AR Consultants, Inc.
Archaeological and Environmental Consulting
11020 Audelia Road, Suite C105, Dallas, Texas 75243-9085
Phone:
(214) 368-0478
Fax:
(214) 221-1519
E-mail: arcdigs@aol.com

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
CITY OF WEINERT’S

WASTEWATER TREATMENT
PLANT IMPROVEMENTS,
HASKELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Report Number 4897

Jesse Todd, MS, MA

Prepared for:

GRANTWORKS, INC.
2201 Northland Drive
Austin, Texas 78756
Prepared by:
AR CONSULTANTS, INC.
11020 Audelia Road, Suite C105
Dallas, Texas 75243-9085
Cultural Resources Report 2008-31
April 30, 2008

HISTORICAL BUILDINGS ARCHAEOLOGY

NATURAL SCIENCES

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
CITY OF WEINERT’S

WASTEWATER TREATMENT
PLANT IMPROVEMENTS,
HASKELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Report Number 4897

Jesse Todd, MS, MA

Prepared for:

GRANTWORKS, INC.
2201 Northland Drive
Austin, Texas 78756
Prepared by:
AR CONSULTANTS, INC.
11020 Audelia Road, Suite C105
Dallas, Texas 75243-9085
Cultural Resources Report 2008-31
April 30, 2008

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

ABSTRACT
The City of Weinert in Haskell County, Texas intends to modify the
existing wastewater treatment plant into a lagoon system which will
increase its water capacity on approximately 10 acres just east of US 277
and northwest of West Webers Street. During the later part of April of
2008, AR Consultants, Inc. conducted an intensive pedestrian
archaeological survey of the 7.5 undisturbed acres of the 10 acre tract for
GrantWorks, Inc. which is doing the environmental planning for the City.
No cultural materials older than 50 years were seen on the ground surface
despite the excellent ground visibility in the upland setting or uncovered in
two shovel tests to approximately 35 cm bs.
Based upon the absence of archaeological sites, AR Consultants
recommends that the Texas Historical Commission concur with our
recommendation that the City of Weinert proceed with construction of the
City’s wastewater plant improvements. If buried cultural materials are
uncovered during construction, work should immediately cease in that
area and the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission
should be advised.

i

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract.............................................................……………………..
Table of Contents......................................................................……..
List of Figures...........................................................................……..
Introduction................................................................................…….
Natural Environment.................................................................……..
Cultural Background.................................................................……..
Research Design and Methodology.................................................…
Results.......................................................................................……..
Recommendations.....................................................................……..
References Cited.......................................................................……..

i
ii
ii
1
3
4
6
7
9
10

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.

Figure 2.

Figure 3.

Proposed Wastewater Treatment Plant Site location
plotted on a portion of the Weinert, Texas 7.5’
USGS map…………………………………………..
Ground visibility within the wastewater treatment
plant. The existing wastewater treatment plant is
located in the in the upper right portion of the
picture. View is to the east…………………………..
Plan of wastewater treatment plant and shovel test
locations plotted on a portion of a mid-2000 aerial
photograph…………………………………………..

r-arc Weinert Wastewater Treatment Plant

2

8

9

ii

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

1

INTRODUCTION

The City of Weinert in Haskell County, Texas intends to modify the existing wastewater
treatment plant into a lagoon system which will increase its water capacity. The
modifications consist of constructing a facultative lagoon pond and two waste
stabilization ponds that will have a capacity of 50,000 gallons per day each. The existing
facility will be removed and a new lift station, a flow meter and a side roll irrigation
system and associated appurtenances will be constructed on approximately 10 acres. The
wastewater treatment plant is located approximately 1,000 feet west of US 277 and about
592 feet northwest of the intersection of US 277 and West Bevers Street (Figure 1).
During the later part of April of 2008, AR Consultants, Inc. conducted an intensive
pedestrian archaeological survey of the 7.5 acre tract, excluding the 2.5 acres for the
wastewater treatment plant, for GrantWorks, Inc. which is doing the environmental
planning for the City.
The purpose of the archaeological survey was to determine if cultural resources were
present, make recommendations about their significance and determine how they will be
impacted by construction. Since the City of Weinert is a political entity of the State of
Texas, the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission has issued Texas
Antiquities Permit Number 4897 for the archaeological survey. Since the study area is
adjacent to a first-order tributary to Lake Creek which contains Waters of the United
States, possibly relevant federal legislation includes the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966, as amended (PL-96-515), the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969
(PL-90-190), and the Archeological and Historical Preservation Act of 1974, as amended
(PL-93-291).
This report has been written in accordance with the guidelines for reports prepared by the
Council of Texas Archeologists (ND). The following report presents a brief description
of the natural and cultural environment of the study area and vicinity. This is followed
by a description of the research design and methodology. The results of the investigation
follow and constitute the body of the report. The last chapter presents recommendations
that arise from the study. A list of references cited concludes the report.

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Figure 1.

2

Proposed Wastewater Treatment Plant Site location plotted on a portion of
the Weinert, Texas 7.5’ USGS map.

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

3

Administrative Information:
Sponsor:

City of Weinert, Texas with GrantWorks, Inc. doing the
environmental permitting
Review Agency:
Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission
Principal Investigator: Jesse Todd
Field Crew:
Lance K. Trask and Todd
Fieldwork Dates:
April 29-30, 2008
Acres Surveyed:
approximately 7.5
Sites Investigated:
Prehistoric: none
Historic:
none
Curation Facility:
No artifacts collected

NATURAL ENVIRONMENT
Haskell County lies in the eastern portion of the Rolling Plains of Texas. The county has
fairly smooth to gently sloping topography except for the sandy part which is hummocky.
A few, deep limestone canyons are present in the southeastern portion of the county. The
three major drainages in the county are the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River,
Paint Creek and Miller Creek (Mowery et al. 1961:1).
The study area is underlain by the thick deposits of the Pleistocene-aged Seymour
Formation which consists mainly of sand but gravel, clay and limestone beds are present
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1972). The study area is adjacent to a first-order tributary
of Lake Creek which is not mapped as containing Quaternary alluvium.
The soils in the study area are mapped as belonging to the Abilene-Roscoe Soil
Association which consists of clay loams and clays in Quaternary outwash (Mowery et al.
1961: General Soil Map). The specific soil Abilene clay loam with 0 to 1 percent slopes
(Mowery et al. 1961:Sheet 12). The B1 horizon is listed as being 8 inches (20 cm) below
the ground surface (Mowery et al. 1961:6).
The study area is located in the Rolling Plains vegetative area of Texas. Kuchler (1969)
classifies the plains as being dominated by mesquite and buffalo grass. Various other
grasses are present as well. Mesquite is present throughout the region due to recent
invasion of this species in disturbed areas. The area is included in the Kansan biotic zone
(Blair 1950: Figure 1). This zone contains 59 species of mammals, 46 reptiles, and 15
amphibians.

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

4

Paleoenvironmental reconstruction is virtually impossible to create from Ray’s geological
interpretations (Ray 1945) since we do not know the ages of the deposits and the cultures
that Ray and Sayles described. Recent environmental reconstructions in adjacent areas
such as the Southern High Plains (Johnson and Holiday 1995), the Upper Colorado River
Basin (Lintz et al. 1993:261-343), Central, and North Central Texas (Bryant and
Holloway 1985; Johnson and Goode 1994; Prikryl 1993) describe climatic changes over
the past ten thousand years. Work is needed within the Rolling Plains in order to develop
a reliable understanding of climatic change in the survey area.

CULTURE HISTORY
The archaeology of the Rolling Plains, in which the study area is located, is tied to the
activities of Dr. Cyrus N. Ray (1929, 1931, 1933, 1935, 1937, and 1945) who was a
founder of the Texas Archeological Society (formerly the Texas Archaeological and
Paleontological Society) and who practiced medicine in Abilene. Ray collaborated with
E. B. Sayles (1929, 1935) of Gila Pueblo in Globe, Arizona (Ray and Sayles 1941) in the
definition of a cultural and chronological framework for prehistoric Native American
sites in the area with the emphasis on Taylor County. Ray’s work has not been expanded
upon, largely due to the fact that virtually no major prehistoric site investigations have
been conducted in the immediate area since World War II, although Suhm (1960:Figure
4) attempted to relate the Abilene area cultural chronology to other chronologies in
Central Texas.
Commentaries about Ray’s work highlight the fact that much of the interpretation is
based on the associations of surface materials (see Krieger 1946:126 and Suhm 1960:77).
Work in surrounding areas has largely ignored Ray’s cultural concepts because it has
been difficult to relate recent ecological, geomorphological, and chronological
understanding to Ray’s interpretations.
Major archaeological surveys have been conducted in nearby Throckmorton, Stephens
and Young Counties, Texas which provide insight into the archaeology of Haskell
County. An archaeological survey was conducted of the Miller Creek Reservoir which is
located on the Baylor/Throckmorton county line (Malone and Briggs 1970). The lake was
to cover 25,000 acre feet. Twenty-one prehistoric sites were discovered, only 2 were in
Baylor County. Sites were discovered in creek bank walls, the floodplain and the river
terrace and consisted mainly of hearths with associated lithic scatters and a few lithic
tools. More than 37,000 acres were investigated for the proposed South Bend Reservoir
which was to be located in Stephens, Young and Throckmorton Counties (Saunders et al.
1992). A total of 541 prehistoric sites, 168 historic sites and 522 isolated finds (370
prehistoric, 129 historic and 23 both). Sites ranged in age from Paleoindian to Late
Prehistoric and site types included burned rock middens, lithic scatters, open campsites
and rock art sites. Evidence is present for contact with Caddoan people but the area was
strongly influenced by Southern Plains cultures during the Late Prehistoric. Historic sites
range from European Contact to the 1930s. Site types covered a wide variety and include
farm/ranch complexes, cemeteries, industrial features, dumps and domestic residences.

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

5

Antiquities Planning & Consulting (2005) investigated approximately 884 acres for a
wind farm project in Throckmorton County, Texas. Most of the wind turbine locations
were in locations similar to the study area. No archaeological sites were discovered. AR
Consultants, Inc. (Chapman 2006) conducted an archaeological survey for the
Shackleford Water Supply Corporation that included portions of Shackleford, Stephens,
Callahan and Throckmorton counties that include settings similar to that of Weinert. No
archaeological sites were found.
Nomadic Native American people traveled through Haskell County based upon the
artifacts found within the county. Historic Native American groups that occupied the
county include Plains Apache, Comanche, Kiowas and Kickapoos. These people camped
near springs and rendezvoused at Flat Top Mountains. It is believed that the Spanish
traveled through the county (Leffler 2008:1).
Haskell County was formed from Milam and Fannin counties in 1858. Due to Native
American hostilities, the county was not occupied for nearly two decades. Ranching
began about 1877 and became the major economic resource. What today is the town of
Haskell, the county seat, was originally named Rice Springs but the name was changed at
the request of the United States Post Office. By 1890, crop farming had become a major
economic resource based upon the amount of cotton and corn grown in communities. BY
1910, two railroads (the Colorado and Southern Railroad and the Kansas City, Mexico
and Orient) ran through the county (Leffler 2008:1-2).
The economy declined between 1910 and 1920 and by 1930, farming was the dominant
economic activity but poultry production became important as an economic base. The
petroleum industry began to make inroads into the county after World War II. Today,
Haskell County continues to thrive based upon farming, ranching, poultry production and
swine raising (Leffler 2008:3).
Previous Investigations
Of the 37 archaeological sites listed for the county, only three are historic. Most of the
prehistoric sites consist of open campsites that contain lithics, dart and/or arrow points,
bone, mussel shell and occasionally ground stone. Several of the sites are burned rock
middens. The sites range from small to several acres (Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
2008).
The major archaeological survey done in the county was for the proposed Paint Creek
Reservoir (now Lake Stamford) by Jelks and Moorman (1953) for the River Basin
Survey. Twenty-one prehistoric sites were recorded. The lake area was investigated again
in 1999 by Prewitt and Associates, Inc. (Kibler 1999) when a diversion dam was
constructed. Eight new prehistoric sites were recorded, six of which were recommended
for further testing to determine their eligibility for nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places.

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

6

In 1980, approximately 1,920 acres and 22 miles of pipeline route for the Oklaunion
Power Plant were surveyed by Environment Consultants, Inc. (Bourdeau et al. 1980).
Twelve prehistoric sites were recorded and consisted of lithic scatters and quarry
locations. Sixty-one miles of pipeline route were investigated by Environment
Consultants, Inc. (Skinner et al. 1982) that ran from the Oklaunion Power Plant to
Abilene, Texas. Sixteen prehistoric sites and three historic sites were recorded. The
historic sites consist of homesteads and a cemetery. Four sites (41HK23-26) were
recorded in Haskell County and consist of prehistoric lithic procurement and open camp
sites.
During the archaeological survey for the replacement of the CR 166 bridge at California
Creek, site 41HK28 was recorded (SDHPT 1984). The site consists of an open camp site
that contained burned rock midden, a shell midden and lithic scatter. The site was tested
(Young 1985) who determined that the site was not eligible for nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places due to the amount of disturbance (road construction,
removal of mesquite trees and erosion and deflation). The site was determined to be
Archaic in age.
Other archaeological surveys of pipeline and transportation routes have failed to discover
any archaeological sites.
Site 41HK1, a prehistoric rock and lithic scatter, was recorded approximately 1.86 miles
northeast of the study area. The site is located the southern terrace of Lake Creek where
US 277 crosses the creek. No archaeological sites are listed within or adjacent to the
study area (Texas Archeological Sites Atlas 2008).
.

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODOLOGY
The purpose of this research design is to insure that fieldwork made a contribution to the
prehistory and history of Haskell County, Texas. The following three research questions
were posed.
The first research question concerns the prehistoric occupation of the study area.
Although site 41HK1 is present northeast of the study area, it is located on
a terrace of and adjacent to Lake Creek. Due to the study area’s distance
from the creek, it is unlikely a prehistoric site is present since the
aboriginal inhabitants would be closer to the creek, a source of perennial
water.
The second question concerns the historic occupation of the study area.
It was predicted that historic sites were likely to be located along historic
roadways in well drained settings that were not farmed although historic
sites may be located in a variety of settings since the European-American
farmers were not tied to perennial water due to the use of cisterns and

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

7

well. No historic transportation route was present adjacent to the study
area; therefore, it was unlikely that a historic site would be encountered.
The third question guided the survey work in this survey as well as any archeological
survey done.
How did past people use the land, what record of this use did they leave
behind?
Methodology
Approximately 25 acres comprise the study area. Armed with the USGS map, soil map,
shovels, a camera and field notes, the archaeologists carefully inspected the ground
surface in transects that ran west-east that were spaced approximately 30 m apart. They
also made notes about the vegetation, soil and soil exposure and took photographs. The
Council of Texas Archeologists (2002) recommends that 20 shovel tests be excavated
within a 10 acre tract. However, since the ground visibility averaged 70 percent or better
and the soil matrix was clayey loam where artifacts would deflate onto the surface, the
recommendation was not followed. In addition, the existing wastewater treatment plant
covered approximately 2.5 acres. Shovel tests were not dug in mechanically disturbed
areas or where the ground visibility was 30 percent or greater. The clay matrices were
manually broken and visually inspected for cultural resources as were the pit walls.
Backhoe trenching was not done due to the fact that no well developed floodplain was
present in which cultural materials would be buried and preserved as well as the shallow
depth to the B horizon.

RESULTS
This portion of the report is broken into several parts. A description of the study area is
presented which is followed by a discussion of the survey. Conclusions derived from the
survey end the chapter. Shovel tests are described specifically in the text and shovel test
locations are plotted on Figure 3.
The Study Area
The study area is fenced and slopes gently north. The area had been plowed and ground
visibility averaged greater than 70 percent (Figure 2) and eye-height visibility was
excellent. Disturbances include the wastewater treatment plant, a corral, two dirt twotrack roads and a channelized drainage (Figure 3).
The channelized drainage is approximately 1.5 m wide and deep. Water from the pond
was present and was about 0.75 m deep. The fill from the channel was placed on the
north side of the drainage. No cultural materials were seen in the drainage banks.

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Figure 2.

8

Ground visibility within the wastewater treatment plant. The existing
wastewater treatment plant is located in the in the upper right portion of
the picture. View is to the east.

The survey
As previously stated, transects were walked approximately 30 m apart starting in the
northeastern corner and going west. Two shovel tests were excavated south of and about
a meter from the drainage where the ground visibility was less than 40 percent. The
shovel tests uncovered 33 and 35 cm of brown (7.5 YR4/3) clayey loam which was very
dry, hard and compact. No cultural materials were seen on the ground surface or
uncovered in the two shovel tests.

Conclusions
As expected, no prehistoric sites were discovered and this is attributed to the lack of
perennial water and low biotic diversity. It is believed that the absence of historic sites
was due to the fact that no historic transportation route was present and the ranchers
preferred to use the land for pasturage.

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Figure 3.

9

Plan of wastewater treatment plant and shovel test locations plotted on a
portion of a mid-2000 aerial photograph.

RECOMMENDATIONS
Based on the findings of this survey, AR Consultants concludes that additions to the City
of Weinert Wastewater Treatment Plant should not impact cultural resources. Therefore,
AR Consultants recommends that the project be given clearance to proceed as planned. If
buried cultural materials are uncovered during construction, work should immediately
cease in that area and the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission
should be notified.

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

10

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.
Bryant, Vaughn M. and R.O. Holloway
1985
The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas. In Pollen Records of Late Quaternary
North American Sediments, edited by V.M. Bryant and R.G Holloway, pp. 39-70, American
Association of Stratigraphic Palynologists.
Bourdeaux, Alex, Terence Fifield, J. Scott Geister and Leonard Lavardera
1980
A Cultural Resource Investigation of the Oklaunion Power Plant. Cultural Resources Report 8016, Environmental Consultants, Inc., Dallas.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1972
Geological Atlas of Texas: Wichita Falls-Lawton Sheet. The University of Texas at Austin.
Chapman, Rebecca
2006
Archaeological Survey for the Expansion to the Shackleford Water Supply Corporation. Cultural
Resources Report 2006-45, AR Consultants, Inc., Dallas.
Council of Texas Archeologists
ND
Guidelines for the Content of Cultural Resource Management Reports. Report on file with the
membership.
2002
Archeological Survey Standards for Texas. Newsletter of the Council of Texas Archeologists
26(1):8-9.
Godwin, Molly F.
2005
A Cultural Resources Survey of the Mesquite Phase of the Cross Timbers Wind Farm, Shackleford
County, Texas. Survey Report 48, Heritage Management Series, Antiquities Planning &
Consulting, Kyle.
Jelks, Edward B. and Edward H. Moorman
1953
Survey and Appraisal of the Archaeological Resources of Paint Creek Reservoir, Haskell County,
Texas. River Basin Survey, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C.
Johnson, LeRoy and Glenn T. Goode
1994
A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene Climates, as well as Archeological Periods, on
the Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.
Johnson, Eileen and Vance T. Holliday
1995
Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments of the Southern High Plains. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 66:519-540.
Kibler, Karl W.
1999
Archeological Survey for the Paint Creek Diversion Project, Haskell County, Texas. Technical
Reports, Number 48, Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Kuchler, A.W.
1969
Potential Natural Vegetation of the Coterminous United States. US Geological Survey.
Krieger, Alex D.
1946
Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas with Extension of Puebloan Dating to
the Mississippi Valley. The University of Texas Publication 4640.
Leffler, John
2008
Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Haskell County,” (accessed April 23, 2008).
http://www.tshaonline.ort/handbook/online/articles/HH/hch10.html
Malone, James M. and Alton K. Briggs
1970
Archeological Reconnaissance in the Miller Creek Reservoir Area. Archeological Survey Report
Number 6, Texas State Historical Survey Committee, Austin and Texas Water Development
Board, Austin.
Mowery, Irvin C., M. T. Turner, Dale Gooch, Jack C. Williams, R. B. Hailey and Tom Robinson
1961
Soil Survey of Haskell County, Texas. USDA, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation with
the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.

WEINERT WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

11

Prikryl, Daniel J.
1993
Regional Preservation Plan for Archeological Resources, Prairie-Savanna Archeological Region.
Section III in Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document, edited
by Nancy A. Kenmotsu and Timothy K. Perttula, Texas Historical Commission, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3, pp. 189-204.
Ray, Cyrus N.
1929
A Differentiation of Prehistoric Cultures of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society 1:7-22.
1931
Recent Archaeological Researches in the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 3:76-89.
1933
Multiple Burials in Stone Cist Mounds of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 5:14-24
1935
The Pottery Complex Artifacts of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontological Society 7:70-88.
1937
More Evidence Concerning Abilene Man. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 9:139-217.
1945
Stream Bank Silts of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 16:117-147.
Ray, Cyrus N. and E. B. Sayles
1941
An Agreement on Abilene Region Terminology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society 13:175-176.
Saunders, Joe. W., C. S. Mueller-Wille and David L. Carlson, editors
1992
An Archaeological Survey of the Proposed South Bend Reservoir Area: Young, Stephens, and
Throckmorton Counties, Texas. Archeological Surveys No. 6, Archeological Research Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
Sayles, E. B.
1929
Some Types of Archaeological Sites near Abilene, Texas. Bulletin of Texas Archaeological
and Paleontological Society 1:43-49.
1935
An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17, Globe, Arizona.
Skinner, S. Alan, Bart Mullins, Jeyne Bennett, LeAnne Baird and Stan Solamillo
1982
Cultural Resources of the West Texas Utilities Oklaunion to Abilene Transmission Corridor.
Cultural Resources Report 82-45, Environmental Consultants, Inc., Dallas.
State Department of Highway and Public Transportation
1984
CR 166: Bridge Replacement at California Creek. State Department of Highway and Public
Transportation, Austin
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960
A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 29:63107.
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
2008
Search for sites listed on the Weinert, Texas 7.5’ USGS map. Texas Historical Commission
internet site.
Young, Wayne
1985
Archeological Testing of Site 41HK28, Haskell County, Texas. State Department of Highway and
Public Transportation, Austin.

