RESEARCH REPORT 95.1
Continuing Cultural Resource Investigations in the Calvert Prospect:
The 1986 Season, Robertson County, Texas
ERRATA SHEET
Page 11
Page 12

Figure 2A should read, “Wooden bridge over Walnut Creek, 41RT37.”
Figure 3B should read, “Site 41RT291 on wooded hill. Note ground cover.”

CONTINUING CULTURAL RESOURCE INVESTIGATIONS
IN THE CALVERT PROSPECT: THE 1986 SEASON
Robertson County, Texas

Michael W. Davis
Dan K. Utley

Steve A. Tomka
Solveig A. Turpin

With contributions by:
Jan Horbaczewski
Tracy O'Shea
Steven M. Kotter
David G. Robinson

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

Texas Archeological Survey

Research Report 95
The University of Texas at Austin

1987

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Researcb Center
10,100 Bllrnet Road

The three sections of this report were originally submitted as separate drafts detailing
various aspects of the 1986 Calvert Prospect studies as commissioned by Phillips Coal
Company and their agent. Morrison-Knudsen Company. Inc. They are combined here
for economy and ease of reference because each was a logical consequence of the prior
investigations. culminating in a management plan applicable to regional studies.
Redundant sections of the management ·plan were omitted at the discretion of the
Principal Investigator who is responsible for compiling the final report from the various
drafts. A fourth aspect of the Calvert Prospect studies. the survey of alternate routes
for the Texas-New Mexico transmission line conducted by Steven M. Kotter. is still in
the review process and will be published separately.

Submitted to Phillips Coal Company and Morrison-Knudsen Company. Inc.
in partial fulfillment of the terms of Work Order 1687
1987

- - - - . __ .._. __..._

.....-

..- . _..­

ABSTRACT
SECTION I: INTENSIVE SURVEY OF THE CALVERT LIGNITE MINE
Between December 1985 and June 1986. the Texas Archeological Survey. The
University of Texas at Austin. completed an intensive cultural resources survey and
assessment of approximately 4800 acres of the Calvert Lignite Mine in Robertson
County. Texas for Phillips Coal Company and their agent. Morrison-Knudsen Company.
The survey was undertaken in compliance with Section 106 of the National
Inc.
Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended and its regulation 36CFR800. and the
National Environmental Protection Act and its regulation 50CFR4 as implemented by
the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The survey results support an application
to the Texas Railroad Commission for a permit to mine lignite as required by the
State Surface Mining Act and to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for
issuance of a new source l\Jational Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit. The
investigation. an intensive pedestrian transect inspection of areas to be affected by
proposed lignite mining and auxiliary facility construction. located. documented and
assessed 78 archeological sites.
Thirty-two were prehistoric campsites and 46 were
historic properties. Additionally. four previously recorded sites. two prehistoric and two
historic. were reinspected.
The prehistoric sites. most of which were located by shovel testing in high
probability areas. are situated on knolls. terraces and hills adjacent to Walnut Creek or
its major tributary streams. A predictive model of high probability site locations was
generated as an aide to planning expansion or development of mining in the Walnut
Creek drainage. Fifteen aboriginal sites located by this survey were recommended for
subsurface testing to evaluate the nature and integrity of their buried cultural deposits
and determine their eligibility for nomination to National Register of Historic Places.
Most of the historic sites recorded are associated with the small rural community of
Tidwell Prairie.
These include numerous farmhouses. sharecropper cottages and
associated outbuildings dispersed across the broad upland divide. as well as the houses
and institutions. such as church. school. cemetery. store. gin and mill. which formed
the center of the farming community. All of the sites postdate the mid-1870s. Oral
history. archival searches and site recordings produced a composite picture of the
development and decline of this rural hamlet. The majority of the sites are not of
singular architectural merit nor related to figures of historic note. Only one historic
site. 41RT260. was determined eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places.

- - - - - - - - _..............._

.......

_--------

-------­

i v I Calvert Lignite Mine

SECTION II: ARCHEOLOGICAL TESTING AND ASSESSMENT OF
PREHISTORIC SITE 41RT267
In May 1986. extensive testing of 41RT267. the first recommended site that
would be directly affected by mining. was carried out to determine site eligibility for the
National Register of Historic Places.
Seven backhoe trenches and twelve test units
were excavated. uncovering five burned rock features and copious lithic material.
including 16 arrow points. 7 dart points and 4 ceramic fragments. The hypothesis that
41RT267 was a temporary field camp. occupied by a hunting task force. at least during
the Late Prehistoric/Late Ceramic Period. was confirmed by detailed lithic analysis.
Based on the results of testing. 41 RT267 was deemed eligible for inclusion on the
National Register of Historic Places, A concentration of mitigative efforts on the knoll
at the northern end of the site where intact features and stratified deposits were
encountered was recommended.

SECTION III: DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
At the conclusion of survey and testing, a management plan for all future work in
the larger Calvert Prospect, a 23,000 acre area that includes the Calvert Lignite Mine,
was prepared as a corollary to a Memorandum of Agreement between the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation and
Phillips Coal. Excerpts summarizing the known cultural resources of the project area
and directions for further interpretation of the archeological and historica I inventory are
presented as Section III of this report. A collecting strategy as described by Binford is
suggested as one explanation for the settlement pattern as perceived through intensive
survey. The scheduling of a specific task. hunting. hypothesized for 41RT267. is also
congruent with this logistically structured model of procurement. Suggested avenues of
future research are outlined to test the applicability of Binford's model.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
.ill

ABSTRACT . . . . . . . .
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

• A.-x.

SECTION I: INTENSIVE SURVEY OF THE CALVERT LIGNITE MINE

Michael W. Davis and Dan K. Utley

1
5

INTRODUCTION . . . .
Environmental Background. . . . .
Previous Investigations . . . . . . .
Research Objectives and Methods

21

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES
Archeological Background .
Prehistoric Site Descriptions.
Site Distribution . . . .

31
53

15

25

HISTORIC RESOURCES
The History of Robertson County
Historic Site Descriptions . . .
The History of Tidwell Prairie . .

59

61
91

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Prehistoric Sites
Historic Sites. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

101
103

EXHIBIT A: TIDWELL PRAIRIE CEMETERY SURVEY.
REFERENCES CITED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

105
111

II

vi / Calvert Lignite Mine

SECTION II: ARCHEOLOGICAL TESTING AND ASSESSMENT OF
PREHISTORIC SITE 41RT267

Michael W. Davis and Steve A. Tomka
INTRODUCTION,

Background. .
Field Methods .

121
121
123

CUl TURAl RESOURCES.
Features at 41RT267
Artifacts at 41RT267 .

127
127
135

RESULTS OF TESTING.
Recommendations.
Discussion. . . . . . . .

163
169

171

EXHIBIT B: SOIL PROFILE DESCRIPTIONS. .
EXHIBIT C: COMPLETE FLAKES. PROXIMAL FRAGMENTS AND CHIPS
REFERENCES CITED . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

175
181
189

SECTION III: DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH

Michael W. Davis. Solveig A. Turpin and Dan K. Utley
INTRODUCTION . . . . . .
EXPLANATORY MODELS
Prehistoric Resources

Historic Study Units. . .
EXHIBIT D: SITES IN THE CALVERT PROSPECT.
REFERENCES CITED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

195
199
199
207
209
213

Table of Contents j vii

LIST OF FIGURES

SECTION I: INTENSIVE SURVEY OF THE CALVERT LIGNITE MINE

FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE

1.
2.
3.

Map of study area.
Historic bridges. . .
Site environments .
4. Artifacts from Calvert Mine.
5. Map of high probability areas. Calvert Prospect
6. Structures at 41RT93 .
7. Log constructions .
8. Historic structures.
9. Historic structures.
10. Architectural details
11. Original land grants in the study area.

x
11
12
48
57
66
67
70

72

73
93

SECTION II: TESTING OF 41RT267

FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE
FIGURE

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

FIGURE 20.
FIGURE 21.
FIGURE 22.
FIGURE 23.

Site map. 41RT267 ..
Backhoe trench profiles
Feature 1. plan map. .
Photographs of Features 3 and 4
Feature 3. plan map . . .
Feature 4. plan map. . . . . . . .
Artifacts from 41RT267 . . . . . .
Percentage of complete flakes. chips and proximal flakes
by cortex categories. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Percentage of secondary. tertiary and all flakes
in 10 mm increments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Percentage of secondary. tertiary and all flakes
in 2 mm increments. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Percentage of all flake size groups per level
with all units combined. . . . . . . . . . . .
Percentage of all flake size groups per level
for test units on northern portion . . . . . .

125
126
128
130
131

133
136
149
156

157
159
160

viii

I

Calvert Lignite Mine

LIST OF TABLES

SECTION I: IN"rENSIVE SURVEY OF THE CALVERT LIGNITE MINE

TABLE
TABLE
TABLE
TABLE

1.
2.
3.
4.

Prehistoric Site/Soil Association.
Summary of Prehistoric Sites . .
Summary of Historic Sites . . . .
Prehistoric Sites Recommended for Further Work.

9
32
62
102

SECTION II: TESTIN G OF 41RT267

TABLE
TABLE
TABLE
TABLE

5.
6.
7.
8.

TABLE 9.
TABLE 10.
TABLE 11.
TABLE 12.
TABLE 13.
TABLE
TABLE
TABLE
TABLE

14.
15.
16.
17.

Descriptions of Cultural Materials: Arrow Points
Descriptions of Cultural Materials: Dart Points . .
Descriptions of Cultural Materials: Utilized Flakes.
Proximal Fragments and Complete Flakes
by Cortex on Platforms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Number and Percentage of Cortexed Striking Platforms
by Level from All Units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Number and Percentage of Cortexed Striking Platforms
by Unit. All Levels Combined. . . . . . . . . . . .
Number and Percentage of Complete Flakes
by Cortex Category in Levels. All Units Combined
Number and Percentage of Chips and Proximal Flakes
by Cortex Category in Levels. All Units Combined .
Number and Percentage of All Flakes
by Cortex Category in Levels. All Units Combined .
Test Unit 1: All Debitage by Material Types. . . .
Test Unit 1: Complete and Proximal Flakes by Platform Faceting
Test Unit 1. Complete and Proximal Flakes by Percussor Type.
Projectile Points from 41RT267. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..

139
139
140
144
147
148
150
150
152
153
154
154
164

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
As is the case in all projects of this nature, numerous persons made contributions
in order to complete the endeavor.
Our gratitude is extended to the following
individuals.
Ken Ratliff of Phillips Coal Company and Jan K. Horbaczewski of
Morrison and Knudsen Company represented the two project sponsors throughout the
several months of fieldwork and report preparation.
They facilitated contractual
arrangements, furnished maps and shared information freely.
Many local residents shared their knowledge and memories of local events and
history. especially concerning the community of Tidwell Prairie, and often invited us
into their homes. Special thanks go to Richard L. Hailey. who seemingly remembers
every detail concerning his lifelong residence in Tidwell Prairie. Lester Hailey, owner of
41RT267, willingly permitted access and excavation. and also shared his knowledge of
the local area. gained through a lifetime. He also allowed the entire crew to take daily
showers at his ranch house. a luxury considering the summer temperatures and
unplumbed crew accommodations. We also wish to convey our gratitude to Frieda
Rains. Betty Clevenger Green. Lester Hailey. Molly Hamilton. Ed Okonski and Mattie
Giddings. all of whom graciously submitted to interviews. Thanks also to Mrs. Herman
Bashinski for her information concerning landowners in the Ash Disposal area; to
Herbert B. Cottingham. who allowed us to occupy his historic structure, 41RT260,
situated at the T-intersection in Tidwell Prairie: and to the many landowners who
graciously allowed us to trek across their property. often becoming our friends during
our several months of residency in the area.
Dr. Solveig A. Turpin served as Principal Investigator for all phases of the
project. The field crew. all experienced archeologists. included Bruce A. Nightengale.
William A. Cloud. Steven M. Kotter. Jeffrey P. Turpin. Steve A. Tomka and Abbie
C. Treece.
Their experience and hard labor allowed for completion of substantially
more fieldwork than anticipated possible. Laboratory chores were shared by Marybeth
F. Tomka and Steve A. Tomka. Steve A. Tomka performed the detailed lithic analysis
which constitutes a primary portion of this report. provides a major contribution to the
understanding of further data recovery from 41RT267. and establishes a beginning point
for all future lithic analyses to be done in the Calvert Project. Jan Horbaczewski and
Tracy O·Shay. soil scientists from Morrison - Knudsen Company. visited 41RT267 and
did detailed descriptions of selected backhoe trenches. thereby upgrading the data.
Ceramic analysis and description was done by David G. Robinson. Steven M. Kotter
wrote the Feature 3 description. Herbert H. Eling. Jr. photographed the historic sites
and. with Daniel G. Julien. developed the field photographs and prepared report plates.
Abby C. Treece drafted all figures.
Deborah Smith edited the draft report with
assistance from Marybeth F. Tomka.

ix

CALVERT PROSPECT
ROBERTSON

COUNT~

TEXAS

ln1ensive Cultural Resource
Survey Boundary

t".::::.'::."!':1

Mining ~t Area
Mining Block
23,000 f>ae Prospect

o

2m
~

i
)
f../

/
\

(
---.--.l i
\

t

~

FIGURE 1.
-----

-

Map of project area.
----

_ _...:...."""",,,,,,,,,,,,,,,211m

SECTION I: INTENSIVE SURVEY
OF THE CALVERT LIGNITE MINE
Robertson County, Texas

Michael W. Davis and Dan K. Utley

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

------

...........

_ _. _ . _ - - ­

INTRODUCTION
Under the sponsorship of Morrison-Knudsen Company. Inc. of San Antonio and
Phillips Coal Company of Richardson. Texas. the Texas Archeological Survey. The
University of Texas at Austin. conducted an intensive cultural resources survey and
assessment in Robertson County . Texas. This cultural resources program was originally
undertaken in support of a permit application by Phillips Coal Company to the Texas
Railroad Commission. The initial permit application specifies 2.240 acres which includes
Additional areas were surveyed in
Mine Block A and auxiliary facilities (Fig. 1).
anticipation of application to the Environmental Protection Agency for new source
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits to discharge
wastewater from the Calvert Lignite Mine and adjacent power plant facilities.
The
survey was designed to comply with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
Act of 1966 as amended and its implementing regulations, 36CFR800, and the National
Environmental Policy Act and its related regulations. 50CFR4. as implemented by the
Environmental Protection Agency.
This cultural resources inventory also conforms to
guidelines set forth by the Texas Historical Commission for Phase II intensive survey
and recommendations offered by the Council of Texas Archeologists.
Fieldwork was undertaken in portions of several months ranging from December
1985 through July 1986.
A total of 125 person-days was expended on the survey
fieldwork. Several additional person-days were expended by the project historian during
oral interviews. historic site documentation and archival and legal record searches. The
total area inspected. herein referred to as the Calvert Lignite Mine, was just under
4800 acres (Fig. 1). Included were a 4000 acre block in the initial mining area. a haul
road corridor from the mining area to the power plant. the plant site. an ash disposal
area and access road. and an access road leading from Texas Highway 6 to the power
plant with an adjacent railroad spur. This is a portion of the la rger Calvert Project.
which encompasses approximately 23,000 acres. all in Robertson County. Due to denial
of access by landowners, three tracts totaling 250 acres. were not surveyed.
Additionally, 100 foot wide strips along the Ash Disposal access road remain
unsurveyed. The latter had little potential for prehistoric or historic occupation. All
unsurveyed tracts will be investigated as permission becomes available.
Prior to the initiation of fieldwork. a literature search of the county site files at
the Texas Archeological Research laboratory (T ARL) was undertaken to determine the
character of previously recorded archeological sites within the current project boundaries.
Four sites were previously documented within the study area (41RT37. 41RT93.
41RT240, and 41RT241) (Good. Turpin and Freeman 1980: TARL County Files). All
of these sites were evaluated during the course of the current fieldwork. The original
site forms were updated. the sites were reassessed and recommendations concerning
further work were made.

1

2

I

Calvert Lignite Mine

No sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) were present
within the boundaries of the current project area. The nearest NRHP properties. the
Calvert Historic District (Texas Historical Commission 1975. 1980). consisting of 46
blocks containing at least 36 structures of historic and architectural importance. are
located in Calvert. Texas. approximately three miles southwest of the southern project
boundary. Other parts of the town have been examined by an architectural historian
from the Texas Historical Commission. who states:
A closer examination of the area indicates that all the western part of the
town and a segment of the eastern part do not reveal significant architectural
characteristics. nor were they part of any notable historical occurrence or
settlement pattern . . . Almost without exception. the housing found in the
western half of Calvert is in poor structural condition. While a few structures
display a characteristic of nineteenth-century vernacular architecture (jig-saw
cut decoration. turned columns. etc.). the examples are isolated. and have
usually been sheathed in a composition or asbestos siding or substantially
altered . . . Beyond these boundaries it was felt that the degree of twentieth
century intill. in the form of mobile homes and recently constructed residences.
was detrimental and the contributing structures became more isolated.
The
architectural forms found within this area fell beyond the area of significant
concentration as required by the National Park Service for approval as a
district. and for the most part failed to continue a unity of style. importance
and distinction. (Heck 1971)
The indirect effect of the mine/power plant project on Calvert will be socio­
economic. The development of the project in the county will result in some increase in
trade and employment for the town.
There could also be some resulting commercial
development. probably in the form of small convenience or fast food businesses. There
may also be some adjustment in local tax revenues brought about by the conversion of
agricultural la nds to industry.
If the tax increase is substantial. the town' s officials
may even want to experiment with ad valoren tax breaks to encourage the restoration
and use of historic properties.
Preservation and protection of the historic sites.
however. will remain the province of the city officials. the Robertson County Historical
Commission. the Calvert Historical Society. and private property owners.
A projected increase in population. although minimal. could result in needs for
new services such as housing or utilities. The costs incurred should be offset by the
economic contributions of the mine/power plant project.
With an abundance of
relatively cheap land in the area. it is probable that any new housing will be
constructed in rural settings closer to the mining operations. and therefore will not
directly affect Calvert. In all probability the historic houses of Calvert. because of their
size. cost and expense of maintenance. will not be the type of housing sought by
project personnel.
Some increased traffic on the major route through Calvert will have a temporary
visual impact on the town's historic Main Street. It will not have a structural effect.

Introduction / 3

The road. State Highway 6. is a state-maintained four lane highway currently large
enough to handle any projected increase in traffic. If in the future there will be a need
to upgrade or enlarge the road. the State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation will consider its effect on historic properties.
The mine itself. because of the distance from Calvert. will have no visual effect
on the town. likewise. no excavation is planned in the immediate area: the closest
mining project boundary would be three miles from Calvert. There are no plans to use
any properties or buildings in Calvert for support services of the mine or power plant.
Following the literature and records search. an intensive pedestrian transect survey
was implemented to locate. document and assess properties of interest. Thirty-two
prehistoric sites were newly recorded as a result of the current survey. All are situated
proximal to Walnut Creek or its major tributaries. Big Willow Creek and Bee Branch.
The survey has demonstrated intensive use of these upland valleys by aboriginals.
Buried material present at the sites recommended for subsurface testing may yield
archeological data concerning localized adaptation to this region.
Forty-six historic properties were newly documented as a result of the current
In general. they are
survey.
Many are extant structures or remnants thereof.
farmhouses and associated outbuildings. built after the mid-1870s. which make up the
dispersed rural community of Tidwell Prairie. Documentation. through archival research
and interviews with lifetime residents. many related to the original settlers of the area.
has provided a descriptive picture of Euro-American settlement and development in the
area.

This page intentionally left blank.

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Location

The Calvert Lignite Project is located in the northwestern portion of Robertson
County. east of Texas Highway 6 and approximately equidistant between Calvert and
Bremond. Texas (Fig. 1). The Brazos River flows about 8 miles (12 km) to the west
and the Navasota River approximately 22 miles (35 km) to the east.
The small
community of Tidwell Prairie is situated in the west central portion of the area and the
town of Hammond is on Texas Highway 6, the western boundary of the project. The
Universal Transverse mercator coordinates for the center of the survey are Zone 14.
E723900jN3442150. The boundaries of the first two areas surveyed. areas A and B.
which encompass about 4000 acres are oriented along property ownership lines. Several
dirt county roads crisscross the area. facilitating access. The auxiliary facilities. which
consist of a power plant. the ash disposal site and associated haul and access roads.
lie west and north of the mining zone.

Climate

The climate in the project area is best described as humid and subtropical with
hot summers and mild winters. Monthly mean temperatures range from 8.7 degrees C
in January to 29 degrees C in August. Rainfall is most frequent in the spring. summer
and fall. although winter cold fronts often cause extended periods of rain. Mean annual
precipitation is 101.9 centimeters. A relatively long growing period is provided by 245
frost-free days (Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc. 1980d:2-6).
Prior to the modern climatic condition, the region was much cooler and wetter
with very little seasonal variability.
This Pleistocene environment began to change
to,OOO to 12,000 years ago. becoming warmer and drier
the Altithermal.
Palynological studies by Bryant (1977:153) indicate that this shift was continuous
during the Holocene and is ongoing at the present time.

Geology

Geology at the Calvert Mine consists of members of the Wilcox Group which are
Eocene in age: The lower formation. the Simsboro. is exposed in the north and west
portions of the project area.
It is comprised primarily of sand. mudstone. mudstone
conglomerate and clay (Bureau of Economic Geology 1970:3).
The topographic
expression of this formation is oak covered. gently rolling hills. The upper formation,
the Calvert Bluff. is fluvial in origin (Henry and Basciano 1979) and contains lignite

5

6 / Calvert Lignite Mine
beds from one to 20 feet thick. Average thickness of the formation is 1.200 feet.
consisting mostly of mudstone and varying amounts of sandstone. lignite and ironstone
concretions (Bureau of Economic Geology 1970:3).
A fault cuts through the project
area. running from the east side of the Little Brazos River to the west side of Big
Willow Creek at an angle of approximately 45 degrees. The downthrown side is the
Calvert Bluff Formation.

Physiography

Four separate. morphologically discrete. physiographic zones are present in the
study area - the uplands of the Brazos River. The descriptions follow those of Skelton
(Skelton and Freeman 1979).
Project-specific geomorphological information (see
Recommendations). generated during Phase 3 archeological endeavors. will greatly
enhance the generalized description.

ACTIVE FLOODPLAINS
This zone refers to those areas that immediately border the present stream
channel. The active floodplain is generally flat but may be slightly sloping and extend
outward from the channel to the terraces. Sediments that make up the floodplain were
deposited during the recent regime of the stream.
Walnut Creek formed wide
floodplains in several places. while those of Big Willow Creek and Bee Branch are
narrower.

TERRACES (FOSSIL FLOODPLAIN)
This term refers to generally level land separated from the active floodplain by
low vertical escarpments and bordered on the opposing side by the higher elevations of
the valley margins. Colluvial and alluvial sediments have formed these upper terraces
and their presence indicates a high probability for aboriginal occupation at the location.
The depth of the sandy matrix on some of these terraces exceeds one meter. Basal
material is a dense clay. red to yellow in color with an abrupt contact boundary.

VALLEY MARGINS
Valley margins lie between the terraces and the higher upland divides separating
the major tributaries.
The areas are often dissected by headwater channels of the
tributaries and are characterized by gentle smooth slopes. In some areas. these valley
margins extend down to the active floodplain where alluviation has been insufficient to
form terraces. Where this physiographic situation is encountered. aboriginal sites are
often found on rises or knolls observable on the slopes.

Environmental Background / 7
UPLAND DIVIDES

This interfluvial zone separates the major tributaries of the drainages. In the
current study area this zone is represented by the highest elevations separating Bee
Branch from Big Willow and Walnut creeks and between Walnut Creek and South
Walnut Creek. The zone is generally flat to gently sloping and. locally. was a favored
Although aboriginal sites
location for historic farmhouses and agricultural activities.
probably existed in this zone. historic land use and subsequent erosion and deflation
have apparently obliterated the remains.

Soils
The Soil Conservation Service (1986) has just completed an in depth soil survey
of the proposed Calvert Prospect. Nineteen soil mapping units were identified. All
recorded archeological sites were plotted on the soil survey field sheets to determine
whether prehistoric or historic sites were associated with specific soil series (Table 1).
Those 14 soil series on or in which sites were documented are alphabetically listed and
described below according to information derived from the current soil survey (SCS
1986:9-45).
Axtell (AtC and AtC3) is a deep. fine sandy loam located on uplands and old terraces
with a slope of 1 to 5 percent. The soil. formed in acid to alkaline clayey sediments.
is moderately well drained. has a slow to rapid runoff and a very slow permeability.
ChaZ05 (ChC) is a deep. loamy fine sand located on high terraces with slopes of 1 to
5 percent. The soil. formed in clayey alluvium. is moderately well drained. has a slow
runoff and slow permeability.
Crockett (CrC and CrC3) is a deep. fine sandy loam located on broad. smooth and
sloping uplands with slopes ranging from 1 or 2 to 5 percent. The soil. formed from
clayey beds and shale. is moderately well drained. has a medium runoff and very slow
permeability.
Dutek (DuC) is a deep. loamy fine sand located on broad uplands and high stream
terraces with slopes of 1 to 5 percent. The soil. formed in loamy and sandy material.
is well drained. has a slow runoff and moderate permeability.
Edge (EdD) is a deep. fine sandy loam located on uplands with slopes of 5 to 12
percent. The soil. formed in acid and alkaline clayey sediments. is moderately well
drained. has a rapid runoff and very slow permeability.
Gladewater (Gw) is a deep. frequently flooded clay located in bottomlands along large
streams with slopes of 0 to 1 percent. The soil. formed in clayey alluvium. is poorly
drained. has very slow runoff and a very slow permeability.

8 / Calvert Lignite Mine

Lufkin (luA) is a deep. fine sandy loam located on level areas on terraces with a 0 to
1 percent slope. The soil. formed in slightly acid to alkaline sediments. is somewhat
poorly drained. has a slow runoff and very slow permeability.
Padina (PaD) is a deep, loamy fine sand located on broad smooth to convex areas on
uplands and terraces with 1 to 8 percent slopes. The soil. formed in thick beds of
sandy materials. is moderately well drained, has a slow runoff and moderately slow
permeability.

Rader (RaB) is a deep. fine sandy loam located on broad, slightly mounded terraces.
lower concave areas and heads of drainageways with 1 to 3 percent slopes. The soil
is moderately well drained, has slow runoff and a very slow permeability.
RobeD (RoC) is a deep. loamy fine sand located on concave side slopes or near the
heads of drainageways on terraces with 1 to 5 percent slopes. The soil. formed in
loamy and clayey sediments. is moderately well drained, has a slow to medium runoff
and slow permeability.

Silawa (SiC) is a deep. loamy fine sand located on convex areas on terraces and
uplands with 1 to 5 percent slope. The soil. formed in loamy and clayey sediments, is
well drained. has slow to medium runoff and moderate permeability.

Silstid (SsC) is a deep. loamy fine sand located on broad areas on uplands with 1 to 5
percent slopes. The soil. formed in sandy and loamy sediments, is well drained. has a
slow runoff and moderate permeability.

Uhland (Uh) is a frequently flooded. deep bottomland loam with a slope of 0 to 1
percent.
The soil. formed from loamy alluvium. is somewhat poorly drained. has a
slow runoff and moderately slow permeability.
Wilson (WiA) is a deep. clay loam located on small. smooth upland areas with slopes
of 0 to 1 percent. The soil. formed from loamy alluvium, is somewhat poorly drained.
has a slow runoff and very slow permeability.
The 34 prehistoric sites currently recorded in the survey are located on eight
(42.1 %) of the identified soils (Table 1).
These eight represent a general cross
section of the types and attributes of recorded soils and physiographic locations within
the upland zone under consideration. indicating a total utilization of the environmental
universe by aboriginals. Of special interest. however. is the fact that 22 (64.7%) of
the sites are located on only three (15.9%) of the soil units (Axtell. Dutek and
Silawa). Common traits shared by this limited group are: falling within the range of
well drained soils (well and moderately well), location on uplands and terraces, and a 1
to 5 percent slope. Two of these characteristics. well drained soil and minimal slope.

Environmental Background / 9
may have made certain locations attractive to prehistoric inhabitants. The distribution
of these soils in both physiographic zones increases their areal frequency. thereby
raising the potential for aboriginal use.
Another possibility is that these soils may
have supported a plant community favored for subsistence.
These conclusions are
tentative: however. in future survey efforts it would seem advisable to pay particular
attention to these soil units. Soil type is one of the factors considered in preparation
of the predictive model of high probability areas.

TABLE 1.

Prehistoric Site/Soil Association

Sites

Soil

Permeability

Runoff

Drainage

8
1
11

Axtell
Axtel13
Dutek
Edge
Padina
Rader
Silawa
Uhland

very slow
very slow
moderate
very slow
moderately slow
very slow
moderate
moderately slow

rapid
rapid
slow
rapid
slow
slow
slow
slow

moderately
moderately
well
moderately
moderately
moderately
well
poor

3

3
2
5
1

Slope
well
well
well
well
well

1
1
1
5
1
1
1

-

5~
5~

-

3~

-

5~

o-

5~

12~
8~

1~

Several additional observations may be made concerning the eight soils associated
with the prehistoric sites. Thirty-three sites (97%) fall within the well drained (well
and moderately well) range.
Permeability at the sites ranges from moderate to very
slow.
The runoff factor spans the entire spectrum of rates. seemingly negating any
obvious correlation. All the soils identified at aboriginal sites display some degree of
acidity. greatly decreasing the potential for recovery of faunal. floral or pollen remains.
including human skeletal material.
Although these generalizations are broad and
inconclusive. patterns or associations may emerge as a result of controlled excavation
during subsurface testing.
Site 41RT253 is the single exception. Cultural material was recovered from an
area mapped as Uhland. a bottomland soil that is frequently flooded.
Immediately
upslope from this area was a prominent knoll with a thin mantle of sand over clay
soil.
This eroded surface appeared to be the likely origin of the cultural material
recovered at 41RT253 (see site description). The knoll soils were mapped as Axtell 3
series.
Associations between historic site locations and soil units are more diverse. with
sites being recorded on 13 (68.4%) of the 19 mapped units. In general. the historic
properties tend to be located on soils restricted to. or predominantly in. the uplands.
Two anomalies are attributable to function.
Historic sites 41RT291 and 41RT293
(Fig. 2) are in areas of the Gladewater series. located on bottomlands that are

.--.-.--~-----~---------~-.---.----------

10 / Calvert Lignite Mine
frequently flooded (SCS 1986:23). Both are modern bridges - one wooden. one metal ­
which cross the Walnut Creek channel.
The topographic location of both historic and prehistoric sites recorded during the
current fieldwork. concurs with the results of the sample survey of the Calvert
Prospect.
The earlier survey noted historic sites situated .. on rises and in higher
elevations" (Good. Turpin and Freeman 1980:99).
This agrees with the current
distribution wherein structures predominate on the rolling upland divides between the
local drainages. Likewise. the previous survey noted the highest density of prehistoric
sites to be "along the breaks above the floodplains and well-developed tributary
systems like Walnut Creek" (Good. Turpin and Freeman 1980:47). The current survey
reinforced this previous finding; all the prehistoric sites are located proximal to Walnut
Creek or one of its major tributary streams on elevated locations adjacent to the
floodplain.
The density of the sites along these tributary streams. alluded to in the
preliminary survey, has been demonstrated by our reliance on shovel testing. a
procedure not used in the sample survey.

Flora
The project area lies within Gould's (1975) Post Oak Savannah. a region totaling
approximately 8.5 million acres. It is bordered on the west by the Blackland Prairie
and on the east by the Pineywoods (East Texas Timbers). The area currently consists
of four vegetational communities; 1) bottomland woodland. 2) upland woodland
(Fig. 3a). 3) rangeland, and 4) pasture (Fig. 3b) (Phillips Coal Company 1986).
Prehistorically. the former two members were present and the latter two would have
been prairies prior to the introduction of agriculture.
Currently the dominant woody species in the uplands are post oak [Quercus
stel/ata] and blackjack oak [Quercus marilandica]. climax species which are remnants of
Other arboreals present are cedar elm [Ulmus crassifolia].
a more extensive forest.
eastern red cedar [Juniperus virginiana]. and black hickory [Carya texana].
Woody
species of the bottomlands are winged elm [Ulmus alata]. post oak and pecan [Carya
illioniensis] (Phillips Coal Company 1986).
A variety of grasses are present in the rangeland and pasture commUnities. The
major species are little bluestem [Schizachyrium scoparium}. indian grass [Sorgastrum
A
nutans]. and switch grass [Panicum vingatum] (Phillips Coal Company 1986).
variety of other tall and mid-grass species comprise the ground cover universe.
The vegetational diversity of the Post Oak Savannah is clear. During the survey.
several trees that may have produced seasonally available food resources for aboriginal
inhabitants were observed:
walnut. pecan. hickory and oak.
Additionally. in upland
areas the luxuriant grasses would have supported popUlations of animals (deer. rabbit.
buffalo) which would also have been attractive food resources to aboriginal groups.

---

---"-""""-- - - ­

Environmental Background / 11

A. Wooden bridge over Walnut Creek, 41RT291.

B. Metal culvert bridge in Walnut Creek, 41RT293.

FIGURE 2. Historic bridges.

12 / Calvert Lignite Mine

A. Site 41RT288 in cleared pasture. Note ground cover. Walnut Creek bottoms in
background.

B. Site 41RT240 on wooded hill. Note ground cover.

FIGURE 3. Site environments.

Environmental Background /

13

Fauna

Extensive field studies have recently been conducted in the project area to identify
wildlife species.
Several methodologies were used and the results are intensively
described in Section 133
Fish and Wildlife Resource Information (Phillips Coal
Company 1986)
Mammals observed include seven species of rodents, eight species of medium size
mammals, and deer. Also noted were the subterranean burrows and mounds of moles
and gophers. Forty-four fish species were collected in the Calvert Prospect. Six turtle
and four snake species were documented.
Archeological investigations at 4·1L T17 (Mallouf 1979) recovered remains of deer.
jackrabbit. large birds and turtle. Fields (1984) recovered a single small mussel shell
fragment at 41LN134. In general. excavations at sites within the region have recovered
only limited amounts of faunal materials. probably because of the poor preservation
conditions created by acidic soils.

This page intentionally left blank.

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Archeological investigations in Robertson County and surrounding areas have been
prompted and maintained at an accelerated rate since the mid 1970s. due to the
development of lignite mining. This section will briefly summarize major archeological
efforts in Robertson. Leon. Freestone and Limestone counties. Prior to 1974. only one
archeological site had been documented in Robertson County. At the present time. 349
sites are formally reported here.
In 1974. the Texas Archeological Survey conducted an archeological survey of the
Upper Navasota Reservoir. later known as Lake Limestone.
Fifty-two archeological
sites were documented (Prewitt 1974).
Subsequent testing and mitigation were
conducted at a number of these sites.
Prewitt (1975) tested the Barkley (41LN20)
and Louie Sadler (41 RT2) sites.
Diagnostic artifacts recovered confirmed that
prehistoric groups had inhabited the area from at least the Late Paleoindian Period
through the Late Prehistoric (Neoarchaic). with cultural influences from both Central
and East Texas. Eleven additional sites were tested at Lake Limestone as a part of a
program of archeological investigation prior to impoundment (Prewitt and Mallouf 1977).
Results of these investigations revealed the same temporal span for occupation of the
area. and evidenced East and Central Texas cultural traits.
Final archeological work carried out at Lake Limestone was the mitigation of sites
41L T12. 41RT17. 41RT21 and 41RT44.
Excavations at 41L T12 recovered expanding
stem dart points (Middle Archaic). contracting stem dart points (Late Archaic) and
arrow points and pottery sherds (Late Prehistoric).
Also recovered were sherds of
Poyner Engraved ceramics. indicative of the early Historic Period.
Many of the
ceramics appear to be consistent with Caddoan types.
The fire smudging on many
sherds indicates use in cooking. The recovery of a fired clay coil suggests possible on­
site manufacture of the vessels. Intact burned rock concentrations were also recorded.
Faunal remains included deer and turtle (Mallouf 1979:10-22).
Investigations at 41LT17 produced diagnostic artifacts contemporaneous with those
from 41 LT12. with the addition of Early Archaic and Paleoindian materials. The bones
of deer. jack rabbit. large birds and turtles were also recovered (Mallouf 1979:23-30).
Projectile points diagnostic of the Middle Archaic through the Late Prehistoric
were recovered at 41L T21.
The lithic artifact assemblage indicated site activities
Three features were recorded: two burned
similar to those hypothesized for 41 LT12.
rock hearths and a cluster of stream worn quartzite gravels displaying clouded exterior
surfaces. possibly indicating use as boiling stones (Mallouf 1979:30-34).
Middle and Late Archaic projectile points were recovered at 41L T44. Two arrow
points are thought to be remnants of a very temporary use of the site by later groups.
or possibly projectile points lost during hunting. No features were encountered.
15

16 / Calvert Lignite Mine
Prewitt and Grombacher (1974) surveyed an area adjacent to the Calvert Prospect
on the east. recording 39 archeological sites. Four prehistoric and five historic sites
were recorded in the Twin Oaks project area. The only temporally diagnostic artifact
recovered was an undecorated ceramic sherd.
A second survey in the Twin Oaks area covered 5,000 acres to be affected by
the construction of a steam electric generating station and adjacent mining area (Turpin
and Kluge 1980). Two prehistoric sites (41RTI0. 41RT11) were tested. The survey
recorded one historic and 29 prehistoric sites. The prehistoric sites were characterized
as light lithic scatters on sandy knolls near permanent water sources.
Two Perdiz
Test
arrow points and one untyped dart point were collected during the survey .
excavations yielded projectile points diagnostic of the Middle Archaic through the Late
Prehistoric periods.
Many of the dart point types recovered (Yarbrough. Dawson.
Morrill and Neches River Oletha) demonstrate influence from the East Texas Archaic
(La Harpe Aspect). The remainder of the stone tools indicate a generalized hunting
and gathering economy. Three burned rock concentrations were encountered at 41RT10
In levels containing Late Archaic diagnostics.
Archeological investigations in the Twin Oaks project area continued on a large
scale. and in 1984 and 1985. Espey. Huston and Associates surveyed approximately
20.000 acres, recording 40 sites. The prehistoric sites are generally light scatters of
lithic chipping debris. The diagnostic projectile points recorded range from the Late
The oldest historic structure was an 1856 barn
Prehistoric to the Middle Archaic.
(Glander 1986).
Cultural resource investigations continued in Robertson. Limestone. Freestone and
Leon counties as part of the Jewett Mine Project. portions of which are immediately
adjacent to Lake Limestone. To date. eight archeological reports have been published
One other testing report is currently in preparation. and
on Jewett investigations.
another is in the regulatory review process (Fields 1986).
Initial work was a 15%
sample survey. 5950 acres designed to gather data to create a predictive model to be
used in surveying the five remaining mining areas (Espey, Huston and Associates.
Inc. 1980a). The sample survey resulted in the documentation of 40 prehistoric and 36
historic sites. Predictions as to the location of prehistoric sites were based on three
criteria: distance to and elevation above a water source and slope of the land (Espey.
Huston and Associates. Inc. 1980a).
An accuracy rate of 85.7% for the predictive
model was claimed. Projectile points recovered were diagnostic of the Late Prehistoric
The probability of occupation during earlier periods was
and Late Archaic periods.
noted: the low recovery of diagnostic materials was possibly due to dense ground cover
at most sites.
A projection of 100 aboriginal sites for the remaining 85% of the
project area was made.
The second survey in the Jewett mine area intensively inspected 3.000 acres at
the Limestone Electric Generating Station (Espey, Huston and Associates. Inc. 1980b).
and 16 prehistoric and 22 historic sites were recorded.
Temporal affiliation of the
prehistoric sites ranged from the Middle Archaic ~p the Late Prehistoric.
Five sites
were recommended for limite<f testing. while three others appeared to warrant extensive

Previous Investigations / 17
testing (Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc. 1980b). Historic sites ranged in age from
the mid-1950s to one possible mid-nineteenth century structure. The following survey
covered the initial impact areas of the mine. or 4.004 acres (Espey. Huston and
Associates. Inc. 1980c).
The predictive model was once again applied. and 15
prehistoric sites were recorded. establishing an 89.5% predictive rate. Three of the 15
sites were too disturbed for further work. 11 warranted limited testing and one
(41LN73) was recommended for extensive testing due to the presence of an intact
hearth 42 centimeters below the surface.
With the completion of this survey. 93
historic sites had been recorded within the current Jewett Mine project area. One of
the most interesting. 41LN86. was the homeplace of Richard Lamb. one of the earliest
settlers in Leon County. arriving prior to 1855 (Espey. Huston and Associates.
Inc. 1980c).
The next phase of work in the Jewett mme area was the testing of seven
prehistoric and two historic sites. assessment of four historic sites. a 400 acre survey
and a high probability survey of two transmission lines and a pipeline right-of-way
(Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc. 1980c). The surveys resulted in the recording of
six prehistoric and two historic sites and the reassessment of a previously recorded
site. Five of the tested sites (41FT51. 41FT52. 41FT124. 41FT125. 41FT134) are in
upland settings. similar to the current project area.
Temporally diagnostic artifacts
recovered from these sites range in age from late PaleoindianfEarly Archaic (San
Patrice points) through the Late Prehistoric (Perdiz. Hayes. Steiner arrow points).
Thirteen features were recorded during excavation of these sites. Twelve were burned
rock hearths of hematite. ferruginous sandstone and quartzite. stratigraphically
associated with Archaic materials. The hearths were constructed of either a single or
double layer of rock. and differences in material types were noted (Espey. Huston and
Associates. Inc. 1981:3-120. 3-129-131). The remaining feature consisted of a quartzite
core and three hammerstones in proximity at 41FT52. A grinding stone (metate) was
also recovered from this site. Scraping tools and utilized flakes were recovered from
several of the sites. The variety of tools along with projectile points seems to indicate
a range of subsistence and resource acquisition activities. Historic sites recorded during
this project included three log structures deemed worthy of architectural drawings.
The final survey in the Jewett mine project covered 6162 acres to be affected in
the first five year permit area. During this survey. 57 prehistoric sites. 7 prehistoric
isolated finds. 46 historic sites and a single historic isolated find were documented
(Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc. 1982a:2-9).
Testing was implemented at two
prehistoric sites. 41LN138 and 41LN156 (Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc. 1983).
Excavations at 41LN138 identified two horizontalty discrete components. manifested by
Archaic-age Yarbrough dart points on the lower terrace and a variety of Late
Prehistoric arrow points on the upper terrace. Caddoan ceramics were also found on
the upper terrace. Excavations at 41LN156 determined that a rock overhang. thought
by surveyors to be a rockshelter. had not been used by aboriginals. However. test
units on top of the formation yielded abundant lithic chipping debris as well as
diagnostics from the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods.

18 / Calvert Lignite Mine
The next phase of investigations was the mitigation of 41 FT52. an upland site.
and 41 LN178. located on a high terrace of the Navasota River.
Excavations at
41LN178 yielded diagnostic projectiles of the terminal Paleoindian (Golondrina) through
the Late Prehistoric.
The density of artifactual material and the presence of large.
double layered. burned rock concentrations. seemed to indicate the site was a
permanent base camp. Features at 41FT52 tended to be smaller and single layered.
and the tool assemblage less varied: implying a limited number of activities at the site.
Diagnostics at the site ranged from Late Paleoindian San Patrice points to late
Prehistoric arrow points. The two San Patrice points confirm influence from eastern
areas at early dates.
The final published report on work in the Jewett area describes test excavations
at 41lN134 and 41lN144 (Fields 1984). At 41lN134, temporally diagnostic artifacts
recovered were representative of the Middle Archaic. late Prehistoric. and middle
nineteenth century.
Although the site lacked natural soil stratigraphy, the vertical
distribution of artifacts indicated the cultural deposits were in roughly chronological
One burned rock feature identified appeared to be intact.
At 41LN144.
sequence.
eleven shovel probes recovered 11 dart points and 120 pieces of lithic debitage. The
dart points. most unassignable to known types. are Archaic in age: one is an Early
Archaic Meserve point.
Of primary interest to the current study was the 1978 preliminary survey of
Calvert (30.845 acres) and Cole Creek (47.266 acres) prospects (Good. Turpin
Freeman 1980). A 15% sample survey of the approximately 78.000 acres utilized
meter wide transects randomly generated and stratified by topographic zone.
In
survey, the 350 foot contour line was used as the demarcation point between
upland and lowland lones.

the
and
100
this
the

In the Calvert Prospect. 3.743.5 acres. or 12.1 percent of the area, was covered
using 101 transects (100 X 1500 m). resulting in the documentation of 38 aboriginal
sites.
Two additional prehistoric sites were recorded as a result of information
gathered from local landowners. Diagnostic cultural material recovered indicated use of
the area from the late Prehistoric (arrow points and ceramics) through at least the
early Middle Archaic (Yarbrough dart point).
In the Cole Creek Prospect. 6.177.4 acres. or 13.1 percent of the prospect. was
covered using 125 transects (100 X 2000 m). reSUlting in the documentation of 17
prehistoric sites. Three previously recorded sites were revisited during transect coverage
and local informants identified the location of four additional sites. Diagnostic artifacts
indicated aboriginal use of the area from the late Prehistoric (2 ceramic sherds)
through the Early Archaic (Bell dart point).
As a result of the survey. prehistoric site density was described in terms of low.
The low density areas were the upland divides separating the
medium. and high.
drainages. medium density was along the floodplains of the major rivers. and highest
density was along the main tributary systems such as Walnut Creek (Good. Turpin and
Freeman 1980:46-47).
Recommendations called for development of a regional

...........

_._-­

Previous Investigations

I

19

chronology and settlement pattern through testing of a representative sample of the
sites recorded during the survey and any recorded during later work.
Several types of significant historic resources were noted within the two
prospects. Two types of economic development in the county created properties of a
different nature. In the western portion. along the Brazos and little Brazos rivers and
their rich bottomlands. wealthy planters using methods brought from the Deep South.
built plantations and prosperous communities such as Calvert.
In the northern and
eastern areas. farmers from the middle South built small farms and developed smaller.
less prosperous communities which reflected their subsistence economy. Mention was
also made of the presence of log structures and cemeteries. both community and
family.
Both of these types of historic resources would warrant extensive
documentation and possibly mitigation.
The current project area totals approximately 23.000 acres (Fig. 1) which is much
smaller than the preliminary Calvert sample survey area. Deleted are all lands west of
Texas Highway 6 and south of Farm to Market Road 979.
Research objectives
determined for this current fieldwork and the field methodologies involved were
established to coincide with the recommendations made after the sample survey. As
Phase 3 (testing) is implemented. more specific research goals will be generated to
incorporate the findings of the original work and the results of this survey.

This page intentionally left blank.

RESEARCH OBJECTIVES AND METHODS
Prior to the initiation of fieldwork. five research objectives were generated in order
to orient the survey toward resolution of archeologically pertinent questions. These five
objectives were:

1. To establish a prehistoric site predictive model for that portion of the
Walnut Creek drainage basin that lies within the impact area of the Calvert
The immediate goal would be the implementation of the model
Project.
that could be projected to the remainder of the Calvert Project.
Formulation and testing of the plan would be accomplished by using data
from the current survey and previous surveys in the basin.
2. To establish the actual prehistoric site density through intensive survey of
an area along the middle reaches of Walnut Creek. These areas have been
previously alluded to as being high density, however. through sample survey
only. .. Site density is the highest along the breaks above the floodplains
and well-developed tributary systems like Walnut Creek" (Good. Turpin and
Freeman 1980:47).
3. To determine if prehistoric sites existed (could be located) or had existed in
the upland areas previously described as low density. "In areas of low site
density. intensive survey should emphasize locations which seem well suited
for site placement. such as high prominences or the confluences of minor
creeks. which were not included in this random sample. Since erosion is
severe in these upland areas. it is doubtful that subsurface probing would
greatly enhance site recognition except in areas of dense vegetative cover."
Shovel testing. intensive surface
(Good. Turpin and Freeman 1980:47).
inspection and use of landowners as informants would be utilized to attempt
to isolate these localities.
4. To fully research the community development. evolution and decline of
Tidwell Prairie. treating it as an important cultural resource much in the
manner in which individual house sites have been previously treated.
5. To then incorporate project-specific information into a regional model by
comparison to data generated in similar on-going archeological and historical
studies such as the Jewett and Twin Oaks work. Such a broad perspective
is contingent upon the acquisition of a sufficient sample of artifacts and
features. and establishing chronological controls through subsurface testing
and excavation in the mitigation phases.

21

22

I

Calvert Lignite Mine
Methods

Prior to the initiation of fieldwork. the site files at T ARL. The University of
Texas at Austin. were examined to ascertain if previously recorded sites existed in the
current area of interest. Likewise. reports covering archeological work done in similar.
adjacent areas were consulted to anticipate the types of environments. settlement
patterns and site types that might be encountered.
Additionally. discussions were
initiated with archeologists who had worked or were currently working in nearby areas
(Fields 1986: Glander 1986).
The type survey conducted may be described as a .. non-exclusive comprehensive
deployed survey with background research and subsurface testing" (King 1978:37) i.e ..
all areas within the first 5-year permit boundary were inspected by pedestrian transect
coverage. with the intention of locating and recording all types of archeological sites.
Transects were walked in zigzag fashion where possible. to maximize the area
inspected. Interval widths varied from 30 to 60 meters depending upon the density of
ground cover. The project area was divided into segments by property ownership and
these tracts were usually examined individually due to the piecemeal fashion in which
Standard procedure was to enter a tract. take a
land access was often obtained.
compass bearing on one of the boundary fences and then to walk that bearing and it's
reverse until the block had been covered. The ground surface was carefully inspected
in all areas with additional attention given to erosional features. such as cutbanks and
gullies. as well as the numerous gopher backdirt mounds.
Subsurface examination. in the form of shovel testing with 1/4" mesh screening.
was undertaken both as an aid in locating sites and in the evaluation and assessment
of buried cultural deposits and soil stratigraphy during their documentation. In addition.
similar subsurface probes were placed in areas that met criteria for probable locations
of aboriginal activity as derived by pre-fieldwork background research. All information
generated during shovel probing was recorded on Shovel Test Data forms that
categorized unit number and size. level and depths. recovery. soils and locational
information for each probe. At each site a large tree was designated as a datum and
shovel tests were plotted on a site map from that point. Plastic flagging tape was
used to mark the tree for future relocation.
Site documentation included completion of a standard State of Texas
Archeological Site Data form. plotting of the site on both the 7.5 minute Hammond
USGS topographic sheet and the high quality. 1 inch:400 feetlS foot contour.
orthophoto aerial maps supplied by the sponsor. At least one overview photograph was
taken of each site.
Included with each prehistoric site form were xeroxes of that
portion of the topographic sheet containing site locations and a xerox of the site area
as shown on the aerial photo with the shovel probe locations superimposed. A log of
all photo documentation and a continuous daily journal of field activities was kept.
However. no
Historic site documentation followed much the same procedure.
shovel tests were dug because it was obvious that material would be present and
unlikely that the depth below ground surface would exceed approximately 20

----~--~"--

Research Objectives and Methods / 23
centimeters. unless the site had been disturbed by subsequent agricultural activities.
Photo documentation was more intense at sites where structures or remains were
present. During the course of fieldwork. attempts were made by the survey crew to
learn as much as possible about the sites from local landowners and informants who
were encountered. Through these discussions and contacts. it became apparent that a
large quantity of Tidwell Prairie history and individual site data was available locally.
In order to verify information and to complement material from the oral history
interviews. the staff historian utilized a variety of resources. Records of the General
Land Office of Texas provided background information on the original grantees of the
project area. Supplementary information came from Malcolm D. McLean's (1974-1986)
multi-volume work. Papers Concerning Robertson's Colony in Texas.
Federal census records. available on microfilm through the Texas State Archives.
contained information useful in researching immigration patterns and individual families.
Additional material came from filmed county tax records. also available at the Archives.
Additional resources there included published histories of Robertson County.
Property title information was compiled through the records of the Robertson
County clerk. Some records of the district clerk and county tax assessor were also
reviewed.
Tax records. which can often be used to set appropriate dates of
construction of individual structures generally proved to be ineffective with regard to
Tidwell Prairie because of numerous land transactions. court litigation. imprecise site
descriptions and the large number of sharecroppers (renters) who do not show up on
In most cases. land title records were used to determine probable
tax records.
builders. based on a comparison with approximate dates of architectural features.
The historical marker files of the Texas Historical Commission yielded information
on the early Polish settlers of Robertson County. especially Joseph and Catherine
Bartula. Equally important was the material on St. Mary's Catholic Church (Bremond).
an important institution in the history of Tidwell Prairie's Polish community. Other
resources included the Barker Texas History Center. Austin: the cemeteries at Tidwell
Prairie. Beck Prairie. and Bremond; and past issues of the Calvert Tribune.
Artifact collection was kept to a minimum. The only historic materials collected
were a sample of the name brand bricks encountered at the various sites. Prehistoric
collections were confined to temporally diagnostic material with two exceptions (see
Artifact Descriptions). All prehistoric artifacts were processed in TARL-SP laboratory
facilities. labeled and properly bagged for permanent curation. All materials generated
by this survey will be housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. The
University of Texas at Austin.

This page intentionally left blank.

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The current study area lies between the borders of two distinct archeological
regions: Central Texas to the west and East Texas (Prewitt 1981:72).
The actual
spatial limits of these two geographic regions are vague due to the overlap of cultural
areas which in turn creates shifting boundaries.
As the archeological data base
expands. synthesis of existing data may allow a more definitive statement of the
geographical and cultural parameters. Cultural influences from each are expected in the
Calvert Prospect and they will be manifested by an admixture of artifactual materials.
especially by the presence of classic projectile point styles from both Central and East
Texas. Although features such as hearths or burned rock concentrations are relatively
common. classic Central Texas burned rock middens or East Texas mounds are
unlikely.
Aboriginal burial practices are. to date. poorly documented in Robertson
County or the adjacent Post Oak Savannah area (Roemer and Carlson ms.).
The
following section presents a framework to place the area of interest into a temporal
context.
The terms used to describe the cultural sequence in Texas are confusing.
largely because they have been adopted from differing systems proposed by various
authors over time. In this report. stage refers to a developmental but non-evolutionary
stage largely based on economics: period refers to a broad time span characterized by a
variety of traits including economics. tool types and features augmented by absolute
dates: and phase is a specific time period and. in the case of Central Texas. is defined
by radiocarbon assays that date tool. feature and site types (Prewitt 1981. 1985).

Central Texas
To the west of the study area is the Central Texas archeological region (Suhm
1960:63) where a cultural history of at least 10,000 years duration is known.
Traditionally. this broad expanse of time has been subdivided into a four period
sequence (Paleoindian. Archaic. Neo-American. Historic) based on changes in lithic
technology and subsistence modes (Suhm. Krieger and Jelks 1954).
Prewitt
(1981:65-89) proposed a phased cultural chronology for Central Texas prehistory.
dividing the two middle periods into 13 phases. He has recently revised the temporal
elements of his model (Prewitt 1985:201-238). His discussion. which lists key artifact
markers and representative archeological sites for each period. will be followed in this
description.
The Paleoindian Stage or Period (before 8500 BP) in Central Texas is
represented by three lanceolate projectile point styles: Clovis. Folsom and Plainview.
Peoples of this era were thought to subsist primarily on species of now extinct

25

26 / Calvert Lignite Mine
megafauna. However. more recent investigations indicate a more varied system that
supplemented hunting with gathering (Bryant and Shafer 1977). Recent excavations at
two of these early sites. 41WM235 and 41BX52. are currently in the reporting stage
and their publication will contribute significantly to the Paleoindian data base.
The Early Archaic Period is divided into four phases: Circleville (8500-6800 BP).
San Geronimo (6800-6100 BP). Jarrell (6100-5100 BP) and Oakalla (5100-4600 BP)
(Prewitt 1981:75. 1985:215). Technologically. the two phases display some remnants
of the Paleoindian lithic traditions. such as basal edge grinding and some parallel
flaking. as the projectile points styles evolve from lanceolate to a wide variety of
stemmed point styles such as Gower. Hoxie. Wells. Bell and Martindale (Prewitt
1981:76-78).
Food gathering. indicated by the increase in grinding stones and
freshwater mussels. appears to increase in importance through time. In the later phase.
burned rock middens make their appearance and are associated with two distinctive
triangular projectile points. Baird and Taylor.
The Middle Archaic Period is also divided into four phases: Clear Fork (4600-4100
BP). Marshall Ford (4100-3500 BP). Round Rock (3500-2600 BP) and San Marcos
(4000-3400 BP).
Marker projectile points for the period include Nolan. Travis.
Pedernales and Bulverde.
Burned rock middens. a type of specialized cooking oven.
proliferate through the first three phases to the point of being the predominant feature
However. a roughly equal ratio
type. indicating a heavy reliance on plant food.
between the presence of projectile points and other tools is indicative of continued
reliance on hunting.
During the first phase of the late Archaic {Uvalde. 2250-1800 BP}. burned rock
midden construction diminishes significantly and bison bone. which has been absent
since approximately 5.000 BP. begins to reappear in the archeological remains.
Of
interest is a slightly higher percentage of tools other than projectile points in the total
artifact assemblage during this phase. indicating a probable increase in plant
procurement. When viewed with the decline in midden accumulation. a new adaptation
in processing seems apparent. A variety of dart point styles serve as key indicators
for this phase: Marcos. Montell. Castroville. Frio and Fairland. The later two phases
of the late Archaic. Twin Sisters (1800-1400 BP) and Driftwood (1400-1250 BP)
continue to evidence these disproportionate fractions in lithic typology. demonstrating a
continued heavy reliance on vegetal subsistence. Included in this non-projectile point
category are distinctive bifaces. Erath. San Gabriel and Hare. various unifaces. scrapers.
perforators and gravers (Prewitt 1981:81-82).
The Austin (1250-650 BP) and Toyah (650-200 BP) phases. originally defined by
Jelks {1962}. constitute the Neo-American or NeoArchaic Period as renamed by Prewitt
(1981:68).
The technological achievements which heralded this period were the bow
and arrow and the beginning of the manufacture of ceramic vessels. Projectile point
markers. in this case arrow points, for the Austin phase are Scallorn and Granbury.
while Perdiz and Cliffton represent the Toyah phase. Hearths of various sizes are the
predominant cooking feature and the use of rockshelters for habitation increases.
Hunting. as a means of subsistence. seems to increase in importance to a point where

Archeological Background / 27
it is equal to or greater than food gathering.
Cemeteries with both cremated and
noncremated interments appear to be the preferred mortuary practice (Prewitt
1981:82-83).
During Historic times (after 200 BP). several Indian tribes inhabited Central
Texas. including Tonkawa. and later Wichita. Comanche and Apache. tribes which
Few archeological sites
moved into Texas from the north (Newcomb 1961:134-135).
attributable to these nomadic tribes have been identified. in part due to their ephemeral
nature.
When located. they display a mixture of native American artifacts and
European goods such as seen at Mission San Xavier. situated near the confluence of
Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel River (Gilmore 1969) in Williamson County. Texas.
A Spanish expedition [entrada] passed through San Marcos in 1709. camping at
the springs which form the headwaters of the San Marcos River on April 15 (Gonzalez
The goal of the mission. known as the Espinosa - Olivares
Aguirre
1982).
Expedition. was to establish contact with the Tejas Indians. The group consisted of
two Franciscan priests and 15 soldiers crossing Texas from a point approximately 30
miles from Eagle Pass to the vicinity of Elgin. Texas (Gonzales 1982:4).
No Tejas
were encountered. but several rancherias of other groups were visited in the area of the
Colorado River.
Campbell (1983) has identified four of these groups - Cantona.
Yojuane. Simaomo and Tusoniki - and noted that only one of the group (Cantona) is
possibly native to the area. Some scholars (Schilz 1983:55; Weddle 1968:93) consider
Cantona to be the name of the leader of a group of Tonkawa. rather than the band
name. Tonkawa are generally thought to be the early inhabitants of Central Texas.
but at present they cannot be securely tied to any prehistoric cultural unit defined in
Texas (Campbell 1986).

East Texas
Paleoindian activity in East Texas is
Texas.
The evidence for the presence of
the recovery of single or small groups of
excavation of sites with later components.
surface collectors.

even less well documented than in Central
these early groups is generally confined to
fluted or lanceolate projectile points during
or their presence in the collections of local

Story (1965:240) has reported .. a very brief occupation during Paleo-indian times"
in Henderson County at the Wild Bull Site (41HE61). Recovery of the medial section
of a Folsom point and a basal fragment of an Eden point in the lower levels of
excavation units led to this conclusion.
Testing and mitigation at Lake Limestone
produced limited numbers of Plainview. Angostura and Folsom points (Prewitt 1975;
Prewitt and Mallouf 1977: Mallouf 1979). Mitigation at 41LN178 yielded a Golondrina
point and two San Patrice points were recovered at 41FT52 (Espey. Huston and
Associates. Inc. 1982b).
The collection of Arch Hancock of Newby. Texas. contains
several examples of Plainview. Golondrina. Scottsbluff. Angostura. Meserve. Gower and
San Patrice points. The author and Robert l. Stiba have photographed much of this
collection and the photos are in the possession of Espey. Huston and Associates.

28 / Calvert Lignite Mine
Austin. Texas. Actual dating of these Early Man manifestations. or statements on
their lifeways in East Texas. remain impossible.
The preliminary descriptive statement on the Archaic Period in East Texas was
presented by Suhm. Krieger and Jelks (1954) and was termed the East Texas Archaic.
Story (1976:46) acknowledged that the definition was "skimpy and generalized". using
as a primary criteria the presence of dart points and absence of ceramics. The major
dart point types affiliated with the East Texas Archaic were Gary. Ellis, Yarbrough.
Kent and Wells. The time period represented by this description was 3,000 B.C. to
500 or 1.000 A.D. Webb (1960) expanded on the previous outline and broadened the
artifact assemblage to include:
pitted stones. hammerstones. manos. milling stones with shallow oval
basins. full-grooved axes of sandstone. quartzite or hematite. fist axes. drills.
large and small end scrapers. end scrapers made by reworking projectile points.
and small side scrapers. (Webb 1960:48)
Also noted was an apparent Paleoindian - Archaic overlap manifested by the presence
of Meserve and San Patrice points in Archaic context. Johnson (1962) presented a
more comprehensive definition of the Archaic of East Texas when he proposed his La
Harpe Aspect. Two quotes from his assessment. which included sites located in a
band running from Houston. Texas north to Oklahoma. summarize his findings.
At the beginning or early part of the Archaic Stage there was a marked
numerical prevalence of expanding stem dart points over those of other
stemming traditions.
This was followed by a growth in the popularity of contracting stem dart
points (represented principally by the Gary type). which development slightly
preceded.
. . . the appearance of pottery vessels of various plain and often crude
wares. (Johnson 1962:268)
Additionally, the newly defined La Harpe Aspect was described as:
A rather far flung Archaic Stage culture. or groups of related cultures. which
borders the fringe of the eastern woodlands. The most salient material traits
of this aspect are (1) flexed burials. usually without accompanying furniture:
(2) pitted manos; (3) expanding stem dart points (early phase); (4)
contracting stem dart points (later phase): (5) plain ceramics (terminal La
Harpe Aspect): and (6) various polished and ground stone artifacts (axes.
gorgets. etc.) which vary considerably in style and in abundance from locality
to locality within the La Harpe Aspect. (Johnson 1962:249)

Archeological Background / 29
The Neo-American (Late Prehistoric) in East Texas is characterized by cultural
groups (Caddo Indians and their ancestors) who displayed a propensity toward
ceremonialism and religion manifested by construction of raised earth platforms or
mounds. manufactured a wide variety of pottery and practiced horticulture as a main
stem of their subsistence (Davis 1970).
The temporal span involved is from
approximately 500 A.D. through and beyond contact with European cultures.
Two
aspects have been defined - Gibson (earlier) and Fulton
and these have been
subdivided into five periods. Brief descriptions of each are presented below. following
Davis (1970).
The first period of Caddoan culture is the Alto Focus.
The type site. George
C. Davis Site in Cherokee County, Texas, is the location of three large ceremonial
mounds. Several ceramic types are diagnostic of the period. including Holly. Hickory
Fine Engraved. Davis and Weches Fingernail Impressed. Alba arrow points are the
marker projectile points.
Caddo II (Sanders Focus) diagnostic pottery types include Sanders Plain and
Engraved and Monkstown Fingernail Punctated. Arrow point types include Bonham and
Perdiz. Mound building and a reliance on agriculture become pronounced (Richner and
Lee 1976).
The Whelan Complex component is the Caddo III manifestation identified in Texas
and radiocarbon assays date the culture to the fifteenth century.
Sites tend to be
single or groups of small mounds on which structures were erected. Ceramic markers
are Ripley and Taylor Engraved, Maydelle Incised and Bullard Brushed. Perdiz arrow
points predominate. Several of these sites were investigated during the construction of
Lake O' the Pines (Davis 1958: Jelks and Tunnell 1959).
The Frankston Focus is the Caddo IV complex most pertinent to this project
area. although several others have been identified.
Sites are smaller and mound
building apparently diminished in importance. Maud. Bassett and Talco arrow points
represent the lithic diagnostics. while ceramics are Killough and Bullard Brushed. and
Poynor Engraved.
Caddo V is the historic era of the Caddo Indians.
The presence of European
trade goods would be a certain distinguishing trait.
Triangular arrow points become
prominent.
Fields (1984:6) suggests defining the cultural chronology of the Jewett Mine area
in three temporal units. The Archaic would begin with the arrival of early man in the
region and extend to approximately 1.000 BP. The Late Prehistoric would span the
next 700 years, being artifactually recognized by a wide variety of arrow points and
ceramics. Post A.D. 1700 is considered Historic because of the increasing influence of
Europeans in the region.

This page intentionally left blank.

PREHISTORIC SITE DESCRIPTIONS
The thirty-four prehistoric sites recorded or re-assessed during this survey are
described below in narrative form. Their salient characteristics are summarized in Table

2.
41RT37
This prehistoric site was originally recorded in 1978 during the Calvert-Cole Creek
sample survey and reported as an ephemeral surface scatter of no more than 20 chert
flakes and chips. Site area was reported to be 20 by 20 meters. Reinspection of the
site revealed three pieces of debitage and one burned quartzite fragment on the surface.
Four subsurface shovel tests with 1/4" sample screening yielded a total of seven pieces
of lithic chipping debris. As a result of this investigation, site area has been expanded
to approximately 50 by 150 meters. The site is atop a sandy knoll on the west side
of Walnut Creek at an elevation of 350 feet MSL. Soils are mapped as AxtelljSilawa
series. The site has been cleared and subjected to agricultural activities. Maximum
depth of sandy matrix in shovel tests was 60 centimeters below ground surface, with
an average depth of 40 centimeters. Lack of depth, paucity of cultural materials and
the disturbed nature of the location seem to negate the potential for meaningful data
yield at this site.

41RT240
Original documentation on this prehistoric site was done by Espey, Huston and
Associates in 1985 (TARL County files) during the Twin Oaks Survey.
Site areal
limits were greatly expanded by this further investigation. Most of the site. situated
on a high hill and slopes overlooking Walnut Creek and its floodplain to the north and
west. is within the current study area. Elevation of the location ranges from 350 to
380 feet MSL and site size is approximately 300 by 400 meters.
The area is
completely wooded and ground cover obscures the surface (Fig. 3B). Five shovel tests
with 1/4" mesh sample screening yielded 31 pieces of lithic chipping debris and four
burned rock fragments.
Depth of the Axtell sandy soli matrix in the probes ranged
from 24 centimeters to more than one meter below ground surface. Cultural material
was recovered to 80 centimeters and the possibility for deeper deposits exists. The
abundant yield from shovel probes and potential for deeply buried. possibly intact,
cultural deposits indicate a likelihood for data recovery through further investigation at
this site.
Subsurface testing is necessary to evaluate 41RT240's eligibility for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.

41RT253
This prehistoric site lies on the eastern slope of a small knoll on the west side
of Big Willow Creek at an elevation of 350 to 360 feet MSL. The site covers an area
of approximately 50 by 50 meters. although at the time of occupation it probably
covered the entire knolltop. The site was recorded on the basis of a basal fragment of
a bifacially chipped stone tool and three small chert interior flakes seen on the surface.

31

-w

~

~

'<::

~

TABLE 2.

rQq'

Summary of Prehistoric Sites.

:::J
~.

distance

Physiographic
Location

Soils

Cultural Material

Condition

Walnut Creek

200

high knoll

AxtelilSilawa

lithic debitage,' single
burned rock fragment

sparse, shallow, subsurface
cultural material; cleared, u_
for farming, eroded

350-380

Walnut Creek

500

high hill

Axtell

lithic debitage, burned
rock fragments

abundant, daep subsurface
cultural matlllllal; wooded,
undisturbed

SOX50

350-360

Big Willow Cr.

300

low knoll
slope

Uhland

lithic debitage, biface
basal fragment

sparse, shallow subsurface
cultural material; cleared,
eroded, deflated

41 RT 264

75X75

360-370

Big Willow Cr.

100

low knoll
and slope

Robco

lithic debitage

sparse, shallow subsurface
cultural material on slope
in project ara8; deeper
deposits outside boundary;
wooded, eroded on slopes,
undisturbed on top

41 RT 265

5OX200

400-410

Big Willow Cr./
spring

300

high hili

Silawa

lithic debitage

sparse, shallow subsurface
cultural material; cleared,
very disturbed

41 RT 267

100X200

400

Big Willow Cr.

250

high ridge

Silawa

lithic debitage, Steiner
arrow point

abundant, deeply buried
cultural material; wooded,
undisturbed

41 RT 268

5OX50

400

Big Willow Cr.

300

high hill

Silawa

lithic debitage

sparse, shallow subsurface
cultural materials; cleared,
severely eroded and deflated

Number

Size (ml

Elev. (ttl

Nearert water

41 RT 37

SOX1SO

350

41 RT 240

300X400

41 RT 253

_

~

!b

Table 2. continued
Number

Size 1m)

Elft. (ftl

Nearest water

._ distance

I'hysiographic
Location

Soils

Cultural Material

Condition

---------:----------------------~--------------------------------

41 RT 269

100X200

350

Big Willow Cr.

50

terrace

Axtell

lithic debitage

moderately dense,. deeply
buried cultural material;
cleared, potential for un·
disturbed deposits

41 RT 271

75X100

360

Intermittent
tributary

200

slight upland
rise

Axtell/Robco

lithic debitage

sparse, surface and shallow
subsurface cultural material;
cleared, disturbed by agri·
culture

41 RT 27850X75

360

Il'Itetmlttent
tributary

100

upland divide

Axtell

lithic debitage, modified
flake

sparse surface and shallow
subsurface cultural material;
cleared, disturbed by agri·
culture

41 RT 279

50X160

360

intermittent
tributary

75

slight upland
rise

Axtell

lithic debitage, possible
burned sandstone fragment

sparse surface and shaUow
subsurface cultural material;
cleared, disturbed by
agriculture

41 RT 280

50X50

360

intermittent
tributary

100

upland divide

Robco

lithic debltage, two burned
quartzite fragments

sparse surface cultural debris

41 RT 283

100X200

330-350

Walnut Creek /
interrnittent
tributary

500/
100

high knoll
and slopes

lithic debitage, one burned
quartzite fragment

moderatelY dense surface and
deeply buried cultural maw"
ial; partially cleared, pote~
tial for undisturbed deposits

41 RT 284

41 RT 285

200X450

300X500

340-350

340-350

Walnut Creek

Walnut Creekl
intermittent
tributary

300

350/
200

high hill

high hill crest
slopes

Dutek

Padina

Dutek

~

:::r­

iii'
.....

C
::!
~.

~
(it'
lithic debitage, charcoal,
burned nut shell, burned
and unburned bone

abundant deeply buried cui­
tural material in $ol)'le ar.al;
cleared, potential for un­
.disturbed deposits

~

lb
11\

...

~

"6'
t:!'
C·

lithic debitage, charcoal,
burned quartzite and
petrified wood fragments

abundant deeply buried cui­
tufal material; wooded, un­
disturbed deposits

:::3

-11\

W
W

w

Table 2. continued
Number

Size (m)

----41 RT 297

EI.v. 1ft)

Nearest water

_

distance

Soils

Cultural Material

Condition

lithic debitage, undecorated
ceramic shard, burned rock
fragments, charcoal

moderately dense, deeply
buried cultural materials;
partially cleared, some
erosion, potential for un­
disturbed deposits

----------------_ ---------------- - - --------------------------------------J:dge
......

5OX100

­~

. Physiographic
location

330-340

Walnut Creek

150

low knoll
slope

~

...~...

r-

oq'

.....
:::l

i1t

41 RT 301

200X350

340-350

Walnut Creek

300

ridge crest &
slopes

Dutek

lithic debitage, blface
overshot flake

abundant and deeply buried
cultural material; wooded,
undisturbed

41 RT303

75X75

340

Walnut Creek

400

low knoll crest

Axtell

lithic debltage

sparse shallow subsurface
cultural material; cleared,
eroded and deflated

41 RT 305

60X60

330-340

Walnut Creek

350

low knoll,
crest and slopes

Padina

lithic debitage, charcoal

moderately dense. deeply
buried cultural material;
cleared, potential for un·
disturbed deposits

41 RT 306

100X100

330-340

Walnut Creek!

350

ridge point

Dutek

lithic debltage

sparse. deeply buried cui·
tural material. wooded, un­
disturbed

41 RT 315

150X150

390-400

Bee Branch

200

hill and slope

Dutek

lithic debltage

sparse. generally shallow sub­
surface cultural material;
cleared. used for agriculture.
erosion and deflation

41 RT 317

25X30

3aO

Bee Branch

100

low knoll on
terrace

Dutek

lithic debltage, thin
biface fragment, burned
rock fragments, charcoal
bits

moderate, deeply buried; cuI­
tural material; cleared, distutbed by agriculture, poten­
tial for undisturbed depositS

~

:::l'

til

~f

f

Table

2. continued

Number

Size 1m)

Elev. (ft)

---------------------

Nearest water _

dittance

. Physiographic
Location

lithic debltage, one
burned quartzite fragment

abundant deeply burled cui·
ture material; deared, dis·
turbed by agriculture

Silawa

lithic debitage

very sparse surface and sub­
surface cultural material;
cleared.

terrace

Dutek

lithic debitage, 3 Perdiz
arrow points, decorated
& undecorated ceramic
sherds, burned & unburned
bone, mussel shell, char·
coal, burned nut shell

dense surface and subsurface
cultural material; cleared,
potential for undisturbed
deposits

high hill

Axtell/Axtell 3

lithic debitage, quartzite
core

sparse surface and shallow
subsurface cultural mate­
rial; deared, disturbed by
agriculture, eroded and d.
flated

350

Walnut Creek
intermittent

200/
200

upland point

41 RT 288

l00x400

350-360

Walnut Creek

400

high ridge crett

41 RT 290

5OX60

355

Walnut Creek

400

upland divide

41 RT 292

125X300

350

Walnut Creek

100

41 RT 294

100X150

380

Walnut Creek

500

75X75

Condition

sparse surface and shallow
subsurface cultural materi.l;
cleared, disturbed by agri·
culture

l00X200

41 RT 295

Cultural Material
lithic debitage

41 RT 287

375

Soils

--_... __ ..-------- ---------------------------------­

Walnut Creek

300

high ridge,
point and slope

Silawa

Dutek

Edge

lithic debitage, utilized
flake

sparse surface & shallow sub<
surface cultural material;
wooded, eroded on slopes

"b

~

:::r­

;;n'

S

~
<'\'

e."
§-,

t:J

(b
~

~

-5'
.....
41 RT 296

100X600

370-380

Walnut Creek

30()'400

ridge crest

Edge

lithic debitage, arrow point
preform, burned quartzite
& petrified wood fragments

moderately dense ,deeply
buried cultural material;
cleared, potential for
undisturbed deposits

Q'

::::s
~

-...
W
U1

w

0"1

Table 2. continued
Number

Size (m)

Elev. (ftl

Nearest water _

distance

. Physiographic
location

Soils

Cultural Material

Condition

- - - - - - - -_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ -r&., _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

41 RT 318

75Xl00

36(}'370

Bee Branch

100

ridge slope

Dutek

lithic debitage

sparse, shallow subsurface
cultural material; cleared,
farmed, erosion and defla­
tion active"

---~

~

....
.....

r­

~.

.........:::s

!b

100

hill slope

41 RT 320

100Xl00

380

Bee Branch

41 RT 321

50X50

370

Bee Branch

41 RT 322

100Xl00

380

Bee Branch

150

hill slope

41 RT 323

30X70

360

Bee Branch

75

low knoll

75

low knoll

Axtell

lithic debitage

very ephemeral subsurface
cultural debris; partially
cleared, stable surface

lithic debitage

limited quantities of sub-

Waco Sinker

surface cultural debris;
wooded, potential for un­
""
d"isturbed d~poslts

Dutek

lithic debitage

sparse, shallow subsurface
cultural material; partially
wooded, stable surface

padina

lithic debitage

sparse, shallow subsurface
cultural material; partially
wooded, stable surface

Dutek

~

:::sO

Cb

Prehistoric Site Descriptions / 37
Of SIX subsurface shovel tests with 1/4" sample screening. four produced negative
The remaining two yielded a total of four small interior flakes.
Soils are
results.
mapped as Uhland series. Erosion and deflation are ongoing processes at the site as
evidenced by the thin mantle of sand over basal clay in certain probes and the
sand/clay mixed matrix in others. The deepest cultural material was encountered at 60
centimeters below present ground surface. Due to the eroded and deflated nature of
the location and the prospect of secondary deposition of cultural materials. it seems
unlikely that meaningful archeological data could be retrieved from this site.

41RT264
This prehistoric site is situated on the western slope of a knoll which juts out
into the Big Willow Creek floodplain on its eastern side at an elevation of 360 to 370
The site area covers approximately 75 by 75 meters within the current
feet MSL.
project boundaries. It is felt that a larger portion of the site extends due east. out of
the project area. up to the crest of the knoll. No cultural debris was seen on the
surface. however the physiographic location seemed to indicate a high probability for
aboriginal occupation and was selected for shovel probing.
Four probes with 1/4"
sample screening produced three small tertiary chert flakes: none deeper than 20
centimeters below present ground surface. Soils are mapped as Robco series. Depth
of sandy matrix ranged from 5 to a maximum of 50 centimeters. Due to the paucity
of cultural materials and the shallow nature of deposits. it seems unlikely that
meaningful archeological data could be retrieved from this site.

41RT265
This prehistoric site is situated on a hilltop on the west side of Big Willow
The site covers an area of
Creek at an elevation of 400 to 410 feet MSL.
approximately 200 by 50 meters. Soils are mapped as Silawa series. Shovel testing
was done on the basis of information concerning the collection of projectile points at
the spot (Hailey 1986). No surface cultural material was observed. Five shovel tests
with 1/4" sample screening produced seven small chert interior flakes in three; two
tests were negative. No cultural debris was recovered below a depth of 40 centimeters.
The site area has been cleared and farmed and the majority is currently being used as
a garden and orchard.
It seems unlikely that this site retains any potential for
significant data yield due to the disturbed nature of the deposits.

41RT267
This prehistoric site covers an area of approximately 200 by 100 meters along a
high ridge (400 ft. MSL) which parallels Big Willow Creek and forms the eastern edge
of the broad. flat upland divide separating the Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek
drainages. No cultural debris was observed on the surface during transect inspection.
however. shovel testing. which appeared warranted due to landform attributes. yielded
positive results.
Four probes with 1/4" sample screening were conducted and all
produced lithic chipping debris. Most of the 53 pieces recovered were small tertiary
flakes and fragments of tan and gray chert. Additionally. a Steiner arrow point was

38 / Calvert Lignite Mine
recovered from Shovel Test 2. indicating activity at the site during. at least, the Late
Prehistoric Period. Soils are mapped as Silawa series. The deepest probe extended 90
centimeters below ground surface without contacting basal clay, thereby raising the
possibility of deeply buried cultural deposits. Most of the site is in a wooded area,
reducing the disturbances caused by agriculture and diminishing the effects of erosion.
The established presence and density of subsurface aboriginal debris combined with the
possibility of more extensive, intact deposits, give this site a high potential for
producing meaningful archeological data. Subsurface testing is necessary to determine
the eligibility of this site for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.

41RT268
This prehistoric site. covering an area of approximately 50 by 50 meters. is on an
upland hill point formed by two erosional gullies. The site surface. at an elevation of
400 feet MSL. slopes down and east in the direction of Big Willow Creek. Soils were
mapped as Silawa series.
Shovel testing was conducted because the physiographic
location appeared to be advantageous to aboriginal utilization. Two probes were done:
each yielded a single chert tertiary flake and both encountered basal clay at 25
centimeters below present ground surface. The site has been cleared for agricultural
purposes and erosion. due to modern land use. is severe. Lack of depth of cultural
materials and erosion have diminished the archeological potential of this site.

41RT269
This prehistoric site is on a substantial terrace on the east side of Big Willow
Creek at an elevation of 350 feet MSL. Established areal extent is 200 by 100 meters.
although it is possible that the site is larger. Soils are mapped as Axtell 3 series.
No surface material was observed. however. two shovel tests yielded moderate amounts
of lithic debitage to a depth of 80 centimeters below present ground surface.
No
contact with basal clay was made and the potential for dynamic geomorphological
depositional processes. created by the proximity of Big Willow Creek. indicates a
possibility for cultural material at greater depths.
Investigation of the subsurface
deposits at this site and further exploration of the substantial soil zones may generate
significant data concerning aboriginal use of perennial stream terraces in upland areas.
Limited testing is necessary to confirm the eligibility of this site for nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places.

41RT277
This prehistoric site is situated on a slight. barely discernible rise on the east
side of an unnamed. intermittent tributary of Walnut Creek at a elevation of 360 feet
MSL. Site area is approximately 75 by 100 meters. Three small chert tertiary flakes
were seen on the surface: seven subsurface shovel probes with 1/4" sample screening
yielded one chert chip. Maximum depth of sandy matrix was 40 centimeters. with the
average being approximately 29 centimeters below present ground surface. Soils are
mapped as Axtell/Robco series. The site is located in a improved pasture previously
used for cotton production. The ephemeral and surficial nature of the cultural deposits

....

_--_._------

- - -...

--~--------------.-----.-

......

-----­

•....

-~-.-----

Prehistoric Site Descriptions / 39
and the disturbed soils. seem to negate the potential for meaningful data yield at this
site.

41RT278
This prehistoric site is situated at an elevation of 360 feet MSL in an improved
pasture which borders the east side of an unnamed tributary of Walnut Creek. The
site covers an area of approximately 75 by 150 meters. Soils are mapped as Axtell
series. Total cultural material encountered consisted of four small interior flakes and a
3 by 3 cm lateral edge-modified flake from the surface and two interior flakes from five
shovel tests with 1/4" sample recovery.
A large piece of charcoal encountered in
Shovel Test 2 appeared to be recently burned tree root.
Potential for significant
archeological data yield at this site appears to be minimal due to the paucity of
cultural remains. lack of subsurface deposits. and the disturbed nature of the area due
to clearing and subsequent cultivation and pasture improvements.

41RT279
This prehistoric site covers an area of approximately 160 by 50 meters at an
elevation of 360 feet MSL. Soils are mapped as Axtell series. A gentle rise in the
surrounding flat improved pasture appears to generally conform to the distribution of
artifactual debris. Eight small tertiary flakes were seen on the surface and four shovel
tests with 1/4" sample screening yielded one fragment of possibly burned ferruginous
sandstone.
Maximum depth of sandy deposits was 26 centimeters below present
ground surface. Cultural debris seems to be primarily restricted to surface scatter that
has been severely affected by historic land use. negating the prospect for retention of
meaningful archeological data.

41RT280
This prehistoric site. situated on the east side of an unnamed tributary of Walnut
Creek at an elevation of 360 feet MSL. covers an area of approximately 50 meters
square. Soils are mapped as Robco series. Documentation was done on the basis of
one chert secondary flake and two pieces of burned quartzite seen on the ground
surface. Neither of the two shovel probes with 1/4" mesh sample screening produced
any cultural material. Depth of sandy matrix ranged from 22 to 30 centimeters before
contact with basal clay. The location has been cleared. farmed. and is currently an
improved pasture. Due to its apparently surficial nature. it is unlikely that meaningful
data could be recovered by further work at the site.

41RT283
This prehistoric site is on a substantial knoll and its slopes on the east side of
an unnamed tributary, 300 meters upstream from its confluence with Walnut Creek.
Elevation ranges from 330 to 350 feet MSL, and site area is approximately 100 by 200
meters. Soils are mapped as Dutek series. Nine chert flakes were seen on the surface.
Seven subsurface probes were done with an aggregate yield of 25 flakes and fragments.
predominantly tertiary, and one burned quartzite fragment (3 x 3 cm).
Cultural

40 / Calvert Lignite Mine
material was recovered from 20 to 80 centimeters below ground surface. and sandy
deposits. with the potential for containing additional buried aboriginal materials.
extended beyond one meter in some probes. The high recovery of subsurface cultural
materials and the depth of sandy soils indicate a possibility for intact deposits. These
deposits may yield information concerning aboriginal activities and site functions
associated with this upland. intermittent tributary. Subsurface testing is necessary to
evaluate the site's eligibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.

41RT284
This prehistoric site occupies a prominent hill on the north side of Walnut Creek
and affords a commanding view of the drainage and broad. flat floodplain. which
extends from the base of the hill south to the creek channel and well beyond. Soils are
mapped as Padina series. Elevation of the site is 340 to 350 feet MSL and site size
is approximately 200 by 450 meters. Shovel testing with 1/4" sample screening was
conducted because the physiographic setting appeared to possess attributes favorable to
aboriginal occupation. The initial probes. situated on the west and central portions of
the site. yielded minimal amounts of lithic debitage with sandy matrix increasing in
depth from west to east.
Shovel tests in the southeastern quadrant of the site
encountered an increased density and variety of cultural debris at depths up to one
meter below present ground surface without contacting basal clay. Materials recovered
included charcoal. burned nut shell (hickory or walnut). tiny unburned bone fragments.
72 burned bone fragments. an unidentified small mammal tooth as well as numerous
chert flakes and fragments. many of which were burned. Although this site has been
cleared and plowed. a good probability remains that buried cultural materials retain
integrity. and due to their diversity have the potential of contributing information
Limited testing is
concerning aboriginal use of this perennial drainage and area.
necessary to determine the eligibility of this site for nomination to the National
Register of Historic Places.

41RT285
This extensive prehistoric site occupies the crest and slopes of a large hill which
overlooks Walnut Creek and its floodplain to the south and is flanked on both lateral
Elevation ranges from 340 to 350 feet MSL:
edges by intermittent tributaries.
approximate site area is 300 by 500 meters.
Most of the site is wooded. negating
disturbance by historic agricultural practices. Soils are mapped as Dutek series. Ground
surface visibility was zero. Shovel testing with 1/4" sample screening was instituted
to inspect this obviously high probability area. All eight probes yielded chert debitage
and several produced charcoal and small burned quartzite and petrified wood fragments.
ranging in depth from 20 to 80 centimeters below ground surface.
Several of the
subsurface tests did not contact basal clay when extended to a depth of one meter.
indicating a possibility of deeper cultural deposits. This site appears to possess the
potential for meaningful archeological data yield considering the presence and depth of
buried prehistoric remains. and the possibly undisturbed nature of the deposits. Limited
testing is necessary to determine the eligibility of this site for nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places.

Prehistoric Site Descriptions / 41

41RT287
This prehistoric site is situated on the western nose of a broad. flat upland point
bordered on the east and south sides by the Walnut Creek channel and on the west by
a deeply incised. unnamed tributary. Site area is approximately 100 by 200 meters and
elevation is 350 feet MSl. Soils are mapped as Silawa series.
Shovel testing with
1/4" mesh sample screening was undertaken because the area appeared to be
physiographically attractive for aboriginal use. Five probes recovered a total of thirteen
pieces of lithic debitage. During site testing and documentation eight to ten additional
flakes and/or fragments were noticed on the surface.
Depth of sandy matrix ranged
from 16 to 100 centimeters below present ground surface: however. only a single
secondary flake was recovered below 40 centimeters. The site has been cleared and
The paucity of subsurface
used for farming and more recently improved pasture.
aboriginal debris and its apparent absence in an undisturbed context. diminish the
prospects for the presence of archeological remains that retain any degree of integrity.

41RT288
This prehistoric site is situated on a high ridge paralleling Walnut Creek on its
west side.
The ridge provides a commanding view of the floodplain and immediate
access to the upland divide to the north and west (Fig. 3A).
Elevation above mean
sea level is 350 to 360 feet and established site size is extensive. approximately 100 by
400 meters. Soils are mapped as Dutek series. No cultural material was observed
during survey transects but the location displayed a very high probability for aboriginal
utilization. Three shovel tests with 1/4" sample screening recovered 37 pieces of lithic
chipping debris. several showing intentional heat treatment and others are potlidded.
Additionally. one 5 by 5 cm burned quartzite rock may be a displaced hearth stone.
All probes were dug to a depth of 80 centimeters below present ground surface and
No contact with basal
prehistoric debris was recovered from all levels in each test.
clay was made. indicating a possibility for deeper remains. The quantity and depth of
prehistoric materials encountered demonstrate a potential for intact deposits able to
yield data concerning upland site function and activities.
Subsurface testing is
necessary to determine site eligibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places.

41RT290
This small prehistoric site. approximately 50 by 50 meters in size. is situated at
an elevation of 355 feet MSL in the center of a flat upland point. equidistant from
Walnut Creek and an intermittent tributary. Soils are mapped as Silawa series. A
single tertiary flake was seen on a gopher backdirt pile. necessitating shovel test
evaluation. Two shovel tests to 80 centimeters below present ground surface recovered
one tertiary flake. This site does not appear to have the potential for meaningful data
yield due to its extremely ephemeral nature.

42 / Calvert Lignite Mine
41RT292
This prehistoric site is situated on a sandy terrace on the south side of Walnut
Creek at an elevation of 350 feet MSL Soils are mapped as Dutek series. Areal
extent is approximately 125 by 300 meters.
Initial attention to the location was
prompted by discovery of an undecorated. fine sand and grog tempered. aboriginal
ceramic sherd on a gopher backdirt mound. Further surface examination yielded two
Perdiz arrow points and freshwater mussel shell. Two subsurface probes with 1/4"
sample screening were done to assess the potential for buried deposits.
Recovery
included an additional Perdiz arrow point at 20 centimeters below present ground
surface, nine pieces of lithic debitage. charcoal. burned nut shell (hickory or walnut).
burned and unburned bone. mussel shell and. at one meter below surface. a fingernail
punctate design. sand and grog tempered. ceramic sherd. Both probes were dug to one
meter and neither contacted basal clay. Temporally diagnostic artifacts arrow points
and ceramics - indicate occupation of the site during the Late Prehistoric Period. The
diversity and density of observed cultural materials suggest intensive use of the area.
On the basis of preliminary investigation. this site. more than any other documented
during this fieldwork, presents a positive prospect for significant research potential.
Data yield. from deposits of the nature exhibited so far. could add meaningful
information to the existing data base concerning use of perennial streams in upland
locales.
Subsurface testing will be necessary to determine the site's eligibility for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.
41RT294
This prehistoric site occupies an upland hill. elevation 380 feet MSL. which
borders the south side of the Walnut Creek valley. Areal extent is approximately 100
by 150 meters. Soils are mapped as Axtell/Axtell 3 series. Two subsurface shovel
probes with 1/4" recovery were done. with depth of sandy matrix being 23 and 35
centimeters below present ground surface. Three small interior flakes were recovered.
Additionally, one interior flake and a quartzite cobble with two primary flakes removed
were observed on the surface. This site has been cleared and extensively farmed.
Erosion and deflation are rampant and ongoing.
It seems highly unlikely that
meaningful archeological data could be gleaned from this site due to the disturbed
nature of the deposits. limited amount of cultural materials and their lack of substantial
depth.
41RT29S
This prehistoric site is on an isolated portion of an upland ridge which overlooks
the Walnut Creek valley to the north. Areal extent is approximately 75 meters square
and elevation above mean sea level is 375 feet. Soils are mapped as Edge series.
Due to the lack of surface visibility and high probability for aboriginal activity at this
location. four probes were done to test for subsurface materials.
Depth of sandy
matrix ranged from 3 to 35 centimeters below ground surface. Subsurface sampling
recovered eight small interior flakes and two utilized flake fragments which fit together.
Although the site is wooded. erosIon has apparently removed much of the sandy soil.

Prehistoric Site Descriptions / 43
This site appears to hold little prospect for meaningful archeological information due to
the limited depth of soils and paucity of cultural remains.

41RT296
This extensive prehistoric site is situated along a high ridge paralleling the Walnut
Creek channel on its south side. The ridge line forms the northern extent of the local
upland divide bordering the stream. Site area covers approximately 100 by 600 meters
and elevation is 370 to 380 feet MSL. Soils are mapped as Edge series. No surface
material was observed during transect coverage: however, because of the physiographic
attributes, shovel testing with 1/4" sample screening was done.
Seven probes were
completed.
Recovery included 45 pieces of lithic chipping debris, several burned
quartzite and petrified wood fragments and one arrow point preform, indicating activity
during the Late Prehistoric Period. Depth of sandy matrix varied greatly, ranging from
27 centimeters to more than one meter, with the deepest aboriginal debris at one meter
below surface.
Most of the site has been cleared and subjected to a variety of
agricultural activities: however. the potential exists for buried cultural deposits which
retain integrity. Further investigation may yield information useful in interpreting upland
habitation by aboriginals. Subsurface testing is necessary at this site to determine its
eligibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.

41RT297
This prehistoric site is located primarily on the nose of a sandy knoll jutting out
into the south side of the Walnut Creek floodplain. The drainage flows by the foot of
the knoll on its north and west sides. Soils are mapped as Edge series.
Elevation
ranges from 330 to 340 feet MSL and areal extent is approximately 50 by 100 meters.
No cultural material was visible on the surface: although four subsurface shovel probes
with 1/4" recovery yielded 41 pieces of chipping debris. small fragments of burned rock
and bits of charcoal.
Also recovered was a single sand tempered ceramic sherd.
indicating site use during the Late Prehistoric Period.
Aboriginal debris was
encountered to a depth of one meter below surface . with the extent of sandy matrix
ranging from 45 centimeters to more than one meter before contact with basal clay.
The potential for intact subsurface cultural remains and the diversity of materials
encountered seem to indicate a possibility for retrieval of data concerning upland use by
prehistoric groups.
Subsurface testing is necessary at this site to determine its
eligibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.

41RT301
This prehistoric site has a horizontal extent of approximately 200 by 350 meters
at an elevation of 340 to 350 feet MSL.
The site is on a south-facing ridge
overlooking the Walnut Creek floodplain. Soils are mapped as Dutek series.
Surface
visibility was nil: however shovel testing was warranted due to landform. Five probes
with 1/4" recovery yielded lithic debitage at depths ranging from 20 to 100 centimeters
below ground surface.
Charcoal flecks were also seen in one test.
Total chipping
debris inventory from initial assessment was 58 flakes and fragments. predominantly

44 / Calvert Lignite Mine
small tertiary. During documentation. a biface overshot flake (ca. 1.5cm sq) was seen
on the surface. and inspection of an eroded area south of the site produced several
additional small flakes. Due to the abundant quantity and substantial depth of cultural
materials. it appears possible that archeological remains exist which may produce data
concerning upland utilization and habitation,
Subsurface testing is necessary to
determine if this site is eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places,

41RT303
This prehistoric site is situated on a small knoll overlooking Walnut Creek and its
floodplain to the south and bordered on the east by a substantial intermittent tributary,
Site area. which is restricted to the knolltop. is approximately 75 by 75 meters, Soils
Elevation is 340 feet MSL.
No cultural material was
are mapped as Axtell series.
seen on the surface.
Three subsurface samples with 1/4" recovery yielded 20 small
interior flakes: most between 20 and 40 centimeters below present ground surface.
The site has been cleared and
Maximum depth of recovery was 50 centimeters.
erosion and deflation of the sandy matrix overburden has been active. The shallowness
of cultural materials and their ephemeral nature seem to negate the potential for
retrieval of significant archeological data from the site.

41RT305
This prehistoric site is situated on the nose of a small knoll on the west side of
Walnut Creek. overlooking the broad floodplain to the east and south. The site covers
an area of approximately 60 by 60 meters at an elevation of 330 to 340 feet MSL.
lack of surface visibility necessitated shovel
Soils are mapped as Padina series.
testing to ascertain the presence or absence of cultural material at this high probability
location.
Three probes with 1/4" sample screening were done; all yielded lithic
Depth of sandy matrix ranged from 83
debitage. and two also produced charcoal.
centimeters to more than one meter. with aboriginal debris being recovered to a depth
of one meter below surface.
The abundant recovery from subsurface sampling and
established depth of cultural deposits indicate a potential for meaningful data yield from
this site.
Subsurface testing is necessary to determine the site's eligibility for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.

41RT306
This prehistoric site is located on the tip of a finger-like ridge bordered on the
north by an intermittent tributary and on the south by the Walnut Creek floodplain.
Elevation is 330 to 340 feet MSl and areal site extent is approximately 100 by 100
meters. Soils are mapped as Dutek series. No cultural material was observed on the
surface during transect coverage.
Shovel testing was done due to the attractive
physiographic setting. Recovery from three probes with 1/4" sample screening totaled
six pieces of lithic chipping debris. Depth of sandy matrix exceeded one meter in all
The site has not been cleared. increasing the possibility of intact
subsurface tests.
remains. Although the yield from shovel testing was low. the depth of sandy deposits.

Prehistoric Site Descriptions / 45
and the undisturbed nature and recovery of cultural material up to one meter below
ground surface. indicate a possibility of in situ archeological remains. Such remains
could be of significance in interpreting upland use by prehistoric groups. Subsurface
testing is necessary to determine the site's eligibility for nomination to the National
Register of Historic Places.

41RT315
This prehistoric site is situated on a substantial hill and its slope on the east
side of Bee Branch. A commanding view of the drainage floodplain and the hills to
the west is available from the site. Easy access to the broad flat. upland divide to
the east is also afforded from the site. Elevation of the site ranges from 390 - 400
feet MSL. Soils at the site are mapped as Dutek series. Site area is approximately
150 meters by 150 meters. Shovel testing was conducted because the physiographic
setting appeared to be favorable to aboriginal occupation.
Four probes with 1/4"
sample screening were done. Twelve small interior flakes were recovered from three of
the tests.
No cultural material was encountered in the the remaining probe.
One
shovel test extended to a depth of one meter below surface. the other three contacted
basal clay at 30 centimeters or less.
The site has been cleared. farmed. and is
currently being used as an improved pasture. Additional potentially disturbing factors
are the sloping nature of the site with the subsequent possibility of secondary
deposition downslope. erosion. and deflation.
Although this site contains limited
amounts of buried cultural material. the ephemeral nature, the shallow depth, and the
potential for disturbance appear to negate the possibility for significant archeological
yield.

41RT317
This prehistoric site is situated on a small. low, barely discernible rise on the
east side of Bee Branch. The rise is located in the center of a terrace which parallels
and overlooks the drainage. The terrace is flanked on its north and south sides by
small tributary channels. The floodplain of Bee Branch is immediately west of the site.
and to the east a long gentle slope extends upward to the top of a hill which
constitutes the western edge of the upland divide separating Bee Branch and Big
Willow Creek. Areal extent is restricted to approximately 30 meters by 25 meters.
Elevation of the site is 380 feet MSL. Soils are mapped as Dutek series. No surface
material was observed: however, shovel testing was done due to the high probability for
Three probes with 1/4" sample recovery were
aboriginal habitation at the location.
conducted. Small tertiary flakes. fragments of burned ferruginous sandstone. tiny bits
of charcoal and a small. thin biface fragment were recovered. The depth of the sandy
matrix ranged from 60 meters- below ground surface to more than a meter. This site
has been cleared and farmed. Due to the variety of cultural materials encountered. the
potential for features (burned rock and charcoal) and the apparent concentration of
artifactual debris from 60 centimeters to 80 centimeters depth. there appears to be a
possibility for significant data yield. 41RT317 is recommended for testing in order to
assess the nature and integrity of the subsurface aboriginal deposits and determine the
site's eligibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.

46 / Calvert Lignite Mine

41RT318
This prehistoric site is situated on the backslope of a long ridge formed by two
intermittent tributaries of Bee Branch. which is immediately west of the site. Elevation
is 360 - 370 feet MSL and site size is estimated to be 75 by 150 meters. SoBs at the
site are mapped as Dutek series.
No cultural material was observed on the surface;
however. shovel probing was warranted due to the attractive physiographic setting of
the location. Five tests with 1/4" sample screening. were done with a total yield of
eleven small tertiary flakes.
No cultural material was recovered deeper than 35
centimeters below present ground surface.
The site has been cleared. used for
cultivation and is now an improved pasture. Due to the sloping nature of the location.
erosion and deflation are ongoing. No further work is recommended for this site due
to the ephemeral nature of the cultural deposits. their lack of substantial depth below
surface and the potential for disturbance.

41RT320
This prehistoric site is situated on the low slope of a large hill located on the
west side of Bee Branch. Site areal extent is 100 by 100 meters. The elevation is
380 feet MSL. The floodplain of the creek is visible to the immediate east. while to
the west the uplands are easily accessible. Soils are mapped as Axtell series.
No
surface material was seen. Five shovel tests were conducted due to the apparent high
probability for aboriginal use. Total recovery was two tiny tertiary flakes. No further
work is recommended at this site due to the extremely ephemeral nature of the cultural
deposits.

41RT321
This aboriginal site is situated on a small rise located on a point of land formed
by Bee Branch and an intermittent feeder that enters the stream from the east.
Elevation of the site is 360 feet MSL and areal extent is 50 by 50 meters. Soils at
the site are mapped as Dutek series. No cultural material was observed on the surface
but shovel testing was warranted due to the probability for aboriginal occupation at the
location.
Three probes were done using 1/4" sample recovery. Total debitage yield
was three small tertiary flakes. and a Waco Sinker of banded quartzite. The Waco
Sinker was recovered from Shovel Test 3 at a depth of approximately 40 centimeters
below present ground surface. The site area has been partially cleared and is currently
used as an improved pasture. Slight erosion and deflation are ongoing but. in general.
the site seems fairly undisturbed. Although artifact yield was minimal. the presence of
a Waco Sinker possibly indicates an Early Archaic component.
Limited testing is
necessary to further assess the subsurface deposits and to determine the eligibility of
this site for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.

Prehistoric Site Descriptions / 47

41RT322
This prehistoric site is situated on the toe slope of a large hill on the west bank
of Bee Branch. Elevation is 380 feet MSL and site size is estimated to be 100 by
100 meters. Soils at the site are mapped as Dutek series. Shovel testing with 1/4"
screening was conducted to determine if subsurface cultural deposits were present. No
cultural material was visible on the surface. Three small tertiary flakes were recovered
at depths ranging from 0 to 40 centimeters below ground surface. The site has been
partially cleared. and due to the slope. erosion and deflation are active. Due to the
ephemeral nature of the cultural deposits and their lack of substantial depth. the
potential for significant archeological data recovery appears to be minimal.

41RT323
This prehistoric site is situated on two low. barely discernible. adjacent rises on
the west side of Bee Branch. Elevation of the site is 360 feet MSL and site area is
approximately 30 by 70 meters. Soils are mapped as Padina series.
No cultural
Shovel testing was conducted to determine
material was observed on the surface.
whether subsurface cultural deposits were present. Three probes with 1/4" sample
recovery yielded eight small tertiary chert flakes. The site area has been cleared. farmed
and is now being used as an improved pasture. These land use practices are causing
deflation and erosion of the soils and it is likely that cultural deposits have also been
disturbed. Only one flake was found deeper than 40 centimeters below ground surface.
The lack of depth of the cultural material. their ephemeral nature and the potential for
disturbance seem to negate the potential for meaningful data yield at this site.
Artifact Descriptions

lITHICS
In general. artifact collection was confined to temporally diagnostic materials.
which would include projectile points and ceramics. Three exceptions were made in the
field.
A tertiary flake of non-local 'chert was collected from 41RT295 in hopes of
determining its origin through identification by a lithic specialist. Also collected. at
41 RT253. was the distal portion of a biface and several interior flakes which on initial
inspection appeared to be of the same lithic material.
It was felt that if positive
identification were made it would be possible to make some statement about stages of
tool manufacturing at the site. Additionally. a Waco Sinker (Fig. 4A) was recovered
Due to the uniqueness of this artifact. it was
from a shovel test at 41RT321.
collected. The specimen is of coarse grained. red quartzite with shallow grooves around
each end.
Four temporally diagnostic projectile points were recovered during the survey. All
are arrow points chronologically assignable to the Late Prehistoric (Neoarchaic) Period.
Additionally. one arrow point preform was collected. Descriptions of each are presented
below. Type designations follow Turner and Hester (1985). Asterisks imply incomplete
dimensions. The previously mentioned tertiary flake. which is a fine grained. dark red

--------

----

~~--------

Prehistoric Site Descriptions / 49
chert. was identified as being material locally available in the Trinity River Basin
(Goode 1986). Microscopic examination of the biface distal fragment and the several
flakes collected nearby revealed that the tiny inclusions in the chert were not the same.
Also. it was apparent under magnification that the grain size of the pieces were very
dissimilar.
Therefore. it had to be concluded that no direct link could be made
between the tool and the debitage.
41RT267
Steiner arrow point (Fig. 4E)
Description: triangular blade. straight irregularly serrated lateral blade edges. prominent
barbed shoulders. expanding stem. concave base. unifacially flaked.
Material: dark gray. medium grained chert. slight reddish tint may indicate heat
treatment.
Dimensions: length. 12mm*: thickness. 3mm: width. 14mm*: stem length. 3.5mm: neck
width. 6.5mm: base width. Smm.
Cross section: plano convex
Provenience: shovel test 2. 20-40 cm below surface
41RT292
Perdiz arrow points. 3 specimens (Fig. 4C.D.F)
Description (Specimen A. Fig. 4C): elongated. triangular blade. straight lateral blade
edges. prominent barb shoulders with pronounced serrations on barbs. stem missing.
however. beginning of contraction discernible. bifacially flaked.
Material: whitish. fine grained chert.
Dimensions:
length. 2Smm*; thickness. 3mm: width. 14mm*: stem length. *: neck
width. Smm. base width. *
Cross section: lenticular
Provenience: surface
Description (Specimen B. Fig. 4D): subtriangular blade extensively reworked. one lateral
edge concave. the other convex. both barbs missing. contracting stem. bifacially flaked.
Material: tan. medium grained chert
Dimensions: length. 23mm: thickness. 2.5mm: width. 11mm*: stem length. 8mm: neck
width. 4.5mm: base width. 2.5mm
Cross section: plano
Provenience: shovel test 2. 0-20 cm below surface
Description (Specimen C. Fig. 4F): subtriangular blade. one lateral edge convex. the
other concave. prominent barbs with fine serrations. stem contracting. unifacially flaked.
Material: yellowish tan. medium grained chert

SO/Calvert Lignite Mine
Dimensions:
length. 25.5mm: thickness. 3.5mm: width. 20mm*: stem length. 5mm:
neck width. 4.5mm: base width. 3.5mm
Cross section: plano-convex
Provenience: surface
41RT296
Arrow point preform (Fig. 4G)
Description: blade incomplete but lateral edges appear straight. base expanding and
somewhat ovoid. small bits of cortex on one face at base. bifacially flaked.
Material: tannish gray. coarse grained chert
Dimensions: length. 19.5mm; thickness. 3.5mm; width. 19mm
Provenience: Shovel test 1. 0-20 cm below surface

CERAMICS
The three earthenware sherds found on the Calvert survey at sites 41 RT292 and
41RT297 belong to two technological wares. The first is the sandy paste ware that
was of great typological variation and wide distribution through most of late
Prehistoric Texas. The second is a sherd tempered ware with affinities to the Caddoan
culture area of northeast Texas.
The co-occurrence of these wares in Robertson
County is similar to their combination in north-central Texas. especially Hill. Mclennan
and Bosque counties (Brown n.d.). The analysis was based on a 7X examination with
a binocular microscope.
41RT292
Each of the two sherds found here belong to one of the defined wares.
The
sandy paste sherd is decorated with widely spaced fingernail punctates in horizontal
rows (Fig, 4B).
The exterior surface is tan to brown. unslipped. and was smoothed
before punctation. Sand particles show on the surface. The interior surface is black.
smoothed and otherwise featureless.
The black interior is from a carbon streak as
wide as the entire sherd.
Solid particles vary from very fine to coarse sand sizes.
The largest particles are angular chunks that appear to be chert: all others are clear or
brownish transparent quartzitic sand varying from sub-rounded to angular in shape.
The sherd or grog tempered sherd has a brown polished exterior with clear
polishing marks. The saddle-shaped double curve of the sherd indicates its position in
the shoulder/neck portion of a probable jar or restricted mouth olla. and the polishing
marks run vertically on this section. The interior surface is dark gray. also polished.
but the polishing marks run horizontally_ The sherd interior has a wide carbon streak
and abundant. very fine to medium sand size. sub-angular and angular quartzitic sand
grains. The sherd also has medium to coarse sand size sub-rounded and sub-angular
crushed tan pottery fragments. The sands are likely natural inclusions in the clay. and
the crushed sherds probably were added deliberately as a tempering agent.

Prehistoric Site Descriptions

I

51

41RT297
The single sherd from this site is akin to the sandy paste sherd from 41 RT292
in having a tan to brown. smoothed exterior surface. a black. smoothed interior surface.
a black carbon streak as wide as the interior. and copious sub-rounded to angular
quartzitic sand particles that protrude through both surfaces.
Large chert particles
observed in the 41RT292 specimen are lacking in the examined section of this sherd.
These two sherds are closely similar. The lack of punctations on the 41RT297 sherd
separates it typologically from the sherd from 41 RT292. but the similarity of materials.
technology and resultant physical characteristics group these two sherds in the same
overall ware.

--

...... -------------~

This page intentionally left blank.

SITE DISTRIBUTION
As the total aggregate of known sites within a given geographical area increases,
a discernible pattern of aboriginal locational choices should emerge. The distribution of
prehistoric sites across the landscape is not arbitrary and it is reasonable to assume
that logical choices underlie the specifics of site location. Given that a developed site
selection system exists, archeologists or anthropologists should be able to make
statements concerning the activities or strategies of a particular group in a given
region. Of major importance to the locational distribution of prehistoric populations is
subsistence procurement.
Whether the adaptive strategy emphasizes hunting or
gathering, proximity to a desired resource would appear to be of primary importance to
general site location. This concept of a site location/resource procurement relationship
is not new (Plog and Hill 1971: Binford 1980: Butzer 1982). Why these decisions
were made and how they changed or remained constant through time would be an
integral part of interpreting a given settlement pattern.
When utilizing only survey data, as in this discussion, the term site distribution
might be more precise. for without chronological control it is impossible to determine a
In this instance. all types of sites are included in the
given settlement pattern.
distribution. i.e.. ranging from "any locus of cultural materials, artifacts or facilities"
(Plog and Hill 1971:8) to the more elaborate system of sites characterized by foraging
Either view of site definition, simple or
or collecting strategies (Binford 1980).
complex, reflects a cognizant subsistence strategy In response to the natural
environment.
The available data on the current area of interest, the Walnut Creek drainage
basin, is the result of several previous surveys (see Previous Investigations) and the
current study. More than 100 aboriginal sites have been recorded in the basin. More
data is forthcoming as a result of further surveys, and excavation of known sites will
greatly expand the potential for conclusions on site activities and temporal affiliations.
Certain patterns. however. may presently be seen. Based on areal extent and density
of recorded cultural material, two types of prehistoric sites appear to be represented in
the Walnut Creek Basin -residential camps and limited activity sites. The former are
proximal to a permanent water source in a transitional environmental zone, between the
bottomlands of the creek and its major tributaries and the uplands, Situated thusly.
subsistence procurement from three natural floral and faunal habitats would be
facilitated. thereby maximizing resource opportunities.
The limited activity sites tend to be associated with a single ecological zone, in
this case the higher upland area, and were, in all likelihood, used for the exploitation of
only one or two resources. These sites are often situated near headwater channels.
Cultural deposits at these limited activity sites would have been minimal because of the
temporary nature of the occupation forced by the lack of water and limited resource

53
- - - .....

--.-~.----

......

-.-~---

- - - - -...... - - - - - ­

........

54 / Calvert Lignite Mine
choice. This possibility may be reflected in the statements of local farmers who report
areas where projectile points were once found. Subsequent to decades of cultivation
and erosion. no artifacts have been seen for years.
These locations may have
represented short term hunting camps.
Possibly there is a missing link in this
explanation of the local adaptive system.
Historic land use in the area may have
obliterated or removed ephemeral sites in the flat upland divides away from water
resources.
Aboriginals in the study area apparently located their sites where a maximum
number of resources could be exploited while expending the least amount of energy
during procurement. This strategy implies an attempt toward facilitation of subsistence
acquisition and affirms that a primary concern during the site selection process is
proximity to desired resources.
As more data is compiled on the drainage basin.
especially through recovery from controlled excavation and establishment of temporal
affiliations of sites. research should be directed toward interpreting the manner in which
this adaptive strategy was manifested and whether changes occurred through time.
It should be noted that certain intangible aspects of aboriginal socia-political
ideology and organization may have affected settlement patterning.
While this is a
nebulous area when referring to prehistoric hunter - gatherer decision making, it seems
appropriate to allude to a few possibilities in order to accentuate the point of unknown
parameters. Site choice could have been influenced by the proximity of other groups or
the potential for their incursion into occupation areas.
Religious taboos may have
eliminated or favored certain locations. Also. preferred or required travel routes may
have played a role in site location.

Predictive Model
An intensive cultural resource survey of 4.800 acres (1.618 ha.) of the Calvert
Prospect has now been completed, allowing an assessment of the archeological potential
of the mining area.
In order to facilitate the structuring and/or placement of future
mining related operations. a predictive model for the location of aboriginal sites was
devised.
The possibility exists that future mining plans may be designed to avoid
areas of high probability or actual site locations. and thereby preserve the resource.
The model was tested on Area B (2000 acres) and the degree of accuracy attained
indicated that it would function as a useful tool in upcoming efforts. Another positive
potential would be the designation of areas to be shovel tested during future intensive
pedestrian surveys.
Four environmental categories were considered during the development of this
model (Plog 1971:47):

1. Water resource - availability. permanence. proximity;
2. Landform - type. accessibility. slope:

--------~.-

-------

....

.........

-~--

.. ~ - - ­

Site Distribution / 55
3. Soil - type. areal extent. slope: and.
4. Plant/animal community - types. densities.
Results of other surveys conducted within the region were also utilized during the
formulation (see Previous Investigations).
The importance of water to human subsistence is obvious: however. the possibility
of sites distant from water sources was not discounted.
Instead of attempting to
numerically quantify the horizontal distance from accessible water to aboriginal sites. it
was inferred that sites would be situated on the first rise above the floodplain. high
enough to insure safety from flooding. Sites away from perennial streams such as Big
Willow and Walnut creeks. would tend to be near intermittent tributaries and springs. if
present. Within the project universe. the landforms that most often meet the above
conditions are high and low terraces. knolls jutting into the floodplain and upland valley
margins which extend to the floodplains of the major drainages. These were targeted
as localities which would be favored for aboriginal use. Of major importance in this
model is the type of soil. which would directly affect the desirability of the location
through its morphological attributes (drainage class. permeability and slope). and the
plant and animal communities it would support. It was felt that sandy soil would be
the most attractive to potential inhabitants and that the environmentally transitional
zones would offer the widest range of subsistence choices to hunter - gatherer groups.
Predictive models are only capable of identifying patterned site distribution. thus the
probability is that most of the sites in the unsurveyed areas will be situated in areas
that conform to the known settlement pattern.
Conversely. not all high probability
areas will contain sites. Anomalous or extremely rare site types. such as single graves
or historic aboriginal camps. can only be identified from specific evidence gained by
subsurface testing or survey.
The initial 4.000 acre survey was done in two approximately equal parts (Area A
and Area B). using slightly different approaches on each.
The first portion was
completely surveyed using only surface inspection. One prehistoric site was found on
the basis of surficial material.
During the survey. it was continuously noted that
vegetation was obscuring the surface. that the potential for buried sites existed along
the creek borders. and that the sandy soils often quickly covered surficial material.
During the pedestrian transects. areas were noted on field maps where shovel testing
seemed warranted. Nine locations were probed. resulting in the recording of five sites.
These results were incorporated into the developing predictive model and tested during
survey of the remaining 2.000 acres.
Prior to initiation of the second phase of the survey (Area B). areas which fit
the established predictive model were shaded on two Hammond USGS topographic
sheets. One copy remained with the Principal Investigator and the other was used as
a master field map.
Nineteen prehistoric sites were recorded in the second phase.
Fourteen were in areas that had been predicted as likely for aboriginal occupation.
Twelve of these were identified only by shovel probes. Additionally. that portion of a
previously recorded site. 41RT240. that extends into the current project area. was

...............

__ - - - - - ­
..

56 / Calvert Lignite Mine
found by shovel testing. Twenty-five prehistoric sites were recorded within the 4.000
acre survey area: 17 found by subsurface probing in areas designated as probable for
aboriginal habitation. These results emphasize the necessity of subsurface testing where
the potential for buried sites is strong.
Further support for the construction of a predictive model. followed by survey and
subsurface probing. is found in reviewing the locations of transects from the 1978
sample survey (Good. Turpin and Freeman 1980). Transects 87 and 90 passed through
sites 41 RT301 and 41 RT306 respectively. Shovel probes in high probability areas were
not used in that survey. thus these buried sites were missed.
Conversely. numerous
areas were shovel tested with negative results during the current survey. These were
along intermittent tributaries and adjacent to isolated finds.
Four sites that were
surface exposures. contributed to the predictive model by illustrating the types of
landforms that were likely to contain sites.
Maps delineating probability areas and
shovel probes are on file at T ARlo
During the survey of the auxiliary facility areas (approximately 800 acres). the
same predictive model parameters were applied.
The drainage under consideration
during this effort was Bee Branch. Seven prehistoric sites were recorded -- all found
by shovel testing. Five of the locations had been predicted on the USGS topographic
maps prior to entering the field.
The remaining two sites were recorded after field
crew members noted topographic features which appeared to be attractive for aboriginal
These features were so subtle that they did not appear on topographic maps.
use.
No surface material was observed at any of the sites.
The degree of accuracy attained during the implementation of the predictive
model. during the survey of Area B and the haul road corridor. affirm its utility as an
aid in locating sites that are buried or sites where surface remains are very ephemeral
or completely obscured by ground cover.
Figure 5 represents the application of the
generated model to the remainder of the Calvert Prospect. It should be stated that
during fieldwork attention must be paid to subtle rises that may not show on USGS
topographic maps.
Also. it must be noted that on Figure 5 many areas are not
shaded which fit the model. These are the locations of recorded sites.

- -...

-~-

~

...

~--

....

­

. . / 57
Site Distribution

BABILITY ARE AS FOR
HIGHARCHE
PRO OLOGICAL SITES
Colvert Prospect

2 ..

FIGURE

. I sites. Calvert Prospect.
pro bability areas for archeologlca

This page intentionally left blank.

HISTORIC RESOURCES
THE HISTORY OF ROBERTSON COUNTY
The area now comprising Robertson County was part of the colony established by
empresario Sterling Clack Robertson.
The Texas Association. also known as the
Nashville Company because it was established in Nashville. Tennessee. was responsible
for settling the area. Following disputes that involved Mexican immigration laws and
even differences with Stephen F. Austin. Robertson received permission to colonize the
Brazos River region in the early 1830s. Early settlers to the Robertson County area
were from Tennessee. Alabama. Arkansas and Mississippi. They were joined later by
natives of Louisiana. Georgia and North Carolina.
By 1837. the year following the Texas Revolution. there were sufficient numbers
of residents in the area to warrant the establishment of a county. In December of
that year the Congress of the Republic of Texas created Robertson County from Milam
County.
Later changes in the county's boundaries were made to accommodate the
establishment of new counties. but by 1846 the present boundaries were set.
The
town of Franklin (now referred to as Old Franklin). located on Mud Creek
approximately 10 miles east of present day Calvert. was selected as the first county
seat. The early days of the county were marked by frequent clashes with Indians and
Old Franklin remained a frontier post. In 1850. the county's residents voted to move
the seat of government to Wheelock.
Three years later however. Owensville was
chosen as the county seat.
In 1870. as a result of disagreements with the
carpetbaggers of the Reconstruction government. the railroad town of Calvert was
chosen as the site for the county government. It was not until 1880 that the present
town of Franklin (earlier known as Morgan) became the permanent location for the
county records.
The demise of Owensville. the construction of rail lines. and the growth of new
towns combined to influence the settlement of the county's upland regions. Several
excellent histories have been written regarding the late nineteenth and early twentieth
century economic development of Robertson County. primarily through the growth of
the towns. The rural community of Hammond. described below. is peripheral to the
project area and will only be tangentially affected by the construction of auxiliary
facilities.
Tidwell Prairie. however. will be directly affected by current and future
mining operations. The historic emphasis. research and documentation focuses on that
community. Following a description of the historic sites and a summary of specific site
types. the history of Tidwell Prairie is detailed in the final chapter of this section of
the report.

---~---

59

......•

_-

........••.

~

...

--.~----

. - . - -..

~----.------.

-----

60

/

Calvert Lignite Mine
Hammond

Dr. Benjamin Franklin Hammond (1818-1890) came to Robertson County from
Huntsville. Alabama about 1853. A planter as well as a physician. he established a
large cotton plantation along the Brazos River in the northwestern part of the county.
Following the Civil War. Hammond was successful in having the Houston and Texas
Central rail line constructed through his property. The line gave Hammond and other
area planters. including Robert S. McCall and James Love, direct access to agricultural
markets.
The community of Hammond developed around the new shipping point. Although
it appeared for a time the settlement would become an important agricultural center for
the county. it was soon outgrown by Bremond, which was also established on the
H& TC line. Never incorporated. Hammond had three stores. a school. post office. and
railway station in 1900. By 1950. however. little evidence of the town remained. The
impact on Hammond. through construction of an access road from the power plant to
Texas Highway 6. will be minimal.

-------~

---.- ..- - - - - - . - - - - ­

...........

HISTORIC SITE DESCRIPTIONS
The 48 historic sites recorded or re-evaluated during this survey are described
narrative form. Their salient characteristics are summarized in Table 3.

In

41RT93 - REHBERG HOUSE
This historic site. recorded during the 1978 Calvert-Cole Creek Prospect Survey
(Good. Turpin and Freeman 1980). consists of five log structures built by William
Rehberg on land he purchased December 18. 1896. Rehberg was a native of Germany
who had lived in the I\lew Baden community. The tract was completely wooded at the
time of purchase but was subsequently cleared for farming.
The first two buildings
constructed were a one room house (Fig. 6A) and a double log crib (Fig. 6B). The
house was later expanded to four rooms. with board and batten construction covering
the log room. Two additional utility buildings were later built. also of hewn. notched
logs. A hand dug well and cistern are present at the site. All the log structures are
in excellent condition. Additional structures. recorded as 41RT93A during the second
phase of survey. are approximately 250 meters southeast of the main complex. They
include another log barn and two board and batten sheds. All log structures exhibit
single saddle corner notching (Fig. 7 A).
The logs are both peeled and unpeeled.
Those used in the construction of the barn near the house were of a larger size (8+
in. dia.), The site is located at the eastern edge of the upland divide separating Bee
Branch and Walnut Creek., It is remembered by local residents as the property of Will
McGaha. who purchased the land in 1911. The family of William McGaha (d. 1945)
and Julia Mitchell McGaha (d. 1935) retained ownership of the property until the
1970s. The McGahas had six children. two of whom died in childhood.

41RT241
This historic site is situated on a hill crest on the south side of Walnut Creek at
the northern edge of the upland divide which separates Walnut Creek and South Walnut
Creek. The site. which was originally recorded during the Twin Oaks Survey (TARL
County Files). consists of two structures. The rectangular house. probably built about
1910-1920. has a vertical log foundation replaced at some corners by vertical. cylindrical
cement piers. Exterior walls are board and batten. the gabled roof has corrugated tin
over earlier wood shingles. and the wood sash windows are 4 over 4 panes. All nails
observed were wire. A tin cattle barn is located 50 meters east of the house. Red
unlabeled bricks. old lumber and tin scraps are scattered about the grounds. Artifactual
material observed during documentation included: an old RCA television set. wooden
chairs. a chest of drawers. gardening tools. several washtubs. mason jars. leather
harness remnants with buckles and rings attached. a TOPP COLA bottle from
Savannah. Georgia. and a MR. COLA bottle from Camden. Arkansas. Neither the
farmhouse nor barn/shed appears to possess any unique architectural features.

61

TABLE 3.

Summary of Historic Sites.

0'1

-­
I.,.;)

NlDber

Current Owner

Description

Condition

41RT93

Frieda Rains

Additional structures located by this survey are part of the previously discussed
compl ex of log structures. They are located approximately 400 meters southeast
of the main complex and consist of a log barn in good condition, attached vertical
plank lean-tos and an adjacent vertical board and batten shed.

41RT241

J. W. Ell lott

Small wooden house in deteriorated condition; two tin cattle sheds; no well located; Fair
Site was originally recorded by Espey. Huston-and Associates, lnc. in 1985.

41RT246

Alcoa Aluminum

l i ght scatter of historic debrfs; no structural remains; no well

Poor

41RT247

E.J. Wallace

Sandstone block foundation for house; no structural remains; concrete beam
dairy barn foundation; partially collapsed outbuilding; hand dug well;
E. J. Wa 11 ace house

Poor

41RT248

lester Hailey

Previous site of relocated house; structure is now s1tuated--ca. -1000 -feet to the
northeast; dwelling now used for hay storage; early home of lester Hailey

Poor

41RT249

lester Hailey

Small woo-den house; location of hand dug well. oow collapsed, ascertained from
local informant; once occupied by Sylvester Sterempski,

Good

41RT250

Q. L

Partially collapsed wooden house; log crib in good condition; collapsed out­
buildings; hand dug well; original owner Hose (?) Dean.

Good

41RT251

Reece Yezak

Location of house destroyed by tornado; collapsed log crib; two collapsed wooden
outbuildings; hand dug well; originally occupied by the 5terempski family.

Poor

41RT252

Bruno Okonski

Previous location of house; no structural remains; sandstone block foundation
remnants; hand dug well; tin cistern; outbuilding

Poor

41RT254

Ed Okonski. Sr.

Currently occupied house; complex of farm outbuildings; log crib fn excellent
condition; built by Ed Okonski Sr. 's father.

Excell ent

41RT255

Bettie Clevenger Green

Previous location af house; no structural remains; hand dug well; tin cistern;
occupied at one time by the Sterempski family.

Poor

41RT256

Ruth Cottingham Sorrels Previous location of last Tidwell Prairie school; no structural remains; brick
foundation footing.

Poor

Johnson

Excellent

~

;§
...
.....
rQq'

....:::,

;;

~

<b

Table 3. continued
Number

Current Owner

Description

Condition

41RT257

Ruth Cottingham Sorrels

Collapsed structural remains of last Tidwell Prairie church.

Poor

41RT258

Ruth Cottingham Sorrels

Large wooden house, now used for hay storage; barn; hand dug well

Fa i r

41RT259

Ruth Cottingham Sorrels

Partially collapsed wooden house; well not found.

Poor

41RT260

Ruth Cottingham Sorrels

Large wooden house in excellent condition; complex of farm outbuildings, hand
dug well; built by John Weaver.

Excellent

41RT2'61

Ruth Cottingham Sorrels

Collapsed wooden house; small wooden barn/outbuildi,n9; no well located; occupied
at one time by John Weaver.

Poor

41RT262

Johnnie Hailey

Collapsed wooden outbuilding; barn constructed of apparently historic materials;
extant house may be older than 50 years.

Fair

41RT263

Alex Bartula

Small wooden house; stacked railroad
building; no well located.

Fair

41RT266

Ronald White

Sandstone block and concrete foundation remnants; no structural remains of house;
log crib in excellent condition with attached board lean-tos; hand dug well.

Good

41RT270

Bettie Clevenger Green

Location of at least three historic graves; possibly as many as six; site pointed
out by 1oca1 informants.

Undetermined

41RT271

Bettie Clevenger Green

Site of now-destroyed house; extant house built in 1930; outbuildings; location of
last store in Tidwell Prairie (extant structure); hand dug well.

Good

ti~

outbuilding; collaps€d wooden out­

:x:

iii·

41RT272

? Kubiak

Two partially collapsed log cribs, one with attached wooden lean-tos; probable
location of dismantled house; no well located.

Poor

Q
ri·

41RT273

Bettie Clevenger Green

Previous house location, no structural remains; site recorded on basis of cast
iron hand pump over wellhead; a single brick foundation footing and light scatter
of historic household debris.

Poor

V)

~.

~

11\
r"I

.s.
.....
g.

11\

m
w

0'1
~

Table 3. continued
Number

Current Owner

Description

Condition

---~

-..,"
Ib

~

4lRT274

Texas Utilities

Collapsed wooden house; cast iron hand pump over wellhead.

Poor

41RT275

Frieda Rains

Currently.occupied board and batten house; double log crib; single room log
smokehouse; small vertical plank outbuilding.

heell ent

41RT276

Phill ips Coal Co.

Small wooden house in deteriorated condition; 1ight scatter of historic debris.

Fair

41RT281

Mrs. Sam (Janie) Yezak

Surface scatter of household debris; no structural remains.

Poor

41RT282

Bettie Clevenger Green

Surface scatter of household debris; no structural remains; location of now~
collapsed well ascertained through local informants; house originally occupied
by members of the Stephenson family.

Poor

41RT286

Phillips Coal Co.

Site recorded on presence of bell-shaped cistern; very light scatter of historic
household debris; no structural remains.

Poor

41RT289

Frieda Rains

Site recorded on basis of 1ight scatter of househo 1d debri s; no structura 1 rema ins;
previous location of house affirmed by local informants.

Poor

41RT291

Frieda Rains

Wooden bridge across Walnut Creek.

Good

41RT293

Gale T. Rampy

Large cast iron culvert in Walnut Creek channel; used as bridge.

Good

41RT298

Ga 1e T.

Site recorded on basis of light surface scatter of
materials; no structural remains.

Poor

41RT299

Gale T. Rampy

Site recorded on basis of light scatter of household debris and construction
materials; no structural remains.

Poor

41RT300

Eda Mae Lastor

Two vertical plank outbuildings; hand dug well; 1imited amount of household debris.

Fair

41RT302

Phillips Coal Co.

Currently occupied farmhouse and complex of outbuildings; house built in 1913
by Bienzienski family and ;s still owned
by family members.

Excellent

i

hous~hold

debris and building

.Qq'

-.tiS

::"

~

::,,'
Ib

Table 3. continued
Number

Current Owner

Description

Condition

41RT304

J. F. Lutz

Site recorded on basis of hand dug well; light surface scatter of household debris
and construction materials; no structural remains.

Poor

41RT314

Herbert Cottingham

Location of mill and gin in Tidwell Prairie; in operation in 1880s; dismantled
in early 19005; no structural remains present; no artifactual material observed.

Dismantled

41RT316

Sam Yezak

Two log cribs in fair condition; hand
plank outbuildings; house dismantled
Roy Mikolojewski.

41RT319

Wi 11 i am leno

Deteriorated small three room house of wooden construction; two wooden
buildings; well not located.

41RT324

Marion Kozak

Wooden farmhouse, currently occupied, in excellent condition; numerous out­
buildings of vertical plank construction varying in stages of repair; occupants
report house was built in 1934 by their father.

Excellent

41RT325

Leonard Warhol

Wooden farmhouse, bali-n and collapsed plank shed; brick- lined cistern and hand
dug well.

Fa i r

41RT326

Florine Bashinsk;

Wooden farmhouse built in 1949; two partially collapsed log cribs and a plank
barn that predate the house; several additional small outbuildings.

Fa ir

Location of first school and church to serve
in operation prior to 1900; no structural remains

41RT346

ly collapsed vertical
structures were built by
out~

of Tidwell Prairie;
no artifactual material.

Fair

Poor

Di$lllantled

::t

1;;'

0­

:=!.

41RT347

Bernard Wilganowski

Hand dug, cement cased well; light scatter of household debris; no structural
remains.

Poor

41RT348

Henry Hoblinski

Scatter of sandstone foundation blocks and bricks; probable collapsed well; very
light scatter of historic debris.

Poor

~

!:!!
.....
(l)

41RT349

Clement Kolachek

Farmhouse in good condition, probably built about 1910; vertical plank outbuilding;
low building constructed of railroad ties - probable smokehouse.

~

~

Good

...

~

'S'
.....
0'
::3

III

--0\

U1

66 / Calvert Lignite Mine

A.

House at 4 1 RT93, front view. Original log house is the room at right
now covered with board and batten. Note cistern to left of house.

{

B.

Double log crib at 41 RT93.

FIGURE 6.

Structures at 41RT93 .

Historic Site Descriptions / 67

A. Cor ner notc hing on
log barn a t 41RT93 .

~

...

~

_::~5-:;'~ · -~ ~

.:

-y~~~-~~s?: .

,

+

"

& Close-up of single saddle no t ching at 41RT27 2 .

~

FIGURE 7.

Log constructions.

68 / Calvert Lignite Mine

41RT246
41RT246. located near the center of the broad. rolling upland divide which
separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. is a very light scatter of historic
household debris; white stoneware fragments. purple glass fragments and metal scraps
in an improved pasture. Shovel probes produced no evidence of subsurface deposits.
Local informants. knowledgeable in the area history. did not recall any structure at this
location. nor does a structure appear at the location in a 1941 aerial photograph
(National Archives and Records Administration 1941).
The general area has been
disturbed by agricultural activities. probably dispersing material over the 25 square
meter site. It does not appear that this site has any relation to 41RT258 because it
is approximately 300 meters distant from the house and on the opposite side of a
deeply incised drainage.

41RT247
This historic site is situated on the eastern portion of the upland divide that
separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek in the Thomas H. Brennan survey.
Cultural features at this site are two foundations. a hand dug. (19'6" deep) concrete
cased well and a partially collapsed outbuilding. A sandstone block foundation. much
still in alignment. indicates the location of a totally razed farmhouse. A rectangular.
concrete beam foundation with several interior beams for partitioning. indicates the
location of a dismantled dairy barn. The concrete beams are 4 inches wide and are
mounted with 1/2 inch bolt studs for attaching wooden base plates. A 3/4 inch inside
diameter galvanized pipe is plumbed through the concrete floor of the structure for the
purpose of venting either gas for heating or water for cleaning.
Just outside the
western end of the building is a capped, iron pipe cased (6" inside dia.) water well. A
"1956" date is scratched in a concrete sidewalk just outside the building. Informants
have indicated this rather elaborate dairy barn was constructed in an attempt to meet
1951 regulations governing the production of Grade "Au milk.
The outbuilding.
apparently a garage. is constructed of board and batten and has a corrugated tin roof.
A mound of earth roughly delineated by the sandstone foundations contains bricks. tin.
old lumber and wood shingles. Other artifactual materials noted were clear bottles and
jars. brown bottles. 1 fragment of hand painted porcelain. 6 fragments of white
earthenware and several farm implements. The original owners of this property were
members of the Yezak clan. although the dairy operation was conducted by
E.J. Wallace.

41RT248
This two room, board and batten house was moved 300 meters to its present
location 30 years ago to make room for the new Lester Hailey home. Visible exterior
features are front and rear porches. the latter now collapsed. and a red brick interior
chimney for a pot belly stove. The house was built by the Hailey family in the 1890s
and is now used to store hay. The house is on the eastern edge of the upland divide
separating Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek.

--------

---~

- - - - - - . - -...- - - - - - - - ­

........

Historic Site Descriptions / 69

41RT249
This historic site is located on the eastern portion of the upland divide which
separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. The site was recorded on the basis of a
small. three room, wooden house (Fig. 8A) which has a low to the ground (mid South
style) ferruginous sandstone block foundation. The house. which was originally a single
pen frame cabin. has pine board and batten (1 X 4". milled) exterior walls. A shed
room has been added to the rear, and half of the front shed porch has been enclosed
in a manner described by Terry Jordan as the "room on the porch," a typical evolution
for one room cottages (Jordan 1978:137). The roof is covered with corrugated tin over
Three entrance doors are
wood shingles and has a witch's hat configuration.
present: 1) under the front porch, 2) into the shed room at the rear, and 3) into the
gabled (south) side of the structure. The separate entrances suggest, as was noted by
local informants, that this and other sharecropper homes often housed more than one
family.
Doors are four paneled wood.
The southern door may have been a later
addition because there is evidence of a pediment below the gable above this side door.
The single window in the structure is 4 over 4 pane. but does not fit the hole it is in,
possibly indicating it is a replacement removed from another building. The window is
milled wood and would have been store bought originally. The window trim has been
painted blue. The interior walls are vertical plank (ca. 10" wide) covered with gauze
and a blue floral print wallpaper. The ceilings are beaded, lapped board and the floors
are tongue in groove wood. There is a metal flue in the shed room and a Star brand
pot belly stove is present. There is a loft over the front room accessed through a cut
panel in the ceiling.
Local informants state this house was originally owned by
members of the Bartula family and was possibly later occupied by a Sterempski. In
recent history, the house was occupied by renters.
The probable construction date
appears to be near the turn of the century. Last occupation was in the 19405 and the
house is in a deteriorated state. No artifactual materials were visible on the surface
and the surrounding ground has been farmed. The land is currently being used for
improved pasture.

41RT250 - MOSE DEAN HOUSE
This historic site is situated on the low upland margin slope which extends down
to Big Willow Creek. just east of the location.
Five structures are present.
The
latest is a brick and wood, single family, detached house of 1950s vintage which is
currently occupied.
Directly behind this house is a large vertical board and batten
house with a ferruginous sandstone block foundation. The roof is gabled and is covered
with wood shingles. The front of the house has a double entry. There is also a
double entry on the south side into a room which appears to have been added after
original construction. The windows are wood sash: however. all glass and trim have
been broken out. negating the possibility of discerning the number of original panes.
Also present is a log crib constructed of hand hewn logs with single and double saddle
notching. The single entry structure has a pitched roof with enclosed (vertical plank)
gable. which appears to postdate the crib construction. Corrugated tin has been used
to cover some of the logs. Attached to the crib is a vertical plank lean-to shed used
for storage.
A partially collapsed vertical plank storage building and a completely

70 / Calvert Lignite Mine

Fron~

A.

view of house at 41 RT249, showing gable and room on front

porch.

B.

Front view of house at 41 ::{T260.
roof.

FIGURE 8.

Historic structures.

Note cloverleaf design ridge row on

Historic Site Descriptions

I

11

collapsed animal shelter are also present.
Both had corrugated tin roofs.
No
household debris was observed on the surface near the structures.
Some Coleman
A trash dump was
brand bricks. cut nails and 20 penny wire nails were present.
located east-northeast of the house. Although most of the trash was mid-twentieth
century in nature, some fragments of white stoneware and purple tinted glass were
present. The house. which appears to be of early twentieth century construction, is
partially collapsed and in danger of further deterioration due to its serious list. The
log structure is in excellent repair.

41RT251
This site is situated near the middle of the broad. rolling upland divide which
separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek.
A house at this site was completely
destroyed six years ago by a tornado. A slightly mounded area of earth denotes the
location of the house. but all building material has been removed. The remaining three
structures were also damaged by the same storm and are all in poor condition. One
structure is a crib constructed of hand hewn logs with saddle notching.
The
foundation is ferruginous sandstone blocks. The building has a corrugated tin pitched
roof with vertical plank enclosed gable. A raised plank floor was installed and round
nails were observed in the logs. Another shed is constructed of horizontal planks. with
a ferruginous sandstone block foundation and a corrugated tin roof. The third shed is
board and batten construction with tin roofing and appears to have served as a garage.
No household trash was observed during site documentation. A hand dug. concrete
cased well has been filled in with dirt and trash. Information indicates the house was
built sometime after the turn of the century - probably around 1910.
The home's
location immediately adjacent to the road indicates its probable use as a sharecropper's
house.

41RT252 - BRUNO OKONSKI HOUSE
This site, located near the crest of the upland divide separating Bee Branch and
Big Willow Creek, was recorded on the basis of a mounded area surrounded by in situ
sandstone blocks which once formed the foundation of a house.
Several displaced
blocks, a semi-subterranean cistern and a hand dug well cased with cement are also
present. Nearby is a small wood plank shed. The cistern is filled with a variety of
household debris and some construction material. According to Ed Okonski. who is 80
It was probably constructed
years old. this house was built by his grandfather.
between 1890 and 1900.

41RT254 - ED OKONSKI HOUSE
This historic site is situated near the eastern edge of the broad. rolling upland
divide which separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. The house. (Fig. 9A) which
has a double front entry and 4 over 4 windows. is a simple "I" plan with ell addition
resting on a high. vertical post foundation that has been substituted in places with new
cylindrical concrete supports. The front and rear exterior walls are covered with board
and batten, while the gabled ends of the house are covered with clapboard. The front

72 / Calvert Lignite Mine

A.

B.

FIGU RE 9.

House at 41 RT254, oblique view.

House at 41 RT275, oblique view.

Historic structures.

Note tin cistern at rear of house.

Note scraped yard.

Historic Site Descriptions / 73

A_

B.

Jig-cut pr, II'/- /!(, I", 41 R T257_
"0

- -~- -

.. ...

Close-up of spindle bracket on
on front porch, 41 RT254.

-----~~- -- ---.!'!'~=::.:=-

~.

--:--:== ­

---=--=-=-:­

--..:::=:.:..:.~ -.--=-~..:..:.-.;:.------

~~'=~- ~-:-- ~2li
C.

Sketch of
jig-cut porch
ornamentat ion ,
41RT258.

~.:",",':~ - -'

FIGURE 10. Architectural details .

~==--

---=~ -

~~ '\

~--"--

----=-=- .,-""7:--~=-~-=

-----.~..

_~=- -

74 / Calvert Lignite Mine
porch displays spindle bracket ornamentation (Fig. lOB). different sized turned posts
and one chamfered post. The side or shed porch has turned posts. An elevated tin
cistern is situated just off this shed porch and is still used to collect rain water. The
house has a new standing seam tin roof. Two chimneys may be seen exiting the ell
addition.
The house was constructed by Mr. Okonski's father in 1917-1918.
An
earlier house stood near the location of a log structure which is still extant. The crib
has single saddle notching with a raised horizontal plank floor. a gabled roof covered
with vertical planks and vertical plank lean-to sheds attached to each side. A hand
dug. concrete cased well is present. Also present are a smokehouse. chicken house and
several other wooden outbuildings. According to Mr. Okonski. all outbuildings were
constructed by his father. The overall condition of the site is excellent.

41RT255 - STEREMPSKI HOUSE
This historic site is situated near the center of the broad. rolling upland divide
separating Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. Although no house remains. the 1962
USGS quad map shows a building at this location. and a well and a cistern are still
present. The hand dug well is cement cased with 24" diameter pipe and is 11 feet
deep. There is also a buried tin cistern as well as an earthen mound that may be the
bulldozed house location.
Cattle pens are present 50 meters northwest of the well.
From 1899 until the early 1940s. the land was owned by Polish families. including the
Kempenskis. the Bajenskis. and the Sterempskis. According to a local informant. the
house that once stood at 41RT255 was built about 1900 and demolished in the 19605.

41RT256 - TIDWEll PRAIRIE COMMUNITY SCHOOL
This historic site is situated in the center of the upland divide that separates Bee
Branch and Big Willow Creek. 41RT256 is the location of the third and last school in
Tidwell Prairie.
The building itself was destroyed by a tornado and much of the
resulting debris was removed from the site. The estimated size of the structure. based
Rain
on the position of three red brick foundation footings. was 63 by 21 feet.
gutters. Standard brand firebrick, wooden 2 by 4 lumber and Ferris red brick with union
maker's marks were seen at the site. A well. reported to have existed. was recently
It served both the church and
located approximately 75 meters east of the school.
school. According to local records. the school was built in the late 1920s and used as
a schoolhouse until 1949.

41RT257 - TIDWEll PRAIRIE COMMUNITY METHODIST CHURCH
This historic site is situated in the center of the upland divide which separates
Bee Branch. Walnut Creek and Big Willow Creek. It is located near the T -intersection
in Tidwell Prairie.
This collapsed structure is the third. and last church in the
community of Tidwell Prairie. School records indicate the church building may have
been an earlier schoolhouse, relocated to the present site.
Records of the county
school board. May 6, 1929 state:

Historic Site Descriptions / 75
On request of the members of the Methodist Church of Tidwell Prairie. the
Tidwell School Trustees were authorized to dispose of the old school building
that was built jointly by the church members and jointly by this school board.
Said disposal to be made to the members of the Methodist Church . . . with
the express understanding that the church members were to provide a suitable
site for the building deeded to the Church not on the school grounds.
(Robertson County School Supt. Records Vol. 1:117)
Exterior walls were horizontal shiplap board and interior walls were vertical plank. It
appears that the church was of a balloon construction type, since no studs were used
between the exterior and interior walls.
Windows were wood sash 2 over 2 pane
(indicating a post-1900 date). They were made of milled lumber and had no hardware
attached. indicating a lack of screens or shutters.
The church had a wood shingle
roof. a 24" overhang from the edge of the building to the bargeboard and a cloverleaf
design ridge row along the peak of the roof. A well which served both the church and
the adjacent school was located during a recent visit to update documentation of the
church. It is collapsed. but the top of the casing may be seen. The location is 45
meters south of the church on the west side of a barbed wire fence.
The only
artifactual materials noted during site documentation were a stoneware crock. keyhole
shaped metal shelf supports. and a jig-cut pew-end (Fig. 10A) with a morticed slot for
the seat. Also present is a 3 burner. gravity fed. coal oil stove with an attached oven
heated by two burners.
The stove was manufactured by the American Stove Co ..
lorrain. Ohio. The model name is .. Quick Meal" (Model number 6725-0. serial number
1486).
41RT258
This historic site is located near the center of the broad, rolling upland divide
which separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. The location is just east of the
T -intersection in Tidwell Prairie. within the L. M. Simons survey. This farmhouse has
a vertical log foundation that is low to the ground in the upper South style. It is a
double pen frame house with a shed room addition across the back. Exterior walls are
board and batten (milled. scalloped batten) and interior walls are horizontal planks.
The roof. which has a witch's hat configuration and relatively high gables. is covered
by corrugated tin overlaying wood shingle. The interior ceiling is beaded lapped board.
Windows are 6 over 6 pane with exterior hardware indicating the presence of screens.
Windows are situated both on the front and on the gabled ends of the house. The
Texas style front porch has a double entry into the house and displays jig-cut. wooden
detailing around its upper edge (Fig. 10C) and chamfered porch posts. Also present is
a barn constructed of vertical plank with a large front door indicating use for vehicle
storage. It has a wood shingle roof covered by corrugated tin. A hand dug. concrete
cased well is located between the house and the barn. The only artifactual materials
noted were white porcelain door knobs. 1 clear jar. and miscellaneous building materials.
including a group of 3-hole. beige colored firebricks located approximately 4 meters west
of the house.
The land was purchased by Joe Foyett (d. 1902) in the late 18805.
Twice married. Foyett had five children. His second wife was Minnie (Yezak) Foyett.

76 / Calvert Lignite Mine
who died in 1927. It was she who deeded in 1917 one acre out of the southwest
corner of her property to the Tidwell Prairie School (Robertson Co. Deed Records.
Vol. 67:257). A later owner. Artie Rushing. also conveyed land to the school in 1928.
In addition. he deeded 1/4 acre to the Methodist Church in 1929 with the provision
that the property revert to the family should the site no longer be used for church
purposes.
The property has been divided on numerous occasions and has been the subject
of complex litigation among several parties. making it difficult to show who constructed
the house. However. based on the investigation of the architectural style. it is believed
to have been constructed during the ownership of Joe Foyett. about 1880 - 1890. The
house and barn are both in poor condition. The house is currently being used for hay
storage.

41RT259 - RUSHING HOUSE
According to a local informant. this board and batten house was built in the early
1930s. The structure. located 100 meters north of the T-intersection in Tidwell Prairie
on the upland divide separating Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. has collapsed and
When originally built. the house was
only portions of three walls remain standing.
about 20 by 30 feet in size. The wooden interior walls were of shiplap construction
and the roof built of 1 by 4 inch boards. There was an interior brick chimney with a
flue for a pot belly stove. A picket fence surrounds the yard. White ceramic door
knobs. Groesbeck brand red bricks and other building materials were noted on the site.

41RT260 - WEAVER/RUSHING HOUSE
This single story. 4 room. "'" plan farmhouse (Fig. 8B) with an associated two­
story barn and outbuilding was built by the Weaver family. prominent early settlers in
the area. The site is 100 meters north of the T-intersection in Tidwell Prairie on the
upland divide separating Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. The house is still occupied
The structure has shiplap (bevel siding)
on weekends and during hunting season.
exterior walls. The central gabled roof has wooden shingles under composition shingles.
There is a brick
It is now covered by tin. with ornamental cloverleaf peak trim.
chimney on the southwest end of the house and a tin flue in the center of the roof.
A formal porch. supported by turned posts of two different sizes. extends along the
front of the house. The west side of the house (west of the central gable) appears to
predate the rest of the structure. Exterior evidence shows clearly the addition of the
gable and east end. Apparently. the west side was constructed as a single. or double
pen cottage.
The gable. which displays both diamond and cove-shaped shingling.
represents an effort to introduce Victorian influences into the design.
The gable.
however. is larger in size. vis a vis the overall house plan. than the standard Victorian
styles. suggesting a vernacular adaptation. The original section was constructed prior
to 1900. possibly as early as the 1880s.
The additions were probably made in the
first decade of the twentieth century.

Historic Site Descriptions

I

77

The Weaver home. later owned by community leader Artie Rushing. was a
landmark in Tidwell Prairie.
The Rushing store. long the commercial center of the
settlement. was located directly in front of the house. Rushing died in 1930 and the
store closed several years later. The yard is fenced with pickets. hay wire and chicken
wire. The barn is of vertical plank construction with an attached, covered lean-to. A
wood plank storage building. with an attached lean-to shed. and an outhouse comprise
the rest of the outbuildings. About 100 meters southwest of the house is a concrete
dip tank used during the 1920s as part of a federal program to eradicate cattle ticks.
Cultural debris includes Mexia and Standard brand red bricks. The sheds and barn are
packed with all types of items related to farming, ranching and household activities.

41RT261 - CULL WILLIAMS HOUSE
41RT261. situated on the west half of the upland divide separating Bee Branch
and Big Willow Creek. consists of a collapsed farmhouse of board and batten
construction and a small outbuilding with an attached lean-to.
Star and Groesbeck
brand bricks and other building materials were present. The house, about 25 by 20
feet in size. has a sandstone block and vertical log foundation and a brick fireplace: no
standing walls remain.
The lean-to area is fenced with wood and wire.
The
outbuilding itself is in poor condition. There is not enough of the house remaining to
aid in a determination of a construction date. However. oral history reveals the house
It was occupied primarily by
was there in the early part of the twentieth century.
renters, including the family of Molly Williams Hamilton, who is now in her 80s. The
Hamilton store. which was originally thought to be at this site. was later shown to be
outside the project area.
The store's location has been ascertained and it will be
recorded as a site should future mining operations move in that direction and owner
access becomes available.

41RT262
This site, located in the western portion of the upland divide which separates Bee
Branch and Big Willow Creek, consists of a brick and wood farmhouse probably built in
the 1940s or 1950s. Other structures currently on the site are a combination barn and
garage. a pump house with an electric pump. cattle pens and two small animal
shelters. Two household trash dumps are located about 150 meters southwest of the
house. The barn appears to have been built from materials salvaged from an earlier
structure and there is a pile of older building materials behind the house.
This
material indicates that other older structures may once have existed. Discussions with
informants indicate that this complex represents the only buildings ever present at this
site. The practice of scavenging lumber. from razed houses in the area. to construct
outbuildings is a common practice.

78 / Calvert Lignite Mine
41RT263 - BARTULA HOUSE
This historic site. situated on the western portion of the broad. rolling upland
divide which separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. consists of a wooden house
and two small outbuildings. The house is a two room "I" plan with a shed room on
the rear. A porch. which stops two feet short of each end of the house. is attached
to the front. The foundation is ferruginous sandstone blocks. The exterior walls are
board and batten (1 X 4" milled), windows are 4 over 4 panes and doors are 4
vertical panels. The front of the house has a double entry, with a single entry on the
south side (gabled) and a single entry into the shed room.
The interior walls are
vertical plank covered with wallpaper, ceilings are beaded lapped board. doors have two
foot mitered trim and beaded moulding is present around the inside of the windows.
Flooring is tongue and groove board. The roof. which has a witch's hat configuration.
is covered with corrugated tin over wood shingles. A brick chimney (Groesbeck brand)
protrudes from the roof.
There is evidence that the north room of the house
represents the original construction. followed by the south room. and then the shed
room across the back. A horizontally stacked railroad tie outbuilding is also present.
It has a corrugated tin roof and a raised wood plank floor. The building appears to
have been used for storage.
A wooden support for a hoisting device. probably for
loading hay, is attached to the front gable peak. A small. totally collapsed. vertical
plank building with corrugated tin roof is just north of the house. The original portion
of the home. which includes floral print wallpaper and exterior blue paint remnants. is
similar in design to 41RT249. also owned by the Bartula family.
The similarities
include the wallpaper design. exterior paint remnants. milled batten design. plank walls.
room size and porch configuration. Because of these similarities. it is believed the two
structures may have been built by the same person at about the same time (ca. 1900).
Artifactual material observed during documentation included clear. green and brown
bottle glass. an iron skillet. a pot belly stove and 1 gallon tin. canned vegetable
containers. The house is partially collapsed and appears to be of little architectural
significance. No well was located during documentation. In all likelihood. it has either
been filled in or collapsed because it was not cased with the usual concrete rings.

41RT266 - MIKOLOJEWSKI HOMESTEAD
This historic site is situated on the western half of the broad. rolling upland
divide which separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek.
The site at one time
consisted of a house which was probably built about 1910. The only remains of the
house are a single sandstone foundation block and a foundation of cemented sandstone
chunks which supported. in all likelihood. a late addition porch on the west side of the
house. Artifactual materials noted at the site were limited to clear and brown bottles.
both of which originally contained alcoholic beverages. and scraps of brick. tin and
lumber. An extant log structure. in fair condition. was also recorded at this location.
It is a single log crib constructed of unpeeled logs with single saddle notching at the
corners. The foundation is vertical log and the roof is gabled. enclosed with vertical
plank, and covered with corrugated tin which overlays wood shingles. The crib has a
raised wood plank floor. indicating it was used for storage and not for stabling. One

Historic Site Descriptions / 79
side of the crib has an upper and lower access door. while the opposite side has only
an upper access door. Wooden planks have been nailed over some rotted logs. Shed
attachments have been added to three sides of the original log building. On the north
side. a ferruginous sandstone block foundation supports a raised plank floor which has
a log sleeper in its center. The planks have been nailed at this point. A lean-to on
the south side of the crib has two vertical plank walls. is open on one end and has a
dirt floor. It was obviously intended for livestock stabling. On the west side. a large
machinery shed with a dirt floor. has one vertical plank wall and is open on two ends.
A hand dug, concrete well is present at the site. Probable dates for construction are
1910 to 1920.
41RT210 - STEPHENSON CEMETERY

41RT270 is a small graveyard where local informants claim three to six
individuals were buried between ca. 1870-1880. For the past 65 years. Mr. Richard
Hailey has plowed and ranched the pasture where the graves are located. Scattered
pieces of fence posts from the fence that originally surrounded the cemetery were noted
on this distinctive. mounded area. A local informant. Mrs. Betty Clevenger Green. nee
Hailey. supplied the names of the three individuals she feels are buried here - her
maternal ancestors. Mary Van Cleve Stephenson, John T. Stephenson and an unnamed
infant. She obtained the names from family records that also indicated the deceased
were not interred in coffins. It is therefore probable that little remains of the burials.
The special status accorded cemeteries under state law mandates procedures to mitigate
the effects of mining on this location.
41RT211 - HAILEY FAMILY HOME SITE

This historic site is located on the western half of the broad. rolling upland divide
which separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. It is situated at the head of the
T-intersection in Tidwell Prairie. The current extant house built in 1932 stands on the
location of the original home site of the Hailey family. It is a single family detached
house. with a brick pier porch. wrought iron railings. lover 1 pane windows and
lapped board exterior walls. The windows have awnings and underpinning obscures the
foundation type supporting the house. The roof is supported by exposed rafters and by
open wooden brackets common to Stick style architecture. A later addition on the east
side includes aluminum framed windows. A contemporaneous wood construction barn
and garage are also present. Additionally. the last store to operate in Tidwell Prairie
is present at this location. Built in 1935 by W.T. Hailey. it remained in operation
until 1972. The building has a concrete pier foundation. board and batten exterior
walls. and a lean-to porch supported by cedar posts.
The building was originally
painted white and evidence of a store sign may still be seen on the north gable. The
store entry on the north end of the building is flanked by windows. No other windows
were present in the building. The building faces the T-intersection. A Gulf gas pump
still stands in front of the store with the price of 35.9 cents per galion. No artifactual
material was observed during documentation of this site.

80 / Calvert Lignite Mine

41RT272
This historic site is situated in the western half of the upland divide which
separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. Two badly deteriorated log cribs and a
In all
well cased with cast-iron pipe of 10 inch interior diameter are present.
likelihood. a house once stood at this location. although no traces of it were discerned.
Both log structures have log post foundations. raised plank floors. single saddle
notching (Fig. 78) and unhewn logs. At the north crib. there is evidence of a lean-to
shed on the north side of the building. namely a parallel line of ridge rows laid on the
ground.
This structure also has a sleeper for floor support displaying adze marks.
There is no roof on this structure. The second crib has a gable covered by vertical
planks and the tin roof. The door on the west side of this structure is framed. There
IS a vertical plank shed addition on the north side which is supported by a vertical
post foundation.
Artifactual material noted during recording included a harness. pot
belly stove. plow. jars. and a block ice type refrigerator. The structures were probably
built between 1880 and 1900.

41RT273
This historic site. located in the center of the upland divide which separates Bee
Branch and Walnut Creek. was recorded on the basis of a scatter of household debris.
an iron hand pump over a metal cased well and mortared brick foundation footing. No
structural remains are present although local informant. Richard Hailey. states a house
once stood at this location.
The pump was manufactured by the E.E. Myers
Company.
Artifactual materials observed were: window glass. clear bottle glass.
fragments of white earthenware. crockware fragments. cobalt glass fragments. Groesbeck
brand brick fragments. electric insulators. a doll cup fragment and a bottle with an
applied lip. Also recorded was an earthenware plate fragment with a maker's mark:
"IRONS ... J.&G. MEA.... HANLEY. ENGLAND."
Also shown on this mark is a
standing lion with coat of arms. A rectangular stock pen is also located at the site
but it obviously postdates the structure because the foundation footing is within the
pen.
Local informants say the land was owned by Peter Stephenson. and that the
home was rented at times by members of the Craft. Hamilton. and possibly the Otwell
families.
It should be noted that in conversations with Richard Hailey it was
mentioned that another historic structure was located directly across (east) the county
road from 41RT273.
This location was missed during the surface inspection by
surveyors. No structural remains are present and the site was not subsequently ground
verified. Mr. Hailey stated considerable controversy surrounded the destruction of the
house and that it was razed in haste to prevent reoccupation by renters who had been
previously evicted.

41RT274
This historic site. situated near the center of the upland divide separating Bee
Branch and Walnut Creek. was recorded on the basis of a collapsed house and
associated materials. The structure was a single story building supported on vertical
Exterior walls are board and batten and a porch
logs with beams of squared logs.

.....

--~-------.---

.....

----­

Historic Site Descriptions

I

81

was attached to the front of the house.
Roofing was corrugated tin over wood
shingle. Wire nails were used in the construction. Also present at this site is a metal
hand pump mounted on a cast-iron pipe cased well. It is identical to the one recorded
at 41RT273.
Manufacturing details were more legible on this unit: "E.E. Myers and
Brother: @ 624 Pat. - Apr. 23. 1918: Ashland. Okl."
Artifactual materials recorded
were limited to fragments of white earthenware and plain red bricks scattered along the
north side of the fence. The land was owned by Sam Stephenson. brother of Peter
Stephenson (see 41RT273) in the 1950s. Other occupants of the site included Kay
Weaver and Bruno Bienzienski.

41RT215
This historic site. situated just north of Walnut Creek on the upland divide
separating the creek from Bee Branch. was documented on the basis of a complex of
buildings which are all in an excellent state of preservation (Fig. 9B). According to
Mrs. Freida Rains and Richard Hailey. the structures were built in the early 1900s by
members of the Stephenson family on family land. The land later belonged to Robert
Rehberg after his marriage to a Stephenson daughter. The single story family house is
supported by a vertical log foundation which has been substituted in places with
modern cylindrical concrete piers. The foundation is high off the ground in the style of
the low South. The beams are hand squared logs. The house is an "I" plan with an
extended gable on the south end. The roof is corrugated tin. A shed room was later
added across the rear of the house and. finally. a lean-to room was added to the north
end. The house has a full length front porch with double entry and the shed room
has a single entry. A metal flue and brick chimney are present. Exterior walls are
board and batten (milled wood) and some repair work has been done with wide planks.
The yard and area surrounding the outbuildings is maintained in the classic scraped
(swept) yard fashion. Also present at the site is a double log crib with an enclosed
pass-through that appears to be of later construction than either crib. It was possibly
used for machinery storage.
The cribs also appear to have been built at different
times. Both have single saddle notching. log on log floors and foundations of concrete
blocks and stone aggregate. probably replacing rotted log supports.
Both structures
have corrugated tin roofs with gables covered by vertical planks. Shed additions have
been added to the south side of each crib. The outside walls of one of these lean-tos
is constructed of vertical posts wired together in a palisado or jacala fashion. This
wall may show the influence of Mr. Paloma. a 3D-year employee of the Rehberg family.
who currently occupies the house. These lean-tos are used for implement storage. A
low (4 feet) log smokehouse is just behind the house. It has a single entrance door.
dirt floor. saddle notching and a corrugated tin roof.
There is also a vertical plank.
single entry. corrugated tin roofed storage shed north of the house.
The buildings
contain old farm and household implements.
The property was the subject of much litigation until the 18805. The title claim
shows at least four gaps during this time. However. since 1881 the property has been
owned at various times by the families of J.W. Weaver. J.T. and Katie Stephenson.
and Bessie Rehberg.

- - - _.......

- ­

82 / Calvert Lignite Mine
41RT276
This historic site. located on a high terrace just north of Walnut Creek. was
recorded due to the presence of an extant single story house which is in deteriorated
condition and is currently being used for hay storage. The foundation of the house has
either collapsed or settled severely and the structure is resting on the ground. The
exterior walls are lapped board covered with vertical plank in places. The house has a
single front entry. a rear entry into the shed addition and entries on both gabled sides.
The windows are wood sash but all glass and trim have been broken out negating
definitive description of their design. Aitifactual materials noted were limited to clear
glass, cut nail fragments and a single barrel hoop.
This house was standing in
1913-1914 as Richard Hailey reports his mother and father moved in at the time of
their marriage. Mr. Hailey referred to the home as the .. green house" because of its
early exterior color. No evidence of the outside paint remains, however.

41RT281
This historic site. situated on the western half of the upland divide separating
Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. was recorded on the basis of household debris
scattered over the surface of a 50 square meter area. Green, brown and clear bottle
glass fragments. brown crockware and white stoneware and enameled cooking ware were
present. No structural remains or materials were seen and there was no indication of
a well.
This may be the location of a house that has been completely razed.
However. after discussion with local informants it appears that this must have been a
limited use dump area. which has been spread about by farming.

41RT282
This historic site. located on the western portion of the upland divide separating
Bee Branch and Walnut Creek. is the location of the home of members of the
Stephenson family. some of the earliest Tidwell Prairie settlers. Nothing remains. but
a moderately dense scatter of historic household materials is visible in the pasture.
Richard Hailey pointed out the previous location of the well. which has collapsed. The
unmarked historic graves, 41RT270. are 75 meters east of the house site.

41RT286
This historic site. situated at the center of the upland divide separating Walnut
Creek and Bee Branch. was recorded on the presence of a rock lined. bell-shaped
cistern. The cistern is approximately 15 feet deep. 10 feet wide at the bottom. and has
a 24 inch inside diameter at the top. A very light scatter of household debris (white
earthenware and blue glass) was seen on the surface and assorted construction
materials have been discarded in the cistern.
No structural remains are present.
although this was undoubtedly the previous location of a house.
The presence of a
cistern may indicate this is an early house site as cisterns predated hand dug wells in
the Tidwell Prairie area.

Historic Site Descriptions / 83
41RT289
This historic site. located near the center of the upland divide separating Bee
Branch and Walnut Creek. was recorded on the basis of a cement wellhead with metal
casing. A light scatter of historic household debris is present. as well as a portion of
either a foundation or step. No structural remains are present. Informants identified
this as the location of the Paul Rehberg home. The structure was razed before the
1950s.

41RT291
This is the location of an old wooden bridge. constructed of railroad ties. which
crosses Walnut Creek. Traces of an old road can be seen on 1958 aerial photographs.
These photographs are in the files of the Texas Natural Resources Information Service.
Austin. Texas.
Oral history sources revealed a great deal of local road construction
and maintenance during the 19305. as part of the New Deal public works projects.

41RT293
This historic site is the location of a large (7 ft. inside dia.), cast iron culvert.
situated in the channel of Walnut Creek. that has been covered by dirt to form a
bridge over the stream. On the south side of the creek. remains of the old road may
be seen because of a path cleared through the trees. Nothing can been seen on the
north side and it seems probable that the road has not been used for 50 years.
Richard Hailey reports this bridge was installed in the 19305 by the oil companies
doing exploration in the area.

41RT298
This historic site. located on a hill overlooking Walnut Creek to the south. was
recognized due to the presence of six Chinaberry trees.
A shovel probe with 1/4"
mesh recovery yielded pieces of window glass, a square nail. leather and brick
fragments. Subsequent to documentation. a Globe brand brick and a piece of roofing
tin were located under a nearby tree.
Historic interviews have identified this site as
the former home of a Black man named Bony Wright.

41RT299
This historic site. located on a hill overlooking Walnut Creek to the south. was
documented on the basis of a surface scatter of plain and decorated stoneware. glass.
brick fragments and other household debris. No structural remains are present. The
entire hilltop where the debris was located has been bulldozed flat and covered with a
limestone base to form a construction pad. Historic interviews identified this as being
the location of a house owned by a Black man named Jim Brown.

84 / Calvert Lignite Mine
41RT300
This historic site. located at the eastern edge of the upland divide separating Bee
Branch and Walnut Creek. was documented on the basis of two vertical wood plank
storage sheds and a cement head for a now dry hand dug well. The rectangular sheds
are approximately 7 feet high. and have corrugated tin roofs. Foundations are vertical
lean-to sheds have been attached. Although no house remains
log and railroad tie.
were located. it seems probable that one was once here.
Base Hamilton. a renter.
lived there for many years.

41RT302 - BIENZIENSKI HOUSE
The main house at 41RT302. built in 1913 by the Bienzienski family. was
constructed in an "l" shaped design of horizontal bevel siding with corrugated tin
Porches are attached on both the front and back.
The verticality of the
roofing.
structure. along with the gables and overall design. denote a transitional Victorian style
farmhouse. Six farm utility buildings are immediately adjacent to the house. creating a
All the buildings and the surrounding areas contain artifacts and
sizable complex.
implements which are a testimonial to agricultural practices and farm living.

41RT304
This historic site. situated on the western half of the upland divide separating
Bee Branch and Walnut Creek. was recorded on the basis of a cement cased. hand dug
well and a disturbed area littered with broken. unmarked bricks. one sandstone block
pier and fragments of corrugated tin and wood planks - all remains of a razed house.
Square nails were present in many of the boards. possibly indicating construction prior
to 1920. limited amounts of household debris were observed on the ground. Richard
Hailey remembers the house being occupied by Isaiah Hightower. a renter. According
to him. the house was there until the 1940s.

41RT314
This designation refers to the previous location of a mule powered gm and mill
Information
which was located just north of the T -intersection in Tidwell Prairie.
gathered from informants has established the location. Repeated visits have failed to
locate any artifactual materials. None of the informants. the eldest being 81 years old.
remember seeing any structures at the location. Richard Hailey reports he remembers
hearing that a small tank which is adjacent to the location was utilized in some
fashion by the operation. No specific mention of the mill structure is made in land
records of the site. although at least one adjacent tract was platted with boundaries
that mention the Weaver mill tract. Richard Hailey believes the mill was started by
his great-great-grandfather. Anthony Weaver. who owned several other mills in
Robertson County .

...............

__

._-­

Historic Site Descriptions

I

85

41RT316
This historic site. located on the western edge of the broad. rolling upland divide
which separates Bee Branch and Big Willow Creek. was recorded on the basis of two
log cribs and a hand dug. concrete cased well (30 feet deep).
Also present is a
partially collapsed shed constructed of vertical boards covered with corrugated tin.
This latter building appears to postdate the cribs. The log structures are both
supported by rough sandstone blocks and have pitched roofs with corrugated tin
covering. Some of the logs are hand hewn but old railroad ties have been used in
places. Both of the log structures are roughly square and of approximately the same
size (2.4 m sq.). Both are in dilapidated condition. Early owners of the property were
members of the Svanta M. Swenson family. Although a construction date is not clear
because of the numerous divisions of the original tract. a 1909 deed to H.B. Hurt
noted that two Blacks. a man named Henderson and a woman named luvilla Kelly.
lived on the property without authority. Since there is no other evidence of homes on
the property. it is assumed that they lived at 41RT316. Other owners of the property
included J.W. McCrary and Roy Mikolojewski.

41RT319 - ZENO HOUSE
This historic site consists of three extant structures. One is a small three room
house of wooden construction. The exterior is lapped board. Roofing is an odd mixture
of wood shingle and composition roofing.
Black tar paper has been used in several
The house had electricity during its occupancy.
Two
places to repair damage.
outbuildings are present - one which appears to have served as a garage. and another
which was apparently utilized for storage.
One outbuilding is of board and batten
construction with corrugated tin roofing. The other is constructed of vertical wooden
local informants stated that the house was built by
planks with similar roofing.
William Zeno approximately 65 years ago. The house is in ill repair and appears to
lack any architectural significance. The outbuildings are in a similar state of disrepair.
Documentation appears to be sufficient for this location.

41RT324 - KOZAK HOUSE
This historic site. located west of Bee Branch on the divide separating Bee
Branch and Barton Branch. was documented on the basis of an occupied farmhouse
and a complex of outbuildings. The house is rectangular and is constructed of wood
with corrugated tin roofing. It was built in 1934 by Marion Kozak whose daughter,
Numerous
Vickie Kozak. and a son. were born in the house' and still occupy it.
outbuildings form the remainder of the complex. They vary in size and construction
(tin. wood and wire) and a" are still in use as integral parts of the ongoing farming,
livestock and poultry operations. All the buildings are in good condition: however. none
appear to be of a significant or singular architectural style and none predate the
construction of the house.
All the structures were photodocumented in black and
white. Color slides were also taken of the house.

86

I

Calvert Lignite Mine

41RT325 - WARHOL HOUSE
This site. located on the upland divide separating Bee Branch and Barton Branch.
was recorded on the basis of three standing structures which form a deserted
farmhouse with outbuildings.
The house is of wooden construction. roofing is
composition shingle over wood shingle.
The exterior walls are covered with white
asbestos shingle. interior walls are wide, vertical planks and some have been covered
with wallpaper. Ceilings are beaded board. The windows are wooden sash with 4 over
4 panes. Small porches are attached to the front and east side of the house - both
are partially collapsed. Two brick interior chimneys used for pot belly stove ventilation
are present, built of Star and Standard brand bricks. The house is .. L" shaped. Also
present is a rectangular barn constructed of vertical 4 by 4 inch and 2 by 4 inch
boards covered with a variety of types of corrugated tin in a quilt work fashion.
There is also a collapsed shed constructed of vertical wood planks with a corrugated
tin roof. Situated under the overhang of the side porch is a bell-shaped. brick lined
cistern which is partially collapsed. Also present is a hand dug well. that is also brick
lined.
It is mounted with an early electric pump. which rests on two railroad ties
across the brick wellhead. Artifactual materials observed at the site were: porcelain
door knobs. various clear bottles and jars. white earthenware fragments. a variety of
electric and gas appliances. farm implements and tools. harness equipment and a broken
plate with maker's mark - .. Edwin M. Knowles China Co .. made in U.S.A. 53-8."

41RT326 - BASHINSKI HOUSE
This historic site was recorded on the basis of a farmhouse and complex of
The house is currently occupied and all the
agriculturally oriented outbuildings.
buildings are still in use as a part of an ongoing farming operation. The house was
built in the summer of 1949 and replaced the original Bashinski home as reported by
Florine Bashinski. who still occupies the house.
The house is shotgun construction
style; wooden shiplap board covers the exterior and roofing is composition shingle.
Two log structures
There is a front and rear porch and windows are wood sash.
(barns) of unhewn logs with saddle notching are present.
They predate the
construction date of the current house. Both have rough sandstone block foundations
and are somewhat deteriorated. The log structures have pitched roofs with corrugated
tin covering, lean-tos. constructed of vertical railroad tie. are roofed with the same
material as the log structures. Also present is a barn which predates the construction
of the current house. It was built of vertical wooden planks and has a pitched roof
covered with corrugated tin.
Interestingly, Ms. Bashinski reports that at one time
small wooden rooms were attached to each side of this building and that a family of
eleven field hands lived in the structure. Several other outbuildings are present. Most
are small. one room buildings of varying construction type - wood, tin and shingle.
Their function appears to be primarily storage.
Ms. Bashinski is an excellent
informant. having lived at this location her entire life (estimated at 65 years). She has
photos of the original Bashinski home and the barn at the time it was occupied by the
hired family. Unfortunately. when asked about the construction date of the old family
home, she answered .. That's a $64 question". Small amounts of glass and ceramics

Historic Site Descriptions / 87
were noted on the surface around the buildings.
tools. implements and equipment.

All the outbuildings contain farming

41RT346
This designation refers to the location of the first Methodist Church and
community school which served Tidwell Prairie.
The one room structure housed all
grade levels of the Tidwell Prairie Common School No. 30. Both institutions shared
the same building. I~o artifactual material is visible on the surface. The schoolhouse
burned during the Christmas season about 1916. Mrs. Hamilton suggested the fire may
have resulted from the school's Christmas tree. The structure was torn down and the
materials were used in construction of the next church/school located near the T­
intersection at Tidwell Prairie.
The site of the old school will not be disturbed by
mining operations as it is situated on the same 6 1/2 acre tract as the Tidwell Prairie
Cemetery.

41RT347
This historic site. located on the broad. rolling upland divide separating Bee
Branch and Barton Branch. was documented on the basis of a hand dug. concrete
cased (24 inch inside dia.) well. one mortared Standard brand foundation footing.
fragments of old milled lumber. tin fragments and a very light scatter of historic
No structures are present. although a house is shown at this
household debris.
location on the 1962 Hammond USGS topographic sheet. Artifactual materials noted
during site recording were a clear quart bottle for tabasco sauce. one fragment of white
stoneware. an old oil-bath air filter and an enameled pot.
41RT348

This historic site. located on the upland divide separating Bee Branch and Barton
Branch. was recorded on the basis of a scatter of Star brand bricks. several large
sandstone and petrified wood blocks. probable foundation footings. and some old.
weathered lumber. A 2 meter square. 1/2 meter deep. depression appears to be the
location of a collapsed. hand dug well. Artifactual material was restricted to 2 clear
bottles and several pieces of tin.
41RT349 - KOLACHEK HOUSE

This historic site was documented on the presence of three structures. located
just off a dirt road on the broad upland divide which separates Bee Branch and Barton
The complex represents a sharecropper house. probably built between 1910
Branch.
and 1920. a storage shed or crib and a probable smokehouse. The house is a two
room wooden structure. the southern half appears to have been constructed first. The
foundation is a mixture of ferruginous sandstone blocks and vertical posts.
Exterior
walls are board and batten (1 X 4 inch. milled); windows are 4 over 4 light and the
roof is gabled at the north and south ends. Roofing material is composition shingle
over earlier wood shingle. A Groesbeck brand brick chimney exits the house from the
center of the roof. Exterior doors are 4 panel wood with a double entry in the front

88 / Calvert Lignite Mine
(west) and single entry in the rear. Interior walls are vertical plank and at one time
were wallpapered. Ceiling is beaded board. There is a small dormer-like gable on the
rear of the house and the remnants of a pediment giving evidence of a now-destroyed
back porch. One outbuilding is constructed of board and batten and supported by a
vertical post foundation. The roof is gabled and covered with tin. The structure had
a raised wooden plank floor and a single entry (east).
The third structure is
approximately 7 feet tall and is constructed of notched. horizontally stacked railroad
ties. The building has vertical board gables and a tin roof. The floor of the building
is dirt and the entrance is a single low door. No artifactual materials were observed
during site recording.

Log Cabins in The Tidwell Prairie Area
Several log structures. including homes and outbuildings. are located within the
Tidwell Prairie area. Of these. the ones at 41RT93. 41RT254. 41RT272. and 41RT275
have enough extant material to provide a basis for a general survey of log construction
techniques in the community.
All were constructed of round. mostly unpeeled logs.
with single saddle corner notching (Fig. 9A). The saddle notch. where the overlapping
logs are cut only on one side in an inverted-U pattern. was the dominant method of
building log outbuildings such as cribs. well houses. and sheds in Texas. The saddle
notch did not require a high level of craftsmanship and was deemed suitable for the
short term: the saddle notched buildings often collapsed due to the natural torquing of
the wood and the crib design. Those that remain in Tidwell Prairie have either been
reinforced with siding and additions or have been incorporated into other structures.
The fact that the saddle notch was the dominant method used in the revival of log
construction in the 19305. when the Great Depression again made the building method
feasible. could present a problem in dating existing log structures. However. because of
oral history and archival research. it is believed all of the Tidwell Prairie log buildings
predate the 19305 and that most construction in the area had stopped by that time.
The roofs of the log buildings are generally low. with vertical board gables. The
foundations and elevations reflect vernacular adaptations of log structures from other
areas.
Generally. log buildings with high foundations were built by settlers from the
lower South. while low foundations were associated with those from the upper South.
Immigrants. such as the Polish families of Tidwell Prairie. appear to have used lower
foundations also.
None of the Tidwell Prairie log structures. with the exception of a smokehouse at
41RT275. reveal a dirt floor. which would have been associated with the earliest phase
of log construction in Texas. Instead. they show evidence of log or timber sleepers.
with plank or log floors. The double crib barn at 41RT275 provides a good example
of the latter.
Although several of the structures are of the double crib. central passageway
construction. none represent broad ranges of evolutionary phases.
The cribs in
41RT275 and 41RT93 appear to have been built at separate times. although the

Historic Site Descriptions / 89
notching and construction methods remained the same. 41RT93 exhibited the largest
logs. with diameters 8 inches and greater.
Oak and cedar were the primary woods
used for logs and all of the structures appear to have been roofed initially by wood
shingles.

Survey of Water Wells
Nineteen hand dug wells were recorded in the project area. Of that number, four
had collapsed. The wells were of two basic designs: unlined and uncased, and cased
with concrete collars. None of the former have survived intact.
The wells range in depth from 10 feet at 41RT249, considered by local residents
as the shallowest in the general area. to approximately 26 feet at other locations.
They were dug through sand into the basal clays.
Some. such as the one at
41RT260, passed through seams of coal and were considered unsuitable for drinking.
All of the surviving wells exhibit commercially made concrete collars. Three. at
41RT273. 41RT274. and 41RT275. are topped with hand pumps manufactured by the
E.E. Myers Company. The pump at 41RT275 is the most complete. with an elongated
tube "bucket" that can be lowered through the center of the well.
The Bienzienski
family still has a windlass used on their early wells.
In addition to the well systems. five cisterns were recorded. Two (41RT252 and
41RT255) were semi-subterranean tin units. A third. at 41RT254. is an above-ground
tin unit still in use by the Okonski family. Ed Okonski told of repairing small leaks in
the system by throwing handfuls of sand into the cistern. The sand gravitated to the
leak and eventually plugged the hole. preventing the need for draining the system. The
remaining two were hand dug. brick lined. bell-shaped cisterns (41RT93 and 41RT325).
According to local informants. where present these cisterns. which collect rainwater
draining from the roof. predate the hand dug wells.

-------------

-----

-~-- .......

This page intentionally left blank.

THE HISTORY OF TIDWEll PRAIRIE

Introduction

Several factors set the structure for historical investigation of the Tidwell Prairie
community. First. initial research showed the settlement had a high percentage of
renters (sharecroppers).
Such individuals would not show up on most land or tax
records. Second. most of the current residents of Tidwell Prairie are descendents of
pioneer settlers of the area. Third. in existing histories. more attention has been given
to the plantation system in Robertson County and to the development of mqjor towns,
such as Hearne. Calvert. Franklin and Bremond. Fourth. initial fieldwork showed that
many residents of Tidwell Prairie would cooperate in the compilation of historical data,
especially oral history.
For these reasons. it was determined that a comprehensive oral history program
should be an integral part of the research process. Members of the community's early
core families could be identified. as well as representatives of the Anglo. Polish and
Black communities: the basis of the study units for the project area. A search of
existing county records, such as tax rolls and minutes of the county school board,
provided a complement to the oral history. A third area of research included secondary
sources. such as books and theses. Several sources have been discovered through the
oral history interviews.
Development of Tidwell Prairie

Tidwell Prairie is the historic name given to a widespread agricultural community
in northwestern Robertson County. Located in the upland divide between the Brazos
and Navasota rivers, Tidwell Prairie was settled late in comparison to other
communities in the county. Early settlement was concentrated along the Brazos River
where the plantation system soon developed.
Robertson County. one of the first
counties in Texas when it was organized in 1837. was an early leader in agriculture,
primarily in the production of cotton. Its location on a major navigable river and on
important trade and immigration routes enhanced the area's growth.
Although it developed early, Robertson County was still on the Texas frontier in
the 1830s and 1840s. An 1839 map of the county at the General Land Office includes
handwritten notations that the area had .. rich muskeet prairies . . . good water. and
hostile Indians" (General land Office Records, map collection, 1839).
The latter
statement was evidenced by a number of clashes between Indians and settlers, including
the murder of J.M. Tidwell. for whom Tidwell Prairie was named. Tidwell was killed
by Indians while plowing his field between Calvert and Old Franklin. now a ghost town.

91

92 / Calvert Lignite Mine
Old Franklin was a settlement at the headwaters of Mud Creek. (approximately 10
miles east of Calvert).
His wife and children were taken captive. but later released
through the efforts of traders (Baker 1970). The Tidwell attack occurred in 1838. the
same year a major cholera epidemic swept Robertson County.
Soon after the end of the Texas Revolution in 1836. the area now compnslng
Tidwell Prairie was divided into fou r grants to pioneer Texas settlers (Fig. 11). They
were: L.M. Simons. who came to Texas prior to August. 1836: Thomas H. Brennan.
who settled in Texas in 1832 and served in the siege of Anahuac and as a guard for
the Runaway Scrape; John Trudoe. a resident of Milam County by 1834: and George
A. Skilleron. whose family inherited his grant upon his death in March. 1837. Census
records do not show the grantees as residents of Robertson County.
It is known.
however. that Skilleron died prior to the issuance of the grant and that Brennan resided
at Rockdale in Milam County.
The land remained undivided until construction of
nearby rail lines opened the area for settlement.
The Houston and Texas Central
Railroad reached the Bremond area in 1869 and. by the early 1870s. the land grants
were being divided into relatively small tracts. less fertile soils. the lack of a major
river. and the heavily wooded land had limited the implementation of the plantation
system in the uplands prior to the Civil War. By the time the area was settled in the
1870s. the declining economic condition of the South and the end of slavery made the
area even less suitable for large farms.
Adding to the early growth of Tidwell Prairie was the decline of an earlier
community. Owensville. which had served as the county seat before the Civil War.
When Calvert became the new seat of government in 1870. Owensville residents began
moving from the area. Many bought land in the newly opened areas around Beck
Prairie and Tidwell Prairie. The decade of the 1870s was one of impressive growth for
Robertson County. In 1870. the county had a population of 9.990 but by the end of
the decade there were over 22.000 residents (St. Clair 1931:184). Many of the area's
earliest settlers came from the lower South. where the land was overworked and
devastated following the Civil War. In order to find fertile farmland. they had to move
to under-developed areas of the west. Henry Jackson .. Jack" Weaver. his brother John
and sister Rena (Weaver) Rushing brought their families to Texas from Montgomery
County. Alabama after 1870. Joining them in Texas was the patriarch of the Weaver
clan. Confederate veteran Anthony Weaver.
The Stephensons. another early family.
came to Texas from Tishimingo County. Mississippi. They were led by John Thornton
Stephenson. also a veteran of the Civil War.
Although they settled in the area of
Beck Prairie. members of the family married into Tidwell Prairie families and became
influential residents of the community. Members of the Williams family. from Panola
County in East Texas. and the Hailey family. from the Houston area. first came to the
area as workers on the railroad.
The Southerners were soon joined by Polish immigrants who were attracted to
the area through the influence of pioneer settlers Joseph and Catherine Bartula (Texas
Historical Commission 1975). Natives of Austrian Poland. the Bartulas came to Texas
in 1873. settling first in New Waverly (Walker County). the mother colony for later
Polish settlements in east and east-central Texas.
In 1875. the Bartulas came to

History of Tidwell Prairie / 93

BREMOND

Hugh Davlin
Thomas
J.
Chambers

L.M
Mathers

Thomas
N.
Mudd

Simons
George

A.
Skellern

C. Chorle

Hannum

H.

SF-/24B/

John Trudoe

Creek

FIGURE 11. Original land grants in the study area (from a 1945 General Land Office
map. 1 in = 2000 varas)

94 / Calvert Lignite Mine
Robertson County and worked as tenants on the land of J.c. and Mary Roberts before
purchasing their own property in Tidwell Prairie. Bremond. and the surrounding farm
country. soon became the center of the largest Polish settlement in Texas. A Polish
journalist visiting Bremond after the turn of the century observed "I am in the capital
of Texas Polonia" (Baker 1982:67). Other Polish families who settled in the Tidwell
Prairie area included the Okonskis. Yezaks. Bienzienskis and Mikolojewskis. A survey
of the census records showed these and other families as natives of Poland. although it
was often noted parenthetically that they came from an area controlled by Germany,
Austria. or Russia.
Another group of early settlers in Tidwell Prairie was the Blacks. Following the
Civil War. many freedmen left the plantations of the Brazos River bottoms and moved
to other areas where they worked as sharecroppers. Their small farming enclaves soon
became centered around their own schools and churches. Two schools. Giddings Chapel
and Willow Point. served the Black community of Tidwell Prairie.
Two early Black
families were the Giddings and the Rogers.

By the 1880s, Tidwell Prairie had developed as a typical Texas rural community.
It included a store. which was the commercial center of the settlement. a mill. and a
building that served as a church. school and community meeting place. The first store
at Tidwell Prairie (41RT260) was probably established by the Weaver family. By the
1890s. however. it was operated by Artie Rushing.
Rushing's store included general
goods such as horse collars. wire. implements. clothes. feed. seed and piece goods.
Because a proprietor had contact with other communities through traveling salesmen.
the store also served as a center of area news. For children who seldom traveled to
faraway places like Waco, or even Hearne. it provided a showcase of modern wonders
that left lasting impressions. Frieda Rehberg Rains recalls:
We just loved to go there because .. take those days. why. we didn't get
to go to town but maybe once a year and that'd be the summertime. The
candy case is what'd catch your eye because Cousin Artie would always give
us maybe a piece of candy . . I can remember one kind that looked so pretty
in there, it'd be that pink marshmallow fluffy kind. you know. Of course. you
don't see that now. you know. And such as that would really catch your eye
(Rains 1986).
Mrs. Rains also recalls that not everyone showed the same awe and respect for the
store:
I remember several times it got broke
hunting dogs and he had some hounds
they was trying to find out who it was
with his hounds to track 'em. And they

into and my daddy had always kept
and I remember one time especially
and they came for him to come over
did. (Rains 1986)

Her story also points to the lack of organized law enforcement in the community.
Residents depended on each other for help in protecting property. since no deputy
sheriff. stock deputy. or constable lived in the community.

-------~-

..........--~----

- - - - - _....... - - - ­

History of Tidwell Prairie / 95
The Hamiltons and Haileys operated later stores.
The Hamilton' s business.
located on a road near the Tidwell Prairie Cemetery (outside the project area). closed
in 1936. The Hailey store operated from 1935 until the early 1970s. An example of
the transitional influences on the community. the store offered gasoline for automobiles.
trucks and farm machines. Richard Hailey recalled an incident that provides an even
better picture of the changes that progress created. When Mr. Hailey's father decided
to sell gasoline. he purchased a used pump and hauled the apparatus to his store with
the aid of a big red mule (Hailey 1986).
Education was an important element in Tidwell Prairie.
Although the first
schools may have been cooperative efforts between farmers conducted in homes or
abandoned houses, the earliest community school for the White children was on land
adjacent to the Tidwell Prairie Cemetery.
The schoolhouse (41RT346) was a
community building that was also used for worship services of the local Methodist
congregation.
The one room schoolhouse burned during the Christmas holidays one
year and was replaced by another community building (41RT257) across the road from
the Rushing store.
In 1919. the county school board organized the Tidwell Prairie
school as Robertson County Common School District No. 30. As a common school
district. its records were not listed separately in reports to the state. but local records
show the school served a scholastic population of 135 by 1928. The following year,
the school and church discontinued their cooperative effort and the school trustees built
a new schoolhouse (41RT256) (Robertson County School Supt. Records 1919-1944).
The records of Tidwell Prairie school served as a good measure of the
community's early growth and eventual decline.
In 1925, the district served 116
scholastics. It reached its peak in the late 1920s and early 19305. when it served 135.
By 1937. however. the number dropped to 65. The number continued to decline and
by 1944. at the height of World War II. the school district consisted of only 20
students.
Three years later the schoolhouse was dormant and in 1949 the county
school board voted unanimously to consolidate the Tidwell Prairie school with the
Bremond Independent School District (Robertson County School Supt. Records
1919-1949).
Throughout its history. the Tidwell school included only seven or eight grades.
Older students completed their high school education in Bremond. The teachers were
paid by the county school superintendent. but often lived with families in the
community during the school year.
One such teacher was Miss Willie Love. who
Mrs. Rains recalled lived with her parents. the Rehbergs.
There weren't too many kids that went to school and I had a brother
named Robert and she' d say, 'Well. let Robert go with us: He was still so
young. when he'd take his nap and go to sleep. she'd put him on the desk.
(Rains 1986)
Richard Hailey recalls a favorite teacher, Mr. Duncan love:

~~~~

......

~--~---~.~~-

96

I

Calvert Lignite Mine
I tell you what, when
the rest.
Duncan Love
went to Bremond in the
was way ahead of them,
catch it. (Hailey 1986)

I got into the sixth grade, that made me forget all
was my teacher.
He was good.
In fact, when I
seventh grade, I had grammar they didn't have .. I
you know . . Whatever he tried to teach me. I could

In contrast to other rural Texas communities. where the school was often moved
to reflect shifts in local politics or changing population centers. the Tidwell Prairie
school was the focal point of the settlement. It served as a gathering place for the
community.
Christmas pageants, scholastic contests and the Easter picnic were
important events. The school was part of the community's identity, and at least one
resident tied the settlement's decline to the closing of the school (Rains 1986).
As noted earlier. the schools of Willow Point and Giddings Chapel served the
Black community. Records on the two schools are not complete. although the name of
the Willow Point teacher often appears in the budget of the county school
superintendent. The only reference to Giddings Chapel is a notice in 1940 that the
building is to be sold.
It is assumed that the Black schools merged with a Black
school in Bremond before World War II.
The church was also an important institution to the early residents of Tidwell
Prairie. As noted earlier, a Methodist congregation shared the schoolhouse. although
the school built a separate building in 1929. Polish residents of the area traveled to
St. Mary's Catholic Church in Bremond.
Founded by Poles in 1876, the church
remains a vital force in the county (Texas Historical Commission 1969). Several small
Baptist congregations provided worship services for the Black community and two
remain. although both are well outside the project area.
The Methodist Church. located near the center of Tidwell Prairie. was organized
The first pastor was the Rev. J.M. Wallace.
A declining
on June 22. 1897.
community population and the transfer of memberships as students began going to
school in Bremond led the church to merge with the Bremond Methodist congregation
in the late 1930s. The church rolls provide a good record of Tidwell Prairie residents.
including members of the Craft. Hailey. Hamilton. Rushing. Meaders. Weaver. O'brien
[sic]. Terry. Williams, Towns. Vaughn. Otwell and Gregory families (Turner 1978).
Two cemeteries are located within the immediate Tidwell Prairie area.
The
largest one is known as the Tidwell Prairie Cemetery (41RT92) and contains graves
dating from the 18705 (Exhibit A).
It is located adjacent to the early school site.
Mrs. Molly Williams Hamilton remembers that the cemetery was once scraped (kept
Flags
free of grass). similar to the style of early graveyards in the lower South.
(irises) and other flowers were allowed to grow there and some graves were decorated
with shells. vases. rocks and broken pottery and glass (Hamilton 1986). No evidence
of grave scraping or decoration now exists. The Stephenson family cemetery contains
only a few graves. possibly as few as three.
Sources indicate the graveyard may
include only the burial sites of Nancy Van Cleave Stephenson. who was born in
Kentucky in 1848 and died at the age of 32. her unnamed baby. and a Buddy

History of Tidwell Prairie / 97
Stephenson.
Buddy Stephenson was probablY John T. Stephenson. Nancy's husband
(Green 1985).
Accounts differ regarding a specific site for a mill and gin operation in Tidwell
Prairie.
Although initial conversations with local informants showed some confusion
regarding a mill site. it was later determined through additional research that a mill/gin
existed hear the T -intersection of Tidwell Prairie. The site was designated 41 RT314.
It is known that several small mills served the area. including one on Giddings Branch
owned by J.W. Weaver.
An 1887 warranty deed describes the equipment as a 15
horsepower Centennial Steam Press with a two flue boiler. Although there may have
been earlier mule powered gins. the Giddings Branch operation is probably typical of
others in the area. Since Tidwell Prairie was isolated for many years. it is possible
that early operations were combinations of grist mills. cotton gins. syrup mills. and
even first-cut sawmills. An interesting note to the industrial history is that by 1885
the Texas Coal and Mining Company was leasing land for coal.
The mining never
took place, according to local stories. because the Brazos River broke in on similar
operations west of the community.
Cotton was the cash crop in Tidwell Prairie from the time of the first settlers
through the 1930s.
It influenced the system of sharecropping. which was the
transitional phase of agricultural production following the plantation system. Depending
on the farm, sharecroppers worked on thirds. fourths (quarters). or halves. Typically.
the cash crop was worked on fourths. which meant the landowner received one-fourth
of the crop and the tenant received three-fourths.
Non-cash crops. such as corn or
peanuts. were farmed on thirds. Both the thirds and fourths were for tenant farmers
that had their own. or most of their own. farm equipment. On occasion. a landowner
would agree to farming on halves. if a tenant had no equipment.
This was not
normally a good situation for the landowner. since it called for no real investment on
the part of the tenant. As Richard Hailey noted:
If you didn't have anything, it was halvers. My daddy had halvers. but he
never did have much luck at that. You'd have halvers. you'd furnish them.
you'd get ready to go to work. you know. and they'd leave.
Move out at
night. that kind of stuff. (Hailey 1986)
The normal system. he added.
every fourth bale of cotton
sharecropper. recalls the same
sugar cane into a Mr. Reed.
(Hamilton 1986).

was that the landlord got every third load of corn and
(Hailey 1986).
Mrs. Hamilton. whose father was a
system. In addition. she remembered that farmers took
in Calvert. who made syrup for them on the halves

Tenants. also referred to as sharecroppers. renters, or hands. were essential
elements of the cotton production system. They were utilized in the chopping process
and were paid by the row. During the harvest. however. they could make even more
money. being paid by the pound of cotton picked or pulled. Richard Hailey recalls that
he could pick 100 pounds of cotton a day and that. although he never considered

98 / Calvert Lignite Mine
himself a good picker. there were workers that could pull as much as 600 to 700
pounds in a day.
At harvest time. the tenants and the landowners worked together as a team in
an effort to get the crop out of the field and to the gin as fast as possible. Richard
Hailey recalls that when it was time to harvest. all the landowner needed to do was to
let local residents know he was ready: .. Shoot. I've seen 'em going down that road.
be 20 or 30 with sacks on their back, going down to my daddy's to pick cotton"
(Hailey 1986).
Mrs. Rains recalls an added incentive that worked for her father at
harvest time:
Daddy could always get hands because they got their dinner. And, you
know those days it was hard for them to get food. So, mother would stay
at home in the morning and cook the dinner and they'd be all at the field
working. And then, she'd put it in pails--it might not be but a great big pot
of beans with a great lot of bacon in it, you know, what they called sow
belly then.
And, a big pan of cornbread and always churned (butter).
There'd be a big container of milk and maybe send some peeled onion or such
as that along and she'd get it all fixed. put it in the containers and the
easiest way to carry it would be to take a great big old cloth. set that in it,
and tie it and see. you could carry it like it was a handle. And, I'd have to
carry it to the field. (Rains 1986)
Ed Okonski. a descendant of one of the early Polish settlers. remembers the
problems associated with cotton farming. In dry years. the boll weevils could strip the
crop and make it worthless.
Dry weather could also bring leafworms. which were
equally destructive. He remembers one incident that occurred on a twelve-acre tract he
cleared and planted in cotton. When the leafworms attacked. he placed strychnine in a
cloth and attached it to the end of a stick.
He would go up and down the rows,
dawbing the leafworms. It worked fine, he said. until the wind shifted and he began
inhaling the dust. His father found him. nearly unconscious. and revived him with a
"sweet milk remedy" (Okonski 1986).
The sharecropping system set the community landscape pattern. Tenant houses
were usually located near the road and were small sites compared to those of the
owners.
The land was frequently plowed up to the house, with minimal room for
outbuildings and sheds. Residents recall that Tidwell Prairie had many more houses
during the cotton days.
Richard Hailey estimates there were as many as 5 or 6
houses per 500 acres (Hailey 1986).
Both renters and landowners worked together on other farm chores. including the
dipping of livestock to avoid the spread of diseases or parasites.
Remains of the
dipping vat on Artie Rushing's property. part of a 1920s government program. can still
be seen. Mrs. Rains described the process:

- - - - _.......

_--­

History of Tidwell Prairie / 99
Now. that was a big time. I mean, the men would all get together about
what time they'd bring their cattle along. you know. so there wouldn't be any
mixup and my brother and myself would have to help daddy and the ones
along the way would help run to the different roads. you know. to keep 'em
from getting out. They'd take .em over to the dipping vat and get back with
them. (Rains 1986)
The community also came together outside of work. As noted earlier. the school
and church were important institutions in the community and served as focal points for
the surrounding farms. Likewise. area social activities gave the community a sense of
identity.
Residents recall the baseball games. which were popular community events
prior to World War II. Tidwell Prairie was a member of the baseball league formed by
Waco sportswriter Jinks Tucker.
Richard Hailey recalls. .. This was a baseball
community. We played baseball. We'd play anybody in the country. Of course, as
far as me saying that, we go as far as Franklin. that was a long ways" (Hailey 1986).
There was a baseball field beside the Hailey home and the Tidwell Prairie players
would practice regularly for their games against such area teams as Nesbitt, Boone
Prairie. Bald Prairie, Walnut. Elmo. Branchville. New Baden. Bremond and Franklin.
As the teams advanced in the league playoffs, however. the larger towns would
dominate since they had more players and the money to recruit players from other
towns.
Still. the game served to draw the rural community closer.
Richard Hailey
notes that several of the players were good enough to play in the professional leagues.
had they been given the chance. One deadly combination was the Hailey 2-4 pickoff:
.. Of course. my oldest brother at second base and my youngest brother, just younger
than me. was catcher. and you just didn't steal second base. Now that's it. They'd
get you" (Hailey 1986). The baseball league ended when the young men went off to
fight in World War II and efforts to set up softball leagues later were not successful.
There were also community parties in local homes, often with live music supplied
by members of the Hamilton or McBride families. The community also came together
to support their neighbors in times of crisis or tragedy.
Early residents remember
assistance efforts during the 1918 influenza epidemic and during World War II.
The economic depression of the 1930s and the ensuing world war combined to
hasten the decline of Tidwell Prairie. Those who served in the military saw a world
quite different from their rural farm community. Others left for better paying defense
industry jobs in larger towns and never returned. Still others were disillusioned by the
Depression and quit farming.
As a result. by the end of World War II. the
composition and identity of Tidwell Prairie had changed. Richard Hailey, who served in
Italy during the war. remembers he was surprised when he returned to the area. What
he noticed most was how few houses were left standing (Hailey 1986).
The Depression was probably the single most significant factor in the decline of
the town since its harshness influenced many to leave. Always a borderline settlement
economically, it could not survive the decline. Mrs. Hamilton, who operated a small
store there in the 1930s. recalls when they had to close the business in 1936: "You

100 / Calvert Lignite Mine
couldn't buy on the credit when they couldn't pay you."
She added that when the
prices bottomed out. no one would buy cotton and that farmers would return home
with the crop they had taken to the gin (Hamilton 1986).
Ironically, the factors that could have led to continued growth in Tidwell Prairie
often contributed to its decline. Improved roads, which replaced the ubiquitous mud
lanes, and the availability of autos and trucks made it easier for residents to trade in
nearby towns.
Efforts to provide area students with a more complete educational
system through consolidation with Bremond may also have caused a loss of community
identity.
David Kyvig and Myron Marty. in their book Nearby History, describe the
evolutionary cycle of a community as construction. abandonment. conversion,
abandonment. demolition and new construction. They add that the process is slower in
the rural areas, where it may even end with abandonment (Kyvig and Marty 1982:165).
The structures in the Tidwell Prairie area reveal all stages of the evolutionary model.
What does not show, however. are the transitional elements of the settlement. Tidwell
Prairie was established as part of the county's transition from the antebellum plantation
system to the era of the small farm. Later, when an economic depression and a world
war brought a decline in cotton production. Tidwell Prairie became a ranching
community, The latter change is harder to evaluate because it is quite recent, having
taken place only within the last 30 years.
However. oral history does provide an
insight into the transition. Mr. Hailey recalls that in the good years of cotton farming.
it was not unusual to raise a bale of cotton to the acre. During his last year as a
cotton farmer. however. he raised only about one bale to four acres because of dry
conditions and boll weevils.
That was when he told his wife. "I might starve to
death. but I'm not going to do it tired. I'm quitting the cotton."
As a result. he
began raising hogs (Hailey 1986). Mrs. Hamilton recalls the end of the cotton era:
When they stopped raising cotton . . . after World War II. when everybody
began to raise cattle. it run away down there and can't tell where nothing's
at .. There was houses everywhere.
Yes, the houses is all down--fallen
down. (Hamilton 1986)
Although little remains of the original Tidwell Prairie. the existing structures and
visible community and farm patterns reflect a rural agricultural settlement of the period
Bypassed by the railroad and major transportation routes, it
from 1910 to 1940.
continues its slow evolution.
As one Bremond businessman. who shall remain
anonymous. noted: "Tidwell Prairie -- I haven't heard that name in a long time."

- - - - - _ ...

_-----------­

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
PREHISTORIC SITES
The intensive survey of approximately 4.800 acres within the Calvert Prospect
project area resulted in the documentation of 32 prehistoric sites. reassessment of two
previously recorded prehistoric sites and location of seven isolated finds. i.e.. single
All of the sites are
aboriginal artifacts with no identifiable associated materials.
contained within the upland region of the Brazos River drainage basin and all share one
common factor - proximity to Walnut Creek or its tributary streams.
Physiographic
setting is predominately along the valley margins on terraces. knolls and hills
overlooking the active floodplain.
Three sites. 41RT267. 41RT292. and 41RT295. produced the total project
inventory of temporally diagnostic artifacts (7) and all date to the Late Prehistoric or
Additionally. the
NeoArchaic Period. approximately 1.250 - 200 BP (Prewitt 1985).
recovery of a Waco Sinker from 41RT321 may indicate the presence of an earlier
component at that site. Obviously. this is far too small a sample to assign a relative
age to any single site or to periods of occupation for the area. At most of the sites
the predominate artifacts encountered were small (>8mm) tertiary flakes and fragments.
negating the formulation of definitive suppositions on site function or activities vis a vis
the presence of tool types or assemblages.
Some preliminary observations and conclusions may be made. however. on the
basis of the recently generated survey data.
Of primary importance is the now­
established certainty that substantial numbers of aboriginal sites exist in the Walnut
Creek drainage basin. horizontally distant from the Brazos River.
The sites are
concentrated along Walnut Creek and its tributaries. The conclusions formulated as a
result of this survey are. essentially. a numerical magnification of the tentative
observations offered after the 1978 sample survey (Good. Turpin and Freeman 1980).
Additionally. the results of this survey extend the previously noted dense accumulations
of aboriginal sites along Walnut Creek and its tributaries further up the drainages. Of
equal interest is the apparent potential of some of these sites for quality data yield.
manifested by relatively dense deposits of buried cultural debris at depths that assume
a degree of depositional integrity. If these materials have escaped. or been minimally
affected. by disruptive forces. archeological information gleaned could produce meaningful
interpretations of regional upland use and adaptation. Considering the areal size of the
recorded sites and their location within an environmentally transitional zone. it is
possible that they served as semi-permanent seasonal base camps from which forays
were made to acquire resources. Since no significant lithic resources were noted within
the area. it would appear that subsistence materials would have been foraged.
As a result of the survey. it is apparent
sites may be affected by current and future
Fifteen of the recently documented sites have
controlled subsurface testing to further assess

101

that potentially significant archeological
mining plans in the Calvert Prospect.
been recommended for some degree of
the quality of the buried deposits and

102 / Calvert Lignite Mine
evaluate their potential eligibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places. Two types of testing were recommended. depending upon the horizontal extent
and depth and density of cultural deposits. Limited testing indicates a projected one
week of excavation at the site.
Extensive testing of two week duration implies only
that the cultural deposits at the site are too dense or widespread to be adequately
assessed in one week.
Analysis of data gained from excavations of the prehistoric sites would be
integrated into a regional archeological model and therein be useful in alleviating the
implied negative effect of mining operations and for planning future operations. Actual
initiation of any of the proposed testing programs is contingent upon formalized mining
plans.
If areas where archeological sites exist can be avoided, preservation would
The remaining prehistoric sites seem to
negate the implementation of further work.
possess no potential for further data yield beyond their documentation and their
integration into regional settlement models.

TABLE 4. Prehistoric Sites Recommended for Further Work

AREA

*HRC

SITE NUMBER

41RT267
A
A
41RT269
B
41RT240
41RT283
B
B
41RT284
B
41RT285
41RT288
B
B
41RT292
B
41RT296
41RT297
B
41RT301
B
41RT305
B
B
41RT306
41RT317
HRC*
HRC
41RT321
Haul Road Corridor

RECOMMENDATION
Extensive testing
Extensive testing
Extensive testing
Limited testing
Limited testing
Extensive testing
Extensive testing
Extensive testing
Limited testing
Limited testing
Limited testing
Limited testing
Limited testing
Limited testing
Limited testing

Additionally, it is recommended that during the testing phase, a geomorphologist
(1) make an assessment of the project-wide depositional processes, and (2) inspect
excavation units and backhoe trenches at individual sites to assess localized deposits as
an aid in site interpretation. In the floodplain, where sites may be buried beyond the
reach of shovel probes, a backhoe could be used to search specified locations.
Additional questions to be considered would be the age of local deposits (sand and
clay), potential for colluvial and aeolian movement of the sandy surface mantle in
upland areas. and the nature of the undulating surface of basal clays that underlies the
sand.

Summary and Recommendations

I

103

As future mining plans become formalized. further intensive culture resource survey
will become necessary.
Reassessment of previously recorded sites within these areas
will also be required. It is suggested that shovel testing be extensively utilized as an
aid in locating aboriginal sites. The high probability areas delineated in Figure 5 are
obvious locations where intensive shovel probing is warranted. Attention to the terrain
during transect coverage will reveal other subtle rises or knolls. not appearing on
topographic maps. that merit shovel testing.

H ISTORle SITES
Most of the 48 historic sites recorded during this survey are part of Tidwell
Prairie. a community formed by yeoman farmers retreating from the social upheavals of
Reconstruction and by Polish emigrants settling in post-war Robertson County. These
sites provide a settlement pattern based on subsistence farming. with the former hamlet
providing the support functions of church. school. cemetery. store and light industry. in
the form of the cotton gin. Although some of these central place structures have been
destroyed. the descendants of the original settlers provide an unparalleled source of
detailed information on their location. physical appearance and role in the community.
Sites closer to the community of Hammond were more influenced by its development.
The construction of a railroad spur and access road. emanating from Highway 6 near
Hammond. will only peripherally affect the remnants of this abandoned settlement.
Sites 41RT347 and 41RT348. located along the proposed routes. are minimally
important cultural properties.
Within the Tidwell Prairie sphere of influence. most of the recorded historic sites
are. as entities. not distinguished by architectural merit or associations with persons of
historical significance. Their importance lies in their overall distribution and relationship
to Tidwell Prairie. Five sites (41RT93. 41RT254. 41RT260. 41RT275 and 41RT302)
are examples of turn of the century rural construction or layout. Also. sites 41RT249
and 41RT263 are typical of the vernacular sharecropper cottage that was prevalent in
this area before World War II.
Most of the cottages were constructed during the
height of the sharecropping agricultural system. which was from 1890 to 1920 in
Robertson County.
Three of the houses are still permanently occupied (41RT254.
41RT275 and 41RT302) and another (41RT260) is used as a weekend hunting
residence, thereby increasing their state of preservation. but limiting the amount of
archeological work which may be conducted at the locations. One unmarked cemetery.
the gravesites of the Stephenson family (41RT270). has special status under the law.
These sites have been singled out for intensive documentation. The most appropriate
approach for the historic resources was considered to be their evaluation within the
larger context of community patterning and development.
The individual sites. as well as the evolution. development. and decline of a rural.
dispersed. agriculturally-oriented community have been subjected to an intensive cultural
resource evaluation that has included both archival and oral history research.
It is
believed the research orientation was both thorough and comprehensive. given the
amount of recorded data available. Supplemental data provided by living descendents of

104 / Calvert Lignite Mine
settling families still residing In the area further enhanced the overall historical
documentation. The volume of data would appear to minimize the necessity for using
archeological excavations for further site documentation. In addition. two factors noted
during survey work further point to the low potential for meaningful data yields through
subsurface testing.
First. the minimal amounts of household surface debris. coupled
with complete removal or reuse of articles such as wood and brick. may reflect a
cultural propensity toward thrift and neatness. Even occupied sites were observed to
be devoid of the household litter commonly associated with long term habitation.
Second. as is the custom in small farming tracts of the South. all available land was
cultivated. including that immediately adjacent to dwellings. This appears to have been
especially true in the project area in the cases of abandoned and razed houses.
As mining plans are developed and it becomes evident that certain extant historic
structures will be destroyed. it is recommended that the following mitigative efforts be
employed to lessen the implied negative impact. First. detailed site plan mapping using
transit and stadia rod will sufficiently document the layout of the individual farmsteads.
such as 41RT93. 41RT254. 41RT260. 1 41RT275 and 41RT302. Second. large format
(4" X 5") photo documentation is suggested to provide an accurate visual record of
the structures. Third. the log structures at these sites could be relatively well dated
by their owners. occupants or descendants of the builders. If they are to be destroyed
or dismantled during mine development. dendrochronological samples would make a
useful contribution to the reference collection now being compiled at Southern Methodist
University.

lEditor's note: 41RT260 has since been determined eligible for the National Register of Historic
Places.

EXHIBIT A
TIDWEll PRAIRIE CEMETERY (41RT92) SURVEY
Dan K. Utley

The following numbers correspond to a survey plat map on file at TARl.
was done on July 12. 1986.
1.

la.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.

12.
13.
14.
15.
16.

This survey

Edward J. Dolney
June 6, 1908-Aug. 25, 1983
Irene Dolney
July 14, 1916
Note: no death date
Tina B. Weaver
July 28, 1897-Aug. 18, 1978
Kay Weaver
Aug. 31, 1892-Apr.27, 1957
Our beloved son
Oscar Weaver
1926-1931
Pinkie S. Craft
1873-1920
F.C. Craft
Note: date illegible
Sidney A. Parr
Cpl. US Army, Korea
Sept. 26, 1928-May 10, 1954
Note: illegible
Note: illegible
E.F. McCafferty
husband of T.D. McCafferty
July 24, 1867-Sept. 23, 1888
son of C. and N.L. McCafferty, Chester, Mississippi
In memory of infant daughter
W.A. and N.M. Fleming
born and died 1874
(Note: month illegible)
Major Weaver
1879-1879
Alice Weaver
1857-1877
John Weaver
Mar. 18, 1884-1888
Weaver baby
Aug. 26, 1898
Weaver baby
Aug. 6, 1901

105

106

/

Calvert Lignite Mine

17.
18.
19.

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.

Kay Weaver
1888-1892
J. Weaver
1905-1909
John W. Weaver
Private, Third Alabama Infantry
CSA
May 16, 1843-June 16, 1914
Mattie Jane Weaver
Dec. 25, 1862-Sept. 12, 1952
John E. Hamilton
Feb. 14, 1870-May 7, 1932
Newell Jackson (Base) Hamilton
June 8, 1898-Aug. 2, 1967
Berta Valentine Hamilton
Feb. 14, 1909-July 31, 1969
A. Rushing
Dec. 15, 1861-Mar. 22, 1930
E.L. Rushing
Dec. 18, 1855-Mar. 28, 1932
Tiva Rushing
1896-1896
Zeby, a child of A. and Luticia Rushing
1898-1898
Rena, wife of Oliver Rushing
May 5, 1833-1888
Harlan Weaver
1904-1905
Bedford, son of F.W. and E. M. Weaver
1902-1903
Dempsey
1876-1888
Note: first name illegible
Mary Yarberry
Note: no date
William Franklin Yarbery [sic]
1880-1893
A.A. Harwell
1834-1883
Charles Henry, son of A.A. and E.J. Harwell
1879-1881
Caprey Harwell
1875-1875
F.M., son of A.A. and E.J. Harwell
1876-1889
Jack Weaver
1872-1891
M.E. Weaver
1895-1896
W.A. Weaver
1867-1895

----------~-~----~~~

~.-~--~

------

Exhibit A

41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.

Katie Stephenson
1865-1888
Zeb Andrew Weaver
Pvt., 65th Dpt. Brigade, World War I
Jan. 18, 1895-Feb. 19, 1947
Baby Weaver
d. 1922
Note: handmade stone
Betty Hailey Clevenger
1925­
Clyde Drew Clevenger
1918-1970
Melvina Weaver Hailey
1896-1983
William Thornton Hailey
1895-1975
Johnnie M. Hailey
1932-1966
Martha Frank Hailey
1928-1979
Lester Thornton Hailey
1920­
Mattie S,_ __
1904­
Note: last name and death date illegible
Jane Weaver
1805-1880
Anthony Weaver
1810-1876
Oliver F., sone of Z.T. and Josie Rushing
Note: dates illegible
1877-1888
Note: broken stone with plaster repair
Frank Weaver
1875-1882 (?)
Ida J. Williams
1893-1976
Jess A. Williams
1885-1969
Ima K. Williams
1918-1927
Glen Meadors
1933-193_
Note: last number of death date illegible
Mary J. Williams
Note: dates illegible
L.A. Williams
1855-1917
Margie Williams
1876-1876

/

107

108

/

Calvert Lignite Mine

64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.

74.
75.
76.
77.
78.
79.
80.
81.
82.
83.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.

Eugene Williams
1877-1877
Bobbie K. Hamilton
Feb. 1933-Dec. 1933
Robert B. Hamilton
1893-1976
Mollie V. Hamilton
1901­
A.N. Hamilton, Jr.
Note: no dates
A.N. Hamilton
Note: no dates
Eva J. Hamilton
1882-1974
Will A. Weaver
1890-1984
Nanny L. Weaver
1892-1984
Little W.A. Weaver
1912-1913
Baby Will A. Weaver, III
Note: two stones
E.J. Hamilton
1882-1933
Martha Hamilton
1849-1909
Simmons baby
Simmons baby
Infant son of J. and H. Carey
1879
Infant of _ _ __
Note: parent(s) name(s) illegible
Ella Lee, daughter of
Carey
1879-1881
Note: first name of parent(s) illegible
James
Note: dates illegible
infant of Carey family
son of J. and H. Carey
d. 1889
Lillie Mandy, daughter of C.D. and Nannie J. Drury
1884-1884
Louise Hailey
1923-1930
Effie E. Hailey
1900-1950
Lauderdale baby
Lauderdale baby
Grandma Hailey
1923­
Note: death date illegible

Exhibit A

90.
91.
92.
93.
94.
95.
96.
97.

9S.
99.
100.
101.
102.
103.
104.
105.
106.
107.
lOS.

109.
110.
111.
112.

Roy B., son of W.J. and Essie Hailey
1896-1897
Sally E. Hailey
1871-1902
Hailey baby
1913
Mal
Hardwell
1891-1918
Note: last part of first name illegible
Agnes Harwell
1911-1918
W.J. Hailey
1861-1939
Berta J. Hailey
1886-1962
Roy Terry
Texas
Private, 69th Coast Arty., World War II
1915-Nov. 14, 1946
Grace L. Terry
1898-1980
Lum C. Terry
1892-1939
Ora Terry
1869-1934
Note: This broken stone is illegible
J.T. Terry
1865-1926
Note: illegible
Mary, daughter of J.T. and Nancy Teary [sic]
Lizzie, wife of J.A. Carey
1861-1883
William J. Otwell
1888-1973
Pearlie Mae Otwell
1894-1938
Sgt. Johnnie Lee Otwell
Feb. 26, 1931
Inducted 1-23-48
Honorable discharge 6-16-55
World War II veteran (?)
Married September 21, 1959
Dorothy L. Haynie
Jan. 17, 1923
Watkins baby
Note: remains of a stone
Parrand baby
1886-1914
parents M.R. and J.W.

/

109

110

/

Calvert Lignite Mine

113.
114.

115.
116.

Strickland
1898-1898
Note: first name illegible
Strickland
Notes: first name illegible and no dates
Joe Dryant (7)
1877-1941
P_rdon
1886-1900
Note: first name and portions of last name illegible

-~-~-~

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

-~~~~

-~~~~~~.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~----~

~----------

.............

~--~-~-

REFERENCES CITED

Baker. J. W.
1970
A History of Robertson County. Texas.

Texian Press. Waco.

Baker. T. Lindsey
1982
The Polish Texans.
Institute of Texan Cultures.
Association. San Antonio.

San Antonio Museum

Binford. Lewis R.
1980
Willow Smoke and Dog's Tails: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Systems and
Archeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45(1):4-20.
Brown. David O.
n.d.
Archeology of Aquilla Lake. 1978 - 1982 Investigations.
Report In
preparation by the Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Bryant. V.M .. Jr.
1977
A 16.000 Year Pollen Record of Vegetational Change
Palynology 1:143-156.

In

Central Texas.

Bryant. V.M .. Jr. and Harry J. Shafer
1977
The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas: A Model
Archeologist. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:1-25.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1970
Geologic Atlas of Texas. Waco Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

the

Bureau of Economic Geology. The

Butzer. Karl W.
1982
Archaeology as Human Ecology:Method and Theory
Approach. Cambridge University Press. New York.
Campbell. T.N.
1983
Espinosa. Olivares and the Colorado River
Historical Bulletin 3: 2-6.
1986

for

for

Indians. 1709.

a

Contextual

Sayers ville

Personal communication to Solveig A. Turpin. July 1986.
Professor
Emeritus. Department of Anthropology. The University of Texas at Austin.

111

112 / Calvert Lignite Mine
Davis. E.M.
1958
The Whelan Site. a Late Caddoan Component in the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir. Northeastern Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park
Service by Texas Archeological Salvage Project.
1970

Archeological and Historical Assessment of the Red River Basin in Texas.
Archeological and Historical Resources of the Red River Basin. H.A. Davis.
editor. Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series 1.

Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc.
1980a A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of the Limestone Electric
Document
Generating Station. Limestone and Freestone Counties. Texas.
8023. Austin.
1980b

An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of the Jewett Mine Project Area.
Document 8011, Austin.

1980c

A Cultural Resources Survey of the First Impact Areas of the Jewett Mine
Project Area. Appendix C in: An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of
the Jewett Mine Project Area. Document 80353. Austin.

1980d

Baseline Climatology and Air Quality, Jewett Mine Project.
79193, Austin.

1981

Archaeological Investigations at the Limestone Electric Generating Station.
Limestone. Freestone, Leon and Robertson Counties. Texas.
Document
81438. Austin.

1982a

A Cultural Resources Survey of the First Five-Year Permit Area. Jewett
Mine Project. Appendix D in: An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of
the Jewett Mine Project Area. Document 81233. Austin.

Document

1982b Archeological Mitigation at the Doyle Martin Site. 41L1\J178. and the P.1.
Ridge Site. 41FT52. Leon and Freestone Counties. Texas.
Document
83038. Austin.
1983

Phase I Archeological Testing in the Jewett Mine Project. Area. Leon,
Limestone and Freestone Counties. Texas. Document 83038. Austin.

Fields. Ross C.
1984
Archeological Investigations at 41LN134 and 41LN144. Jewett Mine Project.
Leon County. Texas. Prewitt and Associates. Inc. Reports of Investigations
35. Austin.
1986

Personal communication.
Texas.

Staff archeologist, Prewitt and Associates. Austin.

References Cited / 113

General Land Office
1839
Map Collection.
1986

Robertson County maps.

Archives and Records Division. Land Grant files.

Gilmore. Kathleen Kirk
1969
The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site Identification.
Building Commission Archeological Program Report 16. Austin.
Glander. Wayne
1986
Personal communication.
Project
Associates. Inc. Austin. Texas.

Archeologist.

Espey,

State

Huston

and

Gonzalez. Anibal
1982
The Overlooked Entrada. The Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre Expedition of 1709.
Sayers ville Historical Bulletin 2.
Good. Carolyn E.. Solveig A. Turpin and Martha D. Freeman
1980
A Cultural Resource Assessment of the Calvert and Cole Creek Lignite
Prospects. Robertson County. Texas. Texas Archeological Su rvey Research
Report 75. The University of Texas at Austin.
Goode. Glen T.
1986
Personal communication.
Project Archeologist.
Highways and Public Transportation. Austin.

Texas

Department

of

Gould. F.W.
1975
Texas Plants - A Checklist and Ecological Summary.
Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station. Texas A & M University. College Station.
Green. Bettie Clevenger
1985
Interviewed December 27. 1985. Bremond. Texas by Michael W. Davis and
Jeff Turpin.
Hailey. Richard
1986
Interviewed April 25. 1986. Tidwell Prairie. Texas by Dan K. Utley.
Hamilton. Molly Williams
1986
Interviewed May 13. 1986, Bremond. Texas by Dan K. Utley and Michael
W. Davis
Heck. Marlene E.
1977
Letter from Texas Historical Commission Architectural Historian to Mr.
Douglas McCreary of Calvert. Texas. April 20. 1977.
On file at Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory. The University of Texas at Austin.
Henry. Christopher D. and Joyce M. Basciano
1979
Environmental Geology of the Wilcox Group Lignite Belt. East Texas.
Bureau of Economic Geology Report of Investigations 98. The University of
Texas at Austin.

~----~-

-------

- - - - - - _.......

------­

114 / Calvert Lignite Mine
Jelks. Edward B. and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959
The Harroun Site.
A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan area.
Upshur County. Texas. Department of Anthropology Archaeology Series 2.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Johnson. Leroy Jr.
The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas. Ph. D. dissertation.
1962
Department of Anthropology. The University of Texas at Austin.
Jordan. Terry G.

1978

Texas Log Buildings.

University of Texas Press.

Austin and London.

King. Thomas F.

1978

The Archaeological Survey:Methods and Uses.
Heritage Conservation and
Recreation Service. United States Department of the Interior. Washington.
D.C.

Kyvig. David E. and Myron A. Marty
1982
Nearby History.
American
I\lashville. Tennessee.

Association

for

State

and

Local

History.

Mallouf. Michael G.
1979
Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone. Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report 71. The University of Texas at Austin.
McLean. Malcolm D.
through 1986. Papers Concerning Robertson's Colony in Texas Various
1974
volumes published by Texas Christian University and the University of
Texas at Arlington.
National Archives and Records Administration
1941
Cartographic and Architectural Branch. Washington.D.C.
1941- Robertson County. Texas.

Map CUJ38

Newcomb. W.W.. Jr.

1961

The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press. Austin

Okonski. Ed
1986
Interviewed May 13 by Mike Davis and Dan K.
resident.
Phillips Coal Company
1986
Surface Mining and
Commission of Texas.

Reclamation

Permit

Utley, Tidwell Prairie

Application

to

the

Railroad

Plog. Fred
Some Operational Considerations.
In: The Distribution of Prehistoric
1971
Population Aggregates.
By George J. Gummerman. Prescott College

Anthropological Reports 1.

References Cited / 115
Plog, Fred and James N. Hill
1971
Explaining Variability in the Distribution of Sites.
In: The Distribution of
Prehistoric Population Aggregates. By George J. Gummerman. Prescott
College Anthropological Reports 1.
Prewitt. Elton R.
1974
Upper Navasota
Reservoir:
An Archeological Assessment.
Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 47.
The University of Texas at
Austin.
1975

Upper Navasota Reservoir: Archaeological Test Excavations of the Barkley
and Louie Sadler Sites.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 53.
The University of Texas at Austin.

1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

Society 52:65-89.
1985

From

Circleville

to

Toyah:

Comments

on

Central

Texas

Chronology.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.
Prewitt. Elton R. and Kerry A. Grombacher
1974
An Archeological and Historical Assessment of the Areas to be Affected by
the Proposed Twin Oak and Oak Knoll Projects, East Central Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 43. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Prewitt. Elton R. and M.G. Mallouf
1977
Upper Navasota Reservoir: Texas.
Test Excavations at Lake Limestone,
Spring 1976.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 66, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Rains. Frieda Rehberg
1986
Interviewed April 25 by Dan K. Utley. Bremond. Texas
Richner. J.J. and R. Lee
1976
Cultural Resources at Tennessee Colony Lake.
Archaeology Research
Program Research Report 113. Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
Robertson County
ms.
Records of County School Superintendent. County Clerk's Office. Franklin.
ms.

Tax and Deed Records. Robertson County Tax Office. Franklin.

Roemer. Erwin Jr. and S.B. Carlson
ms.
Excavations at 41BU16: Highway 21 and the Brazos River. Burleson County.
Texas.
Report to State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation. Highway Design Division by Texas A & M University. in
press.

116 / Calvert Lignite Mine

St. Clair. Lawrence Ward
1931
History of Robertson County. Unpublished Master's Thesis. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Schilz. Thomas Frank
1983
People of the Cross Timbers: A History of the Tonkawa Indians. Ph. D.
dissertation. Texas Christian University. Fort Worth.
Skelton. Duford W. and Martha D. Freeman
1979
A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment at Camp Swift. Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 72. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Soil Conservation Service
1986
Soil Survey of the Proposed Calvert Mine Project
Texas. United States Department of Agriculture.

In

Robertson County.

Story. Dee Ann
The Archeology of Cedar Creek Reservoir. Henderson and Kaufman Counties.
1965
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 36:163-257.
1976

The Archaic of East Texas.
In: The Texas Archaic:
A Symposium.
T.R. Hester. editor.
Center for Archaeological Research Special Report 2.
The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Suhm. Dee Ann
1960
A Review of Central Texas Archeology.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

Society 29:63-107.
Suhm. Dee Ann. Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
1954

Bulletin of the Texas

Archeological Society 25.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
n.d.
County Site Files.
Texas Historical Commission
St. Mary's Catholic Church. Robertson County Historical Marker files.
1969
1975

Joseph and Catherine Bartula.

1975

Texas Medallion files.

1978

l\Iational Register files.

1980

National Register files.

Robertson County Historical Marker files.

Turner. S.E. and T.R. Hester

1985

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Austin.

Texas Monthly Press.

References Cited

I

117

Turner. James L.
1978
A History of the Grace United Methodist Church of Bremond. Texas and
Reminiscences, 1868-1918. Texian Press. Waco.
Turpin. Solveig A. and Margaret Kluge
1980
Cultural Resource Sampling. Survey and Assessment in Areas to be affected
by the Twin Oak Steam Electric Station. Robertson County. Texas. Texas
Archeological Research Report 74. The University of Texas at Austin.
Webb. Clarence H.
1960
A Review of Northeast Texas
Archeological Society 29:35-62.

Archeology.

Bulletin

of

the

Texas

Weddle. Robert S.
1968
San Juan Bautista. Gateway to Spanish Texas. University of Texas Press.
Austin and London.

This page intentionally left blank.

SECTION II: ARCHEOLOGICAL TESTING AND ASSESSIVIENT OF
PREHISTORIC SITE 41RT267
Robertson County, Texas

Michael W. Davis and Steve A. Tomka

With contributions by:

Jan Horbaczewski
Tracy O'Shea
Steven M. Kotter
David G. Robinson

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -.............. - - - _.. - ­

This page intentionally left blank.

INTRODUCTION

BACKGROUND
Prehistoric site 41RT267 was documented in December 1985 during the intensive
cultural resource survey of Part I of the Calvert Lignite Mine sponsored by Phillips
Coal Company (Davis and Utley. Section 1. this report). Fifteen of the 34 prehistoric
sites in the study area were recommended for testing to determine their eligibility for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. Within the core of Mine Block
A. 41RT267 would be the first of the recommended sites to be directly affected.
Extensive testing. commissioned by Phillips Coal Company. was carried out between
May 19 and May 29 by a Texas Archeological Survey crew of four archeologists. A
total of 40 work days were expended during the fieldwork at 41RT267.
41RT267 lies along a saddle-shaped ridge paralleling Big Willow Creek above its
confluence with Walnut Creek. No cultural material was observed on the surface during
transect coverage.
However. due to the advantageous physiographic setting. shovel
testing was implemented to determine if subsurface cultural deposits were present.
Four probes with 1/4" mesh screening of matrix recovered 53 small chert tertiary
flakes and fragments. Also recovered was a Steiner arrow point. evidence of activity
during at least the Late Prehistoric/Late Ceramic Period. This positive yield implied
that substantial quantities of cultural materials were buried. Most of the site area is
uncleared, retaining the natural oak and juniper population. thereby reducing the
disturbance. erosion and deflation caused by historic land use.
The lack of major
bioturbation contributed to the decision to test for intact subsurface cultural deposits
that could yield data concerning prehistoric use and adaptation in the Brazos River
uplands. Two weeks of extensive controlled subsurface testing were recommended to
ascertain the site' s vertical and horizontal extent. to assess the integrity of the
established buried cultural deposits and to determine the site's eligibility for nomination
to the National Register of Historic Places.

Site Description
The site. estimated at 70 by 200 meters in areal extent (14.000 sq. m). follows
a long dissected ridge top paralleling the channel of Big Willow Creek. a perennial.
spring-fed stream. At the north and south ends of the landform. low rises create a
saddle-like area in the middle of the site. Elevation of the ridgetop. which forms the
eastern boundary of the broad. flat upland divide separating Bee Branch and Big Willow
The elevation of the creek
Creek. is 400 feet MSL (USGS Hammond 7.5' map).
channel. approximately 250 meters east of the site. is 340 feet MSL. Although some
alluvium has been deposited along the Big Willow Creek channel. forming substantial

121

122

I

Testing of 41RT267

terraces below the confluence with Walnut Creek. it is unlikely that the stream
deposited sediments on the surface of 41RT261.
The ridge possibly resulted from
severe lateral erosion of Big Willow Creek during the Holocene or earlier.
The soils at 41RT261 are generally characterized as tan to brown fine-grained.
unconsolidated sandy loam overlying a dense compacted orange to red basal clay. The
surface mantle varies in depth from 30 centimeters to more than 2 meters.
More
specifically. the soils are mapped as Silawa (SiC) series, described as "deep, loamy fine
sand located on convex areas of terraces and uplands with 1 to 5 percent slope" (Soil
These soils formed from the
Conservation Service 1986: Exhibit B, this report).
Simsboro geologic unit of the Eocene age Wilcox Group' (Bureau of Economic Geology
1910).

Field Methods / 123
FIELD IVIETHODS
Prior to the removal of fill. permanent vertical and horizontal datum points were
established at each end of the site.
Unit placement and level control were tied to
these points so that reconstruction of the site would be possible during the laboratory
analysis.
Due to the extensive area and the density of the overstory vegetation. a
second set of datum points was established at the southern end of the site. These
were tied to the primary datum point and used for situating additional control units
and maintaining vertical increments.
Two different methods of subsurface examination were employed during testing at
41RT267. hand dug units and backhoe trenching. Initially. measured control units were
hand excavated.
The first four units were begun as 1 by 2 meters in size with
vertical control maintained by arbitrary 10 centimeter levels.
The units were placed
along the length of the north-south site axis. approximately equidistant from each other.
to provide an overview of the cultural deposits and soil horizons. The excavation of
these units was accomplished in a much shorter time than anticipated. As a result.
additional 1 by 2 meter units were opened. These units were more meaningful than the
shovel tests originally proposed. All matrix removed was dry screened through 1/4"
hardware cloth. bagged and labeled as to provenience. After excavation to contact with
basal clay. a scale profile drawing of one wall of each unit was done. A matrix/pollen
sample was taken every 20 centimeters in each unit.
The second method consisted of machine excavation of 24 inch-wide trenches
placed in areas that had not been explored. or situated so as to augment information
gathered in tested areas.
Due to scheduling priorities of the equipment contractor.
these backhoe trenches were done on the third day of fieldwork and had to be
completed that day.
This tight scheduling necessitated two changes in the approach.
The original intention was to screen 20% of the fill removed from each trench:
however. it quickly became apparent that time would not allow for this. The strategy
was reduced to 10%. then to 5% as the time frame narrowed. The second change
was in the profile drawing of the trenches. Trenches 1. 2. 3 and 5 were profiled in
their entirety: however. only a representative 2 meter swath of the remaining trenches
was drawn. Backfilling of all trenches was completed by backhoe.
The testing procedures were documented in several ways. A standard University
of Texas General Record form was completed for each level from each unit. A running
Daily Journal supplemented the level forms with an overview of site activities and daily
recoveries.
Photographic documentation consisted of black and white prints. and color
slides.
Features were narratively described and scale plan maps were drawn.
Additionally. profiles of the walls of the excavation units and backhoe trenches were
drawn.
After completion of the test units. a detailed transit and stadia plan map
(Fig. 12) of the site was prepared.
This procedure was somewhat hampered by
vegetation. and several lines had to be cleared to facilitate line-of-sight. A series of
temporary horizontal and vertical datum points were used to maintain instrument

-----

---- - - -

124 / Testing of 41RT261
positioning. All off these points are shown on the map.
notes was compiled and is maintained in the site files.

A complete set of transit

The final task undertaken was the manual backfilling of the test units. Prior to
refilling. the bottom of each was lined with plastic.
Additionally. large spikes were
driven into two convenient trees proximal to each of the two permanent datum points.
From these points. the location of each datum (wooden stakes with point scribed on
the middle of the top) was triangulated. The datum was then reset (via triangulation)
in cement and driven to just above ground surface to aid in unit relocation.
Additionally. at least one wooden stake was left in place at a corner of each unit.
Laboratory analysis of recovered materials was done at the facilities of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) at The University of Texas at Austin.
Specific strategies and methodologies covering the different categories of cultural
material are detailed in following sections of this report.
All materials generated by
this project will be curated in the permanent repository of T ARL.

Excavation Units
Twelve test pits, totaling 16 square meters, were excavated during the subsurface
testing of 41RT267 (Fig. 12).
Four of these (Units 1 - 4) began as 1 by 2 meter
units: however. two (Units 2 and 3) were reduced to 1 meter squares because of low
artifact densities.
Unit. 8, a 1 meter square. was expanded one meter to the east
(Unit 11) to further expose Feature 3. All other test pits were 1 by 1 meter. With
the exception of Units 8/11. 9 and 10. all test pits were dug to contact with basal
clay. Unit 8/11 was halted at the completion of Level 3. Unit 10 at the completion of
Level 4.
Intact features, encountered in both of these units, were left in place to be
exposed during the later proposed excavation of broad horizontal areas.
Due to the
shallow depth of the sandy loam in Unit 9, one half of the unit was excavated 10
centimeters into the clay to determine if some type of artificial cap had been
encountered. This proved not to be the case.
The decision on placement of the test pits was an evolving process. The initial
four units were placed approximately equidistant from each other along the long. north­
south axis of the site. These units were intended to provide an overview of the type
of cultural deposits and soil horizons, and test the knolls at each end of the site.
Units 5, 6 and 7 were located to further assess initial testing results that suggested
low information potential along the southern end of the site and high information
potential in the northern portion. The remainder of the test pits (Units 8 - 12) were
positioned on the north knoll where a high density of buried Late Prehistoric/Late
Ceramic Period deposits was found. The yield from these additional units would either
verify or negate the significance of this area and thereby determine whether further
work was warranted.

_._----

------­

Field Methods

I

II

II
I""­

1.0
<"I

l-

'"
-0

N

I-­
~

.­

""'¢

1\
I/
I

/

'j

/

e:::
.....
.qo
Q"
I':J

E
<I,)
.....

(.fl

I

<"I

.....
W

0:.

::::>
I..:}

Lt..

/

125

126

/

Testing of 41RT261
Backhoe Testing

Backhoe trenching was used to rapidly expose the soil stratigraphy and to explore
for buried features and cultural deposits. Screening a sample of the excavated deposits
and close monitoring of the backdirt accumulation would hopefully identify temporally or
functionally significant artifacts.
Placement of the trenches followed much the same
strategy as that of the test pits and was predicated on the assumption that the
horizontal limits of the site corresponded to the downslope breaks on all sides.
Trenches 1. 2. 5. 6 and 7 were placed at each end to explore the low rises. Trenches
3 and 4 were located in the site center.
Morrison-Knudsen. Inc. soil scientists
conducted a detailed soils analysis of exposed backhoe trench profiles (Fig. 13: Exhibit

B).

7~m

41RT267
Selected Backhoe Trench Profiles
TRENCH 4
TRENCH 6

TRENCH 7

2m

98.7m

7m (Slnn4jl ......allon)

KEY:

05

meters

FIGURE 13.

Backhoe trench profiles.

•
®

Brown, fine-grained, uOOlll&lllidoted
sandy loam

Ton, medium-grained, slightly
compacted saildy clay

•

o
~
~

\/ary compoct, futturaUY sterite
oranQe clay
Compact, sterile red clay with,
globular mattle&
~t, sterile

red clay with

IoWticol, IiMar motllH

CULTURAL RESOURCES
FEATURES AT 41RT267
Five prehistoric features were exposed during test excavations at 41RT267. All
are burned rock concentrations. generally called hearths. and their implied function is
The features are
food processing or preparation through heating or cooking.
constructed of ferruginous sandstones. available from an erosionally exposed lens
downslope from the site. In its natural state. this sandstone is a yellowish-brown in
color. After being heated the stone discolors to a dark red and/or black. Four of the
features were uncovered during excavation of test pits.
A fifth was almost totally
removed by one scoop of the backhoe bucket from Backhoe Trench 1 (BHT 1).
Enough of this feature remained in the wall of the trench to allow establishment of
provenience. Additional scattered burned sandstone was recovered in many levels in
various test units. suggesting that other features had once been present in some
deposits.
This rock was weighed by level to establish a relative density.
The
potential for intact features at the site appears high.
FEATURE 1
Provenience: Test Pit 1. Level 5
Feature 1 (Fig. 14) is a single layered. roughly circular. loose concentration of
burned ferruginous sandstones. Maximum overall dimensions of the feature are 30
centimeters by 30 centimeters with the main concentration. consisting of seven of the
larger stones. measuring 15 centimeters square. The remainder of the feature consists
of a group of smaller fragments clustered 8 to 10 centimeters south of the main
concentration. The larger rocks range in size from 6 to 10 centimeters square with the
fragments being 2 to 5 centimeters square. Additionally. three other stones. ranging in
size from 3 to 8 centimeters square. were located between 10 and 30 centimeters south
of the cluster of fragments. No in situ thermal fracturing of the rocks was observed.
although several displayed the angular shape associated with heating. All stones were
heat discolored to a dark red or black. No discoloration was noted in the tan sandy
matrix underlying or immediately adjacent to the feature. Small flecks of' charcoal near
the feature were not collected because their aggregate was insufficient for dating. A
sample of the burned rock and adjacent matrix was collected for possible
thermolu minescence dati ng.
This feature appears disturbed. due to the displacement of some of the stones
and the gaps between certain portions of the feature. This disturbance may have been
a function of use. such as removal of stones for use in other features. or incidental
displacement through general bioturbation. erosion or deflation.
Nine small. burned

127

- -.......

--~--

.......

~

..

---

..

_ - _ . _....... _ - ­

128 / Testing of 41RT267
ferruginous sandstone fragments. possibly remnants of Feature 1. were recovered from
the general level fill of the unit. The absence of formal tools negated the possibility of
dating the feature by direct association with temporally diagnostic artifacts from the
same level.
The feature is tentatively assigned to a late Archaic/Early Ceramic
occupation as it is below the Late Prehistoric/Late Ceramic artifact concentration in
Levels 1 - 3 in this and immediately adjacent units.

--_IH¢

4/RT267

Grid North

FEATURE I
Test Unit I
Level 5

o

-

10

----

C::99.~ Bottom

Elevations (Surface
Beneath Rock)

099.12

099.13

FIGURE 14.

Feature 1. plan map.

I[

20

40

--------------

Features at 41RT261 / 129
Artifacts in Level 5 included small interior chert flakes (eight burned). two burned
nut (walnut or hickory) shell fragments. a broken chert cobble and two tabular pieces
of unmodified petrified wood. A contracting stem dart point base was recovered from
Level 6 just below this feature. A Scallorn arrow point. recovered from Level 7 in this
unit. has probably been displaced downward from its original context.
FEATURE 2

Provenience:

Test Pit 2. Level 12

Feature 2 is a small. single layered. amorphous loose cluster of burned ferruginous
sandstones. The scattered appearance of the feature indicates it has been disturbed.
Likewise. the small number of large stones implies that other elements are missing.
Maximum dimensions of the concentration are 30 by 35 centimeters. The three larger
stones range from 8 to 10 centimeters square: the remainder are smaller fragments.
measuring from 2 to 5 centimeters square.
These smaller fragments are scattered
between and around the larger rocks.
All of the sandstone is dark red to black.
indicating heat discoloration. and the smaller stones are angularly fractured also
signifying heating. 1\10 discoloration was discernible in the surrounding or underlying tan
sandy matrix nor was any charcoal observed. Basal elevations of the individual rocks
ranged from 115 to 117 centimeters below ground surface.
No diagnostic artifacts
were recovered from Test Pit 2. When the depth of Feature 2 is compared to other
test pits containing temporal indicators. this feature probably dates to the Early
Ceramic or Late Archaic. The rocks and a sample of surrounding matrix were collected
for future thermoluminescence analysis.
FEATURE 3

Provenience:

Test Pits 8 and 11. Level 3

Feature 3 (Figs. 15a. 16) was first identified in Test Pit 8 by a single large rock
in the floor of Level 2. When other rocks were uncovered in Level 3. the unit was
expanded to the west (Unit 11.) to fully expose the feature. About three-quarters of
the feature was uncovered in Unit 11. although a portion extends into the northern wall
of both units.
Feature 3 IS a shallow rock-lined pit, circular to oval in outline. and about 65
centimeters in diameter. The pit can be inferred from the slope of the rocks which is
inconsistent with flat-laid pavements. Most of the rocks are flat and regularly shaped.
10 to 20 centimeters in length and width. and 2 to 4 centimeters in thickness. A high
degree of material selection is indicated by the repeated choice of rocks of similar
dimensions. The largest rock is 30 by 20 by 20 centimeters. There are also a small
number of angular rocks.
The feature appears free of post-occupational disturbances. but the original
configuration has been obscured by use and/or reuse.
A number of facts can be
reconstructed and several alternate configurations discussed. First, the perimeter of the
excavated pit was lined with rocks laid end-to-end. flat or sloping slightly inward.

130 / Testing of 41RT261

FEATURE 3

I
FEATURE 4

f
)

FIGURE 15.

Photographs of Features 3 and 4.

Features at 41RT261

TEST UNIT II

41RT267

G

~ Se/ecUJd elevqllon$ (lOP)

FIGURE 16.

131

TEST UNIT a

FEATURE 3
Test Unifs 8 and /I

Floor of Level 3

I

o

B

Unfraclurod r()Ck

FIoHaid periphery rOCks
Ointclioo af slope

Feature 3. plan map.

Secondly. a large rock situated at the south side of the hearth (Figs. 15a. 16) appears
to have been used as a facility of some kind. either as a support or pot rest.
The present location of rocks removed from the center of the feature. in most
instances. appears to be the result of feature use.
Two rocks at the southern edge
provide some evidence of the original rock configuration.
The two overlap intact
peripheral rocks and are steeply angled toward the center of the pit. Two alternatives
are suggested. Under Alternative 1. a system of two stacked rocks was used to form
the perimeter and walls of the pit. Under Alternative 2. peripheral and covering rocks
collapsed during removal of food cooked in the pit. leaving the present rock
configuration.
The outer rocks that originally lined the pit along the western portion of the
feature were apparently removed and piled on top of those along the eastern portion.
It is possible that this movement of rocks was done to form a small hearth used later.
On the western periphery. piled rocks form a small basin. The effort expended on the
construction of Feature 3 suggests a more complex function than simple cooking or
This feature was left intact in the hope a broader exposure. profiling and
heating.
more detailed recording would provide clues to its probable use. A sample collected for
thermoluminescence dating consists of a portion of the large rock (from 30 em bs) and
matrix from beneath the rock (30 - 33 em bs).
This sample yielded a
thermoluminescence date of 1350 years BP + 160 (Alpha 3052).

_ _-------------------------------------------­
...

132 / Testing of 41RT261
FEATURE 4

Provenience: Test Pit 10. Level 4
Feature 4 (Figs. 15b. 17). encountered on the next to last day of the testing
program. reaffirmed the positive assessment of the site. The necessity for further work
that prompted the leaving of Feature 3 also mediated in favor of only partially exposing
Feature 4.
The magnitude of the research potential of 41RT267 is most appreciably
addressed by mitigation.
Initial contact with the feature was made along the east wall of Unit 11 during
The dense accumulation of burned ferruginous sandstones was
Level 3 fill removal.
multi-layered near the center sloping downward to a single layer periphery. creating a
mounded or piled configuration. The base of the outer rocks ranged from 44 to 48
centimeters below surface.
The central mound rises 15 centimeters above the base.
The feature extends into the east wall of Unit 11: the exposed portion is 90
centimeters (grid N-S. complete dimension) by 55 centimeters (E-W. incomplete
dimension) (Fig. 17). Morphologically. the feature appears circular and. if this proves
correct. it extends 40 centimeters into the adjoining unit. The size range of the stones
is from 15 centimeters square down to fragments as small as 2 to 3 centimeters
square. Although no in situ fracturing was observed. the angularity of many smaller
All of the stones are red to black in
rocks can be attributed to thermal cracking.
color.
No burned matrix or charcoal was observed adjacent to the feature.
The
construction design of the feature is markedly different from Feature 3. in Level 3 of
nearby Test Unit 8/11.
The morphological variability between the features may
indicate differential use of the heat retention of the stones. implying two separate
functions.
Further exposure and cross-sectioning of the hearth should test this
hypothesis.
Stratigraphically. this feature is below the late Prehistoric/Late Ceramic
zone.
No temporally diagnostic artifacts were recovered from the unit. nor from levels 4
and 5 in any of the test pits at this end of the site. Level 6 is the uppermost level
Since the base of Feature 4 is
yielding a dart point that seems to be in context.
resting between the temporal components. it is not clear whether it represents a late
Prehistoric occupation or is the upper level of the Late Archaic component.
This
question will be addressed when the feature and surrounding areas are exposed during
the mitigation efforts.
Thermoluminescence dating of this feature. given its vertical
proximity to Feature 3. would permit an assessment of depositional rates at the site
(Bement 1984).
FEATURE 5

Provenience: Backhoe Trench 1. 25 centimeters bs
Feature 5. a burned ferruginous sandstone hearth. was almost completely removed
in one backhoe bucket load during fill removal. The trench is located on the low rise
at the south end of the site. Three stones remained in the upper 30 centimeters of
the the trench's north wall after the feature was removed, allowing a provenience

Features at 41RT261

41RT267
FEATURE 4
Test Unit 10
Level 4

(0
FIGURE 17.

Bottom Elevation (surface
beneath rock)

Feature 4. plan map.

--IIH9

Grid North

K

O.~~~JO~~2~O______~40

centimeters

I

133

134 / Testing of 41RT261
determination. The hearth was 1.925 to 2.175 meters west of the east end of the
trench. The 19 burned rocks recovered from the backdirt ranged in size from 10 to 3
Many displayed angular fractures and all were heat discolored.
centimeters square.
This feature appears to have been approximately 60 centimeters wide (grid N-S): over
90% of the stones were present in the 24 inch-wide trench area. No burned matrix or
charcoal was noted near the feature remnant. BHT 1 had a maximum depth of 50
centimeters before contact with basal clay.
BHT 2. also located on the knoll five
meters south of BHT 1. contacted basal clay at only 25 centimeters below surface.
These depths indicate that both the southern and northern rises are geomorphologically
similar. i.e.. a thin mantle of sandy loam overlying an elevated clay contact. North of
the southern knoll in BHT 3 (Fig. 12). the sandy matrix is over 1 meter deep. as was
the case off the knoll on the northern end. Stratigraphically. this feature appears to be
associated with a Late Prehistoric/Late Ceramic occupation.

- - - - -

~---------------------

ARTIFACTS AT 41RT267

Lithics
The excavation of 12 test units and 7 backhoe trenches at 41RT267 resulted in
the recovery of 1847 flakes and chips. 21 utilized/retouched flakes. 16 complete or
fragmented arrow points and 7 complete or fragmented dart points (Fig.
18).
Considering the systematic nature of the excavations. their areal extent and the number
of artifacts. the data obtained has potential beyond that of most testing programs.
The analysis of the lithic artifacts had three goals:
1. to determine site function based on the lithic artifacts through testing of a
series of ethnoarcheologically-derived hypotheses:
2. to compare the lithic artifacts to assemblages from adjacent regions (Mallouf
1979: Fields et al. 1986). and
3. to investigate flake size patterning through time. specifically during the dart
point/arrow point technological transition.

SITE FUNCTION
Preceding the test excavations. the investigators assumed that the site was a
hunting camp. based on the following factors:
• the regional geoecological setting - an upland environment;
• the site's immediate environmental setting - above the confluence of Big
Willow and Walnut creeks: and
• the previously established regional settlement pattern models (Fields et al.
1986).
The lithic artifacts from 41RT267 can independently test the validity of the hunting
camp function based on the above criteria.
The ethnoarcheological research of the Nunamiut Eskimos (Binford 1978, 1979.
1980. 1983) provided descriptions of hunting camp activity sets. While the occurrence
of these activities is conditioned by season and length of occupation. hunting party
size. and hunting success. the following actions are expected:

135

136 / Testing of 41RT261

A

c

B

F

H

FIGURE 18. Artifacts fro m 41RT267: A) Scallorn brang us: B) Scall orn: C) Scallorn : D)
Alba: E) Al ba/ perforat or: F) perforator: G- I) arrow poi nt frag ments: J)
Gary-l ike: K) probable Gary: L) Yarbrough .

Artifacts at 41RT261 / 137
1. tool maintenance:
2. tool manufacture:
3. food preparation and consumption; and
4. activities related to boredom reduction.
Hunting camps and their archeological manifestations should be viewed as
reflecting various types of activities performed during their occupation. some of which
reflect site use rather than function.
Binford's ethnoarcheological observations provide an account of the material
Binford (1979:270) suggests that the lithic
correlates of some of these activities.
debris expected on special purpose sites may consist of flakes resulting from bifacial
retouch, core reduction and from work on partially finished or .. staged items". The
latter activity would produce small tertiary flakes removed by soft hammer and/or
pressure flaking. representing the shaping stage of reduction.
In viewing the composition of tool assemblages at hunting camps, Binford
(1979:270) argues that one should anticipate the use of a .. disproportionate" number of
tools designed for the modification of other raw materials such as wood. antler. bone
or fiber.
However. he also maintains that by viewing artifacts as parts of an
individual's gear. the factors which condition the occurrence of artifacts on different site
types can be better understood. He uses a two-part classification of gears: personal
and situational.

Personal gear is anticipatory in nature and usually curated.
The repair and
replacement of such gear will occur in residential camps, not in the field where the
activity occurred.
Situational gear is responsive to immediate circumstances and
specific activities. These tools are informal and little or no time is invested in their
production. They consist of flakes with minimal or no edge retouch, and high
replacement rates when raw material is readily available (cf. Hayden 1977:180). These
same characteristics of situational gear make their archeological recognition very
difficult.
Based on ethnoarcheological observations among Australian Aborigines.
Hayden (1977. 1979) indicates that most unhafted flakes used as situational gear are
not retouched and have minimal use wear that is easily overlooked in analyses. This
implies that the actual number of flakes used in a situational context may be twice as
large as the number recognized archeologically (Hayden 1977:182).
Lithic procurement strategies may significantly affect debitage composition.
especially with respect to the percentage of secondary versus tertiary flakes. Binford
(1979) maintains that most lithic procurement behavior is embedded in other resource
In such cases he expects that the amount of raw material
procurement activities.
transported to a site would not vary in terms of estimated needs. That is. in cases in
which the supply of raw material in a camp IS a corporate concern. the parties with
The
access to raw material would bring back all they could reasonably carry.

138 / Testing of 41RT267
likelihood that material would be decortified at the quarry is less in the embedded
system than in systems where trips specifically intended to acquire raw material are
As a result. in the context of embedded lithic procurement. hunting camp
made.
debitage expectably should include secondary as well as tertiary flakes.
In summary. if 41RT267
characterized by:

is a hunting camp. lithic assemblages should be

1. a low frequency of personal gear. with the exception of projectile points.
(i.e.. hammerstones. formalized hafted tools) due to their curated character;
2. expedient tools or situational gear;
3. projectile points. well represented by base fragments exhibiting use fracture;
bases. midsections and tips exhibiting manufacture breaks: and a low
frequency of complete points;
4... exhausted" cores from
represented at the site;

projectile

point

manufacturing should

be

well

5. lithic debitage from all stages of reduction (decortification/secondary flakes
and thinning/tertiary flakes) with an over-representation of tertiary flakes
resulting from work on staged artifacts: and
6. debitage should be small in size resulting from the late stages of arrow
point manufacture.
RESULTS OF ANALYSIS

In order to maximize the analytical results of the lithic studies from 41RT267.
the findings will be compared to published results obtained from other sites in the
region. particularly the lake limestone and Jewett Mine sites (Prewitt 1974. 1975:
Mallouf 1979; Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc. 1983. 1984: Fields 1984: Fields et
al. 1986). These regional comparisons will allow statements concerning similarities and
differences between lithic inventories from 41RT267 and other upland sites. As further
work is completed. comparisons utilizing the expanded data base may facilitate
statements contrasting Navasota River and Brazos River upland site functions and
prehistoric adaptive strategies.
EXPECTATION 1: A low frequency of personal gear.
An inspection of Tables 5-7 (arrow points. dart points. and utilized flakes) shows
that the first expectation is clearly met in the artifact assemblage from 41RT267.
With the exception of projectile points and expedient tools. no artifacts which could be
considered as personal gear were recovered. The lack of personal gear (hafted tools) is
expected. in light of their curated character.

Artifacts at 41RT261

Descriptions of Cultural Materials: Arrow Points.

TABLE 5.
Unit/Level

Fragment/Complete

Arrow Point Category

1/1
1/2
1/3
1/3
1/3
1/3
1/7
5/2
5/3
8/1
8/2
11/1
11/1
12/2

Complete
Distal (Ti p)
Distal (Tip)
Distal (Tip)
Distal (Tip)
Basal Notch Frag
Proximal (Base)
Complete
Edge
Distal (Ti p)
Complete
Edge
Proximal (Base)
Complete

12/3
BHT 2

Medial (M idsect ion)
Distal (Ti p)

Sea Ilorn Brangus
Untyped
Untyped
Untyped
Untyped
Untyped
Sca II orn
Perforator
Untyped
Untyped
Alba
Untyped
Sca II orn
Alba reworked into
perforator
Untyped
Untyped

TABLE 6.

3/11

8/3
12/9
12/17
BHT 4

Fracture Type

N/A

Manufacture
Manufacture
Manufacture
Manufacture
Manufacture
Use Impact
Manufacture
Indeterminate
Manufacture
N/A
Manufacture
Use Impact
N/A
Manufacture
Manufacture

Descriptions of Cultural Materials: Dart Points.

Unit/Level Fragment/Complete
1/1
1/6

I

Medial (Midsection)
Prox i ma I (Base)
Prox i ma I (Base)
Medial (Midsection)
Complete
Prox i ma I (Base)
Complete

Dart Point Category

Fracture Type

Untyped
Untyped
Yarborough
Untyped
Gary
Untyped
Gary

Manufacture
Indeterminate
Use Impact
Manufacture

-----------------------

.......

N/A

Indeterminate

N/A

- -..~.-~-....... -

- ­

139

140 / Testing of 41RT267

TABLE 7. Descriptions of Cultural Materials: Uti lized Flakes.
Unit/Level

Tool
Use

Flake
Type

Num. of Edge
Mod.
Shape
Edges

2/9
S/2
BHT 1

Scraping
Cutting
Scraping

Sec.
Sec.
Sec.

1
1
2

S/l
4/1

Scraping
Scraping

Sec.
Tert.

1
2

1/4
1/4

Scraping
Cutting
Scraping
Scraping

Sec.
Tert.

1
2

Sec.

2

Scraping
Scraping
Scraping
Scraping
Scraping

Tert.
Sec.

1
2

Tert.
Sec.

1
1

1/1
1/1
1/1
1/1
4/3

Sec.

3

6/6
6/6
7/6

Scraping
Cutting
Scraping
Cutting
Scraping
Scraping

Tert.
Sec.
Tert.

1
2

1/6

Dri II

Sec.

1

4/5

Scraping

Tert.

2

BHT 3
12/11

Cutting
Scraping

Tert.
Sec.

3

12/11

Scraping

Tert.

2

BHT 2

1

1

* = Alternate faces of the same
**= Burin blow is present above

Convex
Convex
Straight
Concave
Straight
Concave
Straight
Straight
Straight
Concave
Straight
Straight
Straight
Straight
Straight
Straight
Straight
Straight
Straight
Straight
Straight
Straight
Convex

Type of
Modifi­
cation

Uti I.
Blade
Length

Uti 1.*
Uti I.
Ret
Uti
Uti
Uti
Uti
Uti
Uti
Uti
Uti
Uti
Uti
Uti
Uti
Uti .*
Uti
Ret.
Uti 1.**
Uti I.
Uti I.
Ret.
Ret.
Ret.
Uti I.
Uti I.
Uti I.

32.0
12.0
2S.0
12.0
23.0
11.0
13.0
6.0
S.O
4.0
S.O
14.0
10.0
10.0
12.0
10.0
24.0

Concave
Pointed
tip
Straight Uti I.
Uti I.
Straight Ret.
Concave Uti I.
Straight Uti I.
Straight Uti I.
Straight Uti I.
Concave Uti I.

edge are uti lized.
one of the uti lized edges.

10.0
12.0
17.0
lS.0
21.0
lS.0
16.0
9.0
11.0
12.0
2S.0
7.0
9.0
24.0
22.0
lS.0

Artifacts at 41RT267 / 141
On the other hand, the absence of hammerstones may mean they were also
curated. perhaps because raw material was not readily available.
The two nearest
sources of hammerstone raw material are Lake Limestone and the Brazos River, about
20 to 30 kilometers away. On the other hand, sites in proximity to hammerstone raw
material should exhibit a higher frequency of abandoned hammerstones (d. Hayden
1979:180). Wear patterns on these hammerstones should be minimal, reflecting their
use in a situational context. Curated hammerstones should exhibit heavy use. Perhaps
the 13 specimens of hammerstones reported by Prewitt (1974) at 41L T12 and the 10
specimens from 41LN20 (Prewitt 1975) in the Navasota Reservoir area indicate the
proximity of these sites to readily available raw material. A similar explanation may be
offered for the seven and six specimens recovered by Mallouf (1979) from 41LT12 and
41lT17, respectively. Unfortunately, these authors do not provide a detailed breakdown
of the degree of wear on the hammerstones to evaluate the second part of the
hypothesis.
Two of the three perforators recovered from 41RT267 may be consistent with
Expectation 1. One perforator is possibly a reworked Alba point (Fig. l8E). the other
is made on an arrow point blank (Fig. l8F). The latter may represent two elements of
the organizational properties of the lithic technology, the alteration of an arrow point
blank to fit the situation and staged manufacture at a hunting camp.
EXPECTATION 2: Expedient tools or situational gear.
Table 7 shows the tool assemblage from 41RT267.
Of 23 tools. 21 are
utilized/retouched flakes. Three are perforators. One of the perforators is a secondary
flake with a naturally pointed side and two are manufactured from arrow points. All
utilized flakes and the drills are chert, twelve are secondary and nine are tertiary flakes.
No preference for either of the two flake types is obvious. The use of chert reflects the
overall preference of chert over petrified wood or quartzite.
The mean length of
complete flake tools is 28.333 mm. This mean is approximately 16 mm longer than
the modal length of the flakes recovered, reflecting the selection of larger flakes for tool
use.
Two edges on eight of 21 tools exhibit wear and two flakes have wear on three
edges. Two flakes have one edge with alternate face edge wear indicating the use of
both faces.
The analysis of edge shapes show that straight edges predominant.
Twenty-four out of 33 (73%) working edges are straight. five (15%) are concave and
four (12%) are convex.
To determine the cause of wear, ten experimental replicative studies were
conducted to distinguish between cutting and scraping tools.
Scraping was simulated
on a Bois d'Arc branch by holding the flake edge perpendicular to the wood surface
and pulling it along the grain with the bulbar surface facing the direction of the
movement. This movement. especially when the flake and wood angle fell below 80
degrees. created small. approximately 1.0-1.5 mm. well-patterned flake scars on the
dorsal surface and. after 450 scrapes. some rounding of the edge.
Cutting was
simulated by making incisions in Bois d'Arc wood with hand-held flakes. This process

142 / Testing of 41RT267
produced small flake scars on both faces of the working edge caused by the instability
of the hand-held flake in deeper incising. After the equivalent 450 cuts. rounding was
less evident than in the scraping experiments. However. the removal of micro-flakes
from edges differentiates cutting from scraping wear.
Based on these experiments. 15 (71%) of the utilized flakes exhibit scraping wear
patterns. three (14%) exhibit cutting wear patterns. and two (9.5%) exhibit both types
of wear on different edges_ This breakdown of wear patterns signifies the expedient
nature of this tool kit. The mean length of the complete flake edges showing wear is
12.19 mm.
Six flakes were intentionally retouched into denticulates. but this does not change
the expedient character of the tool kit. Hayden (1979) has observed that in a small
number of cases. the Australian Aborigines retouch flakes to create a denticulate edge
even in the expedient context. The retouch provides a fresh edge without altering the
shape of the artifact. Furthermore. Hayden (1979:182) agrees that hand-held tools
generally are expedient artifacts while hafted tools are curated.
41RT267 can be contrasted with 41LN178 which yielded a large number of formal
tools. including seven end. side. or end and side scrapers (Espey. Huston and
Associates. Inc. 1984). 41LN178 was considered a base camp. 41FT52. another site
described as a temporary camp. like 41RT267 lacks curated bifacial tools (Espey.
Huston and Associates. Inc. 198~). The main difference between 41FT52 and 41RT267
is in the number of flake scrapers. The considerable number of cores. arrow points.
dart points. and bifaces in various stages of reduction. indicates that the activities
carried out at 41FT52 were limited in scope. primarily relating to projectile point
manufacture. This may partly reflect the availability of raw material near 41FT52 and
its lack near 41RT267.
EXPECTATION 3: Projectile points represented by base fragments exhibiting use
fracture: bases. midsections. tips exhibiting manufacture breaks: low frequency of
complete points.
The analysis of the 16 arrow points or fragments (Table 5) indicates that
Expectation 3 is met. Two specimens are complete points (Alba. Scallorn brangus), two
are perforators. six are arrow point distal fragments. two are proximal fragments and
one is a midsection. Two arrow point edges and a basal notch fragment were also
recovered. All of the distal fragments. the midsection. the edges and the base notch
evidence manufacturing failure during the flake blank thinning. The two bases exhibit
impact fracture morphologies.
The breakdown of fracture types is consistent with Expectation 3. representing
the production of arrow points and the return of basal fragments still in the arrow
shaft to the hunting camp.
The later behavior is consistent with Binford's (1979)
expectation that the repair and/or replacement of personal gear will not occur in the
field where the hunting takes place. but in the camp. Here the replacement of the
broken point will be .. embedded in other work schedules executed during off time"
(Binford 1979:270).

----~-~.---------

............- - . -

----»

- - > - - - _.. _ - - - - - ­

Artifacts at 41RT261 / 143
The seven dart points and/or fragments breakdown like arrow points (Table 6).
The two complete points. two midsections and one of the bases indicate manufacture
and replacement of fractured points at the site.
In turn. this may suggest a site
function during the Late Archaic Period similar to that of the Late Prehistoric Period.
EXPECTATION
represented.

4:" Exhausted"

cores

from

projectile

point

manufacture

well

The analyses of secondary flakes from Test Unit 1 and from all test units
combined revealed that between 20 and 50% of the secondary platform flakes in Test
Unit 1 have cortexed platforms (Table 8).
In the first seven levels of all units
combined. the percentage of cortexed platforms ranged from 13 to 44% (Table 9).
Table 10 also shows that in Units 1 through 5 and 10 through 12. the percentage of
cortexed platform flakes is between 24 and 41 %. This is not a wide range considering
that five of the eight units have between 33 and 39% cortexed platform flakes. These
figures are relatively high and indicate the reduction of globular raw material rather
than lenticular nodules.
The analysis of the lithic debitage from 41LN178 (Espey. Huston and Associates.
Inc. 1984:69) shows that 18% of the platform flakes have cortex. At 41FT52. 20% of
the flakes have cortexed platforms. Both of these percentages are considerably lower
than the figures obtained from 41RT267.
Similarly low percentages of cortexed
platform flakes were recorded by Fields et al. (1986) in the Jewett Mine area.
The
percentage of cortexed platforms ranges from 7.3% (41LN146) to 16.3% (41LN106).
The relatively high percentage at 41LN106 is interpreted as reflecting initial reduction
and expedient tool use. It is suggested that in the cases of 41RT267 and 41LN106.
the high percentage of cortexed platforms reflects the reduction of globular cores to
produce flake blanks. A number of these blanks are further reduced into arrow points
or used as expedient tools.
Cortexed platform flakes are a result of blank
manufacturing when "overhangs" are removed from the edge of the core after a series
of blades have been removed (d. Crabtree 1968).
That the entire sequence of core reduction was performed at the site is strongly
indicated by the presence of primary. secondary and tertiary flakes. flake blanks and
cortexed platform flakes. Given this range of lithic debitage. cores would be expected
In the test excavations.
Surprisingly. no cores or core fragments were recovered.
This pattern contrasts with other sites in the region.
At 41LN178 (Espey.
Huston and Associates. Inc. 1984:57) 140 cores were recovered. while at 41FT52. 61
specimens were found.
Mallouf (1979:217-18) recovered 214 specimens from sites in
the Lake Limestone area (41L T12 - 88 cores; 41L T17 - 39; 41LT44 - 63; 41LT21 ­
24).
In the Upper Navasota Reservoir. Prewitt (1975:25-28) recovered 25 cores from
41LN20; and 6 from 41RT2. Smaller numbers were recovered in the Jewett Mine area:
41LN29A - 2 cores; 41LN106 - 0; 41LN146 - 0; 41LN149A - 1; 41LN149B - 1;
41LN149C - 2; 41LN149D - 1) (Fields et al. 1986:258-259). Similarly. small numbers
were found at 41RT5 (2). 41RT4 (1) and 41RT6 (1) at the southern end of the Upper
Navasota Reservoir (Prewitt 1974).

---------~--~~

- - - - - - -

-----------~--~--~-~~~

~

-

--­

~-------

144 / Testing of 41RT267

TABLE 8. Proximal Fragments and Complete Flakes by
Cortex on Platforms.
TEST UNIT 1
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Total

Total Number
19
36
27
20
19

10
5
136

Number With Cortex
6
12
15
7
3
5
1
46

Percentage
32
33
44
35
16
50
20
34%

TEST UNIT 2
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Total Number
8
6
5
3
2
1
4
2
2

Number With Cortex
3
4
1
1
0
1
2

12
13
14
15

3
1
0
0
0

1
0
0
0
0
0
0

Percentage
38
67
20
33
0
100
50
50
50
0
0
0
0
0
0

Total

38

14

37%

8

9
10
11

1

1

TEST UNIT 3
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

10
11

12

---

....

--~-~~.~.--

Total Number
1
3
1
3
0
1
1
0
0
2
2
0

Number With Cortex
1
0
1

0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0

Percentage
100
0
100
0
0
0
100
0
0
0
0
0

Artifacts at 41RT267 / 145

Test Unit 3 (continued)
13
14

3
0

1
0

33
0

Total

17

4

24~

TEST UNIT 4
Level
1
2
3
4
5
Total

Total Number
3
3
3
2
1

12

Number With Cortex
0
2
1
0
0
3

Percentage
0
67
33
0
0
25~

TEST UNIT 5
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Total

Total Number
1
7
5

Number With Cortex

4
5
2

4
3
1
1
1

Percentage
100
14
80
33
25
20
50

33

12

36%

9

1
1

TEST UNIT 6
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6

Total Number

Total

8

1
1

2
2
0
2

Number With Cortex
1
0
1
1
0
1

Percentage
100
0
50
50
0
50

4

5M

TEST UNIT 7
Level
1
2

3
4
5
Total

Total Number
0
0
2
0
2

4

Number With Cortex
0
0
0
0
0
0

Percentage
0
0
0
0
0
O~

146 / Testing of 41RT261

TEST UNIT 8
Level
1
2
3
Total

Total Number
3
6
3
12

Number With Cortex
0

Percentage
0

1

17

0

0

1

8~

TEST UNIT 9
Level
1
2

Total Number
0
2

Total

2

Number With Cortex
0
1
1

Percentage
0
50
50~

TEST UNIT 10
level
1

2
3
4
Total

Total Number
2
10
4
6
22

Number With Cortex
1
4
3
1
9

Percentage
50
40
75
17
41~

TEST UNIT 11
level
1
2
3
Total

Total Number
9

13
8
30

Number With Cortex
5
5
0
10

Percentage
56
38
0
33~

TEST UNIT 12
level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Total Number
0
4
8
5
3
2
4
5
3
2

11

11

12

6

Number With Cortex
0
0
3
2
0
0
2
1

2
2
7
4

Percentage
0
0
38
40
0
0
50
20
67
100
64
67

Artifacts at 41RT261

Test Unit 12 (cont i nued)
13
14
15
16
17
Total

3
0
2

0
0
1
0
0

0
0
33
0
0

61

24

391

2
1

BACKHOE TRENCHES
Level
BHT 1
BHT 2
BHT 3
BHT 4
BHT 5
BHT 6
BHT 7
Total

Total Number
3
2
2
1
1
4
6
19

Number With Cortex
2
2
2
0
0
2
2
11

Percentage
67
100
100
0
0
50
33
581

TABLE 9. Number and Percentage of Cortexed Striking Platforms
by Level From AI I Units.
Level
1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13
14
15
16
17

Total Number
47
91
68
50
31
21
16
7
5
5
16
7
2
1
3
0
2

Number With Cortex
18
30
26
15
4
8
7
2
3
2
7
4
0
0
1

0
0

Percentage
38
33
38
30
13
38
44
29
60
40
44
57
0
0
33
0
0

I

147

148 / Testing of 41RT267

TABLE 10. Number and Percentage of Cortexed Striking Platforms
by Unit All Levels Combined.
Unit
1

2
3
4

5

Total Number
136

Number With Cortex

Percentage

46
14

38
17

34
37
24

4

12
33

12

25
36

3

6

8

4

4

o

50

7
8
9

12

8
50

o

10

22

1
1
9

11

30

10

33

12

61

24

39

2

41

The lack of exhausted cores and angular shatter rules out the reduction of cores
and cannot be used to explain their absence.
Given that core and staged artifact
reduction did occur at 41RT267 and flake blanks were used for arrow point
manufacture. the absence of cores may be explained by their curation.
That is.
following the preparation of a suitable platform on the globular nodule. the reduction
sequence focused on the removal of blanks suitable for the manufacture of arrow
points. Some of the larger flakes. when judged to be inappropriate for projectile point
manufacture. were selected as expedient scraping and/or cutting tools.
By the time
core preparation was completed and blanks were produced. it may have been more
efficient to return the prepared core to the base camp rather than dispose of it. given
that the process would have to begin anew with a new core.
EXPECTATION 5: Lithic debitage
representation of tertiary flakes.

from

all

stages

of

reduction

with

an

over­

The analysis of the lithic debitage was performed separately on the chips and the
complete flakes. The category of chips included incomplete flakes (proximal. medial or
distal) and shatter. Complete flakes and chips are categorized into primary. secondary.
and tertiary. Primary flakes were those that contained cortex on their entire dorsal
surface. Secondary flakes were those with cortex on either the platform and/or their
dorsal surface.
Tertiary flakes have no cortex on either the platform or the dorsal
surface.
Table 11 and Figure 19 show the number and percentage of primary. secondary
and tertiary complete flakes per level in all test units combined. It is evident that in
Levels 1 through 7. the levels with statistically larger samples. the percentage of
tertiary flakes ranges between 53-80%. the secondary flakes between 20-46%. and
primary flakes are 0-3% of the total debitage. Table 12 and Figure 19 show the
number and percentage of the three flake types among the chips. It is not surprising
that the percentage of tertiary flakes is higher here than among the complete flakes.

Artifacts at 41RT261 / 149

CHIPS S PROXIhIAL FIWlMENTS

C<HPLETE FLAl<£S

AlII.AYeIl,ANlJrlitt

All Unit" AU LtvM
70

10

""

60

!IO

(10

r.,./iory

Stit:aldfJry

..,

....

J40
Z

.

•..

Ii

~

~'"

"
iii'"
20

20

10

"

-,.

10

"'1tf1(J('JI
~

10

""

OOMPLETE fLAKES, CHIPS
PAOXIMAL. FRAGMENTS

ao

'"

..,

..

DEPTH 8EUlW SlJIFIoCE 10loi

DEPTH IIEUlW!IURI'N:£"'l

""

...

a

All Unit •• A.lH....nllc

00

.
to

10

10

FIGURE

19.

..

Percentage of complete flakes. chips and proximal flakes
category in levels with all units combined.

-------

.............

_.-.....

by cortex

_-------------------­

150 / Testing of 41RT267

TABLE 11.
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Number and Percentage of Complete Flakes by Cortex Category
in Levels with AI I Units Combined.
Primary
No.
2

"3

Tertiary
No.

36

40

43
85
80
55
47
21
40
13
16
11
9
6
2
2
4
1
3

391

438

"

44
46
70
41
32
41
20
35
20
21
57
45

71

1
1

3
2

11

12
13
14
15
16
17
Total

Secondary
No.

54
39
22
15
16
7
4
3
12
5
5
1
.3

71

33
43

2
4

II

289
-

~

"

53
54
60
59
68
56
78
65
80
79
43
55
29
67
57
100
60

60%

Total
81
156
134
94
69
37
51
20
20
14
21
11
7
3
7
1
5
731

~~-

TABLE 12. Number and Percentage of Chips and Proximal Flakes
by Cortex Category in Levels with AI I Units Combined.
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

Primary
No.

"

1

1
1

1

5

1

12
13
14
15
16
17

Total

Secondary
No.
47
89
69
40
26
15
21
2
6
6
9
7
4
4

38
42
33
35
27
31
34
13
32
40
45
26
29
31

1

25
67

75
124
139
73
68
33
41
14
13
9
10
20
10
9
2
3
4

351

647

8

3

11

"

Tertiary
No.

352

"

62
58
67
64
72
69
66
87
68
60
50
74
71

69
100
75
33
641

Total
122
213
208
114
95
48
62
16
19
15
20
27
14
13
2
4
12
1004

Artifacts at 41RT267 / 151
inflating the tertiary flake count. Exhibits (1 and (2 show the breakdown of primary.
secondary. and tertiary flakes and chips by unit and level. In cases with large samples.
the tertiary flakes consistently represent 60-65% of the debitage. while secondary flakes
represent 35-40%.
It is undetermined whether the 20-30% difference between the
tertiary and secondary flakes is actually the over-representation of tertiary flakes
resulting from work on .. staged items". The percentage of secondary versus tertiary
flakes produced depends on the size and shape of the core. and the method of
reduction.
The percentages clearly indicate that both decortification and thinning occurred at
the site. Unfortunately. while the 20-30% difference may represent an .. unusual" over­
representation of tertiary flakes. this may only be established by replicative
experimentation with similar size raw material and using similar reduction strategies.
The comparison of the flake type percentages with those from adjacent sites is
complicated by the fact that most analysts use their own definitions of primary.
secondary. and tertiary flakes.
These definitions are not identical but overlap those
used in this report. Fields et al. (1986:265) work in the Jewett Mine area reveals that
66.2% (41LN149B) to 81.7% (41LN106) of the flakes were tertiary. and 0 to 2% were
primary. While these figures for primary flakes agree well with the figures from
41RT267. the tertiary flakes seem over-represented. The high percentages may be due
to inclusion in the tertiary category of flakes with cortexed platforms and uncortexed
dorsal surfaces.
The current analysis would have counted them as secondary flakes.
Accounting for this discrepancy. the percentages of tertiary flakes in the debitage from
41RT267 and the Jewett Mine area sites may be similar.
At the Lake Limestone sites. the percentages of secondary versus tertiary flakes
are relatively similar at 41L T12 (49 to 50%) and 41LN21 (50 to 49%). while
secondary flakes predominate at 41LN21 (64 to 33%) (Mallouf 1979). However. the
results from 41LN178 and 41FT52 showed that at 41LN178. 64% of the debitage was
tertiary and 30% secondary (Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc. 1984:69-72). Similarly.
41FT52 had higher percentages of tertiary flakes than secondary flakes (52% vs 41%).
Malloufs (1979) analytical categories are identical to the ones used in this report. and
as such the percentages are directly comparable. On the other hand. Espey. Huston
and Associates. Inc.'s (1984) categories differ in that some flakes which retain 5%
cortex on their dorsal surface were considered tertiary. This procedure may explain the
high percentage of tertiary flakes versus secondary flakes in the debitage of 41LN178
and 41FT52.
The above percentages were calculated using all of the complete and incomplete
flakes. To present the data in a comparable fashion. Table 13 and Figure 19 show the
percentage of primary. secondary and tertiary flakes.
It is evident that in the levels
that have a large sample size (1-7). the percentage of tertiary flakes is 57 to 72%.
secondary 27 to 43%. while primary flakes consistently represent 1 % of the debitage.
These figures seem to be most similar to those obtained by Fields et al. (1986).
although a direct comparison is not possible because of the differences in definitions
used. Unfortunately. the exact behavioral correlates of these percentages will not be

152 / Testing of 41RT267
known (i.e.. more extensive reduction of chert at the different sites. vs. staged
manufacture at hunting camps, vs. nature of raw material vs. reduction strategy) until
experiments are performed to establish the correlates of each of these possible
alternatives.

TABLE 13.

Number and Percentage of all Flakes by Cortex Category
in Levels with AI I Units Combined.

Level

Pr imary
No. ~

1

2

2
3
4
5

6
7
8

1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1
1

9

10
11

1

2

12
13
14
15
16
17

Tota I

Secondary
No.
~
83
160
123
79
48
30
31

9
10
9
21
12
9

5
3
1

10

7.41

643

41
43

36
38
29
35
27
25
26
31
51
32
43
31
33
38
59

37 .11

Tertiary
No.
~

Total

118
209
219
128
115
54
81
27
29
20
19
26
12

58
57
64
61
70
64
72

203
369
342
208
164
85

75

36
39
29
41
38
21
16

74
69
47
68
57
11 69
6 67
4 62
7 41

1085

52.61

113

9
5
17

1735

Hoping to gain more insight into the lithic reduction strategy practiced at the
site. a detailed lithic analysis was performed on the debitage from Test Unit 1. the
largest unit sample.
Table 14 indicates that between 92-100% of the debitage in Test Unit 1 is
composed of chert. while petrified wood and quartzite are equally low. 1 to 2%. This
dominance indicates a purposeful selection of chert. This figure is similar to the 88.2%
chert in the assemblage at 41LN29A (Fields et al. 1986:265). but is much higher than
any of the other sites in the Navasota River drainage (Fields et al. 1986). The overall
percentage of chert resembles most closely that obtained at 41LN178 where 89% of the
debitage consisted of chert (Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc. 1984:68-69). A lower
occurrence of chert debitage (81%) appears at 41FT52 (d. Espey. Huston and
Associates. Inc. 1984:71).

Artifacts at 41RT261 / 153

TABLE 14. Test Unit 1: AI I Debitage by Material Type
Level
1
2
3
4

5

6
7

Chert
No. "
69 100
129 99
120 100
87 100
86 97
39 100
55 100

Quartzite
No.

"

1

1

Petrified Wood
No.
1

2

"

.8

2

Total
69
130
120
87
89
39
55

An analysis of platform faceting (Table 15) indicates that 20-44% of the
secondary flakes are single faceted. while only 2-18% are single faceted among the
tertiary flakes.
Striking platform multifaceting is an indication of the degree of
These figures
platform beveling to achieve the desired platform angle (Muto 1971).
reveal that a great deal of attention was devoted to platform angle preparation,
especially in the later part of the reduction. Study of percussor types used in the
removal of the debitage from Test Unit 1 indicates that most of the tertiary flakes
(59-87%) were removed by small billet percussion or pressure flaking (Table 16), and
most of the tertiary flakes so removed have multifaceted platforms (Table 15). The
percentage of flakes removed by hammerstones is higher in the secondary flakes
(50-100%).
The extremely high percentage of multifaceted platform-bearing tertiary flakes,
coupled with the high percentage of billet and/or pressure tool use, is the strongest
indication of the staged reduction of artifacts at the site.
During core or flake
reduction. the knapper removes a large number of single faceted tertiary flakes to bevel
the platform. The fact that almost all of the tertiary flakes are multifaceted suggests
that they were removed from preformed artifacts that have a larger number of flake
scars and a thin lenticular morphology.
The comparison of platform faceting in the lithic technology of 41RT267 with
those in the Lake Limestone area shows significant differences. Among the sites
excavated by Mallouf (1979), the secondary flakes show a high percentage of single
faceted flakes (41L T12=86%, 41LTl1=76%, 41L T44=80%, 41LN21=83%). Similarly,
the tertiary flakes include relatively high percentages of single faceted flakes
(41L T12=50%, 41LT17=19%. 41LT44=35%. 41LN21=39%). Only tertiary flakes from
41L T17 resemble those of 41RT267 in terms of platform flakes.
Separate data on the platform faceting of secondary and tertiary flakes was not
reported for 41LN178 and 41FT52 (Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc. 1984).
However. the data show that at 41LN178. 62% of the platform flakes are single
faceted. Since 36% of flakes are primary or secondary. then at least 26% of the
tertiary flakes are single faceted. At 41 FT52. 69% of the flakes are single faceted. Of
the flakes. 48% are primary or secondary, therefore. 21% of the tertiary flakes are

--~-------~

154 / Testing of 41RT267

TABLE 15. Test Unit 1: Complete and Proximal Flakes
by Platform Faceting
Level
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

Flake Type
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary

Platform Faceting
MultiSingle
No.
% No. %
11
58
8 42
29 97
1 3
20 56 16 44
33 89
4 11
18 67
9 33
35 92
3 8
14 70
6 30
30 97
1 3
12 63
7 37
41
98
1 2
8 80
2 20
14 82
3 18
4 80
1 20
21
91
2 9

Secondary
Tertiary

87
203

64
93

Total

209

82" 64

49 36
15 7
18"

Total
19
30
36
37
27
38
20
31
19
42
10
17

5
23
136
218
354

TABLE 16. Test Unit 1: Complete and Proximal Flakes
by Percussor Type.
Level Flake Type
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Secondary
Tertiary
Total

Indeterminate
No. %
3 16
4 13
5 14
7 26
5 13
5 25
4 21
4 9
3 30
3 18
5 22
48

14"

Hard
Hammerstone
No.
10 52
6 20
18 50
6 16
17 63
7 18
10 50
4 13
11 58
5 12
5 50
4 23
5 100
2 8

Bi I let/
Pressure Total
No.
6 32
19
20 67
30
13 36
36
31
84
37
3 11
27
26 69
38
5 25
20
87
27
31
4 21
19
33 79
42
2 20
10
10 59
17
5
16 70
23

110 31"

196

"

"

551

354
- _.....­

Artifacts at 41RT267 / 155
single faceted. If the data from 41RT267 is seen in this broader breakdown. 82% of
the flakes are multifaceted and 18% are single faceted (Table 15). Unfortunately. the
sites in the Jewett Mine area cannot be compared to the current data because the
single and multifaceted categories are not separated in the report (Fields et al. 1986).
These comparisons show that the debitage from 41RT267 is unique in terms of
the percentage of multifaceted striking platforms.
If the percentages of multifaceted
platform flakes at the other sites are the result of biface reduction. then the high
percentage at 41RT267 results from the reduction of staged artifacts in conjunction
with flake cores.
EXPECTATION 6: Debitage should be small in size resulting from the late stages of
arrow point manufacture.
Figure 20 shows the percentage of flake sizes in each flake size category. It is
clear from Figure 20c that 93% of the flakes are equal to or smaller than 30 mm in
length.
A smaller percentage of secondary flakes fall within the 1-10 mm category
than tertiary flakes. and a larger percentage of secondary flakes fall within the 20-30
mm category than tertiary flakes (Fig. 20b). At the same time. more secondary flakes
than tertiary flakes are equal to or greater than 30 mm. The breakdown of flake sizes
in 2 mm increments (Fig. 21) reveals that 20% of the tertiary flakes are between
10.1-12 mm in length while only 12% of the secondary flakes fall in this size category.
Patterson and 5011 berger (1978) indicate that the maximum size of pressure flakes is 16
mm. Eighty percent of the tertiary complete flakes fall within the 16 mm or smaller
category. while only 56% of the secondary flakes are equal to or less than 16 mm.
While flakes of this size can be produced by hammerstone or billet percussion. the
multifaceted platforms and flake shape suggest that a large number of the tertiary
flakes smaller than 16 mm may be pressure flakes.
The drop of percentages in the smaller than 8 mm size category can be explained
by the screening method used in artifact recovery. All matrix was screened through a
1/4" hardware cloth. As a result. most of the flakes in the smallest category were not
retained. Graphs of flake size percentages. drawn from experimental reduction of cores.
show the highest percentage of flakes in the smallest size category (cf. Patterson
1982).
The graph is a smooth line from small flakes representing the greatest
percentage of the debitage. declining smoothly to larger flakes.
To test this assumption. 12 unsereened matrix samples with volumes between
1000 and 1200 cubic centimeters. were sorted. Extrapolating the volume of soil within
a 10 by 100 by 100 em level. between 100 and 800 flakes and flake fragments were
lost by the 1/4" screen. These figures show that the decrease in the percentage of
the smallest flakes (Figs. 20. 21).
is a function of the screen size rather than
geological or behavioral factors.
A comparison of these flake size categories with those obtained by Espey. Huston
and Associates. Inc. (1984) at 41L1\1178 shows that 25% of the complete flakes are
less than or equal to 10 mm in length. 50% are between 10.1 - 20 mm and 18% are

- - - - - - _...

__

..-

- - -

..

--~

--­

156 / Testing of 41RT261

to

'"

SE'CONOAAr FLAKES
AU "'_, AIIUni..
U-285

l£RTlAftY I'LAi<£S

..'UVO"'.........
"'G>

!IO

'"

.0

...
I!!
"•

~!IO

! ..

...z

~
~
2()

10

-

"""'I'1..A><£
" SiZE"""""

"""""

00­

..,.,.

.......

co_n
S£CONDARVa T£ATlAR't'
Fl.AI(I!S
AII~"'_

eo

H-m

10

FIGURE 20. Percentage of secondary. tertiary and all flakes in 10 mm increments.

.".,

Artifacts at 41RT267 / 157
SECONDARY FLAKES
AU Units, Alll.IMtl.
M&:HJ6

o

10

FlAKE SIZE (mm)

TERTIARY FLAKES
All \.JniI$, All t.avel.

20

Ns430

10

20

FLAKE SIZE <mm)

COMPOSITE
SECOI\IOARY.TERTIARY FLAKES
I~

o

l'O

Xl

FLAKE SIZE (mm)

""

FIGURE 21. Percentage of secondary, tertiary and all flakes in 2 mm increments.

158 / Testing of 41RT267
between 20.1 - 30 mm in length. Ninety-three percent of the debitage at 41LN178 is
less than or equal to 30 mm in length. a figure identical to the 41RT267 assemblage.
At 41FT52 a similar pattern emerges. Twenty-nine percent of the flakes are less than
or equal to 10 mm; 46% are between 10.1
20 mm: and 18% are 20.1 - 30 mm in
length. Overall. 93% of the flakes are less than or equal to 30 mm in length. These
percentages reveal identical flake size ranges. a great deal of similarity in lithic raw
materials used, and the manner of reduction at these sites.

Archaic Post-Archaic Technological Transition
Patterson (1980:11) suggests that flake size increases with depth below surface.
A similar suggestion is implied by Skinner (1971:262) when he states that in post­
Archaic times there was a switch in technology from core-based to f1ake~based
reduction techniques. Mallouf (1979:46). however. finds no support for a technological
change between Archaic and post-Archaic periods at 41L T44. A similar lack of change
in lithic artifact assemblages through time is noted by Lynott and Peter (1977:127-134)
In the Aquilla Lake material.
The plot of flake size groups per level derived from Test Units 1-11 (Fig. 22)
shows that flakes of less than 10 mm make up their largest percentage in the debitage
of Level 3 (31%). Level 4 (32%) and Level 5 (42%). Flakes measuring between 10-18
mm are most abundant in Level 3 (59%). Level 4 (60%) and Level 6 (61%). Flakes
measuring between 20-30 mm are at their lowest percentage in Level 3 (11%). and
Level 4 (8%). while no flakes in the 30-40 mm category were recovered from Levels 3.
4 and 5. Level 3 is associated with the intensive Late Prehistoric use of the site (i.e..
burned rock features).
Figure 22 shows a small increase in percentage of flakes
measuring between 20-30 mm and 30-40 mm in Levels 5. 6 and 7. The first in situ
dart point was recovered from Level 6.
Contrary to Patterson's (1980:Fig. 19)
findings. rather than an associated decrease of small flakes with the increase in larger
flakes. the data from Test Unit 1. the unit with the largest sample size. shows a high
percentage of to-18 mm flakes. particularly in Level 6.
The plot of flake size groups per level for all test units on the northern portion
of the site (Test Unit 1. 5. and 8-12) shows similar results (Fig. 23).
Levels 1
through 7 have statistically valid sample sizes. while the small samples from Levels 8
through 16 lessen the significance of the patterns. Levels 6. 7. 10. 11. 13 and 15
show relatively large percentages of flakes equal to or larger than 20 mm.
At the
same time. the percentage of flakes less than 10 mm and between 10-18 mm remains
high.
These two plots combined with the fact that the relative percentages of
secondary and tertiary flakes remain stable between Archaic and post-Archaic levels (1-5
and 6-16. respectively). suggest a relative stability in lithic technology. The increase in
the percentage of flakes larger than 20 mm in Levels 8 through 16 cannot be
interpreted because of the small sample size.

Artifacts at 41RT261 / 159

60

a

SECONDARY TERTIARY
FLAKES
Test Units I-II
Levels 1-7

50
..J
W

>
W

..J

Q:

w 40

0..
0..

;::)

~

(!)

W
N 30

00
w
~

<t:

..J
lL.
lL.

0

w
(!)

20

~

zw

0

a:::
w

0..

10

o

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

DEPTH BELOW SURFACE (em)

FIGURE 22. Percentage of all flake size groups per level with all units combined.

160 / Testing of 41RT261

so

STATISTICALLY SIGNIFICANT

INSUFFICIENT SAMPlE SIZE

SECONDARY a. TEfmARY
FLAKES
Tellt Unit. 1,3.8.9,10. II

o

a 12

170

DEPTH BElDW IUfllFACE (em)

FIGURE 23. Percentage of all flake size groups per level for test units on northern
portion of site.

Summary of Lithic Analysis
Based on the results of the lithic analysis. 41RT267 was primarily a hunting
camp where expedient tasks related to tool maintenance and food processing were
performed. and where core reduction, arrow point manufacture and the reduction of
staged artifacts were the prime components of the lithic technology. There is strong
evidence for the curation of prepared cores and hammerstones and it is believed that
this is a function of the lack of available chert and quartzite appropriate for flake
blanks and hammerstones.
While a comparison of the lithic technology from 41RT267 with 41lN178 and
41 FT52 indicates some similarities. a number of differences in tool types, relative
percentages of primary, secondary and tertiary flakes. and frequencies of cores and
hammerstones are apparent. These differences can be ascribed to 1) the availability of
chert and quartzite raw materials. lacking near 41 RT267; 2) the manner of lithic
reduction: and 3) the varying functions of these camp sites.

~

.. ~--

..

-

.....

~

.~~-

Artifacts at 41RT267 /

161

Ceramics

SPECIMEN :l
Provenience: Test Unit 1. Level 3.
Specimen 1 has medium brown exterior and interior faces and a dark gray core.
The interior face was roughly smoothed. but the exterior was well smoothed, almost to
the point of polishing.
The sherd is distinguished by the abundance of subrounded
translucent white and brown fine sand grains that show prominently on all surfaces.
including the exterior. The large amount of sand gives the sherd a granular texture.
The sherd compares closely with Specimen 2. The attention to smoothing allies the
sherd with Leon Plain. but the copious sand and lack of bone tempering are eastern
and coastal traits.

SPECIMEN 2
Provenience: Test Unit 1. Level 6
Specimen 2 has a light brown exterior face. gray core and interior face. Both the
interior and exterior faces are well smoothed. the exterior almost to the point of
polishing. The sherd is distinguished by the abundance of subrounded translucent white
and brown fine sand grains which show prominently on all surfaces, including the
exterior.
The density of sand gives the sherd a granular texture.
The sherd is
practically identical to the Specimen 1sherd.
The degree of smoothing indicates
affinities with Leon Plain. although copious sand and lack of bone tempering are
eastern and coastal traits.

SPECIMEN 3
Provenience: Test Unit 5. Level 6
Specimen 3 has a light brown smoothed exterior and dark gray core and interior
face.
The texture is rough and striated with occasional large voids. These features
contrast with the other recovered specimens. The sherd appears to be grog tempered
with black. red and a few white ceramic particles. Fine sand grains are also abundant
as is a very fine unidentified opaque. shiny particle. The sherd cannot be attributed to
a ware or type. but it has affinities with East Texas.

SPECIMEN 4
Provenience: Test Unit 8. Level 2.
Specimen 4 has medium brown interior and exterior faces. and a medium brown
interior with a grayish-brown center which may be a remnant carbon streak.
The
ceramic fabric has a fine porous texture composed of abundant translucent white and
brown subrounded sand grains. The interior and exterior faces are smoothed. and the
interior shows a few striations left from smoothing.
The sherd resembles coastal
pottery such as Goose Creek Plain more than it does Leon Plain pottery from Central
Texas.

-----~

...

~-.-----~.

162 / Testing of 41RT267
Miscellaneous Artifacts

A group of materials other than lithics and ceramics were recovered during the
test excavations. A brief description of each. with provenience. is shown below.
NUT SHEll

Provenience: Test Pit 1. Levels 4 (N=1) and 5 (N=4); Test Pit 2. Level 7
(N=1): and Test Pit 12. Level 4 (N=3).
All specimens are hardwood nut. probably hickory. Their internal configuration
seems identical to hickory nuts collected during the survey. Their recovery indicates a
strong potential for radiocarbon analysis during the mitigation phase if larger samples
can be collected or if accelerator assay can be commissioned.
BONE

Provenience: Test Pit 2. Level 11.
One small. unburned fragment of a small mammal long bone was recovered.
Recovery of only this single specimen appears to indicate a very low potential for
faunal recovery during mitigation.
CHARCOAL

Provenience: Test Pit 1. Level 5: Test Pit 12. Levels 6 and 7.
These bits and flecks of charred wood were too small for species identification.
If found in sufficient quantities. they could be used for radiocarbon dating.
Unfortunately. based on the testing research. recovery of adequate amounts seems
doubtful.
LIGNITE

Small (less than .25 centimeters square). burned bits of lignite were recovered.
Their origin is. at this time. unclear. They were not found in association with any of
the recorded features. No unburned lignite was noted during the testing. All charcoal
samples collected during mitigation should be examined for lignite contamination.

RESULTS OF TESTING
The Phase "' testing program undertaken at 41RT267 resulted in several
conclusions concerning the subsurface cultural deposits. The accumulated data and the
potential for recovery of additional information suggest that the site fulfills Criterion D
for eligibility to the National Register of Historic Places i.e.. the site .. . . may be
likely to yield information important in history or prehistory" (U.S. Department of the
Interior 1982: Section 1202.6:628).
Based on the recovery of aboriginal debris from a" units. the entire ridge was
apparently used by prehistoric groups. The time span of this activity ranges from the
Late Prehistoric/Late Ceramic through the Middle Archaic/PreCeramic periods. as
evidenced by the recovery of temporally diagnostic artifacts.
In general. the massive
structu red. homogeneous sandy loam at the site lacks discernible soil stratigraphy.
However. the cultural deposits contained within the zone demonstrate an overall.
chronologically correct. vertical distribution. Testing has also demonstrated that varied
intact subsurface features are present. increasing the interpretive potential of the
deposits. The fact that one of these features has produced a thermoluminescence date
contemporaneous with associated projectile points indicates that site deposits can be
dated by absolute means.
Although recovered charcoal and burned nut hulls were
insufficient for radiocarbon analyses. larger samples collected in large area excavations
should prove adequate for standard or accelerator dating. Additiona"y. the substantial
number of artifacts other than debitage, such as tools. projectile points (Table 17) and
ceramics. presents a high potential for sequencing occupations and determining site
functions through artifact analyses. Such analyses enhance the capacity for meaningful
statements on aboriginal adaptations in the uplands of the Brazos River drainage.
However. these positive information yield attributes are not evenly distributed across the
site.
The middle and southern portions of the site. assessed by Test Units 2. 3. 4. 6
and 7. and Backhoe Trenches 1 through 4. contain subsurface stratified archeological
remains. This stratigraphy is demonstrated by an arrow point recovered from the thin
mantle of surface soil (BHT 2). a Gary-like dart point (Fig. 18J) from approximately 1
meter below surface in BHT 4. and Yarbrough dart point (Fig. 18l) from Level 11 in
Test Pit 3.
However. the information potential is much lower here than at the
northern end of the site. Excavation of the five test pits and four backhoe trenches
along the middle and southern portions of the site yielded 570 pieces of lithic debitage.
or 31% of the site total (N=1847). Of the total projectile points (N=23). including
fragments. preforms and perforators). only three (13%) came from this area. Of the
21 lithic tools (other than projectiles). 10 (47.6%) were recovered here. as well as two
(40%) of the five features.

163

164 / Testing of 41RT267

TABLE 17. Projecti Ie Points from 41RT267
Sca I lorn brangus arrow point (Fig. 18A)
triangular blade, straight lateral
edges,
wide
Description:
notched
concave
base;
tip
shows
alternate
resharpening flake scars
chert,
reddish
tint
cream colored fine grain
Mater i a I:
indicates heat treatment
length 36 mm; thickness 4.5 mm; width 13 mm
Dimensions:
Cross-section: lenticular
Provenience:
Test Pit 1, level 1 (0-10 cm bs)
Scal lorn arrow point (Fig. 18B)
Description:
triangular blade, irregularly serrated blade edges,
corner notched straight base; blade and one corner
of stem show impact breaks
Material:
cream colored fine grain chert
Dimensions:
length 25.5 mm*; thickness 0.4 mm;
width 16 mm;
stem length 6.0 mm; neck width 7.0 mm; base width
10 mm*
Cross-section: lenticular
Provenience:
Test Pit 11, level 1 (0-10 cm bs)
Scal lorn arrow point (Fig. 18C)
Description:
triangular blade, few irregular serrations on
edges, corner notched straight base, blade
impact fracture
Material:
cream colored fine grained chert
Dimensions:
length 17 mm*, thickness 3.0 mm, width 14 mm,
length 5.0 mm, neck width 6.0 mm, base width 12
Cross-section: lenticular
Provenience:
Test Pit 1, level 7 (60-70 cm bs)

blade
shows
stem
mm

Alba arrow point (Fig. 18D)
elongated triangular blade, straight lateral edges,
Description:
some irregular
shoulders
with
prominent
barb
serrations on barbs, straight stem, rounded base;
of
blade may
be
result of extensive
shape
resharpening.
somewhat grainy chert, reddish tint resulting from
Materia I:
heat treatment.
Dimensions:
length 32 mm, thickness 3.5 mm, width 18.5 mm, stem
length 7.5 mm, base/stem width 5.5 mm
Cross-section: lenticular
Provenience:
Test Pit 8, level 2 (10-20 cm bs)

Results of Testing

I

Perforator (Fig. 18E)
Description:
narrow and short triangular
blade,
prominent
shoulders, straight stem, rounded base, possibly a
reworked Alba arrow point; shape of blade may be
result of extensive resharpening or purposeful
shows
retouch to produce perforator blade, tip
microscopic wear.
Material:
fine grain cream colored
chert,
reddish
ti nt
resulting from heat treatment.
Dimensions:
length 23 mm, thickness 3.0 mm, width 20.0 mm, stem
length 7.5 mm, base/stem width 5.0 mm
Cross section: lenticular
Provenience:
Test Pit 12, level 2 (10-20 cm bs)
Perforator (Fig. 18F)
Description:
roughly triangular outline, shape characteristic of
preforms with tip narrowed to provide perforator
blade, rounded base.
Materia I:
fine grain cream colored chert
length 24.0 mm, thickness 4.5 mm, width 16.0 mm
Dimensions:
Cross section: plano-convex
Provenience:
Test Pit 5, level 2 (10-20 cm bs)
Arrow point fragment (Fig. l8G)
Description:
relatively long, finely flaked triangular blade,
irregular serrations on both edges, probably corner
notched base, prominent barbs, most of stem and base
missing.
fine grained, cream colored chert
Material:
length 37.5 mm, thickness 4.5 mm, width 19.5 mm, stem
Dimensions:
length 3.0 mm*, neck width 6.0 mm, base width 6.0 mm*
Cross section: plano-convex
Provenience:
Backhoe Trench 2
Arrow point fragment (Fig. 18H)
Description:
leaf shaped, convex blade, probably corner notched
base with basal break caused during notching, stem
and base missing.
fine grain cream colored chert, reddish tint from
Material:
heat treatment.
Dimensions:
length 24.0 mm., thickness 4.0 mm, width 16.0 mm
Cross section: lenticular
Provenience:
Test Pit 1, level 3 (20-30 cm bs)
Arrow point fragment (Fig. 181)
Description:
probably long triangular blade with side notches, tip
and stem show manufacture breaks, some irregular
serrations on blade, prominent barbs.
Material:
cream color fine grained chert

---

------~

....~.-- ..-

- - ­

165

166 / Testing of 41RT267

Dimensions:

length 14.0 mm*, thickness 3.5 mm,
neck width 8.0 mm.
Cross section: lenticular
Provenience:
Test Pit 12, level 3 (20-30 cm bs)

width

20.0 mm,

Gary dart point (Fig. 18J)
Description:
triangular blade with long contracting stem, straight
base.
light brown chert with inclusions and reddish specks
Material:
Dimensions:
length 42.0 mm, thickness 7.5 mm, width 23.0 mm, stem
length 19.0 mm, neck width 17.5 mm , base width 11.0
mm*
Cross section: lenticular
Provenience:
Backhoe Trench 4
Gary dart point (Fig. 18K)
Descr i pt ion":
triangular blade with small fine striations, short
contracting stem,
straight base with possible
manufacture break although seems in finished state.
Mater i a I:
cream colored fine grain chert
Dimensions:
length 36.0 mm, thickness 6.0 mm, width 20.0 mm, stem
length 12.5 mm, neck width 16.0 mm, base width 13.0
mm
Cross section: lenticular
Provenience:
Test Pit 12, level 9 (80-90 em bs)
Yarbrough dart point (Fig. 18l)
Description:
most of blade missing from impact fracture, extending
stem with sl ightly concave base, one barb also broken
during impact.
light gray fine grain chert
Material:
Dimensions:
length 23.0 mm*, thickness 8.0 mm*, width 22.0., stem
length 17.0 mm, neck width 17.5 mm*, base width 18
mm.
Cross section: lenticular
Provenience:
Test Pit 3, level 11 (100-110 cm bs)
Dart point fragment
Description:
most probably expanding stem dart point with
fire pitting.
Material:
dark gray chert, may be result of heating
Dimensions:
neck width 17.5 mm
Cross section: lenticular
Provenience:
Test Pit 12, level 17 (160-190 cm bs)

*

= indicates

partial dimensions

heavy

Results of Testing / 167
Of primary importance is the high artifact density area containing a large
percentage of temporally diagnostic projectile points. prehistoric ceramics and other lithic
tools assignable to the Late Prehistoric/Late Ceramic Period. and associated with intact
Features 3 and 4. This area is roughly delineated by the low rise at the north end of
the site. Also present here are deeper. stratified. potentially isolatable deposits. ranging
to a depth of at least 190 centimeters below surface. Excavation of Test Units 1. 5.
and 8 through 12. and Backhoe Trenches 5 through 7 recovered 1277 pieces of
In
debitage (69%) and 20 specimens from the projectile point category (87%).
addition. a Steiner arrow point was recovered from Shovel Test 2 in this area during
survey documentation of the site (Davis and Utley. Section 1. this report).
Eleven
(52.4%) lithic tools (other than projectiles). all of the ceramic fragments (N=4) and
three (60%) features were encountered in this area.
This northern area was intensively used by Late Prehistoric/Late Ceramic groups
and their artifactual debris has remained stratified. Of the 16 arrow points recovered
during testing. 15 (93.8%) came from this area. and of this number. 14 were recovered
in Levels 1 through 3. A single arrow point came from Level 7 in this area and one
was recovered from a shovel test during the survey phase of investigations.
Additionally. a large intact burned ferruginous sandstone hearth (Feature 3). encountered
in Test Pits 8 and 11. Level 3. yielded a thermoluminescence date of 1350 BP + 160
(Alpha 3052).
This temporal range is within the limits of a Late Prehistoric/Late
Ceramic association. This date demonstrates the positive potential for dating other in
situ features. such as Feature 4. that may be encountered. Radiocarbon assays may
also be possible. given the recovery of small amounts of charcoal and burned nut hull.
Two other features (1. 4) were encountered on the southern knoll. Features 1. 3
and 4. although constructed of the same stone material. appear to have had different
functions. based on the variability in construction styles. This varied nature of the in
situ features suggests a multi-purpose use of the, heat retention qualities of the stone
and increases the interpretive potential of feature documentation.
Of the Archaic projectile points from this area. two dart point midsections appear
to be out of context. One came from Level I and one from Level 3. It is possible
that individuals from later groups transported these artifacts to this location.
The
remaining three demonstrate a correct vertical positioning. i.e.. all lie well below the
Late Prehistoric/Late Ceramic materials (Levels 6. 9. 17). and are also stratified
according to their morphological attributes. The two upper specimens have contracting
stems and. although fragmentary. appear to be Gary-like dart points.
The severely
burned specimen from Level 17 has an expanding stem.

This page intentionally left blank.

Results of Testing / 169

RECOMMENDATIONS
Due to the established high potential for significant data recovery from subsurface
cultural deposits at 41RT267. it is recommended that. if avoidance of the site is not
feasible under finalized mining plans. a program be implemented to mitigate the implied
adverse effect upon the buried archeological remains.
This can best be facilitated
through an intensive program of controlled excavations centered on that portion of the
site which has demonstrated a positive research potential during extensive testing.
This area is confined to the northern end. where it is visually discernible as a slight
rise. Horizontally. the area is delineated on the north. east and west by the downslope
break (99 m contour) that marks the end of the ridge. and on the south by a barb
wire fence.
It is recommended that excavations consists of two or more large block
units placed adjacent to Test Pits 1. 5 and 8/11. The objective would be to expose
broad horizontal living areas where testing yielded large quantities of Late
Prehistoric/Late Ceramic cultural materials with associated intact features. and stratified
earlier components. The focal point of the initial large units would be Features 3 and
4. which were left in situ at the end of the Phase III season. These features should
be carefully exposed. and excavations radiating from them would attempt to locate
other features in the same stratigraphic context so that spatial relationships can be
observed.
Special attention should be given to any structural variability in these
features.
The construction designs of Features 3 and 4 are significantly different.
possibly relating to a difference in function. Tools and other primary artifacts (bone.
shell. ceramics) should be accurately point plotted on floor plans. These procedures
would be designed to maximize the data yield from recovered cultural materials and
facilitate statements on site activities.
At the same time, it is recommended that a 2 meter square unit be placed
adjacent to Test Pit 12. the only unit encountering the deep sandy deposits at the
northern end of the site. to further explore the minimally 190 centimeters deep deposits.
Based on the assessment of these deeper deposits, which have already demonstrated
stratigraphy through recovered projectile points. further units may be warranted.
Of major concern will be a geomorphological evaluation of the site landform and
it's depositional history, along with an assessment of the undulating surface of the
basal clay which underlies the sandy loam mantle.
The basal clay is known to be
from 30 to 70 centimeters below surface in the central area of the rise where the Late
Prehistoric/Late Ceramic concentrations were encountered. and to be nearly 2 meters
deep just to the edge of the rise.
Evidently the clay surface is domed in the high
density area and slopes downward radically away from the crest of the knoll.
The
further use of mechanical excavation may prove helpful in documenting this slope.
Machine excavation might also aid in establishing the southern edge of the rise. which
is felt to be near the barbed wire fence. An additional geomorphological question to be

170 / Testing of 41RT267
addressed is the source and rates of the deposition of the sandy matrix in these
uplands. where it seems unlikely that flooding buried the features and cultural deposits.
The methodology employed during mitigation should be designed to retrieve the
maximum data. It is recommended that all units be excavated to contact with the
culturally sterile basal clay. with the maximum increment of vertical control being no
more than 10 centimeters. Matrix screening should be done with 1/4 inch hardware
cloth with some percentage of fill being subjected to 1/16 inch fine screen recovery.
The large block excavation units should be done in 1 meter square units.
There is a slight chance that organic remains will be recovered during mitigation.
although only minimal amounts were seen during the Phase III effort. If charcoal. bone
or burned nut hull can be collected in sufficient quantities. radiocarbon assay can
establish the age of the cultural deposits at the site in particular and by inference.
similar deposits within the Calvert Project area. Further use of thermoluminescence
dating of burned ferruginous sandstone is recommended if no organic material is
retrieved.

Results of Testing

I

171

DISCUSSION
Site 41 RT267 is located in a culturally and environmentally transitional zone
where cultural traits and influences from adjacent areas are frequently demonstrated in
the artifactual remains. No regionally specific chronological framework exists: those for
the Central and East Texas archeological regions have often been used to place local
archeological remains in some temporal framework.
More recently Fields et al.
(1986:61-74) have suggested that a construct based on the relationship of ceramics.
dart and arrow points. be applied to local archeological deposits (Fields et
al. 1986:61-74). Likewise. the propensity to use diagnostic type names from Central
and East Texas projectile points may have obscured the presence of local lithic
developments.
In the testing proposal. this admixture of artifactual material was predicted at
41RT267. This expectation proved correct. For this testing report. temporal affiliation
for the regionally diagnostic materials was presented by the traditional local designation
followed by the corresponding category in the Fields (Fields et al. 1986) framework.
Three defined arrow point styles were recovered:
Steiner. Scallorn and Alba.
The Scallorn. although found to some extent in all areas of Texas. is most numerous
in Central Texas where it is the marker projectile point for Prewitt's (1981) Neo­
Archaic Austin Phase (1250-650 BP). The Alba is a predominant point style in the
early part of the Late Prehistoric Period of East Texas and is associated with Caddo
Indian cultural groups. The Steiner point is also an East Texas type assignable to the
late Prehistoric Period, within the range of 700 to 1700 A.D. as suggested by Story
(1981:142). All of these point styles would fall into Fields' (Fields et al. 1986) Late
Ceramic Period.
Two defined dart point styles were also recovered. Gary and Yarbrough. The
Gary. affiliated with East Texas cultures, is generally thought to be a Late Archaic
type on the basis of its contracting stem. placing it in Fields' (Fields et al. 1986)
Late Ceramic Period.
The Yarbrough dates to the earlier part of Johnson's (1962)
Archaic La Harpe Aspect which correlates with Fields' (Fields et al. 1986) Preceramic
Period.
This period is estimated to range from 6000 to 200 B.C. in East Texas
(Story 1981:142).
Analysis of the cultural material from 41RT267 has allowed some statements on
site seasonality and function to be made. The small sample of burned hickory shell
implies that at least one occupation of the site occurred in autumn. Although these
charred hulls may represent remnants of nut processing or consumption. their limited
number and the absence of nutting stones seems to rule out their being of primary
importance. In fact. they may have been incidentally introduced into a fire along with
the fuel.
However. the establishment of a time of occupation at the site allows a

~~-.-~-~~~.~-----~~~~~-

172 / Testing of 41RT261

projection of the other food resources available at the same time.
Two other
hardwood nuts would have been ripe concurrently, pecans and walnuts. Both would
also have been available along the Brazos River bottoms near the larger base camps,
thereby making travel and transportation unnecessary.
Acorns would have been
abundant in certain years, providing a possible food resource as well as providing a
crop to maintain and hold a deer population in place. In the fall. deer herds increase
in size as the male deer begin to forage with the doe herds (Flannery 1968). The deer
would present a major diet choice with the added bonus of the skins which would have
been prime at this time of year. Larger mammals such as bear and bison would also
be at their maximum in accumulated fat and pelt thickness. This inventory of food
resources, available in one location at the same time, would present an optimal foraging
opportunity that would most likely have been incorporated into a prehistoric group's
subsistence strategy (Winterhalder and Smith 1981).
Assuming that the primary resource to be procured is game. a range of site
activities would consist of those daily domestic chores necessary for basic living and
maintenance of a limited tool kit specific to procurement and processing of the pursued
resource.
Such an assemblage was recovered at 41RT267.
Collecting of vegetal
resources might be in progress concurrently with hunting forays. This range of tasks
appears to necessitate the presence of both males and females because the division of
labor generally ascribed to hunting and gathering groups places the males in the
hunting - tool manufacturing role and the female in the processing - collecting role
(Flannery 1968:75).
The implied variety of activities might explain the differential
configuration of Features 3 and 4.
The artifactual remains of the procurement phase at a hunting camp would be
projectile points and fragments, and the lithic debitage produced as new points are
manufactured or existing specimens are reworked.
The processing phase would be
represented by cutting and scraping tools utilized in preparing meat and hides. These
formal tools were not recovered in quantities that would indicate major processing
activities. The tools which appear to have been used for cutting or scraping are of a
very expedient nature. These two factors may signify either the animal processing was
being carried out away from the main camp area (Yellen 1977), therefore the absence
of tools. or that only minimal preparation was being done before transportation back to
the base camp. Some debitage would also result from production and resharpening of
tools.
Ceramic vessels may have been used for domestic activities or resource
processing.
Based on the testing results. 41RT267 appears to fit a functional interpretation
as a seasonally oriented hunting camp, at least during the Late Prehistoric Period.
Ethnohistoric descriptions of settlement patterns in the early nineteenth century imply
semi-permanent base camps along the Brazos River (Berlandier 1969: Kress 1931)
supported by a collecting strategy that exploited a full range of ecological zones. This,
in turn. suggests that scheduling (Flannery 1968) during seasons of maximum resource
availability was a necessary function in the subsistence strategy. as in the fall
occupation at 41 RT267. Whether this seasonal hunting camp notion can be applied to
the earlier components at the site is unclear since only a small sample of the deposits
were investigated.

---

Results of Testing / 173
Site 41RT267 thus assumes a larger role in modeling adaptive strategies through
time in the Brazos drainage. Evidence to date suggests a collecting strategy emanated
from semi-sedentary population aggregates based in multiple resource zones along the
river (Binford 1980). Robertson County fits within the warm temperate zone defined
Thus.
by Binford (1980:14) as favorable for semi-nomadic to sedentary settlement.
expectably many of the prehistoric groups would develop delayed return systems
(Woodburn 1982) where scheduling. storing and collecting strategies assume more
importance. The testing program at 41 RT267 suggests such a model can profitably be
proposed for the project area as a whole.
The specific goal of mitigation will be to test the hypothesis that 41RT267 was
an autumn upland procurement station established during the Late Prehistoric Period
through the recovery of a valid sample of cultural materials from the upper levels at
the site.
An additional goal will be to determine whether this assessment holds
through time or whether the site served a different function in the Archaic Period.

----------~---

- ----------­

This page intentionally left blank.

EXHIBIT B

SOIL PROFILE DESCRIPTIONS OF SELECTED BACKHOE TRENCHES AT 41RT267
Prof i Ie No:

860521

Taxonomic
Classification:
Location:
Tx Plane Coor.:
Elevation:
Physiographic
Position:
Slope:
Drainage:
Vegetation:
Parent Mater i a I :
Described by:
Samples taken:
Horizons:
A
0-10

In.

Pit 1

Chazos loamy fine sand, 1-5% slopes;
mixed, thermic, Aquic Paleustalfs
41RT267 - Backhoe Trench 1.
E 540250 N 3154850
+ 390 feet above MSL.

fine,

Broad crest of ridge, approximately 500
feet to the northwest of the nose of the
ridge.
Approximately 3% slope to the southeast.
Moderately wei I drained soil with claypan
at 15 in.
Unimproved pasture in
upland
woodland
(cedar, post oak, blackjack oak)
Trench not deep enough to observe parent
materia I.
T.A. O)Shay and J.K. Horbaczewski
None
Dark brown (10YR4/3) fine sandy
loam;
granular, fine, weak; friable; many, very
fine, common fine roots; no mottles; rare
si liceous rounded pebbles (up to 0.5 in.
across); clear and irregular boundary.

E

10-15 in.

Light yellowish-brown (10YR6/4) loamy sandi
granular,
fine,
very
weak;
friable;
common very fine and few fine roots;
no
mottles; rare si liceous rounded pebbles up
to 0.5 in. across; clear, wavy boundary.

Btl

15-20 in.

Strong brown (7.5YR5/6) sandy clay;
with
light yellowish-brown (10YR6/4) common,
medium, distinct subrounded mottles, and
red (2.5YR4/6) common from approx. 19 in.
depth,
medium,
prominent
mottles;
subangular
blocky, medium, weak;
firm

175

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _................._ - - - - - ­

176

I

Testing at 41RT261

(moist), sightly hard (dry);
few fine
roots;
few to rare, very fine pebbles (up
to 0.1 in); clear, wavy boundary.
Bt2

20-34

tn.

Bt3

34-44+in.

Light olive gray (5YR6/2) clay;
with
mottles of dark red (2.5YR3.6) - many,
prominent, medium, sub rounded to rounded;
brownish-yel low (10YR6/6)
fine to very
fine,
common
(especially
inside
red
mottles) distinct subrounded; subangular
blocky, fine, medium; firm (moist), soft
to 51 ight/y hard (dry);
very few fine
roots; apparently stoneless; clear, wavy
boundary.
Dominant color - red (2.5YR3/6) sandy clay
loam;
strong brown (75.YR5/6) very fine
outer boundary (single sand
grain
in
thickness to the red areas) transition to
light brownish-gray (2.5YR6/2)
mottles.
These gray mottles are very predominant ­
elongated vertically up to 1 in.
wide
converging
downwards
(and
narrowing),
sometimes marked with root in
center.
(Under eyelens gray material has washed
sand grain surfaces and red is stained and
coated partia"y with fines); subangular
blocky, medium, weak (weaker than in Bt2);
friable (moist) soft to slightly hard (dry)
- softer than Bt2j very rare fine roots;
apparently stoneless; base not seen.

Comments:
1.

Colors are for moist soi I, unless otherwise indicated.

2. The profile used for the description was selected for the
maximum development of horizons. Adjacent (on the western side)
to this profi Ie was a pedon with a large wedge of Bt2 horizon
material replacing the Btl horizon.
3. In the profile described the soi I was moist to a depth of 15
in.;
moist to moderately dry from 15 in. to 20 in.; and
moderately dry below that. No seepage of water was observed at
the interface of the E and B horizons at 15 in. depth.

----~-.------.- ..

----.

Exhibit B / 177

4. This trench was tested and described by Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) archeologists. It yielded one arrow
point distal fragment from the surface 15 in. Basal sterile clay
was identified by TARL archeologists at 15 in. depth.
5.
Transition from subrounded to elongated
vertical
and
subvertical mottles is very marked at a depth of approximately 34
in. This transition is also marked by a strong change In
texture, from clay to a much I ighter sandy clay loam.
Prof i Ie No.

860521

Taxonomic
Classification:
Location:
Tx. Plane Coor:.
Elevation:
Physiographic
Position:
Slope:
Drainage:
Vegetation:
Parent Material:
Described by:
Samples taken:
Horizons:
0-3 in.

Al

A2

3-8 in.

Pit 2

0-8~
slopes;
Padina loamy fine sand,
loamy,
si liceous,
thermic
Grossarenic
Paleustalfs.
41RT267 - Backhoe Trench 6.
E 540600 N 3154680
401 + 2 feet above MSL.

Broad summit of ridge with level or weakly
convex surface approximately 200 feet by
100 feet.
Level site, less than 2~ slope.
We I I draj ned.
Upland woodland - post oak and blackjack
oak predominately.
Trench not deep enough to observe parent
material.
T.A. Q'Shay and J.K. Horbaczewski
0-3in., 3-8 in., 8-55 in. and 55-651n.
Dark yellowish-brown (10YR/4/4) loamy fine
sand; single-grain to granular, very fine,
very
weak;
no mottles;
stoneless;
friable; many very fine roots, common fine
root;
stoneless;
abrupt
irregular
boundary.
Yellowish-brown (10YR5/4) loamy fine sand
with dark yellowish-brown (10YR4/4) mottles
- diffuse, irregular, up to 2 in.
across;
single-grain (totally slaked by water);
stone less;
friable
to
very
friable;
common very fine, few fine roots; gradual
wavy boundary.

178 / Testing at 41RT261

A3

8-55

in.

Brown (10YR4/3) loamy fine sandi
no
mottl ing; single grain (totally slacked by
water);
stoneless;
friable
to
very
friable (wi I I probably col lapse when dry);
few fine to medium roots;
gradual wavy
boundary.

B

55-72+in.

50% Pale brown (10YR6/3) loamy sand with
50% strong brown (7.5YR4/6) light sandy
clay
loam;
firm;
seeping
water;
stoneless; very few roots.

Comments:
1.

Colors are for moist soil, unless otherwise indicated.

2. This soi I profi Ie was moist throughout to a depth of 72 In.
with some seepage of water suggesting the presence of a less
permeable horizon at greater depth.
3. Quartz grains appear to be bleached In the A2 and A3 horizons
under a handlens, although there may be some clay bridges.
4. Oak leaf litter - several leaves thick - on the soi I
at the profi Ie site.
Prof i Ie No.
Taxonomic
Classification:
Location:
Tx. Plane Coor.:
Elevation:
Physiographic
Position:
Slope:
Drainage:
Vegetation:
Pa rent Mater i a I :
Described by:
Samples Taken:

860521

surface

Pit 3

Si Istid loamy fine sand, 1 to 5%
loamy,
siliceous,
thermic
Paleustalfs.
41RT267 - Backhoe Trench 4.
E 540380 N 3154760
397 + 2 feet above MSL.

slopes;
Arenic

Broad crest in upper part of
ridge,
approximately 200 feet to the southeast of
summit of ridge.
Approximately 3% slope to the southeast.
Moderately wei I drained.
Unimproved pasture in clearing in upland
woodland (cedar, post oak, blackjack oak) .
Trench not deep enough to observe parent
material.
T.A. O'Shay and J.K. Horbaczewski
None

Exhibit B / 179

Horizons:
Al
0-11 in.

Brown (10YR4/3) loamy fine sand; stoneless;
common very fine roots; friable; gradual
wavy boundary.

A2

11-41 In.

Brown (10YR5/3) loamy fine sand; very few,
common
fine
and
medium roots;
very
friable; clear wavy boundary.

E/B

41-53+in.

Pale brown (10YR6/3) loamy sand with dark
yellowish-brown
(10YR4/4)
sandy
loam;
manganese concretions up to 0.6 in. across
in cores of dark yellowish-brown sandy
loam.

Comments:
1.

Colors are for moist soi I, unless otherwise indicated.

2. Whole profile moist throughout to a depth of
seeping in at 53 in. depth.

63

In.

Water

This page intentionally left blank.

EXHIBIT C-1:
Level

COMPLETE FLAKES

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

No.

No.

"

No.
18
31
21
24
24

TEST UNIT 1

"

Total

"

62
54
56
61
63
11 61
20 80

29
51
48
36
38
18
25

38"

155 62"

251

89
40
23
50
12
25
36
20
22

1 11
6 60
10 71
3 50
1 88
3 15
7 64
8 80
7 78
2 100
3 50

9
10
13
6
8
4

1

11

2
3
4
5
6
1

26
21
12
14
1
5

38
46
44
33
37
39
20

Total

96

8
4
3

TEST UNIT 2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

3

1
1

4
2
2

10
11

3

12
13
14
15

1

Total

32

50
100

11

10
9

2
6

1

36"

1 100

1

58 64"

90

4 80

5
2

6 67
4 57
3 100
1 50
2 100
3 100
4 100
3 75
1 33

7
3
2
2
3
4
4
3

TEST UNIT 3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

1
2
3
3

20
100
33
43

1

50

1
2

25
67

8

9
10
11

181

9

182 /

Testing at 41RT261

Test Unit 3 continued
12
13
14
Total

-- --

2 100

3 100

16

33~

2
3

67~

33

49

TEST UNIT 4
1
2
3
4
5
6
Total

2 33

3 30
2 20
2 29
1 50
10

29~

1

67
70
80
71
50

25

71~

4
7
8
5

6
10
10
7
2
35

TEST UNIT 5
3 75
8 62
5 50
6 43
5 56
3 50
6 86

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

1
5
5
8
4
3
1

Total

27

43~

36

1
2
1

33
50
17

2
2
5
4

25
38
50
57
44
50
14

57~

4
13
10
14
9
6

7
63

TEST UNIT 6
1
2
3
4
5

6
Total

67
50
83

100

2 100
6

32~

13

68~

3

4
6
4
2
19

TEST UNIT 7
1
2
3
4

-­ -­
2

67

1 100
1 33
1 100

1
3

1

Exhibit C /

Test Unit 7 continued
5
6

1 50

2
2

4

9

2 100
1 50
4

44.5%

2
5
2

29
31
25

4 57
11 69
6 75

7
16
8

9

29~

21 68%

31

1
2

2

67

2 100
1 33

2
3

Total

2

40%

3

60~

5

1
2
3
4

2
8
2
5

67
62
33
71

1
5
4
2

33
38
67
29

3
13
6
7

Total

17

59%

12

41%

29

9
7

56
55
58

6
10
5

38
45
42

16
22
12

28

56%

21

421

50

3
5
5

50
46
50

1

33

Total

1

11.2~

44.5~

TEST UNIT 8
1
2
3

1 14

Total

1

3~

TEST UNIT 9

TEST UNIT 10

TEST UNIT 11
1
2
3

1

Total

1

6

12

2%

TEST UNIT 12
1

2
3
4
5
6
7

3 50
6 54
5 50
3 100
2 67
5 100

0
6
11

10
3
3
5

183

184

/

Testing at 41RT267

Test Unit 12 (continued)
8
9
10

5
2
2

11

7

12
13
14
15
16
17

4
2
1
3

71
29
25
58
50
50
33
50

2

40

Total

42

42%

2 29
5 71
6 75
5 42
4 50
2 50
2 67
3 50
1 100
3 60

7
7
8

12
8

4
3
6
1
5

57

58%

99

7
3
3
5

78
60
60
71

3
1

60
25

9
5
5
7
1
5
4

22 61.1%

36

BACKHOE TRENCHES
BHT
BHT
BHT
BHT
BHT
BHT
BHT

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Total

1 14

1 2.1%

2
2
2
1
1
2
3
13

22
40
40
14
100
40
75
36.1%

Exhibit C / 185

EXHIBIT C-2: PROXIMAL FRAGMENTS AND CHIPS
Level

Primary

Secondary

Tertiary

No.

No.

No.

~

~

Total

~

TEST UNIT 1
18
35
24
20
15
7
6

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Total

45
47
33
39
30
33
22

125 37%

22
38
48
31
35
14
21
209

55
53
67
61
70
67
78
63~

55
73
72
51
50
21
27
334

TEST UNIT 2
1
4
6
2
4
3
3
2
3
4
1
3
1

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

12
13
14
15
Total

7
24
30
67
29
33
33
18
60
57
50
75
50

14
13
14
1
10
6
6
9
2
3
1
1
1
2

37 31%

83

4 50
2 20
6 29
1 9

4
8
15
10
6
1

1 50

1

2 33
1 20
1 33

2
4
4
2

93
76
70
33
71

67
67
82
40
43
50
25
50
100
69~

15
17
20
3
14
9
9
11

5
7
2
4
2
2
120

TEST UNIT 3
1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

...........

--~-------

50
80
71
91
100
100
50
100
67
80
67

8
10
21
11
6
1
2

2
6
5
3

186

I

Testing at 41RT261

Test Unit 3 continued
12
13
14
Total

2 25
1 20
21

23

2 100
6 75
4 80

2
8
5

69 77r.

90

TEST UNIT 4
1
2
3
4
5
6

Total

6 67
4 44
4 33
3 30
3 43
20 42r.

3

5
8
7
4
1

33
56
67
70
57
100

28 58r.

9
9
12
10
7
1
48

TEST UNIT 5
5 71
2 18
11 79
7 70
1 50
1 25
6 75

14
10
2
4
8

23 41"

33 59%

56

1

2 67

2
3
4
5
6

2 50

1 33
4 100
8 100
2 50

3
4
8
4

2 100

2

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Total

2
9
3
3
1
3
2

29
82
21
30
50
75
25

7
11

TEST UNIT 6

Total
TEST UNIT 7
1
2
3
4

4 19r.

1 33

17

81"

2 100
1 100
1 100
67
2

21
2
1
1
3

Exhibit C /

Test Unit 7 continued
5
6
Total

1

25

1 100
3 75

1

4

2 17"

10

83"

12

3 27
4 24
3 50

8
13
3

73
76
50

11

10 29"

24

71"

34

2 22
3 23

7
10

78

77

9
13

5 23"

17

77"

22

1
12
7
7

25
63
41
64

4
19
17

24 47"

27

53"

51

6 46
15 54
5 31

7
13
11

54
46
69

13
28
16

26 46"

31

54"

57

TEST UNIT 8
1
2
3
Total

17

6

TEST UNIT 9
1
2
Total
TEST UNIT 10
1
2
3

4
Total

3
7
10
4

75
37
59
36

11

TEST UNIT 11
1
2
3

Total
TEST UNIT 12
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

4 44
6 32
4 31
3 21
1 17
9 56

1 100
5 56
13 68
9 69
79
11
5 83
7 44

1
9
19
13
14
6
16

187

188

I

Testing at 41RT261

Test Unit 12 continued
8
9

10
11
12
13
14
15
16

1

6

14
33
50
19
25
50

1 25
8 67

17

Total

1
1
8
4
1
3

1

1~

54

34~

3 100
6 86
2 67
7 44
17 81
3' 75
3 50
2 100
3 75
4 33
101

65~

3
7
3
16
21
4
6
2
4
12
156

BACKHOE TRENCHES
BHT
BHT
BHT
BHT
BHT
BHT
BHT

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Total

7
6
9

4 36
2 25
1 10
1
8

11

6 50
4 80

1
6
1

18

30~

41

64
75
90
92
100
50
20
70~

11

8
10
12
1

12
5
59

REFERENCES CITED
Berlandier. Jean louis

1969

The Indians of Texas in 1830.

Smithsonian Institute. Washington D.C.

Binford. lewis R.

1978
1979

Nunamiut Ethnoarchaeology.

Academic Press. New York.

Organization and Formation Processes: looking at Curated Technologies.

Journal of Anthropological Research 35(3):255-273.
1980

Willow Smoke and Dogs' Tails: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Systems and
Archaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45(1):4-20.

1983

In Pursuit of the Past.

Thames and Hudson. New York.

Bureau of Economic Geology

1970

Geologic Atlas of Texas, Waco Sheet.

Bureau of Economic Geology. The

University of Texas at Austin.
Crabtree. Don E.
Mesoamerican Polyhedral Cores and Prismatic Blades.
1968
33:446-478.

American Antiquity

Espey. H uston and Associates. Inc.
Phase I Archeological Testing in the Jewett Mine Project Area. leon.
1983
limestone and Freestone Counties. Texas. Document No. 83038. Austin.
1984

Archeological Mitigation at the Doyle Martin Site. 41lN178. and the P.I.
Ridge Site. 41FT52. leon and Freestone Counties. Texas. Document No.
82209. Austin.

Fields. Ross C.
1984
Archeological Investigations at 41lN134 and 41LN144. Jewett Mine Project.
Leon County. Texas. Prewitt and Associates. Inc. Report of Investigations
35. Austin.
Fields. Ross c.. S.V. Lisk. J.M. Jackson. M.D. Freeman. G.L. Bailey
1986
National Register Assessments of Archeological and Historical Resources at
the Jewett Mine. leon County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates Reports of
Investigations 48. Austin.
Flannery. Kent V.

1968

Anthropological Archeology in the Americas.
Washington. Washington D.C.

189

The Anthropological Society of

190

I

Testing of 41RT261

Hayden. Brian
1977
Stone Tool Functions in the Western Deserts.

In Stone Tools as Cultural
Markers: Change, Evolution and Complexity. pp. 178-188.
R.V.S. Wright.
editor. Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies, Canberra.

1979

In Lithic Technology and Ethnographic Excavation
Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.
among Australian Aborigines.
Canberra. Humanities Press Inc.. New Jersey.
Paleolithic Reflections.

Joh nson. LeRoy. J r.
1962
The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas.
The University of Texas at Austin.

Ph.D. dissertation.

Kress. Margaret Kenney (translator)
1931
Diary of a Visit of Inspection of the Texas Missions Made by Fray Gaspar
The Southwestern Historical Quarterly
Jose de Solis in the Year 1767-68.
XXXV:28-76.
Lynott. Mark J. and Duane E. Peter
1977
1915 Archeological Investigations at Aquilla Lake. Texas.
Southern
Methodist University. Department of Anthropology Archeological Research
Program. Dallas.
Mallouf. Michael G.
1979
Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone. Fall and Winter. 1977.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 71. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Muto. Guy Roger
1971
A Technological Analysis of the Early Stages in the Manufacture of Lithic
Artifacts. Masters thesis. Idaho State University. Pocatello.
Patterson. Leland W.
1980
The Owen Site. 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County.
Texas. Houston Archeological Society Report 3.
1982

The Importance of Flake Size Distribution.

In Contract Abstracts and CRM

Archeology 3(1):70-72.
Patterson. LW. and J.B. Soli berger
1978
Replication and Classification
Anthropologist 23(80) :103-112.

of

Small

Size

Lithic

Debitage.

Plains

Prewitt. Elton R.
1974
Upper
Navasota
Reservoir: An
Archeological
Assessment.
Texas
The University of Texas at
Archeological Survey Research Report 47.
Austin.
1975

Upper Navasota Reservoir: Archeological Test Excavations at the Barkley
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 53.
and Louie Sadler Sites.
The University of Texas at Austin.

References Cited / 191
1981

Cultural Chronology
Society 52:65-89.

In

Central Texas.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

Skinner. S. Alan
1971
Prehistoric Settlement of the De Cordova Bend Reservoir. Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 42:149-269.
Soil Conservation Service
1986
Soil Survey of the Proposed Calvert Mine Project in Robertson County.
Texas. United States Department of Agriculture.
Story. Dee Ann
1981
An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas.
26(92) :139-156.

Plains Anthropologist

U.S. Department of the Interior
1982
National Park Service.

National Register Division.
How to Apply the
National Register Criteria for Evaluation Washington. D.C.

Winterhalder. Bruce and Eric Alden Smith. editors
1981
Hunter Gatherer Foraging Strategies: Ethnographic and Archeological
Analysis. The University of Chicago Press. Chicago and London.
Woodburn. James
1982
Social Dimensions of Death in Four African Hunting and Gathering Societies.
In: Death and the Regeneration of Life. M. Bloch and J. Perry. editors.
Cambridge University Press.
Yellen. John C.
1977
Archeological Approaches to the Present: Models
Past. Academic Press. New York.

- - -..

~

for Reconstructing the

..

~~

.....

~~~--.-

~~-

....

~~-~-

This page intentionally left blank.

SECTION III: DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH
The Calvert Prospect, Robertson County, Texas

Michael W. Davis, Solveig A. Turpin and Dan K. Utley

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

This page intentionally left blank.

INTRODUCTION
Based on previous research and the results of survey and testing reported in
Sections I and II of this report, T AS developed a management plan intended to guide
further research in the Calvert Prospect, a 23,000 acre study area that includes the
Calvert Lignite Mine (Fig. 1).
This document was offered as part of a pending
Memorandum of Agreement between the Environmental Protection Agency. the Advisory
Council on Historic Preservation and Phillips Coal Company (PCC). applying to a
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System application for the Calvert Lignite Mine
and adjacent power plant site (Texas - New Mexico Power Plant -- TI\IMP) in
Robertson County.
The management plan addressed additional intensive cultural
resource survey. testing of archeological sites where a determination of eligibility for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) would be required and
the preservation or mitigation of unavoidable adverse impacts on NRHP quality
properties through a data recovery program. Excerpts presented as Section III of this
report summarize all previous investigations in the 23.000 acre Calvert Prospect.
including the Calvert Lignite Mine studies reported in Sections I and II. and offer
dir«tions for future research. General background material, similar to that presented in
Section I. and technical material relating to field methods and documentation. contained
in the original management plan, are omitted.

SUMMARY OF PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Sample and intensive surveys have resulted in the documentation of 126
archeological sites within the total Calvert Prospect as now defined (Exhibit D). Based
on these findings. a predictive model of site distribution for the prospect has been
prepared (Fig. 5) as a guide to future survey. In addition. it is now possible to apply
models of hunter-gatherer adaptation that are appropriate to the physical and cultural
environment of the Walnut Creek Basin.

Phase I Survey

A preliminary archeological reconnaissance of portions of the Calvert Prospect.
conducted by TAS in 1978. was the first cultural resource inventory done within the
project area (Good. Turpin and Freeman 1980).
The original prospect area covered
30.845 acres of which 12.1% or 3743.5 acres, was subjected to archeological survey.
Coverage was achieved by 101 transects (100 by 1500 m) that were randomly
generated and stratified by topographic zone. The 350 foot contour line was used as
the demarcation point between the upland and lowland zones.
Also surveyed during
this sample assessment were portions of the Cole Creek Prospect.

195

196 / Calvert Prospect
As a result of this survey. 21 historic and 38 prehistoric sites were documented
within the Calvert Prospect.
Two additional prehistoric sites were recorded through
information derived from local residents.
The prehistoric sites indicated aboriginal
activity in the prospect area from at least the Middle Archaic/Preceramic Period
(Yarbrough dart point) through the Late Prehistoric/Late Ceramic Period (ceramics and
arrow points). The low density areas for aboriginal sites were the high upland divides
separating the drainages. with medium density occurring along the floodplains of the
major rivers. The highest site density was found along major tributary drainages such
as Walnut Creek.
Historic resources documented by the sample survey indicated two differing types
of economies in action within the prospect. The first involved wealthy planters raising
cotton in the rich bottom lands along the Brazos and Little Brazos rivers. using
methods brought from the Deep South.
This affluent subsistence is manifested in
towns such as Calvert. which lies outside the Calvert Mine.
In the northern and
eastern portions of the county. families from the mid-South farmed on more of a
subsistence basis and developed rural dispersed communities such as Tidwell Prairie
(Section I. this report). Two types of historic resources were projected to be within
the project area - log structures and historic cemeteries.

Phase II Survey

Three separate Phase II surveys have covered portions of the Calvert Prospect as
now defined (Exhibit D).
Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc. (Glander et al. 1986)
recorded nine sites in the far eastern portion of the study area during survey for the
Twin Oak project.
Two of these sites. 41RT240 and 41RT241. were revisited and
reassessed by TAS personnel during the Calvert Lignite Mine survey.
The T AS intensive cultural resource survey and assessment of approximately 4800
acres in the Calvert Lignite Mine and adjacent power plant facilities. reported as
Section I of this report. located and documented 78 archeological sites and reassessed
four previously recorded properties.
Recommendations were made regarding the
prehistoric sites and their potential for yielding significant archeological information.
Sites with subsurface cultural deposits that appeared to warrant further investigation
were recommended for either limited or extensive controlled testing to determine the
site's eligibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.
Of the
prehistoric sites. 15 were recommended for testing. The extensive testing of 41RT267.
the only site in Mine Block A that would be directly affected under the current mine
plan. is reported in Section II of this report.
The historic sites were. for the most part. structures or the remains thereof that
formed the rural dispersed farming community of Tidwell Prairie.
Also documented
were the community buildings or locations which served the residents as a whole ­
church/school. cemetery. gin/mill and store.
For the most part. these structures are
not architecturally significant. thereby negating their listing as N RHP properties. Only
the Weaver/Rushing house. 41RT260. was considered eligible for the I\IRHP.
The

...

--.~--

..

-

- - _....... _ - - - - - - ­

-----

.....

--.~---

Future Research / 197
extant buildings range in age from the last quarter of the nineteenth century up to the
1930s.
The final survey. also conducted by TAS. was along the proposed TNP
transmission corridor which links the TN P power plant with the existing transmission
line emanating from the Twin Oaks power plant.
Kotter (ms.) recorded 17
archeological sites along the proposed line and revisited three that had been previously
recorded. Eight of the newly recorded sites were recommended for testing. 41 RT219.
previously recommended for testing (Glander et al. 1986), is adjacent to. but outside.
the transmission corridor. Prehistoric site 41RT10 had been previously tested (Turpin
and Kluge 1980) but found lacking in the integrity necessary for NRHP eligibility.

Phase III Testing
Numerous sites within the Calvert Prospect boundaries have been recommended
for subsurface evaluation (Good. Turpin and Freeman 1980: Glander et al. 1986; Davis
and Utley. this report: Kotter ms.). The deciding factor in the implementation of these
testing programs will be the feasibility of preservation by avoidance. 41 RT267. located
in Mine Block A. is scheduled to be disturbed by construction of a surface water
control structure. and as such cannot be avoided. Therefore. pursuant to instructions
from the project sponsor. extensive testing was conducted at the site to evaluate the
subsurface cultural deposits and to determine the site's eligibility for nomination to the
NRHP (Section II. this report).
The field work. conducted in May 1986. relied upon both backhoe trenching and
excavation of controlled test pits. The testing phase resulted in the isolation of five
subsurface burned rock features and the recovery of substantial quantities of lithic
artifactual materials. Vertical stratification was demonstrated by temporally correct
Analysis of the tools.
positioning of diagnostic artifacts in the subsurface deposits.
ceramics and debitage generated by on-site manufacturing indicated that the site was a
hunting camp during the Late Prehistoric/late Ceramic Period (Davis and Tomka. this
report). Earlier stratified deposits. only lightly sampled. may possess the potential of
meaningful data yield when future excavations investigate these deeper deposits.
On
the basis of the information generated during the Phase II testing and the potential for
future positive data yield. 41RT267 was recommended for an intensive data recovery
program and determination of eligibility for the National Register of Historic Places.

Phase IV Mitigation
No full-scale excavations have yet been commissioned in the Calvert area. Such
a data recovery program has been recommended for 41RT267. The mitigation effort is
outlined in the testing report recommendations section (Davis and Tomka. this report).
In general. large block excavations are considered appropriate in the area of the site
where the most concentrated cultural remains were encountered.

- -

..

-

- - - _....... _ - - -

-----­

----

-----

.....

--.~.--

.....

--.~---

198

/

Calvert Prospect
Discussion

Future expansion of lignite mining in the project area will greatly enlarge the site
inventory through intensive survey and afford the opportunity to test the predictive
model of site distribution offered in Section I (Fig. 5). The survey data garnered to
date and the limited subsurface testing carried out in the project area suggest that
general models of hunter-gatherer adaptation are applicable and that future work can be
oriented toward the resolution of specific research topics.
The following section
outlines potential hunter-gatherer subsistence strategies that may have been practiced in
prehistory in this region and offers means of determining their validity.

------------------~-

- - - ...... --.~.----.~--

EXPLANATORY MODELS
PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Introduction

Several approaches to interpreting hunter-gatherer adaptation are applicable to
future work in the Calvert Prospect.
Its location. within the uplands of the Brazos
River. encompassing portions of Walnut Creek. several minor tributaries and their
headers. limits the range of exploitation and settlement patterns that can be expectably
detected by additional survey. testing and excavation.
For the purposes of the
following discussion. a study area is proposed that includes all of the area drained by
the Walnut Creek system. Three assumptions that will be tested by ongoing work are
preliminary to formulating the localized adaptive model. These assumptions are:
1. the project area meets the definition of a provident resource base with
ample subsistence opportunities for hunters and gatherers.

2. the semi-sedentary settlement pattern along the Brazos (Hatcher 1919:
Berlandier 1969) was not solely a function of the post-Contact formation of
composite bands but rather reflected some time depth. Although the Indians
reported in residence were migrants to the area. the resource potential was
sufficient to support semi-sedentary occupation.

3. survey and testing in the Calvert Prospect. although limited in extent.
demonstrates that evidence will be sufficient to test hunter-gatherer adaptive
models from the upland perspective
As a result of the archeological surveys thus far conducted for the Calvert
project. it has become apparent that the portions of the Walnut Creek drainage basin
within the impact boundaries were intensively utilized by prehistoric aboriginal groups.
It is expected that the currently established density of prehistoric sites along the major
creek and its perennial tributaries (Big Willow, Bee Branch. South Walnut) can be
projected to unsurveyed sections within the impact area. creating a large data base on
site locational choice within this upland region.
Similarly. the information yielded by
the extensive testing at 41RT267 (Davis and Tomka. this report), the first site to be
investigated in the project area, indicates that significant stratified deposits exist not
only at that site but. in all likelihood. at many of the other sites that have been
recommended for testing. This apparent potential of some of these buried upland sites
for archeological deposits with interpretative value was also indicated by the shovel test
recovery during survey documentation at 41RT292 (Davis and Utley, this report). The

199

---

......

200 / Calvert Prospect
implication is that the completed and future cultural resource investigations within the
Calvert Prospect should generate data sufficient to interpret hunter-gatherer occupation
of the Walnut Creek drainage basin and their exploitation of the resource base. This
objective can be best realized if placed within the framework of an economic behavioral
model that attempts to understand the factors governing the process of food selection
by the aboriginal groups under consideration. Assumptions and theories may then be
compared to the existing archeological data base and future investigations can be
oriented toward testing the model.
The hunter-gatherer subsistence strategy of the prehistoric cultural groups utilizing
the study area can be compared to that described by Binford (1980:4-19) as collecting.
In this analogy. semi-permanent camps are supplied by logistically ordered task groups
who exploit the available resources on a scheduled seasonal basis.
The resultant
settlement pattern would reflect a central base from which smaller. functionally specific.
camps were established on a short term basis. This categorization appears warranted
for three reasons.
First. the climate of the region is warm and temperate. though
somewhat cooler temperatures existed much earlier in time. Studies have shown that
hunter-gatherer mobility is related to climate. tending toward more sedentary strategies
in warm temperate regions (Binford 1980:14). Secondly. the wide variety of potential
food items that existed in the Walnut Creek basin presented prehistoric groups with a
resource abundant or non-marginal environment (Keene 1981:111). The post oak belt
that encompasses the project area was known to the Spaniards as EI Monte Grande
and is mentioned by Newcomb (ms.) as one of the rich environmental areas to which
He also
displaced hunter-gatherer groups migrated in the late seventeenth century.
states that these groups were able to follow their previous subsistence strategies due to
the plentiful resource potential. This availability of sufficient subsistence items allowed
the prehistoric inhabitants to be less mobile than in a marginal environment. Finally.
ethnographic accounts (Hatcher 1919:57: Berlandier 1969:44) mention a semi-sedentary
pattern in existence along the Brazos River at the time of initial European encounters.
Although by the nineteenth century population aggregates were a defensive response to
the aggressive policies of settlers and other displaced Indian groups and were. to some
degree. permitted by acquisition of the horse. the potential of the environment to
support less mobility and increased group size can be projected into prehistory.
An important criteria in formulating this foraging methodology is that a
.. congruence between past and present environments be demonstrated. so that the
modern environment may serve as a source of relevant biological data" (Yesner
The proposed model estimates that the Walnut Creek drainage basin
1981:149).
ecological zone offered an abundance of food resources from which hunter-gatherer
groups could select.
This premise is based on the assumption that the prehistoric
environment was as rich or richer in resources than the modern environment.
The
climate of the region has not changed drastically in the last few millennia (Bryant and
Shafer 1977). Early historic accounts described the Brazos River and the uplands as
being plentiful in resources and having much the same vegetational character as today.
De Solis. traveling through the area in 1767-68. described the Brazos River [Brazos de
Dios] as forested with sabine. willow. walnut. elm. ash. pin oak and other varieties

------

Explanatory Models

I

201

(Kress 1931).
Edible plants and animal species were also abundant: cattle. horse.
buffalo, bear, deer, turkey. quail. partridge. persimmon. hazelnut. chestnut and some
wild sweet potato.
Abundant fish are also mentioned. In the uplands between the
Brazos and Navisota [sic]. De Solis (Kress 1931) described the forest as replete with
.. big oaks, pin oaks. walnuts. elms. ashes. cedars and sassafras." Buffalo, deer. turkey.
partridge and quail were also sighted in this region. which would correspond to the
project area.
It is assumed that these groups would have operated within the Walnut Creek
drainage basin, utilizing a foraging technique to .. acquire non-produced foodstuffs
through hunting. gathering. netting. snaring and other techniques" (Winterhalder
1981:16).
An ethnographic account of Yojuane Indians encountered on the Colorado
River by St. Denis about 1717 states:
the property of these nations is communal. because that which anyone
obtains by fishing is for the nation and likewise that which he gets by
hunting . . They support their wives by hunting. fishing and with roots, tubers
and other fruits. (Shelby 1923)
Yojuanes also inhabited the area between the Brazos and Trinity in the early decades
of the seventeenth century (Newcomb ms.).
Although the Indians described were
already in possession of the horse, this subsistence strategy may well have had its
roots in prehistory.
The individuals occupying the study area would have foraged
desired resources from a variety of locations (sites) using organized task groups chosen
for special experience in acquiring the targeted items. An attempt would be made to
maximize or optimize this strategy by seasonal scheduling.
The assumption is that the resident aboriginal groups would have achieved an
optimal foraging mode.
The strategy would have gained the most benefit (resource)
with the least cost (energy) through a complete knowledge of the environment and a
decision making process that organized the group members and available resources in a
seasonal scheme. i.e., scheduling (Flannery 1968:74-78). Keene (1981:7) states that
patterns
will have
knowledge
behavioral

of resource distribution, abundance, and availability, for example.
direct bearing on human subsistence strategies and that precise
of these ecological conditions facilitates prediction of human
responses.

The resultant organization will be manifested by the differential utilization of
locations within the ecological zone of occupation. Linear programming models. natural
extensions of optimal foraging theories, use .. mathematics to analyze the allocation of
resources and the optimal plan or schedule of activities that best satisfies the goal"
(Keene 1981:14).
The model being developed for the project area implies seasonal
variations in food procurement activities and predicts that these contrasts may be
preserved in the archeological record. It is possible that this approach could be applied
to the study area. using current floral and faunal inventories (Phillips Coal 1986). with

-------~------

........................

-------~----------_

......................

_----_._----------------­

202 / Calvert Prospect
the addition of species no longer present (bison. bear). to predict which food resources
would have been targeted in various seasons if the hunter-gatherer residents were. in
fact. minimizing their cost (labor) while maximizing their benefits (acquisition of
Unfortunately. validation of such a proposed
nutrition or other non-food resources).
model may prove difficult in the project area due to the paucity of organic remains
usually retained in these sandy soils.
Seasonal occupation of the one site (41RT267) thus far tested is suggested by
the presence of charred hickory nut hulls. Although hickory nuts are a potential food
source scoring. in fact. lowest in processing cost (Keene 1981:71) when compared to
several other nut varieties present in the project area. they are considered by Keene
(1981:195) to be of "only marginal significance" unless stored as a reserve for less
abundant times of the year. The transport of bulky foodstuffs. such as nuts. detracts
from the efficiency (least cost) of their procurement unless compensated for by
storability. Thus. nut procurement would be most productive in proximity to the base
camp where storage was to be maintained.
Hickory is an excellent fuel. apparently
Thus. the hickory nut hulls recovered from
preferentially selected when available.
41RT267 may not clearly indicate the primary resource sought. They could well have
been gathered as a minor dietary component or incidentally introduced into the fire with
fuel.
The curated lithic tools from the site are dominated by projectile points indicating
hunting as a primary activity. Fall is an optimal time to procure deer because:
1. the males join the does and fawns in response to mating instincts. thereby
creating even larger herds:
2. seasonally abundant acorn crops would serve to attract and hold deer
place.

In

3. fat content and hide quality are at a peak (Keene 1981:194); and
4. antlers are in prime condition.
Deer procurement would have represented an optimal foraging decision at this time of
year so 41RT267 may have served as a field camp for individuals procuring and
processing this major faunal resource.

Binford's Collecting Model
Binford (1980) differentiates between two basic types of procurement - foraging
and collecting - depending upon the degree of residential mobility and the logistical
structuring of hunting and gathering tasks.
Based on ethnographic accounts and the
results of survey to date. late populations in the study area may well have practiced a
collecting strategy. supplying more permanent base camps from field camps such as
41RT267.
Binford (1980:10) attributes five types of sites to this kind of economic

---

......~--...-

- ....

-~.-----

- -

.....-

- - _....._ - ­

Explanatory Models / 203
adaptation: residential base. location. field camps. station and cache. and further states
the two integral characteristics of a collecting mode: "1) the storage of food for at
least part of the year and 2) logistically organized food-procurement parties."
A
residential base in the group's "hub of existence" (Binford 1980:9). would reflect a
myriad of activities and a wide spectrum of archeological remains which in turn will
denote the site as being a long term occupation locality. Locations are sites at which
., extractive tasks are exclusively carried ouf' (Binford 1980:9). Field camp is defined
as a "temporary operational center for task groups" (Binford 1980:10) where they
maintain themselves while in the field on procurement missions. The station is a very
short term site where individuals or groups gather for information sharing pertaining to
acquisition of a target resource. Cache refers to the place where temporary storage of
bulk quantities of resources takes place prior to its transportation to residential bases
for consumption by the total population (Binford 1980:12).

APPLICABILITY TO THE PROJECT AREA
In the Walnut Creek drainage basin. only two of these site types will repeatedly
and obviously be manifested - residential bases and field camps.
Locations. such as
kill sites or nut picking locations. will not be easily discernible because of the
ephemeral nature of the artifactual materials used at these sites and the poor
preservational qualities of the soil.
Locations in the project area may be represented
by single or isolated lithic artifacts. such as those occasionally observed in the upland
areas away from the drainages.
Stations will also be missing from the inventory
because their temporary nature precludes the accumulation of debris. In the study area.
it is theorized that the abundance of perennial water allowed the placement of field
camps near the habitat or range of the varied food resources and that caching of the
procured subsistence items took place at these locations prior to their transfer to the
residential base or population aggregate.
In the case of certain bulk commodities. it
may have been suitable to bring the people to the cache (Binford 1980. Keene 1981).
However. since most of the cached material was of an edible and therefore. perishable
nature. this assumption may not be provable. The single exception that may appear in
the archeological record is lithic caches.
Differentiating between the two types of sites
residential and field camps - will
depend upon the composition of the artifact assemblage. Residential sites will display
an expanded material inventory that will demonstrate an extended tenure of occupation
by a large number of people involved in diverse activities. More particularly. residential
sites will be characterized by a diversity in feature and tool types. large artifact
assemblages displaying intense tool use and high densities of curated tools and formal
tools (Binford 1982). Several varieties of lithic material may also be present. indicating
procurement from a wide range of resources. At residential camps. due to their term
of duration and possible regimentation of people/activities. excavation should reveal
patterning of artifacts and features.
Field camps are sites at which logistically organized groups maintain themselves
while on foraging expeditions.
Therefore, the artifactual content of the site should
reflect a range of site activities consisting of certain daily domestic chores necessary to

204 / Calvert Prospect
a basic standard of living (food preparation and consumption) and maintenance of a
limited tool kit specific to procurement and processing of targeted resources.
Another
assemblage is
Binford (1979)
This aspect of

important factor in determining site type through the lithic artifact
the presence or absence of differing types or ratios of individual gear.
has outlined a two-part classification of gear: personal and situational.
site material has been summarized by Tomka (Section II: 137):

Personal gear is anticipatory in nature and usually curated. The repair and
replacement of such gear will occur in residential camps, not in the field where
the activity occurred.
Situational gear is responsive to immediate
circumstances and specific activities. These tools are informal and little or no
time is invested in their production. They consist of flakes with minimal or
no edge retouch. and high replacement rates when raw material is readily
available.
Presumably, situational gear (expedient tools) will be more prevalent at the
temporary camps while broken or discarded personal gear (curated tools) may indicate
the main resource procured, as in the case of 41RT267 where a high percentage of
projectile points suggested the location was a hunting camp (Davis and T omka. this
report). Hopefully. as data from excavation accumulates. analytical comparison of the
situational gear (expedient tools) recovered from different camps may begin to reveal
their functions. vis a vis morphology. permitting inferences about targeted resources to
which these artifacts were applied (Davis and Tomka. this report).
The following questions have been formulated as tests of some of the hypotheses
generated by the analysis of 41RT267.
Due to the buried nature of the sites in the
project area, much of the data needed to validate or negate specific topics must come
from subsurface investigation.
RESEARCH QUESTION 1:
Do the lithic materials recovered from testing and
mitigation of sites within the project area indicate the presence of residential bases as
well as field camps?
Topic 1: At what sites are varieties of curated artifacts present and what
implied?

IS

Topic 2: What is the ratio of expedient tools to retouched flakes at field camps
in the project area? At residential camps?
Topic 3: Does the debitage assemblage from sites designated as field camps
consistently indicate only the maintenance of a limited task oriented tool kit?
Similarly. does the debitage from sites designated as residential bases indicate
manufacture of a variety of tools?
RESEARCH QUESTION 2: What are the distributional differences between residential
bases and field camps within the project area? Within the study area?

- - - - _.........

_

..... _ . _ - - - _ .

----­

Explanatory Models / 205
Topic 1: Do the field camps tend to concentrate on the tributary streams of
Walnut Creek?
Topic 2: In turn, are the numerous sites along Walnut Creek all residential bases?
Topic 3:
Moving upstream along Walnut Creek toward the upland divide, do
residential bases decrease in frequency or disappear from the site inventory?
RESEARCH QUESTION 3: Given a Fall occupation at the one tested site (41RT267),
do the other similar sites within the project area display the same seasonal occupation?
If so. what statement on resource scheduling or resource availability can be made?
Topic 1: Are there field camps, such as 41RT267. which do not indicate a Fall
occupation? If so. what can be implied about resource choices for this site?
Topic 2: Do the residential bases indicate Fall occupation also? If not. what can
be implied about the relationship between residential bases and/or field camps?
Topic 3: Are there other seasonal materials that may be present in the artifactual
recovery that might indicate the time of site occupation?
RESEARCH QUESTION 4:
within the project area?

Does the collector strategy model hold true through time

Topic 1: Are the earlier deposits at sites considered as either residential or field
camps consistent with those from late deposits or do locations of various site
types vary through time?
Topic 2: If the collector strategy remains constant through time. does the artifact
recovery from earlier deposits indicate any changes in intensity or population 1
Topic 3:
Are there differences in feature designs or construction In
contemporaneous levels? In chronologically separate deposits? What functional
differences / similarities does feature comparison generate? How do these contrasts
relate to potentially targeted resources or the currently proposed model?
These suggested topics are only a few of many approaches to understanding
hunter-gatherer adaptation to various environmental zones. Binford's collecting mode is
identifiable at the survey, testing and mitigative levels usually implemented in cultural
resource programs. More sophisticated models. such as optimal foraging (Winterhalder
1981) and linear programming (Keene 1981). require a detailed. quantitative analysis of
potential resources and as such are often beyond the scope of individual projects.
They are offered here as guides for future research that may become feasible as
techniques improve and knowledge accumulates.

This page intentionally left blank.

HISTORIC STUDY UNITS
As noted in Resource Protection Planning Process for Texas (RP3). the basis for
the organization of all study units is the socio-cultural system. It is defined as:
.. a network of human social relations plus the requisite worldview.
values. and knowledge which allows the network to exist. adapt. and endure
through time .. , Thus. a study unit ought not be a homogeneous class of
cultural resources of the same physical type. but rather a heterogeneous group
of distinct sorts of cultural resources that pertain to one identified
The organizing feature for cultural resources IS.
sociocultural system.
therefore. not some arbitrary characteristic of the material object itself. but
rather the identity of those who used it. (Brown et al. 1982)
Based on the historical survey conducted by TAS. three distinct cultural systems
operated in the Calvert Prospect area: Polish-Texans. Blacks and Anglo-Americans.
The area was settled late. in comparison with other parts of Robertson County. and
the three groups began moving to the project area at about the same time between the
end of the Civil War and the turn of the century. As a result. they did not produce
separate communities. but retained their uniqueness within the framework of a dispersed
farming settlement.

Polish-Texans (1875 to Present)
The study of Polish immigrants in Robertson County offers both historical and
contemporary frames of reference.
Polish settlement in the project area dates from
1875. when Joseph and Catherine Bartula migrated there. Natives of Austrian Poland.
they came to Texas in 1873. settling first in New Waverly. the Walker County
community considered the mother colony of later Polish settlements in east and east­
central Texas.
Following favorable reports by the Bartulas. other Polish-Texans soon
moved to Robertson County in search of available land that could be utilized for
agricultural purposes.
Although the -flow of Polish immigrants declined by World War I. their influence
in Robertson County was not abated. Bremond. and the surrounding area. became the
center of the largest Polish settlement in Texas.
Descendents of the European
immigrants still live in the area and one of their important institutions. St. Mary's
Catholic Church. remains active. The twentieth century period of Polish settlement in
the project area is essential to an understanding of community development and
acculturation.

207

208

/

Calvert Prospect

Blacks (Post-Civil War to Present)
Freedmen began moving into the project area as soon as it opened for settlement
following the Civil War.
Not accepted fully as members of the community at first
because of cultural biases that existed throughout the South at the time. they
developed small. dispersed. enclaves that centered around their schools and churches.
However. they were integral to the utilization of the land through the sharecropper
system of agricultural production. Because of the cooperative effort required of such an
economic system. they became more accepted over the years.

Anglo-Americans (1870s to Present)
As with the Poles and Blacks. Anglo~Americans began moving into the project
area in the 1870s. Robertson County was located in a region settled by immigrants
from both the lower and upper sections of the Old South who headed west when the
productivity of their farmlands declined following the Civil War. Of the three distinct
cultural groups mentioned as part of the project area, the Anglos were probably
dominant because of their control of business. political and educational elements within
the farming community.

land Utilization (1870s to 19505)
An overriding element of the historical development of the project area is the
changing methods of land utilization.
Initially. the uplands were not considered ideal
for agricultural purposes. especially when there was an abundance of fertile bottomlands
along the Brazos River. As the area became more populated. however. settlers began
to clear the uplands for small subsistence farms.
Despite a transition from a
plantation system to one based on sharecropping. cotton remained the cash crop well
into the 1920s and even 1930s.
As a result of the economic depression of the 1930s and the subsequent world
war. many residents of rural Robertson County migrated to towns or urban centers in
search of jobs.
The lack of available labor. along with new markets and consumer
demands. influenced a major change in the land utilization. What had been subsistence
farms and later larger cotton farms. gave way to pork production. Eventually the pork
production declined and was replaced by cattle ranches. now the most common form of
land use in the project area.
A study of land utilization will also include research on farming and ranching
techniques. as well as the overall context of rural Texans in the surrounding region. A
detailed study of a dispersed. isolated farming community. such as Tidwell Prairie.
could provide elements that would be beneficial to a better understanding of agricultural
lifeways in other parts of the state. In addition. it could serve as an integral part of
a comprehensive comparative survey. Such studies of both Texas agricultural history
and rural community life are still incomplete.

EXHIBIT 0: SITES IN THE CALVERT PROSPECT
Site No.1
Site Type

Reference Work
Projected
Completed Impacts

Recommendation

41RT10/P

1,3i6

Testing

41RT35/P
41RT36/P
41RT37/P
41RT38/P
41RT39/P
41RT40/P
41RT41/P

2
2
2i5
2
2
2
2

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT42/P
41RT43/P
41RT44/P
41RT45/P

2
2
2
2

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT46/P
41RT47/PiH
41RT48/P

2
2
2

Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT50/P
41RT51/P
41RT66/PiH
41RT92/H
41RT93/H
&93A
41RT94/H

2
2
2
2
2i5

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

TNP Transmission
Corridor
None
SPC-14
None
Mine Block J
Mine Block J
Mine Block J
Overburden
Stock Pile
SPC-16
Makeup Water Pipeline
None
Mine Block K,TD-l, Conveyor Alignment, SPC-l1,
SPC-14, Haul Road
Mine Block J, SPC-14
None
Mine Block K, SPC-ll ,
Haul Road
DPC-2
Mine Block K
None
None
Mine Block B, Haul Road

2

Survey

None

41RT95
41RT150/PiH
41RT151/H
41RT152/H
41RT172/P
41RT195/H
41RT238/H
41RT239/H
41RT240/P
41RT241/H

2
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4i5
41;5

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

None
None
None
None
DPC-2
DPC-2
None
None
None
None

NFW
None
None
None
Test
Test
None
None

Listed
Listed
listed
Listed
Listed

None Listed
Test
Test
Test
None Listed
None Listed
Test
None Listed
Test
None Listed
Preserve
NFW
Preserve
or relocate
Preserve
NFW
NFW

NFW
Test
NFW
NFW

Test
Test
NFW

209

210

I

Calvert Prospect

Site No.1
Site Type

Projected
Reference Work
Completed Impacts

41RT246/H

5

Survey

41RT247/H

5

Survey

41RT248/H
41RT249/H
41RT250/H
41RT251/H

5
5
5
5

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT252/H
41RT253/P
41RT254/H

5
5
5i6

Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT255/H
41RT256/H

5
5

Survey
Survey

41RT257/H

5

Survey

41RT258/H

5

Survey

41RT259/H

5

Survey

41RT260/H

5

Survey

41RT261/H

5

Survey

41RT262/H
41RT263/H
41RT264/P
41RT265/P
41RT266/H
41RT267/P
41RT268/P
41RT269/P
41RT270/H

5
5i6
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Testing
Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT271/H

5

Survey

41RT272/H
41RT273/H

5
5

Survey
Survey

41RT274/H
41RT275/H
41RT276/H

5
5
5

Survey
Survey
Survey

Mine Block A, Ash
Disposal Area 2
Mine Block A, Mine Block
B, Haul Road
Mine Block A
None
None
Haul Road, Ash Disposal
Area A-2
Mine Block A
None
Mine Block A, TNP Transmission Corridor
None
Mine Block A, Mine Block
B, Haul Road, Ash Disposal Area A-2
Mine Block A. Ash Disposal Area A-2
Mine Block A, Ash Disposal Area A-2
Mine Block A, Haul Road
Ash Disposal Area A-2
Mine Block A, Mine Block
B, Haul road, Ash Dis­
posal area A-2
Mine Block B, CDC-5, Ash
Disposal Area A-2, Haul
Road
Facilities Erection Site
None
None
Mine Block A
None
Mine Block A, CDC-3
Mine Block A
None
Mine Block B
Mine Block B, CDC-5,
Ash Disposal Area A-2
None
Mine Block A, Ash Disposal Area A-2
Mine Block B
Mine Block B
Mine Block B

Recommendation
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFVI

NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
Mitigate
NFW
Test
Preserve or
relocate
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW

Exhibit D

Site .No.1
Site Type

Projected
Reference Work
Completed Impacts

41RT277/P
41RT278/P
41RT279/P

5
5
5

Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT280/P
41RT281/P
41RT282/H
41RT283/P
41RT284/P

5
5
5
5
5

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT285/P

5

Survey

41RT285/H

5

Survey

41RT287/P

5

Survey

41RT288/P
41RT289/H
41RT290/B
41RT291/H
41RT292/P
41RT293/B
41RT294/P
41RT295/P
41RT295/P
41RT297/P
41RT298/B
41RT299/B
41RT300/H
41RT301/P

5

5
5

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT302/H

5

Survey

41RT303/P
41RT304/B
41RT305/P
41RT306/P
41RT314/H

5

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT315/P
41RT316/H
41RT317/P
4iRT318/P
41RT319/H
41RT320/P
41RT321/H
41RT322/P

5

5
5
5

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

5
5

5
5
5
5
5
5
5

5
5

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

Mine Block B, Haul Road
Mine Block B
Mine Block B, SPC-17,
Haul Road
Mine Block B, SPS-17
Mine Block A
Mine Block B
Mine Block B, SPC-7
Mine Block B, CDC-5,
CDC-7, SPC-7, SPC-8
Mine Block B, SPC-7,
Haul Road
Mine Block B, Ash Dis­
posal Area A-2
Mine Block B, SPC-8,
CDC-9
Mine Block B, CDC-9
Mine Block B
Mine Block B, CDC-9
.None
.None
SPC-7
.None
.None
.None
.None
.None
.None
.None
SPC-7, Makeup Water
Pipeline
Mine Block B, Ash Dis­
posal
Makeup Water Pipeline
.None
Makeup Water Pipeline
Makeup Water Pipeline
Mine Block B, Ash Dis­
posal Area A-2
DPC-l, SPC-5
.None
DPC-l
DPC-i, Haul Road
Power Plant Site
DPC-1, Haul Road
.None
DPC-i

Recommendation
.NFW
.NFW
.NFW
.NFW
.NFW
.NFW
Test
Test
Test
.NFW
.NFW
Test
.NFW
.NFW
.NFW
Test
.NFW
.NFW
.NFW
Test
Test
.NFW
.NFW
.NFW

Test
Test

NFW
.NFW
Test
Test
.NFl
.NFl
.NFW
Test
.NFl
.NFW
.NFW
Test
.NFW

/

211

212 /

Calvert Prospect

Site No.1
Site Type

Recommendation

Projected
Reference Work
Completed Impacts

41RT323/P
41RT324/H
41RT325/H
41RT326/H
41RT327/H
41RT328/H
41RT329/P
41RT330/P
41RT331/P
41RT333/P
41RT334/P
41RT335/P
41RT336/P
41RT337/P
41RT338/P
41RT339/P
41RT341/PlH
41RT342/PlH

5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

Mine Block B
Power Plant site
Ash Disposal Area A-1
Ash Disposal Area A-1
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Tranmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TN? Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line

41RT343/H
41RT344/P
41RT345/H
41RT346/H
41RT347/H

6
5
5

Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey
Survey

41RT348/H
41RT349/H

5
5

Survey
Survey

TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
TNP Transmission Line
Mine Block B
Power Plant
Access Road
Railroad Spur
Ash Disposal Area A-1

6
6

1 - Prewitt &; Grombacher 1974
3 - Turpin l Kluge 1980
5 - Davis &; Utley. this report

NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
Historic Research
Historic Research
Test
NFW
NFW
NFW
Test
Test
NFW
NFW
Test
NFW
Test
Test-Prehistoric
Historic Research
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW
NFW

2 - Good, Turpin and Freeman 1980
4 - Glander et al. 1986
6 - Kotter ma.

NFW = No further work
P - Prehistoric
H - Historic

-

-------

- - - - -

........................

~-------

- - - - - - - - _........­

REFERENCES CITED
Berlandier. Jean Louis

1969

The Indians of Texas in 1830.

Binford. Lewis R.
1979
Organization and Formation

Smithsonian Institute. Washington D.C.
Processes: Looking at Curated Technologies.

Journal of Anthropological Research 35(3):255-273.
1980

Willow Smoke and Dogs' Tails: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Systems and
Archaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45(1) :4-20.

1983

In Pursuit of the Past.

Thames and Hudson. New York.

Brown. T.M .. K.L. Killen. H. Simons and V. Wulfkuhle
1982
Resource Protection Planning Process for
Commission. Austin.

Texas.

Texas

Historical

Bryant. Vaughn M. Jr. and Harry J. Shafer
1977
The late Quaternary Environment of Texas: A Model for the Archeologist.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 48:1-25.
Flannery. Kent V.

1968

Anthropological Archeology in the Americas.

The Anthropological Society of

Washington. Washington D.C.
Glander. W.o T. Bearden. S. Victor. D. Blanton. K. White. D. Jurney. 1\1. Barker and
C. Green
1986
Additional Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Twin Oak Surface
Mine. Robertson County. Texas.
Espey. Huston and Associates. Inc.
Austin. Texas.
Good. c.E.. S.A. Turpin and M.D. Freeman
1980
A Cultural Resource Assessment of the Calvert and Cole Creek Lignite
Prospects. Robertson County. Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research
Report 75. The University of Texas at Austin.
Hatcher. Mattie A. (translator)
Texas in 1820: Report on the Barbarous Indians of the Province of Texas.
1919
by Juan Antonio Padilla. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 23(1):47-68.

213

214 / Calvert Prospect
Keene, Arthur S.

1981

Prehistoric Foraging in a Temperate Forest: A Linear Programming Model.
Academic Press. New York.

Kotter. Steven M.
ms.
Cultural Resources of the Texas-New Mexico Transmission Line Connecting
the Calvert Lignite Prospect and the Twin Oak Substation. Robertson
Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at
County, Texas.
Austin (in review).
Kress. Margaret Kenney (translator)
1931
Diary of a Visit of Inspection of the Texas Missions Made by Fray Gaspar
The Southwestern Historical Quarterly
Jose de Solis in the Year 1767-68.
XXXV:28-76.
Prewitt. E. R. and K. Grombacher
1974
Upper
Navasota
Reservoir: An
Archeological
Assessment.
Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 47.
The University of Texas at
Austin.
She1by. Charmon Clair
1923
St. Denis' Declaration Concerning Texas

In

1717.

Southwestern Historical

Quarterly 26(3):165-183.
TUf1>in. S.A. and M.J. Kluge
1980
Cultural Resource Sampling. Survey and Assessment in Areas to be Affected
by the Twin Oak Steam Electric Station. Robertson County. Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Report 74. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Winterhalder. Bruce
1981
Optimal Foraging Strategies and Hunter-Gatherer Research in Anthropology:
Theory and Models. In: Hunter Gatherer Foraging Strategies: Ethnographic
and Archeological Analysis. Edited by B. Winterhalder and E. Smith. The
University of Chicago Press. Chicago and london.
Yesner. David R.
1981
Archeological Applications of Optimal Foraging Theory: Harvest Strategies of
Aleut
Hunter-Gatherers.
In:
Hunter
Gatherer
Foraging
Strategies: Ethnographic
and
Archeological
Analysis.
Edited
by
B. Winterhalder and E. Smith. The University of Chicago Press. Chicago
and london.

