A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND
ASSESSMENT OF THREE STREET IMPROVEMENT
PROJECTS, AUSTIN
Travis County, Texas

Steve A. Tomka

Principal Investigator:

Solveig A. Turpin

A report submitted to the
City of Austin °rn ful fi llment of terms of
State Antiquities Permit No. 577
for crp Projects

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
November 1986
--~~--

---

COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TextlSArcheologicalResearch Laboratory·Sponsored Projects
10100BllrnetRoad· Allstin, Texas 78758-4497" (512)835-3120

Editor
Deborah Smith

CIP Projects:
No. 627816, Grove Boulevard / Country Club Drive
No. 627820, Loyola Lane
No. 627837, Stassney Lane

ABSTRACT
During the week of August 25, 1986, the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin conducted an intensive
pedestrian survey of three road improvement and construction areas on
Stassney Lane, Loyola Lane and Country Club Drive. This work was
carried out at the request of the City of Austin and authorized under
Antiquities Permit 577 issued by the Texas Antiquities Committee.
Concomitantly with the pedestrian survey, relocation and reassessment
of two previously recorded sites, 41TV850 in the Stassney Lane
improvement area and 41TV325 in the Loyola Lane improvement area, were
carried out.
Subsequent construction activities have limited the
potential scientific contribution of these sites.
Two additional prehistoric sites were discovered;
41TV1284 in
the Stassney Lane area and 41TV1283 in the Loyola Lane area. Both
sites are light surface scatters of secondary flakes, tested cobbles
and core fragments, defining a lithic procurement area. Neither site
was deemed eligible for State Landmark or National Register status and
al I records generated by this project are curated at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL).
The principal contribution of the four sites consists of
extending current knowledge of the regional settlement and resource
procurement patterns. Given the lack of potential for intra-site
analysis, road construction and improvement activities wi I I not affect
significant archeological resources.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This report was written by Steve Tomka who served as Field
Supervisor.
The cultural background was written by David C. Robinson
and the environmental background was written by Henry B. Moncure.
Figures for the report were drafted by Abby Treece. Marybeth Tomka
typed the manuscript.
Deborah Smith and Solveig Turpin provided
editorial comments.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT . . . . .
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
INTRODUCTION . .

1

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND .

2

CULTURAL BACKGROUND

6

.

METHODS AND TECHNIQUES . .

:9

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

10

REFERENCES CITED . . . . . .

14

FIGURE 1.

Project Location Map

........•........

~v

FIGURE 1.

Project Location Map.

'"c:

"

..J

, .............
\.
"\

71

ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AT

THREE ROAD IMPROVEMENT
AREAS!
AUSTIN, TEXAS
St.Elmo Rood

-~ SURVEYED A~A

oI

0.5

2
miles

.{.v

1

INTRODUCTION
This report IS the result of archeological
investigations
conducted by the Texas Archeological Survey of The University of Texas
at Austin for the City of Austin at three construction areas: Country
Club Drive improvement area, 2) Stassney Lane improvement area, and 3)
Loyola Lane improvement area. The goals of the investigations were to
determine the presence of archeological resources, and to assess the
impact of road construction (Stassney Lane) and widening (Country Club
Drive, Loyola Lane) on the prehistoric cultural resources In or
immediately adjacent to the project areas.
The investigations were divided into two stages.
Stage I
consisted of a review of previous archeological investigations in or
adjacent to the construction areas. Stage II involved an intensive
pedestrian survey of the project areas. A third stage, subsurface
shovel testing, was contingent upon the results of the pedestrian
survey_

2

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The study area lies within the West Gulf
Coastal
Plain
physiographic province of Travis County (Arbingast et al. 1973:7;
Fenneman 1938:100-103). Physiographic descriptions of this section of
Texas are most commonly based on the surface manifestations of the
underlying rock. In the study area, the Blackland Prairie is the
applicable physiographic district, overlying the rocks of the Upper
Cretaceous, Austin Chalk Formation. The prairie is gently rol ling and
moderately dissected with slopes from 2 to 51 (Garner 1974:101,108).
Within the study areas, the most prominent topographic features are
those
resulting
from
the formation of the Walnut Creek and
Wi I liamson/Onion Creek stream valleys, their cutbanks and floodplains.
Elevation above mean sea level ranges from approximately 750 to 630
feet, with most above the 680 foot contour.
Geology
The surface geology in the study areas is characterized by a
Cretaceous soft limestone, the Austin Chalk. This formation is gray
to white, variably thinly to thickly bedded, massive to sl ightly
nodular, fine-grained limestone, marly limestone and chalk. The
deposits average 114 meters (375 feet) in thickness. The Austin Chalk
may be further broken down into five distinct subdivisions which are,
from top to bottom, Burditt (marl and limestone), Dessan (chalk),
Johan
(limestone),
Vinson (chalk), and Atco (chalk and marly
limestone). The Burditt marl and limestone, generally the surface
strata within the study areas, is a I ight gray, shel I-containing
calcareous clay overlying hard chalk (Sel lards, Adkins and Plummer
1966:450).
Soi Is
The soi I associations within the study areas, mapping units of
the Soil Conservation Service (SCS), are channeled Frio soils, Austin
si Ity clay, Eddy gravelly loam, Brackett clay loam and the Stephens
si Ity clay (SCS 1974:sheets 24,25,34,35). The Austin Chalk Formation
furnishes the rock parentage for much of the area soi Is. The Brackett
is an unspecified limestone and marl derivative. The Brackett and
Eddy soils are very shallow and generally lack the depth to provide
good stratigraphic potential for archeological sites. Frio soi Is are
formed from creek floodplain sediments and have the requisite depth,
but are subject to severe erosion and deposition from runoff within
the drainage basin. Cultural resources deposited on the Frio soi Is
are subject to quick burial or are washed away, and those currently in
place have probably been transported downstream from other parts of
the basin. Incidents of sudden flooding have been recorded in studies
of the floodplain and In the accounts of the early
settlers

3

(U.S. Corps of Engineers 1972, 1980; Atkinson and Gi les 1981:19,23).
It is these shal low soi Is, the Brackett, Eddy, and the flood-prone
Frio, which are the most likely to show surface evidence of cultural
resources because of their proximity to the major stream, the wi Idlife
habitat they afford and their position on the dominant landforms.
Hydrology
The major aquifer of the study areas is the Edwards Formation.
It is composed of the Edwards and associated I imestones, and consists
of Cretaceous-age cherty, gypseous, argi I laceous I imestones.
The
Edwards I imestone is the prImary water-bearing formation and is
characterized by its wide area solution channel ing (Muller and Price
1979).
In some instances, this shows up as a honeycomb effect and in
the extreme may produce cavernous strata such as Inner Space Caverns
near Georgetown, a few mi les north of the study area.
Recharge of the aquifer IS primari Iy accomplished by downward
percolation of surface water from streams traversing the outcrop,
including Walnut and Onion creeks.
In addition, lateral underflow
from the Glen Rose Formation provides a sma I I amount of recharge.
Ground water effects rapid movement through the aquifer.
The volume
of avai lable water is quickly expressed in natural spring flow, such
as Austin's Barton Springs.
Natural flow is drastically reduced
during drought periods, but fortunately recharge can be effected
during wet periods. The numerous springs associated with this aquifer
make the study area particularly suitable for human habitation.
Indeed, Shiner (1983:1-7) has discussed the relationship between large
springs and early American Indians.
CI imate
Travis County is located within Carr's (1967:6 map) South Central
Texas climatic division and his Interior cl imatic region. The former
is based on blocks of counties having simi lar rainfal I amounts, and
the latter on blocks of climatic divisions having a common seasonal
rainfal I pattern. The county averages an annual rainfal I of 32.49
inches (Belo Corporation 1982:230), with twin maximum rainfal I periods
in May and September and a low precipitation period in February and
March (Carr 1967:7). Annual evaporation, runoff and water consumption
result in little or no water surplus from local precipitation in any
season
(Russel I 1945:43-46).
Travis County has a mean annual
temperature of 68 degrees F, with January averaging 53.5 degrees F and
August averaging 84.7 degrees F (Russell 1945:8). Below freezing
temperatures occur less than 25 days a year and the frost-free growing
season is about 270 days a year.
Winds are generally southerly with northerly winter shifts
allowing Canadian
continental cold fronts to introduce abrupt
temperature drops several times a year.
Maritime tropical fronts

4
generated in the Gulf of Mexico dominate the summer season, coming off
the Gulf with no abrupt land elevation change until the Balcones
Escarpment. -rhese warm, moist air masses provide the major components
of the area's humid and subtropic cl imate.
Vegetation
The study areas are within Gould's (1975:2) Texas Vegetational
Region 4, the Blackland Prairie adjacent to both the Edwards Plateau
and the Cross Timbers Prairies. Little of the original plant regime
remains as it was prior to Anglo-American settlement. Improved
pastures, seeded with Dalligrass, common and coastal Bermuda, and
other introduced grasses are common.
The native vegetation, according to Gould, is true prairie with
little bluestem as a climax dominant (1975:11). Other components of
this grassland are big bluestem, Indiangrass, switch grass, sideoats
grama, si Iver bluestem and Texas wintergrass. In areas where soil
characteristics or landforms do not lend themselves to farming or
ranching, cedar brakes (Juniper) and mesquite are found. The soils
are too high in alkaline for post oak and blackjack oak and trees are
severely I imited in root development by the shallow soils. Spanish
oak, live oak and redbud are native to the Brackett soi Is and live oak
to the Eddy soi Is. Native wi Id flowers are bluebonnet, Mexican hat,
mountain pink, rain Iii Iy, western yarrow, wi Id daisy and wild
verbena.
Native shrubs are evergreen, sumac, yaupon, yucca, agarita
and lantana.
The overall vegetation pattern was exploited
by
prehistoric populations for food, fuel, shelter, fiber and as a source
of support for wi Id game.
Fauna
Due to the sweeping alterations to the landscape and vegetation
fol lowing Anglo-American settlement, the current faunal array is much
changed from that found previously. In general, there has been a
drastic reduction In large bodied vegetarian mammal ian species and
carnivores, an increase in the sma I ler mammals, and an influx of
highly adaptable species which can live on the introduced vegetation.
Within the study areas rabbits, quails, doves, song birds and
squirrels abound.
It is probable that wi Id turkey and deer were
recently in the areas, and coyotes, raccoons, skunks and gophers,
along with the are undoubtedly present armadi I 10. The current array
of repti les and amphibians probably matches that of the past and
includes 39 snake species, 16 lizard species, at least 2 turtle
species and 18 amphibians.
The present species would provide a reasonable resource
the support of an aboriginal population of some density.
currently native to the area but whose remains have been
local
archeological contexts include bison, pronghorn

base for
Fauna not
found in
antelope,

5

peccary, wolf, puma, jaguar, ocelot, badger and black bear (House
1978:110-114).
These
species
would have enhanced the area's
attraction to a hunting and gathering people and could have supported
an even larger population.
An over-representation of deer and the
formerly-present bison in archeological sites is possibly attributable
to the durabi I ity of large bones, rather than superior use of these
species.

6

CULTURAL BACKGROUND
The project area lies within the Central Texas archeological
region (Prewitt 1981, 1985), a zone with a cultural occupation of at
least 10,000 years. The region has been divided into a sequence of
four stages identified on the basis of the major economic strategies
employed by the prehistoric populations: Paleo indian (12,000-ca. 8500
BP), Archaic (ca. 8500-1250 BP), Late Prehistoric (1250-200 BP) and
Historic (200 BP-present). The dominant economic strategies of the
prehistoric stages have been inferred largely from stone artifacts and
stylistic studies. In recent years, research has cast doubt on any
significant differences between the dominant hunting and gathering
strategies of the Archaic and Late Prehistoric stages.
For this
reason, Prewitt (1981) renamed the Late Prehistoric the "Neoarchaic".
Prewitt (1981, 1985)
Both terms are used here interchangeably.
further divided the prehistoric into recognizable cultural phases
based on artifact styles, and site and artifact assemblages.
The
chronology was established with radio carbon dating. The cultural
stages and phases list as fol lows:
Paleoindian stage
Archaic stage
Circlevil Ie phase
San Geronimo phase
Jarre I I phase
Oaka I Ia phase
Clear Fork phase
Marshal I Ford phase
Round Rock phase
San Marcos phase
Uvalde phase
Twin Sisters phase
Driftwood phase

12,000 - 8500 BP
8500 - 1250 BP
8500
6800
6100
5100
4600
4100
3500
2600
2250
1800
1400

-

6800
6100
5100
4600
4100
3500
2600
2250
1800
1400
1250

BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP

Neoarchaic stage

1250 -

200 BP

Austin phase
Toyah phase

1250 650 -

650 BP
200 BP

Historic stage

200 BP - present

7

Paleoindian Stage (12,000 ca. 8500 BP)
The Paleoindian stage began with the arrival of North America's
first inhabitants, who spread rapidly to al I ice-free regions of the
continent.
These people
practiced
non-special ized
gathering
strategies and a degree of specialized hunting of Pleistocene
megafauna such as mammoth and mastodon.
Major time diagnostic
Paleoindian artifacts in Central and East Texas are stone tools,
notably Clovis, Folsom and Plainview projecti Ie point types.
Central
Texas Paleoindian sites have placed the region in the forefront of
Paleoindian research.
Publ ications are sti II
awaited
on the
Wi Ison-Leonard Site (41WM235), which yielded the famous Leanderthal
Lady burial, and the stratified 41BX52 site near San Antonio.
Archaic Stage (8500 to 1250 BP)
The long Archaic stage IS defined by hunting and gathering
economies.
Modern ethnographic studies suggest that these economies
yield greater proportions of gathered plant foods than meat, and they
usually require a nomadic lifestyle. Social differentiation is scant;
individuals accrue status according to their accompl ishments and
neither inherit nor bequeath it.
The earliest Archaic phases in
Central Texas retain Paleoindian lithic traits -- basal edge grinding
and paral lei flaking on projecti Ie points -- but projecti Ie point
styles evolved into a variety of stemmed forms, notably the Gower,
Hoxie,
Wei Is,
Bel I and
Martindale
types.
The proportional
contribution of food gathering, evidenced by grinding stones and
freshwater mussel shel I, increased through the Early Archaic, and the
first burned rock middens were formed near the end of the period,
ca. 5000-4600 BP.
Population trends, inferred indirectly from the
ratios of phase components to phase duration, reflect increase to a
peak in the San Geronimo phase, then sl ight decl ine toward the end of
the period (Prewitt 1981:75-78; 1985:216-225).
The Middle Archaic
saw the apex of burned rock midden formation and the emphasis on the
plant foods baked in these features. Continued hunting is shown by
the Nolan, Travis, Pedernales and Bulverde projecti Ie point styles.
Population reached a peak early, then apparently declined only to rise
to a stable plateau late in the period. The Late Archaic, beginning
ca. 2250 BP, witnessed the dec I ine and disappearance of the burned
rock midden subsistence strategy.
-rhe proportions of gathering
artifacts to hunting artifacts remain high, however, indicating a
shift in emphasis to another set of gathered plant foods. Diagnostic
projecti Ie point styles are Marcos, Monte I I, Castrovi I Ie, Frio and
Fairland.
Population rose steadi Iy throughout the period to the
prehistoric population maximum in the Driftwood phase, 1400 to 1250
BP.

........

-~-~~

...-

- - - - - ­

8

Late Prehistoric Stage (1250 to 200 BP)
Technological
innovations appl ied to continuing Archaic
subsistence
strategies define the Late Prehistoric stage.
Principally, these innovations were the adoption of the bow and arrow
and the use of pottery. The stage is indicated by diagnostic arrow
points of the Granbury, Scal lorn, Perdiz and Cliffton types, by
pottery and by cemeteries. Central Texas pottery is the varied and
i I I-defined Leon Plain ware. This pottery and formal ized cemeteries
both have affinities with East and Coastal Texas. Gulf coastal shel I
in Central Texas indicates continuing, probably trade, connections
with the coast.
The development of agricultural societies in the
Caddo area of northeast Texas had effects in northern Central Texas.
A single cob of domesticated maize in the Kyle Site (41HI1) (Jelks
1962) and occasional finds of Caddoan pottery in the same Brazos River
area indicate at least some exchange and social relations between the
two zones. Population dec I ined sharply and steadi Iy through the Late
Prehistoricj
the subsistence emphasis may have shifted to hunting.
Bison remains make a notable reappearance in sites of the Toyah phase
It is in the Toyah phase sites that artifact
(650-200 BP).
assemblages bear resemblances to those of historically identified
Indian tribes.
Historic Stage (200 BP to present)
Technically, the Historic Stage began in A.D. 1528 with Cabeza de
Vaca's transit of coastal and southern Texas, but actual record
keeping on Central Texas did not commence for another 200 years.
In
that interval, indigenous groups suffered dislocations from the
advancing wavefronts of European diseases and other dislocated
Indians.
The Tonkawas, recorded as in Central Texas in the early
nineteenth century, may actually have migrated from the southern
Plains. Intensive settlement of the Travis County region began in the
1820s with the founding of Stephen F. Austin's Little Colony. As the
history of' Texas advanced, the aboriginal cultures retreated and
eventually vanished, so that now the native record lies almost
entirely within the province of archeology.

- - - _ ..-

-----------

' - - _.......

- - - - - - -....

--.~

- - - - - ­

9

METHODS AND TECHNIQUES
The primary purpose of the investigations was to evaluate the
presence of cultural resources in the three project areas. A review
of archeological works revealed the presence of two sites, 4lTV325 and
41TV850, in the Loyola Lane and Stassney Lane road improvement areas.
-rhe effect of construction activities on the sites was assessed during
the current project.
AI I field notes, photographs and site survey
forms genererated by this project are curated at TARL.
At each of the three prospect areas, investigation consisted of
an intensive pedestrian survey. The survey was conducted by walking
both sides of the proposed right-of-way.
Where available, roadcuts
were examined for the presence of buried remains. Based on the
results of the pedestrian survey, subsurface shovel probing was judged
unnecessary.

10

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Loyola Lane Improvement Area
Located between Highway 183 and Decker Lane, this two mi Ie
affected
by residential
improvement zone
has been
heavi Iy
subdivisions, street construction and other utility construction
activities.
Currently the right-of-way is from 15 to 20 feet wide on
either side of the road. In most cases, this right-of-way wi I I not be
widened extensively, although the width of the present road wi I I be
increased. Soi I deposition along the right-of-way has been altered by
artificial
level ing,
clearing,
ditch construction and banking
operations.
Site 41TV325, recorded by John Clark in 1977 (TARL n.d.) has been
identified as an Archaic multicomponent camp site and chipping area.
Re-investigation of the site, which extends from .175 to .575 mi les
west of the Loyola Lane/Decker Lane intersection along Loyola Lane,
revealed a great deal of disturbance from construction of Wentworth
and Riverside drives, and the bui Iding of Fire Station 26 at the
intersection of Riverside Drive and Loyola lane. Whi Ie the portion of
the site south of the southern right-of-way is relatively intact, the
northern portion has been leveled, landscaped and affected
by
residential construction.
The site seems to have been a lithic
procurement area and has no further information potential beyond that
achieved by its recording. Simi larly, 41TV326, identified by W. Lynn
as a late nineteenth - early twentieth century farm complex, has been
entirely destroyed by construction activities and fal Is outside of the
proposed road improvement corridor.
An additional site, 41TV1283, was discovered on a sma I I rise
immediately north of Loyola Lane, .8 mi les west of its intersection
with Decker Lane. The site, consisting of approximately 30 secondary
flakes, 5 or 6 tested cobbles and core fragments, is surficial; no
subsurface materials were noted in the roadcut. The scatter, covering
approximately 2500 square meters, is the result of lithic procurement
episodes. No diagnostic artifacts were recovered.
The widening of
Loyola Lane wi I I affect the southern extent of the site. However,
given the site's extremely limited data potential, it IS suggested
that construction activities proceed as planned.
No other archeological sites were located along the
road
improvement right-of-way. Intensive residential and road construction
may have affected 41TV1283, outside of the right-of-way.

----

.......

__._-_._---

-----~~--.-----~

..- - - ......•.....--.--

-~-~-

----.----~

11

SUMMARY OF RESULTS
1) Located 41TV1283 and reassessed sites 41TV325 and 41TV326.
2) Residential and street construction have disturbed the limited
potential of these sites.
3) While their location is relevant in reconstructing regional
settlement and resource procurement patterns, no other contribution is
expected.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Investigations show archeological resources of extremely limited
potential beyond locational information. The sites are not eligible
for SAL or NRHP status. It is recommended that road widening and
improvement work proceed as proposed.
Stassney Lane Improvement Area
This improvement area, approximately 2 mi les in length, is
located southwest of the intersection of Montopolis Drive and Burleson
Road. It wi II connect this intersection with an extension of Stassney
Lane via Nuckols Crossing. A dirt road currently provides access to
this area.
A previous archeological survey of the Stassney Lane area in the
vicinity of Nuckols Crossing conducted by Alton K. Briggs, encountered
two sites, 41TV849 and 41TV850 (TARL n.d.).
Although 41TV849, a
twentieth century homestead, fal Is outside of the present project's
impact area, it was revisited and appeared to be unaltered by previous
street construction.
41TV850 was interpreted as an 85 acre lithic
procurement area. Since its recording in May of 1984 , extensive
construction of the Hunter's Creek Subdivision and associated access
streets have disturbed approximately three-quarters of the site.
A
sma I I portion of the site remains immediately adjacent and west of
Wi II iamson Creek. The artifacts include a light scatter of flakes and
infrequent core fragments.
The site's contribution consists of its
role in the regional resource procurement pattern and it presents no
potential for further archeological information.
The survey located an additional site, 41TV1284, interpreted as a
sma I I I ithic procurement area. The site, which covers approximately
600 square meters, is located .55 miles south-southwest of the
Montopolis Drive and Burleson Road intersection on the east side of
the dirt road. Located on the slopes of the terrace leading to the
Wil I iamson Creek/Onion Creek basin, the site is a I ight scatter of
secondary and tertiary flakes, tested cobbles and
cores.
No
diagnostic artifacts were found.

12

Whi Ie most of the artifacts at 41TV1284 are prehistoric, a hearth
and a nearby cluster of hammerstones and tested cobbles belong to a
modern component. A beer can, cigarette butt and fresh charcoal
indicate that the area was recently used. The freshness of the breaks
on the refuse indicate modern flintknappers. The modern component's
mixing with the prehistoric has greatly affected the site's contents
and potential information.
This site contributes only to the
knowledge of this area as a lithic procurement zone within the
regional settlement pattern.
No additional sites were located during the survey although
isolated tested cores and flakes were found throughout the road
improvement area.
SUMMARY OF RESULTS
1) Reassessment of 41TV850 found a large portion disturbed by
residential construction.
2) Recorded 41TV1284, a sma I I prehistoric I ithic procurement area
with a modern component.
3) Neither site has significant archeological potential beyond
their placement within a regional settlement pattern.
RECOMMENDATIONS
Investigation shows archeological resources of extremely
potential.
The site is not eligible for SAL or NRHP
Construction work should proceed as proposed.

limited
status.

Country Club Drive Improvement Area
A portion of this project wil I involve relocation of the
intersection of Country Club Drive south of its present location along
East Riverside Drive facing Grove Boulevard, widening of the road
along the Riverside Golf Course, and improvement on a dirt road to
connect County Club Drive with Montopol is Drive.
A structure was noted adjacent to the proposed intersection
relocation, 25 feet east of East Riverside Drive. This di lapidated
bu i Iding, based on the bathroom app I i ances I art i factua I mater-i a I and
trash composition, dates to the post-19SOs and has no archeological
value. A simi lar post-19S0s structure was encountered at the northern
end of the proposed road improvement area, .16 mi les west of its
intersection with Kemp Lane. The Country Club Creek terrace had no
archeological remains on the surface nor in the erosional profi les.

13
Due to the presence of these profi les no subsurface testing was done.
The portion of the project area along Country Club Drive has undergone
extensive leveling and landscaping, disturbing in situ soi I horizons.
No archeological resources were encountered.

SUMMARY OF RESULTS
No archeological resources were located during the survey.

RECOMMENDATIONS
Work to proceed as planned.

SUMMARY
The archeological survey of three proposed street improvements in
the
City of Austin recorded two I ithic procurement sites and
reassessed one open campsite and one I ithic procurement area.
Historic site 41TV849 was determined to be outside the construction
zones. The four prehistoric sites are badly disturbed by urban
expansion and hold I ittle scientific potential beyond that gained in
this survey. Cultural resources therefore present no bar to street
construction or widening.

14

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast,
1973

S.A., L.G. Kennamer,
R.H. Ryan,
A. Lo,
D.L. Karney,
C.P. Zlafkovich, M.E. Bonine, R.G. Steele.
Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Atkinson, Mary Jourdan and Eugene V. Gi les
1981
Kingdom Come! Kingdom Go! Eakins Press, Burnet, Texas.
Belo Corporation
1982 Texas Almanac.

Dallas.

Carr, John T.
1967 The CI imate and Physiography of
Board Report 53. Austin.

Texas.

Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of Eastern
Company, New YOrk.

States.

United

Water

Development

McGraw-Hi II

Book

Garner, L.E.
1974 Environmental Geology - An Aid to Urban Planning: Austin
Area Texas. Approaches to Environmental Geology. Bureau of
Economic Geology Report of Investigations 81:101-102.
The
University of Texas at Austin.
Gould, Frank
1975 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary.
Agricultural Experiment Station. Publication MP-585.
A l M University. College Station.
House, Kurt D.
1978 Texas Archeology.
Dallas.

Southern

Methodist University

Texas
Texas

Press,

Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in
Hil I County, Texas. Department of Anthropology Archaeology
Series 5. The University of Texas at Austin.

15
Muller, Daniel and Robert D. Price
1979 Ground-Avai labi lity in Texas.
Resources Report 238. Austin.

Texas Oepartment of

Water

Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
- ­
Archeo Iog i ca I Soc iety 52: 65-89. Fort Worth.
1985

From Circlevi I Ie to Toyah: Comments on Central
Texas
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
Chronology.
54:201-238. Austin.

Russel I, Richard Joel
1945 Climates of Texas. Annals of the Association of
Geographers 35(2) :37-52. - - Sellards, E.H., E.S. Adkins, and F.B. Plummer
1966 The Geology of Texas, vol. I, Stratigraphy.
of Texas Bulletin 3232. Austin.
Shiner, Joel
1983 Large Springs and Early
Anthropologist 28:99:1-7.

American

The Un i vers i ty

Indians.

Soi I Conservation Service (SCS)
1974 Soi I Survey of Travis County, Texas.
Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
n.d.
(TARL) County Site Fi les.
The University
Austin.

American

United

Plains

States

of Texas at

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
1972 Flood Plain Information: ~ and Little Walnut Creeks,
AUstin, Texas. Fort Worth District.
1980

Walnut and
Wi I liamson
Creeks: Expanded
Floodelain
Information Study, vol. III. Environmental Considerations.
Fort Worth District.

