A Cultural Resources Survey of the 7.7-Mile
Faith Toro Trunkline and Well Connect in
Dimmit and Webb Counties, Texas

Prepared for Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd.,
San Antonio, Texas
by
David L. Nickels, Principal Investigator
Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations Report #198
February 2013

Abstract
Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. of San Antonio, Texas contracted with Tierras
Antiguas Archaeological Investigations (TAAI) to conduct a background review of the Faith
Toro Trunkline and its well connect. TAAI then conducted a full pedestrian field survey along
the proposed rights-of-way. The project was entirely privately funded, and the properties across
which the pipelines will cross are privately owned; therefore, no Texas Antiquities Permit was
required.
The field survey was conducted by two archaeologists on December 5, 2012. During the course
of the survey, TAAI archaeologists documented one previously unrecorded prehistoric open
campsite (41DM190), as well as six isolated prehistoric pieces of chipped stone tools and
debitage. Our assessment of 41DM190 and the six isolated artifacts is that they are surficial in
nature and lie on heavily eroded and deflated surfaces. As such, they possess minimal research
potential to further our understanding of the prehistory of south Texas. In that regard, we
recommended that construction of the Faith Toro Trunkline and well connect be allowed to
proceed as currently aligned. However, Tierras Antiguas recommended that should any cultural
materials be encountered during construction, such finds should be evaluated by either TAAI
archaeologists or any other professional archaeologists before construction is allowed to proceed.
No artifacts were collected during this survey.

Acknowledgments
There are mainly four individuals who are greatly appreciated, and whose efforts contributed to
the successful planning, organization, and completion of this project. They are Ms. Judy Vader,
and Mr. Ryan DeBarros, Project Managers at Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, and Mr.
Ronnie Glenewinkel and Mr. David Black, Environmental Coordinator and Permitting Specialist
at Mockingbird Midstream. All were extremely amiable and helpful throughout the project, and
their overall knowledge of the project contributed significantly to our understanding of the
project’s scope of work.
In addition, I express my sincere gratitude to Tierras Antiguas staff archaeologist Belisario Silva,
who worked hard, long hours, and expressed an attitude and work ethic that ensured this survey
was conducted in a thorough and professional manner.

Cover Photo: Selected artifacts at 41DM190, with San Lorenzo Creek crossing.

i

Table of Contents
Title
Page
Abstract.......................................................................................................................................i
Acknowledgments.......................................................................................................................i
List of Figures.............................................................................................................................ii
List of Tables...............................................................................................................................ii
Introduction..........................................................................................................,........................1
Modern Environmental Setting....................................................................................................2
Paleoenvironment........................................................................................................................4
Cultural Chronology....................................................................................................................5
Dimmit County Prehistory and History......................................................................................10
Webb County Prehistory and History........................................................................................11
Site Types to be Expected.........................................................................................................12
Archaeological Atlas Sites and Historic Maps Results................................................................15
Soils..........................................................................................................................................17
Background Review Summary...................................................................................................19
Goals, Methodology, and Levels of Effort.................................................................................20
Results of the Investigations......................................................................................................21
Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations.......................................................................28
References Cited........................................................................................................................29

List of Figures
Figure
Page
1. Dimmit and Webb counties and project location..................................................................1
2. Project Area on large topographic map................................................................................1
3. Project Area on local topographic map...............................................................................2
4. Physiographic regions of Texas...........................................................................................4
5. Biotic provinces of Texas....................................................................................................4
6. South Texas cultural chronology.........................................................................................6
7. Soils map of the Project Area............................................................................................18
8. 41DM190 site map............................................................................................................21
9. 41DM190 aerial photograph.............................................................................................22
10. Photo of DM190 western slope.........................................................................................23
11. Photo of 41DM190 eastern slope......................................................................................23
12. Bulldozed cut at 41DM190...............................................................................................24
13. Shovel testing at 41DM190...............................................................................................24
14. Artifacts at 41DM190 west of San Lorenzo Creek............................................................25
15. Artifacts at 41DM190 east of San Lorenzo Creek.............................................................26
16. Additional artifacts at 41DM190 east of San Lorenzo Creek............................................26

ii

List of Tables
Table
Page
1. Soils Dissected by the Faith Toro Trunkline and Well Connect........................................18

iii

Introduction
In December 2012,
Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological
Investigations (TAAI)
conducted a review of
cu lt u ral res o urces
documented either on,
or within one mile of
the proposed 7.7-Mile
Faith Toro Trunkline
and well connect, to be
constructed in
southwestern Dimmit
C o u n t y
a n d
northwestern Webb
County, Texas for
Flatrock Engineering
and Environmental,
Ltd., and hereinafter
occasionally referred to Figure 1. Location of the Project Area in Texas.
as the Project Area (PA)
(Figure 1-3). The
research by TAAI
included:
1) A review of the most
current literature
documenting the
prehistory and history of
the immediate area
2) A review of the
Texas Historical
Commission’s Texas
Archeological Sites
Atlas (Atlas 2012) to
identify what cultural
resource surveys have
been conducted, and
what archaeological
s i t e s h a v e b e e n Figure 2. Project Area on large topographic map.
1

documented
within at least
1,000 meters of
the PA
3) A search of
v a r i o u s
websites that
offer old maps
of the PA
4) A literature
review of both
published and
unpublished
r e p o rts a n d
manuscripts
that describe
the types of
archaeological
sites that were Figure 3. Faith Toro Trunkline and well connect on Chupadera Creek
p r e v i o u s l y (1984) and East Losa Tank (1984) USGS 7.5' topographic maps.
documented,
and thus provide insight as to the type of sites that may be expected either in the PA, or
immediately adjacent to it
5) A review of local soils maps in order to evaluate the potential for intact and buried cultural
materials within or immediately adjacent to the PA
Based upon TAAI’s recommendations, Flatrock Engineering and Environmental, Ltd. and
Chesapeake Midstream agreed that an archaeological survey of the pipeline rights-of-way should
be conducted.

Modern Environmental Setting
Climate and Vegetation
Dimmit and Webb counties are located in south-central Texas along and near its southern border
with Mexico, with the Rio Grande forming the western border of Webb County (see Figure 1).
Their current political boundaries encompass 4,670 square miles. The generally flat to rolling
terrain ranges in elevation from about 400-800 feet above mean sea level. Clayey and loamy soils
support the growth of small predominately mesquite trees, and thorny scrub brush with assorted
2

cacti and grassy understory.
With their semi-arid environment, the county is generally frost-free from mid-February through
early December, allowing for between 290-314 growing season days. The average annual rainfall
is about 20-22 inches, with most rainfall occurring in May and September. These peaks are the
result of thunderstorms bearing moist air from the Gulf of Mexico to the east, and the Pacific
Ocean much farther to the west. Dimmit County is known as part of the Winter Garden Region
for the vegetables grown there
However, rainfall amounts vary significantly from year to year, and the high evapotranspiration
effects in the area effectively offset any beneficial surplus of annual rainfall. This is another
reason irrigation systems are so necessary, and commonly found in use today throughout the area.
Summers are indeed hot and dry, with temperatures consistently hovering above 1000F, humidity
is generally low compared to environments closer to the Gulf Coast. Overall, the climate can be
classified as subtropical steppe (Leffler 1996; Leffler and Long 1996).
Hydrology
The Nueces River and the Rio Grande are the major southeasterly trending rivers draining the
South Texas region. A subtle divide through the county causes numerous intermittent creeks to
flow south into the Nueces River, and others to drain toward the north, and into the Frio River.
Many drainages intermittently flow into both rivers during infrequent seasonal periods of
abundant rainfall. Although there are many springs in Dimmit County, very few are active due
primarily to the dip of the substrate shales which carry these subterranean seeps to the south and
east. Ancient springs that may have existed in the area at one time have likely succumbed to
overgrazing and irrigation pumping during modern times (Brune 1981).
Flora and Fauna
The project area lies within the South Texas Plain/Brush Country vegetation area as defined by
Gould (1975), and the regional flora of South Texas has been classified as being part of the
Tamaulipan biotic province extending out from northeast Mexico (Figures 4 and 5). This is the
only part of Texas where some vegetation exhibits growth throughout the year (Blair 1950; Maps
2012a). Thorny brush is the dominant vegetation today, but this is a relatively recent occurrence,
with a mix of woody and grassland species providing a savanna environment during prehistoric
times (Archer 1995; Black 1989; Hester 1980; Inglis 1964). The original vegetation was an open
grassland mixed with brushy chaparral. Oaks, pecan, and ash were common along perennial
streams. Due in part to overgrazing and the exclusion of fire, the invasion of woody species has
changed the vegetation into “Texas brush country” dominated by mesquite, acacia, spiny
hackberry, brazil, whitebrush, lotebrush, and others (Diamond et al. 1987:203-221). On sandy
soils, the brush includes mesquite with mixed grasses. In contrast, clay soils support mesquite
(Proposis juliflora), various species of Acacia, and mimosa, granjeno or desert hackberry (Celtis
pallida), lignum vitae (Porliera angustifolia), cenizo (Leucophyllum texanum), white brush
(Aloysia texana), prickly pear (Opuntia lindheeimeri), tasajillo (Opuntia leptocaulis), and species
of Condalia and Castela (Blair 1950).

3

The South Texas Plains/Brush Country
exhibits some of the greatest
mammalian species diversity in the
state. Sixty-one species of mammals,
36 snakes, 19 lizards, and several
species of turtles, salamanders, and
frogs are present in the region (Blair
1950). Approximately 50 species of
fish have been identified in the lower
Rio Grande (Lee et al. 1980).

Paleoenvironment
The paleoenvironment of south Texas
is as varied as the landscape, and the
South Texas Paleoclimatic record
contains significant gaps primarily due
to the scarcity of deep, finely stratified,
and well-dated deposits (Stahle and
Cleaveland 1995:51). To date, the best
record of paleoenvironmental
reconstruction in South Texas has been Figure 4. Physiographic regions of Texas
accomplished by Robinson (1982) from (http://www.lib.utexas.edu/geo/pics/txphysio.jpg).
analysis of phytoliths from three
archaeological sites in Live Oak
County. Overall, the data there along
with data from other sites in Texas
suggest that the waning of the
Pleistocene, or late-glacial period,
marked a transition from a cooler,
wetter environment to one that steadily
grew warmer and drier, and more
seasonal, with intermittent moist
periods through about 6,000 years ago.
Most researchers then generally agree
that the period between 6,000 and 3,000
years ago was much warmer and drier
than today. Since that time, intermittent
moist and dry intervals have occurred
over the past 3,000 years.
It is unlikely that the climate has Figure 5. Blair’s (1950) biotic provinces of Texas.
4

changed significantly in the past few thousand years in the area that would significantly induce
vegetation changes. The greater changes have been induced by human intervention through the
clearing of wooded areas along the river and streams for construction purposes, pumping more
water for irrigation which has lowered water tables, and overgrazing by livestock. Although there
are still many seeps, springs, and streams in the area, they most probably flowed with greater
abundance during wetter intervals than exist at the present time, providing an abundant resource
for prehistoric occupants.

Cultural Chronology
The Project Area project lies within the South Texas archaeological region as defined by Hester
(1980, 1995, 2004). Refining a cultural chronology for south Texas is problematic, due to the
compressed nature of the archaeological record and the scarcity of stratified sites excavated
within the region. Hester (1995:433) acknowledges the paucity of information that exists for
south Texas and as such offers only a “general framework” for prehistoric periods particular to
the region (Figure 6). All dates are given as approximate years before present (B.P.), i.e., before
1950.
Paleoindian (11,200 - 7950 B.P.)
This period is estimated at between ca.11,200–7950 B.P. in south Texas (Hester 1995). The
Paleoindian period began toward the close of the Pleistocene. Diagnostic artifacts of the early
Paleoindian interval include Clovis and Folsom projectile points. The wide distribution of
Clovis-type points across most of North America and even into Central America suggests a wide
dispersal and interaction of the people who made them. Other artifacts associated with the Clovis
culture include bifaces and prismatic blades, engraved stones, bone and ivory points, stone bolas,
ochre, and shaft straighteners. During the late Paleoindian interval, the first stemmed lanceolate
points, such as Angostura, Golondrina, St. Mary’s Hall, and Barber (among a few others) appear.
In general, the Paleoindian adaptation has been considered to be one of small bands of nomadic,
big-game hunters following herds of Late Pleistocene fauna, including mammoth, mastodons,
bison, camel, and horse, across North America (Black 1989). More recently, emphasis has been
placed on the wide diversity of plants and animals used for subsistence by these early Americans,
such as turtles and tortoises, alligators, mice, badgers, and raccoons, although they undoubtedly
hunted the large animals as well (Collins 1995:381). Known Clovis sites include killsites,
quarries, caches, open campsites, ritual sites, and burials (Hester 1995:433–436). A Folsom
interval follows the Clovis. Folsom artifacts are fairly common in south Texas; however, no
camp sites or killsites have been found south of a large workshop, Pavo Real (41BX52), in Bexar
County (Hester 1995:434–435). Most Paleoindian finds in south Texas have consisted of surface
lithic scatters on upland terraces and ridges (Black 1989).
As the warming that marks the transition from Pleistocene to Holocene climates began to take
effect in Texas, prehistoric inhabitants adapted with changes in lifestyle. This climatic shift is
5

also marked by the decline and
extinction of mammoth,
mastodon, horse, camel, and
giant bison (Bison antiquus).
Large gregarious game animals
were perhaps extinct in Texas.
Human hunters were forced to
concentrate on deer, antelope,
and other medium-size or
smaller game. Changes in the
subsistence base required
technological shifts that mark
the beginning of a new cultural
period known as the Archaic.
Early Archaic (7950 - 4450
B.P.)
Hester (1995:436–438)
identifies the Early Archaic,
with Early Corner Notched and
Early Basal Notched dart points,
as roughly dating between 7950
to 4450 B.P. The extinction of
large herd of megafauna and the
changing climate at the
beginning of the Holocene
stimulated a behavioral change
by the Prehistoric inhabitants of
south Texas (McKinney 1981).
While the basic hunter-gatherer
adaptation probably remained
intact, an economic shift away
from big game hunting was
necessary. In general, more
intensive exploitation of local
and smaller resources such as
deer, fish, and plant bulbs is
indicated by greater densities of
ground-stone artifacts, firecracked rock cooking features,
and more specialized tools.
Weir (1976) speculates that
Early Archaic groups were Figure 6. South Texas Archaeological Region chronology.
6

small and highly mobile, an inference based on the fact that Early Archaic sites are thinly
distributed and that diagnostic projectile point types are seen across a wide area, including most
of Texas and northern Mexico. Story (1985) believes that population densities were low during
the Early Archaic, and that groups consisted of related individuals in small bands with “few
constraints on their mobility” (Story 1985:39). Their economy was based on the utilization of
a wide range of resources, especially such year-round resources as prickly pear and lechugilla,
as well as rodents, rabbits, and deer.
Middle Archaic (4450 - 2350 B.P.)
Hester (1995:438–441) suggests that the period between 4450 and 2350 B.P. reflects the Middle
Archaic in south Texas. The Middle Archaic appears to have been a time of increased
population, based on the large number of sites from this period (Story 1985:40; Weir 1976:125,
128). On the South Texas Plains, exploitation of widely scattered, year-round resources such as
prickly pear continued (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13–15), as did hunting deer and rabbit.
Weir (1976) believes that the widely scattered bands prevalent in the Early Archaic now began
to coalesce, at least during the acorn-gathering season, into larger groups who shared the
intensive work of gathering and processing the acorn harvest (Weir 1976:126). Many researchers
believe burned rock middens are a result of this endeavor (Creel 1986; Prewitt 1991; Weir 1976).
The common presence of deer remains in burned rock middens encourages the view that deer
processing took place at burned rock midden sites. Bison bone is encountered in archaeological
sites in south Texas, at least occasionally, during all but the earliest part of the Middle Archaic
(Dillehay 1974). Cemeteries make their first appearance during this period, suggesting a
movement toward less mobility and perhaps territorialism. One of the earliest occurrences dating
to the south Texas Middle Archaic, is Loma Sandia in Live Oak County, which dates between
ca. 2550 and 2750 B.P. (Taylor and Highley 1995).
Late Archaic (2350 - 1250 B.P.)
Hester believes the Late Archaic in south Texas may be defined as between 2350–1250 B.P,
Some researchers believe populations increased throughout the Late Archaic (Prewitt 1985),
while others feel populations remained the same or fell during this period (Black 1989:30).
Subsistence is assumed to have become less specialized on acorns, in favor of a broad spectrum
subsistence base (Black 1989:30). Story (1985:44–45) believes the presence of cemeteries
indicates that Late Archaic populations in central and south Texas were increasing and becoming
more territorial. Although inhabitants of the South Texas Plain near Brownsville and Rockport
had begun to make pottery by about 1750 B.P., the northern part of the plain was still “preceramic” until 1,000 years later (Story 1985:45–47). Late Archaic points tend to be much smaller
than Middle Archaic points.
Transitional Archaic (2250 - 1250 B.P.)
A late subperiod or interval of the Late Archaic is frequently referred to as the Terminal Archaic
or Transitional Archaic. Turner et al. (2011) cite data placing the Transitional Archaic as
2250–1250 B.P. Although Hester may lump current data into a Late Archaic period, he cautions
that more evidence will likely result in what may be termed as a “Terminal Archaic” period
7

during the latter part of the Late Archaic in south Texas. This Terminal Archaic period is
represented by diagnostics such as Ensor, Frio, and Matamoras points which appear to overlap
the Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods (Hester 1995:442). Weir (1976) believes this
marked a transition period to localized area sites, a disappearance of burned rock middens and
bison, and a reappearance of highly mobile hunters and gatherers. Others (Black and McGraw
1985; Peter 1982; Skelton 1977) argue that in some locations burned rock middens did not
disappear and sites were more intensely occupied during the Transitional Archaic period.
Late Prehistoric (1250 - 420 B.P.)
The term “Late Prehistoric” is commonly used to designate the period following the Late Archaic
in south Texas. Generally, the Late Prehistoric period is thought of as spanning the period
between A. D. 700 - 1530 ([1250 - 420 B.P.] [Hester 1995]). A series of distinctive traits mark
the shift from the Archaic to the Late Prehistoric period, including the technological shift to the
bow and arrow and the introduction of pottery to central Texas and the northern South Texas
Plain (Black 1989:32; Story 1985:45–47). Two distinct phases recognized within the Late
Prehistoric are the Austin and Toyah. During the Austin phase, there appears to be a subtle
transition from expanding stem projectile points that may have been used as dart points, as well
as early arrow points. The most prevalent point found in Austin phase sites is the Scallorn arrow
point. Settlement shifts into rockshelters such as Scorpion Cave in Medina County (Highley et
al. 1978) and Classen Rockshelter in northern Bexar County (Fox and Fox 1967) have been
noted. Cemeteries from this period often reveal evidence of conflict (Black 1989:32).
Beginning rather abruptly at about 650 B.P., a shift in technology occurred. The Perdiz arrow
point may best represent the appearance of a distinct culture in south-central Texas lasting for
about 300 years, which archaeologists have labeled the Toyah phase. Hester (1995:444)
recognizes this phase as the “best documented Late Prehistoric pattern” throughout south Texas,
with dates ranging between ca. 650/700 to 300/350 B.P. (A.D. 1250/1300 to 1600/1650).
In addition to Perdiz points, evidence of a Toyah culture is manifested as bone-tempered pottery,
bone spatulates, awls, and beads, stone endscrapers, beveled knives, and expediently utilized
flakes. Briefly, expedient lithic technology involves removing flakes from a core in a
nonstandard manner; the purpose is to knock off sharp flakes for immediate use, selecting the
ones that best suit the need at the time. This technology differs from formal, standardized core
reduction and the manufacturing of formal, usually bifacial tools. Expedient lithic technology
is a continent-wide phenomenon indicative of increased sedentism, and is observed in Toyah
assemblages in Texas.
Whether the Toyah phase seen in the south-central Texas archaeological record is a result of a
group of people moving into the region, or adapted technologies from the region’s periphery is
a matter of conjecture. Steele and Assad-Hunter (1986) argue for the occurrence of a distinct
change in diet between the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric components in two sites in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir area in south Texas. Analysis of the number of identified specimens
(NISP) shows a marked increase in artiodactyla elements present during the later part of the Late
8

Prehistoric, an increase largely due to the addition of bison to the “menu” (Steele and AssadHunter 1986:468). Whether or not agriculture was practiced during this period in south Texas
has not been documented. There simply is not enough evidence to postulate there was ever a
significant presence of maize in the area. The later arrival of the Spanish during the later
Protohistoric/Historic period brought significant cultivars to south Texas.
Protohistoric/Historic (420 B.P. - present)
The end of the Late Prehistoric and beginning of the Historic period in south Texas is
characterized by written accounts of European contact with indigenous groups. The Protohistoric
period begins in 1528 when Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca traversed parts of southeast and
south Texas and left a diary of his five years spent traveling among the hunter-gatherers of Texas
and northern Mexico (e.g., Hallenbeck 1971). Cabeza de Vaca’s account of his stay with the
Miriami in 1533-34 indicates that groups of Native Americans would normally tether themselves
to the easily exploitable riverine environments in the fall, winter and summer, occasionally
sending a hunting party onto the grasslands to hunt deer. In the summer, many groups would live
near each other in the semiarid environs of South Texas to harvest prickly pear pads and other
succulents (Campbell and Campbell 1981:13-37).
Linguistically, early protohistoric accounts of the late 1500s indicate that a large group which
spoke Cohuilteco inhabited the area now known as south-central Texas. Coahuiltecan is a term
coined by Mexican linguists in the 1800s, and the name refers to the many small bands of Native
Americans who lived in northeastern Coahuila, Mexico and south Texas. The Coahuiltecans
were rapidly dispersed or killed during the Protohistoric period.
By the 1540s and 1550s Spanish ranchers had established large ranches in northern Mexico, with
several hundred thousand cattle, using Indian slaves as labor. Large mining ventures in northern
Mexico did the same. This encroachment from the south forced Native Americans to escape into
the south-central Texas region.
The period between de Vaca’s written account and the advent of Spanish missions in the late
1600s and early 1700s is referred to as the Protohistoric; a time when few, scant written
documents exist detailing Native American life outside the missions. The Historic period then,
is generally thought of as beginning in the 1700s.
Some 30 miles south of Eagle Pass, the Spanish established Mission San Juan Bautista in 1700
(now modern-day Guerrero). Early Spanish explorers then repeatedly traveled the Camino Real
enroute to newly established missions and settlements in today’s modern Texas throughout the
1700s and 1800s. Mexican families from across the river expanded into Texas, and these families
trace their roots to the early development of the area. In the ensuing years, lawlessness prevailed,
with saloons, gambling houses, outlaws, and slave hunters prevalent.

9

Dimmit County Prehistory and History
Indian artifacts found in Dimmit County indicate that the area has been occupied for about
11,000 years. Plentiful food sources such as wild game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land
hospitable. Early technology included tools from wood and stone, woven basketry, sewed
rabbitskin robes, and a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a throwing stick that greatly
increased the deadliness of their spears (Hester 1984; Leffler 1996). Perhaps as early as 1,300
years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt with bows and arrows. “During the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians native to Dimmit County were
squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were
moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in
Coahuila. Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place” (Leffler 1996).
“No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of
Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in
Texas. Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included
territory now in Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land,
however. By 1836, when Texas became independent from Mexico, the area remained populated
almost solely by Indians” (Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas Revolution and the Mexican War (1836–46), most of Dimmit County lay in
the disputed area between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River, and it became a haven for
desperate characters until about 1865. Carrizo Springs was founded in 1865, with the new
settlers who lived in jacals or dugouts frequently being harrassed by hostile Indians and outlaws.
Due in part tobeing pursued by the Texas Rangers, and being decimated by disease, the Indians
were forced to leave Dimmit County by 1877, and in 1880 Carrizo Springs became the county
seat for the newly formed county. By 1880, cattle ranching was firmly established, and although
sheep ranching was also an important part of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended
droughts and an increase in predators combined to make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling
business (Leffler 1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing
areas in the country.
As with rest of the nation, during the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced
to cut back their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on
raising poultry, hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in
the county in the 1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County’s economy, and although large
ranches lay claim to most of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much
a progressively increasing part of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).
10

Webb County Prehistory and History
“Artifacts dating from the Paleo-Indian period demonstrate that humans have lived in the area
around Webb County for perhaps 11,000 years. Evidence suggests that various Indian groups,
including the Carrizo, Pacuache, Pastaloca, and Pitalac peoples, lived in the region during the
Late Prehistoric period. By the early 1800s, however, these Coahuiltecan groups were being
squeezed out by Comanches, Lipan Apaches, and other Indian groups and by the Spanish, who
were moving up from the south” (Leffler and Long 2012). Early Spanish explorers traveled
through the area on their journeys north of the Rio Grande as early as the 1680s.
“In 1749, Jacinto De León, a Spanish army officer, established a ford, later known as the Paso
de Jacinto, a mile north of the site of present-day Laredo. In 1755, Laredo was established, but
was actually little more than a ranch in its first years of existence. In 1767, a royal commission
visited Laredo and arranged for the survey of a formal townsite, inaugurated a government, and
assigned land grants to families who had settled in the area. The commission also extended the
jurisdiction of the town north to the Nueces River so that it eventually included all of the area
of present Webb County as well as parts of modern La Salle, Dimmit, and Zapata counties”
(Leffler and Long 2012).
“The area's ranching potential was its primary attraction for the early Spanish settlers, and
ranching operations dominated the economy from the first years of settlement. Food and other
necessities imported from the south were bought with profits derived from cattle, sheep, and
other livestock. By the early 1800s at least forty ranches had been established around Laredo.
Settlement in the outlying areas was hindered, however, by the continual threat of Indian raids.
Comanches and Lipan Apaches moving in from the north drove many ranchers off their lands
and dissuaded others from attempting to establish operations in the countryside. As early as 1819
thirty-seven of the forty-four ranches in the vicinity of Laredo had been abandoned for fear of
Indian attack; and in 1828, in the midst of the sheep-ranching expansion, many ranch workers
refused to leave Laredo to work on the ranches farthest from town” (Leffler and Long 2012).
“The area suffered most from Indian attacks during the 1830s, especially after 1835 when the
Texas Revolution diverted the attention and resources of the Mexican government away from
the growing Indian menace. Receiving no help from the Tamaulipas state government, the
alcalde of Laredo petitioned Mexican president Antonio López de Santa Anna for help and
suggested that, in the face of continuing Comanche attacks, the town might have to be
abandoned. Preoccupied with their own problems, and content for the moment to remain within
the Republic of Mexico, the people of Laredo and the surrounding area played only a small role
in the Texas Revolution. Mexican commanders passing through the area en route to and from
Texas battlefields requisitioned livestock from local citizens and sometimes stopped in Laredo,
but the citizenry remained largely uninvolved in political issues” (Leffler and Long 2012).
“Between 1836 and 1848 the area that is now Webb County was part of the disputed strip of land
between the Rio Grande and the Nueces River claimed by both Mexico and Texas. Despite the
hopes of prominent Laredo citizens, who petitioned to remain part of Mexico, the area was
11

formally incorporated into the United States in May 1848. Worried about their future after
annexation, many residents moved to the Mexican side of the river and established Nuevo
Laredo; others moved into the surrounding Texas countryside. Suspicions that land titles would
not be respected under the new government were soon put to rest. The Bourland-Miller
Commission, which inspected Spanish and Mexican land titles in South Texas, proved to be fair
and impartial in its assessment of land records. Local landholders therefore found it easier to
accommodate themselves to the new political situation. Federal soldiers stationed at Fort
McIntosh patrolled the area for bandits and hostile Indians” (Leffler and Long 2012).
“Around 1882 numerous mines were started, and a thriving mining industry grew up, giving rise
to the communities of Carbon, Islitas, and Joyce. In the middle 1880s the Rio Grande and Eagle
Pass Railway was built to ship the coal out of the county. The number of ranching operations in
the county increased between 1880 and 1890, as the railroad spurs opened the area to more
intensive development and Indian and bandit raids were curtailed. By 1900, the introduction of
water pumps powered by wind, gas, and electricity for the first time allowed for large-scale
irrigation along the Rio Grande. Cotton also began to be grown around the turn of the century.
At this time the discovery of oil helped spur the economy. Gas was found in 1908, in 1921the
first producing oil well prompted a boom. Coal mining declined during the 1930s, falling victim
to competition from other Western mines and from increasing transport costs. In 1939 the Cannel
Coal Company, the area's largest producer, ceased operations. As a result, most of the coal towns
declined or were abandoned. A few families stayed to try their hands in farming, but most moved
to Laredo or out of the county” (Leffler and Long 2012).
“By the 1980s leading industries in Webb County included tourism, oil and gas extraction,
general and heavy construction, meat packing, soft-drink bottling and canning, trucking, and the
manufacture of clothing and leather shoes. Cattle ranching was also very much a thriving
operation at that time. Principal agricultural crops included sorghum and hay, and oil and gas
continued to account for an important part of the county's income” (Leffler and Long 2012).

Site Types to be Expected Along the Project Area
Prehistoric Open Campsites
Most numerous among the sites recorded in Dimmit and Webb counties are prehistoric open
campsites ranging in age from the Paleoindian period through the Historic period (see Figure 6).
Some of these represent a single campfire where a very small group of Native Americans may
have camped for one night. Others are very large, covering very extensive areas representing
large groups of people that stayed for long periods, perhaps seasonally, with ancestral groups
returning to these same campsites over a period of several thousands of years. Cultural remains
to be found at these large campsites include among other items, an abundance of fire-cracked
rocks representing multiple hearths, a wide variety of chipped stone tools and the lithic debris
that results from making them, ground and smoothed stones used to grind nuts and seeds, faunal
remains from terrestrial and aquatic animals consumed, bone tools, pottery sherds, and mussel
and snail shells. Open campsites occur in all types of environments, whether that be in a plush
12

riverine environment that offered a wide variety banquet of plant and animal foodstuffs, or in the
uplands away from flowing water sources. Seasonally, the upland grasses, shrubs, cacti offered
a different food source that could be exploited such as various grass seeds, mesquite beans,
prickly pear pads and tunas, and agave hearts. In addition, at various times, bison were known
to graze on the northern South Texas Plains, and were highly sought after for use as food, hides,
and bone tools (Dillehey 1974).
Depending upon the integrity of these open campsites, archaeologists and the Texas Historical
Commission consider these as perhaps the most significant types of sites in regard to their ability
to contribute to our understanding of south Texas prehistory. A few of the desired ingredients
that can indicate significance include cultural material that is buried beneath the surface in a
well-preserved, stratified, and relatively undisturbed context. Although these situations most
frequently occur within stratified terrace deposits adjacent to streams, they can also occur in
upland settings where the landscape has been generally stable through time. Other ingredients
that archaeologists look for in potentially significant campsites include good organic
preservation in the form of charcoal and/or charred plant remains, faunal preservation,
temporally diagnostic stone tools or ceramics, and intact features such as hearths.
Prehistoric Lithic Scatters or Procurement Sites
Lithic scatters are the next most common type of archaeological site that can be expected along
the Project Area. These sites simply represent the chipped stone debris and broken tools that
were left behind when Native Americans made new tools or re-sharpened their old ones. The
general absence of fire-cracked rocks and other cultural material normally found at open
campsites suggest that they did not camp there, or remain there for any extended period of time
( However, small camp fires may have been used to heat-treat chert or quartzite cobbles to make
them more knappable). Yet, they were drawn to these isolated locales because of the natural
outcroppings or surface exposures of good quality raw material such as chert or quartzite
cobbles. Examples of chipped stone most commonly found at these sites include cobbles with
one or two flakes removed, called ‘tested cobbles’. That is, the Native Americans knew from
experience the quality of stone that could most easily be flaked and reduced for stone tool
production, so they ‘tested’ the cobble to judge whether it was useable or not. If the quality was
judged to be inferior, then the cobble was tossed aside. That is why the majority of tested cobbles
found on these sites are of poor quality, coarse-grained material. While the finished stone tool
products are carried away from these sites, what remains are those tools broken during the
manufacturing process, and the thousands of pieces of debitage in the form of flakes and angular
debris. Also unique to lithic scatters where large cobbles are present are snapped ‘quarry blanks’.
These are simply cobbles flakes on both sides, reducing the cobble into a transportable ‘blank’
that can be used to further reduce it and make finished stone tools from the flakes taken off of
it. The unbroken quarry blanks are usually not found on these sites because they have been
carried off, presumably to areas of south Texas where raw material is not readily available. The
snapped or broken quarry blanks are of little or no use, so they are discarded and left behind.
Lithic scatters range in age from the Paleoindian through the Historic periods and can be found
on any landscape setting where gravels or cobbles have been exposed. Notably, gravel outcrops
that were exposed to the surface a few hundred or thousand years ago could be deeply buried
13

today, and the opposite could also be true; it all depends on the terrain setting and the dynamics
of landscape evolution through time. Most lithic scatters in the Dimmit and Webb county areas
have been documented along upper stream terraces abutting the eroded upland slopes.
Prehistoric Quarry Sites
Prehistoric quarries and procurement also can range in age from the Paleoindian through Historic
periods, but differ from lithic scatters in that at those sites Native Americans exploited loose
gravels, but at times they specifically sought quarry sites where raw material such as cherts or
quartzites were not yet freed from their parent geologic formation, and they had to be ‘quarried’.
These types of sites are rare in south Texas for two reasons: 1) the geological exposures generally
do not present themselves, and 2) throughout Texas, even in central Texas, it is much easier to
pick up gravels from the surface than to try to mine them from hard rock. Quarried and chipped
stone remains likely to be found at these sites include large chunks of angular cherts or
quartzites, as well as parent material detritus, and flaking debris. Snapped quarry blanks can also
be expected. Although a handful of prehistoric quarries or procurement sites have been recorded
in south Texas, they are rare.
Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens
There are no documented burned rock middens in Dimmit County, and only one in Webb
County. Burned rock middens result from a series of multiple-use earth ovens that were
constructed much like modern-day roasting pits are dug into the earth for roasting a pig. With
repetitive uses, as the larger rocks that serve as heating elements in the earthen pit fracture and
thus become less effective as a thermal source, they are ‘pitched out’ around the edge of the pit.
As the pit becomes unusable, another is dug near by, and the procedure repeated. Over time,
these multiple pits and the ‘pitched out’ fire-cracked rocks coalesce together, obscuring each pit
as indiscernible. (For a full discussion of the formation of burned rock middens and their
documented presence in Texas, see Leach and Bousman 2001; Leach et al. 2001; Mauldin et al.
2003).
Prehistoric Burial and Cemetery Sites
Although not common, isolated prehistoric burials and cemeteries have been documented in
south Texas. Individual and isolated burials have been found in association with open campsites
in both upland settings as well as in alluvial terraces along streams, but the largest prehistoric
cemetery found in close proximity to the Project Area is 41LK28, in Live Oak County.
Historic Sites
As discussed above in the Cultural Chronology portion of this report, although Spanish ranchers
had established large ranches in northern Mexico by the mid-16th century, and Spanish entradas
began penetrating south Texas in the 1700s and 1800s, there is no record of any sort of
permanent structures in the area during those periods (Chipman 1992), the area was generally
not considered safe for settlement by whites until after the Civil War in 1865, and white settlers
then began establishing smaller ranches and farmlands (Leffler and Long 1996; Leffler 1996).
Because of the vastness of the landscape and the relatively late settlement and development of
south Texas compared to east and central Texas and northern Mexico, historic sites are not
14

abundant, but they certainly do exist. The most common types to be encountered are related to
ranching and farming endeavors, or small communities from the 19th and 20th centuries. Site
types most commonly include farmsteads or ranches with corrals, cisterns, chimney and
foundation remains from both main houses and outbuildings, related trash dumps, an occasional
family burial or cemetery, school houses, churches, community buildings, and industry-related
structures or construction projects.

Archaeological Atlas and Historic Maps Results
We preface this section by stating that although it presents the number of sites and their types
documented within each of the four counties, the results simply provide the data that is
available. In reality, the number of documented sites and their types are very heavily skewed
based upon the types of cultural resource surveys, and the areas of those surveys. That said, the
data that is available on the Texas Atlas is only as good as the areas of south Texas that the
surveys represent. Most of south Texas has never been subjected to formal cultural resource
surveys, so it is conceded that the true character of the archaeological record is very poorly
understood. Nevertheless, the few surveys that have been accomplished provide at least some
aspect of what the region looks like from an archaeological perspective.
Dimmit County
Other than early work done by A. T. Jackson in 1932, perhaps the earliest systematic
archaeological survey in Dimmit County was conducted by Parker Nunley and Tom Hester.
Their work resulted in the documentation of 24 archaeological sites in the county, ranging in age
from the Early Archaic through the Late Prehistoric Toyah phase (Nunley and Hester 1966).
However, other surveys in the county since that time have resulted in a total of 155
archaeological sites being documented in the county. Evidence of ancient hearths, along with
diagnostic projectile points indicate that 100 of these sites had been used as open campsites from
as early as the Paleoindian period, and through as late as the Late Prehistoric periods (see Figure
6). Of particular note was the discovery of prehistoric human burials at four of these sites.
Prehistoric lithic scatters and lithic procurement sites account for 50 of those documented, where
pieces of chipped stone represent the technology used to fashion stone tools through time. Three
sites were emphasized for their abundance of lithic raw material, and where Native Americans
exploited gravel outcrops for making stone tools. Other sites of interest include a carved Indian
petroglyph, and other petroglyphs near Campo de los Cuervos. Historic sites documented within
the county include farmsteads with the remains of houses, corrals, cisterns, and trash scatters.
At one of those sites is a circle of stone marking a cowboy burial. The remnants of an old
railroad bed that runs through the county has also been designated as an archaeological site. The
only State Archeological Landmark is the county courthouse in Carrizo Springs (Atlas 2013).

15

Webb County
Many large-scale archaeological surveys have been conducted in Webb County, such as the
Bromley Cooper Surface Survey in 1970, the Chupadera Ranch Survey in 1974, the Trevino
Mining Permit Area Survey in 1991, the Killam Ranch Survey in 1991, and the Joint Task Force6 Survey in 1997. Large-scale surveys such as these clearly demonstrate the density, as well as
the diversity of archaeological site types that exist in this area of Texas. As a result of surveys
such as these, Webb County now has 664 professionally documented archaeological sites.
Of the prehistoric sites, 329 are open campsites, 236 are lithic scatters, and 76 are lithic
procurement sites. At one of the open campsites a skeletal burial has been found, one site has a
likely burial, and a possible cremated burial is suspected at a third site. Another suspected,
heavily disturbed prehistoric burial was recorded as an isolated site. The only prehistoric burned
rock midden site recorded in the county is located on sandstone outcrops along the Rio Grande.
Pictograph carvings have been recorded at one site. Protohistoric occupations are represented at
two sites by the presence of lithic debitage along with early period glass, ironstone, square nails,
etc. At a third site, Spanish Colonial ceramics have been found.
Historically, there are only 49 sites, or components of sites, documented in the county. This
seems to be a small number of sites given the county’s historical richness. Nevertheless, among
those that have been documented are four adobe lime kilns, Fort McIntosh (1849-1947), 1800s
and 1900s house structures near the approach to the International Bridge in Laredo, the Laredo
Cemetery, a stone pumping station, irrigation tanks, cisterns, military encampments, the Darwin
Community town, coal mine, and cemetery, the Delores Mining Community cemetery, rural and
generally abandoned cemeteries, six structures and a cemetery on a private ranch, and multiple
other 19th and 20th century rural house sites and ranching activity sites.
Archaeological Sites
A recent review of the Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites indicated that prior to this survey these
was only one known archaeological site (41DM29) within one mile of the proposed Faith Toro
Trunkline and well connect (Atlas 2012; 2013). Its location is shown in Figure 3, and it is briefly
described as follows:
41DM29
This large prehistoric open campsite site was recorded by Carrizo Springs Archaeological
Society members Tom Hester, J. W. House, and Parker Nunley in January 1964. At that time
they noted that artifacts were scattered over several acres. The owners of the ranch at that time
were the heirs of Wesley West (Atlas 2012).
“Located on the Faith Ranch in southwestern Dimmit County, the site lies near a dam on the San
Lorenzo Creek. This site has been known to relic-collectors for a number of years and has been
heavily hunted. Only Archaic artifacts were recovered by the survey party, including: one
Tortugas point, one stemless dart point, one unidentifiable dart point fragment, nine knives and
knife fragments, six scrapers and scraper fragments, four cores, and one worked flint flake. Most
of the material at the site seems to be on the surface” (Nunley and Hester 1966:245).
16

Historic Maps
A standard source of research is the extensive collection of online maps and aerial photographs
available at the Perry Castañeda Library at the University of Texas at Austin (Perry Castañeda
Library 2012). In general, the area has apparently been historically used as ranchland pasture,
with no development other than associated ranching activities such as windmills, stock tanks,
corrals, and sparsely scattered outbuildings. As such, no historic aerial photographs were found
in this usual reliable online database.
The oldest maps found of the area were 1925 and 1940 U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (1:62,500)
topographic maps of the San Lorenzo Creek area (Maps 2012b, c) which show no structures on
or adjacent to the proposed Faith Toro Trunkline or well connect. These maps are not exact by
today’s standards, and it is possible that historic water tanks, corrals, outbuildings and other
structures related to early ranching activities could be encountered along the Faith Toro
Trunkline and well connect rights-of-way that do not appear on any old maps. Technically, any
structures older than 45 years are now considered of interest by the Texas Historical
Commission, and this should be considered when the trunkline and well connects are excavated.

Soils
A review of county soils maps and publications both online and in hard copy format indicated
that the Faith Toro Trunkline and well connect will dissect 13 different soil types or
classifications. The characteristics of these soil classifications offer varying depths,
sedimentation, and deposition rates. As such, the soils in these areas likewise imply the potential
for the preservation of intact cultural resources to exist. Figure 7 shows the routes of the
pipelines through these soil areas, and the soils are briefly described in Table 1 (Sanders and
Gabriel 1985; Stevens and Arriaga 1985; Web Soil Survey 2012).

17

Figure 7. Soils along the Faith Toro Trunkline and well connect.
Table 1. Soils to be Dissected by the Faith Toro Trunkline and Well Connect.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact
Archaeological Potential

Brystal fine sandy loam (ByB)

Deep loamy soils on convex-form
uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about 20
inches below the surface

Caid sandy loam (CaB)

Deep loamy soils on gently
sloping uplands

Moderate to about 46 inches
below the surface

Capita fine sandy loam, 0-3%
slopes (CpB)

Deep loam on interfluve side
slopes and summits

Minimal to about 14 inches below
the surface

Jimenez very gravelly loam (JED)

Very shallow to shallow very
gravelly and friable loam on
uplands

Minimal to about 12 inches
below the surface

Jimenez-Quemado complex (JQD)

Shallow sandy, gravelly clay
loam on ridge and hill sidelopes

Minimal to about 13 inches below
the surface

Mata gravelly sandy clay loam
(MAC)

Deep, well drained gravelly,
loamy soils on uplands

Minimal to about 16 inches below
the surface

Maverick-Catarina complex,
gently rolling (MCE)

Deep clay on interfluve ridges
and summits

Minimal to about 6 inches below
the surface

18

Palafox clay, 0-3% slopes (PaB)

Potentially deep silty alluvium on
convex interfluves and toe slopes

Minimal to Moderate to about 28
inches below the surface

Tonio fine sandy loam (TOB)

Deep loamy soil on gently
undulating uplands

Minimal to Moderate to about 30
inches below the surface

Verick fine sandy loam (VEC)

Shallow loamy soils in upland
areas

Minimal to about 10 inches below
the surface

Verick fine sandy loam, 1 to 5%
slopes (VkC)

Shallow, gently sloping soils on
summits and sideslopes of low
hills

Minimal to about 15 inches below
the surface

W ebb fine sandy loam (W EB)

Deep loamy soils on gently
undulating uplands

Minimal to moderate to about 13
inches below the surface

Zapata-Rock outcrop complex,
gently undulating (ZAC)

Very shallow soils and rock
outcrops on summits and
sideslopes of low hills

Minimal to about 7 inches below
the surface

In sum, much of the Project Area rights-of-way will pass through upland areas with soils and
sediments that are generally shallow, and if prehistoric archaeological sites did exist, the soils
as mapped suggest that any archaeological deposits are likely in a palimpsest (collapsed) or
eroded state, and thus offer little in the way of scientific significance. However, the areas
adjacent to San Lorenzo Creek and its tributaries suggest that there may be extant terrace
deposits where prehistoric open campsites may still be in situ.
Nevertheless, in reality, without an on-the-ground physical examination and potential shovel
testing program, the true existence of deeply buried and intact archaeological deposits that can
be potentially significant to our understanding of Texas prehistory can only be modeled and
surmised. As such, Tierras Antiguas recommended a full pedestrian survey along the proposed
main right-of-way and well connect.

Background Review Summary
From this preliminary cultural resources background review, it was clear that the proposed
Project Area rights-of-way could encounter previously undocumented archaeological sites. Some
of those may be heavily disturbed and/or redundant site types, and as such have little to
contribute to the prehistory of south Texas. These sites should be considered as non-significant,
and should not impede the pipelines’ construction as planned. However, it was also clear from
this review that there was a moderate probability that archaeological sites of significance lie in
the planned main right-of-way and well connect.
The main right-of-way and well connect had never been subjected to a cultural resources survey,
and therefore the number of undocumented sites, as well as their potential significance along the
main right-of-way and well connect were unknowns. Although the number of sites and their
potential significance can be modeled, because of the scant few professional surveys that have
been conducted in this area of south Texas to date (and under less stringent standards than
19

mandated today), such models are considered unreliable. Accordingly, TAAI recommended that
a full pedestrian cultural resources survey along the Project Area main right-of-way and well
connect be conducted, with shovel testing at the discretion of the Project Archaeologist.

Field Survey Goals, Methods, and Levels of Effort
Goals
The project goals focused on archaeological issues that could be addressed by the types of data
obtained through pedestrian survey, along with limited shovel testing. The topics addressed were
site type, distribution, density, size, depth, and stratigraphy. The theoretical framework is
structured around patterns of settlement, mobility, subsistence, and social systems for the South
Texas region.
The goals of the project were to:
1)

locate and record cultural locations and sites in the project area using a systematic
survey methodology;

2)

quantify site size, as well as depth, and stratigraphy; and,

3)

place any diagnostic artifacts within the regional time frame.

Methods and Levels of Effort
A 100-percent pedestrian survey of the main right-of-way and well connect was conducted, with
two archaeologists meandering back and forth across the rights-of-way to ensure full coverage.
In accordance with a general “no collection” policy, cultural material of a redundant nature, both
prehistoric and historic, were not to be collected. Instead, they were to be fully documented via
sketches, field photographs, and copious notes.
Exceptions were to be made for diagnostic artifacts, particularly those artifacts which could be
considered as significant to the interpretation of Texas prehistory, such as Early ArchaicPaleoindian transitional, or Paleoindian diagnostics. These were to be collected on a case-bycase basis, and that decision was left up to the Principal Investigator and/or the Project
Archaeologist. Historic buildings, trash scatters, or other historic occurrences adjacent to the
ROW were to be documented with photographs and included in this report of investigations. All
cutbanks, and rodent and mammal backdirt piles along the rights-of-way were thoroughly
examined.
Shovel tests were to be dug in 20-centimeter (cm) levels, and all sediments were to be screened
through 1/4-inch wire mesh. Following our designed research plan, any artifacts recovered from
shovel tests were not to be collected, but were to be placed in the upper 20 cm of the backfilled
shovel test. The results of shovel testing were fully documented on Shovel Test forms.

20

The lone archaeological site documented was mapped using a pace-and-compass method, as well
as a GPS. Field notes were made about the site and a sketch map was drawn. Digital photographs
of the site and selected artifacts were taken, as well as selected photographs representing the
surveyed rights-of-way in general, and a photo log was maintained. Isolated Finds were
documented with a sketched drawing, notes were made of their attributes, and their locations
were mapped using a handheld GPS.

Results of the Investigations
Although the background review suggested that there could be potentially significant prehistoric
archaeological sites along the proposed pipelines, our field examination revealed that in general,
the soils are shallow and eroded, with little or no terrace deposits. Otherwise, the pipelines will
course through upland areas with generally shallow and deflated soils. Evidence of cultural
material observed during our pedestrian survey was on newly discovered archaeological site
41DM190, as well as six Isolated Finds; the locations of these finds are shown in Figure 3, and
they are discussed below.

41DM190
Description

41DM190
(Figures 811) consists
of scattered
fire-cracked
r o c k s ,
chipped
stone tools,
and lithic
debitage on
both sides of
San Lorenzo
Creek. The
western
approach to
the creek is
Figure 8. 41DM190 site map.
gradually

21

sloping and has been machine cleared to within 15 meters of the edge of the creek. Secondary
small mesquite brush, assorted cacti, and sparse bunch grasses are now prevalent. The eastern
slope is more pronounced and exhibits extensive gullying, and mechanical clearing and
channeling, with the same sparse grasses, low thorny brush, and cacti. Otherwise, riverine-like
oaks and larger mesquite trees, thorny brush, and herbaceous weeds as understory are dense
within 10-15 meters along both banks. The creek is deeply incised, with 2-3 meter cutbanks.
However, the west edge cutbank exhibits terrace deposits, while the eastern cutbank suggests
significant sideslope erosion, with only traces of alluvial terracing. At the time of our
examination in December 2012, deep water was standing in the creek in an apparent niche pool
(see cover photo). Surface visibility on the slopes was >95 percent, while visibility adjacent to
San Lorenzo was < 30 percent. Soils along the creek are Brystal fine sandy loams (BYB), with
Verick fine sandy loam (VEC) on the adjacent slopes.

Figure 9. 41DM190 on aerial photograph.

22

Figure 10. 41DM190 western slope approach to San Lorenzo Creek; facing west.

Figure 11. Gullied, mechanically cleared and channeled, and eroded slope of 41DM190 east
of San Lorenzo Creek; facing west.

23

Figure 12. Bulldozed cut on west edge of San Lorenzo Creek; facing east.
Levels of Effort
and Results
An inspection
of the surface
within the 33m eter (100foot) right-ofway, suggests
that cultural
material has
been dispersed
across an
extensive area
on both slopes
of San Lorenzo
Creek such that
they cover
approximately
23,463 square
m e t e r s ( 5 . 8 Figure 13. Shovel testing at 41DM190 on the west edge of San Lorenzo
a c r e s ) . Creek; facing east.
However, the
24

site undoubtedly extends along both sides of San Lorenzo Creek for many meters both to the
north and south, well outside the limited area examined during this pipeline right-of-way survey.
A thorough inspection of the cutbanks of San Lorenzo Creek within the right-of-way revealed
a possible A Horizon on the western side, but no cultural material was observed. In addition, as
shown in Figure 12, the two-track road cut through the San Lorenzo Creek channel was heavily
bulldozed, allowing for an inspection of both the backdirt as well as the resulting cutbank. A
single shovel test excavated on the west edge of the creek (Figure 13; see also, Figure 8) revealed
very pale brown (10YR8/3) silty loam in the upper 20 centimeters, with nine machine-fractured
as well as culturally altered chert flakes, underlain by pale brown (10YR6/3) silty loam with no
lithics below, and then light gray (10YR7/1) silty clay hardpan.
Artifacts observed on the surface on the west side of San Lorenzo Creek included small, widely
dispersed fire-cracked rocks, middle and late stage bifacial manufacturing flakes, biface
fragments, and an Ellis dart point, all manufactured from fine-grained chert (see for examples,
Figure 14). Although not clearly shown in Figure 14, the Ellis point exhibited an impact scar on
its ventral surface, and originally would have been roughly another 1-2 centimeters longer.
Although scattered Rabdotus shells were mixed within the assemblage, none appeared to exhibit
evidence of cultural alteration.
Artifacts observed on the
heavily eroded and
gullied sloping surface
east of San Lorenzo
Creek included scattered
fire-cracked rocks,
bifaces, a unifacial
gouge or adze, blade
flakes, bifacial
manufacturing flakes,
and an untypable point
base (Figure 15 and 16).
The untypable point
base, shown in Figure
15, exhibits evidence of
moderately heavy patina,
and post-depositional
breakage. Although
b l a d e f l a k e s a r e Figure 14. Selected artifacts found on the surface of 41DM190 west
commonly found in Late of San Lorenzo Creek: a and b - bifacial manufacturing flakes; c Prehistoric assemblages biface fragment; d - Ellis Point; e thru h - bifacial manufacturing
as a product of blade flakes.
core technology, larger blades of this size are commonly found in Paleoindian assemblages
(Collins 1995; Kelly 1995; Parry and Kelly 1987).

25

Site Summary,
Conclusions, and
Recommendations
This large open
campsite that spans
both sides of San
Lorenzo Creek appears
to have been occupied
during at least two
periods in prehistory.
Based upon the blade
flakes and untypable but
heavily patinated point
base, we surmise that
the site east of San
Lorenzo Creek was
occupied possibly as
Figure 15. Biface, unifacial gouge/adze, untypable point base found
early as the
Late
on the surface at 41DM190, east of San Lorenzo Creek.
Paleoindian period, ca.
8,850 to 8,000 years
ago. The only truly
diagnostic point type
found was an Ellis
point, suggesting an
occupation period
along the western edge
of San Lorenzo Creek
sometime between
1,550 and 1,300 years
ago.
However, this
assumption is based on
a very limited survey of
the pipeline right-ofway as it transverses
San Lorenzo Creek.
The wide variety of Figure 16. Broken blades and a crude biface found on the surface of
stone tools and scattered 41DM190, east of San Lorenzo Creek.
fire-cracked rocks suggest that it was likely occupied repeatedly throughout the Archaic and Late
Prehistoric periods, but without the discovery of other diagnostics, this will remain an unknown.
This area of the site lies adjacent to a two-track road and fenceline, and likely has been surface
collected for many years. The site’s boundaries in all probability extends further north and south
along both sides of San Lorenzo Creek, well beyond the pipeline right-of-way examined during
this survey.
26

In sum, the portion of the site that will be impacted by construction of the Faith Toro Trunkline
consists of surficial and generally disturbed cultural materials. Other than its positioning on the
landscape, in its current heavily disturbed condition, we assess the research value of the portion
of the site that lies within the Faith Toro Trunkline right-of-way as minimal at best. In view of
this, Tierras Antiguas recommends that construction of the Faith Toro Trunkline as planned be
allowed to proceed through the site, with no further investigations. However, this becomes a
moot point, as the site and creek are to be deeply bored under for pipeline construction, and thus
the site will not be impacted.

Isolated Finds
Isolated Find 1
This is a core reduction flake manufactured from fine-grained, non-heated, tan chert. It exhibits
three multi-direction flake scars and no cortex on its dorsal surface. It was discovered on a
bladed cutbank surface at N3119927 E404272 (NAD83).
Isolated Find 2
This is a crude biface manufactured from fine-grained, non-heated, gray chert. It has no cortex
remaining on either its dorsal or ventral surfaces. It was documented amidst chert carpet gravels
on an upland knoll at N3199936 E404502 (NAD83).
Isolated Find 3
Isolate Find 3 is a light gray bifacial manufacturing flake made from a fine-grained, non-heated
chert cobble. It has two dorsal flake scars and no cortex. It was found at N3119936 E404982
(NAD83) on the surface of a southeasterly sideslope amidst abundant chert gravels.
Isolated Find 4
Isolate Find 4 is a grayish brown bifacial manufacturing flake made from a fine-grained, nonheated chert cobble. It has one dorsal flake scar and no cortex. It was found at N3119938
E404987 (NAD83) on the surface of a southeasterly sideslope amidst abundant chert gravels.
Isolated Find 5
This specimen is a crude biface found on the surface where chert carpet gravels were prevalent
across a deflated sidelope at N3119946 E406160 (NAD83). It had been reduced to an early stage
of reduction, but discarded for an unknown reason, but possibly for coarse-grained inclusions
encountered during the manufacturing process.

27

Isolated Find 6
A core reduction flake found on an upland slope amidst abundant chert carpet gravels is
identified as Isolated Find 6. It has been manufactured from a grayish brown, fine-grained, nonheated chert cobble. It exhibits three dorsal flake scars, with roughly 60 percent cortex
remaining. Its location is N3118781 E406272 (NAD83).

Survey Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations

In sum, two archaeologists walked the entire lengths of the Faith Toro Trunkline and well
connect. Particular attention was provided to the main right-of-way in proximity to the San
Lorenzo Creek area where 41DM190 was documented. In addition, six isolated prehistoric pieces
of chipped stone tools and debitage were discovered. Our assessment of 41DM190 and the six
isolated artifacts is that they are surficial in nature and lie on heavily eroded and deflated
surfaces. As such, they possess minimal research potential to further our understanding of the
prehistory of south Texas. In that regard, we recommend that construction of the Faith Toro
Trunkline and well connect be allowed to proceed as currently aligned. However, Tierras
Antiguas recommends that should any cultural materials be encountered during construction,
such finds should be evaluated by either TAAI archaeologists or any other professional
archaeologists before construction is allowed to proceed.

28

References Cited
Atlas
2012 The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/.
[Accessed December 1, 2012].
2013 The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/.
[Accessed February 21, 2013].
Black, S. L.
1989

Environmental Setting. In From the Gulf Coast to the Rio Grande: Human
Adaptation in the Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T. R. Hester, S. L.
Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement,
pp. 5-17. Research Series No. 33, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Black, S. L., and A. J. McGraw
1985 The Panther Springs Creek Site: Cultural Change and Continuity in the Upper
Salado Creek Drainage, South-Central Texas. Archaeological Survey Report,
No. 100. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Campbell, T. N. And T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indians of the Choke Canyon Reservoir Surrounding Area, Southern
Texas. Choke Canyon Series, No. 1. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archaeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361–400.
Creel, D. G.
1986
Dillehay, T.
1974

A Study of Prehistoric Burned Rock Middens in West Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Arizona, Tucson.

Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(64):180–196.

Fox, A. A., and D. E. Fox
1967 The Classen Rockshelter, 41BX23. Manuscript on file. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
29

Fox, A. A., and P. Ward
1986 Archaeological Investigations at Historic Sites in the Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas; Choke Canyon Series: Volume 12. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D, S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1981 Choke Canyon Series: Volume 5: Archaeological Investigations at Choke
Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke Canyon Series:
Volume 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Hallenbeck, C.
1971 Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca: The Journey and Route of the First European to
Cross the Continent of North America, 1534-1536. Kennikat Press Scholarly
Reprints, Port Washington, New York.
Hester, T. R.
2004
1995
1984

1980

The Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, pp. 127-154. Edited
by T. K. Perttula. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:427–459.
Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In Dimmit
County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell. Wind River
Press. Austin, TX.
Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists.
Corona Press, San Antonio.

Highley, L., C. Graves, and G. Judson
1978 Archeological Investigations at Scorpion Cave (41ME7), Medina County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 49:139–194.
Kelly, R. L.
1995

The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer Lifeways. Smithsonian
Institution Press, washington, D.C.

Leach, J. D., and C. B. Bousman
2001 Cultural and Secondary Formation Processes: On the Dynamic Accumulation
of Burned Rock Middens, Chapter 7. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek
Site, 41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D.
Leach, and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265,
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio
and Archeological Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.

30

Leach, J. D., D. L. Nickels, B. K. Moses, and R. Jones
2001 Appendix D. Estimating Rates of Burned Rock Discard: Results from an
Experimental Earth Oven. In Test Excavations at the Culebra Creek Site,
41BX126, San Antonio, Texas by D. L. Nickels, C. B. Bousman, J. D. Leach,
and D. A. Cargill, pp. 119-145. Archaeological Survey Report, No. 265, Center
for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio and
Archeological Studies, Report 3, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Leffler, J.
1996

Dimmit County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 2, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Leffler, J. J., and C. Long
1996 Webb County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 6, pp. 864-866.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Maps
2012a Biotic Provinces of Texas.
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/landwater/land/maps/gis/map_downloads/images
/pwd_mp_e0100_1070ae_6.gif. [Accessed December 1, 2012].
2012c San Lorenzo Creek 1925. Perry Castañeda Library Map Collection. USACE
Topographic Map. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo [Accessed December
1, 2012].
2012d San Lorenzo Creek 1940. Perry Castañeda Library Map Collection. USACE
Topographic Map. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/maps/topo [Accessed December
1, 2012].
Mauldin, R. P., D. L. Nickels, and C. J. Broehm
2003 Archaeological Testing to Determine the National Register Eligibility Status of
18 Prehistoric Sites on Camp Bowie, Brown County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report, No. 334, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio and the Adjutant General’s Department of Texas,
Department of Facilities and Engineering Environmental Branch, Austin, Texas.
McKinney, W. W.
1981 Early Holocene Adaptations in Central and Southern Texas: The Problem of the
Paleo-Indian-Archaic Transition. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:91–120.
Nickels, D. L.
2011a A Cultural Resources Survey of the 10-Acre Faith Compressor Facility in
Dimmit County, Texas. Archaeological Report No. 41. Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.

31

2011b A Cultural Resources Survey of Ten Miles on the Faith Discharge Lateral Line
on the Faith Discharge Lateral Line in South-Central Dimmit and Northwestern
Webb Counties, Texas. Archaeological Report No. 27. Tierras Antiguas
Archaeological Investigations, Martindale, Texas.
Nunley, P., and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, pp. 233-253.
Parry, W., and R. Kelly
1987 Expedient Core Technology and Sedentism. The Organization of Core
Technology, edited by J. Johnson and C. Morrow, pp. 285-309. Westview Press,
Boulder, Colorado.
Peter, D. E.
1982

Alternative Perspectives on Burned Rock Middens, In Archaeological
Investigations at the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 2,
compiled and edited by T. R. Hays, pp. 20.1–20.15. Archaeology Program,
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.

Prewitt, E. R.
1991 Burned Rock Middens: A Summary of Previous Investigations and
Interpretations. In The Burned Rock Middens of Texas: An Archeological
Symposium, edited T. R. Hester, pp. 25–32. Studies in Archeology 13. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1985 From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.
Sanders, R. R., and W. J. Gabriel
1985 Soil Survey of Webb County. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.
Skelton, D. W.
1977 Archeological Investigations at the Fayette Power Project, Fayette County,
Texas. Research Report 60. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Steele, D. G., and C. Assad Hunter
1986 Analysis of Vertebrate Faunal Remains from 41MC222 and 41MC296,
McMullen County, Texas. In The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological Investigations, edited by G.
D. Hall, T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black. Choke Canyon Series, No. 10. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

32

Stevens, J. W., and D. Arriaga
1985 Soil Survey of Dimmit and Zavala Counties. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C., in Cooperation with
the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station, Texas.
Story, D. A.
1985

Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Coastal Plain. In
Prehistoric Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19–56.
Anthropological Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Taylor, A. J., and L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28): A Prehistoric
Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. Volume I. Studies in
Archaeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Turner, E. S., T. R. Hester, and R. L. McReynolds
2011 Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Gulf Publishing. Houston, TX.

Web Soil Survey
2012 D i m m i t
County,
Webb
County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed
December 1, 2012].
Weir, F. A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Anthropology
Department, Washington State University.

33

