1

Buried in the Bottoms:·
The Archeology of Lake Creek Reservoir
Montgomery County, Texas

'Te~ 51.rcfi. ~earcfi Lab.

Library

Leland C. Bement
Rolfe D. Mandel
Jesus F. de la Teja
Dan K. Utley
Solveig A. Turpin

s~::~c~;~:~s~nomic~--+--+----~ ~~'!:J.'~~~::;:~~=~d,
'ontrol by lineage and
clan

Leadership roles:

gfg;'J!~Je~~eoqe-heads,

dealh-compensction,
making peace

r;.c__ _ _ _---¥.114 "LJ~'h;~;~'s;iJ~~~~t~ers,
ochre, ground stone ornaments,
subsistence Items, bone

I •

Texas Archeological Survey

Research Report 97
AR-TX
TARL 06.097
copy 1

The University of Texas at Austin

1987

1
11 I

BURIED IN THE BOTTOMS:
THE ARCHEOLOGY OF LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Montgomery County, Texas

Leland C. Bement
Rolfe D. Mandel
Jesus F. de la T eja
Dan K. Utley
Solveig A. Turpin

Report submitted to the Bureau of Reclamation
Contract 6-CS-50-05340

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

RESEARCH REPORT 97
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
1987

Principal Investigator: Solveig A.

Turpin_J~ '-~

This page intentionally left blank.

ABSTRACT

In 1986. under Contract 6-CS-50-05340 with the Bureau of Reclamation. the
Texas Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin. conducted a cultural
resources assessment for the proposed Lake Creek Reservoir. Montgomery County.
Texas.
The project incorporated geomorphological. ethnohistorical. historical and
archeological studies with a sample pedestrian survey of 3570 acres -- roughly 20% of
the reservoir area -- to predict the nature and density of cultural resources to be
affected by reservoir construction. Deposits within the Lake Creek Basin represent Late
Pleistocene. Early and Late Holocene periods with Middle Holocene age deposits either
missing or. more likely. restricted to the deeply buried deposits of the floodplain. The
potential for site deposits representing all periods of cultural exploitation is contained in
the Lake Creek area. Pedestrian survey. coupled with intensive shovel probing, located
four with historic Anglo components.
and recorded 46 prehistoric sites
Ethnohistorically. Lake Creek lay within the range of the Akokisa. hunters and gatherers
who practiced a seasonal round. summering on the coast and wintering inland. but no
specifically named villages or camps were found in the study area. The high propensity
for floods and the inhospitable environment of the Lake Creek bottoms discouraged
European settlement in the floodpool. Only one historic component. the former site of
a hardwood mill. predates 1940. The historic potential in the reservoir is limited to
mill sites and isolated burials associated with the timber industry. The sparse Spanish
and Anglo references to the Akokisa were incorporated into models of prehistoric
adaptation. Building on the archeological experiences of the Upper Texas Coast and
Central East Texas and ethnohistorical accounts. a socio-economic model of prehistoric
adaptation for Southeast Texas has been constructed.
This model is theoretically
based in the ethnographic studies of Dalton and Binford with regional support drawn
from Aten's summary of coastal archeology and excavations in Livingston and Honea
reservoirs. The research design for. further work in the Lake Creek Reservoir is based
on a set of expectations that can only be tested by subsurface sampling. Eight sites
located by the 20% survey were recommended for limited testing in conjunction with
intensive survey of the remaining area within the reservoir.

KEYWORDS: southeast Texas prehistory. geomorphology. ethnohistory. history, sample
survey. Montgomery County

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The successful completion of this project is attributable to the many people with
varied talents that provided support for the fieldwork and later analysis and writing
periods. First and foremost in the list to be thanked are the landowners and leasors
of the lands that were surveyed.
These people and organizations include George
P. Mitchell, Mitchell and Mitchell Corporation, Mitchell Development Corporation. Joe
Cliff Mock. Charles Magan. Henry and Estelle Vincent. Dr. William Fonville. Mr. and
Mrs. Joe Stinson. Mrs. Gowing, Frank McWhorter, Ronnie Kilpatrick. Malcolm Damuth.
Alma Gresham. L.B. Walker and Associates. Mr. and Mrs. William Dean. Walter
Damuth. Mr. and Mrs. G.B. Hosford, Houston Agricultural Association. Mrs. Fay
L. Mclaughlin, Doug Howell, Ron Fenter and Buck Syma.
Logistical support was provided by the staff of the San Jacinto River Authority
under the leadership of Mike Cavelier. Special thanks go to Remmie Scarborough for
his backhoe operators expertise. Additional backhoe work was admirably performed by
Joe Stinson.
Local residents who contributed to this project by their intimate knowledge of the
area and its history include Johnny Webel. Mrs. Bessie Owen. Sonny Boy Butler.
Carroll Tharp. Narcissus Boulware. Mr. and Mrs. Maynard Griffith. Charles Mock. Mrs.
P.L. Sneed. Lois Stoneham and Frank Ray. Nancy Olson of the Montgomery County
Museum in Conroe. graciously offered her knowledge of local collectors and prominent
historical and genealogical society members. Becky Carr. geologist and Van Button.
archeologist at the Bureau of Reclamation. Amarillo. provided logistical support and
interest in all phases of the project.
Special thanks to Howard N. Martin of Houston for his assistance with the
research on the Coushatta Trace and to Mary Peoples and her staff at the
Montgomery County Genealogical Society collection. Conroe Public Library.
Drafting of all maps. figures and tables was done by Abby Treece and Rolfe
Mandel.
Darkroom work was performed by Dan Julien.
Editorial services were
provided by Deborah Smith. who also typed the manuscript.
Dr. Solveig Turpin
oversaw all aspects of this project and contributed to the stylistic and logistic
completion of the report.
The field crew - Steve Kotter. Bruce Nightengale. David Robinson and Leland
Bement - deserve special recognition for their valient efforts. undying enthusiasm and
professional performance in the face of all natural and unnatural hardships encountered
during the six week survey in the Lake Creek bottoms.

iv

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
In 1986. the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, and
the Bureau of Reclamation entered into Contract 6-CS-50-05340 for specified cultural
resource studies as a planning guide for a proposed reservoir on Lake Creek. a tributary
to the San Jacinto River in Montgomery County. Texas.
Ethnohistorical. historical.
geomorphological and archeological research. and a sample survey of ten tracts totalling
3570 acres, or 20% of the reservoir flood pool. culminated in a research design for
further work.
The 38 day field season began July 29 and ended September 17. the
least productive time of the year for the labor-intensive aspects of the project. Ten
survey tracts were selected to provide a stratified sample of the minor topographic
variability evidenced in the reservoir.
A heavy reliance on shovel probing resulted in
the identification of 46 prehistoric sites. four with historic components. A total of 321
shovel probes and 26 backhoe trenches were excavated as part of the combined
geomorphological and archeological investigation.
Although the ethnohistoric research found no specifically named aboriginal sites
attributed to the Lake Creek area. early Spanish and French accounts provided some
information on physical characteristics, material culture. social organization. population
densities. subsistence strategies and exchange systems. Lake Creek was included within
the territory defined as the northern or inland extension of the Akokisa who spent the
winter in aggregated villages along Spring Creek. south of the current study area. The
proximity of the related Bidai and the close ties between the two groups suggests that
Lake Creek may have served as an interaction zone. devoted to resource procurement
and trade.
The decimation of the Akokisa. their merger with the Bidai and eventual
absorption by the Coushatta are detectable in names given to the trade routes. or
traces. that traversed the general area.
Although Montgomery County was the scene of important historic events, the
Lake Creek bottoms were hostile to early settlement. The humid environment is not
conducive to preservation. especially of structures built of untreated native lumber.
Only one of four historic components located, a 1920s hardwood mill site. meets the
50 year age criterion for site recording.
Oral and archival information suggests the
greatest potential for historic sites is cut-and-run mills and the unmarked graves of
transient lumber workers. buried where they died.
The geomorphological study was essential to understanding the processes that
buried the majority of the prehistoric sites beneath alluvial. colluvial and eolian deposits.
Five contexts with a high potential for buried sites were identified. Recommendations
for more intensive geomorphological investigations include additional cross sectioning of
the valley. archeological excavations in floodplain mound sites. laboratory analysis of
soils and sediments. radiometric dating where possible, topographic mapping at reduced
scale. and collection of paleoenvironmental data.
The limited exposure of buried sites granted by shovel probing inhibited the
construction of a functional site typology.
Forty-five of the sites were broadly
classified as open campsites. The one limited use locale is a lithic procurement site.

v

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
The time span represented by the five projectile points and 73 ceramic sherds is
restricted to the last 3000 years. Late Archaic through Caddoan periods in the local
chronology.
A cross section of the Lake Creek valley was used to categorize the relationship
of prehistoric occupation to landforms.
Seven topographic settings and four
environmental areas were defined.
The majority of the sites were found along Lake
Creek tributaries. Mound and Fish creeks.
Additionally. site density concentrated in
topographic settings marked by bisecting perennial streams.
Three sites were located
on isolated floodplain mounds with only one site found in the clay matrix of the
floodplain proper.
The results of the survey are viewed within the framework of Aten's (1983)
cultural-historical model of coastal adaptation. Binford's (1980) logistically structured
settlement patterns. and Dalton's (1977) model of aboriginal economies in stateless
soc1et1es.
Binford's model is suggested by the seasonal round or Akokisa model
proposed by Aten from ethnohistoric and archeological data.
The adaptive role of
exchange. which forges political alliances. permits the retention of autonomy and
provides luxury and mundane goods (Dalton 1977). is demonstrated by ethnohistoric
references to Akokisa-Bidai-Caddo interaction. followed by French and Spanish
exploitation of established trade networks. Expectations derived from these models are
outlined for application in any future cultural resource studies in the reservoir.
The difficulties in surveying the densely wooded Lake Creek bottoms mandate
reliance on shovel probing. Survey techniques that proved successful included intensive
probing of sandy deposits and transect coverage of open and deflated areas. Based on
the labor expended in the sample survey. 25 acres per day per person. with an
expectable loss of field time to inclement weather. the remaining 80% of the reservoir
would require the expenditure of 30 to 32 person months and include a minimum of
1280 shovel probes to identify an additional 200 sites. All floodplain mounds within
the sample units contained occupational residues but only one site was identified in the
floodplain proper.
Backhoe testing will be needed to probe the dense clays of the
floodplain for additional sites.
Potential locations include the confluences of minor
tributaries with Lake Creek.
In addition. older components may lie buried beyond the
reach of simple shovel probes in the recorded sites.
Twenty-four sites that may contain significant data should be considered for
Phase Ill testing when the inventory of the reservoir is complete. Eight of those 24
are ranked as candidates for immediate testing.
Sampling of the cultural deposits at
these sites can provide the link between shovel probe findings and site integrity. age
and content of buried components.
In addition. subsurface testing of the most
potentially significant sites will set standards for the evaluation of all sites recorded in
the survey of the remaining acreage within the reservoir.
Specific recommendations
include excavating broad horizontal units to expose features and their relationship to the
artifact assemblage and detailed analytical procedures intended to identify seasonality of
occupation. trade items. subsistence strategies and population characteristics.

-------------------

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . . . .
Acknowledgements .
Management Summary
CHAPTER 1.

v

INTRODUCTION

.

1-1

Solveig A. Turpin and Leland C. Bement

CHAPTER 2.

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING . . . . . . .

2-1

Leland C. Bement

Location .
Climate ..
Vegetation
Fauna ..
Geology .
Soils . .
Hydrology

2-1
2-1
2-1
2-3
2-3
2-4
2-4

CHAPTER 3. ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

3-1

Leland C. Bement

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . .
Upper Texas Coast . . . . . . . . . .
Central East Texas Cultural Sequence
Southeast Texas Cultural Sequence . .
Local Research . . . . . . . . . . .
CHAPTER 4.

GEOMORPHOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

3-1
3-1
3-6
3-7
3-9

4-1

Rolfe D. Mandel

Introduction .
Methodology . .
Physiography .
Surf ace Geology
Landforms . . .
Soils and Stratigraphy
Summary . . . . . . . .
CHAPTER 5.

4-1
4-1
4-2
4-4
4-7
4-12
4-32

ETHNOHISTORIC INVESTIGATIONS

5-1

Jesus F. de la T eja

Introduction . . . .
Historical Narrative
The Akokisa People .
Conclusion . . . . .
CHAPTER 6.

S-1
5-2
5-6
5-9

HISTORICAL INVESTIGATIONS

6-1

Dan K. Utley

General History of Montgomery County
Floods on Lake Creek
Farmsteads
Roads and Traces . . . . . . . .

6-1
6-2
6-3
6-5

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Lumbering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Graveyards, Burial Sites and Hidden Treasure
Oilfields . . . . . .
Hunting Camps . . . . . . . .
Stills . . . . . . . . . . .
Miscellaneous Sites . . . . .
Recorded Historic Components
Preliminary Findings . . . .
CHAPTER 7.

THE SAMPLE SURVEY OF LAKE CREEK

6-8
6-12
6-15
6-16
6-16
6-17
6-17
6-18
7-1

Leland C. Bement

Sample Selection . .
Field Methods . . . .
The Sites . . . . . .
Prehistoric Land Use
Assessment of Site Components
CHAPTER 8.

7-1
7-2
7-4
7-5
7-17

EXPLANATORY MODELS

8-1

Solveig A. Turpin and Leland C. Bement

The Akokisa Model . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Logistically Oriented Settlement Model . .
Aboriginal Economies in Stateless Societies
Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
CHAPTER 9.

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

...

8-1
8-2
8-4
8-9
9-1

Leland C. Bement and Solveig A. Turpin

Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Reconunendations for Additional Work
APPENDIX A.
APPENDIX B.

SCOPE OF WORK . . . . .
SOIL PROFILE DESCRIPTIONS

9-1
9-6

A-1
B-1

Rolfe D. Mandel

APPENDIX C.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

C-1
Leland C. Bement

APPENDIX D.

ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

..... .

D-1

Leland C. Bement

R-1

REFERENCES CITED
List of Figures

Figure 1.1.

Sample survey tracts in the Lake Creek Reservoir

1-2

Figure 2.1.

Mean annual precipitation and temperature in Texas

2-2

Figure 3.1.

Major geological and cultural boundaries in the
San Jacinto and lower Trinity basins . . . . .
Published East Texas and Upper Coast chronologies .

3-2
3-3

Figure 3.2.

--

---

--- - - -

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

4.1.
4.2.
4.3.
4.4.
4.5.

Geomorphological exposures in study area
Landforms in project area
Microphotographs of sand grains .
.
Soil profile, Cutbank 2
Generalized diagrammatic cross section of the Lake
Creek drainage basin
. .
.
.
Generalized diagrammatic cross sections of Mound
Creek and a low order stream
Geomorphic components of a hillslope

Figure 4.6.
Figure 4.7.
Figure 6.1.

4-3
4-7
4-15
4-23
4-33
4-34
4-37

1861 land grant map showing known Indian trade
routes through Montgomery County
Early Texas lumbering
. . . .
.
.
.
.
Early Texas tram operations
Reported historic resources in the general Lake
Creek area
.
. .
.

Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.3.
Figure 6.4.

6-6
6-9
6-10
6-13

Stylized Lake Creek drainage profile
Views of various topographic settings
Acreage surveyed by topographic setting
Frequency of recorded sites by topographic setting
Distribution of sites with ceramics by reservoir
area and topographic setting . . .
Distribution of site size by topographic setting
Plot of observed and expected artifact density and
frequency
.
.
.
. .
.
.

7-5
7-6
7-12
7-13

Figure 8.1.

Interdependent attributes making for alliances

8-5

Figure 9.1.

Expected and observed prehistoric site locations within
the Lake Creek basin .
. .
.
..
Aerial photograph of cleared tract in the Lake Creek
floodplain, showing meander scars and the braided
system of a perennial tributary

9-10

Rim and decorated sherds
Lithic and bone artifacts

D-5
D-11

Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

7.1.
7.2.
7.3.
7.4.
7.5.

Figure 7.6.
Figure 7.7.

Figure 9.2.

Figure D.1.
Figure D.2.

7-16
7-17
7-19

9-9

List of Tables

Table 3.1.

Index Markers for the General Southeast Area

3-8

Table 4.1.

Evolution of Nomenclature, Upper Tertiary and
Quaternary Formations, Coastal Plain, Texas .
Particle-size Data for Trench 19
. . . .
Soil Horizons, Particle-size Data for Trench 23
Particle-size Data for Auger Site 1 . . .
Radiocarbon Dates on Bulk Organic Carbon

4-4
4-13
4-18
4-19
4-22

Table
Table
Table
Table

4.2.
4.3.
4.4.
4.5.

-------

----~----

--

-~

----

---

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Table 4.6.

Description of the Soil-Stratigraphic Sequence at
Cutbank 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 4.7. Particle-size Data for Cutbank 2 . . . . . . . .
Table 4.8. Description of the Soil-Stratigraphic Sequence at
Trench 26 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Table 4.9. Particle-size Data for Trench 26 . . . . . . . .
Table 4.10. Soil Description for Floodplain Mound at Auger Site 3
Table 4.11. Preservation Potential for Buried Cultural Deposits

4-26
4-27
4-30
4-36

Table 6.1.

Montgomery County Population

6-2

Table 7.1.
Table 7.2.
Table 7.3.

Lake Creek Survey: Summary of Recorded Sites
Lake Creek Sites with Ceramics . . . .
Projectile Points from Lake Creek Sites

7-3
7-15
7-15

Table 9.1.

Potentially Significant Sites . . .

9-7

Table
Table
Table
Table

Lake
Lake
Lake
Lake

D-2
D-6
D-8
D-9

D.1.
D.2.
D.3.
D.4.

Creek
Creek
Creek
Creek

. . . . . . . .

Ceramics: Sand-tempered
Ceramics: Grog-tempered
Ceramics: Bone-tempered
Lithics

4-24
4-25

x
------ ---------

---------

-----

-----------

----

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
So/veig A. Turpin and Leland C. Bement

The San Jacinto River Authority and the U.S. Department of the Interior. Bureau
of Reclamation are seeking alternate sources of surface water to meet the growing
needs of urban eastern and coastal Texas. Initial studies. commissioned to determine
the feasibility of a reservoir on Lake Creek. a tributary to the San Jacinto River,
included a review of pertinent ethnohistoric sources (Boyd and Button 1985). vegetation
studies and the identification of endangered biotic communities (James and Wilkinson
1985). A literature and records search. listing all pertinent references and recorded
sites in a ten county area. had been prepared by the Texas Archeological Survey
(TAS). The University of Texas at Austin. for the proposed Bedias Reservoir. north of
Lake Creek (Bartholomew 1986). These studies were used to prepare a scope of work
(Appendix A) for special studies and sample survey to be used in the construction of a
detailed research design to direct all future cultural resource management investigations
in the reservoir. In May. 1986. the Bureau of Reclamation and the University of Texas
at Austin entered into contract number 6-CS-50-05340 for the performance of four
related tasks that would ultimately lead to the formulation of models to guide future
research in the Lake Creek Reservoir.
This pilot study incorporated ethnohistoric research to identify potential site
locations and to devise a model that might help explain both prehistoric and contact
period occupation of the reservoir.
Original documents were compared to modern
translations to determine if Spanish or French chroniclers made mention of the Lake
Creek area.
Of special importance was ascertaining if any named camps could be
identified in the study area. The ethnohistoric research demonstrated that Lake Creek
falls within the range of the semi-nomadic Akokisa and Bidai. Atakapan speakers that
seasonally exploited the study area. The villages specifically located in these sources
were. however. south or north of Lake Creek Reservoir.
Historic research was similarly intended to identify potential site locations and to
provide an interpretive context for the recorded sites. Heavy reliance was placed on
interviews with local informants and the active Montgomery County historical societies.
The humid environment and frequent flooding of Lake Creek discouraged permanent
occupation within the bottoms and contributed to the destruction of any historic sites
once constructed in the floodplain.
Geomorphological research was commissioned in part to overcome the limitations
imposed by the heavy vegetation and recent alluvium that mask extensive areas of the
ground surface.
In addition. the potential for buried sites could be evaluated by
mapping and estimating the ages of various landforms. The geomorphological study
provided the framework for the analysis of site distribution across the landscape of the
basin.
A sample survey of selected tracts along the length of Lake Creek was intended
to provide a first approximation of the impact of reservoir construction on the
prehistoric resources (Fig. 1.1). The sampling design for Lake Creek Reservoir was

.....
):..

~
~
~

"~
::z;,

...... A:~·~ . ''\'

...{ \

-·..1.

.J .. --·1 '··.

Y\

( I j

L. .~ \~' \ ~ ,,. / 1L: J.. T r .

'"\~..\ . "'~:~ ·:. ¥ij

!

.

"...+.··"

·..

. ) .7'. \

liel .

-

I

/

{.1

I
!lo,)

·.

,_,·

\

,.

\

\ \

) j
)
'\i/

\. _/ ·. ) I -.__,. ."". . ,
I.

Ji

\

I

.

\

/,

~·'

LAKE CREEK
PROJECT LOCATION

Jf.IW Survey Tract
0

2
milts

4

'

\

'!

~ "·\

FIGURE 1.1. Sample survey tracts in the Lake Creek Reservoir.

- ..........

'\\
·),

~

i.

1.

~.

\

\
/

f=-JEGYPT

"

;

..\ \...

~
(§
::5

INTRODUCTION

purposefully non-random. Ten tracts, totalling 3.570 acres, were selected based on two
criteria: 1) the minimal amount of topographic and hydrological variety along Lake
Creek was exploited by placing sample units along the length of the impoundment,
targeting areas above and below tributary confluences and along the minor drainways
that would be flooded and 2) tracts which had been subdivided for development, thus
entailing multiple landowners. were avoided in order that the sample would consist of
accessible. continuous blocks. easily relocatable in the future (Fig. 1.1). Block survey
was selected in order that the areas intensively surveyed during the pilot project could
be identified and excluded from resurvey if the project was indefinitely delayed.
The sequencing of the Lake Creek investigations permitted the completion of the
ethnohistoric and historic studies and the preliminary geomorphic mapping prior to the
sample survey. Field work was undertaken between July 28 and September 17. 1986.
The intense heat and inhibiting dense vegetation mandated that 38 days be expended in
surveying the 3.570 acres. This equates to approximately 25 acres a day per person-well below the usual expected allotment. Factors that contributed to the low daily
acreage per person include the labor intensive shovel probing required to locate 43 out
of 46 prehistoric sites and the additional probing needed to determine site size. In all,
321 shovel probes were dug in 20 centimeter levels to an average depth of 100
centimeters (5 levels). In addition, five rain days cost the equivalent of 20 working
days. a loss that can be anticipated in all future Lake Creek field studies.
Forty-six prehistoric sites. four with historic components. were recorded. Only
one of the historic components met the 50 year age criterion for site recording. The
dearth of significant historic sites can be attributed to the inhospitable environment of
the Lake Creek bottoms.
The 46 aboriginal sites are viewed in the context of
economic and subsistence settlement models to predict the nature and density of
prehistoric resources.
Recommendations for future studies in the reservoir include
initiating limited testing at specified sites concurrent with additional intensive survey.
Ethnohistoric research was conducted by J.F. de la Teja. historic studies by Dan
K. Utley. geomorphic analyses by Rolfe D. Mandel. and the archeological survey and
analysis of prehistoric resources by Leland C. Bement. Solveig A. Turpin. principal
investigator. contributed the explanatory models. The field survey was carried out by
Leland C. Bement. Bruce A. Nightengale. Steven M. Kotter and David G. Robinson.
This report is organized into four sections. Introductory material is followed by the
description and results of special studies: geomorphology. ethnohistory and history. The
emphasis on prehistoric resources. Section 3, is mandated by the preponderance of
aboriginal sites in the current inventory. The fourth and last section summarizes the
results of all studies. The original scope of work. soil descriptions, site descriptions
and artifact descriptions are appended.

1-3

This page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER 2: ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Leland C. Bement
LOCATION

Lake Creek is a large, east-flowing tributary of the West Fork of the San Jacinto
River in westcentral Montgomery County, Texas (Fig. 1.1).
The project area lies
approximately 8 miles west of Conroe, the county seat. and 4 miles south of the
historic town of Montgomery. Spring Creek, the ethnohistorically documented inland
center of the Akokisa is approximately 10 miles south of Lake Creek and Bedias Creek.
named for the Bidai Indians. flows 30 miles to the north.
CLIMATE

The proposed Lake Creek Reservoir lies in the subtropical belt that circumscribes
the Gulf of Mexico. Major climatic conditions are derived from the Gulf during the
spring. summer and fall months and from cold arctic air masses in the winter. First
and last freezes occur about November 26th and March 1st, respectively. thus defining
a growing season of 270 days duration (McClintock et al. 1972:67). Average maximum
daily temperature is 63 degrees F. in the winter and 94. 7 degrees F. in the summer
(McClintock et al. 1972:67). Humidity for this area averages 73% and is controlled by
the prevailing southeasterly winds transporting moist air from the Gulf. Periods of low
humidity occur primarily in the winter months and are associated with cool. dry air
masses. locally known as "blue northers". invading on northerly winds. The average
annual precipitation is 47.94 inches including half an inch in the form of snow
(McClintock et al. 1972:69).
Monthly precipitation varies little throughout the year
with the minimum amount in March and August through October and the maximum in
April and May (McClintock et al. 1972:69) (Fig. 2.1).
Flooding of the Lake Creek
Valley is common during the fall and spring and occasionally results from tropical
storms moving inland during August and September.
VEGETATION

Montgomery County lies in a part of Texas where the East Texas pine forest.
oak-hickory forest and coastal prairie meet (Arbingast et al. 1973:11: McClintock et al.
1972:1).
The various plant communities characteristic of each of these broad
vegetation groupings provide diverse economic resources for both the prehistoric and
modern inhabitants. Specific plant communities identified for the proposed Lake Creek
Reservoir area are Hardwood. Hardwood-Pine. Pine-Hardwood, Pine, Streamside and
'
Floodplain forests (James and Wilkinson 1985). Dominant
tree species include loblolly
pine. short leaf pine. various oaks, sweetgum, hickory and elm.
Understory
communities are dominated by yaupon and various vines.

r-

):.

~

MEAN ANNUAL PRECIPITATION

~
~
:);,;
:ti

~

MEAN ANNUAL TEMPERATURE

~

C§
~

I\.)
I

I\.)

Numbers represent Inches.

Numbers represent degrees
Fahrenheit.
REDRAWN FROM ARSINGAST ET AL. 1973

FIGURE 2.1.

Mean annual precipitation and temperature in Texas.

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The composition and distribution of vegetation communities during prehistoric
times has been identified through pollen and macro-plant parts recovered from
archeological sites and bogs (Holloway 1986:315-320: Holloway, Raab and Stuckenrath
1987).
The present communities were established by approximately 2000 years ago
with similar communities in residence as early as 10,000 years ago (Aten 1983:137).

FAUNA
The Southeast Texas area falls into Blair's (1950) Texan Province which includes
47 species of mammals. 29 snakes, 10 lizards, 2 turtles. 7 frogs and toads, and a wide
variety of birds including migratory species.
Certain of these species are useful as
habitat indicators (Werner 1986) and, if combined with economic or subsistence
information. can be used to reconstruct site catchment zones and dietary patterns for
prehistoric man. Although the acidic soils characteristic of this region of Texas are not
conducive to bone preservation. recovery of deer. coyote. turtle. bird. reptiles and
mussel shell at 41PK69, the Crawford Site. provides some evidence for human
procurement within the last two millennia (Hunter 1986:294-314). Ethnohistoric sources
describe plentiful bison. bear. deer. beaver and rabbits at the time of contact. Certain
faunal remains. such as fresh water mussel and fish that were seasonally collected. are
one clue to the scheduling of procurement strategies of prehistoric man.

GEOLOGY
Montgomery County lies primarily on the Gulf side of the Hockley Scarp - the
first cuesta inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Fenneman 1938:111). The Hockley Scarp
forms a rough boundary for the surface exposure of Miocene age materials to the north
and Pliocene - Quaternary age materials to the south (gulfward). The surface geology
in the vicinity of lake Creek consists of the gravel-bearing Willis Formation of Pliocene
age in the uplands with Pleistocene Bentley and Deweyville formations along the valley
sides and terraces, and finally. Holocene alluvial deposits along the stream channels
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1968; Mandel, this report) . .
The Willis Formation contains pebbles to small cobble-size chert and quartzite
deposits and is the first deposit of its kind north of the Gulf of Mexico.
As such,
these deposits are the closest lithic resources available to the aboriginal groups living
along the coast in the vicinity of Galveston Bay.
With the possible exception of
gravels along the Brazos and Trinity rivers. these are also the only chert and quartzite
resources available for a distance of at least 100 miles north. Petrified wood deposits
in the Yegua Formation and fused volcanic glass in the Manning Formation (Brown
1976:189), north of Montgomery County. form the only other major lithic resource
concentration in the area.

2-3

---~-------~~---

----~-------

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

SOILS
Montgomery County contains soils included m eight soil associations: 1) Conroe
association, 2) Splendora-Boy-Segno association 3) Wicksburg-Susquehanna association,
4) Sorter association, 5) Ferris-Houston Black-Kipling association, 6) Albany-Tuckerman
association, 7) Tuscumbia association, and 8) Hockley-Katy association (McClintock et
al. 1972:2-6). Soils found along the Lake Creek drainage contain five of these eight
associations including the three upland types - Conroe. Wicksburg-Susquehanna, FerrisHouston Black-Kipling - and two lowland types - Albany-Tuckerman and Tuscumbia
(James and Wilkinson 1985:11: Mandel. this report).
These soils generally contain
sandy to loamy upper zones and sandy clay to clay lower zones. For a more complete
description see Mandel (this report) or McClintock et al. (1972). The acidity of most
of these soils and the high sand content retard the preservation of organic artifacts.
foodstuffs and pollen needed to reconstruct prehistoric diet. lifeways and environmental
setting.

HYDROLOGY
Montgomery County enjoys an ample water supply in the form of surface water
and subsurface aquifers. The stratification of sands and clays in the substrate provides
numerous avenues for the transport of water. These aquifers can be utilized in two
fashions: 1) tapped and drawn to the surface by wells. and 2) natural artesian springs.
Artesian springs supply much of the annual water that flows in Lake Creek and its
perennial tributaries. such as Mound and Landrum creeks. The surface waters produced
by the discharge of aquifers is supplemented by the release of atmospheric moisture as
rain and, to a lesser extent, snow. The Lake Creek drainage basin encompasses 326
square miles, approximately 8% of the 4000 square miles that constitute the entire San
Jacinto River basin (Bureau of Reclamation 1985). Lake Creek has an average flow of
22 cubic feet per second (Cfs) with a minimum and maximum flow of 1.9 Cfs and 285
Cfs respectively (Bureau of Reclamation 1985). Stream flow varies with the amount of
precipitation and aquifer discharge. Lowest stream discharge occurs during July through
October with a combined total equalling only 10% of the yearly flow (calculated from
Dougherty 1980). The highest flow. nearly 15% of the total yearly discharge, occurs
during April. Increased water flow in November refills or flushes many of the stagnant
ponds along Lake Creek. Though massive flooding is possible during these times, the
freshening of the potable water sources would encourage prehistoric settlement during
the winter months.

2-4

CHAPTER 3: ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Leland C. Bement

INTRODUCTION
The proposed Lake Creek Reservoir falls within an archeologically ill-defined
cultural area known as southeast Texas.
Archeological work along the coast in the
Galveston Bay area and inland in northeast and central east Texas has led to the
development of cultural histories and chronologies for these areas (Fig. 3.1). Overall
trends defined to the north and south can be applied to the study area and so both
cultural history constructs will be presented.

UPPER TEXAS COAST
The Galveston Bay area has received considerable archeological attention. Out of
the numerous studies has evolved a chronology based on geomorphological. technological
and stylistic changes (Fig. 3.2). Perhaps the most comprehensive presentation of this
chronology is Aten's (1983). The earliest inhabitants of the region. the Paleoindians.
lived in a land quite different from that of today.
During the Late Pleistocene and
Early Holocene, lower sea levels and a receding shore line broadened the exposure of
the Gulf Coastal plain. Galveston Bay was then dry land (Aten 1983:137).
Paleoindian Period (ca. 12.000 - 9000 B.P .) habitation sites along the coast
littoral are now inundated by the Gulf of Mexico so archeological materials of this age
are usually found only in dredge spoil and cores (Aten 1983:150). Sites dating to this
period in the present coast littoral actually reflect inland exploitation by the
Paleoindians (Aten 1983:146). These sites contain the fluted and unfluted lanceolate
projectile points and now-extinct faunas typical of the Late Pleistocene.
The following Archaic Period is often subdivided into Early, Middle and Late
portions. This period lasted from 9000 B.P. to approximately 2000 B.P. The Early
Archaic (ca. 9000 to 6000 B.P.) coastal littoral sites, like the Paleoindian sites, have
been inundated by rising sea levels (Aten 1983:153).
Once again the sites presently
above water represent inland occupation during this period.
Initial Middle Archaic Period (6000 - 3000 B. P.) sites along the littoral are
likewise submerged. By approximately 3500 years ago. however. the sea level stabilized
near its present elevation. Thus. littoral sites post-dating this period are represented in
the archeological record (Aten 1983:155). Sites from this period provide the first view
of the nature of coastal littoral exploitation in the Galveston Bay estuary (Aten et al.
1976).
The Late Archaic Period (ca. 3000 - 2000 B.P .) contains the most archeologically
visible sites within the broad Archaic time frame. With the stabilization of the coastal
littoral zone. the changes in the cultural sphere can be identified.
The first major

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

TEXAS

KEY
I Canos' Village

2 El Gordo's Village
3 Mateo's Village
4 Calzones Colorado's
Village

5 El Orcoquizoc:

Lake Creek

Presidio San Agust{n
de Ahumada
Mission Nuestro Senora
de la Luz

Study Area

River Basin
Bohio-Orcoquizac

Rood

Gulf of Mexico
0

10

20

30

40

miles

FIGURE 3.1.

Major geological and cultural boundaries in the San Jacinto and lower
Trinity basins.

3-2

UPPER TEXAS
EAST TEXAS
COAST
DATE
1450-

Y1iA:s
500

,.. 950 -1000

450A.D. ... 1500

Aten(l983)
Old River

u

Story(l981a)

1

aeor Lake '-

508.C.- ... 2000

EARLY
CERAMIC

~

Termini!:,

ddoon FULTON ASPECT
lnterm. Coddoon
GIBSON
111
I- Early
ASPECT
;c
CoddOon
Early
Ceramic

S

...__ 1 ' 1 v ----111---'"'-II -;:

i

LA

t-1050 - '-30001550 - ~3500

3050- c. 5000

wI
w

<J

ARCHAIC

HISTORIC
a:

LATE
~ CERAMIC

LATE PRECADDOAN
HISTORIC !:!
EARLY
WOODLAND 111 CERAMIC

I

HARPE

LATE
ARCHAIC

ASPECT

PRE-

2550 - ... 4500 -

Pre-~do
Formative

HISTORIC

Sha!., •I al.
11970)

-

MIDDLE
ARCHAIC

<t

LATE
LITHIC

a::
<t

4050- L-6000

eonri1980)
a Moor•

HISTORIC HISTORIC HISTORIC
MISSISSIPPIAN
PREHISTORIC

WOODLAND

ARCHAIC

MIDDLE

MIDDLE

EARLY
ARCHAIC

LITHIC
ARCHAIC

u

....:i:

1'.:" 'EARLY

5550-'-7500

EARLY

6050- 8000)

LATE

6550-... 8500

PALEOINDIAN

7050-'-9000

... 9550- L-J0,500

9050- L-IJ,000
9550-'-11,500

EARLY
CERAMIC

LITHIC

1-5050- 7000

8050- '-I0,000

HISTORIC

LATE
LITHIC

LITHIC

,..4550 • ... 6500

... 7550. '-9500

Shaler a S11arn1
119701

LATE
CERAMIC

LATE
CERAMIC
EARLY
CERAMIC

0

~

(.)

3550-'-5500

Fi•ldt
(1978)

Q

:c

CERAMIC

11:1110
1983)

.!:!

550 - L.. 2500 -

2050-'-4000

SOUTHEAST TEXAS
Pall•raon
(1979, 1980)

Brown et al (1982)

HISTORIC

LATE
Round Lake .~
PREHISTORIC
Turtle t!OV i~
Mcivea Island

NORTHEAST TEXAS

LITHIC

=tJ

LITHIC

PALEOPALEO-

PALEO-

~LEO-

)::,.

~

0
,....
0

PALEO-

INDIAN

INDIAN
EARLY
PALEOINDIAN

I0,050- ~12,000

~

INDIAN

~
,....

INDIAN
INDIAN

~

~

~

0

FIGURE 3.2.

Published East Texas and Upper Coastal chronologies.

~

I:)

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

change to be identified is the introduction of ceramics. Pottery vessels were probably
superior to other containers. especially for cooking. Ceramics define the first cultural
period in the Galveston Bay area - the Clear Lake Period (Fig. 3.2) (Aten 1983:286).
The Clear Lake Period extended from A.O. 100 to A.O. 350 and is identified by small.
contracting stem dart points such as Gary. and ceramic types Tchefuncte. Goose Creek.
Mandeville Plain and O'Neal Plain (Aten 1983:283). At the end of the Clear Lake
Period. dart points were replaced by arrow points. The technological shift from the
atlatl and dart to the bow and arrow marks the beginning of the Mayes Island Period
(A.O. 350 - A.O. 650) (Fig. 3.2) (Aten 1983:288).
The use of gastroliths as a
possible source material for arrow points is also noted (Aten 1983:288). This period is
defined mainly by ceramic seriation and is characterized by a resurgence of Goose Creek
Red-Filmed and the elaboration of design patterns on Goose Creek Incised.
Goose
Creek Plain remains the dominant ceramic type.
At the end of the Turtle Bay Period (Fig. 3.2). a shift in ceramic technology
resulted in the introduction of grog, or crushed pottery sherds. as a tempering agent.
marking the beginning of the Round Lake Period which lasted until A.O. 1350 (Aten
1983:288).
The use of sand-tempered wares decreased sharply and Baytown Plain
replaced Goose Creek Plain as the dominant ceramic type.
A resurgence in Goose Creek Plain. Incised and Red-Filmed marks the Old River
Period which extended from the end of the Round Lake Period until A.O. 1700 (Fig.
3.2).
This period includes the protohistoric and early historic aboriginal occupation
along Galveston Bay.
Bone-tempered ceramics peaked during this time.
Early
European trade wares may also be included in the assemblages of this period.
Following the Old River Period. major European colonization is signalled by the
advent of the trade items that distinguish the Orcoquisac Period (A.O. 1700 - A.O.
1810) (Aten 1983:288).
After the Orcoquisac Period. a Late Historic Period is
hypothesized but no sites of this period have been identified along Galveston Bay (Aten
1983:288). The ethnohistoric accounts from this and the preceding two periods (Old
River and Orcoquisac) provide important descriptions of Native American lifeways that
help bridge the gap between the archeological record and the cultural systems that
produced them. The ethnohistoric descriptions form the basis for a seasonal round
settlement model for late prehistory in Galveston Bay.
In 1983. Aten proposed an explanatory cultural-historical model for the upper
Texas coast and areas immediately inland, defined as the territory of the Akokisa (Aten
1983:319). This model. termed the Akokisa Model, charts the historical development of
technologies and subsistence correlated to an exponential population increase. The finer
points of this model incorporate apparent outside influences or intrusions from the
Lower Mississippi Valley or the Caddoan areas to explain technological advances or
influx of materials.
Aten's dissertation (1979) and subsequent book (1983) incorporate historical
accounts of sightings, encounters and dealings between the aboriginals along the upper
Texas coast and the Spanish and French explorers, traders or missionaries, to develop

---- - - - - -

3-4

---~-----

-~----

--~---------------------

----

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

estimates of population size. density. limits of territories. subsistence practices and
social interactions.
This approach assumes an ethnographic stance although no
ethnographic study in the anthropological sense is ever presented or was ever
conducted.
Aten· s synthesis emerged during the influx of great amounts of data about the
upper Texas coast and the lower Trinity River area. Much of the work was Aten's
own; however, other researchers in the area contributed greatly. McClurkan (1968) at
Livingston Reservoir had just finished excavations on sites to be inundated by the
reservoir (Fig. 3.1).
One of these. 41PK8. the Jones Hill Site. provided the only
radiocarbon dated sequence for the area inland from Galveston Bay. At the same time.
Dillehay was testing and excavating along the lower Trinity River. gathering data on
shell middens and geomorphic processes.
Ambler's (1967. 1970. 1973) and Aten's
(1967. 1971) earlier work in the area served as a basis or backdrop for the subsequent
projects and provided a time depth of work in the area to season the new results.
Aten's (1981) own work on determining seasonality of Rangia cuneata harvest
based on shell growth was probably the impetus for the Akokisa Model.
By
determining the seasonality of harvest and thus site occupancy, Aten and others learned
that the coastal sites were only occupied from May through October with very few
exceptions (cf. 41 CH46, Dillehay 1975:55).
Consequently, it was deduced that the
coastal peoples moved out of the area during the winter months. Ethnographic sources
indicate this movement was inland (de la Teja, this report). However, the nature of
inland occupation could not be confirmed due to the lack of information about the
middle and upper San Jacinto River and middle Trinity River. The survey and testing
at Lake Conroe (Shafer 1966, 1968) provided little interpretive data due to the poor
preservation and sandy deposits containing the site materials.
The work at Lake
Livingston (McClurkan 1968) provided more data and important radiocarbon dates but
the ceramic collections contained too many foreign or Caddoan wares to be understood
in an Akokisa Model.
Lacking the substantive data needed to apply the Akokisa
Model. its value at this point was largely historical. presenting the times and
relationships of major technological and stylistic changes that occur along the coast.
More recent projects, such as Addicks Reservoir (Kotter and Fields 1983. Fields.
Freeman and Kotter 1983). Barker Reservoir (Fields et al. 1986). Cinco Ranch (Ensor
1986) and the Crawford Site (Ensor and Carlson 1986) conducted in the more inland
areas adjacent to the upper Texas coast have attempted to frame their research goals
within Aten's Akokisa Model and his hypothesized seasonal round model. The limited
areal extent of these studies preclude any determination of settlement patterns that
might be used in support of the seasonal round model. The archeology has so far
failed to put the seasonal round model to the test.
In its undeveloped state. the
seasonal round model can only suggest a settlement pattern for the coast during the
summer months. The proposed winter occupation of inland sites remains hypothetical.
The technological and subsistence shifts proposed by Aten (1983:319). however. have
withstood the test of excavation of coastal site locations.

3-5

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
CENTRAL EAST TEXAS CULTURAL SEQUENCE
The other well known cultural area with possble ties to Lake Creek is north and
central East Texas, occupied during Late Prehistoric times by groups of Caddoan
speakers (Fig. 3.1). The most recent chronological sequence for this area (Fig. 3.2) is
presented in an overview of East Texas by Story (1981a). The cultural sequence is
divided into four periods: Paleoindian, 10,000 - 6000 B.C.: Archaic, 6000 - 200 B.C.:
Early Ceramic 200 B.C. - A.O. 700: and Late Prehistoric, A.O. 700 - 1700 (Story
1981a:142) (Fig. 3.2). Paleoindian and Archaic period descriptions mirror those for the
same periods along the coast. The Early Ceramic Period begins 300 years earlier in
Northeast Texas than on the coast (Clear Lake Period, Aten 1983:286). and is marked
by the introduction of ceramics akin to Tchefuncte types of the Lower Mississippi
By A.O. 500. the use and production of sandy paste
Valley (Story 1981a:145).
ceramics in south and central east Texas and grog-tempered wares in northeast Texas
became widespread.
The Late Prehistoric Period is characterized by permanent settlements and
agriculture in central and northeast Texas with the retention of mobile hunter gatherer
lifeways in southeast Texas.
With the Late Prehistoric came the Caddo.
Ceramic
seriation - the major chronological framework during the Late Prehistoric - is based
primarily on changes in design motifs and vessel shapes, rather than tempering agents
as used in the Galveston Bay area (Aten 1983:10).
The line between the central
eastern Caddo agriculturalists and the southeastern Atakapan gardeners and huntergatherers corresponds to the geologic Kisatchie Escarpment (Fig. 3.1) (Story
1981a:147).
North of the Escarpment. Story (1981a:147) suggests that extensive
infertile volcanic ash deposits may have halted the southward expansion of intensive
agriculturalists. and their concomitant social order. The Caddo settlements in central
east Texas nearest the Kisatchie Escarpment are most apt to have influenced groups in
the Lake Creek area so further discussions concentrate on this area. With the influx of
agriculturalists came settlement patterns. social organizations and ritual behavior that
differ substantially from those associated with hunting and gathering groups.
In early Caddoan times (ca. A.O. 700 - 1350). the settlement pattern was
hierarchical. Large civic-ceremonial centers with structural mounds, burial mounds and
large resident populations were supported by small permanent villages and hamlets
which were "comprised of less than a dozen households. a community cemetery and, in
some cases. a central plaza" (Story 1981a:149). The large centers such as the Davis
Site in Cherokee County served as nodes in interregional exchange and redistribution.
Contact between the Davis Site population and those to the south is evidenced by the
recovered ceramic assemblages which include San Jacinto Incised and red slipped wares
attributed to the Akokisa area and sandy paste forms with Caddoan design elements
attributed to the Bidai area (Stokes and Woodring 1981:137. 222).
Lithic tools
presumably used in working shell are also numerous and may indicate the importation
of coastal shell (Story 1981b:363).

3-6

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

The
settlement
in central
probably a

Protohistoric and Early Historic Caddo retain much of the hierarchial
pattern developed in earlier times. The best known site of this time period
east Texas is the Deshazo Site in Nacogdoches County.
Deshazo was
hamlet or lesser center (Story 1982:33).

As a result of previous fieldwork. compilations of Caddoan archeology and
excavations at Deshazo. Story (1982:30) presents a synthetic model of settlement
patterns. socio-political organization and intergroup interaction for the Late Caddoan era.
The model identifies three levels of socio-political interaction: 1) affiliated groups. 2)
constituent groups. and 3) site.
An affiliated group is made up of a number of
constituent groups and a major center. The major center serves as the focus or hub
of trade and redistribution and houses the primary socio-political superstructure that
forms the ties of the constituent groups.
The constituent group is comprised of
villages. hamlets. farmsteads. cemeteries and a lesser center. often equating to the
settlment pattern of a single drainage. The site, then. is the smallest division and it
too may be subdivided based on the activities performed there. For the most part. a
site will be either an isolated farmstead. hamlet, small village or lesser center. Shortterm use locales. such as hunting camps, are also postulated as a class of site
although their identification seems unlikely due to small size and short duration of use.
Cemeteries are located in or near the habitation areas and are associated with
individual sites. The basic site consists of a midden area. house structure near. but
not atop. the midden. work areas and possibly a cemetery around the structure.
Structures are identified archeologically by the circular arrangement of post holes.

SOUTHEAST TEXAS CULTURAL SEQUENCE
Lake Creek is at the center of the gap between the upper Texas coast and East
Texas cultural sequences.
The area bounded by the Kisatchie Escarpment on the
north. Brazos River on the west. Sabine River on the East and Galveston Bay and the
Gulf of Mexico on the south is known as southeast Texas (Fig. 3.1). Ethnohistoric
accounts have identified a number of aboriginal groups that lived in this area. These
include the Bidai. Deadose. Patiri. and seasonally. the Akokisa (Newcomb 1980:281). all
probably Atakapan speakers.
In the absence of a well defined chronological sequence for this area. each
researcher has seemingly devised their own by assigning new period names (Fig. 3.2).
A tentative ceramic seriation based on temper and. to a lesser extent. design motifs.
has been suggested by Aten (1983:292-296). but the paucity of intensive excavations
has hampered its refinement. Projectile point types. accompanied by ceramic types in
later times. serve as index markers for particular time periods. A list of these and the
period they represent are provided in Table 3.1.

3-7

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Table 3.1
Index Markers for the General Southeast Texas Area
Historic
Late Prehistoric (Late Ceramic)
Woodland (Early Ceramic)
Late Archaic (Late Lithic)
Middle Archaic (Middle Lithic)
Early Archaic (Early Lithic)
Paleoindian

European trade goods
ceramics:San Jacinto; lithics: Alba
Perdiz. Scallorn, Fresno, Catahoula
ceramics: Goose Creek Plain;
lithics: Elam. Gary
Gary, Kent. Ellis. Ensor. Fairland. Yarbrough
Carrollton. Trinity, Bulverde, Pedernales
Meserve. Dalton, Early Stemmed
Plainview. Scottsbluff. San Patrice. Clovis

In general. the culture history has been divided into three periods:
• Paleoindian
• Archaic
• Late Prehistoric

(9000 B.C. - 6000 B.C.)
(6000 B.C. - A.D. 200)
(A.D. 200 - 1600)

The local Paleoindian period is the least well known but probably is similar in
artifactual type to those to the north and east. The Archaic, often termed the Lithic
Period (Shafer 1975) contains the same elements defined by Johnson (1962:268) as the
La Harpe Aspect. In general. the La Harpe Aspect is characterized by:
. . . (1) flexed burial. usually without accompanying furniture; (2) pitted
ma nos; (3) expanding stem dart points (early phase); (4) contracting stem
dart points (late phase); (5) plain ceramics (terminal La Harpe Aspect); and
(6) various polished and ground stone artifacts. . . (Johnson 1962:269).
The southeastern Texas area shows a scarcity of polished stone artifacts
(Johnson 1962:270). Johnson includes the introduction of ceramics in the terminal La
Harpe Aspect (Johnson 1962:269) which corresponds to the latter part of the Late
Archaic. termed Woodland by Shafer (1975:249) and Patterson (1974:3-4; 1976:172).
and Ceramic by Shafer et al. (1975) and Bond and Moore (1980).
The addition of ceramics to the cultural inventory did not perceptibly alter the
otherwise Archaic lifestyle of these people so adoption of a ceramic technology remains
a component of the La Harpe Aspect. Sometime between A.D. 700 and A.D. 900.
however. other technological changes - the introduction of the bow and arrow and plant
husbandry - signal a transition to a different lifestyle. Ceramic design motifs diversify
and grog and bone are added as tempering agents.
The frequency of dart points

3-8

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
declines, suggesting that the bow and arrow gained in popularity. The effect that plant
husbandry had on the aborigines in southeast Texas is not known, but some
ethnohistoric evidence suggests limited horticulture supplemented hunting and gathering
(de la Teja, this report).
The introduction of the bow and arrow. and agriculture
coincides with the advance of the Caddo into the central east Texas area.
The
changes in ceramic technology and decoration. probably produced by contact with the
Caddo, are used to divide the Late Prehistoric into Early Ceramic and Late Ceramic
periods (Fields et al. 1986:14-15). The Late Ceramic Period endures from A.D. 700
until contact is made with European explorers sometime in the 1600s.
Unlike the Galveston Bay area with its defined site type - small shell midden
occupation. and the Caddoan farmstead, village, or hamlet layout, inland southeast
Texas has no typical site layout or typology. The only apparent trend is that most
sites are located on sandy ridges along the margins and terraces of drainages.
LOCAL RESEARCH

A review of the literature indicates that little systematic work has been conducted
in Montgomery county.
Site files at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
Austin. Texas. listed 7 4 sites in Montgomery County prior to the survey of the Lake
Creek area. Thirty-four of these were recorded during the Honea Reservoir (now Lake
Conroe) project (Shafer 1966).
The many smaller surveys conducted in the county
have generally failed to locate sites. Agencies involved include the Department of the
Army, Galveston District Corps of Engineers, Texas Department of Water Resources,
Federal Energy Regulation Commission, Housing and Urban Development, National Park
Service, Office of the State Archeologist - Texas Historical Commission. Rural Electric
Administration, Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation. Texas
Department of Parks and Wildlife. United States Forest Service, and the Soil
Conservation Service (Bartholomew 1986). The Bureau of Reclamation sponsored the
current study of Lake Creek, bringing the total of Federal and State agencies to twelve.
The most important project in terms of local archeology is the survey and testing
conducted for the National Park Service in anticipation of the impounding of Honea
Reservoir (Shafer 1966, 1968). Honea Reservoir, now Lake Conroe, is only ten miles
north-northeast of Lake Creek. Thirty-four prehistoric sites were located and re~orded
by the survey of the reservoir area along the West Fork of the San Jacinto River.
Shafer (1966) did not estimate the areal extent of his survey nor describe the methods
used.
His objective was simply to obtain a representative sample of the cultural
resources to be affected by the reservoir. Three of the 34 sites, 41MQ4. 41MQ5 and
41MQ6, were tested (Shafer 1968).
Three general trends in culture history were
identified by this work:
1) The initial occupation at each site is Archaic. It is characterized chiefly
by Gary, Kent and Pa/mil/as dart points; crude bifacial implements other than
projectile points are more frequent in the Archaic levels.

3-9

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
2) Ceramics. arrow points and small drills consistently show a
position in vertical distribution than do dart points.

higher

3) Plain, sand-tempered pottery is the most dominant ware in each site
throughout the ceramic levels.
Possibly, the decorated, sand-, bone-. and
grog-tempered pottery were late additions to the ceramic inventory.
(Shafer
1968:78,79)
The trends observed by Shafer (1968) have been supported by additional work in
recent years (Ensor and Carlson 1986. Shafer and Stearns 1975) While the sites tested
by Shafer (1968) belonged to the Late Archaic through Late Prehistoric periods. a
fourth site in the Honea Reservoir area (41MQ41) - the Scott Ridge Site - produced
materials of the Early and Middle Lithic periods (Early Archaic and Middle Archaic
Periods respectively) (Shafer and Stearns 1975:37). The Scott Ridge Site is located
on an upland ridge; a setting with a high potential for early and Middle Archaic age
sites (Shafer 1968:79). The correlation between upland settings and early prehistoric
sites is not a product of settlement but rather the age of the landforms which have
the potential to contain sites of early age. The lack of Middle and Early Archaic age
sites in stream terraces and floodplain contexts corresponds to the inability to find
lowland landforms of these ages.
A second cultural resource inventory conducted in preparation for the construction
of Lake Livingston. 50 miles northeast of Lake Creek. bore out the findings at Honea
Reservoir (McClurkan 1968). Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric - termed Neo-American
by McClurkan - deposits were found in sites to be inundated by the reservoir
(McClurkan 1968:107). Cultural changes here mirror those in surrounding areas. with
sandy paste ceramics appearing with contracting stem dart points.
Dart points are
replaced by arrow points around A.O. 800 with the concurrent introduction of Caddoan
ceramics (McClurkan 1968:110). The first radiocarbon dates for this area of southeast
Texas were produced from the Jones Hill Site (41PK8) at Livingston Reservoir.
These dates include two from the lower level
excavated in 1968 (McClurkan 1968).
and two from the upper level. The lower zone. dated to A.O. 540 - A.O. 980 (TX336
and TX325). is dominated by contracting stem dart points and plain sandy paste
ceramics. Arrow points were recovered in the upper levels of this lower zone.
The upper zone is dated to A.O. 1140 - A.O. 1560 (TX335 and TX330) and is
characterized by contracting stem arrow points and decorated ceramics. including those
of defined Caddoan wares (McClurkan 1968:10). Again. Early and Middle Archaic age
materials were found only in the upland. older landform exposures. The Crawford Site
(41PK69), on the eastern edge of Lake Livingston. contained stratified Early Archaic
through Late Prehistoric materials in sandy upland deposits. Radiocarbon assays date
early site usage from 6240+80 years B.P. to 4000 +110 B.P. (Ensor and Carlson
1986:60). Two thermoluminescence assays identify later occupations at A.O. 1130+90
and A.O. 1250 + 90 (Ensor and Carlson 1986:59).
Technological shifts and their
accompanying lithic or ceramic products follow the same patterns identified at lowland
sites in Livingston Reservoir and sites at Honea Reservoir.

3-10

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Excavations at Honea Reservoir and Livingston Reservoir have been primarily
concerned with sites with deep cultural deposits and the potential for intact stratified
occupation levels.
These excavations were designed to provide data for chronology
building. culture histories and material inventories.
None of the projects have
attempted to reconstruct settlement patterns or investigate sites from a regional
subsistence perspective.
The proposed construction site of Lake Creek Reservoir in Montgomery County
once again falls into the defined upper territory of the Akokisa (Aten 1983:35) affording
the opportunity to test Aten's seasonal round model. Perhaps more important is the
potential for applying more broad-based hunter-gatherer settlement and economic
models. building on the seasonal round hypothesized by Aten (1983).
These models
will also rely upon information supplied by the Spanish and French traveling though the
area during the seventeenth. eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (de la Teja. this
report: Boyd and Button 1985) and the data gained through archeological investigations.

3-11
-----

- - - - - - - - - -

---------------------~-----~~

-

This page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER 4: GEOMORPHOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Rolfe D. Mandel
INTRODUCTION
This chapter focuses on the geomorphology and near-surface stratigraphy of the
Lake Creek project area.
The Scope of Work (Appendix A) did not require a
comprehensive subsurface investigation of landforms in the Lake Creek Valley. Instead.
the geomorphological investigation was conducted as a pilot project. with emphasis
placed on gathering data to structure an effective and cost-efficient program for future
geomorphological studies. The major objectives of the geomorphological investigation
were to:
1) identify areas where a high potential exists for recovering intact
archeological sites. especially those of the Archaic and Paleoindian periods: 2) suggest
the location and approximate spacing of shovel tests and areas for particularly intense
inspection of natural and man-made profiles: 3) formulate a detailed strategy for future
deep subsurface testing programs: and 4) provide baseline data for future excavation
programs. The conclusions and evaluations presented in this chapter are intended to
assist the Bureau of Reclamation in developing cultural resource management strategies
for the project area.

METHODOLOGY
Several methods were used to accomplish the objectives outlined above.
The
geomorphological investigation began with a review of the literature pertinent to the
late Quaternary geologic history of the project area.
In addition. interviews were
conducted with professionals who are familiar with the geology. soils, and
geomorphology of the area. including individuals at The University of Texas Bureau of
Economic Geology, the Soil Conservation Service. and universities in eastern Texas
(Texas A & M University and Lamar University).
A generalized map of landforms in the project area was prepared by combining
data from the Soil Conservation Service 1:20,000 - scale soil maps (McClintock et al.
1972) and the USGS 1:24.000 - scale topographic maps with information gleaned from
field investigations.
Unfortunately, contour intervals on the 7.5 minute topographic
maps are not sensitive enough to delimit many landforms subtleties that are important
to this investigation. Aerial photographs were also examined. but they were of little
value to the terrain analysis due to the dense vegetative cover in the project area.
After the preliminary geomorphological data were gathered for the project area.
A total of 26
detailed subsurface investigations were undertaken with a backhoe.
trenches were excavated by a tractor-mounted backhoe with a maximum depth of
penetration of about 3.5 meters. Most of the trenches were dug along cross-valley and
longitudinal transects in the eastern half of the project area. A hand-operated bucket
auger was used in areas where the backhoe could not gain access due to landowner

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
restrictions. swampy conditions or dense vegetative cover. Geomorphological data were
also gleaned from stream cutbanks and from archeological shovel tests in the project
area. The location of backhoe trenches. auger holes. and cutbanks that yielded soilstratigraphic information are shown in Figure 4.1.
Detailed descriptions of all selected natural and man-made exposures were made
in the field using standard United States Department of Agriculture procedures and
terminology (Soil Survey Staff 1981).
Soil profiles were described according to the
latest taxonomic nomenclature outlined by Birkeland (1984). The soil descriptions are
presented in Appendix B. Organic-rich soils and sediments encountered in exposures
were collected for radiocarbon dating. Radiocarbon samples were submitted for analysis
to Beta Analytic. Incorporated. Additional soil and sediment samples. taken at selected
locations. were placed in labeled plastic bags for transfer to the University of Kansas
Quaternary Research Laboratory.
Laboratory analyses were conducted on selected soil and sediment samples to
determine lithological discontinuities and help establish relative chronologies for
depositional units. The analyses included determination of: 1) particle size distribution
by pipette method (Day 1965): 2) clay mineralogy by X-ray defraction (Hallberg. Lucus
and Goodmen 1978): and 3) surface morphology of sand-sized particles using Scanning
Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Krinsley and Doornkamp 1973).
PHYSIOGRAPHY
The project area is located in the West Gulf Coast section of the Coastal
Proyince (Texas Water Development Board 1977). This region is a nearly flat plain
sloping gently toward the Gulf of Mexico, with low. wide valleys and slow surface
drainage.
Nowhere in the Gulf Coastal Plain does any great amount of relief occur.
However. the degree of relief increases away from the coast and a slightly rolling
landscape begins in southern Montgomery County.
The project area is characterized by a well-developed dendritic drainage network
that consists largely of first-. second-. and third-order streams according to the ranking
system of Strahler (1958). Lake Creek. the largest stream (fifth order) in the project
area. flows approximately 60 kilometers from Richards. Texas to its confluence with the
San Jacinto River. draining an area of about 844 square kilometers. The gradient of
Lake Creek is low throughout the project area. ranging from about 1 to 2.5 m/km.
The combination of low stream gradient. poor drainage and high water table has
resulted in the development of swampy conditions on the valley floor.
Within the project area, the principal tributaries of Lake Creek are Fish. Mound
and Landrum creeks. Although there is usually streamflow in these creeks throughout
the year. most of the first- and second-order streams are intermittent. and carry
appreciable amounts of runoff only during periods of intense and prolonged ram.
However, some of the small streams are fed by springs or seeps.
Discharge from
these sources is usually adequate to maintain year-round streamflow.

------

4-2

-----------~---------

<'·. (

"·)-··f

t

..<

\Ti ) >
l I

.

--\.

L

\

/v

.J:>.
I

w

~
\

\
Backhoe Trenches
Cutbonks
•

0

~

Auger Siles

2

4

t

~

\

\

'\.

<

)

miles

FIGURE 4.1.

Geomorphological exposures in the study area.

,

nm
\

"· \
·.

\

Il \

~T

I

i...

'l

I

\

\
\

\

.

.

\

\I

~

0

s:0
~

~

0
10
r-

C'\

"""'

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
The landscape of the Lake Creek Valley consists of a wide. flat floodplain
bordered by flat to gently rolling river terraces and gently to steeply sloping valley
The steepest slopes are located on the southern side of Lake Creek
walls.
approximately 6.0 kilometers west of its confluence with the San Jacinto River. Within
the project area. there is a maximum relief of 55 meters between the valley floor and
the highest ridgetops. Numerous benches. knolls and minor interfluves step down from
the major stream divides to the valley floor. The slopes of the valley walls are heavily
eroded, with many draws cut into the surfaces of Pleistocene and Plio-Pleistocene
deposits. The origin and characteristics of these deposits are described in the following
discussion.
SURFACE GEOLOGY
The surface geology of the Coastal Plain of Texas has been studied by a number
of investigators.
The basic geological framework and definition of formations was
established by Dumble and Kennedy during the late 1800s and by Hayes, Udden, Dall
and Deussen during the early 1900s (see Kennedy 1891; Dumble 1894; Hayes and
Kennedy 1903; Dall 1913; Deussen 1914: Udden, Baker and Bose 1916). Evolution of
the stratigraphic nomenclature is presented in Table 4.1.

Table 4.1. Evolution of Nomenclature. Upper Tertiary and Quaternary
Formations. Coastal Plain. Texas (taken from Solis 1981).
--

Hayes and
Kennedy,
1903
Beaumont

Demsen, 1914,
1924

Ban on.
1930

Beaumont

Plummer,
1932

Weeks,
1933

Doering.
1935

Beaumont

Beaumont

Beaumont

Beaumont
Columbia

Lissie

Lissie

..,

Uvalde

csc:

Lafayette

>ox:

"'

- - - - - De Win

.£
~

Lissie

Unnamed
Pliocene
Sand

g

u

Upper
Lissie
lower
Lissie

Prairie

Beaumont

Montgomery

Unnamed
Second
Terrace

Bentley

Lissie

u

Goliad

Beaumont

§
"':l
E
.;...

Lissie

Willis
.st

;:;

"'c:

e

Tipsword,
1962

Willis

Willis
~

c;
Upper
Lagarto
·or Reynosa

Bernard
and others,
1962

Lissie

c:

Goliad

Fisk, 1938;
Bernard.
1950

e

~
~

u
Goliad

Goliad

Frio Clays

----Fay1me
Sands

Fleming
Clay

Lagana
Lapar a

Fleming

::c
c:

.E

Lagarto

lower
lagarto

Oakville

Oakville

.;;
Oakville

"-

::c

.Ec:

"'

..._

Lagarto
Oakville

::c
c:

·::

;:
.:::

lagano ,
Oak,·ille

The surface deposits that mantle the Coastal Plain of southeastern Texas consist
primarily of offlapping series of coastwise (ie.. coast parallel) terraces. Each terrace is
a series of deltaic or alluvial plains of the major Texas rivers that flow across the
Coastal Plain.
The deltas and fans coalesced from stream to stream. and each
successively younger deposit overlaps the seaward part of the previous deposit. The
Beaumont Sheet of the Geologic Atlas of Texas (Bureau of Economic Geology 1968}
shows four major coastwise terraces. They are. from oldest to youngest. the Willis.

4-4

GEOMORPHOLOGY
Bentley. Montgomery and Beaumont formations.
In addition to these coastwise
terraces, a series of river terraces extend inland along the major streams. The river
terraces have been correlated with the Bentley, Montgomery and Beaumont coastwise
terraces (Bureau of Economic Geology 1968).
Also. there is the "Deweyville" river
terrace that has no known subareal coastwise equivalent.
The four-fold division of the Pleistocene formations (Willis. Bentley. Montgomery
and Beaumont) shown on the Beaumont Sheet is based on A.N. Fisk's model of Gulf
Coast Pleistocene geology. According to Fisk (1938. 1939. 1944). the four Pleistocene
formations were laid down as fluvial. deltaic. coastal marsh and lagoonal sediments
during times of high sea level. similar to the present. The intervals of high sea level
were associated with the Pleistocene interglacial stages.
Fisk assigned the Williana
Formation (equivalent to the Willis) to the Aftonian interglacial; the Bentley Formation
was considered Yarmouthian; the Montgomery, Sangamonian and the Prairie (equivalent
to the Beaumont). mid-Wisconsinan. Fisk (1944) believed that the sediments in the
terrace fills of the lower Mississippi River were derived from the glacial outwash
deposits of the upper Midwest.
He argued that each successive terrace was tilted
Gulfward, the cumulative effect of which is the older terraces are more steeply inclined
than the younger ones and terminate. in many places. along well-developed erosional
scarps. According to Fisk's scheme. the previously deposited formations were incised
and dissected by streams during the glacial episodes of the Pleistocene. Fisk attributed
stream entrenchment to falling sea levels that accompanied glaciation.
Although the four-fold scheme of Fisk still appears in recent accounts of Gulf
Coast geology. it is currently being dismantled. Modification of Fisk's model began
with Bernard's (1950) recognition of a terrace (Deweyville Formation) that lay below
the Prairie but slightly above the modern floodplain along a number of Gulf Coast
streams. Recent assaults on Fisk's sequence are listed below.

1. Fisk's model assumes a one-to-one correlation between the coastwise terraces
Dort (1985) and Boellstorff (1978) have
and the Pleistocene inter-glacial stages.
demonstrated that the sequence of glacial and inter-glacial events is much more
complex. The lithostratigraphic record indicates that there were at least seven major
glacial advances in portions of the Midwest during the Pleistocene. some pre-dating the
classical Nebraskan stage. There is also evidence for more than four stages of high
sea level stands during the Pleistocene (Beard. Sangree and Smith 1982).
2.
Fisk assumed that the Pleistocene began around one million years ago.
Studies of eustatic cycles indicate that late Cenozoic glacially controlled sea level
changes may have started over 2.6 million years ago (Fillon 1984; Beard. Sangree and
Smith 1982).
3. The "erosional scarps" that Fisk used to define part of the boundaries of the
coastwise terraces are actually products of faulting (Van Siclen 1978: Verbeek and
Clayton 1981).
4. The Williana Formation (Willis Formation m Texas) is now considered late

4-5

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Pliocene or Plio-Pleistocene in age (Solis 1981): its deposition appears to be unrelated
to glacial events of the Pleistocene.
5. There is disagreement on whether the Prairie Formation (Beaumont Formation
in Texas) is a Sangamonian or intra-Wisconsinan deposit.
6.
Fisk's correlations of the Red River terraces in north-central Louisiana with
coastal terraces have been questioned (Alford and Holmes 1985; Alford. Kolb and
Holmes 1985).
The Bureau of Economic Geology is presently revising the sheets of the Geologic
The four-fold sequence of coastwise
Atlas of Texas covering the Gulf Coast.
formations (Willis. Bently. Montgomery and Beaumont) is being reduced to a three-fold
sequence (Willis, Lissie and Beaumont). Despite these recent revisions. the stratigraphy
of Quaternary deposits in southeastern Texas remains controversial.
LANDFORMS
The landform map of the project area (Fig. 4.2) shows three major landform
units in the Lake Creek Valley. These units were identified by combining data from
soil and topographic maps with information gleaned from the field investigation. The
three landform units are. in order of descending elevation. (1) the High Terraces (HT).
(2) Low Terraces (T-1) and (3) Floodplain (T-0) (Fig. 4.2).

High Terraces
The surfaces of the High Terraces (HT) in the project area are approximately 8
to 15 meters above the modern floodplain of Lake Creek.
The High Terraces are
strath surfaces developed on the Willis coastwise formation. and the Lissie river
terraces. The Willis and Lissie were combined into a single landform unit because (1)
the same soils occur on both and (2) a distinct scarp does not separate the Lissie
deposits from those of the Willis.
Thus. it was impossible to determine the areal
extent of the Willis and Lissie lithostratigraphic units on either the 1:20.000 scale soil
maps or the 1:24.000 topographic maps. Also. the scale of the Beaumont Sheet of the
Geologic Atlas of Texas is too small (1:250.000) to permit an accurate transfer of
landscape data onto the 7 .5 minute topographic maps.
The Willis Formation 1s the oldest lithostratigraphic unit and highest
geomorphological surface in the project area. The name Willis was first introduced by
Doering (1935). after the town of Willis in Montgomery County, to describe a sequence
of sands and gravelly sands unconformably overlying the Fleming Formation (Miocene)
in southeastern Texas. Willis sediments originally were called the DeWitt Formation by
Deussen (1914): Dumble (1918) referred to these deposits as the LaFayette Gravel:
Bailey (1923) named them the Lower Lissie: and the formation was mapped by the
U.S. Geological Survey as undifferentiated Lissie and Reynosa (Darton. Stephenson and
Gardner 1932: Trowbridge 1932). Doering (1935) originally thought that the Willis was

4-6

y-"

~

-..

~

..
EID

C)

Floodplain (T-0}
Law Terrace (T-1}
High Terrace (HT)
(in vicinity of reservoir)

,,

\

~

...
\

0

2

4

miles

FIGURE 4.2.

Landforms in project area.

\,,.

)
!

,

\
/

v

......

<-r-J~~·

\

"· \ "·\ )

_A·'~
~

'.'
'(

>
i

-···-···-\..

ibEGYPT

1...

\

\ ·.

I

)

\

·.

.

\

s::0~

::0

~
0
r0

C')

-oe::

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
However. Fisk (1938. 1944) suggested that the Williana Formation
Pliocene in age.
(Louisiana equivalent to Willis) was a fluvial-deltaic unit deposited during the
Yarmouthian interglacial episode of the Pleistocene. Using topographic criteria, Doering
(1958) reevaluated Fisk's model and concluded that the Willis Formation was PlioPleistocene in age.
The results of more recent investigations of possible Willis
equivalents, especially in Citronelle in Louisiana, Alabama and the panhandle of Florida
(see Rosen 1969; lsphording and Lamb 1971; Otvos 1973). suggest that it ranges m
age from mid-Pliocene to very early Pleistocene.
The Willis Formation dominates the uplands in the project area. It consists of
reddish. mottled, coarse and gravelly sands and subordinate clays attaining a maximum
thickness of about 50 meters.
The sands and gravels are primarily rounded and
subrounded quartzite. chert and petrified (silicified) wood. These sediments are often
cemented with iron oxides and ironstone concretions are common. Many exposures of
cross-bedded Willis sand and gravel may be seen in roadcuts and gravel pits throughout
the project area.
The Lissie (fluvial) Terrace occurs on the north side of Lake Creek between
Mound and Fish creeks.
The name Lissie was first used by Deussen (1914) to
describe a coastwise formation in eastern Texas. The Lissie was later subdivided by
Bernard and LeBlanc (1965) into a younger Montgomery Formation and an older
Bentley Formation. The latest revision of the Texas Gulf Coast geology (Van Siclen
Instead. they
1985) does not attempt to distinguish between these two formations.
have been recombined into the Lissie Formation. Although the Lissie occurs primarily
as a coastwise formation in Montgomery County, its sediments also form streamparallel deposits in the area.
The age of the Lissie Formation is not known.
However, based on radiocarbon dates from the inset Beaumont Formation in
southeastern Texas (see Aronow. Nordt and Hallmark 1986). the Lissie is older than
37.000 years.
The Lissie Formation is similar in character to the Willis Formation.
Lissie
sediments consist of reddish, reddish-yellow and gray fine- to coarse-grained crossbedded
sands and gravels that contain intercalations of clay and sandy clays. They include
abraded fossils and lentils of gravel of varied composition (Solis 1981). According to
Barnes (1974). the Lissie sediments were deposited as meanderbelt, levee, crevasse
The upper part of the formation is calcareous m some
splay and floodbasin fades.
locations, and may include calcareous concretions and iron-manganese nodules.

Low Terraces

The Low Terraces (T-1) occur as discontinuous remnants that flank Lake Creek
and its major tributaries (Fig. 4.2). The elevation of the T-1 surface ranges from 2 to
5 meters above that of the modern floodplain. Bernard (1950) recognized low terraces
along a number of Gulf Coast streams.
He assigned the name Deweyville to these
terraces after the Texas town located in the type area along the Sabine River.

4-8

GEOMORPHOLOGY
The most notable characteristics of the Deweyville Terrace is that the meander
scars on its surface have considerably larger wavelengths. channel widths and radii of
curvature than those of modern streams. Also. the Deweyville fill is coarser than that
of the modern floodplain. The T-1 terraces consist of very fine to coarse sand grading
in places to clayey silts and silty sands. The grain size of the Deweyville deposits. as
well as the larger meander scars. seems to indicate a paleodischarge several times
larger than the modern discharge (Alford and Holmes 1985).
Aten (1983:111)
commented that "the extreme lateral and vertical erosional capability of the Deweyville
streams was the primary agent responsible for scouring and shaping the valleys of
many Gulf Coast river systems into their present configuration."
In his original description of the Deweyville Terrace, Bernard (1950:40) recognized
two alluvial sequences. The older of these is widely exposed whereas thhe younger,
which is entrenched into the Deweyville fill. is known primarily from subsurface
evidence. Aten (1983:111. 114) designated the older and younger Deweyville surfaces
as T2 and Tl. respectively.
A buried Deweyville surface (described later in this
chapter) was observed in the study area but no discrete T2 has been designated.
There is no general agreement about the age of the Deweyville Terrace. Bernard
(1950) suggested that the fill was deposited during the early Holocene when sea level
was below the modern stand.
Gagliano and Thom (1967) suggested that the
Deweyville fill is associated with a high sea level stand that may have occurred during
the Farmdale Substage (ca. 30.000-20.000 B.P.).
Rehkemper (1969:32) noted that
Deweyville terraces are capped by approximately 9000 year old peats in the subsurface
under Galveston Bay.
Peat overlying submerged Deweyville surfaces at Sabine Pass
also has yielded dates of about 9000 B.P. Nelson and Bray (1970) reported that peat
at the top of fluvial sand, presumed to be Deweyville, on the continental shelf is
approximately 10,200 years old.
Aronow (1976) presented radiocarbon dates for
Deweyville Terrace deposits that range from as young as ca. 13.250 years B.P. to
older than 30,000 years B.P. Aronow, Nordt and Hallmark (1986:14) suggested that
the Deweyville may encompass a rise-fall-rise sequence of sea level fluctuations in the
Wisconsinan (i.e .. a Farmdalian sea level rise, a Woodfordian sea level fall and a postWoodfordian sea level rise).
Saucier (1977) argued that the Deweyville is midWisconsinan to early Woodfordian in age. Aten (1983) suggested that the Deweyville
is basically Woodfordian and that the largest meander scars are associated with an
intense cold period that occurred very late in the glacial stage (ca. 10.500 B.P.).
Alford and Holmes (1985) noted that the sharp definition of the meander features and
the low relief of the Deweyville terrace remnants relative to the modern floodplain of
the Sabine River suggest that the Deweyville surface is Holocene in age. Archeological
evidence supports the idea that some of the Deweyville surfaces are post-Pleistocene.
Paleoindian artifacts that are no more than 11.000 years old were found by Sellards
(1940) in the basal portion of a Deweyville-like fill. Artifacts recovered from the upper
portion of the deposit indicated a mid-Holocene age for the surface of the terrace.
Taking this evidence into account, Alford and Holmes (1985) noted that the implied
chronology would allow the large meanders to be associated with the warmer climate of
the Altithermal (ca. 7.500-4,000 B.P.) or perhaps with the increased summer monsoonal

4-9

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
inflow of moist air that
assignment is in accord
Louisiana that have been
age (ca. 15.000-3000 B.P .)

is thought to have begun around 9000 B.P.
This age
with the age of Deweyville-like terraces in southeastern
radiocarbon dated as late Woodfordian to late Holocene in
(Alford. Kolb and Holmes 1983).

In the present study, a date of 9380 + 190 B.P. was determined on bulk organic
carbon recovered from the surface of a buried Deweyville-like deposit in the Lake Creek
Valley. This date supports Aten's (1983) contention that the Younger Deweyville (T-1)
strath terrace records a major reversal in the rising sea level phase of the late
Wisconsinan (probably post-Two Creekan glaciation). and that modern fluvial conditions
were established soon after 9000 B.P.

Modern Floodplain
The modern floodplain (T-0) is the lowest and youngest landform in the project
area.
Floodplain deposits mantle the flat valley floors of Lake Creek and its major
tributaries.
The T-0 surfaces consist of many fluvial geomorphological features in
varying degrees of preservation. The floodplain generally lacks the large fluvial patterns
noted on the T-1 surfaces. although in places the T-0 surface has a palimpsest, or
obscured, large-scale point bar pattern suggestive of the T-1 level. Meandering fluvial
patterns are, for the most part, restricted to the immediate vicinity of Lake Creek and
its major tributaries, where small radii meander loops are evident.
The palimpsest
Deweyville pattern, along with rare. small-scale meander scars. suggest that the actual
area laterally traversed by the meandering Lake Creek during Holocene time is relatively
narrow.
Depositional features that occur on the T-0 surface include point bars. natural
levees, flood drapes and floodplain mounds. The point bars occur where the streams
have meandered or moved laterally.
At other locations. levees have formed where
stream velocity dropped as floodwaters overflowed the channel banks.
The levees
generally are several meters wide and less than one meter high. Most of the levees
have been deflated or dissected by gullying; however, well-preserved remnants occur on
the southern side of Lake Creek at the east end of the project area.
The most prominent features on the T-0 surface are low. circular to elliptical
sandy mounds. referred to as "floodplain mounds" in this report.
Typically. the
mounds are 10 to 30 meters in diameter and rarely more than 1.5 meters in height.
although smaller and larger mounds are also present.
Floodplain mounds occur in
clusters and as isolated features. The T-0 surfaces around the mounds generally are
flat and featureless. with the exception of small scours.
The internal structure,
composition and origin of the floodplain mounds will be discussed later in this chapter.
The T-0 surfaces in the Lake Creek Valley appear to be Late Holocene in age.
Aten (1983:115) suggested that the floodplain deposits of streams on the Texas
Coastal Plain aggraded during the final phases of rising post-Pleistocene sea level.
This period began around 9000 years ago.
Aronow (1976) noted that floodplain

4-10

GEOMORPHOLOGY

deposits in Montgomery County are graded to modern sea level. which reached its
present stand between ca. 5000 and 3500 years B. P.
In the present study. bulk
organic carbon recovered from floodplain deposits at depths of 65-85 cm. 167-177 cm.
and 250-260 cm yielded dates of 2170 + 60. 3080 + 60. and 8530 + 110 years B.P ..
respectively.
This sequence of dates suggests that the T-0 surfaces are relatively
young and closely post-date Deweyville Terr ace deposits.

SOILS AND STRATIGRAPHY
Geologic deposits and associated soils bear a close relation to major landform
units described on the preceding section. Since an extensive stratigraphic study was
not undertaken. the observations offered here are general. This discussion is intended
to serve as a guide for future research and planning efforts, but should not be
considered comprehensive. The locations of all geological exposures mentioned in the
text are shown in Figure 4.1.

High Terraces
As mentioned previously. the High Terrace forms the uplands of the project area.
Erosion undoubtedly is the dominant geologic process in the area of these ancient
terraces. A well-integrated drainage net exists. and the slopes range from about 1 to
15 percent. The steep slopes (>5%) often are deeply eroded exposing red B-horizon
material of the soils. The footslopes and toeslopes usually are zones where sediment
Sediment also accumulates in small
eroded from adjacent sideslopes accumulates.
stream channels and draws that have incised the High Terraces.
Other zones of
sediment accumulation on the High Terraces include tributary interfluves and knolls that
occur downslope from the major stream divides. In addition to the colluvial sediment
from adjacent higher slopes. the relatively flat surfaces of these landforms are mantled
by wind-blown sediments at some locations.
The Fuquay (Arenic Plinthitic Paleudult). Wicksburg (Arenic Paleudult}. Boy
(Grossarenic Plinthic Paleudalf). Splendora (Fragic Glossudalf). and Susquehanna (Vertie
Paleudalf) series are the dominant soils on the High Terraces in the project area. In
general, these soils have sandy surface horizons lying abruptly over sandy clay loam or
clayey subsoils. The A horizons usually are less than 12 centimeters thick, and often
are low in organic matter.
An abrupt textural change exists across the boundary
between the E and Bt horizons in these soils. The Bt horizons exhibit well-developed
structure. and usually are strongly acidic. Most pedons have common to many mottles
in hues of 2.5YR to 2.5YR. values of 4 to 8. and chromas of 3 to 8. Plinthite occurs
in the subsoil of the Fuquay. Boy and Splendora series. and ironstone concretions are
common in the Bt horizons of all soils on the High Terraces.
In addition to the five dominant soil series on the High Terraces are a number of
other soils that are less common. These soils are the Albany (Grossarenic Paleudult).
Blanton (Grossarenic Paleudult}. Burleson (Udic Pellustert). Conroe (Arenic Plinthite

4-11

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Paleudult). Crowley (Typic Albaqualf). Eustis (Psammentic Paleudult). Hockley (Plinthite
Paleudalf). Lucy (Arenic Paleudult). Tuckerman (Typi Ochraqualf) and Waller (Typic
The Albany. Hockley and Luch soils are formed in sandy and
Glossaqualf) series.
loamy. noncalcareous sediments. The Blanton soil is formed in sandy. noncalcareous
eolian deposits that mantle the high. flat knolls. The Burleson soil is formed in clayey
alkaline sediments. The Conroe, Crowley and Tuckerman soils are formed in clayey,
noncalcareous deposits on the ancient stream terraces.
The Waller soil occupies
depressions on flat surfaces of the High Terraces.
Among the soils on the High Terraces are three series -- the Albany. Lucy and
Tuckerman -- that also occur on the Low Terraces in the project area. Normally one
would expect a soil chronosequence across terraces of differing ages. but because of
similar alluvial lithologies. possible modification from erosional. colluvial and eolian
processes. and/or existence of a pedogenic steady state. soil differences are not great
enough to allow terrace/soil correlations. Thus. it is not always possible to isolate
time as the primary soil forming process. This is especially true with soils on the
Willis and Lissie surfaces. The ambiguity of the soil chronosequence across the WillisLissie boundary may be explained. in part. by considering the concept of a pedogenic
steady state.
The High Terraces in the Lake Creek Valley are dated as Middle
The soils on these terraces evolved rapidly soon after the
Pleistocene or earlier.
original sediments were exposed to the subaerial environment. However. through time,
the rate of soil genesis slows greatly and, eventually, additional incremental changes
may become imperceptible. i.e.. a point of steady state is reached. It is likely that
pedogenic steady state has been attained or approached on the terraces older than T-1
in the Lake Creek Valley, thereby explaining soil similarities on the surfaces of Willis
and Lissie deposits (Aronow, Nordt and Hallmark 1986).
The soil stratigraphy of High Terrace deposits was examined in 14 backhoe
trenches (Trenches 1-4. 7. 9, 10. 12. 15. 18-22: Fig. 4.1).
All of these trenches
exposed thick zones of loose sand overlying sandy clay loam or clayey sediment.
Rounded siliceous pebbles up to 2.0 centimeters in diameter are scattered throughout
the sandy zone. The contact between the E and Bt horizons is very abrupt, usually
yielding a sharp boundary over a transition range of only a few millimeters. With the
exception of the soils exposed in Trenches 1. 2 and 3, there is little evidence of
interfingering of the sandy E horizon with the upper surface of the Bt horizon.
The abrupt nature of the E/Bt contact suggests that the Bt horizon represents a
lithological discontinuity.
Textural analyses performed on sediment samples from
Trench 19 provide additional evidence of this break in the depositional sequence. The
total sand and silt contents calculated on a clay-free basis are shown in Table 4.2.
The rationale for this method of expressing particle size is that it should minimize the
effects of clay illuviation on the recognition of lithologic discontinuities. The textural
data show there is a uniform sand/silt ratio down to the E/Bt contact. after which
there is a sharp decrease.
As noted earlier. the High Terraces are older than 37,000 B.P .. and in the case
of the Willis Formation, date back to Plio-Pleistocene times.
However. at 17 sites.

4-12

GEOMORPHOLOGY

Table 4.2.

Particle-size Data for Trench 19

Horizon Depth Horizon Depth Horizon Depth Horizon Depth
(cm)
(cm)
(cm)
(cm)
Particle
Size
A
Distribution
Sand

M

c
vc

Total

41-52

2Bt

2Btc 52-116

12.8
61.9
3.9
0.3
0.1
79.0

12.0
61.1
4.8
0.4
0.1
78.4

12.8
47.2
3.5
0.4
0.2
64.1

16.9
38.8
0.3
0.0
0.0
56.0

3.0
7.2
8.9
19.1

2.6
7.3
9.4
19.3

2.6
7.8
8.8
19.2

0.1
3.6
7.6
11.3

1.0
0.9
1.9

1.3
1.1
2.4

14.0
2.9
16.9

30.8
2.0
32.8

eu

VF
M

c

Total
Clay

10-41

E

eo

VF
F

Silt

0-10

eu

<.Su
2-.5u
Total
Clay
Free
Basis
Sand OD
Silt OD
Sand/Silt
Ratios

A

E

2Bt

2Btc

80.5
19.5

80.2
19.8

77.0
23.0

83.3
16.7

4.1

4.1

3.3

4.9

VF=very fine, F=fine, M=medium, C=coarse, VC=very coarse

4-13

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Late Prehistoric cultural materials were found in the lower zone of the sandy epipedon
at depths of more than one meter beneath the land surface. The presence of ceramic
artifacts within the E horizon suggest that the epipedon is a late-Holocene deposit.
Rounded, siliceous pebbles are scattered throughout the sandy overburden, indicating
these deposits are composed, in part. of colluvial sediments derived from the Willis
Formation. However, SEM examination of sediment samples from Trenches 9, 10, 12.
15, 18 and 19 indicate the sand fraction, which usually makes up more than 75% of
the sample, is composed almost entirely of fine and very fine sand grains that were
transported at one time by wind. The larger sand grains (0.25-0.125 mm) tend to be
well-rounded and without edges: sphericity changes are common (Fig. 4.3a). Fractured
portions of the grains are characterized by large upturned plates (Fig. 4.3b). Solution
and precipitation have modified many of the plates producing rolling microtopography on
the grains. The smaller sand grains (0.125-0.062 mm) usually display flat upper and
lower surfaces with irregular grain ends (Fig. 4.3c). Occasionally. concoidal breakage
features create angularity (Fig. 4.3d). These very fine grains were carried primarily in
eolian suspension. never experiencing the violent collisions that created the mechanical
features on larger grains.
The fine and very fine sand grains showed evidence of
frosting.
The presence of siliceous pebbles scattered throughout what appear to be eolian
sands raises a question about the origin of these deposits. Clearly, the pebbles were
It is likely the sandy overburden represents eolian
not deposited by the wind.
sediments that were reworked and transported relatively short distances as slopewash.
The siliceous pebbles probably were incorporated into these reworked eolian sands as
they washed downslope.
Thus. these surface deposits principally consist of colluvial
sediments overlying the eroded and weathered surfaces of the Willis and Lissie
formations.
The colluvial deposits on the High Terraces in the Lake Creek Valley probably are
This formation is an informal stratigraphic
equivalent to the Big Brushy formation.
unit named for the stratum that contains cultural materials at the Big Brushy Site in
Vernon Parish. west-central Louisiana (Bianchi 1984:463-467). At its type locality it
consists of massive sandy and loamy sediments of colluvial origin. Typically, it is the
parent material in which the modern A and E horizons developed (Bianchi 1984:
Heinrich 1986a, b).
Heinrich (1986a) noted that in southeastern Texas, an abrupt
erosional contact separates sandy and loamy sediments of the Big Brushy formation
The Big Brushy formation also has been
from the underlying Lissie Formation.
identified in east-central Texas (Heinrich 1986b). Bianchi (1984) and Heinrich (1986a)
suggested that the Big Brushy formation is no older than early Holocene, and
frequently is much younger. as indicated by the occurrence of Late Prehistoric materials
as the only undeflated cultural remains within this stratum at the Eagle Hill II Site
(Brown 1982:273-275; Servello and Bianchi 1983:441-443).
In summary. the High Terraces
project area.
They are composed of
stream terrace deposits (Fig. 4.2).
Pleistocene in age, and the Lissie fill

are the highest and oldest landforms iri the
the Willis coastwise formations and the Lissie
The Willis Formation is thought to be Pliois more than 37,000 years old. Together, the

4-14

----~------------------

-----

GEOMORPHOLOGY

FIGURE 4.3.

Microphotographs of sand grains. a) large round eolian sand grain with
smooth surface (.2 mm dia.) b) large quartz grain with mechanically
broken upturned plates (.15 mm dia.) c) small quartz grain with flat
surface and irregular ends. note concoidal fracture (.09 mm dia) d) fine
irregular quartz grain with rounded corners. conchoidal breaks on surface.

4-15

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Willis and Lissie deposits form the uplands of the Lake Creek Valley. Although the
High Terraces are. as a whole. being degraded by erosion. the upland landscape can be
subdivided into areas of net erosion and net aggradation.
For example, the steep
shoulder and backslopes are areas of net erosion.
Often, these hillslope positions
exhibit the eroded B horizon of the modern soil. or they may show a weakly expressed
stone line that represents an erosional lag. In contrast. the footslopes and toeslopes
are zones of net aggradation, where sediment eroded off adjacent slopes accumulates.
Other zones of net aggradation are the summits of tributary interfluves and knolls
that occur downslope from the major stream divides. The relatively flat surfaces of
these landforms often are mantled with colluvium derived from adjacent higher slopes
and. in some locations. with windblown sands and silts.
The soils on the colluvial slopes of the High Terraces are characterized by sandy
epipedons overlying strongly developed loamy or clayey Bt horizons.
Morphological
evidence and textural data suggest that the top of the Bt horizon represents a
lithologic discontinuity. In addition. the micro-texture of quartz grains from the sandy
epipedons indicate they are composed. in part. of eolian sediments that have been
transported relatively short distances as slopewash. These findings suggest that the
epipedon of the modern soils are formed in colluvium that mantles an eroded Bt
horizon developed in Willis or Lissie fill.
The presence of ceramic artifacts in the
sandy epipedon at one location indicates that some of the colluvium is late Holocene in
age.

Low Terraces
Remnants of the Low Terrace (T-1) are mapped in Figure 4.2.
As noted
previously, the T-1 is equivalent to the Deweyville Terrace described by Bernard
(1950). The T-1 surfaces are relatively flat with slopes ranging from 0 to 1 %. Most
of the Low Terraces have been dissected by small streams and gullies that drain into
Lake Creek and its major tributaries.
In general. the soils on the Low Terraces are sandier than those on the High
Terraces.
Although isolated occurrences of Lucy (Arenic Paleudult) and Tuckerman
(Typic Ochraqualf) soils may be noted on fine-textured T-1 alluvium. the Albany soil
dominates. The Albany is a Grossarenic Paleudult characterized by a sandy epipedon
overlying a sandy loam. fine sand loam. or sandy clay loam argillic (Bt) horizon. The
A horizon usually is less than 15 centimeters thick. and often is low in organic matter.
The E horizons are structureless and consist largely of medium. fine, and very fine
sands. The thickness of the E horizon ranges from about 50 to 200 centimeters.
The soil stratigraphy of T-1 deposits was examined in four backhoe trenches
(Trenches 16. 17. 23. and 24). In addition. samples of T-1 sediments were taken at
various locations with a bucket auger. The T-1 deposits consist of thick mantles of
loose sand and sandy loam overlying strongly-weathered loamy alluvium. The A and E
horizons of the modern soil are formed in the sandy surface sediments. The boundary

4-16

GEOMORPHOLOGY

between the sandy epipedon and the loamy subsoil is very abrupt. Also, the thickness
of the argillic horizon is independent of the thickness of the epipedon.
These
morphological properties suggest that the Bt horizon represents a stratigraphic
discontinuity.
Particle-size analysis was conducted on selected pedons to better
understand the relationship between the sandy epipedons and the underlying Bt
horizons.
Textural data for the T-1 sediments from Trench 23 and Auger Site 1 show that
the E horizons are composed of approximately 40 to 50% fine sand (0.25 - 0.10 mm).
13 to 20% medium sand (0.5-0.25 mm). and 11 to 13% very fine sand (0.10-0.05 mm)
(Tables 4.3 and 4.4). On a clay-free basis. the textural data for Auger Site 1 show a
uniform sand/silt ratio down to the E/Bt contact. below which there is a sharp
decrease (Table 4.3). At Trench 23. the sand/silt ratio is uniform down to the E1/E2
contact (Table 4.4). There is a moderate decrease in this ratio going from the E1 to
the E2. followed by a sharp decrease at the E2/Bt transition. Thus. the textural data
indicate that the upper surface of the Bt horizon represents a stratigraphic
discontinuity. The archeological evidence supports this interpretation.
Twenty-six archeological sites have been discovered on Low Terraces in the
project area. At 17 of these sites. ceramic artifacts dating back no further than about
1500 B.P. are deeply buried in the sandy epipedons. As noted earlier. most of the
radiocarbon dates from the Texas Coastal Plain suggest that the Deweyville Terr ace
(T-1) aggraded between ca. 30.000 and 9000 B.P. Thus. the presence of Late
Prehistoric artifacts in the upper 1-2 meters of the T-1 deposits suggests that the
surfaces of the Low Terrace have been zones of deposition during the late Holocene.
The origin of the sandy deposits on the T-1 surfaces in the Lake Creek Valley is
problematic. At several locations. there is subtle evidence of stratification in the lower
zones of these deposits. For example. thin lamellae were observed near the base of
the E2 horizons in Trenches 16. 23 and 24 (Appendix A).
However. for the most
part. these deposits consist of clean. homogeneous. unstratified sands: there is no
evidence of cross-bedding or fining-upward sequences. The fact that artifacts seem to
be scattered through the sand. rather than concentrated. suggests the human occupants
and the depositional agency operated in the same area at the same time. rather than
alternately. These findings raise the question: what is the origin of the sand?
Aronow (1986) suggested that the sandy deposits on the T-1 surfaces are
accumulations of wind-transported sediments. There are numerous sources for the sand
including point bars. levees. channel deposits and floodplain mounds along Lake Creek
and its tributaries. The sand may have been transported off the floodplain by wind.
and subsequently trapped in vegetation on the T-1 surfaces.
SEM examination of
sediments from the sandy deposits support this hypothesis.
Sand grains from T-1 surface deposits at Trenches 16. 17. 23 and 24 and at
Auger Sites 1 and 2 were examined with a scanning electron microscope. The larger
sand grains (10.5-0.25 mm) typically are well rounded and without edges (Fig. 4.3a).
Wind abrasion has produced distinct upturned plates on the fractured portions of the

4-17

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Table 4.3.

Particle
Size
Depth
Distribution (cm)
A

0-13

Soil Horizons, Particle-size Data for Trench 23
Depth
(cm)

Depth
(cm)

Depth
(cm)

E1
13-79

E2
79-130

2Bt1
130-177

Depth
(cm)
2Bt2
177-215

Sand (%)
11. 7
45.3
19.0
3.0
0.3
79.3

12.3
43.2
16.0
2.8
0.5
74.8

14.1
32.5
6.8
0.6
0.0
54.0

3.7
7.8
10.0
21.5

1.8
5.4
11.4
18.6

1.9
8.8
12.5
23.2

4.4
13.9
15.3
33.6

1.0
0.1
1.1

1.5
0.4
1.9

1.2
0.9
2.1

10.1
2.4
12.5

11.5
44.1
19.5
2.1
0.2
77.4

VF

F
M

c
vc

Total

12.7
32.1
7.4
0.4
0.1
52.7

Silt (%)
VF

M

c

Total
Clay

3.0
11. 7
14.0
28.7

(%)

<.5u
2-.5u
Total
Clay
Free
Basis

0-13

Sand(%)
80.6
Silt (%) 19.4
Sand/silt
Ratios
4.2

13-79

79-130

130-177

81.0
19.0

76.3
23.7

61.6
38.4

4.3

3.2

1.6

VF=very fine, F=fine, M=medium, C=coarse, VC=very coarse

4-18

16.7
2.2
18.9

177-215
64.7
35.5
1.8

GEOMORPHOLOGY

Table 4.4.

Horizon Depth
(cm)
Particle
Size
Distribution

10-45

E1

Particle-size Data for Auger Site 1

Horizon Depth
(cm)
E2

45-76

Horizon Depth
(cm)
76-95+

2Bt

Sand OD
VF
F

11.8
52.4
13.0
0.9
0.2
78.3

12.5
50.3
14.2
1.4
0.2
78.6

11.6
36.4
9.3
0.9
0.1
58.3

1.8
5.5
10.8
18.1

2.0
6.1
10.3
18.4

2.6
7.9
8.7
19.2

<.5u
2-.5u
Total

1.6
2.0
3.6

1.6
2.0
3.6

20.7
2.0
22.7

Clay
Free
Basis

10-45

45-76

81.0
19.0

81.1
18.9

75.3
24.7

4.2

4.3

3.0

M

c
vc

Total
Silt

'")

VF
M

c

Total
Clay (")

Sand (")
Silt (")
Sand/Silt
Ratios

76-95+

VF=very fine, F=fine, M=medium, C=coarse, VC=very coarse

-----------------

4-19

--

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
grains. Many of the smaller grains (0.25-0.05 mm) have flat upper and lower surfaces
with irregular ends (Fig. 4.3c).
It is apparent that the small grains underwent only
limited eolian transport since they lack mechanical features indicative of strong or
extended impact.
Given the modern environment of the Lake Creek Valley. it is difficult to consider
the possibility that large volumes of sand were mobilized. transported. and deposited by
the winds during the late Holocene. As noted in Chapter 2. the natural vegetation on
the floodplains and terraces consists of mixed stands of oak. hickory and pine.
However. the current riparian vegetation along Lake Creek may not have been present
when the eolian sands were deposited.
Aronow (1986) suggested that prairies or
savannas may have existed in the region at times during the late Holocene. indicating a
drier environment.
Palynological data from Weakly Bog m east-central Texas
(Holloway. Raab and Stuckenrath 1987) indicate that an episode of warmer
temperatures and drier conditions persisted in that area after 1500 B. P.
These data
suggest that a climate more favorable to eolian processes may have existed in eastcentral Texas throughout much of the Late Holocene. It is not known whether these
same bioclimatic conditions extended into southeastern Texas.
Nevertheless. episodes
of landscape instability. conducive to eolian processes. may have been initiated in the
region by infrequent. but severe. droughts during the late Holocene.
Residents of
eastern Texas reported that sand dunes were common along many streams in the
region during the drought years of the 1930s (Aronow 1986). In addition to reducing
vegetative cover. droughts create conditions that are favorable for widespread forest
fires.
Fires. in turn. further remove protective vegetative cover. thereby exposing
sediments for transport by wind.
In summary. remnants of a Low Terrace (T-1) occur along Lake Creek and its
major tributaries.
These remnants are thought to be equivalent to the Deweyville
Terrace that flanks many streams on the Gulf Coastal Plain. The T-1 deposits have
flat. dissected surfaces approximately 2-5 meters above the modern floodplain.
The
soils on the T-1 surfaces typically have a thick. sandy epipedon overlying a loamy Bt
horizon.
The Bt horizon formed in stratified sediments of fluviatile origin. However.
available data strongly suggest one or more episodes of eolian transport of much of the
sediment composing for the sandy epipedon. The source of the sand could have been
point bars. levees. stream beds. and perhaps burned-over floodplain mounds in the Lake
Creek Valley. The sand is thought to have been transported relatively short distances
by the wind and probably did not develop dunes.
Instead. the fine sand appears to
have been in suspension before it settled onto the vegetated or partially vegetated T-1
surface. The micro-textures of the larger sand grains suggest they were transported
near or at the ground surface by saltation. An eolian event. every year. producing a 1millimeter thick sand layer. or any suitable combination of other events. would provide
1.5 meters of accretion in 1500 years. very roughly the rate of accretion for the sandy
deposits on the Low Terrace.

4-20

- - - - - ---------

GEOMORPHOLOGY

Modern Floodplain

The Modern Floodplain (T-0) is an extensive landform (Fig. 4.2.). In the present
study. floodplain deposits of Lake Creek and its major tributaries were identified mainly
on the basis of certain soils that are considered to form in T-0 sediments. However.
as will be discussed later, most of the area mapped as floodplain apparently consists of
thinly veneered Deweyville deposits.
The actual valley laterally traversed by the
meandering channel of Lake Creek during Holocene time appears to be relatively narrow.
Compared to the soils of the Low and High Terrace levels. soils of the floodplain
are fine textured. The Tuscumbia soils occupy the greatest area of the T-0 surface.
They are formed in clayey alluvium on slopes typically less than 1%. The Tuscumbia
soils are classified as Vertie Haplaquepts. They are characterized by a thin. dark grey
A horizon overlying a thick. gray Bg horizon.
The Bg horizon has coarse. blocky
structure with prominent slickensides on the faces of peds. The soil matrix of the A
and Bg horizons is very hard when dry and very sticky and plastic when moist. The
Tuscumbia soils are poorly drained and have very slow permeability. They are flooded
frequently and the water table is near the surface during the winter and early spring
(McClintock et al. 1972).
Other soils that occur on the floodplain are the Bruno (Ty pie Udifluevent).
Chipley (Aquic Quartzipsamment). Kosse (Fluventic Haplaquoll). Kaufman (Vertie
Haplaquoll). and Trinity (Vertie Haplaquoll) series. The Bruno series is composed of
sandy soils formed on natural levees near stream channels.
The Chipley soils art
formed on sandy floodplain mounds. The Kosse series consists of deep. somewhat
poorly drained. loamy soils.
The Kaufman and Trinity soils are similar to the
Tuscumbia soils. but both have thicker mollic epipedons (>60 cm) and the Trinity soils
are calcareous.
The soil stratigraphy of floodplain deposits was examined in eight backhoe
trenches (Trenches 5-6. 8. 11. 13-14. and 25-26) and at two stream cutbanks in the
project area. In addition. a bucket auger was used to take sediment samples from a
sandy floodplain mound. The subsurface investigation revealed complex stratigraphies at
a number of locations on the floodplain. At Trenches 6 and 13 (Fig. (1). 3 vertical
meters of very dark gray and dark gray clayey alluvium were exposed beneath the T-0
surface in the main valley of Lake Creek (see Tables B.6. B.13. Appendix B). There
was no obvious textural variation in these deposits. The soils at both localities are
classified as Tuscumbia clay. The dark colored A and Bg horizons of the soils indicate
high organic-carbon contents. A radiocarbon date of 3080 + 60 B.P. was determined
on bulk organic carbon recovered at a depth of 167-177 centimeters beneath the surface
at Trench 6 (Table 4.5). Based on the radiocarbon date and the fine texture of the
sediments. the alluvium at Trench 6 represents late Holocene overbank deposits.
At Trenches 5 and 25 near Mound Creek (Fig. 4.1). relatively thin clayey deposits
rest on thick deposits of fine sandy loam (see Tables B.5, B.22. Appendix B). The
stratigraphic sequences observed at Trench 26 and Cutbank 2 near Lake Creek (Fig.
4.1) resembled those at Trenches 5 and 25, although the clayey surface deposits were

4-21

- --

------~---~--------

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

thicker at the lake Creek localities. The texture and color of the alluvium suggest
that the clay-rich sediments represent Holocene flood-drapes overlying the eroded surface
of the Deweyville (T-1) Terrace. laboratory data presented in the following discussion
support this hypothesis.

Table 4.5. Radiocarbon Dates on Bulk Organic Carbon

Material
dated

Site

Soil 1 Trench 6
Soil Cutbank 2
Soil Cutbank 2
Soil Cutbank 2
1

2

Deposition
unit
1
2
4
5

Depth below
surf ace (cm)
167-177
65-85
250-260
285-300

Date 2
Cyr B.P .)
3080+60
2170+60
8530+110
9380+190

Lab No.
Beta-18273
Beta-18274
Beta-18275
Beta-18276

Dates for soils were determined on bulk organic carbon.
All dates are 13 C corrected.

At Cutbank 2 (Fig. 4.1). approximately 5 vertical meters of floodplain alluvium
are exposed in a continuous profile (Fig. 4.4: Table 4.6). The stratigraphic sequence
at Cutbank 2. from top to bottom. is as follows: dark grayish-brown sandy loam (Unit
1): dark brown clay loam (Unit 2): dark grayish-brown clay loam (Unit 3): gray clay
loam (Unit 4): and grayish-brown sandy clay loam (Unit 5). All of the depositional
units are laminated e~cept Unit 2. which appears to be composed of overbank
sediments that filled small. shallow channels cut into Units 3 and 4. A radiocarbon
date of 2170 + 60 B.P. was determined on bulk organic carbon from the up.per zone
of Unit 3 (Table 4.5). Thus. Units 1. 2 and 3 are late Holocene floodplain deposits.
Although Unit 4 resembles the clayey late-Holocene deposits morphologically. bulk
organic carbon from its base yielded a date of 8530 + 110 B.P. (Table 4.5). X-ray
analysis of clays from Unit 4 indicate dominant smectite mineralogy.
Thick.
intersecting slickensides. and streaks of material that fell into open cracks. provide
abundant evidence of the shrink-swell cycles that result from the combination of high
smectite. high clay content. and wetting-drying cycles of the sediment.
A weak
textural break separates Unit 4 from the surface of Unit 5 (Table 4. 7). However. the
sediments of Unit 5 coarsen rapidly with increasing depth. Based on its morphological
and textural characteristics. Unit 5 strongly resembles the Bt horizon of the Albany
soils exposed in trenches on the Deweyville (T-1) terraces. A radiocarbon date of 9380
+ 190 B. P. determined on bulk organic carbon from the surface of Unit 5 suggests
that this deposit is part of the younger Deweyville fill.
Thus. the stratigraphic
sequence at Cutbank 2 consists of a thin mantle of late Holocene floodplain sediments
(Units 1-3) resting unconformably on early Holocene alluvium (Unit 4). Unit 4 overlies
the eroded strath surface of the Deweyville (T-1) Terr ace.

4-22

GEOMORPHOLOGY

DEPTH
IN METERS
0 ...................
. :::::::::::::::::::: :::: :::: ::::::::::::
....... .........
..........
······ .... . ..................... .
.........
........

.. ·.·.·········.·.· ..... ······.············

. .... ·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.··· ···.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·.·

0

················
.. ································
·······························. ····························
·················
········· ...................................
.............................................
················ ..... ..............
············································
·················
...................
.············································
.····································
............... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
............. ································
..............
·······························
................ ... ..............................................
...................
············································
..............
······························· ············································
.............................................
..........
..
································
············································
·················
..
············································
.... . . . . . . ....... ....... ......... . .. .. . . . . .
················ .... ..............
·················
·········· .... ································
······························· .············································

1.0

2.0

2.0

3.0

3.0

4.0

4.0

SEDIMENTARY UNITS

- -

UNIT 1

U NIT2

U NIT 3

C - 14 Dates:

0

0.5

1.0

CD 2170±60 B.P.
® 8530 ±110 B.P.
® 9440 ±190 B.P.

Scale in Meters

FIGURE 4.4. Soil profile. Cutbank 2.

4-23

UNIT4

UNIT5

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Table 4.6.

Description of the Soil-Stratigraphic Sequence at Cutbank 2.
Depth (cm)

Depositional
Unit

Description

0-55

1

Overbank deposit. Grayish brown (10YR5/2)
sandy loam dark grayish brown (10YR4/2)
moist; structureless; loose; horizontal
lenses of fine sandy loam at depths of ·
3.5-6.0cm, 13-15.5cm, and 51-55cm below
the surf ace; faint lamination through the
deposit; noneff ervescent; abrupt smooth
boundary.

55-145

2

Overbank deposit that has filled small
channels cut into Units 3 and 4. Dark
grayish brown (10YR4/2) clay, dark brown
C7.5YR4/2) moist; few fine faint yellowish
brown (10YR5/4) mottles and few very fine
distinct strong brown (7.SYRS/6) mottles;
moderate, fine, angular blocky structure;
firm; common dessication cracks filled with
fine sandy loam from above; noneffervescent; abrupt wavy boundary.

55-130

3

Overbank deposit. Grayish brown (10YR5/2)
clay loam, dark grayish brown C10YR4/2)
moist; fine and very fine distinct strong
brown (7.SYRS/6 and 5/8) mottles; strong,
coarse columnar structure; firm; common
fine pores with ferromanganese coatings;
noneffervescent; abrupt smooth boundary.

130-260

4

Overbank deposit. Gray (10YR6/1) clay
loam, gray {10YR5/1) moist; common fine
distinct strong brown C7.5YR5/6 and 5/8)
mottles; moderate fine blocky structure;
firm; common, thick, intersecting slickenslides; dessication fractures as great as
85cm long and 2 cm wide, with fine sandy
loam in the fractures; few ferromanganese
coatings on pressure faces and on the walls
of fine pores; few fine ferromanganese concretions; noneffervescent; diffuse smooth
boundary.

260-310

5

T-1 (Deweyville fill) . Light brownish
gray (10YR6/2) sandy clay loam, grayish
brown C10YR5/2) moist; many medium faint
light olive brown (2.SYRS/4) mottles;
massive; firm; few fine and medium ferromanganese concretions; noneffervescent;
gradual smooth boundary.

310-500+

5

T-1 (Deweyville fill). Light grayish.brown
(2.5YR6/2) sandy clay loam, grayish brown
(2.SYRS/2) moist; common fine distinct
light olive brown C2.5YR5/6) and yellowish
brown (10YR5/8) aottles; 11assive; loose;
texture fines-upward; noneffervescent.

4-24

GEOMORPHOLOGY

TABLE 4.7.

Particle-size Data for Cutbank 2

Particle
Sample
Size
Depth
(cm)
Distribution

Sample
Depth
(cm)

Sample
Depth
(cm)

Sample
Depth
(cm)

Sample
Depth
(cm)

1
20-40

2
80-100

3
75-95

4
200-220

5
280-300

11.7
45.2
7.5
0.3
0.0
64.7

5.5
24.6
5.9
0.1
0.0
36.1

5.9
32.4
7.8
0.1
0.1
46.3

7.9
26.5
7.5
0.1
0.0
42.0

13.7
30.0
5.2
0.4
0.2
49.5

3.6
8.2
8.8
20.6

4.2
8.9
6.0
19.1

2.7
6.5
5.4
14.6

3.6
10.4
9.9
23.9

3.9
7.5
10.9
22.3

<.Su
2-.Su
Total

11. 7
2.9
14.6

39.6
5.2
44.8

35.3
3.6
38.9

30.1
4.0
34.1

24.7
3.4
28.1

Clay
Free
Basis

1

2

3

4

5

75.7
24.3

65.6
34.5

75.9
24.1

63.8
36.2

69.0
31.0

3.1

1.9

3.1

1.8

2.2

Sand (%)
VF

F
M

c
vc

Total
Silt (%)
VF
M

c

Total

no

Clay

Sand no
Silt(%)
Sand/Silt
Ratios

VF=very fine, F=fine, M=medium, C=coarse, VC=very coarse

4-25

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

The stratigraphic sequence at Trench 26 (Table 4.8) resembles the one at
Cutbank 2. Trench 26 was excavated on the floodplain of Lake Creek at the western
end of the project area. The stratigraphic sequence. from top to bottom. is: black clay
loam (Unit 1); dark grayish-brown sandy loam (Unit 2); and dark brown sandy clay
loam (Unit 3). The A and B horizons of the modern soil are formed in Unit 1. The
dark. clayey sediments of this surface deposit resemble the flood-drapes observed on the
T-0 surface at Cutbank 2 and at Trench 6. There is a sharp textural break between
Units 1 and 2. with a considerably higher sand content in the latter. Unit 2 probably
represents overbank sediments deposited by a higher flow regime than that which
deposited the Unit 1 sediments. A smooth. abrupt boundary occurs between Units 2
and 3. The morphological evidence for this boundary is supported by the particle-size
The sand/silt ratio distinctly
data determined on a clay-free basis (Table 4.9).
increases between Unit 2 and Unit 3.
Unit 3 strongly resembles the weathered
Deweyville fill exposed at Cutbank 2 (Unit 5) and at other locations in the project
area.

Table 4.8.

Depth (cm)

Description of the Soil-Stratigraphic Sequence at Trench 26.

Depositional
Unit

Description

0-93

1

T-0 Flood Drape. Very dark gray C10YR3/1)
clay loam, black C10YR2/1) moist; moderate,
coarse blocky structure; very firm; very
sticky, very plastic; common fine roots;
noneffervescent; abrupt smooth boundary.

93-176

2

T-1 (Deweyville fill). Dark grayish brown
C10YR4/2) sandy loam, very dark grayish
brown C10YR3/2) moist; many fine distinct
yellowish red C5YR4/6) mottles and few fine
faint yellowish brown (10YR5/8) and very
dark grayish brown (10YR3.2) mottles; weak
medium subangular blocky structure; firm;
the sandy loam gradually gives way to
loose, fine sand at a depth of 113cm below
the land surface; abrupt smooth boundary.

176-206+

3

T-1 (Deweyville fill). Brown (10YR5/3)
sandy clay loam, dark brown C10YR4/3)
moist; many medium and coarse, distinct
yellowish brown (10YR5/6 and 5/8) mottles
and few fine strong brown (7.5YR5/8) and
red C2.5YR4/8) mottles; massive; loose;
texture fines-upward; noneffervescent.

4-26

GEOMORPHOLOGY

Table 4.9.

Particle
Size
Distribution
Sand

Sample

Depth

Particle-size Data for Trench 26

Sample

Depth

1

20-60

Sample

(cm)

(cm)

2

113-133

Depth
(cm)

3

176-206

on

VF

13.7
25.3
0.8
0.1
0.0
39.9

11.0
49.8
4.9
0.1
0.0
65.8

13.5
49.3
4.2
0.2
0.1
67.3

4.5

2.5

1.6

M

11.2

7.4

Total

10.7
26.4

6.9
16.8

4.3
6.0
11.9

<.5u
2-.5u
Total

29.7
4.1
33.8

15.6
1. 7
17 .3

18.5
2.1
20.6

Clay
Free
Basis

20-60

113-133

176-206

60.2
39.8

79.7

20.3

85.0
15.0

1.5

3.9

5.7

F
M

c
vc

Total
Silt

c~o

VF

c

Clay

(%)

Sand (%)
Silt C%)
Sand/Silt
Ratios

VF=very fine, F=fine, M=rnedium, C=coarse, VC=very coarse

4-27

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
The available data suggest that most of the surface of the Lake Creek floodplain
(T-0) is underlain by fine textured Holocene alluvium of variable thickness resting on
the eroded surface of the Deweyville Terrace. The T-0 surface is flooded periodically.
adding an accretion veneer of fine grained sediments. However. the channel is incising
Aronow (1986) suggested that Lake Creek and its
while the floodplain is accreting.
major tributaries probably will continue to incise the Deweyville Terrace. eventually
creating their own wide meander belts subject to flooding. but at present. much of the
floodplain surface has been inherited from a previous flow regime.
Currently. there is no formal lithostratigraphic classification for Holocene floodplain
deposits on the Texas Coastal Plain. However. Heinrich (1986b) recently developed an
informal classification scheme for the Buffalo Bayou floodplain in southeastern Texas.
Most of the surface of the Buffalo Bayou floodplain is underlain by a thin alluvium of
variable thickness that rests on the eroded surface of the Beaumont and Lissie
formations (Heinrich 1986b:161). This alluvium has been informally named the Harris
formation (not. to be confused with the soil series) by Heinrich (1986b:161). which he
The Buffalo
divides into an upper member (Buffalo) and a lower member (Addicks).
member typically consists of a yellowish-brown to brown sandy. loamy sand. sandy
loam or loam. According to Heinrich (1986b:161). the Buffalo member is an overbank
deposit that includes such features as natural levees and levee-like ridges.
All these
features are late Holocene (Heinrich 1986b:162).
The lower portion of the Harris
alluvium consists of widespread clayey sediment which Heinrich (1986b:162) named the
Addicks member. This member consists of dark gray to dark brown clay or clay loam.
Heinrich (1986b:162) suggested that the Addicks member is alluvial in origin. most
likely representing overbank deposits of mid-Holocene age.
Based on morphological characteristics. i.e .. color and texture. and pos1t1on in the
stratigraphic sequence. the clayey T-0 flood-drapes in the Lake Creek Valley are similar
to Heinrich's (1986b) Addicks member of the Harris alluvium.
However. radiocarbon
dates from the Lake Creek flood-drapes indicate they are products of early- and lateHolocene alluviation. Because of the small number of radiocarbon dates from the flooddrapes. it is not known whether these overbank deposits also include mid-Holocene
alluvium comparable in age to the Addicks member in its type area.
The sandy levee deposits that mantle the T-0 flood-drape in the Lake Creek
Valley may be the local equivalent of Heinrich's (1986b) Buffalo member of the Harris
alluvium. Although the absolute age of the natural levees is not known. soils evidence
suggests they are late Holocene landforms.
The soils. internal structure. and
composition of levees and other depositional features on the T-0 surface are described
in the following discussion.
The most prominent depositional features on floodplain surfaces in the project
area are colluvial aprons. natural levees and floodplain mounds.
In terms of cultural
resources. these features are very important because they often contain sites (McGuff
and Cox 1973: Aten and Bollich 1981: Fields. Freeman and Kotter 1983: Heinrich
1986b: Chapter 7. this report). Thus, an attempt was made to better understand the
internal structure and composition of these features.

4-28

GEOMORPHOLOGY
A single backhoe trench (Trench 8) was excavated on a colluvial apron at the
eastern end of the project area (Fig. 4.1).
The apron formed where sediments from
the High Terraces have been transported downslope by sheetwash onto the floodplain
surface. The trench exposed a 112 centimeter thick deposit of loose. fine sand resting
on an abrupt erosional contact with the underlying clayey sediments (see Table B.8.
Appendix B).
A few siliceous pebbles were scattered through the sandy matrix.
indicating an admixture of coarse colluvium derived from the Willis Formation.
The
modern soil. a variant of the Bruno series formed in the sandy colluvium. has a thin A
horizon overlying a structureless C horizon. The C horizon rests on the truncated B
horizon of a buried paleosol.
The buried soil is formed in dark. clayey alluvium that
resembles the late Holocene flood-drapes described at Trench 6 and at Cutbank 2.
The clayey sediments rest on an abrupt erosional contact with underlying loamy
sediments. The loamy alluvium at the base of the profile is morphologically similar to
the Deweyville fill.
Based on the soil - stratigraphic information gleaned from Trench 8. colluvial
aprons on the floodplain surface appear to be relatively young landforms. The lack of
substantial soil development in the colluvium suggests these deposits are no older than
late Holocene. The soil evidence is supported by the fact that the colluvium mantles
clayey flood-drapes that have yielded late Holocene radiocarbon dates at nearby
locations. The colluvial aprons on the T-0 surfaces probably are equivalent to the Big
Brushy formation that occurs on uplands in eastern Texas.
As noted earlier. this
formation consists of sands. sandy loams and loams of colluvial origin.
Trench 11 (Fig. 4.1) was excavated on a preserved remnant of a natural levee at
the eastern end of the project area. The trench exposed more than two vertical meters
of stratified loamy fine sand and fine sand (see Table B.11. Appendix B).
Unfortunately. the walls of the trench were unstable. preventing full excavation and the
expected contact of the sandy deposit with the underlying sediment was not reached.
Deposition of three levee deposits was sporadic.
A weakly developed Bruno soil is
formed in the sandy alluvium. The A - C profile of this soil indicates the levee has
not been stable long enough for a B horizon to develop.
Thus. the levee deposit
probably is no older than late Holocene.
The preliminary subsurface investigation of floodplain mounds was limited to
sampling with a bucket auger and examining exposures created by shovel tests.
Landowner restrictions and/ or the presence of archeological sites in the mounds
precluded the use of a backhoe to excavate trenches across these features.
Nevertheless. the field investigation gathered some useful information about the internal
structure and composition of the floodplain mounds.
The description of a representative soil profile from a floodplain mound is
presented in Table 4.10. The soil belongs to the Chipley series and is classified as an
Aquic Quartzipsamment. It is characterized by a thin. dark grayish-brown A horizon
overlying a thick. brown to very pale brown C horizon. The C horizon was subdivided
on the basis of color: there was no evidence of textural change in the subsoil. The A
and C horizons are composed of loose. unstratified fine sand. The expected contact of

4-29

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
the sandy material with underlying clayey sediments was not reached in any of the
shovel tests or auger holes.
Thus the base of the mounds must lie at depths
exceeding 1.5 meters.

Table 4.10.

Soil Description for a Floodplain Mound at Auger Site 3.

Description

Depth (cm)

Horizon

0-10

A

10-38

C1

Brown (10YR5/3) fine sand; single grained;
loose; few fine roots; noneffervescent;
gradual irregular boundary.

38-95

C2

Pale brown (10YR6/3) fine sand; single
grained; loose; noneffervescent; gradual
irregular boundary.

95-120

C3

Light yellowish brown (10YR6/4) fine sand;
single grained; loose, noneffervescent.

Dark grayish brown C10YR4/2) fine sand;
single grained; loose; many fine roots;
noneffervescent; gradual smooth boundary.

Cultural materials were found below the surface of three floodplain mounds in the
project area.
Two of these mounds contained ceramic artifacts. indicating that the
sandy deposits aggraded some time after about 1500 B.P.
The other yielded no
diagnostic artifacts.
The preliminary soil - geomorphological data gathered in this investigation raise a
number of questions about the origin of the floodplain mounds in the Lake Creek
valley. Some researchers (e.g .. Fields. Freeman and Kotter 1983: Fields et al. 1986:
Heinrich 1986b) have argued that floodplain mounds (not to be confused with· pimple
mounds) are primarily alluvial in origin. caused either by aggradation of floodplains or
by erosion of the floodplain surfaces.
However. the circular to oval shapes of the
mounds in the project area do not resemble any known alluvial landform. Also. the
uniform texture and unstratified nature of mound sediments appear to rule out a
primary flu vial agency.
There is no evidence of upward-fining sequences or silt and
clay lenses that would suggest deposition by alluvial processes.
If the mounds were
not formed by alluvial process. then how?
Aronow (1986) suggested the floodplain mounds in the Lake Creek Valley were
formed by eolian processes. More specifically. he proposed that the mounds represent
accumulations of wind-transported sediments around clumps of vegetation.
Aronow's
hypothesis is strongly supported by a recent investigation of floodplain mounds at the
Cinco Ranch archeological sites in Fort Bend County. Texas (Ensor 1986). The Cinco

4-30

--

---

- - - - - - - - - - - --

- -

-------------

GEOMORPHOLOGY
Ranch study combined the results of particle-size analyses (Hallmark 1986a) and soil stratigraphic/cultural - stratigraphic investigations (Holliday 1986) in an effort to
understand the origin of floodplain mounds. Holliday (1986) cited four major factors
favoring eolian processes as the prime cause of mound formation: (1) the uniform
texture and unstratified nature of the sediments (no lensing. banding. etc.): (2) the
shapes of the mounds (not suggestive of alluvial origin): (3) the presence of a generally
stratified archeological sequence that probably precludes aggradation of material
associated with rodent burrowing: and (4) the lack of evidence for erosional activity as
reflected in the uniform horizontal distribution of artifacts (no breaks in artifact
densities between mounds). He concluded that the Cinco Ranch mounds were formed
by slow aggradation of eolian material over the past 2000 years. According to Holliday
(1986). the mounds probably are coppice dunes. which are accumulations of eolian sand
trapped by clumps of vegetation.
Floodplain mounds in the Lake Creek project area also may be coppice sand
dunes. The symmetry of these mounds. and the lack of cross-bedding. argue against a
migrating dune origin.
Instead. the fine sands may have been trapped by scattered
clumps of vegetation on the floodplain surface. The source of the sand could be point
bars. natural levees. channel deposits. and overbank deposits on the low (T-1) and high
terraces. or the coarser fraction (sand and silts) of Deweyville fill on the T-0 surface.
Selected quartz grains from a floodplain mound were examined with a scanning
electron microscope.
The results support. but do not prove. the hypothesis of wind
transport. The common grain surface markings were large upturned plates (Fig. 4.3b).
flat pitted surfaces and rounded ridges.
Many of the grains were frosted and well
rounded (Fig. 4.3a).
Additional soil - geomorphological research is needed to clearly
understand the origin of the floodplain mounds in the project area.
The present
geomorphological investigation has provided preliminary information about the internal
structure and composition of the mounds. but these findings are not conclusive.
In summary. the Modern Floodplain (T-0) of Lake Creek and its major tributaries
are characterized by a complex alluvial stratigraphy and a variety of depositional
landforms. The broad flat surface of the floodplain is mantled by clayey flood-drapes
of variable thicknesses.
These overbank deposits rest on the eroded surface of the
Deweyville Terrace.
Radiocarbon dates determined on bulk organic carbon from the
upper two meters of the flood-drapes indicate they are composed. in part. of late
Holocene alluvial deposits. In addition. organic carbon extracted from a deep. clay-rich
deposit yielded a radiocarbon date of 8530 + 110 B.P. Thus. the age of these fine
grained floodplain sediments span most of the Holocene. but does not include the
middle Holocene. This does not imply that middle Holocene alluvium is absent in the
Lake Creek Valley.
The number of radiocarbon samples from T-0 deposits is too
small to make such an assumption.
In addition to the stratigraphic units below the T-0 surface, there are a number
of depositional features on the surface of the Modern Floodplain.·· The most prominent
features are colluvial aprons. natural levees and floodplain mounds.
Colluvial aprons
have formed where sediments from the High Terraces have been transported onto the

4-31

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
floodplain surface as sheetwash. These landforms are composed of a mixed matrix of
fine sand and siliceous pebbles.
The lack of substantial soil development in the
colluvium suggests these aprons probably are no older than late Holocene.
Natural levees apparently flanked the channels of Lake and Mound creeks at times
during the Holocene. Although many of these deposits have been dissected by gullying,
deflated by wind erosion. or otherwise destroyed. well preserved remnants occur near
Lake Creek at the eastern end of the project area.
These levees are composed of
thick deposits of stratified loamy fine sand and fine sand. The presence of a weakly
developed soil (A-C profile) in the sandy overbank deposits suggests that the levees are
relatively young landforms. probably no more than 2000 to 3000 years old.
The floodplain mounds occur in clusters or as isolated features on the floodplain
surface. They are circular to oval in shape. with diameters ranging from about 20 to
50 meters. The mounds are largely composed of loose, unstratified fine sand. Ceramic
artifacts were discovered beneath the surfaces of two of the three mounds that
contained cultural materials; the other did not contain diagnostic artifacts. The origin
of the mounds is problematic. However, the available data suggest they were formed
by aggradation of eolian sediments. perhaps as coppice dunes. during the late Holocene.
This interpretation is based primarily on (1) the shape of the mounds: (2) the sandy.
homogeneous. unstratified nature of the mound sediments; (3) SEM analysis of quartz
grains; (4) the presence of ceramic artifacts in two of the mounds that contained
cultural materials: and (5) findings at the Cinco Ranch archeological sites southeast of
the project area.

SUMMARY
The previous discussion has outlined. in general terms. the nature of the valley
landscape in the project area and. in more specific terms. the characteristics of various
landform/sediment assemblages.
Available data indicate the project area includes a
series of landscape elements ranging from Plio-Pleistocene to late Holocene in age.
Geologic cross sections for the valleys of Lake Creek. Mound Creek and a low order
tributary are shown in figures 4.5 and 4.6.
The findings and interpretations of the
geomorphologic record of the Lake Creek Valley are briefly summarized.

High Terraces
The High Terraces consist of the Willis coastwise formation and the Lissie
stream terraces.
The Willis Formation is considered Plio-Pleistocene in age. and the
Lissie fill is more than 37.000 years old. The High Terraces form the uplands of the
project area. and have surfaces that are about 5 to 20 meters above the modern
floodplain.
Deposits composing the High Terr aces primarily consist of siliceous sands
and gravels with lenses of silt and clay. These sediments are deeply weathered. with a
strongly developed Bt horizon extending down tc about 3.0 meters. The argillic horizon
may be capped with a thick (1.0-2.5 m) mantle of colluvium that is primarily late

4-32

High Terrace

~
I

w

w
·....

. .. ·.

1 - Clayey Holocene Alluvium

4 - Lissie Terrace

2 - Deweyville

5 - Colluvium

3 - Eolian Sediment (Primarily Fine Sand)

6 ·Willis Formation

FIGURE 4.5.

Generalized diagrammatic cross section of the Lake Creek drainage basin
(no horizontal scale).

I~
cr-c

~

"'<

r

,....
::t:.

~
~
~

Low-Order
Stream

~

:::0

[!'.l

~
C§

55
1 - Sandy Fill (Alluvium and Colluvium).
2 - Willis Formation

.,.w~
Floodplain
Mound

t

1 - Clayey Holocene Alluvium

3 - Colluvium

2 - Deweyville

4 - Eolian Sediment (Primarily Fine Sand)

FIGURE 4.6.

5 - Willis Formation

Generalized diagrammatic cross sections of Mound Creek and a low order
stream (no horizontal scale).

GEOMORPHOLOGY
Holocene in age.
In addition. portions of the High Terraces are covered with thick
deposits of windblown sediment of unknown age (possibly Holocene).
However. the
High Terraces have been mainly an area of erosion since the late Pleistocene.

Low Terraces
The Low Terraces are equivalent to the Deweyville Terrace that flanks streams of
the Gulf Coastal Plain.
The age of the Deweyville fill ranges from about 30.000 to
9000 years B.P. The Low Terraces occur as scattered remnants 2 to 5 meters above
the surface of the modern floodplain.
In many locations. the T-1 surface is highly
dissected by gullies and small streams.
Test trenches excavated in the T-1 fill
revealed a well developed Bt horizon extending down to about 2 meters through fine to
coarse sand upward fining to clayey silts and silty clays. The Bt horizon is capped by
a thick (1.0-1.5 m) veneer of eolian sediments composed largely of fine sand.
The
eolian deposits appear to be late Holocene in age. Relative to High Terraces. the Low
Terraces exhibit constructional rather than erosional origin. better preservation of
geomorphological features. large channel geometry and considerably less intensive
weathering of deposits.

Modern Floodplain
The Modern Floodplain is the lowest and youngest landform in the project area.
The T-0 alluvium primarily consists of heavy clay loam and clay.
The floodplain
generally lacks the large relict fluvial patterns that are present on Low Terraces.
although in places the T-0 surface has a palimpsest or obscured, large scale point bar
pattern suggestive of the T-1 level.
Test trenches excavated on the T-0 surface
revealed clayey flood-drapes overlying the strath surface of the Deweyville Terr ace.
Thus. it is apparent that the actual area of the floodplain that has been laterally
traversed by the meandering stream channel during Holocene time is relatively narrow.
Radiocarbon dates indicate that the flood-drapes are. at least in part. late Holocene.
In addition, an early-Holocene date was determined on organic carbon from a deep.
clayey T-0 deposit.
There also are a number of depositional features on the T-0
surface. including colluvial aprons. natural levees and floodplain mounds. The colluvial
aprons consist of sediment reworked from the High Terr aces.
These deposits are
composed largely of a mixed matrix of siliceous pebbles and fine sand. Natural levees
occur near active and abandoned stream channels and comprise overbank deposits of
stratified loamy fine sand and fine sand. The floodplain mounds are scattered across
the T-0 surface. These features typically are 20 to 50 meters in diameter and rarely
more than 1.5 meters in height. The mounds are circular to oval convex masses of
loose. unstratified fine sand. Although there is considerable controversy over the origin
of the mounds. the preliminary field and laboratory data from this study. combined with
results of a recent investigation at the Cinco Ranch sites (Ensor 1986). suggest they
are products of eolian processes.
The absolute age of depositional features (i.e ..
colluvial aprons. natural levees and floodplain mounds) on T-0 surfaces is not known.

4-35

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

However. the soils and archeological evidence clearly indicate that most of these
landforms are no older than late Holocene.
The geomorphological information gathered in this study provides a framework for
future archeological investigations in the project area.
It also provides needed
background for assessing the influence of landscape evolution on preservation of the
archeological record and three-dimensional distribution of sites. The following discussion
considers the geologic potential for archeological deposits of various ages within the
project area.
Potentials for Buried Sites

Given the observations of the preceding subsections concerning the geomorphology
and soil - stratigraphy of the project area. it is possible to evaluate the various
landforms in terms of their potential to contain buried cultural resources. Table 4.11
presents estimates of site-preservation potential for buried cultural deposits in different
landforms The potential is based on (1) the presence or absence of late-Wisconsinan
and Holocene soils and sediments within an area. and (2) the results of the
archeological survey in the project area and elsewhere in the region.

Table 4.11. Preservation Potential for Buried Cultural Deposits.
High Terraces (HT)
Cultural
Period

Alluvial
deposits

Colluvlal
deposits

Low Terraces (T-1)
Eol Jan
deposits

Alluvial
deposits

Coll uv1al
deposits

Modern Flood11lain (T-0)
Eolian'
deposits

Flooddrapes

Natural
1 evees

Colluv1al
aprons

Floodplain
mounds

Paleoindian

+

+++

+

Early Archaic

+

++

+

+

++

+

+

+

Middle Archaic

+

+

+

?

+

+

+

++

++

++

+++

++

++

++

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

+++

Late Archaic
Late Prehistoric
1

?

+

Sandy surface deposits

- not possible; +low potential; ++moderate potential; +++high potential; ? unknown

HIGH TERRACES

In order to consider the potential for buried prehistoric cultural materials on the
High Terraces. the landscape must be subdivided into various hillslope elements.
Several models of hillslope development have been formulated. The model outlined by
Ruhe and Walker (1968) is applicable to the uplands of the Lake Creek Valley
landscape (Fig. 4. 7).

4-36

GEOMORPHOLOGY

·.-Su: -· . ::',.:·j .Sh:·, lss

1sh

- ' \ /Fs /

/ Fs / Bs

, ;::'.0Rl...f:"T"Jrw

Al- alluvium

FIGURE 4.7.

I

Su

~~~,~~;;;:,

B s - backs lop e
Fs - footslope
Ts - toes lope

Geomorphic components of a hillslope (adapted from
Ruhe and Walker 1968).

On steep shoulders and backslopes. prehistoric cultural materials will lie at or near the
land surface. These are areas of net erosion, and therefore deep burial in the ancient
(pre-Wisconsinan) Lissie and Willis deposits is precluded.
The most likely locations for the burial of prehistoric cultural materials along a
slope profile are in the footslope and toeslope positions. Three of the archeological
sites discovered during the Lake Creek field survey are located in footslope or toeslope
positions.
All of these sites are near small streams that drain the uplands. Long
footslope and toeslope positions are combined under a single heading. colluvial slopes.
in this report.
Loamy soils developed on the eroded and weathered surface of the
Lissie and Willis formation. are mantled with sandy and loamy sediments.
The
thickness of these colluvial deposits ranges from approximately 1 to 2 meters.
Therfore, methods other than surface survey and/ or shallow shovel testing are
necessary to adequately evaluate the archeological potential of these deposits.
The
absolute age of the colluvial deposits is not known. However, the presence of ceramic
artifacts at one of the three sites discovered on colluvial slopes indicates that some of
these deposits are late Holocene in age.

4-37

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
There also may be good potential for buried prehistoric sites on the summits of
knolls and interfluves downslope from major stream divides. The relatively flat surfaces
of these landforms are often mantled with colluvium derived from adjacent higher slopes
and. in some locations. with windblown sediments.
There is a problem with developing maps and/or detailed models of hillslope
elements in the project area from existing topographic and aerial photographs. The
small size of most individual elements, combined with marked differences in the degree
For
of erosion and deposition on different slopes, prevents detailed treatment here.
example. phenomena such as tree fall, rilling and slumping may affect relatively small
areas at a given time, but can have a severe impact on the integrity of an
archeological site. Because of these limitations it is felt that the general erosion and
deposition scenarios outlined above provide the most complete model of slope
development applicable to cultural resource surveys in the study area at this time.

LOW TERRACES
The deposits of windblown sands and silts that mantle the Low Terraces have a
high potential for buried archeological sites. In the course of the present survey, the
thickness of the sand cap was measured at a number of places and found to range
from 70 to more than 150 centimeters. The archeological significance of these surface
deposits is established by the discovery of 26 sites in the windblown sediments on the
T-1 surfaces. All of these sites are situated near small streams that bisect the Low
Terraces.
Fifteen of the sites contained ceramic artifacts and the remainder of the
sites (11) yielded no temporally diagnostic materials. Based on the available data, the
sandy eolian deposits on the T-1 surfaces are likely to contain sites at locations where
the terraces are bisected by streams that are draining into Lake Creek and its major
tributaries.
The probability of finding sites older than Late Prehistoric in these
deposits appears to be poor.
The buried site potential of the loamy T-1 fill (2Bt and 2C horizons) below the
sandy surface deposits (A and E horizons) is high only for the Paleoindian and Early
Archaic cultural periods. Most of the T-1 fill is too old (ca. 30.000 - 9000 B.P.) to
contain deeply buried Archaic or Late Prehistoric - Woodland materials.
An early
Holocene date (9440 + 190 B.P.) for the upper section of the T-1 fill was documented
at one location in the project area. Thus, a search for Paleoindian and Early Archaic
sites should focus on the upper section of the T-1 fill.

MODERN FLOODPLAIN
The clayey flood-drapes that mantle the surface of the Modern Floodplain have a
high potential for buried archeological sites. Based on the few radiocarbon dates from
the project area, the upper sections of the flood-drapes may contain Late Archaic and
Late Prehistoric - Woodland cultural materials. and the lower units may contain Late
Paleoindian and Early Archaic sites. Middle Holocene deposits were not documented in
the T-0 alluvial sequence, possibly because of the small number of sampling sites.

4-38

GEOMORPHOLOGY
The T-0 flood-drapes mantle the Deweyville Terrace (T-1) across most of the
Modern Floodplain.
As noted earlier. the upper section of the T-1 fill has a high
potential for containing Paleoindian and Early Archaic materials.
The depositional features that occur on the surface of the Modern Floodplain have
a very high potential for buried archeological sites.
The most common features are
colluvial aprons. natural levees and floodplain mounds. These deposits are most likely
late Holocene as indicated by the poorly developed soils on their surfaces. Also, three
archeological sites were found beneath the surface of floodplain mounds. Two of these
sites yielded ceramic artifacts. supporting the hypothesis that the mounds are relatively
young geomorphological features. Thus, depositional features on the T-0 surface may
contain Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric - Woodland materials.

Conclusions
The Lake Creek project area contains a complex but orderly array of landforms
These have been discussed in terms of their relative chronology and
and deposits.
their potential for containing archeological sites of various cultural periods. The highest
potential for buried sites in the project area occurs in five contexts: (1) the colluvial
and/or eolian deposits that mantle some High Terrace surfaces, (2) the eolian and
colluvial deposits that cap the T-1 fill. (3) the upper section of the T-1 fill. (4) the
Holocene flood-drapes of the Modern Floodplain. and (5) the depositional features on
the T-0 surface. including colluvial aprons. natural levees and floodplain mounds.
Given the existence of extensive late-Wisconsinan and Holocene-age deposits in
the project area. it is recommended that future cultural resource surveys undertaken in
the area include geological investigations to evaluate the depth, absolute ages. internal
stratigraphy, and archeological site potential of subsurface deposits in the surveyed
areas. Specific recommendations are listed in the following section.

RECOMMEN CATIONS
The present geomorphological investigation of the Lake Creek project area was
conducted as a pilot project emphasizing collection of data that may be used to
structure an effective and cost efficient program of future geomorphological work.
Given this objective. the following recommendations are offered.
1. A combination of extensive deep coring and limited trenching is needed
along cross valley transects. Backhoe trenches expose stratigraphy in long
continuous sections. but these excavations consume a great deal of time and
money and may contribute to the destruction of archeological sites. On the
other hand. coring is efficient and economical. but stratigraphy must be
In order to maximize data collection,
interpolated between coring sites.
detailed stratigraphic information from widely spaced trenches should be
correlated with data from numerous cores taken between trenching sites.
The cores should be spaced no more than 30 meters apart.

4-39

---------------------------------

---

-

-

-----

-------------

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

2. Archeological sites in floodplain mounds should be excavated in order to
examine the soil - stratigraphy and the cultural - stratigraphy of the
deposits.
The contact between the mound deposits and the underlying
alluvium should be exposed. A hydraulic soil probe should be used to trace
the contact across the. site. Altogether. this information may be used to
determine the origin of the mounds.
The incorporated archeological
materials. as well as fauna! and floral remains. also may assist m
reconstructing the environmental conditions under which mounds formed.
3. Laboratory analyses of soils and sediments are needed to differentiate
stratigraphic units and to determine whether deposits are alluvial. colluvial or
eolian in origin. Genetic interpretation is needed to establish the relative
chronologies of landforms and associated deposits -- information vital to an
archeological investigation. These analyses should include:
a.

clay mineralogy by X-ray diffraction.

b.

particle-size determination of clay and silt fractions by pipette analysis
or automated means,

c.

particle-size determination of sand fractions by sieving with quarter-phi
screens.

d.

heavy and light mineral separation,

e.

determination of grain morphology for sand and silt sized particles
using SEM. and

f.

micromorphological analysis of soils based on examination of thin
sections with a petrographic microscope and SEM.

4. Emphasis should be placed on sites that may yield organic carbon suitable
for radiometric dating (1 4c and 13 C). At present. little is known about the
absolute chronology of landforms and landscape evolution in the project area.
Radiocarbon data would facilitate the development of a landscape model for
the Lake Creek Valley.
5. There is a need for topographic maps of the project area with 1 or 2 foot
contour intervals. Contour intervals on the USGS 1:24.000 scale maps are
too coarse to delimit landform subtleties important to this investigation.
6. Emphasis should be placed on collecting paleoenvironmental data in the Lake
Creek region.
This may require coring in bogs, floodplain deposits and
natural lakes. Samples from the cores should be examined for pollen, opal
phytoliths and other floral remains.
The Late-Wisconsinan and Holocene

4-40

GEOMORPHOLOGY
bioclimatic history of southeastern Texas is not well understood. Any new
paleoenvironmental information would be valuable to the development of a
model of landscape evolution for the project area.

4-41

This page intentionally left blank.

CHAPTER 5: ETHNOHISTORIC INVESTIGATIONS
Jesus F. de la T eja
INTRODUCTION
The proposed Lake Creek Reservoir area of Montgomery County was the site of
few, if any, known contacts between the indigenous population and European cultures
before the advent of Anglo-American colonization. A considerable number of primary
sources describe Spanish-French-Indian contacts on the lower Trinity River basin. and a
few documents record the presence of Indian settlements on present day Spring Creek.
No comparable evidence exists for the Lake Creek area in pre-Anglo American times.
Numerous archival collections contain material for the history of Spanish southeast
Texas.
Foremost among these is the Bexar Archives. housed at the Barker Texas
History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
This massive collection is well
indexed and calendared, and is available on microfilm. The Nacogdoches Archives, at
the Texas State Library, also contain important documents.
Transcripts and an
incomplete index exist at the Barker Center.
Also at the Barker Center is a large
number of photostats from the Archivo de San Francisco el Grande in Mexico City. an
important collection for the missionary history of Texas. and transcripts from the
Archivo General de lndias. Seville.
At the Nettie Lee Benson Latin American
Collection. The University of Texas at Austin. there is a microfilm copy of a large
portion of the Archivo General de la Naci6n de M~xico.
The above-cited manuscript collections were surveyed for this project through
available indexes. All documents bearing on the study area and its native population
were reviewed. In most instances, the documents had already been put to maximum
use in the works cited below as well as in others. Most references are to secondary
sources since these are in English and more readily accessible.
Historians of Spanish Texas have made use of almost all materials important for
the ethnohistory of the area.
The most complete account is in Herbert E. Bolton's
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. The section titled "Spanish Activities on the
Lower Trinity River. 17 46-1771" in many instances closely paraphrases original
documents. In Our Catholic Heritage in Texas, Carlos E. Castaneda. also extensively
paraphrased documents, especially those Bolton did not use.
Another important
published source is Bolton's Athanase de Mlzi~res and the Louisiana- Texas Frontier.
1768-1780, which provides information on the Akokisa for the decade following the
abandonment of El Orcoquisac by the Spanish.
Sjoberg (1951) included some
information on the Akokisa in her summary of Bidai ethnohistory and W.W. Newcomb.
Jr. (1980) assembled most of the pertinent information concerning the Atakapa peoples.
including the Akokisa. in The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times.

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
In view of the absence of sources linked to the Lake Creek area and the nature
of available information. the focus of this chapter will be the broader area of the lower
Trinity and San Jacinto rivers.
This chapter has three purposes: 1) to provide an
historical narrative explaining indigenous - European contacts in the study area: 2) to
synthesize information on the Indian groups indigenous to the area from the Spanish
record and secondary sources; and 3) to provide a map illustrating communication
routes. and Indian and European occupation sites.

HISTORICAL NARRATIVE
Initial Contacts with the Spanish and French
Alvar NJnez Cabeza de Vaca almost certainly traveled through the area under
study in the 1530s. It is also possible that Luis de Moscoso led the remnants of the
Hernando de Soto expedition into the northern fringes of the area a decade later.
Unfortunately. none of the accounts of these earliest expeditions provide accurate
enough ethnographic or geographic information to determine the exact routes taken.
More than 140 years after Cabeza de Vaca and Moscoso. Rene Robert Cavalier.
Sieur de la Salle. probably passed through the area searching for the Mississippi.
Perhaps the most successful effort to retrace the route of any of these early explorers
is E.W. Cole's (1946) work on La Salle. Using the topographical descriptions provided
in the journals of the expedition. Cole establishes a route for La Salle that takes him
across Spring Creek. Caney Creek and Lake Creek. west of the proposed reservoir area.
A mysterious Teao village. briefly described by Henri Joutel (1962). is located by Cole
near Dacus in Montgomery County. Unfortunately. there is no other account of such a
village in subsequent Spanish records. and Joutel provides no information directly
relatable to the Lake Creek project.
The first well defined contact between Europeans and the indigenous Akokisa
occurred about 1719. when a French seaman. Simars de Bellisle. was stranded in
Galveston Bay. In the winter of 1719-1720. he and two companions rowed up the San
Jacinto River. but located no settlements on its banks. After losing his companions.
de Bellisle was captured on the coast by a band of Akokisa. who held him captive
until 1721. when he escaped with the help of Hasinai Indians.
He returned to the
Galveston Bay area as a guide on one of Bernard de la Harpe's expeditions and helped
bring back to New Orleans some of the Indians who had held him. His account serves
as the best tool for understanding Akokisa coastal culture in the early eighteenth
century (Folmer 1940; Newcomb 1980).
At some point after the La Harpe expedition. French traders from New Orleans
opened contact with the Akokisa. Apparently. no record of this early trading activity
has survived because it was illegal and unknown to the Spanish. In 1745. rumors of
annual expeditions by French traders to the Neches. Trinity and Brazos rivers were
forwarded by Captain Joaqufn de Orobio y Basterra at La Bahfa. to the viceroy. who

5-2

ETHNOHISTORY

ordered an exploration of the upper coast in search of the French. It was Orobio who
first brought the Spanish into contact with the Akokisa (Bolton 1970a:328-334;
Castaneda 1976(1V):46-49; Rader 1971:21-24).
Spanish-Akokisa Relations

Captain Orobio's expedition to Galveston Bay is well described by Herbert
E. Bolton (1970a:328-334) in his Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century. Having first
made contact with Bidai Indians on the middle Trinity. Orobio was led south into the
land of the Akokisa. Along the banks of the San Jacinto River and Spring Creek.
Orobio identified three Akokisa villages and another on the Trinity near Galveston Bay
(Fig. 3.1).
The Akokisa declared this to be their first encounter with Spaniards.
although they had considerable knowledge of French activity in the area.
The next two Spanish encounters with the Akokisa took place outside the study
In the Spring of 1747 a group of Akokisa appeared at La Bahfa requesting
area.
missions in their land which. according to Captain Orobio. extended along the coast
between the Sabine and San Jacinto rivers. The Indians carried French guns and spoke
of visits by French traders both overland and by sea. The Akokisa next showed up on
the San Gabriel River. then known as the San Xavier. where missionaries from San
Antonio were attempting to establish a new mission field for southeast Texas tribes.
In early 1749. when Mission San Ildefonso was founded. it included 59 Akokisa in 21
families. as well as 88 Bidai. and 55 Deadose (Castaneda 1976(111):266-267; Bolton
1970a: 196-199).
In view of the Akokisa's presence at San Xavier. viceregal officials decided to
postpone establishing missions for them on the coast until determining whether the
congregation effort would work.
It did not.
The close communion of so many
different tribes. along with animosities between missionaries and soldiers and the
outbreak of disease, led to at least three abandonments of Mission San Ildefonso
between 1749 and 1752. Some evidence suggests that the Bidai. Akokisa and Deadose
neophytes remained nearby. but the mission was not reorganized. In 1756. the San
Xavier mission site was abandoned.
However. Spanish officials believed they had
provided for the Akokisa in orders issued for the establishment of a presidio and
missions at the mouth of the Trinity River (Bolton 1970a:263. 273: Castaneda
1976( 111) :277).
It is clear from the available evidence that Spanish traders began operating in the
lower Trinity River at least by 1751. In that year a new governor. Jacinto de Barrios
y J:uregui. established a trade monopoly with the various Texas Atakapa groups. The
goods. including glass beads. cloth. scissors. vermillion. tobacco. combs. agricultural
implements. even guns and ammunition. were traded for horses. corn. bison skins and
deer skins (Bolton 1970a:336-337: Castaneda 1976(1V):52-53: Rader 1971:29. 32). This
trade. involving French goods and including the prohibited items of guns and
ammunition. was contraband and hence untraceable and unquantifiable.

5-3

-------

--~--

---~~--

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Increased Spanish activity among the Akokisa was bound to cause rivalry with
French traders. Secret information about French trading activities led Governor Barrios
to send an expedition to the lower Trinity in the Fall of 1754. Captured at the mouth
of the Trinity River was Joseph Blancpain, along with some companions and their trade
goods. A cabin, numerous boats and canoes. and the statements of the local Akokisa
Chief Calzones Colorado (Red Britches), indicated the French were in the process of
establishing a permanent presence in southeast Texas. On the basis of this evidence,
Governor Barrios recommended to the viceroy that a mission and settlement be
established on the coast. a recommendation which was not adopted until February 1756
(Bolton 1970a:337-338; Castaneda 1976(1V):53-57: Rader 1971:32-33. 38).
During 1755 reports of further French activity in southeast Texas continued to
reach Governor Barrios. In June, a scouting expedition returned with news from the
Indians that Frenchmen had arrived by boat and explored the coast to the Brazos River
shortly after Blancpain's capture. Later that year. another group of Frenchmen, this
time on horseback. arrived in Akokisa country. but left when the Indians refused to
deal with them. Louisiana's governor went so far as to say that Blancpain's arrest
had been illegal for the trader had been on French soil (Castaneda 1976(1V):67-68:
Rader 1971:39-40).
These French intrusions inspired further exploration and the occupation of the
lower Trinity basin. just as similar French threats had led to the exploration and
occupation of Texas in 1690 and 1716. The site on which Blancpain's cabin had stood
became the focus of Spanish settlement in Akokisa territory in May 1756 (Bolton
For the next sixteen years
1970a:346: Castaneda 1976(1V):66; Rader 1971:45-46).
Franciscan missionaries and Spanish soldiers came into regular contact with the
Akokisa. The presidio of San Agusdn de Ahumada, named in honor of the viceroy,
and Mission Nuestra Senora de la Luz (Our Lady of the Light) came to be collectively
known as El Orcoquisac.
Neither the presidio nor the m1ss1on were successful in their functions.
The
presidio failed to keep French traders out. and the mission failed to Christianize the
Indians. The main difficulty was the attitude of the Akokisa toward the Spanish. and
the latter's incomprehension of the Indians. The Akokisa found the Spanish willing to
make them gifts of food and trade items. So long as the gifts continued to arrive, the
Indians played at being converted. They remained near the mission but found excuses
not to enter. Each chief wanted a mission of his own. and Akokisa and Bidai refused
to share a single mission. The Spanish failed to take into account tribal rivalries and
the need to reach out to the Indians rather than trying to bring the Indians to the
mission.
France's relinquishment of Louisiana to Spain in 1763 ended Spanish fears of
French occupation of southeast Texas. Thus. the single most important reason for El
Orcoquisac's existence abruptly disappeared.
During the Marqu~s de Rub('s 1767
inspection of the presidio and mission, the accompanying engineer found the area
uninhabitable, the Indians recalcitrant, and the presidio's continued existence unjustifiable

5-4

ETHNOHISTORY
(Bolton 1970a:374: Castaneda 1976(1V):98: Rader 1971:102-103).
years the site was abandoned piecemeal. the soldiers being sent to
hostilities at San Antonio. and the missionaries finding their
untenable.
In early 1771. the last three soldiers and two
Orcoquisac (Bolton 1970a:374: Castaneda 1976(1V):98: Rader
Spanish would not occupy the area again for 36 years.

Over the next four
help against Apache
position increasingly
missionaries left El
1971:1023-103): the

English and French continued to trade in the area in spite of nominal Spanish
sovereignty.
In 1772. Captain Cazorla led an expedition into southeast Texas and
discovered a large trading village of Akokisa. Bidai. Cocos, and Atakapa Indians, all
with English goods. just east of the Trinity River (Bolton 1970b(ll):18-19). Five years
later. Governor Ripperda reported that recent English incursions had been stopped by
having the Akokisa. who lived near the extinguished presidio, report any foreigners to
officials at the newly established town of Bucareli (Bolton 1970b(ll):123-124). Trade
with the Akokisa continued from Natchitoches, although it appears the Indians would
have liked the commerce to come by sea (Bolton 1970b(11):300: Castaneda
1976(V):122-123).
Groups of Akokisa on occasion visited La Bahfa and even San
Antonio.
Visitors to the Texas capital were to receive gifts prescribed by Spanish
Indian policy (Castaneda 1976(V):129-130).
Ironically. it was a renewed threat of foreign occupation of the area that led to
El Orcoquisac's resettlement. After the Louisiana purchase, Spain once again faced a
hostile power in Louisiana. Disputes over the exact location of Mexico's border with
the new United States territory, and an influx of Spanish, French, Indian and even
Anglo-American settlers fleeing United States domination, led to prompt action on the
part of the colonial government. A force was sent in 1805 to occupy the site of the
former presidio. the same year the town of Santisima Trinidad de Salcedo was founded
on the Trinity River on the road from San Antonio to Nacogdoches.
It remained
occupied until 1813, when the Mexican War of Independence. spreading through Texas.
forced its abandonment (Castaneda 1976(V):311-319: Faulk 1965:197).
The Akokisa continued to inhabit the lower Trinity and San Jacinto throughout
the first two decades of the nineteenth century, apparently getting along with whomever
came their way.
In 1808, when Samuel Davenport reported them as having banded
with the Bidai. but continuing to range between the Trinity and Brazos rivers from the
Nacogdoches road to the coast (Davenport 1808).
The Akokisa chief. Tacona. took
some horses away from two Mexicans headed for the United States. and turned them
in at Trinidad in 1810 (Lopez Prieto 1810): and the following year the Akokisa chief.
Nicope, appeared at Trinidad asking for a trading post (Domingo 1811).
At least one Akokisa village remained at the same site it had occupied m the
1740s. Chief Canos' village. at the confluence of the San Jacinto and Spring Creek,
just above the La Bahfa to El Orcoquisac road, proved a lifesaver to Blaz Esparza, a
soldier from La Bah(a sent on a scouting expedition to the Trinity River.
On his
return from Atascosito in January 1816, Esparza found the San Jacinto too swollen to
cross.
After waiting a week he decided to cross on his own and search for "the

5-5

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Orcoquizac Indians whom I knew were [settled] just north of the trail." He found the
village and stayed with the Akokisa a total of four days (Esparza 1816).
It is at this point that the Akokisa disappear from the Spanish record.
In hi's
report on conditions in Texas in 1835. Juan Almonte lists the various Indian tribes
throughout the state. The Akokisa are not listed. but are surely included in a note
stating: "There are several other tribes of Indians whose names are not given because
they have been practically exterminated" (Almonte 1925). When the area was surveyed
for Stephen F. Austin in the early 1830s. a number of trails were marked going
through areas which were certainly within the Akokisa's range.
Yet no villages are
included and the trails bear the name of the recently arrived Coushatta Indians. a
people with whom the last remnants of the Akokisa may have merged.

THE AKOKISA PEOPLE

Range
The western branch of the San Jacinto River and lower Trinity River were, during
the Spanish colonial period. the central part of the Akokisa people's range. Spanish
period documents do not record the presence of other Indian settlements in the area,
and so discussion herein will be limited to the Akokisa. Starting at the Brazos River
and extending into Louisiana dwelt the Atakapan people.
The Atakapa proper.
linguistic relatives of the Akokisa. lived from the Neches River east.
To the north.
along the Trinity and eastern branch of the San Jacinto. lived the Bidai. another
closely related tribe.
The linguistically unrelated but culturally similar Karankawa
roamed along the coast to the west.
According to Fr. Agustfn Morfi (1967(1):80), in the 1770s the Akokisa inhabited
the mouths of the Neches and Trinity rivers.
Samuel Davenport's (1808) report on
Indian nations, which has the Akokisa and Bidai having joined forces, states their range
to be between the Brazos and Trinity rivers, and adds "It is to be noted that they
never ascend beyond the Camino Real but. on the other hand. are inclined toward the
coast."
Although other tribes traveled through the area. it appears from the record
that the only long term inhabitants were the Akokisa.
The Lake Creek area was not thoroughly explored until it was surveyed for
Stephen F. Austin in the early 1830s. The Spanish. when traveling to the Galveston
Bay area. used two routes: neither crossed the Lake Creek reservoir zone.
The first
route was down the Trinity River from the San Antonio road, and the second route
was the road from La Bahfa (now Goliad) which crossed the San Jacinto below its
confluence with Spring Creek. Because the main waterway. and natural communication
route between the East Texas settlements and Galveston Bay, was the Trinity River.
little attention was paid to the San Jacinto basin before the nineteenth century.

5-6

ETHNOHISTORY

The Akokisa Population
It is impossible to provide any but the roughest figures for the population of our
study area from the early eighteenth century to 1810.
Captain Orobio's estimate of
the population in 1747-1748. was 300 families in five villages (Bolton 1970a:335:
Castaneda 1976(111):267). In 1756. Bernardo de Miranda. who produced the first map
of the area. estimated the population at Canas' village to be 20 warriors and their
families. Bolton extrapolates this to mean a total Akokisa population of about 500 to
600 persons (Bolton 1970a:335-336). The council of war that met at San Antonio in
1778. estimated Akokisa strength at 50 warriors (Bolton 1970b(11):166). In 1808. when
Samuel Davenport counted the Akokisa with the Bidai. it was still possible to
differentiate between the two groups.
He counted 50 Akokisa and 60 Bidai warriors
(Davenport 1808; Castaneda 1976(V):403).
Juan Antonio Padilla's 1820 report on
Texas Indians puts the number of Akokisa at 300 (Hatcher 1919:51).
Athanase de Mtzi'eres. writing to the viceroy about a possible campaign against
the Apache in 1778. did not consider the Akokisa as suitable participants for the
undertaking in part because they were the least numerous of the east Texas tribes
(Castaneda 1976(11):173).
Fr. Agustfn Morfi. who borrowed heavily from M{zi~res'
reports. is extremely subjective in writing about the Akokisa. and does not even provide
an estimate of their numbers. He states merely "they are few in number. and are of
little importance" (Morfi 1967(1):80).
Although references to the Akokisa as a named tribe are scattered and sparse.
some description of their physical characteristics can be extrapolated from references to
both Bidai and Akokisa (Sjoberg 1951:14-15).
The Atakapans were apparently short
and stocky. their dark skin tatooed and their heads deformed.

Basic Subsistence
The preponderance of eighteenth century evidence points to the Akokisas being a
semi nomadic. hunter-gatherer people like the more easterly Atakapa.
Traveling
between the coast and interior. the Akokisa's diet varied seasonally between shellfish
and bison meat. De Bellisle. who was captured by a band of Akokisa. described their
summer subsistence as consisting of gathering shellfish. birds' eggs. "wild potatoes".
and fishing.
In the fall he was taken inland. where the bands gathered into villages
and the men went bison and deer hunting (Newcomb 1980). Akokisa housing consisted
of small huts constructed of a framework of poles intertwined with reeds and covered
with skins. with a central smoke hole in the conical roof (Sjoberg 1951:64).
Their
apparel. at least during the summer on the coast. was limited to the women wearing
moss pubic coverings and the maidens deerskin garments.
Sjoberg's (1951:64-66)
suggestion that the more northerly Bidai relied upon their hunting skills to provide
protective clothing and the materials for their bear skin tents may extend to the
Akokisa during the winter segment of their seasonal round.
Hides from the hunt
became the principal source of currency with which the Akokisa bought European goods.

5-7

- - - - - - - - - -

--

------- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

The group that de Bellisle traveled with did no farming (Newcomb 1980).
Athanase de Mlzi~res. writing half a century later. also stated that the tribe did not
cultivate the soil (Bolton 1970b(11):173). Other sources contradict this view. however.
Captain Orobio. during his second expedition to the Trinity River in 1748. noted that
the Indians in the village near the mouth of the river "cultivated small patches of land
and raised good corn and other vegetables (Castaneda 1976(V) :50).
Davenport
remarked of the Akokisa-Bidai. that although they lived primarily from hunting. "there
are also years in which they plant corn. etc."
(Davenport 1808).
The report on
Texas in 1820 also mentions the Akokisa farming as well as hunting (Hatcher
1919:51).
Although these statements seem contradictory. there are plausible interpretations.
First. if we consider that the Akokisa formed four or five distinct groups. the
observations of the various Europeans may be overgeneralizations. Orobio. arriving at a
village where some farming was done. may have considered all Akokisa farmers. De
Bellisle. having been captured by a purely hunter-gatherer group. might have reached
the opposite conclusion. A second possible explanation is that Davenport's view that
the Akokisa planted only on occasion is correct. and so earlier observers were not on
the scene long enough to notice this behavior. A third possibility relies on accepting
the Akokisa as exogamic. a trait noticed by the Franciscans at San Gabriel. If so.
Bidai or other women entering the tribe might have brought farming practices with
them that quickly died out in the harsh environment.
European Influences

By the time de Bellisle was captured by the Akokisa. the horse had become a
part of their culture. The bison hunt that the Frenchman witnessed took place on
horseback. although the Indians still used bows and arrows. The horse did not greatly
extend the range of the Akokisa. but it did allow them to put in appearances at La
Bahfa and San Antonio on occasion.
Some references indicate that the Akokisa
acquired a somewhat more than rudimentary mastery of the horse during the late
eighteenth century. It appears that both Europeans and Indians traveled to the lower
Trinity to buy horses from the Akokisa (Bolton 1970b(ll):105. 107n).
The gun took a little longer to arrive in the lower Trinity-San Jacinto area. De
Bellisle mentions only bows and arrows for weapons. and Orobio. who noticed guns
among the Bidai. made no similar remark concerning the Akokisa. However. by the
time Orobio reported on them in 1747. they had guns furnished to them by French
traders (Castaneda 1976(111):267).
During Governor Barrios' tenure. the Akokisa
acquired firearms from the Spanish, although such trade was strictly forbidden (Bolton
1970a:336-337). Among the items captured from the French trader Blancpain in 1754
were guns. powder. and ammunition (Castaneda 1976(1V):55).
That guns are not
mentioned prominently in regard to the Akokisa should not be surprising. Since the
tribe always remained friendly to the Spanish. there was little concern of their having
firearms.

5-8

----------------

------

-------~--

-------~-------

ETHNOHISTORY

Trade in a variety of other items was carried out by both French and Spanish
traders. and on occasion even by the English. Some indication of the range of goods
involved in the barter has already been made. The extent of the trade is impossible to
measure but there is some indication the Akokisa became dependent upon it. In 1779.
Mezieres wrote that the Akokisa had repeatedly requested that trade with them be
conducted by sea rather than overland from Natchitoches. to reduce the cost of
transport (Bolton 1970b(11):300). In 1811. Akokisa appeared at Trinidad de Salcedo
asking that a trading post be established in the town for them (Domingo 1811). At
the end of the decade. the Akokisa were described as regularly taking their furs to
Calcasieu and Opelousas. in Louisiana. to trade with the Anglo-Americans (Hatcher
1919:51).
The people who inhabited the regions of the lower San Jacinto and Trinity rivers
were not considered hostile by Spanish or French. Moreover. the documentary evidence
from the eighteenth and early nineteenth century reveals the Akokisa to have
maintained good relations with other Indian groups as well as with both European
cultures. In 1778. Mlzi~res described the Atakapa and Akokisa as living "under the
protection of the other tribes. who free them from every attack" (Bolton 1970b(ll) :173).
The Akokisa's services to the Spanish garrison stationed at Atascosito between 1805
and 1812 were worthy of comment by Juan Antonio Padilla in 1820 (Hatcher 1919:51).
Yet. apart from trading hides for various European wares. and adopting the horse
and firearms. the Akokisa showed little interest in accepting Spanish sedentary life.
During its brief existence. Mission San Ildefonso. on the San Gabriel River. was
abandoned on at least three occasions by the Akokisa and other congregated tribes.
Mission Nuestra Senora de la Luz. near the mouth of the Trinity. met with an equal
lack of success. The Indians were willing to say they wanted a mission. and to go
through the formalities which included distribution of gifts and food to them, but never
became neophytes. In this they resembled the culturally more advanced Caddos, who
also remained friendly to the Spanish without accepting Christianity.
CONCLUSION

This chapter began with the statement that there are no recorded contacts
between Europeans and Indians in the Lake Creek reservoir zone. None of the recorded
explorations of the lower San Jacinto River mentions occupation sites above Spring
Creek. Undoubtedly, the Lake Creek area of present day Montgomery County was used
by the Akokisa. and perhaps other East Texas Indian peoples. The woods of the area
must have afforded the indigenous population rich hunting grounds. the bounty of
which, in part. fueled trade with Europeans. At least some of the trails found in the
area by Anglo-American surveyors in the early 1830s must have been the product of
Akokisa movements.
Akokisa-European trade is important in defining the archeology and history of the
Lake Creek reservoir zone during the Spanish period. The Akokisa villages located on

5-9

------

----------

----------

-~----

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Spring Creek most certainly used the Lake Creek area as a hunting ground. Proceeds
of the hunt were used to barter for European goods. including guns, ammunition, and
knives. At least some of the Coushatta and "contraband" trails passing through the
Lake Creek area must first have been opened by the Akokisa. During the eighteenth
and early nineteenth centuries these trails linked the Akokisa with their Bidai neighbors
on the Trinity as well as with the Spanish at Nacogdoches and later at Trinidad de
Salcedo.

5-10

--------

CHAPTER 6: HISTORICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Dan K. Utley
GENERAL HISTORY OF MONTGOMERY COUNTY

Montgomery County is situated in southeast Texas. in an area where the
timberlands of East Texas merge with the prairies of the Coastal Plain.
It was
included in the colonization contracts issued by the Spanish. and later Mexican.
government and administered by empressario Stephen F. Austin.
Anglo-American
settlers began moving into the area by the early 1820s. soon after Mexico gained its
independence from Spain.
Among the pioneers was Andrew Montgomery, who
established a trading post at the crossing of two historic trails. the Loma del Toro and
the Lower Coushatta Trace.
Later. he was joined by other pioneers and the
subsequent settlement became known as Montgomery Prairie.
The present town of
Montgomery is located not far from the early post.
By the 1830s. settlers had entered the area in numbers sufficient to warrant the
establishment of a county government. By act of the Republic of Texas Congress.
Montgomery County was established in December. 1837.
Created from Washington
County. it included land between the Brazos and Trinity Rivers.
Eventually. the
counties of Grimes. Walker. San Jacinto, Madison and Waller were created from the
territory assigned to Montgomery County. The present boundaries were established in
the 1870s after the formation of Waller County.
The town of Montgomery served as the first seat of government. In 1874. Willis
was named the county seat. but Montgomery again served in that regard in 1880.
Nine years later. Conroe became the center of the county government.
The early economy of Montgomery County was based on agriculture. primarily
subsistence farming and plantations.
Cotton was the main crop, but substantial
acreage was also cultivated for corn and tobacco production. Lumber was a limited
resource initially. providing fuel and building materials for the local residents.
A new economic era began following the Civil War. when the first rail lines were
constructed across the county (Table 6.1). They not only created new settlements. but
they provided an efficient means of harvesting the abundant timberlands.
Lumber
became a boom industry in the latter part of the 19th century and the early part of
the 20th century. Communities such as Dobbin. Bobville. Egypt. Mostyn. Karen.
Leonides. Cowl Spur. Keenan and Honea developed as lumber shipping points or as mill
sites. Since little attention was given to reforestation or other conservation measures
in the early days of lumbering. some of the settlements died as operations were moved
to more productive areas.
Lumbering later became a more efficient and renewable
industry. but began to decline in Texas in the 1950s when lumbering companies from
other areas. primarily in the northwestern United States. bega'n competing favorably for
Tex as markets.

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Table 6.1.
Montgomery County Population
1850 ........ 2.384
1860 ........ 5.479
1870 ........ 6.483
1880 ....... 10.154a
1890 ....... 11.765
1900 ....... 17 .067
1910 ....... 15.679

1920 ....... 17.334
1930 ....... 14.588b
1940 ....... 23,055c
1950 ....... 24.504
1960 ....... 26.839
1970 ....... 49.479
1980 ...... 128.487

aReflects construction of railroads. beginning of lumber industry.
bMarks decline of lumbering due. in part. to lack of conservation practices.
cReflects "boom" of the 1930s oil

di~covery.

The discovery of oil in Montgomery County provided a new
the 1930s to the present. the production of petroleum has been
the growth and development of the area (Table 6.1).
The
Montgomery made it one of the richest oil producing areas in the

boom industry. From
a significant factor in
combined oilfields of
nation.

Today, Montgomery County is experiencing continued development because of its
diversified economy and its proximity to Houston.
Conroe. the Woodlands and other
areas of the county are attracting both industry and residents relocating from the
rapidly expanding urban area to the south.

FLOODS ON LAKE CREEK
Lake Creek. sometimes referred to as Big Lake Creek. rises in eastern Grimes
County and flows generally southeast to a junction with the West Fork of the San
Jacinto River near Conroe in Montgomery County.
The area drained by the creek.
especially from the town of Dobbin to the river confluence. is called "the bottoms" by
residents. It is subject to frequent and widespread flooding. The Hoods are central to
all accounts of the creek. whether the recollections of present county residents or the
writings of early travelers.
Gustav Dresel. a German vrsrtor to Texas in the late 1830s and early 1840s.
mentioned the Lake Creek floods in his record of a trip from Montgomery County to
Houston (Freund 1954:83-84). More recently. a 1981 Houston Chronicle article notes
that before early low-water crossings were replaced by modern highways. the town was
sometimes cut off by the rising creek. The article also mentions an incident in 1917,
when a Beaumont-bound train had to stop as it reached the creek because the waters
were flowing over the trestle. The train backed into Dobbin and not long after. the

6-2

LOCAL HISTORY
flood waters washed away the bridge and several
Chronicle. December 28. 1981).
The other end of the project area also flooded.
article.
Mentioning floodwaters that washed out a
San Jacinto River and Lake Creek. the article says.
number of bridges washed away from this site. but
dozen" (Houston Chronicle. December 5. 1940).

miles of railroad bed (Houston

as was noted in
bridge near the
"No record has
there have been

a 1940 Chronicle
confluence of the
been kept of the
at least a half a

Lake Creek differed from other east Texas streams. such as the Neches and
Angelina rivers. where floods were seasonal and often beneficial to transportation or
lumbering operations.
Factors such as low stream banks. an expanse of surrounding
lowlands and a nigh average rainfall (over 45 inches in Montgomery County) combined
to produce frequent floods in the Lake Creek bottoms that were disruptive to travel.
commercial operations and settlement.
Flood-prone Lake Creek was avoided by most early travelers and settlers. Maps
of western Montgomery County. whether they are of roads. railroads. early communities
or current subdivisions. show construction or concentration no closer than the outlying
areas of the bottoms.
There were, however. isolated incidents of individuals who
moved into the area. hoping to utilize its rich resources while avoiding the damaging
floods. Because these efforts were minimal. and largely unsuccessful. the probability of
locating related structures is extremely low. Water damage. high humidity levels. acidic
soils and the use of native. untreated lumber. further reduce the possibility that historic
structures survive.
An overriding factor. too. is the rapid vegetative growth in the
Lake Creek area.
Although most of the climax timber was cut by the 1920s. and
cutovers resulted from increased lumber activity in the 1940s and 1950s. the area
remains heavily forested with dense undergrowth. This makes the location of historic
features even more difficult.
Based on current research. however. there remains evidence that certain historical
elements of the Lake Creek area could still be located in the process of constructing
the reservoir. At best. they will be minimal representations of the area's history.

FARMSTEADS
Occasionally. individuals would move into the Lake Creek bottoms in an effort to
establish a homestead. Upper stretches of the creek were bordered by natural prairies
that seemed suitable for farming.
Cattle and hogs were allowed to range in the
bottoms and by the 1930s. loose livestock and semi-feral pigs. known as piney woods
rooters. were common to the area.
Although settlers began arriving in western Montgomery County by the 1820s.
most established their homesteads in the uplands. There are accounts. however. that
some did penetrate the Lake Creek bottoms.
Narcissus Boulware. a native of
Montgomery County. recalls the story of a family that built a cabin on a crossing of
Lake Creek.
There they provided shelter for individuals traveling through the area.

6-3

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
The wayside cabin may have been there as early as the 1840s. when William Bollaert
Mrs. Boulware
(Hollon 1956:266) wrote of his trip from Montgomery to Houston.
pointed out that there were two primary crossings of the creek -- one where FM 149
now crosses and the other near the present Egypt - Honea Road. It is not known
which of these crossings was the site of the cabin.
One early log cabin was mentioned by German native Gustav Dresel. who traveled
through the areas of present Harris and Montgomery counties in the late 1830s and
early 1840s. On route from Montgomery to Houston, he noted the following in his
journal:
On the first day we got only as far as Lake Creek. where we resolved to
camp. Scarcely had we lit the fire when torrents poured from the sky ... An
ice-cold wind blew through our wetted clothes so that we stood there
shivering . . . There was no shelter to be had beneath the wagons, so heavily
did it rain. Therefore. in order to suffer from the cold at least from one side
only, we tried to set an empty abandoned log cabin on fire.
After many
fruitless attempts, we succeeding in doing so.
Wrapped in rugs and
continually turning, we surrounded the fire. The rain stopped after midnight
only. Squatted together. we fell asleep. (Freund 1954:83-84)
It is certain there were others who tried to settle along Lake Creek, although
most who built close to the stream were eventually threatened by floods. One of the
earliest families to settle in the area was that of Noah and Ester Wightman Griffith.
natives of New York.
Their Mexican land grant. where they settled in 1831. was
located just south of Dobbin (Texas Historical Commission 1985).
Another early settler. James McGown. mentioned Lake Creek
of town lots:

in

the advertisement

The lands surrounding Montgomery, known as the Lake Creek Settlement.
being of such a rich and fertile character. and having a rich and industrious
population. it is destined to be, in a short time. a town of considerable
importance. (Montgomery County Patriot. July 25. 1845)
No structures from the early period of settlement were noted in the current
investigation. Likewise. no oral histories or historic documents gave specific locations
of structures that might still be extant. Early structures were probably built of native
logs for utilitarian purposes. It is doubtful that any have survived the floods or the
climate of Lake Creek. Were there any pioneer structures still remaining. they would
have been mentioned by area residents or by members of the active county historical
commission. since there are many individuals in the area who are interested in historic
preservation.

6-4

LOCAL HISTORY
ROADS AND TRACES

Even before the first Anglo-American settlers migrated to present Montgomery
County. numerous Indian trails crossed the Lake Creek area.
The Bidai and the
Coushatta. among others. traversed Lake Creek in search of game or in order to trade
with the early Spanish settlements of South Texas.
Some of the trails eventually
became routes of outlawed trade between New Spain and French Louisiana.
Historically. the two most significant trails that evolved in the vicinity of Lake
Creek were the Coushatta Trace and the Loma del Toro. The latter may have been
named for the vast herds of buffalo visible from the high ridges along Lake Creek
(Montgomery 1975:25).
The former has been carefully researched by Mr. Howard
Martin (1986) of Houston. using land records and surveyors' field notes (Fig. 6.1).
Mr. Martin is the archivist of the Alabama-Coushatta Indian Reservation and has
compiled the information for his testimony on behalf of the tribal claims of ancestral
lands.
He also plans to use the information for a future history of the AlabamaCoushatta Indians.
Mr. Martin places the approximate date of the trace in the late eighteenth
century.
Historic records show the Coushatta were in Texas at the time of the
American Revolution.
The Coushatta Trace was a trade route from the Coushatta
main village at the confluence of Quicksand Creek and the Sabine River (present
Newton County) to the missions at La Bahia (near present Goliad).
It left the
Coushatta village. following first an earlier trail toward the Spanish settlements at
Nacogdoches. until it crossed a sand ridge running east and west (probably in northern
There, the trail headed west across northern Tyler County (near
Jasper County).
historic Fort Teran). then into Polk County. San Jacinto County. a small section of
Walker County and into Montgomery County. From there it continued west to Goliad
County. southeast of San Antonio. East from the Coushatta village. a trail led to the
Alabamas' main camp near Opelousas. Louisiana.
The Coushatta Trace was only one small part of the network of trade routes
that crossed East Texas. There were other Indian traces. and other Indian tribes used
the trails later named for the Coushatta. By the early nineteenth century. there were
reports of Alabamas and Coushattas trading in San Antonio. La Bahia. along the Texas
coast. and in Natchitoches. Louisiana. In 1812. Felix Trudeaux. who served as the
Spanish vice-consul at Natchitoches. sent a communique to Lieutenant Colonel
Bernardino Montero at Nacogdoches. suggesting that the East Texas Indians might be
used to send messages and letters to San Antonio. The implication was that the
Indians might prove more reliable than their own soldiers (Peebles 1968:63).
An important north-south route. noted in various histories as the Loma del Toro.
Bull's Hill Road. Smuggler's Road or the Contraband Trace. crosses Lake Creek in the
general vicinity of FM 149 (the road from Montgomery to Tomball) (Fig 6.1). The
trail was west of the Iron Mound League on the Raleigh Rogers League. near the
present Yell Cemetery. There is speculation that the road was used by Frenchman
Louis Juchereau de St. Denis to trade in contraband goods between French Louisiana

6-5

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

....>.
c:
::I

0

u

...>.cu
E

0

....bO
c:
0

:2
..r::.

bO
::I

0
....

..r::.

....
Ill

....::Icu
0
....

cu

-0

........
nl

c:

nl

-0

c:

c

;::
0

c

~

bO

c:

·;:
0

..r::.

II)

c..

11:1

E

....c:
nl
....

bO

-0

c

-11:1

ID

CIO

Crimes

Co.

ID
w

c:::

:::::>
I.!:>

L--~~~--~--~--------~
6-6

LOCAL HISTORY

and Spanish Texas.
In 1713. St. Denis was commissioned by Antoine de la Mothe
Cadillac. the French governor of Louisiana. to open a trade route with Mexico. He
was successful in this effort and eventually assisted the Spanish in the establishment of
East Texas missions. Later however. he was accused of dealing in contraband and
served time in a Mexico City jail.
Following his release on bail. he returned to
Louisiana. where he founded a post at Natchitoches and continued with the contraband
trade until his death in 1744 (Webb 1952:527-528).
It is believed one of St. Denis' major routes into southeast Texas followed part
of the Old San Antonio Road. branching off near the Arroyo Loco west of
Nacogdoches. continuing through present Angelina County and down through
Montgomery County (Webb 1952:403-404). The back of a photograph in the Forest
History Collection at Stephen F. Austin University in Nacogdoches carries the following
notation: "Contraband Trace or Smugglers Road claimed by John Henry Brown 'History
of Texas' to be road blazed by St. Denis in 1714. crosses SH 35 nine miles S of
Nacogdoches" (Forest History Collection ms).
Robin Montgomery (1975). in The History of Montgomery County. shows the
Loma del Toro (Contraband Trace) crossing the Trinity River in present Trinity County
(Fig. 6.1). His map also shows a branch from the Trinity River crossing of the Old
San Antonio Road at Robbins Ferry (Madison County) (Montgomery 1975:opposite page
1).
Early maps of Montgomery County show present Landrum Creek was once
recorded as Bidal Creek. This name may be a corruption of the tribal name Bidai.
referring to early Indian movements up and down the Loma del Toro. William Bollaert.
the early chronicler of Texas. referred to the route in his observations of the Bidai
Indians. "Bidais live and hunt about Cincinnati and the prairies towards Lake Creek
Montgomery--there are but few of these: less than the Coshattes" (Ewers 1969:116fn).
The Cincinnati he mentioned was an important Trinity River port in present Walker
County. Local tradition also mentions an early physician. Dr. Price. whose offer to
treat Bidai villagers suffering from smallpox was rejected (Owen 1986). This village
may have been been near Caney Creek. north of the study area (Mock 1986). a
location that could have contributed to the naming of the creek.
Both the Coushatta Trace and the Loma del Toro became important routes for
early settlers migrating to Texas from other states of the South. They also served as
commercial routes for the pioneers. No physical evidence of either the Coushatta Trace
or the Contraband Trace was found in the preliminary investigations. Only the latter
crossed Lake Creek. The only roads that now run through the area were constructed
much later. As mentioned earlier, FM 149 crosses Lake Creek between Montgomery
and Tomball.
The Honea-Egypt Road originally dates to the turn of the century.
although later maps show the road has been changed considerably. A road west from
the Honea-Egypt Road was. according to local informants. built in the 1930s by the
Civilian Conservation Corps of the Federal government.

6-7

---

---------~---------~-~-

------~---------------~--------

·-----

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
LUMBERING

Montgomery County is located on the western edge of the East Texas Piney
Woods. As such, it is also on the extreme boundary of what Maxwell and Baker
(1983:3) call the .. great trans-Mississippi evergreen forest, embracing Arkansas. eastern
Oklahoma, and Louisiana... It reached from southern Missouri to the flatlands of the
Gulf of Mexico and from the Mississippi to the broad blackland prairies of Central
Texas."
In Montgomery County, the dominant trees are the short leaf and loblolly
pines, but there are also isolated stands of gum, ash and oak.
The earliest permanent settlers in East Texas were primarily farmers from the
South. As such. they were familiar with the pine barrens and utilized them on a
For many years. the pioneer
limited basis. mostly for fuel and building materials.
settlers either cleared the land or maintained existing open spaces for subsistence
farming.
Cotton was the principal cash crop. but the land also supported corn and
other basic crops. and forage for cattle and hogs.
Although preceded by some earlier mills. steam-powered sawmills appeared in East
Texas in the 1830s. As the need for timber increased. so did the level of non-selective
harvest. Since reforestation and other conservation measures were not common until
after World War II. the early mills stayed in an area only as long as it took to cut
out the surrounding timber (Fig. 6.2a). The lack of adequate transportation was also
a factor in limiting the scope of logging operations.
Often referred to as
"peckerwoods", the small mills were usually for first cuts, sending the unfinished planks
to a nearby planer. or for special cuts such as railroad ties.
Early mill owners frequently cut all the surrounding timber (Fig. 6.2a) and moved
the operation to another site before taxes and financial responsibilities came due. Such
"cut and run" mills were common in the bottoms. where often the landlords were
absentee. Owing to the temporary nature of peckerwood and cut and run mills. and to
the fact that many artifacts of the lumber industry were later used in other areas or
contributed as part of metal scrap drives. little evidence of the early timber operations
should have survived in the Lake Creek project area.
Remaining evidence would
probably consist of immense sawdust piles (which were not burned in the early days).
mill ponds and logging roads.
The greatest impact of the lumbering industry came as a result of the large
sawmills. Over the years. many existed in western Montgomery County. and a few
remain in operation on a limited basis. As long as the lumber industry depended on
mules and ox teams for transportation of the logs. the mills had to be located close to
the source of lumber. When the mills became larger. it was necessary for the logs to
be transported over greater distances.
As a result. a network of tram roads was
established through the pine forests. Small Shay engines used the tramways to move
logs from the fronts [front line camps (Fig. 6.2b)J to the mill (Fig. 6.3a). The trams
were in existence only long enough for a particular area to be cut out, so the railroads
were not constructed in a permanent manner (Fig. 6.3a).

6-8

LOCAL HISTORY

FIGURE 6.2 .

Early Texas lumbering (courtesy of Forest History Collection . Stephen
F. Austin University) a) an example of the sawyers' work. ca. 1900
b) East Texas lumber camp. commonly called the "front".
6-9

,.._
):::..

~
("'\
~

~
~

~

~

~

"'~
0

-

°'
I

0

FIGURE 6.3.

Early Texas tram operations (courtesy of Forest History Collection. Stephen F. Austin University}.
a) a loaded tram in the Piney Woods, note mule team b) Shay engine. moving into position for loading,
note simplicity of tram bed.

LOCAL HISTORY
Although it is not known when the first tram roads were built. Maxwell and
Baker state they were in operation before the Civil War and that some of the early
ones used mules to pull the railway cars across wooden tracks (Maxwell and Baker
1983:59-60).
However. eventually locomotives served as the main source of power
(Fig. 6.3b). A typical one was the Shay engine as described by S.G. Reed:
The Shay locomotive weighed. in working order. about 20.000 pounds and
could attain a maximum speed of about ten miles per hour. The fuel was
split pine wood and the sparks emitted from the cabbage-head smokestack on
a dark night would have made a modern fireworks display appear
uninteresting . . . (Reed 1941:503)
Maxwell and Baker provide further information about the tram operations:
In any rail and power-skidder logging operation, the steel gang was
constantly laying down rails and ties for a spur track and taking them up
again when that section was logged out. . . . The logging railroads varied
greatly in construction. maintenance and rolling stock.
Some operated over
well-ballasted. adequately graded roadbeds. while others could hardly be
described as ballasted at all. The width ranged from standard gauge (4 feet
8-1/2 inches) down to three feet. . . . The general rule was no ballasting
and only a minimum of grading for the spur lines, which were temporary and
were taken up again in a few days or weeks. The spur lines often resembled
snakes as they disappeared into the forest. weaving and dipping. swerving to
avoid standing timber. easing right or left to miss a stump that otherwise
would be directly under rail (Maxwell and Baker 1983:62-63).
A similar scene. in Shelby County. is described by veteran lumber man W.I. Davis
m an oral history interview with Robert S. Maxwell:
The tram road was powered by four steam engines and tracks were
continuously being taken up and relaid as one section after another was cut
out. In the forest proper. mule teams and cable skidders or slides were used
to bring the logs to track side. As in other counties. the Pickring Company
would establish a camp or front. laying track to that area and proceed to cut
out desirable timber. When that operation was finished the camp equipment
and tracks were moved to a new location. (Davis 1956)
Charles E. Wells (1971). who has researched the early trams of East Texas.
believes there were almost two dozen trunk line tram roads in Montgomery County.
more than any other part of Texas except Polk County.
Statistics noted by Ruth
Allen in her book on lumber workers would seem to substantiate the claim. In 1870
and 1880. and again in 1950. Montgomery County had the largest number of mills of
any Texas county. In those years when it was not the leader. it was one of the top
four counties (Allen 1961:29).

6-11

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Charles Magan (1986). a longtime surveyor in Montgomery County, has several
early aerial photos that show a network of tram roads (Fig. 6.4) extending northeast
from Magnolia. where the extensive Grogan and Cochran mill was located. The extent
of the cutting is evident from the photos that show large open areas at the extreme
reaches of the trams.
It is important to note that subsequent photos of the area.
taken in the 1960s. show no trace of the tramways. This points to the temporary
nature of the railroads as well as the rapid revegetation of the area forests.
In the course of the historical research. the names of numerous mills were noted.
Among those that probably cut in the Lake Creek bottoms were the F.A. Talley mill at
Keenan. the J.D. Sunday mill near Montgomery. the Grogan-Cochran operation at
Magnolia. George Dean's mill above Ford's Lake on Lake Creek. the Rice-Hardesty mill
in Montgomery. the Wooten mill (1940s) on the Superior Road and the Jones-Parsley
mill (1940s). a small operation near the proposed dam site (Fig. 6.4).

GRAVEYARDS, BURIAL SITES AND HIDDEN TREASURE
No cemeteries shown on county maps are threatened by construction of the
proposed Lake Creek Reservoir. There may however be isolated burials. or even small
family graveyards. that have been forgotten and neglected and therefore remain
unrecorded. Through oral histories it was learned there was an early cemetery used for
the burial of sawmill workers near Ford's Lake (Montgomery County Genealogical
Society. Inc. 1981:257). Subsequent research showed the graveyard was outside the
project area. southwest of Dobbin (Griffith 1986).
Mr. Griffith has agreed to help
locate the burial ground and to provide more information about the families associated
with the site.
Mr. Griffith also told of an unrecorded cemetery for blacks. believed to date from
the antebellum era. that is west of FM 1486, not far from the Noah Griffith homesite.
The cemetery may have first served slaves of the Dupree plantation. It too is outside
the project area. A cemetery that appears closer to Lake Creek. but still outside the
project area. is the one at the Bobville Community just south of Dobbin on FM 1486.
It is shown on the Texas Forest Service map of the Anderson Quadrangle.
There may be similar sites in the Lake Creek area that do not show on historical
maps or that have not been remembered by oral history informants interviewed for this
report. When a mill worker died during the early days of the Texas lumber industry
(1880-1910). it was not uncommon for him to be buried near the sawmill. A quote
from the February 12. 1912. edition of the Halletsville Rebel. noted in East Texas
Lumber Workers by Ruth Allen. mentions the common burial practices:
At forty, he sickens with Company malaria. lies
is attended by a Company doctor who doses him
then he draws his last Company breath. while the
widow in Company scrip for the company coffin
Company ground. (Allen 1961:155)

down on a Company bed.
with Company drugs. and
undertaker is paid by the
in which he is buried on

6-12

---··-----

----·-

---

-

-

--------~

---

-----·

----

O'I

.....
w
I

~

Approximate Locations

~
\

0

I

2

"'""

4

\

\

I

I

·.

'

. )
\.J

.

.. ,,,
.\{
""\

\

I

\

FIGURE 6.4. Reported historic resources in the general Lake Creek area.

r

'\

-

• 'I

I

'\ l
\

I

f-'JEGYPT

1.

·.

\
i

~

I

-···-·-t

\

;

r

\:

\ .
".

\

\...

.....
c
~
.....
~
Col)

ti=->

""<

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Mr. Sonny Boy Butler. a nonagenarian and a longtime sawmill worker who resides at
Mostyn (Butlers Crossing). also mentioned burials at sawmill sites. According to him.
the interments were often made by a fencerow. He knows of at least a dozen such
burials near his home (Butler 1986).
The number of individuals killed in
significant: the timber industry was one
Lumber companies and contract loggers
even sketchy statistics show the level of

Montgomery County lumber accidents could be
of the most dangerous in the United States.
were reluctant to keep accurate records. but
danger. According to Maxwell and Baker:

Of all manufacturing occupations. logging and sawmilling were two of the
most dangerous. The United States Department of Labor. Bureau of Labor
Statistics. rated the lumber worker seven times as likely to "sustain an injury
on the job" as an average of all other workers in manufacturing industries.
Among United States industries logging and sawmilling ranked first and third
in frequency of disabling accidents and first and fourth in number of fatalities.
The record was no better than that of the nation as a whole. (Maxwell and
Baker 1983:123)
During the height of the lumber industry in Texas. unskilled workers came from
across Texas and from other states to participate in the "boom". Many were without
families and many others left no more permanent record of their past or their origins
than the information required for the company payroll. This. coupled with the fact
that the timberlands of the Lake Creek area were harvested in both the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, increases the possibility that there are isolated burials in the project
area.
Early settlers in the bottoms may also have buried family members in the area.
Diseases brought about by the high humidity. swamp-like conditions and infestations of
insects such as mosquitoes and ticks. were common along Lake Creek. As a result.
the infant mortality level was probably high relative to other areas of the country.
John William Devereaux. a member of the family that established a large plantation
near Dobbin. wrote of the hazards of Lake Creek life in 1845:
Deo Volente I will date myself away from middle Texas (in all) June next-I'll be seen no more between San Jacinto and Lake Creek--1 have been three
years in this poison'd atmosphere--drank bad water and breath'd foul air--have
borne northers and scorchers--inundations drouths--pestilence endemic and
epidemic--child with cold and moisture and again panting and exhausted with
hot sirocco air surcharged with malaria from stagnant lakes--the sun is
obscur'd every morning until nine oclock and constant rains from October until
June and drouth from June until October ... (Winfrey 1962:48)
The story of another early Lake Creek family, mentioned earlier, includes a reference to
travelers that never made it through the bottoms. The family's living quarters were
divided by means of a suspended sheet on those occasions when a traveler spent the

6-14

LOCAL HISTORY
night. Several times. it is told. the traveler would meet his demise at the hands of
the family's daughter while silhouetted against the room divider.
Members of the
family would then separate the individual from his belongings and bury him along the
creek.
Any discussion of possible burials in an isolated area of East Texas would not be
complete without the mention of lynchings. primarily those motivated by racial
The antebellum economy of Montgomery County, and much of southeast
prejudice.
Texas, depended on the plantation system. When that system was replaced following
the Civil War, intense hatred was often exhibited by whites toward blacks. Although
the discussion of civil rights in Montgomery County is beyond the scope of this report.
it should be noted that there were incidents in the area that could have resulted in
lynchings.
Mr. Butler recalls a time when he walked to Houston.
The trip took
several days. so he traveled with a bedroll and slept at the edge of the woods along
the route. At one point he came upon a fence with a sign that warned: "Nigger. read
and run. If you can't read, run anyway" (Butler 1986). Lynchings were most common
just after the Civil War and had decreased dramatically by the 1920s when there was
greater acceptance of local law enforcement (Branda 1976:547-548).
As with other isolated areas of the state that remain largely undeveloped, the
Lake Creek bottoms have spawned legends and tales of hidden treasure.
One story
involved Kit Hall, outlaw stepson of early resident Nathanial Alston.
Convicted of
killing and robbing two slave traders, Hall was sentenced to hang. Just before his
execution, he told of concealing his ill-gotten gains in a hollow tree in the Lake Creek
bottoms (Montgomery 1975:272-273). apparently tossing it from horseback into a
convenient hole. The validity of this story remains unknown since there have been no
reports of peckerwoods attaining sudden wealth.

OILFIELDS
By the turn of the century. oil and gas deposits were found in Montgomery
County. In 1901. a water well dug in conjunction with the construction of Santa Fe
rail lines showed traces of oil. Reports by foresters and farmers of gas seepages in
southeastern areas of the county were also common. Test wells were drilled there as
early as 1919. The big discovery came on December 31. 1931. when a well drilled by
Missouri native, George W. Strake (1894-1969). struck oil. Strake's well. known as
the South Texas Development Company No. 1. marked the beginning of the great
Conroe Oil Field.
Exploration in other parts of the county increased and, eventually, over a dozen
new fields were disc~vered. One of these was the Lake Creek Oil Field, opened in
1941 with a discovery well that came in at 9,211 feet. The oil-rich sands of the Lake
Creek area eventually made the field the sixth largest in the county. with a production
nearing a million barrels by 1965 (Hallman 1965:65).

6-15

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Evidence of the 1940s oil boom may still be found in the Lake Creek area.
primarily in the form of roads. abandoned oil derrick sites and some vintage wells that
remain in operation.
A major oil company camp, known as Superior Camp. was
established on FM 1488 between Magnolia and the Egypt community. Residents still
refer to the Superior Road, a north-south corridor into the Lake Creek Oil Field (Fig.
6.4).
Many of the frame structures associated with the oilfield
offices and workers' housing. were temporary by design.
Some
they could be moved readily as the well sites or needs changed.
of these structures remain in the Lake Creek bottoms. although
have been salvaged for later construction.

activities. including
were constructed so
It is doubtful if any
parts of some may

HUNTING CAMPS
According to local informants. several hunting camps are located in the area
surrounding Lake Creek (Fig. 6.4).
These hunting camps generally reflect private
ownership and do not represent the type of formal hunting clubs more common in other
parts of East Texas. Some of the camps. such as the one on 41MQ110. may include
structures built from or on the site of earlier buildings. It should be noted. also. that
fishing is a popular activity along Lake Creek. although the sport did not always follow
conventional practices. Mrs. Boulware (1986) recalls when large numbers of fish were
produced by the practice of dynamiting the creek's lakes and deep holes. The practice.
while probably successful and certainly questionable as sport. could have resulted in the
destruction of historical sites in the area.

STILLS
One of the most significant national social issues facing Americans following
World War I was Prohibition.
For years. temperance organizations pushed for both
state and national legislation that would outlaw the sale of alcoholic beverages.
In
Texas. such groups as the United Friends of Temperance, the Women's Christian
Temperance Union, the Grange and the Greenback party, worked actively for fhe
prohibition cause.
Determined, outspoken and demanding, the groups were a major
force in the state as early as 1887. when they forced a statewide election on a
prohibition amendment that was defeated.
Despite the setback. they continued to
work. building grassroot support. As a result. by 1918. almost 200 of the counties in
Texas were considered "dry". That year. however. the Texas Legislature adopted the
national prohibition amendment (18th Amendment).
Later the Texas Legislature
str~ngthened the amendment with passage of the Dean law. an act that made the
manufacture of liquor in the state illegal for any purpose. Prohibition did not end until
1933. with passage of the 21st Amendment (Webb 1952:414-415).

6-16

LOCAL HISTORY
From 1918 to 1933. there were countless efforts to circumvent Prohibition. One
of the most common methods was the local manufacture of illegal liquor. or moonshine.
Both Mrs. Boulware and Mr. Mock remembered stories of illegal moonshine operations
in the Lake Creek bottoms. It should also be noted that moonshining is an activity
that was not relegated necessarily to the Prohibition era and there may have been stills
in operation much later than the 1930s.
Although it is more common to hear of
bootleggers operating in the dry counties of East Texas today. occasional stills are still
discovered by law enforcement officials.
One Lake Creek informant. who asked to remain anonymous. recalled an incident
in the 1920s when moonshiners were in operation. Trying to cross Lake Creek on a
horse. the informant. who was of school age at the time, was startled by an armed
man who suggested a route further downstream.
Following the creek for almost a
mile. the informant tried to cross several more times. but was thwarted on every
attempt by gun wielding men.
It was later learned that this was the method of
security used by the still operators when they were "running shine".
Because of the secretive nature of moonshine operations m the Lake Creek
bottoms. the distilling sites are not widely known. It is unlikely that any remains of
stills will be found.

MISCELLANEOUS SITES
According to Charles Mock (1986). a longtime employee of a local land
development company. a tanyard was in operation near Lake Creek before the Civil War
(Fig. 6.4). Although there are general references to the tan yard in other sources and
interviews. no specific information about it could be found (Mock 1986).
Mr. Mock also described a concrete dipping vat (Fig. 6.4) that probably dates to
the twentieth century tick eradication programs (Mock 1986). Another site of note is
the Kirbee Kiln (outside the project area) which has been thoroughly researched and
investigated by the Texas Historical Commission (Malone. Greer and Simons 1979).

RECORDED HISTORIC COMPONENTS
Four sites with historic components were located during the survey (41MQ104.
41MQ110. 41MQ111. 41MQ117). All are situated on prehistoric sites and thus share a
site number with a prehistoric component. Structural remains or standing structures
are present on all four. The ages of these structures can be placed within the last 40
years and. as such. do not meet the minimum 50 year criterion set for historic sites.
Only 41MQ104 is known to have held a 1920s hardwood mill. dismantled and moved
prior to the construction of the recent structures (Appendix C) (McWhorter 1986).
41MQ110 is also the site of a sawmill that operated during the 1940s, and 41MQ111
is in the general vicinity of an old gin and mill reported by local informants.

6-17

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Note should be made of a special case that involves several historic structures
that have been relocated to a site within the project area. Mr. Carroll Tharp has. over
a period of years. moved several early East Texas structures onto his property and
restored them. The buildings include the Crane Family Cabin. a nineteenth century log
cabin relocated to Montgomery County from Angelina County in the 1970s. and the
James Jordan (Jardine) Log House. moved from Walker County in 1976: both have
been designated Recorded Texas Historic Landmarks by the Texas Historical
Commission (Tharp 1986).
As such. the buildings have a limited legal protection;
before they can be moved or altered in any way, a written notice must be filed with
the Research and Markers Department of the THC.
The letter must be specific.
stating when and how the building will be moved. and where it will be relocated. The
law (Article 6145, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) allows the Commission a 60-day
review period, plus an additional 30 days if the staff determines the extra time would
aid in the preservation of a structure. Although the 60 (or 90) days is for review and
recommendations only, the Commission can invoke injunctive relief for the required time
if they are not properly notified.
It should be noted that. since Mr. Tharp received the markers for his buildings.
the Texas Historical Commission has toughened their view of relocating historic
buildings.
Following accepted preservation practices. they discourage moving the
buildings since it results in a loss of historical and architectural integrity. As a result
of their concern. the THC no longer awards Recorded Texas Historic Landmark status
to relocated buildings. In addition. they have adopted a policy of requiring the removal
of building markers (RTHL) for structures that are relocated subsequent to the
awarding of the medallion (Texas Historical Commission 1985).
Not all of Mr. Tharp's buildings will be adversely affected by construction of the
Lake Creek Reservoir. Since the exact size of the lake is still conjectural at this point.
it may be that the final plan will pose no threat to the relocated buildings.

PRELIMINARY FINDINGS
None of the historic sites uncovered in the research exhibit intrinsic architectural
Subsequent construction work in the area may.
integrity or historical significance.
however. uncover additional structures or sites that will need to be reviewed in the
cqntext of the general history of Lake Creek and Montgomery County. At this time.
there is no reason to believe any historic sites will bar construction of the reservoir.

6-18

CHAPTER 7:

THE SAMPLE SURVEY OF LAKE CREEK
Leland C. Bement

In response to the Bureau of Reclamation scope-of-work (Appendix A). TAS
devised a research design for a 20% sample survey of Lake Creek Reservoir. Integral
tasks included: 1) selection of the sample units: 2) identification of prehistoric and
historic resources: 3) construction of a site typology: 4) integration of data generated
by the various special studies: and 4) provision of recommendations for additional work
within the framework of a refined research design. The theoretical considerations that
underly the design are outlined in Chapter 3: Archeological Background and expanded in
Chapter 8: Explanatory Models. Data integration and recommendations are presented in
Chapter 9: Summa.ry and Recommendations. This chapter summarizes the methods and
techniques used to achieve a 20% sample. describes the site typology and places it
within an environmental and temporal framework. Comparisons between average density
of artifacts per site and maximum frequency per level are used to estimate the
stratigraphic integrity of the buried sites as an aid to formulating recommendations for
subsurface testing.
The records of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory and the Texas
Historical Commission demonstrated a lack of archeological study in the Lake Creek
area. No prior surveys had included any portion of the proposed reservoir and no sites
had been reported in the study area. A literature review of the surrounding ten county
area. carried out by T AS for the proposed Bedias Reservoir north of Lake Creek
(Bartholomew 1986). provided a current summary of regional archeological studies. The
sample survey of Lake Creek was designed to conform to the research design for
Thus. sample selection. site
complementary studies planned in Bedias Reservoir.
definition. site typologies and methods and techniques for both projects are essentially
the same.

SAMPLE SELECTION
A non-random. stratified block sample. comprised of ten tracts totalling 3.570
acres or approximately 20% of the reservoir, was selected for intensive survey. The
tracts were distributed across the proposed floodpool of Lake Creek Reservoir to sample
all possible landform. hydrological and soil group combinations (Fig. 1.1). Sample units
were generally rectangular and oriented with the long axis perpendicular to the creek to
increase the diversity of landforms. The tracts were spaced at regular intervals along
the longest dimension of the reservoir but varied in horizontal distance from the main
water course to incorporate examples of various environmental zones. Stratifying the
sample units immediately rendered the selection process non-random.
Although
randomness is often seen as eliminating bias. targeting sample units permits the
avoidance of highly disturbed areas, those where access is denied. where the
geomorphological conditions are not conducive to site preservation or exposure, and
where environmental diversity is lacking.

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Block survey was selected to gain a representative sample of site types and their
A second advantage
relationship to each other and to their environmental setting.
inherent in block survey is from the management point of view.
The practical
implementation of survey is much easier if blocks are defined by landmarks such as
creeks, roads and property lines. These units can then be relocated in the future and
eliminated from additional intensive survey. The configuration of the Lake Creek tracts
generally corresponds with present day ownership bounds.
Since the Bureau of
Reclamation does not own nor lease any of the proposed project area. access to all
tracts depended on the courtesy and cooperation of the local landowner.

FIELD METHODS
The survey method developed for this pilot study can best be described as a
"bunch and scatter" approach. Crew members. entering a survey block. would spread
out and make their way through the dense vegetation. looking for sandy soils. Eroded
exposures of the B horizon were examined for deflated cultural materials stranded on
the clay. The team congregated on sandy deposits to dig shovel probes. One member
shoveled. two screened and one documented the results.
Matrix was removed in
approximate 20-centimeter levels and screened through 1/4-inch mesh hardware cloth.
Probes were placed every 50 to 80 meters for the extent of the sandy soils.
The
team then dispersed in search of surface-exposed cultural materials or additional sandy
deposits.
Using this method. areas with exposed B horizons received pedestrian
coverage and sandy deposits were intensively probed. A total of 321 shovel probes
Of these. 182 either located or further defined prehistoric sites and 139
were dug.
were sterile (Table 7.1). Very few probes were placed in the Lake Creek floodplain as
the hardened clay could not be penetrated nor screened.
The cutbanks along streams and roadways wer~ also inspected for exposure of
cultural material. Contact with local ranchers. amateur collectors and landowners led to
the documentation of one site (41MQ87) within and one site (41MQ121) outside the
reservoir.
A third prehistoric site within the proposed floodpool was reported by a
landowner but the current owner prevented its recording at this time.
It should be
noted that the majority of local informants believed no evidence of prehistoric
occupation would be found in the bottoms. a portent of the buried nature of all the
located sites.
The site definition proposed for the Bedias Reservoir study was perpetuated at
Lake Creek. The sparsity of exposed surface materials made site definition contingent
upon extensive subsurface probing in high probability areas and where isolated or
limited cultural material was found. If. following shovel probing. less than three items
of lithic debitage, single ceramic fragments or artifacts, or items clearly displaced from
their original context were the sole evidence of prehistoric occupation. the locale would
be considered an isolated find.
This definition proved to be of little utility as no
isolated finds were recorded during the survey. cultural material never found in such
limited quantities. Artifact collection was limited to items of value in determining site
age and function (Appendix D). The 46 recorded prehistoric sites were documented on
7-2

Table 7.1. LAKE CREEK SURVEY: Summary of Recorded Sites.
Maximum

Site

Number
(41MO-)

-.I
I

w

75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98
99
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
110
111
112
113
114
115
116
117
118
119
120
TOTAL

Field
Number
(P-1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39

40
41
42
43
44
45
46

Tract
Number

Number
of Probes

4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
3
3
3
3
7
10
10
10
10
10
7
6
6
6
9
9
9
8
8
8.
8

4
4
8
3
4
3
4
6
6
2
6
3
11
4
3
7
7
5
2
4
1
3
5
3
5
1
5
4
3
4
4
3
3
5
5
1
4
5
3
4
4
1
3
3
1
3
182

• t=Primary setting; x=Dotible setting

Historic

Arrow

Component

Points

Dart
Ceramics

Points

Other

t

t
t

t

t

Lake Mound
Creek Creek

Fish
Creek

Cooks

Intermittent

Branch

Stream

(Sq.m.)

Setting

1,600
9.375
5,000
3,750
6,375
750
3,600
2,000
5,000
1,200
7,500
1,000
11,250
900
1,600
8,000
6,500
1,600
400
3,600
400
1,200
3,200
1,600
2,400
900
2.400
3,200
4.400
400
600
1,600
2,100
12,800
3,200
1,600
2,500
2,400
4,800
1,800
2,400

VI
VI
I
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
I
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VII
I
VII
VI
VII

t
t
t
t

t
t
t

t

t
t
t
t

t
t

t

t
t

x
x

t

t
t
t
t
t

x
x

t
t
t

t

t
t
t
t
t
t

t
t

t

t

t

t
t

x
t
x

x
x
x
x

x
x

t

li

t

t

t
t

t
t

t

t

t

t

t
t

t

t

t

x

x
x

Unknown

t

t

24

x

x
t
x

t
t
t
t
t

x

3

13

10t
13x

2,500
3.600
1,600
3,000

x

t

t
t

2

x
x

x
x
t

t
t

t

4

t
t

t

x
14t
2x

Bt
Ox

Depth of
Cultural

Site
Size

lt
2x

Ot *
9x*

Topographic

v

VI
V·
IV
VI
IV

v
v
v
v
v

IV
Ill
VI

v
v
v

Deposit

(20cm levels)
6
4
5
5
5
5
4
5
5
5
5
5
6
5
5
6
5
6
2
5
5
5
5
5
5
3
5
6
5
6
2
5
6
5
5
4
5
5
5
6
5
1
5
6
5
5

Research

Potentiol

t

t
t
t

T

~

t
t

n,

t

~

t
t
t
t

~

r-

n,

(./)

§6
~
~

-

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
State of Texas Archeological site data forms with accompanying black and white and
color photographs. Shovel probe locations were plotted on site maps drawn to scale
and the contents of each probe recorded on an inventory sheet. Photographs. daily
journal and daily progress reports were also kept.
All notes. records. site forms.
photographs and artifacts are curated at T ARL with copies of the written
documentation housed at the Texas Historical Commission and the Bureau of
Reclamation, Amarillo, Texas.
Each site has been assigned a permanent number
following the trinomial system. In this system a number consists of a two digit state
identifier (41= Texas) followed by a two letter county designator (MQ=Montgomery
County) and the sequential number of sites in that county (100=100th site).
Thus.
41MQ100 is the one hundredth site recorded in Montgomery County, Texas.

THE SITES
A total of 46 prehistoric sites, four with historic Anglo components, were located
during the survey of the 3.570 acre sample (Table 7.1: Appendix C).
Generalized
density equates to 1 site per 77.6 acres for a projected reservoir total of 200 to 250
prehistoric sites. The cultural material inventories are fairly homogeneous for all sites
recorded.
The most common artifact type is lithic debitage including primary,
secondary. tertiary flakes and chips. Burned flakes and shatter. the remnant pieces of
fire-fractured rock. are the next most common artifact types.
In lesser numbers are
lithic tools. including bifaces, projectile points and drills and ceramics. Other culturally
modified or produced materials observed at a few sites are bone. mussel shell. burned
nut hulls and charcoal. Cultural features. in this case. hearths. were only positively
identified at one site (41MQ107).
The limited recovery gained by shovel probing hampered the construction of a
Forty-five of the sites are preliminarily classified as open
functional site typology.
campsites and one is a single activity site focused on lithic procurement/reduction
(41MQ100).
The latter contained culturally modified lithic materials including cores.
primary and secondary flakes, chips and tested cobbles, restricted to a small area of a
now-buried gravel and pebble deposit of the Willis Formation. No temporally diagnostic
artifacts or finished tools were recovered at this site.
Its topographic setting on a
gravel outcrop at the edge of a high bluff overlooking the Lake Creek drainage also
distinguishes it from the majority of the habitation sites.
Debris at the other 45 sites was indicative of more than one activity. These sites
are well situated to exploit multiple resources through diverse activities.
Hearths.
burned rock. burned clay, and burned flora and fauna are key criteria identifying these
sites as domestic locales.

7-4

-

---

----------~------

THE SAMPLE SURVEY

PREHISTORIC LAND USE
Landform Typology
A prime objective of the geomorphological and archeological tasks was the
derivation of a site typology from the distribution of prehistoric cultural remains across
the landscape of the study area. Toward that end. a seven-part division of the Lake
Creek drainage was constructed from a cross section of the basin (Fig. 7 .1).
The
stylized profile presented in Fig. 7.1 is a composite of landforms. expressing the surface
geology found in the study area and mirroring the topographic reality of the reservoir.
The use of a basin cross section as a base line format for analysis of the survey
results was first suggested by Caran (1986) and elaborated by Caran. Mandel and
Bement.
The topographic settings generally correspond to high terraces (HT). lower
terraces (T-1) and modern floodplain (T-0) described by Mandel (this report).

Terrace
Topographic
SettinQ

FIGURE 7.1.

HT

TII

T-0
111

Stylized Lake Creek drainage profile.

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING I
The Lake Creek drainage basin is bounded by a gently rolling interfluve with Mill
Creek to the south and west, and Caney Creek and the West Fork of the San Jacinto
River to the north. Capping these hills are the sands and gravels of the Late Pliocene
to Early Pleistocene Willis Formation. Geomorphological processes affecting this setting
include wind and rain erosion transporting material downslope as colluvium onto Setting
II. Soils in Setting I belong to the Conroe. Hockley-Katy, Wicksburg-Susquehanna. and
partially to Splendora-Bay-Segno associations (McClintock et al. 1972:63). These soils
are characterized by deep sandy to loamy upper layers with clayey lower layers and
vary from well drained to somewhat poorly drained (McClintock et al. 1972).
Vegetation on this setting is dominated by Pine-Hardwood Forests (Fig. 7 .2a)
composed of loblolly pine, shortleaf pine. post oak and red oak {James and Wilkinson
1985:39). This setting is part of Mandel's High Terrace (HT) in the geomorphological
section of this report.

7-5

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

a. Typical vegetation on
Lake Creek terraces,
Settings I, II and VII .

b. Tree-studded Lake
Creek f loodplain,
Setting 111.

c. Large, tree-covered
floodplain mound,
Setting IV.

FIGURE 7.2. Views of various topographic settings.

7-6

THE SAMPLE SURVEY

d. Perennial tributary
crossing the Lake
Creek floodplain,
Setting V.

e. Lower Fish Creek,
Setting VI.

f. Creekside vegetation
along Mound Creek,
Setting VI.

7-7

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING II
The adjacent lower bench (T-1) of the Lake Creek basin is composed of the
Deweyville Formation of Late Pleistocene to Early Holocene age. Soils on this setting
belong to the Albany-Tuckerman association which consists of deep sandy to loamy
poorly drained soils (McClintock et al. 1972). Deposition on this setting is effected by
colluvial action from the Willis Formation and possibly from alluviation during massive
floods. probably caused by hurricanes from the Gulf. This setting supports a forest of
pine and oak with equal proportions of loblolly pine and southern red oak (Fig. 7.2a).
Other common trees include post oak. sweetgum. winged elm and white ash (James
and Wilkinson 1985:61).

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING Ill
The modern floodplain (T-0) of Lake Creek is very broad and scarred by many
Alluvial sediments from overbank flooding
meanderings of the channel (Fig. 7.2b).
consist of dark vertisol clays.
Rates of alluviation along Lake Creek have not been
determined. In limited backhoe trenches in the upper reaches of the project area near
Soils
Ford Lake. however. the Holocene alluviation is approximately 1 meter thick.
Sandy levees and point
have been identified as part of the Tuscumbia association.
bars contain the larger sediment fraction.
These soils support a forest vegetation
comprised of pine and a wide variety of hardwoods.
Included in the overstory are
loblolly pine, sweetgum, water oak. sugarberry and hornbeam (James and Wilkinson
1985:93). The understory is dominated by palmetto with occasional thickets of yaupon.

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING IV
Setting IV consists of isolated knolls in the floodplain of Lake Creek (Fig. 7.2c).
The origin of these knolls has been the topic of much debate by geomorphologists for
over 80 years (see Mandel. this report). The age of part of the constituent deposits is
within the Holocene. Soils consists of deep sands to loams which tend to be better
drained than the alluvial clay deposits surrounding the knoll.
Typical vegetation
includes a sparse overstory of hardwoods with a moderate understory of vines and
grasses. This setting is Mandel's floodplain mounds in the geomorphological section of
this report.

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING V
This setting is like Setting Ill. the modern floodplain (T-0). with the addition of
bisecting perennial or intermittent streams (Fig. 7 .2d).
In addition to the alluvial
deposits from Lake Creek are the overbank deposits from the tributary. Vegetation
mirrors that of Setting Ill.

7-8

THE SAMPLE SURVEY

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING VI
Setting VI includes the lower bench (T-1) described as Setting II with the
addition of bisecting perennial or intermittent streams (Fig. 7.2e.f). Overbank deposits
from the tributary are added to the colluvial materials dominating Holocene Age
deposits at this setting.
The pine-hardwood canopy is joined by species of the
Streamside Forest. including water oak. willow oak. and hardwood nut species. such as
black walnut and hickory (James and Wilkinson 1985:82).

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING VII
This setting · combines the gently rolling interfluves of Setting
bisecting perennial or intermittent streams.
Overbank deposits provide
Holocene Age deposits with minor burial attributable to colluvial actions.
the pine-hardwood forest (Fig. 7.2a). the stream supports an overstory
willow oak and cedar elm (James and Wilkinson 1985:82).

I (HT) with
the dominant
In addition to
of water oak.

Environmental Areas
The ten survey tracts can be combined into four general environmental areas that
characterize segments along the course of Lake Creek.
These are:: 1) perennial
tributaries to Lake Creek; 2) high bluffs and floodplain of the Lower Lake Creek portion
of the reservoir: 3) Lake Creek floodplain and lower terraces at mid-reservoir: and 4)
Lake Creek floodplain and lower terraces at the upper end of the reservoir.

AREA 1: Major perennial tributaries to Lake Creek
Five named perennial streams flow into Lake Creek: Fish Creek. Mound Creek.
Stowe Branch. Cooks Branch and Landrum Creek. Numerous other unnamed perennials
also drain into Lake Creek. Portions of all five named tributaries were contained in the
surveyed tracts. However. only Fish Creek and Mound Creek were specifically sampled
for data pertaining to this topographic zone.
Fish Creek is a spring-fed perennial which drains a small linear catchment on the
north side of Lake Creek. Only the upper half contains water the year round, the flow
going underground before reaching the lower segment of the creek (Vincent 1986). The
lower half of the drainage is intermittent, only discharging after heavy rains during the
spring and less often in the fall.
The survey tract included the intermittent. lower
portion of the Fish Creek drainage. where past lumbering activity has promoted a dense
understory growth of vines and shrubs (e.g .. greenbriar and yaupon) with an overstory
of mixed pine and hardwood deciduous forest.
Soils in the lower portion of the
drainage consist of sandy upper zones and sandy clay lower zones. Cultural material is
contained in the sandy upper zones which occasionally reached depths in excess of one
meter. The creek channel has a sandy bottom. The survey tract covered topographic
Settings I. II and VII.

7-9

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Mound Creek is a spring-fed perennial which drains a large dendritic catchment
basin to the north of Lake Creek and west of Fish Creek. Like the Fish Creek tract.
logging has affected the vegetation of this drainage. In addition to the forest zone, the
Mound Creek floodplain supports a wetland community including ferns and palmetto.
Soils are characteristically sandy with some gravels over a sandy clay in the upland
and near upland areas, changing to dark clay in the Mound Creek floodplain.
Two of the survey blocks sample portions of the middle Mound Creek drainage,
upstream of the point where Mound Creek enters the broad Lake Creek floodplain.
Settings I. II. VI. and VII of the stylized Lake Creek geomorphic profile (Fig. 7.1) are
represented.
In the vicinity of the survey tracts, the clay bottom of Mound Creek supports
small colonies of mussel.
Mussels were not found along Fish Creek.
Perennial
streams were included in other survey tracts, but they were of secondary concern to
the primary task of sampling a variety of settings within the reservoir area.
Description of these creeks will be included with that of the primary locale.

AREA 2: High bluffs and floodplain of Lower Lake Creek
The south bank of Lake Creek. near the proposed dam site. is a topographical
high bisected by short. deeply entrenched spring-fed drainages. The active floodplain of
Lake Creek constricts to half its width on either side of the bluff line.
One
archeological survey tract placed in this area contained all geomorphic surfaces except
Setting IV. Soils consist of sand and gravel overlying sandy clay on the I. II. Ill and
VII surfaces and deep. dark clays on Settings Ill and V. The second tract. on the
north side of Lake Creek. encompasses the confluence of Mound and Lake Creeks.
Topographic Settings II. Ill. V and VI are contained in this tract.
Soil descriptions
mirror those on similar surfaces on the south creek tract.
Vegetation along this section of Lake Creek includes an overstory dominated by
long leaf pines on the upland sandy soil becoming intermixed with deciduous hardwoods
on the slopes and floodplains.
The understory consists of vines and shrubs
characteristic of secondary growth due to lumbering in the uplands and marsh
inhabitants dominated by palmetto in the Lake Creek and Mound Creek floodplain.
An extensive live colony of mussels was found in the clayey bottom of Lake
Creek at the mouth of Mound Creek. One sample of this colony is extremely large.
measuring 17 by 11 by 7 centimeters. Deposits along Lake Creek contain the shells of
dead mussels.

AREA 3: Lake Creek Floodplain and Lower Terraces at Mid-reservoir
The middle reservoir is characterized by a wide Lake Creek floodplain. bounded by
gently sloping sandy terraces and upland hills. Soils in the valley margins consist of
sandy upper zones underlain by sandy clays. Deforestation of the middle Lake Creek
reservoir area has left the floodplain in low grasses. often improved pasturage, with
hardwoods lining the creeks and drainages. The floodplain margins and uplands support

7-10
--------------------------~----------

THE SAMPLE SURVEY
mixed deciduous and pine overstory with a dense brushy understory. All seven of the
stylized topographic settings or geomorphic surfaces are represented by the three survey
tracts in this area.
Most of the acreage is categorized as Setting Ill. undissected
floodplain.
Tributaries in the three survey tracts include sandy bottom intermittent
drainages and sand and clay bottomed spring-fed perennials.
Water flow in the
perennials varies from fast moving in inclined drainages on the north side of the valley
to slow moving, forming swamps and marshes on the south. Lake Creek floodplain.

AREA 4: Lake Creek floodplain and Lower terraces at the upper end of the
Reservoir
The upper reservoir area is very similar to the middle area except that the Lake
Creek floodplain is narrower.
Another striking difference is two large, natural lakes
Ford Lake is contained in the
within the floodplain: Ford Lake and Johnson Lake.
modern Lake Creek channel and could be described as a broadening of the channel.
Johnson Lake is in the floodplain north of the present Lake Creek channel and appears
to be an abandoned channel. fed by the intermittent drainages and overbank flooding of
Lake Creek.
Two survey tracts sampled the upper reservoir area. Sands underlain by sandy
clays are located on the valley margins and dark clays with some sandy knolls occur in
the floodplain. All seven stylized geomorphic surfaces are contained in the survey area.
Again. deforestation by lumbering during the early 20th century has left this area in
pasturage (often improved) with deciduous trees along the drainages and Lake Creek.

Summary of Topographic Divisions and Environmental Areas
The relative acreage contributed by each geomorphic surface to the surveyed area
of the reservoir is provided in Figure 7 .3. As can be expected in any reservoir project.
the most acreage is contained in the floodplain (Settings Ill. IV and V). The perennial
stream breakdown shows an equal representation of Settings I. II. VI and VII. The
characteristics of the valley margins change, however. when different areas along Lake
Creek are considered. Upland settings I. II. VI and VII are evenly distributed in Area
1. but not in Areas 2. 3 and 4. This is in part due to the distance of the tract from
the Lake Creek floodplain and the biases imposed on tract selection and shape by land
access.
Areas 1. 2. 3 and 4 are relatively evenly represented. containing 1000. 750. 1140
and 680 acres respectively (Fig. 7.3).
The seven part topographic settings are not
Area 1 contains only Settings I. II. VI and VII.
The acreage.
evenly matched.
however. is evenly distributed at approximately 250 acres apiece (Fig. 7 .3). Area 2
contains all topographic settings except Setting IV. Setting Ill dominates at 205 acres,
followed by VI at 148, II at 128. V at 110. and I and VII at 80 acres each (Fig. 7.3).
All seven settings are found in Area 3 with the most acreage in Setting Ill at 494
acres. The next largest is Setting V at 180 acres followed by VI. I, II. VII and IV at
144. 126. 99 and 85 and 18 acres respectively (Fig. 7.3). Area 4 follows the pattern of

7-11

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
3 and 2 with the most acreage in Setting Ill at 223 acres. In descending order are
Settings V. VII. II. VI. I and IV with 167. 98. 83. 19 and 7 acres respectively (Fig.
7 .3). Combining all areas of the reservoir. Setting Ill. Lake Creek Floodplain. is the
most heavily represented with 922 acres followed by Settings VI. II. VII. I. V and IV
with 625. 560. 513. 475. 457 and 18 acres respectively (Fig. 7.3).

1000
900
8
700

L&J

600

"

500

<(

UJ

0::
0

<(

2
100

0

II

Ill

IV

V

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING

D
WmJ

AREA I

~AREA 2

AREA 3

e:J

AREA 4

FIGURE 7.3. Acreage surveyed by topographic setting.

7-12

VI

VII

THE SAMPLE SURVEY

Site Distribution by Landforms and Environmental Areas
Twenty prehistoric sites. or 43% of the total inventory. were located in Area 1.
Mound and Fish Creek drainages. Areas 2. 3. and 4. along Lake Creek proper. contain
nine. nine and eight sites respectively.
A plot of the site frequency by topographic
setting for all four reservoir areas illustrates that most sites are found on Settings V.
VI. and VII (Fig. 7.4). These settings have the common denominator of a bisecting
perennial or intermittent stream. All but seven sites are associated with perennial or
intermittent tributaries to Lake Creek. and three of the seven are distant from any
drainage.

20-.--------------------------------------------------------VI
II

111
)-

0

z

LLI

::>
~ 10
~

LL

La.I

!:::

(/)

II

Ill

IV

V

VI

VII

TOPOGRAPHIC SETTING

D

AR£ A I: Mound

a Fish Creeks

~ . AREA 3: Middle Lake Creek

ffi@J

AREA 2: Lower Lake Creek

bd

AREA 4: Upper Lake Creek

FIGURE 7.4. Frequency of recorded sites by topographic setting.
Of the four sites associated with Lake Creek. three are located in Setting IV,
isolated floodplain mounds (Fig. 7.4). The remaining site is located in Setting Ill. the
Lake Creek floodplain.
This site. more than any other recorded during this survey,
illustrates the bias of field workers against the floodplain or bottoms. The clays in the
floodplain are not easily probed: they clog the screens. and resist erosion that in other
settings might provide cutbank exposures of cultural deposits. Often, deposition caused
by overbank flooding buries surfaces beyond the reach of simple shovel probes.
Because of these hardships. surveyors often do not expend the necessary recovery time.

7-13

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
and its correlate. money. to search for sites in this setting. In Lake Creek. Setting Ill.
with 922 acres. is the largest topographic setting contained in the survey plots. Only
one site was found in Setting Ill. This may not represent the true density of sites in
this setting, but rather the difficulties of probing these deposits.
In contrast.
topographic Setting II is well represented with 560 acres but no sites were found in
this setting.
However, because of the sandy soils. this setting received as much
probing as. for example, Setting VI where 26 sites were located in 625 acres.
In
conclusion. the methods employed during the Lake Creek survey were inadequate for the
assessment of cultural resources in topographic Setting Ill. the floodplain proper, but
were more than sufficient in locating sites on other landforms.

Temporal Di1tribution of Sites
-

Twenty-four of the 46 prehistoric sites produced temporally diagnostic artifacts ~~ ~indicative of at least one period of occupation (Appendix D).
The most abundant
temporal marker found on all 24 sites is pottery (Table 7.2). Five of the 24 contained
-------------- relatively complete, finished arrow or dart points (Table 7 .3).
In general. all temporally diagnostic artifacts are assignable to Late Archaic
through Caddo times. Three sites held dart points of Late Archaic types Kent. Gary
and Gary-like (Table 7.3). Two sites yielded arrow points. including one Perdiz. one
Alba and one untyped: sandy paste or sand-tempered sherds were recovered at 22 sites.
grog-tempered at seven and bone-tempered at six (Table 7.2). Site 41MQ118 yielded
the only definite Caddoan ceramics. One body fragment and one straight. flattened rim
sherd are decorated with intersecting blocks of parallel incised lines. This design and
execution are found on Canton Incised and occasionally Maydel/e Incised utility wares.
A problematic sherd from 41MQ106 has a flattened rim and sharp curvature,
reminiscent of a pipe stem. The texture on the exterior surface is very smooth and
fine grained.
A smooth ridge on the rim hints to a European mold as an origin.
however. the extremely small size of the fragment precludes definite identification. If
this sherd is from a trade pipe. then 41MQ106 would be the only site recorded at Lake
Creek with demonstrated historic aboriginal ties.
The distribution of temporally diagnostic artifact classes follows the pattern
established by plotting the frequency of sites by topographic setting.
The major
difference is the restriction of bone-tempered ceramics to sites on Settings IV and V in
Areas 3 and 4. floodplain knoll and bisected floodplain sites in the middle and upper
Lake Creek Reservoir areas (Fig. 7 .5). The majority of the diagnostic artifacts, like
the majority of the sites, are found in Setting VI in Areas 1 and 2. Although the
sample size is small. the limited distribution of bone-tempered wares implies temporally
late occupations. The single occurrence of Caddoan pottery in Setting V in Area 3.
coincides with three of the six bone-tempered sherds.
The possibility that bonetempered sherds may still be present in other settings and areas cannot be overlooked.
however. 57% of the sites or 71% of all ceramic producing sites recorded, were located
in Setting VI and none contained bone-tempered wares (Fig. 7 .5).

7-14

----~-----------------------

THE SAMPLE SURVEY

Table 7.2.

Site No.
41MQ75
41MQ76
41MQ82
41MQ85
41MQ86
41MQ87
41MQ90
41MQ91
41MQ92
41MQ93
41MQ94
41MQ97
41MQ98
41MQ101
41MQ102
41MQ106
41MQ107
41MQ109
41MQ111
41MQ112
41MQ114
41MQ118
41MQ119
41MQ120
Totals

Sand

Temper
Grog

1
1
1
2
1
3
6
1
1
1
3
3
3
1
1
1 (pipe)
1

Bone

3

2
3

1
1

1

10
2

4

1
2

3

1

1

48

16

9

Type

Site No.

Gary
Gary-like
Kent
Perdiz
Alba

41MQ76
41MQ111
41MQ75
41MQ97
41MQ97
41MQ118

VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI
VI

4/1
4/1
5/1
5/1
5/1
2/2
2/2
1/1
1/1
1/1
1/1
1/1
1/1
3/2
3/2
10/4
10/4
10/4
6/4
6/4
9/3
8/3
8/3
8/3

3

1
1

Topographic
Setting

Tract/Area

2

Table 7.3.

Untyped

Lake Creek Sites with Ceramics

VII

VI

v

IV
IV

v
v
v
v
v
v

Projectile Points from Lake Creek Sites.

Lot No.

Level

Area

1
4
4
4
1

3
5

2

4

2
4
2
1
1
3

5

5
2

7-15

Topographic
Zone

VI

v

VI
VI
VI

v

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Topographic Setting

VII
II

111

IV

I
I

I

I
I
I

h llS

.c"•

.
·c;

..•

I 3S 2G

21

OB

I

31

3S

2G

38 I

l 41

3S

IG

I 0 I I 6

3

28 I
I
I

>

2G OB

I

Ill

I

I
I
2sites I

S • Sane:! Tempered
G = Grog Tempered
B .. Bone Tempered

I

7 sites

I

IS OG 08
1

I
I

5

I

I
I
I
I

14

4

0

14Sites

0

0

I site

I
I
I

I

FIGURE 7.5. Distribution of sites with ceramics by reservoir area and topographic
setting.
The lack of older deposits cannot be explained at the present time. although this
situation is common in reservoir areas in southeast Texas. A single Wells dart point
indicative of Early-Middle Archaic age was privately collected from a site located west
of the Lake Creek Reservoir area.
The site (41MQ121) surrounds a spring. on the
sandy banks of Mud Branch. a tributary of Lake Creek.
This topographic setting
would be classified as Setting VI in the Lake Creek typology. suggesting that Setting
VI in the reservoir proper may contain older deposits that were simply beyond the
reach of shovel probes.
Sites such as 41MQ94. 41MQ87 and 41MQ75 produced
cultural material to a depth of 120 centimeters. still above the basal clays of purported
Pleistocene age. One of these. 41MQ75. is near a seep spring. Large artesian springs
form the headwaters of Mound and Fish Creeks and. although they are outside the
reservoir area. may offer some potential for early sites in the vicinity of the project
area.

Site Size by landform
The size of each site has been estimated based on the horizontal relationship of
artifact-producing shovel probes. sterile shovel probes. and natural bounds such as
drainages. streams or terrace edges (Table 7.1). Since these estimates rely on shovel
probe data. site size often reflects the possible extension of a favorable landform
(terrace remnant) and. in other cases. the direction and extent of post-depositional

7-16

--------

----

-

--

-

-

---~-

--- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

THE SAMPLE SURVEY
disturbances such as erosion. The potential inaccuracies in these estimates of site size
limit their usefulness in site assessment. The majority of the sites (38 out of 46) are
under 4000 square meters and most of these are under 2000 square meters (Fig. 7.6).
Eleven sites have areas estimated above 4000 square meters and nine of these are
located on topographic Setting VI. one on V and one on VII.

(.!)

z

~w

(/)

II

VII-

Ii ..

:g1 'i'1,'&•H
1191 e11<f
llO
la.
e10•

VI•

v-

~

g

107 •

IV·

l'iJz rh

•111

.

112 . .IN

0

%
a..
ct
a:
(.!)

•1111

• MIO

,,.

.

,,

ea

".,,

-

....

.,,,,

.,.

elO

:~I~~:=

•iot

Ill
II 100•

1-

I

)

.77

...

IOOO

I

2000

I

3000

I

I

4000

5000

I

6000

I

7000

.

8000

I

9000

I0,000•

SITE SIZE (1q. mJ

FIGURE 7.6. Distribution of site size by topographic setting.

The most restrictive topographic setting is IV - isolated floodplain mounds.
Presumably. mounds were selected for their elevation above frequently flooded areas. In
addition. the landform must have been large enough to accommodate at least a minimal
social unit such as a nuclear family or task group.
In this setting then. site size equates to the extent of the landform or floodplain
mound. The range of site size estimated on floodplain mounds is equivalent to that
calculated for the majority of the sites in Setting VI where 57% of all sites are
located. A possible inference that should be tested using sites of equal size in both
settings is their parallel exploitation for similar purposes by equivalent populations.
Sites on Setting VI are the least affected by topographic determinism. a factor apparent
in the range of site sizes from smallest (400 square meters) to the most extensive
(12.800 square meters) found in the survey. The larger sites in Setting VI may have
been occupied by more people, for a longer time. or for more diverse activities.

ASSESSMENT OF SITE COMPONENTS
The buried condition of all sites located during the survey of select tracts in the
proposed Lake Creek Reservoir area limits the information needed to accurately assess
site potential. Each site is known only from the materials recovered in shovel probes.
During the survey. shovel probes were positioned to delineate site boundaries.
The
recovery of numerous artifacts was interpreted as "on site" probe; less than three
7-17

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
artifacts in a probe was considered the edge of the site. This method dictates the
widespread placement of probes toward the periphery or in low artifact density areas of
a site with only one or two probes into the high density areas. Low density probes
may actually be testing central structures, barren of artifacts, while high density areas
are refuse middens on the site periphery.
One method of compensating for the
probable sampling error is to normalize the artifact count by calculating an average site
density and comparing it to the maximum recovery per level. Average density (AD) is
the total of debitage, tools and sherds recovered from all probes divided by the total
number of 20 cm levels dug. The maximum number (MN) is the highest frequency of
artifacts recovered from one level of one probe. Average density and maximum number
thus reduced the artifact assemblage of each site to a common denominator of one
level of one probe in one site.
In the statistical sense. artifact density (AD) and
maximum frequency (MN) are observed values. Expected values (EV) for each site can
then be extrapolated and the differences between the observed and the expected used to
test site integrity and intervals of occupation (Fig. 7.7).
A plot of the two observed values illustrates a clustering of sites in the low
density - low frequency area with a few outliers in the high density - high frequency
The solid line represents the expected values if the artifact
portion (Fig. 7. 7).
assemblage is largely contained within one level at the site. Sites clustering along the
solid line should include sites occupied continuously long enough to accumulate a
maximum 20 centimeters of cultural debris while remaining relatively undisturbed.
The dashed line represents the expected values if the site is distributed through
two or more levels. indicating either intermittent occupations of similar magnitude or
severe disturbances. Thus. sites plotted above the solid line are distributed through
more than one level while those below are discrete. Arbitrary 20 centimeter levels are
too gross to differentiate between components in the overall site assemblage.
For
example. 41MQ97 is plotted below the solid line in Figure 7.7. in the area of single
However. artifacts recovered in the shovel probe include both Perdiz and
level sites.
Alba arrow points, each possibly representing different habitation periods. Because of
the structure of the analysis presented in Figure 7. 7. both occupations of the site are
grouped into one period represented by a single 20 centimeter level. Rates of erosion
and deposition provided for this soil (Soil Conservation Service 1985:31) equate to an
accumulation of .017cm/year. or 20 centimeters in 1200 years. Thus, both components
are encompassed in a 1200 year occupation level. The obvious conclusion is that
neither episode left a sufficient amount of debris to force the plot above the solid line.
Hence both site components probably consist of small artifact concentrations,
accumulated over a short time.
The cluster of sites in the low average density and low maximum recovery area
(Fig. 7. 7) is probably composed of single level and small. badly disturbed multiple-level
sites.
The deposits are characteristically comprised of one or two flakes with a
maximum of five flakes in a level. The plotting of 41MQ100. a lithic procurement site.
in this area mirrors the field observation that all culturally modified materials were
contained in one level buried by 10-15 centimeters of sand. Thus, its inclusion in this
cluster reflects limited activities performed at the site more than any finite period of
7-18

THE SAMPLE SURVEY

I{)

~

"'

!i!

•

0

<(

IO
II

>
1.1.J

~

•

~

........

z

::E

N

,M.
+:

0

...

~

.!

E
::J

z

E

~

·;c
0

~

:l
C'"

- -...
.a
en

I{)

>.

u
c:
cu

::E

cu

"'C

c:

"'
>.

....

"iii
c
cu
"'C

....u
~
.......

"'

"'C

....ucu
cu

Q..
II(

cu

"'C

c:

Q

"'

"'C

cu

>
....

cu
Ill

..0

0

I()

0

....

..2

0..

0

Q

N

.....
.....
w

0:::
:::;)

C1
I.I..

7-19

-------

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
exploitation.
Similarly. all cultural material at 41MQ116, another member of this
group. was contained in a 5 centimeter level buried by 15 centimeters of clay in the
Lake Creek floodplain.
Such sites are rarely recommended for further assessment
although in this cluster 41MQ84. 41MQ89, 41MQ106. 41MQ108, 41MQ111 and
41MQ112 were exceptions. Characteristics not included in these calculations. such as
unique topographic setting and organic materials. contributed to a recommendation for
additional testing at these sites.
Sites with plottings that correspond to field observations include 41MQ87 and
41MQ90 which are separated from each other by a small drainage. Cultural materials
from both sites are comparable. suggesting the possibility of coeval occupations. The
analysis plots both sites just above the solid line and right of the low density, low
artifact cluster. Similarly. sites 41MQ118. 41MQ119 and 41MQ120 are plotted above
or just below the broken line. interpreted as high probability multi-level sites. Again.
these sites are separated by drainages and contain comparable deposits. Site 41MQ94
contains deep deposits with high artifact densities in most levels which warrants its
placement above the broken line.
Conversely, 41MQ95 and 41MQ105 contain high densities of lithic debitage but
culture bearing deposits are not as deep as those at 41MQ94. These two sites are
probably disturbed. Another possible misplotting is 41MQ102 (Fig. 7.7). One level in
one of four shovel probes produced 44 artifacts. The other levels produced an average
of 5.6 artifacts.
It seems that the high recovery in the one level outweighed the
others and so affected the average density (7.4 AD) that it is plotted below the solid
This plotting suggests the site is
line at the far righthand side of the graph.
contained in a single level - which it may be.
However. if the highest count is
eliminated. the next maximum frequency in one level is 11. A plot based on the count
11 and an adjusted artifact density of 5.6 places the site above the broken line midway
The latter
between 41MQ94 and 41MQ120. in the multi-level area of the graph.
interpretation of 41MQ102 is probably more accurate. if the high artifact count in one
level signifies more intensive site utilization at one time.
Although this bivariate analysis provides a means of grouping or segregating the
sites based on shovel probe data alone. the resulting graph provides only one
perspective on site significance.
The validity of the plottings must be tempered by
field observations. Other variables which affect the site assessment include the range
of artifact classes: preservation of organic materials such as bone. nut hulls and
charcoal with demonstrable cultural associations: preservation of intact cultural features
such as hearths: and the potential for deeply buried deposits of Early and Middle
Archaic age. Many of these criteria cannot be applied to the current sample until more
data is gathered through subsurface testing or in-depth geomorphological mapping.

7-20

-------·

CHAPTER 8: EXPLANATORY MODELS
So/veig A. Turpin and Leland C. Bement
The Akokisa and Bidai are but two of many small hunter-gatherer groups that
occupied North America at the time of European contact.
Their survival as
autonomous groups in the midst of more complex and aggressive cultures is best
explained by ethnographic analogy in the context of more general theoretical models.
Aten's (1983:319-323) Akokisa model attempts to explain the trajectory of Akokisa
culture as it is manifested in archeological remains and to infer certain aspects of social
structure that are correlates to technology, subsistence and settlement patterns. This
model of coastal adaptation established the cultural-historical framework that suggests
settlement and procurement patterns may have been logistically structured into two
quite different systems (Binford 1980). each compatible with the resource base exploited
at opposite nodes in the seasonal round.
Binford' s (1980) differentiation between
foraging and collecting modes of production provides a set of expectations that can be
tested in further studies of southeast Texas prehistory. Ethnohistoric references to the
structure and economy of Akokisa and Bidai society and archeological investigations on
the Texas Gulf Coast merit analysis in the context of a more general economic model
proposed by Dalton (1977) for stateless aboriginal societies that participated in
extensive trading networks. Although less firmly tied to archeological remains. Dalton· s
model permits some inferences on the structure of Akokisa society and its role in a
broader interaction sphere. The general principles guiding each model will be outlined.
their relevance to the current project summarized and expectations for testing their
applicability to future studies in the Lake Creek Reservoir listed.

THE AKOKISA MODEL
The Akokisa Model. developed by Aten (1983:319-323: Chapter 3:5-8. this report)
successfully incorporated ethnohistoric. geomorphological and archeological information to
develop a cultural-historical framework for coastal adaptation. He defined native group
territories; estimated their population through time; charted technological. subsistence
and stylistic changes; and made inferences about social integration and status. Perhaps
of most relevance to the Lake Creek project, he proposed a seasonal round that
included the study area in the northern extension of the Akokisa winter range.
His
determination of seasonality in the procurement of Rangia cuneata reaffirmed de
Bellisle's description of Akokisa summer subsistence. The distribution of coastal sites,
with their emphasis on limited. specific resources. supported Aten's (1983:319)
reconstructed pattern of dispersal into small bands during the warm season while the
ethnographic descriptions indicate an aggregation into semi-permanent inland villages
during the winter.
The Akokisa Model. applied successfully on the coast. remains
untested in the inlands. Site-specific attempts to apply the model have failed largely
due to the inadequacy of the data base (Ensor 1986: Ensor and Carlson 1986).

---

---~-------------~--

------------

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
The sample of prehistoric cultural remains gained from the survey of selected
tracts in the Lake Creek Reservoir is limited in three dimensions: 1) the survey was
restricted to the proposed floodpool so the full range of environmental variability within
the catchment of any given site is not represented: 2) only 20% of the reservoir was
surveyed so it can be presumed that perhaps as many as 200 more sites will be added
to the inventory by complete coverage; and 3) the buried nature of all the sites
recorded to date limits the analysis to materials fortuitously recovered in shovel probes.
However. future work should permit the seasonal round hypothesis to be at least
partially tested.

LOGISTICALLY ORIENTED SETTLEMENT MODEL
Binford (1980) describes two hunting and gathering procurement systems based on
differing degrees of residential mobility that are, in turn, reflected by somewhat distinct
settlement patterns. The Akokisa summer dispersal described by de Bellisle (Folmer
1940) and archeologically confirmed by the distribution of sites along the coast
conforms to Binford's foraging mode.
Their winter aggregation into major camps.
called villages (Bolton 1970a:331) would require a shift to a collecting strategy. This
seasonal round produces a bipolar or linear axis territorial range. similar to that
described by Cabeza de Vaca for the Mariames of South Texas (Campbell 1983).
The region and the regional band are defined in terms of the "road" of
winter and summer movement. The regional band's territory thus has an axis
rather than boundaries or edges. (Helm 1972:76).
The bipolar settlement pattern of the Akokisa then incorporates two logistically
structured activity sets that. m turn. conform to the distinct biotic zones contained
within their overall range.
In Binford's terms, foraging is practiced by small. transient groups who exploit
Although foraging implies reductions in
limited areas surrounding a residential site.
group size and considerable mobility, the linear distribution of staple marine foods in
the coastal environment creates sufficient redundancy in site location to produce the
shell middens so characteristic of the Texas Gulf littoral.
In some senses, this
settlement pattern resembles the Coahuiltecan example of tethered nomadism (Taylor
1964) where population clusters near critical resources (Binford 1980:9).
At the northern terminus of the seasonal round. the Ak~isa aggregated in more
permanent villages along potable water sources. relying upon a collecting strategy to
supply the aggregated population. The reduction in residential mobility is only possible
in areas of diverse. fixed resources that can be procured on a task specific basis.
Concomitant benefits may have accrued from defensive strength and permanence as an
established node in the trading network.
Binford (1980:10) predicts five distinct site types would be produced by a
collecting strategy:
residential base. location. field camp. station and cache.
The

8-2

EXPLANATORY MODELS

residential base equates to the group's "hub of existence" and would reflect a multitude
of activities visible in the archeological record by the vast array of materials and tools.
Locations are sites where specific tasks. such as the extraction of resources. are
performed.
Field camps are temporary sites occupied by the task group for the
duration of their project.
Stations are short-term sites where information about the
targeted resources is gathered and exchanged and, in Binford's definition. cache is a
stockpile of extracted goods prior to their transport to the residential base.
Within the Lake Creek study area. only residential bases and field camps can
expectably be detected due to the dense vegetation. poor preservation and burial of
sites in loose. sandy soils. A location. such as a bison kill site. produced by a task
group emanating from a residential base. has some chance of surviving the elements
but such sites would be outside the reservoir limits. Exploitation of forest resources is
less likely to produce durable residues.
Caches would survive only if they are
comprised of resistant materials. such as lithics. and then only if they were lost or
forgotten. Stations are even more ephemeral. A hunting lookout on the bluffs above
Lake Creek may have been a point of information exchange but little material evidence
will be left to confirm the site's function.
Although no residential bases, or villages. are ethnohistorically described in the
Lake Creek area. the possibility that earlier or contemporaneous base camps eluded the
Spanish chroniclers remains. The one possible residential base identified in this survey
is a purported Coushatta village (41MQ121) that also yielded the oldest temporally
diagnostic artifact recorded. indicating repeated occupancy.
This site surrounds a
permanent spring feeding a tributary to Lake Creek, outside the reservoir bounds. a
more hospitable environment than the floodplain proper. Based solely on environmental
criteria. such as flood frequency and insect infestation. prehistoric settlement may have
mirrored historic occupation. with more permanent habitations established on the
periphery of the bottoms.

Expectations Under the Lo1i1tical Model
Under the logistically structured model. field camps and residential bases are the
site types most likely to be identified in the Lake Creek Reservoir with a lesser
probability for Binford's other types.
If the proposed Bedias Reservoir is built. the
potential for locating residential bases will be heightened given the ethnohistoric
accounts of permanent villages in this area.
Differentiating between residential bases
and field camps will rely on the composition of the artifact assemblage (Binford 1979).
the intersite patterning (Binford 1982) and site size. Residential camps will contain a
more varied inventory of tools indicative of many functions and multiple resource
processing.
Sites will be larger and various activity areas will be delimited.
Site
furniture (Binford 1979). such as hearths and other stationary features. and personal
gear. curated artifacts produced in anticipation of regular tasks. should dominate the
cultural material inventory at residential sites (Binford 1979).

8-3

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Situational gear, that expediently produced for a specific task, should be more
common in the field camp inventories (Binford 1979). The assemblage should display
functional specificity but if two or more tasks are performed simultaneously. some
variety may be expected. For example, if lithic procurement is an embedded activity.
carried out while in the vicinity on a hunting trip. materials from both tasks may be
discarded in the same location. These sites are. by virtue of the length and complexity
of occupation, smaller and features should be limited to those needed for temporary
warmth, cooking or immediate processing of the extracted resources.

ABORIGINAL ECONOMIES IN STATELESS SOCIETIES
One of the salient characteristics of the Akokisa and their related tribes was their
participation in extensive trade networks. a facet of their culture the French and
Spanish were quick to exploit.
According to Dalton (1977). the formulation of
exchange networks is an adaptive strategy with implications far beyond the movement
of essential goods.
In stateless societies. primitive valuables. including both practical
items such as foodstuffs. stone and hides, and luxury goods such as shell. salt and
exotics. play political. social and economic roles.
Drawing from societies known
ethnographically for their trading networks. Dalton compiled a list of five attributes that
describe societies where exchange is a positive adaptation. providing means of retaining
political autonomy. resisting reduction by warfare and establishing alliances as a form of
surplus against hard times (Fig. 8.1).

Small Scale Populations:

All the groups discussed by Dalton are small in scale:

small groups of hunters. gatherers, fishermen. and swidden
agriculturalists organized into lineages, lineage clusters. and clans of varying
size.
Their access to food and natural resources also varied.
Typically.
population densities were low and the size of political units very small.
(Dalton 1977:192)
As a result. these populations are politically weak and economically vulnerable unless
they can form protective alliances.
One avenue is through the medium of exchange.
Aten's (1983: Table 4.3) estimates of population density in proto-historic times, despite
the margin for error, describe the small scale of both inland and coastal Akokisa and
their closest allies. the Bidai, ranking them well below the Trobriander and Kwakiutl
standards used by Dalton (see also de la Teja. this report). Significantly. both groups
were circumscribed by larger, more complex or more aggressive neighbors. The second
attribute, the variable access to food and natural resources. is evident in the gradient
of biotic forms from coast to prairie within the Akokisa-Bidai territorial range.

Stateless Society: Dalton· s sample was also characterized as stateless or
acephelous, their operative political and economic units defined by exogamy. rules of
preferential marriage and residence. unilineal descent, lineages, lineage clusters, subclans. clans and clan pairs. Exogamy, as a form of ceremonial exchange, formed links

8-4

EXPLANATORY MODELS
between tribal segments and potential unrelated allies. Within the context of aboriginal
economic adaptation. the Akokisa exogamy noted by the Franciscans at Mission San
Gabriel (de la Teja. this report) could well be a trait of some time depth, an integral
part of forging alliances.
Small scale:
Small populations,
small political units

I

Leadership roles:
big-men1 lineage-heads,
ctan leaaers

FIGURE 8.1.

Primitive valuables:
Lithics, shell, feathers,
ochre, ground stone ornaments,

subsistence il8ms, bone

Interdependent attributes making for alliances.

Authority Figures: Concomitant with the description of internal group structure.
authority was vested in the lineage head or clan leader. the big-men in a stateless
society. Although the ethnographic descriptions of Akokisa culture do not specifically
designate the means by which power accrued to individuals. they do refer to chiefs or
headmen whose name was given to the entire village (de la T eja. this report: see Aten
1983:68 for a discussion of status by consent).
Whether the exchange of goods
proceeded along a chain of individuals or was transported by professional traders. the
accrual of power to the headman through his entreprenurial talents served to secure his
position and to elevate the status of his followers.

Primitive

Valuables:

Primitive valuables are "intimately connected to
statelessness. to ceremonial exchanges. and to alliance formation" (Dalton 1977:198).
Unlike money, these valuables are dispensed in social transactions as death
compensation. bridewealth. war alliances and for emergency conversions in times of
famine. Aten (1983:Table 5.2) lists several commodities that would qualify as primitive
valuables in Dalton's definition: ochre. tassles. ground stone beads and sinkers. and
ceramic ear spools are inland products: olive shell tinklers. columnella beads and

8-5

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

pendants, sharks teeth and bird feathers are coastal commodities. Women were also
considered a primitive valuable. exchanged for social and political as well as economic
reasons. Another intangible form of exchange was access to resources otherwise held
by members of the trading alliance. In this fashion. economic goods could be acquired.
not through direct trade but by permission to collect. hunt or fish extra-territorially.
Another source of mundane items came through commercial exchange along the routes
established by ceremonial exchange.
Dalton's fifth attribute, primitive warfare, prevailed amongst
all the aboriginal stateless societies with ceremonial exchange networks.
Primitive Warfare:

Unusually small clan segments were politically vulnerable in the sense of
being militarily weak. and so need allies for defense when attacked and for
successful raiding or retaliation for revenge; they also needed allies for refuge
when they were overrun and had to flee their home areas . . . (Dalton
1977:193}
The Akokisa seemed to have been able to effect peaceful relationships with the majority
of their neighbors. except for perhaps the Karankawa proper (Bolton 1970a:328-332;
Castaneda 1976(1V}:49).
The extent to which warfare prevailed in prehistoric and
proto-historic times is difficult to determine, but de Bellisle describes at least one
skirmish between the Akokisa and traditional enemies (Folmer 1940:219). In addition,
the taking of slaves probably resulted from at least low-level raiding. The ability of
the Akokisa and Bidai to forge alliances through trade is evidenced in their role as
suppliers to the French, Spanish and Apache, all potentially hostile newcomers to the
region.
The Middleman Model
Within the context of Dalton's broader economics. Renfrew (1975:43} provides an
archeologically testable structure that may explain the role of the Akokisa and Bidai in
east Texas trade networks: "Middleman trading. The Middleman C exchanges with A
at a and with B at b. C is not under the control of A or B." At various times in
the ethnographic record. the Bidai served as middleman (C} between the Akokisa (A)
and the Caddo and Tonkawa (B). Free-lance trading (Renfrew 1975:50) as a stressreducing strategy is later evidenced by the Akokisa assuming the middleman role (C)
between the French commercial traders and the Bidai. Deadose and Caddo (Bolton
1970a:331). Fluidity in the system is evident by the Caddo (C) passing French (A)
firearms to the interior groups (B). including the Bidai and Deadose (Newcomb ms.).
A simplified reconstruction of the trading network is based on the scheduling
mandated by seasonal resources.
During spring and summer, the Akokisa exploited
coastal resources.
Materials needed for these pursuits included bone and antler
projectile points, some stone tools, and ceramic vessels. Deer skins were used for
clothing and shelter.
Fiber, cane and wood undoubtedly were utilized. but their

8-6

EXPLANATORY MODELS
preservational qualities are poor.
Primitive valuables collected at this time would
consist of shell. fish oil. fish. asphaltum. sharks teeth. feathers and perhaps medicinal
seaweed (Aten 1983: Table 5.2).
The Caddo were at these times. engaged in their agricultural pursuits, ra1smg corn
and squash supplemented by hunting. The Bidai small-scale horticulture permited them
to devote more time to hunting. fishing and gathering. Trade items produced during
the summer would include the agricultural staples, ceramics and animal products.
In midfall. the Akokisa moved north and aggregated in villages from which they
procured and processed nuts. berries. fruit and honey.
Deer and bear hunting were
optimal: the deer were congregating for the breeding season and the bear were at their
maximum fat and pelt value. The Caddo harvest provided their winter needs with a
surplus for trade. The Bidai exchanged hides. bone. antler and other collected products
for corn and joined the Akokisa for communal bison hunts as the winter migration
peaked. Winter leisure permitted agricultural groups to produce crafts and freed them
to hunt. Lithic raw material. ground stone. ceramics, ochre, hides. sinew, bone and
antler passed to the Akokisa through direct trade or through access to inland resources.
This was the framework that permitted post-European contact exchange of native
products for guns. horses. cloth. metal goods and trinkets (Aten 1983: Table 5.2).

ARCHEOLOGICAL SUPPORT FOR THE MIDDLEMAN MODEL
To date there is some archeological support. albeit limited. for the Middleman
Model. The greatest data base, and thus strongest support. comes from the Akokisa
summer occupation of the Gulf Coast littoral zone (Aten 1983: Dillehay 1975).
The
analysis of Rangia cuneata shells determines that the seasonality of site occupancy was
consistently during the spring and early fall.
Ceramics have been fully quantified and
distinct types have been identified. The recognition of ceramic types provides evidence
that the Akokisa occupied the inland areas as far north as Lake Conroe (Shafer 1968).
The inland zone of the Akokisa also contains small amounts of Caddoan wares (Shafer
1968: Bement. this report). Late fall and winter inland occupation is indicated by the
presence of burned hardwood nut hulls (hickory and black walnut) at sites in the Lake
Creek reservoir area and at the Crawford Site (Ensor and Carlson 1986). No evidence
for the duration of seasonal occupation has been obtained for the inland area, and
future research in the area should strive to determine seasons of occupancy.
The Bidai region is even less understood and explored than that of the Akokisa.
Lake Livingston sites (McClurkan 1968) and the Crawford Site (Ensor and Carlson
1986) may have been Bidai camps, considering the increase in Caddoan influence on
otherwise Atakapan cultural materials (McClurkan 1968: 109). No cultigens have been
identified: however. such would be difficult due to the sandy soils and poor
preservation. The burials at the Jones Hill Site (McClurkan 1968) define a cemetery
with all its implications for more permanent settlement in the inlands.

8-7

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
The southern Caddo region is as poorly known archeologically as the Bidai. No
definite southern limit is delineated although the Kisatchie Excarpment is the boundary
suggested by Story (1981a: 147). The George C. Davis Site in Cherokee County is
one of the best known excavated sites in the southern Caddoan area (Story 1981b).
This site has produced evidence of corn horticulture if not agriculture. A year-round
occupation is reflected by ripened nut hulls and the agricultural products.
Contact
between the Davis population and those to the south can be seen in the ceramic
assemblages which include San Jacinto Incised, slipped wares (an Akokisa type) (Stokes
and Woodring 1981: 222) and sandy paste forms with Caddoan design elements.
probably of Bidai origin (Stokes and Woodring 1981: 137).
Tools presumably used in working shell. the latter acquired in trade with the
coast, are numerous at the Davis Site (Story 1981b: 363).
The early ceramic
materials may indicate that Atakapan speakers once inhabited this region. Under Caddo
pressure. these Atakapans may have moved south to join their neighbors. becoming the
Bidai of historic times.
The Crawford Site materials reflect interaction with neighboring groups. especially
the Caddo (Ensor and Carlson 1986: 252). This is best illustrated by an increase in
Caddoan ceramics in the upper levels of the site.
Sherds definitely attributable to
Caddoan types are all from utilitarian vessels such as Pennington Punctated/lncised and
Broadus Brushed (Ensor and Carlson 1986: 201.203).
Similar assemblages were
recovered during the earlier excavations at Lake Livingston (McClurkan 1968) and one
Pennington Punctated/lncised sherd was identified at Lake Conroe (Shafer 1968).

MIDDLEMAN MODEL EXPECTATIONS
The Middleman Model suggests certain expectations that should be visible m the
archeological record:
Any middleman has an effective area of operation. outside of which he does
not normally travel.
Within this area. in the absence of any preferential
service for central places. the fall-off of the commodity with distance from
source will be much less rapid. (Renfrew 1975:50)

Expectations for the Akokisa Territory
• 1) Small sites in the Gulf Coast littoral zone 2) Seasonal spring through
early fall occupation 3) Use of nonlocal expendable materials such as stone
and bone projectile points 4) Use of ceramic vessels for rendering and
storage 5) Large sites near potable water in inland zone 6) Seasonal late
fall through winter occupation 7) Ceramic vessels for storing nuts and fruit
8) Ceramic vessels for trade in fish oil or shell 9) Caddoan vessels for
trading corn and squash 10) Bidai vessels or pouches for trading bone and
antler 11) Lithic workshops and procurement sites 12) Small deer and bison
hunting sites: nut and fruit collecting camps.

8-8

EXPLANATORY MODELS

Expectations for the Bidai territory
• 1) Small horticulture sites along streams and rivers during spring and
summer 2) Large sites at southern end of range for trade with Akokisa-occupied during winter 3) Small hunting and foraging camps 4) Large trade
sites in northern territory occupied during mid-fall 5) Ceramic vessels used
for storage and cooking--of of local make but similar to Caddoan utilitarian
wares 6) Caddo trade wares 7) Akokisa trade wares.

Expectations for the Caddo territory
• 1) Permanent agricultural villages along perennial streams and rivers 2)
Large storage vessels 3) Utilitarian wares used for storage and cooking 4)
Use of nonlocal shell 5) Small amounts of Bidai wares and even lesser
quantities of Akokisa wares other than small jars used in trade--filled with
oil or shell 6) Small bison hunting camps occupied during winter.
From a cultural-historical perspective. the Middleman Model is most valid as an
explanatory device for the late Ceramic period beginning with the Caddoan occupation
of the northern areas.
Prior to this time, the Bidai, as a distinct cultural entity.
probably did not exist, but rather were an inland Akokisa group which no longer moved
to the coastal area in the summer. In fact, the linguistic affinity between the Bidai
and Akokisa, both Atakapan speakers. suggests a common immediate ancestor stock.
Thus. the middleman role may have originated in the earlier period when Atakapan
speakers were displaced from the lower Mississippi Valley. Initially. then. two groups
of Atakapan speakers inhabited the area. One group, the ancestral Akokisa. developed
a seasonal round from the coast to the inland while the other, the ancestral Bidai.
adopted an eclectic hunter-gatherer existence remaining entirely inland. The two groups
would meet during the winter months at inland sites between their respective ranges.
This pattern was somewhat modified with the emergence of the Caddoan villages to
the north of the ancestral Bidai. The northern Akokisa took advantage of agricultural
technology to supplement their hunter-gatherer diet and emerged as the Bidai. Thus.
the Middleman Model can provide an interpretive framework for the period from
Atakapan influx to the Caddoan emergence.

SUMMARY
The theoretical models of Dalton and Binford can only guide the research designs
for future work in the Lake Creek Reservoir.
Only testing and excavation can
determine their ability to explain the trajectory of Akokisa culture and to project its
system back beyond the Late Prehistoric Period.
Certainly, any residential bases
identified during survey and testing should receive high priority in any major plan for
excavation. Spatial analyses will be difficult given the nature of sandy soils but single
component sites may afford the finite bounds needed to determine site layout.
Cemeteries. and their associated grave goods. also provide much of the data needed to

8-9

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
By implication. their presence should correlate with Binford's
test Dalton's model.
Excavation efforts should be restricted to a sampling of field
collecting strategy.
camps to determine the resources and types of activities that structured their
distribution.
Of prime significance is the determination of seasonality. subsistence and the
identification of trade items. Analytical techniques should emphasize lithic use wear.
floral and faunal identification, ceramic sources and technology, quantification of tool
assemblages and. of course, methods of absolute dating.

8-10

CHAPTER 9: SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Leland C. Bement and Solveig A. Turpin

SUMMARY
The cultural resource study of Lake Creek Reservoir described in this report had
as its ultimate goal the preparation of a detailed research design for all future regional
investigations. Ethnohistoric sources were searched for references to sites that might
be identified in the Lake Creek area and to provide a framework for interpreting the
prehistoric resources.
Similarly, the historic records were researched to locate
potentially significant structures, roads, industrial locales. cemeteries and to reconstruct
modern land use in the reservoir.
A pilot geomorphological study was intended to
assess the potential for buried sites and. used in conjunction with the archeological
survey. isolate areas with high and low potential for aboriginal settlement. A sample
survey of 20% of the estimated flood pool provided a first approximation of the density
and nature of prehistoric exploitation of the Lake Creek bottoms.
The ethnohistoric and historic studies were initiatied by J. F. de la Teja and Dan
K. Utley prior to field work in order that their findings could be incorporated into the
survey methodology. Geomorphological and archeological field work were carried out
between July 28 to September 17. 1986. by Leland C. Bement, Bruce A. Nightengale.
Steven M. Kotter and David. G. Robinson, all staff members of the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin. and Rolfe D. Mandel. consulting
geomorphologist. Ten tracts. totalling 3570 acres, were selected to provide a sample
of each environmental zone in the Lake Creek floodpool.
A total of 46 prehistoric
sites. four with historic components, were located. largely as a result of the heavy
reliance placed on subsurface shovel probes. Only three of the 46 prehistoric sites
were surficially evident and only one of those was known to a local rancher. In all.
185 shovel tests were needed to locate the 46 sites and an additional 136 probes were
used to delineate site boundaries. bringing the total to 321 subsurface probes.
The limited perspective given by the biased sample of cultural material recovered
in shovel probes precluded assignment of the sites to specific functional categories. All
sites with the exception of one are classified as open campsites: 41MQ100 is a lithic
procurement site.
A site typology was derived by plotting the sites across seven
topographic settings based on a cross section of the Lake Creek basin. The common
denominator for high site density was proximity to perennial streams bisecting the
terraces and floodplain. Only one site was recorded in the dense clay matrix of the
floodplain proper. In broader terms, four environmental zones characterize the length of
the proposed reservoir; in this division, the area of the two Lake Creek tributaries.
Mound and Fish creeks. again dominated the site inventory.
Twenty-four of the 46 prehistoric sites produced temporally diagnostic artifacts in
the form of ceramics or projectile points. These materials limit the span of prehistoric
occupation representated to the last 3000 years. Although some of the sites may be

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
older. at the present time no radiocarbon dates or index artifacts demonstrate that
antiquity.
Each site was assessed for its potential to contribute to regional prehistory.
Twenty-four of the 46 sites appear to contain materials applicable to as yet only
broadly defined topics such as procurement strategies, chronology building, intra-site
patterning, subsistence activities and site burial processes (geomorphologic aspects of
the landscape). The research design for further work was derived from ethnographic
analogy, historic research. geomorphological mapping and the preliminary survey.

Ethnohistory
At the time of European contact, ca. A.O. 1600. Lake Creek was occupied or
exploited by Atakapan speakers.
Bellisle's description of the seasonal round of the
Akokisa would place the study area within the northern inland or winter range of these
inhabitants of the Texas littoral. Akokisa villages named by the Spanish concentrated
on Spring Creek south of Lake Creek. The Bidai. linguistic and consanguinal relatives
of the Akokisa, who occupied the territory to the north. maintained at least one major
village on Bedias Creek. only 30 miles above Lake Creek. References to the Akokisa
village at the confluence of Spring Creek and the San Jacinto span almost 80 years.
The strong ties
testifying to the relative stability of the winter settlement pattern.
between the Bidai and Akokisa are apparent in their joining for communal hunts. their
mutual participation in exchange networks - first between the coastal foragers. the
inland agriculturalists and the Plains buffalo hunters. and later with the French and
Spanish - and their eventual merger. Thus. Lake Creek could be considered a zone of
interaction. where Akokisa and Bidai hunted and collected and where essential and
exotic goods changed hands. Commodities listed in the ethnographic record that were
available in the Lake Creek area include: deer. bear. beaver. nuts. tubers, berries, fruit.
In addition, the possibility that some gardening
wood. bone, hides and honey.
supplemented the collecting strategy can not be totally eliminated.
Trade routes that crossed Lake Creek, such as the Loma del Toro and Coushatta
Trace (Fig. 6.1). predate the barter economy introduced by the French. providing strong
evidence for alliances based on exchange. the Akokisa and Bidai serving as the
middlemen.
Exotic goods. suitable for ceremonial and mundane exchange, included
shell. fish. fish oil. salt and asphaltum moving north and corn. hides. bone. antler.
stone and ochre moving south. Ceramics. as containers and prestige items. will provide
the strongest material evidence for trade.
The Akokisa fell prey to European diseases and disappeared from the ethnographic
record by the early 1800s.
The few survivors apparently joined the Bidai.
The
eventual reduction of the Bidai. resulted in the formation of a composite band
subsumed under the immigrant Coushatta. The former trade routes of the Akokisa and
Bidai became the Coushatta Trace and the Loma del Toro. and the Akokisa were lost
to memory. The oldest artifact seen during the survey of the study area. a Wells dart
point. came from a campsite traditionally attributed to the Coushatta, illustrating that

9-2

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
the last Native
predecesors.

Americans

m

this

area

occupied

the

same

campsites

as

their

DAL TON'S ECONOMIC MODEL
The adaptive contribution of exchange to the maintenance of hunting and foraging
lifeways is best explained in the context of an economic model such as Dalton's (1977)
ethnographic study of stateless aboriginal societies. Both the Akokisa and Bidai meet
Dalton's definition of small-scale societies - small groups of hunters, gatherers, fishers
and swidden agriculturalists.
Consequently, their social organization was divided into
lineages, lineage clusters and clans of varying size. Their access to natural resources
was highly varied. the Akokisa procuring coastal, littoral and inland products while the
Bidai harvested the Plains, inland forests and, less importantly. agricultural fields.
Population density was low and the size of cohesive political units concomitantly small.
Militarily and economically weak, these groups must have forged alliances through the
ceremonial exchange of primitive valuables and marriage partners. Thus, the exogamy
noted in the mission records may have been of long-standing. part of the exchange of
primitive valuables that enabled the Akokisa and Bidai to remain autonomous in the
midst of their more powerful neighbors.
The anthropological literature is replete with examples of the role of reciprocity
and the obligations imposed by giving. Five positive benefits that would have accrued
to the Akokisa are: 1) peaceful alliances were forged, permitting access to resources
and providing support in the event of conflict: 2) smaller groups retained political
autonomy and avoided absorption by conquest; 3) delayed reciprocity provided a hedge
against future insecurities; 4) prestige accrued to the successful individual and his
lineage; and 5) needed or valued goods were acquired. Only the latter has its basis in
true economics, permitting the direct procurement of items from frontier territories. such
as Lake Creek, or their acquisition by trade. The relationship between the Akokisa and
the Bidai may mirror that described by Dalton:
Peaceful expeditions went forth to visit and feast; conduct ceremonial
exchange, trade, arrange marriages, and to use the natural resources of
external groups with whom peaceful relationships existed. with, of course. their
hosts' permission. (Dalton 1977:200).
Although survey data is unlikely to produce much material evidence of such alliances.
some of the attributes listed by Dalton are demonstrated by the ethnohistoric
references.
The environmental variability encountered in the seasonal round provided
the requisite imbalance in available goods that would have favored the exchange
network. The rapid adoption of the middleman role with the Apache seems to have
permitted the Bidai to survive well into historic times. joining other new friends from
the North as prudence dictated. The traces that crisscross the Lake Creek area are
probably trade routes of long standing. their originators supplanted by newcomers who
practiced the age-old tradition of exchange alliances.

9-3

-------------------------~------~-----------------------

---

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Dalton's model can only serve as a theoretical foundation for the research design
for future work in the Lake Creek area.
However. the mechanisms that permitted
cooperative subsistence strategies and exchange across diverse environmental zones
should be manifested in the study area.
A set of expectations that can be
archeologically tested was derived as part of the research design for further work in
Lake Creek reservoir (Chapter 8).
LOGISTICALLY STRUCTURED SETTLEMENT
The ethnohistorically described bipolar seasonal round of the Akokisa apparently
incorporated two logistically structured subsistence strategies described by Binford
(1980).
Archeological information. gathered in the coastal or summer range of the
Akokisa. conforms to the foraging strategy that was ethnohistorically described in that
environmental zone. The summer dispersal within the coastal habitat fits well within
Binford's concept of residential mobility which in turn produces numerous small camps
lacking in permanent features.
Dispersed settlement and concentration on a limited
variety of resources during the summer contrast with the ethnographic evidence for
winter villages with concentrated populations exploiting more diverse habitats.
The
winter aggregation in villages near potable water supplies would be supported by a
collecting strategy, implemented by specific task-oriented groups. Lake Creek would. in
this reconstruction. have supplied the subsistence and some of the trade goods
redistributed in the villages.
Expectations generated for such a logistically oriented
collecting model are outlined in Chapter 8.

History
The complex history of Montgomery County has been detailed in two recent
publications (Montgomery County Genealogical Society 1981; Montgomery 1975). The
absence of specific references to the study area noted in the ethnohistoric sources is
repeated in the historic documents. The humid, often flooded, environment of the Lake
Creek bottoms was hostile to early settlement and to the preservation of the few
structures that may have been built from green lumber. Untreated logs are reduced to
humus in about six years in the bottoms so the few early cabins reported by long-time
residents were lost generations ago.
The cut-and-run mills of the early twentieth
century were moved in their entirety and. unless clearings were maintained for pasture.
their sites were reforested within two decades. Equally short-lived industries, such as
stills, are so ephemeral only the most recent will remain visible. Possible historic sites
indicated by local informants are described in Chapter 6 (Fig. 6.4).
The most
significant unrecorded locations are probably the unmarked graves of anonymous
transient workers. their lives and deaths now forgotten. The exploitation of the Lake
Creek bottoms in early historic times may well parallel that of prehistoric times with
specific resources exploited on a temporary basis from permanent residences constructed
in a more hospitable environment.
Future historic research in the Lake Creek Reservoir should concentrate on the
reported sites. locating those indicated in the archives and by local informants. and

9-4

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
further assessing those found by additional survey. In addition. the continued gathering
of oral histories from long-time residents in the area will preserve a vanishing record of
lifeways in the early twentieth century.

Geomorphology and Archeology
The pilot nature of this study required that geomorphological and archeological
studies be combined to develop a predictive model for defining high probability site
locales. Site burial has occurred primarily by one or more of three processes: alluvial.
colluvial and eolian.
The geomorphological study has attempted to define the age
boundaries for the alluvial deposits along lake Creek and its tributaries. A map of
these deposits and their proposed ages was constructed from field studies. The seven
topographic settings used to stratify the lake Creek flood pool can now be equated to
the alluvial sequence and assigned to broad eras of geologic time.

I:

Upland flats or interfluves of Pliocene age, capped in this
region by the Willis group of sands and gravels.

II:

Late Pleistocene - Early Holocene age deposits often capped
by reworked Willis materials from locale I.

III:

Holocene (including recent) floodplain of Lake Creek, usually
consisting of dark clays.

IV:
V:
VI:
VII:

Sandy mounds of unknown origin but of Pleistocene-Holocene age.
Tributary creek banks bisecting the Holocene floodplain.
Tributary creek banks (Holocene) bisecting the Late Pleistocene
age terraces.
Tributary creek banks (Holocene) bisecting the Pliocene age terraces.

Colluvial deposits are much more difficult to map as they have been dated only
by archeological materials recovered by the survey and a few radiocarbon dates from
soil organics. Eolian deposits are equally difficult to date. A small fraction of eolian
material probably contributes to all burial processes.
Major eolian deposition in the
form of sand catchments has been postulated for the construction and continued growth
of Setting IV deposits. floodplain mounds. It should be noted that the depth and thus
maximum age of these deposits could not be tested by shovel probing as many of
these mounds exceed 1.2 meters. Some areas of the reservoir. in particular the
floodplain. contain dense clays which cannot be penetrated by a shovel and. perhaps
more importantly. cannot be screened for artifacts without the use of water. Sites do
exist in this context (see 41MQ116): thus. these areas should not be overlooked. The
most appropriate method for investigating the clay floodplain is digging backhoe
trenches and pumping water from Lake Creek to water screen a certain percentage of
the backdirt.

9-5

-

-----

--

---------------

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
In addition. more intensive geomorphological analyses should be incorporated into
future phases of work at Lake Creek. Core transects across the valley should augment
backhoe testing to provide a basis for interpolating the subsurface stratigraphy. During
archeological excavations at floodplain mound sites, the origin of these features should
be further investigated using floral. faunal and cultural remains in conjunction with
laboratory analyses of soils and sediments. Additional paleoenvironmental data should
be collected from suitable sites to aid in the reconstruction of landscape evolution.
Absolute dating of strata is imperative and more refined contour mapping would serve
as an aid to identifying the subleties in landforms evident in the project area.

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ADDITIONAL WORK
The explanatory models outlined in Chapter 8 provide a structure for the further
analysis of subsistence-settlement patterns. site-landform relationships and material
culture. The patterns inherent in this structure form the core of the research design,
and affect the assessment of site significance at all levels of investigation, from survey
to full excavation. By modeling a set of expectations derived from ethnohistory. the
goal of identifying socially adaptive mechanisms takes precedence over a more
materialistic or artifact-oriented analysis.
In the Lake Creek area. where the majority of the sites are buried. the material
recovered from shovel probes is relatively homogeneous. consisting largely of lithic
debitage.
Only half the sites yielded any temporal diagnostics and then in small
quant1t1es. Thus. research merit must be determined based on unique characteristics or
adequate sampling to insure representation of all potential site types and landforms. In
addition. no prior settlement pattern studies and only a few intensive excavations in the
vicinity of Lake Creek set standards for site assessment. It is therefore recommended
that selected sites identified in the pilot study be tested or excavated prior to. or
concurrent with. intensive survey of the remainder of the reservoir. Backhoe testing in
select floodplain areas could be coordinated with testing. permitting further
geomorphological studies to benefit from the subsurface exposures, especially if
chronometric samples could be collected to clarify the depositional sequences.
Twenty-four of the 46 prehistoric sites located during this sample survey merit
consideration for additional testing when the inventory of the reservoir is complete
(Table 9.1). Eight of these were selected for immediate testing based on their ranked
relevance to six research questions generated from Aten's Akokisa model. Dalton's
economic model and Binford's logistically structured settlement patterns.
Expanding upon Aten's Akokisa and Dalton's economic models depends largely on
the analysis of material culture so that 1) technological and stylistic changes can be
identified: 2) the variability can be ordered chronologically: and 3) causes and
consequences can be explored.
Testing the applicability of Binford's logistically
structured model depends upon 4) determining settlement patterns. site layout and
artifact assemblage composition. Inter- and intra-site comparisons should differentiate
between temporary collecting or foraging stations and residential bases. Finally. some

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
of the sites selected for testing hold potential for 5) relating landforms to human
occupational preferences and 6) reconstructing the geomorphological history of the Lake
Creek valley.

Table 9.1.

41MQ75 (1)
41MQ76 (1)
41MQ84 (6)
41MQ85 (4)
*41MQ87 (1, 4 5)
41MQ89 C6,5,4)
41MQ90 (1, 4 5)
41MQ92 (4, 1)
41MQ94 (4 5 6)
*41MQ97 (1,2,6)
*41MQ99 (6,5)
41MQ100 (4)
I

I

I

I

Potentially Significant Sites.

41MQ101
41MQ102
*41MQ106
*41MQ107
41MQ108
41MQ109
41MQ111
41MQ112
*41MQ114
*41MQ116
*41MQ118
41MQ120

(4,5)
(4,5)
(1,2,3,4,5)
(5,4)
(5,6,4)
(5,4)
(4, 5)
(4, 1, 2)
(6,4)
C4,6)
(1,2,3,4)
C6,5,4)

* Sites recommended for immediate testing
1-6 Relevance to research topics
Additional lnten1ive Survey
The experience gained in the sample survey can contribute to technical approaches
to additional survey and testing in the reservoir.
The emphasis placed upon shovel
probing of sandy deposits should be continued using the "bunch and scatter" technique
that proved successful in the pilot study.
Proposed clearing of the reservoir would
remove the obstacle of dense understory and temporarily improve surface visibility. but
secondary growth would immediately regenerate while the majority of the sites remained
buried in the sandy matrices that compose two-thirds of the project area. The optimal
crew size is a factor of three. one shoveling and two screening and documenting the
recovery. All sandy soils should be probed at intervals ranging from 50 meters on flat
areas to 100 meters on steeper slopes. Probes should attempt to penetrate the sands
and intrude 10 centimeters into the sandy clay B horizon so that the Holocene and
Late Pleistocene deposits are plumbed. Matrix should be screened through 1/4 inch
mesh in approximate 20 centimeter levels. the. recovery inventoried and the deposits
described.
Temporally or functionally diagnostic artifacts should be collected.
catalogued and curated.
Miscellaneous debitage can be returned to the probe given
that it can not be considered representative of the site contents and provides little data
beyond that observable in the field. All shovel probe locations should be plotted on
site maps drawn to scale.
Areas without sandy deposits, such as the eroded hill
slopes and the floodplain proper. should be surveyed using serpentine transects with an
emphasis placed on locating cultural material perched on the now-deflated surface or
eroding from the banks of streams or channel meander scars.

9-7

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
The location, potential and age of prehistoric sites within the unsurveyed portion
of the reservoir has been estimated for each defined landform in the Lake Creek basin
(Fig. 9.1). Predictably, the highest site density can be expected in setting VI. terraces
dissected by tributaries to Lake Creek. All floodplain mounds identified in the sample
survey contained cultural material. attesting to the special role of these features in the
prehistoric settlement.
Conversely. although the upper B horizon of the T-1 is
estimated to be Late Pleistocene to early Holocene in age. probes into this sandy clay
The absence of site components older than 3000 years may
were invariably sterile.
well be attributable to sampling error. including possible burial beyond the reach of
simple shovel probes.
Backhoe trenching and water screening are needed to locate sites buried in the
clayey alluvial deposits of the floodplain.
Placement of these trenches should be
decided after studying the proposed low-altitude aerial photographs and the pedestrian
Key areas will. in all probability, be adjacent to meander scars identified on
survey.
the aerials (Fig. 9.2) and near the confluences of tributaries with Lake Creek.
Trenches should penetrate the clay floodplain drapes and intrude into the sandier
deposits of the Deweyville formation to insure that both Holocene and Late Pleistocene
strata are exposed. Additional mechanical excavation should concentrate on known site
locations in deep sandy deposits where shovel probing failed to provide adequate
exposures.
Many of the floodplain mounds exceeded the depth attainable in shovel
probes. Optimal trench length is 4 to 5 meters: a minimum of 5 percent of the trench
spoil should be water screened for artifacts masked by clay coating.
Some locales
trenched in the pilot study later proved to be site locations when shovel probed with
screening of the matrix. illustrating that trenching alone is insufficent if the cultural
materials are sparse and thinly distributed. Documentation of trenches should follow
the procedures used by Mandel (this report) with the addition of more detailed profiles
in all trenches where cultural materials are exposed.
Based on the labor expended in the sample survey, with an average of 25 acres
per person per day and the expectable loss of field time to inclement weather. survey
of the remaining 80% of the reservoir would require the expenditure of 30 to 32 person
months and include a minimum of 1280 shovel probes to locate and assess
approximately 200 more prehistoric sites.
Minimally. 30 backhoe trenches will be
needed to explore potential site locations and provide exposures for the
geomorphological study. The effort devoted to trenching specific sites will be affected
by site size and depth and should be left to the discretion of the excavators.
Scheduling of the field work to avoid the summer heat would undoubtedly increase the
efficiency of the survey personnel.

Limited Testing
The burial of all sites in the Lake Creek Reservoir beneath a mantle of sand
mandates that limited testing rely on machine excavation to determine the extent and
depth of cultural deposits. Trenches should extend beyond the sand into the B horizon
of the soil profile. exposing all Holocene and the upper Pleistocene strata. Additional

9-8

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

High Terraces (HT)
Cul tura 1
Period

Alluvial
deposits

Colluvial
deposits

Low Terraces (T-1)
Eal ian
deposits

Alluvial
deposits

Colluvial
deposits

Modern FloodQlain (T-0)
Eal ian 1
deposits

Pal eoindian

+

+++

+

Early Archaic

+

++

+

+

Middle Archaic

+

+

+

++

++

++

+++

+++

+++

Late Archaic
Late Prehistoric
1

Flooddrapes

Natural
1 eve es

Coll uvial
aprons

Floodplain
mounds

+
++

+

+

+

+

+

+

+++

++

++

++

+++

+++

+++

+++

Sandy surface deposits

- not possible; +low potential; ++moderate potential; +++high potential; ? unknown

Probability of cultural deposits at depth of:
o-1m
1-2m
2+m

Topographic
Setting

High
Moderate
None

High
None
None

High
None
None

High
Moderate
Untested

High
High
Untested

High
High
Untested

High
Moderate
None

I HT

II T-1
Ill T-0

Number of sites

3

Sites with diagnostics o

FIGURE 9.1.

0

IV

3

0

0

2

--..
-

10

..2i5"

...

......

..
7·

3

15

Expected and observed prehistoric site locations within the Lake Creek
basin.

9-9

---------

~

--------~

----- -------

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

FIGURE 9.2.

Aerial photograph of cleared tract in the Lake Creek floodplain. showing
meander scars and the braided system of a perennial tributary.

9-10

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
shovel probes can be used to help determine the optimal placement for hand excavated
units within the site boundaries.
Depending upon the site size and depth. broad
expanses of the culture-bearing deposits should be exposed to identify features such as
pits, hearths. burials and post holes.
Test pit dimensions should approach 2 by 2
meters whenever features are detected so that aspects of the site layout can be
determined. Too strict an adherence to arbitrary vertical levels may prove inefficient;
flexibility would permit the supervising archeologist to chose the increment best suited
for data recovery from the site as a whole. Matrix, with the exception of feature fill.
should be screened through 1/4 inch mesh with 1 liter samples taken from each level
of each unit for fine screening. Floodplain sites will require water screening to process
the dense clay matrix.
In all other respects, standard field techniques and recording
procedures should prove equally adequate at the Lake Creek sites.
The expectations outlined in Chapter 8 require that specific analytical techniques
be implemented.
Radiocarbon and thermoluminescent assays are critical to both the
geomorphological and archeological interpretations.
Seasonality of floral and faunal
procurement are the optimal test of the Akokisa and. to a lesser degree. the economic
models. Potential indicators of seasonality are nut hulls. fish scales, deer antler, bison
bone and freshwater mussel.
Although pollen studies are rarely meaningful in this
environment. presence or absence should be determined on select samples. Ceramics,
as a viable indicator of exchange, should be thin-sectioned and select sherds submitted
for thermoluminescent assay. Stylistic and technological analyses of the ceramics are
Logistically structured site
expected to yield valuable information on interaction.
activities may be isolated by comparing lithic assemblages from the various sites to
differentiate curated from expedient tool kits (Binford 1979).
Raw material is an
important attribute in any future lithic analyses.
Provisions should be made for
detailed bioarcheological studies, including chemical composition. dentition, pathologies.
and metric comparisons. of all skeletal material encountered.

Statement of Purpose

Procedures for implementing the intensive survey of the remainder of the reservoir
and selected site testing are technical. intended to facilitate the difficult task of
assessing the cultural resources of Lake Creek Reservoir.
The recommended analyses
cannot be considered all-inclusive; as research progresses undoubtedly many of the goals
will be refined. Lake Creek is only one small part of a much larger system, shaped by
forces that often emanated from beyond the bounds of this study area. Placing Lake
Creek within the context of broad explanatory models transcends some of the
limitations imposed by the narrow bounds of the reservoir and the buried nature of all
the sites. The Dalton and Binford models are but two of many attempts to explain
hunting and gathering adaptation. In the case of Lake Creek. both are well-founded in
ethnohistory while remaining archeologically testable. In addition, their focus on specific
subsets of the' cultural system simplifies the task of attempting to unravel complex
interactions between social. environmental, demographic, technical and historical
considerations (Keene 1981:241).

9-11

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX A:
C.3.

SCOPE OF WORK

SCOPE OF WORK

C.3.1. Objectives.-- The overall objective of this pilot study is to formulate a detailed.
operational research design for future San Jacinto Project cultural resource
investigations. The research design will be a major part of the final report resulting
It will specify the anthropological and historical questions which
from this contract.
may be successfully addressed with San Jacinto Project area data. It will present and
defend the methodology (theoretical approach. field strategy. and specific field
techniques) which should govern the future historic and prehistoric archeological and
geomorphological studies in the project area which may be performed under contracts
subsequent to this one. Note: Cultural resource studies which may be needed beyond
the scope of the present work will not be accomplished by amending or extending a
contract resulting from this procurement action. Cultural resource investigations beyond
the pilot study level are anticipated and will. if needed. be the subject of separate
competitive procurement actions.
The work to be performed for the San Jacinto Project cultural resource pilot study
shall be structured to accomplish the following:
C.3.1.1. Ethnohistoric research.--A number of relevant summaries of secondary sources
have already been done.
Completion of ethnohistoric background research should be
accomplished during this pilot study.
This work will involve detailed analysis of
sources directly relevant to the project area and will depend to a significant degree on
primary sources. The purpose of this work is twofold: (a) to identify locations and/or
likely locations for contact period archeological sites and (b) to allow formulation of
propositions regarding local aboriginal lifestyle. subsistence. settlement pattern. etc.,
which may help in the location and interpretation of both prehistoric and contact period
archeological sites.
C.3.1.2. Historic research.--The pilot study should complete needed background historic
research for the project area. Again. the purpose of this work is twofold: (a) to help
locate historic sites and (b) to provide the context to interpret and evaluate them.
C.3.1.3. Geomorphological research.--The importance of this kind of research has been
demonstrated for areas like the San Jacinto Project where heavy vegetation ad recent
The objectives of
alluviation mask extensive areas of the ground surface.
geomorphological work. in general. are to (a) identify the most promising areas for
deeply buried intact archeological sites (particularly those of the Archaic and Paleoindian
periods). (b) identify areas where conventional surface survey may be unproductive. (c)
formulate guidelines by local landform for project area surveys in terms of appropriate
spacing of shovel testing and transects and profitable areas for particularly intense
inspection of natural and manmade profiles, (d) formulate a detailed strategy for future
deep subsurface testing programs, and (e) provide baseline data for future excavation
programs. The work shall be structured to maximize the possibility of fully achieving
the above-stated objectives. However. it will not be possible. under the limit of 30

APPENDIX A
person-days of geomorphological fieldwork suggested below, to comprehensively verify all
the aspects which pertain to the geomorphological objectives. The pilot study of this
part of the work is stressed. It should be possible to firmly determine some aspects
of the project area's interrelationship of geology and archeology with a minimal level of
effort. Other aspects will probably require investigation beyond the scope contemplated
here. The purpose of the pilot study geomorphological work is to collect the hard data
needed to structure an effective and cost-efficient future program of geomorphological
work.
Depending on the skill of the investigator and conditions encountered in the
field, it should be possible to complete some aspects of a comprehensive
geoarcheological study.
A detailed program of work needed to complete such a
comprehensive study will be included in the final report (e.g.. scope and placement of
needed backhoe trenching and/or power augering. specific locations where soil samples
should be retrieved and the nature of tests needed on them, etc.). Evaluation of the
pilot program of geomorphological work proposed by offerors will be based on potential
direct research contribution and efficiency (see Evaluation Criteria. Section M.2 below).
C.3.1.4. Fieldwork.--The objective of fieldwork is ground truthing. This aspect of the
work involves collecting geomorphological data. field checking locations suggested by the
ethnohistoric and historic background research, and collecting data to define prehistoric
site types and distribution. These data will be used to support the proposed overall
research design which is to be this contract's final product. An additional fieldwork
requirement is to inspect the area which may be first disturbed by project construction
(the dam axis).
C.3.1.5.
Analysis
and
reports.--Analysis
of field-collected
and
previously
collected/written data will be structured to accomplish the overall objectives stated
above.
Integration of ethnohistoric/historic. archeological. and geomorphological tasks
will be stressed.
The required final report will formally present research findings and recommendations as
noted above.
A preliminary report has been scheduled to provide Reclamation staff
with basic information needed for their work preparing Reclamation project planning
documents. Monthly progress reports will also be required (see section F).
C.3.2. Work
Tasks
-C.3.2.1. Research design.--Offerors shall in their proposals briefly specify their research
objectives and propose a detailed framework for accomplishing those objectives and
integrating the tasks specified below (items C.3.2.2 to C.3.2.6).
A full-blown
methodological treatise is not an item requested for inclusion in proposals. Offerors
should be able to define their theoretical orientation and justify its appropriateness for
the San Jacinto Project area primarily by citing appropriate professional literature. The
purpose of defining research objectives is to provide necessary context for justifying the
offerer's proposed approach and methods.
For instance. different research priorities
might influence fundamentals like the method of selecting areas to be subjected to
pedestrian survey, the intensity of survey, decisions on collection/formality of
collection/no collection. placement of geomorphological test pits. etc. These (also for

A-2

SCOPE OF WORK

instance) might differ between and investigator exclusively concerned with assessing the
project area's potential for building a sound local cultural historical sequence and an
The
investigator pursuing a question of diachronic change in settlement patterns.
research design aspect of proposals will be evaluated on two levels: (1) the practicality
and potential research contribution of the proposed research objectives and (2) the
adequacy and appropriateness of the approach proposed to accomplish them (see also
Section M.3, Evaluation Criteria).
C.3.2.2. Ethnohistoric study.--Ethnohistoric research shall be performed in advance of
fieldwork. and the results of such investigations shall be used to guide the location of
a portion of the fieldwork. Offerors shall. in their proposals. provide a specific outline
of the approach to be followed to meet the ethnohistoric work objectives. A listing of
source locations including the relevant materials located in them. anticipated research
yield. and time required to access them would be a way to accomplish this.
C.3.2.3. Historic study.--The historic research shall also be coordinated so that it can
guide the location of part of the fieldwork.
In the case of the historic research.
interpretation of discoveries made in the field may require subsequent records search.
Offerors shall. in their proposals. provide a specific outline of the approach to be
followed to meet the historic work objectives.
C.3.2.4.
Geomorphological study.--Geomorphological research shall also be closely
coordinated with the archeological fieldwork. A primary means of accomplishing the
geomorphological objectives will be preparing a map of project area landforms detailing
the distribution of terminal Pleistocene and Holocene soils ad at least one geological
cross section representative of the project area.
It is estimated that 30 person-days of fieldwork will be needed to accomplish this
aspect of the work. Up to 200 cubic meters of backhoe excavation will be allowed.
Offerors shall. in their proposals. provide a detailed outline of the methods and analytic
procedures to be used to accomplish the geomorphological objectives. The scale and
degree of detail for the landform map and cross section(s) shall also be specified.
Offerors shall make a commitment to and specify methods for recording archeological
materials encountered during the course of geomorphological work.
All hand and
mechanically excavated pits shall be backfilled.
C.3.2.5. Archeological fieldwork.--Offerors shall, in their proposals. present a detailed
program of field investigations and justify that program in terms of its applicability to
the objectives defined above. Proposals shall be worded to commit the offeror to (a) a
specific method of selecting areas to be surveyed and/or specific areas to be surveyed,
(b) detailed methods to be used in the course of survey. (c) site recording methods
(including definition of a site ad number and kind of photographs) and methods to be
used for recording material which do not meet criteria for definition as a site. and (d)
the minimum acreage to be covered by the survey.
As a general indicator of
anticipated level of effort. 150 person-days are suggested as appropriate for the ground
survey work in the project area (a standard survey crew in the field for a month.
including supervisory and support personnel).
Several days of records search for

A-3

APPENDIX A

historic period field discoveries are included in this total.
Note, however, that the
capabilities and qualifications of staff and the manner in which historical.
geomorphological. and archeological tasks are integrated may allow offerors to
accomplish work objectives more economically and/or achieve an end product of higher
technical quality.
C.3.2.6. Analysis.--Offerors shall, in their proposals. specify the kinds and level of
detail of analysis which will be performed. The analysis proposed shall be justified in
relation to the research strategy proposed by the offeror.
C.3.4.
Popular Brochure.--A two- to four-page brochure presenting a_ basic cultural
history of the project area shall be prepared. The proposal shall detail a proposed
format and content for the brochure. The brochure will be written at approximately
eighth grade level of difficulty.
A writing sample will be included with offerors'
proposals to illustrate the level of difficulty proposed for the popular brochure.
C.3.5.

Other.--See Section L.19. Content of Proposals.

A-4

-------

APPENDIX B:

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS
Rolfe Mandel

The soil profiles exposed in 21 of the 26 backhoe trenches are described in the
following tables. Descriptions could not be made in Trenches 14. 20, 21 and 22 due
to unstable side-walls. The soil profiles were described using the terminology of the
Soil Survey Manual (Soil Survey Staff 1981).
The colors are for moist soils as
determined with Munsell Color Charts. Lower case letters are used in the tables as
suffixes to designate specific kinds of master horizons.
The symbols and their
meanings are as follows:
• c: Concretions or hard nonconcretionary nodules cemented by material other
than silica.
• g: Strong gleying.
This symbol is used to indicate that iron has been
reduced and removed during soil formation or that saturation with stagnant
water has preserved a reduced state.
• k: Accumulation of alkaline earth carbonates. commonly calcium carbonate.
• t: this symbol is used to indicate an accumulation of silicate clay that has
either formed in the horizon or been moved into it by illuviation.
• v: Plinthite.
this symbol is used to indicate the presence of iron-rich
humus-poor. reddish material that is form or very firm when moist and
exposed to the atmosphere and to repeated wetting and drying.
These
properties are characteristic of plinthite.
• !: Fragipan character. This symbol is used to indicate genetically developed
firmness. brittleness. or high bulk density. These features are characteristic
of fragipans. but some horizons designated ! do not have all properties of a
fragipan.

Table B.1
Exposure: Backhoe Trench 1
Elevation: Approximately 205 ft {62.5 m) MSL
Soil Series: Splendora
Taxonomic Class: Fine-loamy. siliceous. thermic Fragic Glossudalf (see remarks)
Landscape:

Upland convex slope: High Terrace

Parent Materials:

Alluvium and colluvium

APPENDIX 8
Slope: 2%
Vegetation: Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine. hickory and gum
Described by: Rolfe Mandel
Remarks: This soil would be classified as Fragiaguic Glossudalf if this subgroup was
provided in the Taxonomy. Glossic materials (E) comprise 5% or more of
most of the argillic horizon. There is a lithological discontinuity at a depth
of 81 cm.

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS
A

0-10 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) loamy fine sand; weak. fine. granular structure:
friable; noneffervescent: many tree roots; clear smooth boundary.

very

E

10-81 cm
Light gray (10YR7 /2) loamy fine sand; single grain: loose: very friable: few
fine and medium siliceous pebbles: few fine ironstone concretions:
noneffervescent; clear wavy boundary.

2Bt

81-95 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) loam. common medium and coarse faint brownish-yellow
(10YR6/6) mottles. and few medium distinct dark red (2.5YR3/6) mottles:
weak. medium subangular blocky structure: friable: light brownish-gray
(10YR6/2) area show strong evidence of clay stripping leaving clean sand
and silt grains: common fine and medium roots: few fine ironstone
concretions: non-effervescent: gradual irregular boundary.

2Bt/E1

95-118 cm
Gray (10YR6/1) sandy clay loam with light brownish-gray (10YR6/2) ped
surfaces: many medium and coarse distinct yellowish-brown (10YR5/8) and
dark red (2.5YR3/6) mottles: weak. medium. subangular blocky structure:
friable: slightly sticky and slightly plastic when moist: light brownish-gray
(10YR6/2) areas are mostly E horizon material that is tongued into horizons
above and below: common fine ironstone concretions: few medium roots:
noneffervescent: clear irregular boundary.

2Btx/E2

118-181 cm
Distinctly mottled gray (10YR6/1). yellowish-brown (10YR5/8). and dark red
(2.5YR3/6) sandy clay loam ped interiors (Bt part) with almost 20% tongues
of gray (10YR6/1) very fine sandy loam (E part): weak, coarse. subangular
blocky structure: firm: hard when dry. slightly sticky and slightly plastic when
moist: few yellowish-red (5YR4/6) mottles with brittle centers: 10 to 15% of
the mass is plinthite: thin patchy clay films on faces of peds; common fine
pores: common fine ironstone concretions: noneffervescent: gradual wavy
boundary.
B-2

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS
2Btx/E3

181-215 cm
Prominently mottled yellowish-brown (10YR5/8). gray (10YR6/1). dark red
(2.5YR3/6). red (2.5YR4/8) sandy clay loam ped interiors (Bt part) with
about 30% tongues of gray (10YR6/1) very fine sandy loam (E part): weak,
coarse. angular and subangular blocky structure: firm: hard when dry: slightly
sticky and slightly plastic when moist: common yellowish-red (5YR4/6)
mottles with brittle centers: 15 to 25% of the mass is plinthite: thin patchy
clay films on faces of peds: few fine ironstone concretions: noneffervescent:
gradual wavy boundary.

2Btx/E4

215-315 cm
Prominently and coarsely mottled light brownish-gray (10Y R6 /2). yellowishbrown (10YR5/8). yellowish-red (5YR4/6). strong brown (7.5YR5/8) dark red
(2.5YR3/6), and red (10YR4/8) sandy clay loam ped interiors Bt part) with
about 10% tongues of light brownish-gray (10YR6/2) loam (E part): weak.
coarse. subangular blocky structure: very firm: hard when dry, slightly sticky
and slightly plastic when moist: redder areas are brittle plinthite comprising
25 to 30% of the mass: thin patchy clay films faces of peds: few fine and
medium siliceous pebbles: few fine ironstone concretions noneffervescent.

Table B.2
Exposure: Backhoe Trench 2
Elevation: Approximately 180 ft (54.8 m) MSL
Soil Series: Splendora
Taxonomic Class: Fine-loamy. siliceous. thermic Fragic Glossudalf (see remarks)
landscape: Upland convex slope. High Terrace
Parent Material: Alluvium and colluvium
Slope: 2%
Vegetation: Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine, hickory and gum.
Described by: Rolfe Mandel
Remarks: This soil would be classified as Fragiaquic Glossudalf if this subgroup
was provided in the Taxonomy. Glossic materials (E) comprise 5% or more
of most of the argillic horizon.
There is a lithological discontinuity at a
depth of 56 cm.

B-3

- - - - - ----

--

---

---------- -

--------------

-~----~----

APPENDIX B
HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-8 cm
Brown (10VR4/3) loamy fine sand: weak, fine granular structure; very friable;
noneffervescent: many tree roots; clear smooth boundary.

E

8-56 cm
Light brownish-gray (10VR6/2) loamy fine sand: single gram: loose: very
friable; few fine and medium siliceous pebbles.

2Bt

56-75 cm
Gray (10VR6/1) loam: common medium distinct yellowish-brown (10VR5/8)
mottles; weak. medium. subangular blocky structure: friable: light brownishgray (10VR6/2) areas show strong evidence of clay stripping leaving clean
sand and silt grains: common fine and medium roots: few fine ironstone
concretions: noneffervescent: gradual irregular boundary.

2Bt/E1

75-96 cm
Gray (10YR6/1) sandy clay loam with light brownish-gray (10VR6/2) ped
surfaces; many medium and coarse distinct yellowish-brown (10VR5/8). strong
brown (7.5VR5/6). and dark red (2.5VR3/6) mottles; weak. medium.
subangular blocky structure: friable; slightly sticky and slightly plastic when
moist: light brownish-gray (10VR6/2) areas are mostly E horizon material
that is tongued into horizons above and below; common fine ironstone
concretions: few medium roots: noneffervescent: clear irregular boundary.

2Btx/E2

96-115 cm
Distinctly mottled gray (10YR6/1). yellowish-brown (10VR5/8). and dark red
(2.5VR3/6) sandy clay loam ped interiors (Bt part) with about 20% tongues
of gray (10YR6/1) very fine sandy loam (E part); weak. coarse. subangular
blocky structure: firm: hard slightly sticky and slightly plastic when moist;
few yellowish-red (5VR4/6) mottles with brittle centers: 10 to 15% of the
mass is plinthite; thin patchy clay films on faces of peds: common fine
pores; common fine ironstone concretions; noneffervescent: gradual wavy
boundary.

2Btx/E3

165-220 cm
Prominently mottled yellowish-brown (10YR5/8). gray (10VR6/1). strong
brown (7.5VR5/8). dark red (2.5YR3/6). and red (2.5YR4/8) sandy clay
loam ped interiors (Bt part) with about 30% tongues of gray (10VR6/1) very
fine sandy loam (E part): weak. coarse. angular and subangular blocky
structure: firm: hard. slightly sticky and slightly plastic when moist: common
yellowish-red (5YR4/6) mottles with brittle centers: 15 to 25% of the mass
is plinthite; few fine ironstone concretions: thin patchy clay films on faces of
peds; noneffervescent; gradual wavy boundary.

----- - ____-- _
---....:...-

B-4

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS

2Btx/E4

220-269 cm
Prominently and coarsely mottled light brownish-gray (10YR6/2). yellowishbrown (10YR5/8). strong brown (7.5YR5/8). yellowish-red (5YR4/8). dark
red (10R4/8) sandy clay loam ped interiors (Bt part) with about 10%
tongues of light brownish-gray (10YR6/2) loam (E part): weak. coarse.
subangular blocky structure; very firm; hard, slightly sticky and slightly
plastic when moist; redder areas are brittle plinthite comprising 25 to 30% of
the mass; thin patchy clay films on faces of peds; few fine and medium
siliceous pebbles: few fine ironstone concretions; noneffervescent: clear wavy
boundary.

2Cx

269-305 cm
Color as above: sandy loam: massive: very hard. firm: redder areas are brittle
plinthite comprising 25 to 30% of the mass: common fine and medium
rounded gravel: few fine ironstone concretions: noneffervescent.

Table B.3

Exposure: Backhoe Trench 3
Elevation: Approximately 165 ft (50.3 m) MSL
Soil Series: Splendora variant
Taxonomic Class: Fine-loamy. siliceous. thermic Fragic Glossudalf
Landscape: Upland. convex slope; High Terrace
Parent Material: Alluvium and colluvium
Slope: 1%
Vegetation: Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine. hickory and gum
Described by: Rolfe Mandel
Remarks: Glossic materials (E) comprise 5% or more of most of the argillic horizon.
There is a lithological discontinuity at a depth of 84 cm.
HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-12 cm
Brown (10YR4/3) loamy fine sand: weak. fine granular structure; very friable:
many tree roots: noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

B-5

------

-----

APPENDIX 8

E1

12-61 cm
Light brownish-gray to pale brown (10YR6/2-6/3) loamy fine sand: single
grained: loose: few fine ironstone concretions: noneffervescent: clear smooth
boundary.

E2

61-84 cm
Pale brown (10YR6/3) loamy fine sand; common medium faint yellowishbrown (10YR5/4) mottles and few fine distinct yellowish-brown (10YR5/8)
mottles: single grained: loose: few fine ironstone concretions: noneffervescent:
gradual wavy boundary.

2Bt

84-106 cm
Yellowish-brown (10YR5/6) loam: common medium and coarse faint pale
brown (10YR6/3) mottles; weak. fine. subangular blocky structure: friable:
pale brown areas show strong evidence of clay stripping leaving clean sand
and silt grains: few fine ironstone concretions: noneffervescent: gradual
irregular boundary.

2Bt/E1

106-142 cm
Yellowish-brown (10YR5/6) sandy clay loam with pale brown (10YR6/3).
strong brown (7.5YR4/6). and dark red (2.5YR3/6) mottles; moderate.
medium. subangular blocky structure: friable; slightly sticky and slightly
plastic when moist: pale brown (10YR6/3) areas are mostly E horizon
material that is tongued into horizons above and below: common fine
ironstone concretions: noneffervescent; clear wavy boundary.

2Btx/E2

142-193 cm
Distinctly mottled yellowish-brown (10YR5/6). strong brown (7.5YR4/6). and
dark red (2.5YR3/6) sandy clay loam ped interiors (Bt part) with about 30%
tongues of gray (10YR5/1) loamy fine sand (E part): moderate. medium.
subangular blocky structure; firm: hard when dry. slightly sticky and slightly
plastic when moist; few yellowish-red (5YR4/6) mottles with brittle centers: 5
to 10% of the mass is plinthite: thin patchy clay films on faces of peds;
common fine pores: common fine ironstone concretions; noneffervescent:
gradual smooth boundary.

2Btx/E3

193-289 cm
Distinctly mottled yellowish-brown (10YR5/6): strong brown (7.5YR4/6). and
dark red (2.5YR3/6) sandy clay loam ped interiors (Bt part) with about 30%
tongues of gray (10VR5/1) loamy fine sand (E part): moderate. medium.
subangular blocky structure; firm; hard when dry. slightly sticky and slightly
plastic when moist: common yellowish-red (5YR4/6) mottles with brittle
centers: 10 to 15% of the mass is plinthite; thin patchy clay films on faces
of peds: common fine pores: few fine ironstone concretions: noneffervescent;
gradual wavy boundary.

B-6

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS

2Btx/E4

289-320 cm
Prominently and coarsely mottled gray (10YR5/1). strong brown (7.4YR4/6).
red (10R4/8). and dark red (2.5YR3/6) sandy clay loam ped interiors (Bt
part) with about 10% tongues of gray (10YR5/1) loam (E part): weak.
coarse. subangular blocky structure: very firm: very hard when dry. slightly
sticky and slightly plastic when moist: redder areas are brittle plinthite
comprising 20 to 25% of the mass: thin patchy clay films on faces of peds:
few fine ironstone concretions: noneffervescent.

Table B.4
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 4

Elevation:

approximately 160 ft (48.7 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Eustis

Taxonomic Class:

Lower portion of upland convex slope: High Terr ace

Landscape:

Parent Material:
Slope:

Sandy. siliceous. thermic Psammentic Paleudult

Alluvium and colluvium

1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine, hickory. and gum
Rolfe Mandel

The Bt horizon is weakly expressed with at least 3% more clay than the E
horizon. The clay in the Bt is primarily coating on sand grains.

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-10 cm
Dark grayish-brown (10YR4/2) fine sand: single grained: loose: many tree
roots: noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

E

10-27 cm
Light yellowish-brown (10YR6/4) fine sand: single grained: loose: many tree
roots: noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

Bt1

127-203 cm
Yellowish-red (5YR4/6-5/6) loamy medium sand: weak. fine. granular
structure breaks down to single grain: sand grains are coated with clay and
oxides: few fine and medium rounded siliceous pebbles: noneffervescent:
smooth gradual boundary.
8-7

APPENDIX 8
Bt2

203-274 cm
Yellowish-red (5YR5/8) loamy coarse sand: weak. fine. granular structure
breaks down to single grain: sand grains are coated with clay and oxides:
common medium and coarse rounded siliceous pebbles: noneffervescent.

Table 8.5
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 5

Elevation:

Approximately 145 ft (44.2 m) MSL
Tuscumbia

Soil Series:

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Floodplain (T-0)

Parent Material:
Slope:

Fine, mixed. nonacid, thermic family of Vertie Haplagaquepts

Alluvium

<1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Mixed bottomland hardwood forest with palmetto understory
Rolfe Mandel

The upper 36 centimeters of the profile appears to be a clayey flood-drape.
The sharp textural break between the Bg1 and 2Bg2 may represent the
contact between clayey Holocene alluvium and sandy late-Wisonsinan
Deweyville alluvium.

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS
A

0-10 cm
Dark brown (10YR3/3) clay: moderate. coarse. blocky structure: very firm:
very hard dry, very sticky and plastic when moist: many tree roots:
noneffervescence: clear smooth boundary.

Bg1

10-36 cm
Very dark gray (10YR3/1) clay: moderate. coarse. blocky structure: very firm:
very hard when dry. very sticky and very plastic when moist: nay tree roots:
noneffervescence: abrupt smooth boundary.

2Bg2

36-122 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) fine sandy loam: common fine and medium distinct strong
brown (7.5YR4/6 and 5/8) mottles: weak. medium subangular blocky
structure:
very
friable:
clay
bridges
between
some
sand
grams:
noneffervescent: clear boundary.

B-8

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS
2Bg3

122-230 cm
Gray to grayish-brown (10YR5/1-5/2) sandy clay loam; common fine and
medium distinct strong brown (7.5YR4/6 and 5/8) mottles; structure could
not be determined due to saturated conditions; noneffervescent.

Table B.6
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 6

Elevation:

Approximately 135 ft (41.1 m) MSL
Tuscumbia

Soil Series:

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Floodplain (T-0)

Parent Material:
Slope:

Fine. mixed. nonacid, thermic family of Vertie Hapaquepts

Alluvium

<1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Mixed bottomland hardwood forest with palmetto understory
Rolfe Mandel

A soil sample was taken at a depth of 165-175 centimeters for radiocarbon
dating.

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS
A

0-12 cm
Very dark gray (10YR3/1) clay; moderate. coarse. blocky structure: very firm;
very hard when dry; very sticky and plastic when moist: many tree roots:
noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary

Bg1

12-96 cm
Dark gray to dark grayish-brown (10YR4/1-4/2) clay; common fine distinct
strong brown (7.5YR5/8) mottles; moderate. coarse. blocky structure; very
firm; very hard when dry, very sticky and very plastic when moist;
noneffervescent; gradual smooth boundary.

Bg2

96-198 cm
Very dark gray (10YR3/1) clay; very fine distinct strong brown (7 /5YR5/8)
mottles; moderate. coarse. blocky structure; very firm; very hard when dry.
very sticky and very plastic when wet: few slickensides that do not intersect:
few fine black concretions: noneffervescent; gradual smooth boundary.

B-9

APPENDIX B

Cg

198-305 cm
Dark gray (5Y4/1) clay; common fine and medium distinct olive (5Y5/6)
mottles and fine faint olive (5Y4/4) mottles; massive; very firm: very hard
when dry, very sticky and very plastic when moist; noneffervescent.

Table B.7

Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 7

Elevation:

Approximately 145 ft(44.2 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Burleson

Taxonomic Class:

Lower portion of upland convex slope. High Terrace

Landscape:

Parent Material:
Slope:

Fine, montmorillonite, thermic Udic Pellustert

Alluvium

1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Mixed bottomland hardwood forest with palmetto understory
Rolfe Mandel

The high clay content of this alluvial soil is attributed to the texture of the
original sediment, i.e.. a clayey slack-water deposit. The presence of calcium
carbonate nodules and masses is attributed to the poor drainage; the CaCo 3
cannot be translocated.

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A1

0-12 cm
Gray (10YR5/1) clay, common fine distinct strong brown (7.5YR5/8) mottles;
moderate, medium, angular blocky structure; very firm; very hard when dry,
very sticky and very plastic when moist; noneffervescent; clear wavy
boundary.

A2

12-50 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) silty clay: common fine distinct. strong brown (7 /5YR5/8)
mottles: moderate. coarse. angular blocky structure: very firm: very hard when
dry, very sticky and very plastic when moist: intersecting slickensides: shiny
pressure faces on peds: few fine ferromanganese concretions; noneffervescent:
clear wavy boundary.

Bw1

50-132 cm
Dark gray (10YR4/1) clay; common medium and coarse distinct olive brown
B-10

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS

(2.5Y4/4) mottles: moderate. coarse. angular blocky structure: very firm: very
hard when dry, very sticky and very plastic when moist: shiny pressure faces
on peds: intersecting slickensides: pale brown (10YR6/3) silt and fine sand
grains on walls of desiccation cracks: few fine ferromanganese concretions:
noneffervescent: gradual wavy boundary.

Table B.8

Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 8

Elevation:

Approximately 140 ft (42.7 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Bruno variant

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Colluvial apron on the surface of the Modern Floodplain (T-0)

Parent Material:
Slope:

Sandy. mixed. thermic Typic Udifluvent

Colluvium and alluvium

1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine. hickory. gum
Rolfe Mandel

There are lithological discontinuities at depths of 112 and 224 centimeters
below the surface. The clayey material of the 2Bg1 horizon is typical of the
Holocene flood-drapes (see Tuscumbia soil). The loamy sand of the 3Bg2
horizon is typical of the Deweyville Terrace (see Albany soil).

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-8 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) loamy fine sand: single grained; loose: few tree roots;
noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

C1

8-43 cm
Light yellowish-brown (10YR6/4) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose; few
fine. medium and coarse rounded pebbles: few tree roots: noneffervescent:
clear smooth boundary.

C2

43-112 cm
Very pale brown (10YR7 /4) loamy fine sand: single grained; loose: few fine
and medium rounded siliceous pebbles: few tree roots: noneffervescent: abrupt
smooth boundary.

B-11

APPENDIX 8

2Bg1

112-224 cm
Gray (10YR5/1) clay: few fine distinct yellowish-brown (10VR5/1) and strong
brown (7.5VR4/6) mottles; moderate, coarse, blocky structure; very firm; very
hard when dry, very sticky and very plastic when moist; cracks and root
channels filled with sandy material like that of overlying horizons;
noneffervescent; abrupt smooth boundary.

3Bg2

224-305 cm
Light brownish-gray (2.5VR6/2) sandy clay loam; many fine and medium
yellowish-brown (7.5VR4/6) mottles; moderate. medium. subangular blocky
structure: friable; noneffervescent.

Table B.9
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 9

Elevation:

Approximately 180 ft (54.8 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Blanton

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Upland knoll; High Terrace

Parent Material:
Slope:

Loamy. siliceous. thermic Grossarenic Paleudult

Eolian sands

1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Timber recently cleared; secondary growth of sweetgum
Rolfe Mandel

The thick deposit of eolian sands contains a few rounded siliceous pebbles
that are probably colluvial in origin.

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-10 cm
Grayish-brown (10VR5/2) fine sand: single grained; loose; many tree roots:
noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

E1

10-51 cm
Light yellowish-brown (10VR6/4) fine sand: single grained; loose; many tree
roots: noneffervescent: gradual smooth boundary.

E2

51-78 cm
Pale brown (10VR6/3) fine sand; single grained; loose; few fine and medium

B-12

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS

rounded siliceous pebbles: many tree roots: noneffervescent: gradual smooth
boundary.
E3

78-153 cm
Pale brown (10YR6/3) fine sand; common medium distinct yellowish-brown
(10YR5/4) mottles; single grained: loose; few fine and medium rounded
siliceous pebbles: few fine ironstone concretions: noneffervescent: gradual
smooth boundary.

E4

153-210 cm
Pale brown (10YR6/3) fine sand: few discontinuous strong brown (7.5YR5/8)
loamy fine sand lamallae about 1 cm thick: single grained: loose:
noneffervescent.

Table B.10
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 10

Elevation:

Approximately 185 ft (56.3 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Wicksburg

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Upland convex slopes: High Terrace

Parent Material:
Slope:

Clayey. kaolinitic. thermic Arenic Paleudult

Alluvium and colluvium

1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Lob lolly pine forest (controlled stand)
Rolfe Mandel

Round siliceous pebbles occur throughout the E horizon.
lithological discontinuity at a depth of 117 cm.

There is a

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS
A

0-13 cm
Grayish-brown (10YR5/2) loamy fine sand: weak. fine. granular structure:
very friable: many tree roots: noneffervescent; abrupt wavy boundary.

E1

13-64 cm
Very pale brown (10YR7 /3) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose: few fine
and medium siliceous pebbles; noneffervescent: gradual smooth boundary.

B-13

APPENDIX B

E2

64-117 cm
Very pale brown (10YR7 /4) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose: few fine
rounded siliceous pebbles: noneffervescent: abrupt wavy boundary.

2Bt1

117-128 cm
Yellowish-brown (10YR5/6) sandy clay loam; many medium faint. brownishyellow (10YR6/6) mottles; moderate. medium, subangular blocky structure;
firm; few patchy clay films on faces of peds; noneffervescent; clear wavy
boundary.

2Bt2

128-179 cm
Mottled light gray (10YR7 /1-6/1). dark red (2.5YR3/6). and yellowish-brown
(10YR5/8) clay: moderate. medium. subangular blocky structure: very firm:
few patchy clay films on faces of peds: few fine and medium rounded
siliceous pebbles; noneffervescent: gradual wavy boundary.

2Bt3

179-241 cm
Mottled light gray (10YR7 /1-6/1). dark red (2.5YR3/6). and yellowish-brown
(10YR5/8) sandy clay; moderate. medium. subangular blocky structure; very
firm; few patchy clay films on faces of peds; few fine and medium rounded
siliceous pebbles: noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

2BC

241-254 cm
Mottled red (10R4/8). yellow-brown (10YR5/8). light gray (2.5YR6/2) sandy
clay loam: weak. fine. medium. subangular blocky structure: very firm:
noneffervescent; gradual smooth boundary.

2C

254-325 cm
Mottled red (10R4/8). yellowish-brown (10VR5/8). and light gray (2.5VR7 /2)
sand; massive; Willis gravel comprises 50% of the mass; noneffervescent.

Table B.11
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 11

Elevation:

Approximately 140 ft (42.7 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Bruno

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Natural levee on the surface of the Modern Floodplain (T-0)

Parent Material:
Slope:

Sandy. mixed. thermic Typic Udifluvent

Alluvium

<1%

B-14

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS

Vegetation:

Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine. hickory. gum

Described by:

Rolfe Mandel

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-10 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose: noneffervescent:
clear smooth boundary.

Ct

10-15 cm
Light yellowish-brown (10YR6/4) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose:
contains thin strata of very fine sand: few tree roots: noneffervescent: abrupt
wavy boundary.

C2

51-122 cm
Very pale brown (10YR7 /4) fine sand: single grained: loose: few tree roots:
contains thin strata of very fine sand: noneffervescent: abrupt wavy boundary.

C3

122-205 cm
Pale brown (19YR6/3) fine sand: common medium distinct yellowish-brown
(10YR5/6) mottles: contains thin strata of very fine sand: few tree roots:
noneffervescent.

Table B.12

Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 12

Elevation:

Approximately 190 ft (57.9 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Fuquay

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Upland convex slope: High Terrace

Parent Material:
Slope:

Loamy, siliceous, thermic Arenic Plinthic Paleudult

Alluvium and colluvium

1%
Loblolly pine forest (controlled stand)

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Rolfe Mandel

There is a lithological discontinuity at a depth of 46 cm.

8-15

-

------

-~------

-- - -

------

---------

---------------

APPENDIX B
HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-12 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) loamy fine sand: weak. fine. granular structure: very
friable: many tree roots: noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

E

12-46 cm
Very pale brown (10YR7 /4) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose: many tree
roots: few fine ironstone concretions: noneffervescent: abrupt wavy boundary.

2Bt

46-83 cm
Yellowish-brown (10YR5/8) sandy clay loam; moderate, medium. subangular
blocky structure: friable: patchy clay films on faces of peds; common fine
ironstone concretions: noneffervescent: clear wavy boundary.

2Btc

83-122 cm
Yellowish-brown (10YR5/8) sandy clay loam: common medium and coarse
distinct dark red (2.5YR3/6) mottles: moderate. medium. subangular blocky
structure: friable: few hard strong brown (7.5YR5/8) nodules of ironstone
about 1 cm in diameter: few fine ironstone concretions: patchy clay films on
faces of peds; few tree roots; noneffervescent: clear wavy boundary.

2Btv1

122-173 cm
Yellowish-brown (10YR5/8) sandy clay loam: coatings and streaks of light
grayish-brown (10YR6/2) sandy clay: few linear streaks of yellowish-red
(5YR5/8) and dark red (10YR3/6) sandy loam: moderate, medium,
subangular blocky structure: friable: common plinthite nodules. red and brown
zones of plinthite are very firm and brittle: common fine and medium pores:
few patchy clay films on faces of peds: noneffervescent: gradual smooth
boundary.

2Btv2

173-215 cm
Reticulately mottled yellowish-brown (10YR5/8). yellowish-red (5Y5/8) and
dark red (10R3/6) sandy clay loam and light grayish-brown (10YR6/2) sandy
clay: gray parts surrounded by yellowish-brown colors that grade into
yellowish-red and red colors: weak, medium, subangular blocky structure: firm;
common plinthite nodules: few fine pores; few faint clay films on faces of
peds: noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

2Btv3

215-236 cm
Reticulately mottled light gray (10VR6/1). strong brown (7.5YR4/6). and
reddish-yellow (7.5YR6/8) sandy clay loam: small pockets of white
(10YR8/2) silt; weak, coarse, subangular blocky structure: firm: common
distinct clay films on faces of peds in light gray areas: common plinthite
nodules: few fine pores: noneffervescent; gradual smooth boundary.

B-16

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS
2C

236-312 cm
Light gray (10YR6/1) fine sand; many medium and coarse distinct red
(2.5YR4/8) and light red (10R6/8) mottles; massive: firm: noneffervescent.

Table B.13
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 13

Elevation:

Approximately 140 ft (42.7 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Tuscumbia

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Floodplain (T-0)

Parent Material:
Slope:

Fine. mixed, nonacid, thermic family of Vertie Haplaquepts

Alluvium

<1%

Vegetation:
Described by:

Bottomland hardwood forest with palmetto understory
Rolfe Mandel

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS
A

0-13 cm
Very dark gray (10YR3/1) clay: moderate. coarse, blocky structure: very firm;
very hard when dry, very sticky and very plastic when moist: many tree
roots: noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

Bg1

13-43 cm
Gray (10YR5/1) clay: few fine distinct strong brown (7.5YR4/6) mottles:
moderate. coarse, blocky structure: very firm: very hard when dry, very sticky
and very plastic when moist: many tree roots; noneffervescent: gradual
smooth boundary.

Bg2

43-71 cm
Dark gray (10YR4/1) clay: few fine distinct strong brown (7.5YR4/6)
mottles: moderate, coarse, blocky structure: very firm: very hard when dry.
very sticky and very plastic when moist: few slickensides that do not
intersect: few fine ferromanganese concretions: noneffervescent: clear smooth
boundary.

Bg3

71-132 cm
Very dark gray (10YR3/1) clay: common fine distinct strong brown
(7.5YR4/6) mottles: moderate, coarse, angular blocky structure: very firm:

B-17

APPENDIX B

very hard when dry. very sticky and very plastic when moist: few slickensides
that do not intersect: few fine ferromanganese concretions: noneffervescent:
clear smooth boundary.
Cg

132-140 cm
Grayish-brown (2.5YR5/2) clay: common fine distinct light olive brown
(2.5YR5/6) mottles: massive; very firm; very hard when dry, very sticky and
very plastic when moist; few fine ferromanganese concretions: noneffervescent.

Table B.14
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 15

Elevation:

Approximately 190 ft (57.9 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Wicksburg

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Upland convex slopes: High Terrace

Parent Material:
Slope:

Clayey, kaolinitic. thermic Arenic Paleudult

Alluvium and colluvium

1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Loblolly pine forest (controlled stand)
Rolfe Mandel

Rounded siliceous pebbles occur throughout the E horizon.
lithological discontinuity at a depth of 69 cm.

There rs a

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-12 cm
Grayish-brown (10YR5/2) loamy fine sand: weak. very fine granular structure:
very friable: many tree roots: noneffervescent: abrupt wavy boundary.

E1

12-41 cm
Pale brown (10YR6/3) loamy fine sand; single grained: loose: few fine
rounded siliceous pebbles; noneffervescent: gradual smooth boundary.

E2

41-69 cm
Very pale brown (10YR7 /3-8/3) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose: many
fine and medium rounded siliceous pebbles: few fine ironstone concretions:
noneffervescent: abrupt wavy boundary.

B-18

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS

2Bt1

69-79 cm
Yellowish-brown (10YR5/6) sandy clay: many medium faint brownish-yellow
(10YR6/6) mottles: few faint and medium distinct dark red (2.5YR3/6)
mottles: moderate. medium. subangular blocky structure: firm: few patchy clay
films on faces of peds: noneffervescent: clear wavy boundary.

2Bt2

79-114 cm
Mottled light gray (10YR7 /1-6/1). dark red (2.5YR3/6). and yellowish-brown
(10YR5/8) clay: moderate. medium subangular blocky structure: firm: few
patchy clay films on faces of peds: few fine and medium rounded siliceous
pebbles: noneffervescent: gradual wavy boundary.

2Bt3

114-165 cm
Mottled light gray (10YR7 /1-6/1). dark red (2.5YR3/6). and yellowish-brown
(1010YR5/8) sandy clay: moderate. medium. subangular blocky structure:
firm: few patchy clay films on faces of peds: few fine and medium. rounded
siliceous pebbles: noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

2BC

165-216 cm
Mottled red (10R4/8). yellowish-brown (10YR5/8). and light gray (2.5YR7 /2)
sandy clay loam: moderate, medium, subangular blocky structure: firm: few
fine. rounded siliceous pebbles: few patchy clay films on faces of peds:
non effervescent.

Table B.15
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 16

Elevation:

Approximately 150 ft (45. 7 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Albany

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Low Terrace (T-1)

Parent Material:
Slope:

Loamy, siliceous thermic Grossarenic Paleudult

Alluvium

<1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine. hickory. gum
Rolfe Mandel

The Grossarenic feature is the sandy zone from the surface to a depth of
190 cm. There is a lithological discontinuity at a depth of 190 cm.

B-19

---------

--------

APPENDIX 8
HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-13 cm
Dark grayish-brown (10YR4/2) fine sand: single grained: loose: many tree
roots: noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

E1

13-64 cm
Pale brown (10YR6/3) loamy fine sand: single grained; loose: common tree
roots: noneffervescent; gradual smooth boundary.

E2

64-190 cm
Pale brown (10YR6/3) loamy fine sand: single grained; loose: common thin
(2-4 cm thick) light brown (7.5VR6/4) lamallae; few fine ferromanganese
concretions: noneffervescent: abrupt smooth boundary.

2Bt

190-260 cm
Grayish-brown (10VR5/2) sandy loam: many medium and coarse distinct gray
(10VR6/1). dark red (2.5VR3/6). and red (2.5YR4/8) mottles. fine distinct
yellowish-red (5YR5/8) mottles: weak. medium. subangular blocky structure:
friable: clay bridging between some sand grains: clay coatings on some sand
grains: few fine ferromanganese concretions: noneffervescent.

Table B.16
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 17

Elevation:

Approximately 150 ft (45.7 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Albany variant

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Low Terrace (T-1)

Parent Material:
Slope:

Loamy, siliceous. thermic Grossarenic Paleudult

Alluvium

<1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine. hickory. gum
Rolfe Mandel

The upper 25 cm of the profile appears to be a clayey overbank deposit
typical of Tuscumbia soils. The Grossarenic feature is the sandy zone from
25 to 64 cm below the land surface. There is a lithological discontinuity at a
depth of 64 cm.

B-20

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-25 cm
Very dark grayish-brown (10YR3/2) clay: moderate. coarse, angular blocky
structure: very firm: very hard when dry. very sticky and very plastic when
moist: common pale brown (10YR6/3) fine sand grains on ped surfaces:
noneffervescent: abrupt smooth boundary.

2E1

25-42 cm
Pale brown (10YR6/3) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose: noneffervescent:
gradual smooth boundary.

3Bt1

42-64 cm
Pale brown (10YR6/3) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose: few faint
yellowish-brown (10YR5/6) mottles: few tree roots: noneffervescent: abrupt
smooth boundary.

3Bt1

64-86 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) fine sandy loam: many medium distinct yellowish-brown
(10YR5/6) mottles and a few faint strong brown (7.5YR4/6) mottles: weak.
medium. subangular blocky structure: slightly hard: friable: clay bridges
between some sand grains; few fine ferromanganese concretions;
noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

3Bt2

86-114 cm
Mottled gray (10YR6/1). strong brown (7.5YR5/8) and dark red (10R3/6)
fine sandy loam: weak. medium. subangular blocky structure: slightly hard:
friable: some of the red mottles are slightly brittle: clay bridges between
some sand grains: clay coatings on some sand grains: few fine
ferromanganese concretions: noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

3Btg

114-170 cm
Gray (5Y6/1) sandy clay loam; many medium and coarse distinct strong
brown (7.5YR5/8) and dark red (10YR3/6) mottles; moderate, medium,
subangular blocky structure: firm: common hard masses; clay bridges between
some sand grains: clay coatings on some sand grains: noneffervescent.

Table B.17
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 18

Elevation:

Approximately 160 ft (48.7 m) MSL

Soil Series: Boy
Taxonomic Class:

Loamy, siliceous, thermic Grossarenic Plinthite Paleudult

B-21

APPENDIX B
Landscape:
Slope:

Upland convex slope: High Terrace

2%

Vegetation: Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine. hickory. gum
Described by:

Rolfe Mandel

There is a lithological discontinuity at a depth of 147 cm.

Remarks:

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS
A

0-8 cm
Brown (10VR5/3) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose: many tree roots:
noneffervescent: clear smooth boundary.

E1

8-30 cm
light brownish-gray (10VR6/2) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose: many
tree roots: noneffervescent: clear wavy boundary.

E2

30-147 cm
Pale brown (10VR6/3) loamy fine sand: few medium and coarse faint
yellowish-brown (10YR5/4-5/6) mottles: single grained: slightly brittle: friable:
few fine and medium rounded siliceous pebbles: few tree roots:
noneffervescent: abrupt smooth boundary.

2Btv

147-205 cm
Light brownish-gray (10VR6/2) sandy clay loam: many medium faint
brownish-yellow (10YR6/) mottles and come fine distinct yellowish-brown
(10VR5/8) mottles: weak. subangular, blocky structure: friable. common
plinthite nodules; yellowish-brown zones of plinthite are very firm and brittle:
patchy clay films on faces of peds: few clay bridges between sand grains:
common fine soft ferromanganese concretions: few fine pores: noneffervescent.

Table B.18
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 19

Elevation:

Approximately 160 ft (48.7 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Fuquay

Taxonomic Class:
landscape:

loamy, siliceous. thermic Arenic Plinthite Paleudult

Upland convex slope: High Terrace

Parent Material:

Alluvium and colluvium

B-22

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS
Slope:

1%

Vegetation:

Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine. hickory, gum

Described by:
Remarks:

Rolfe Mandel

There is a lithological discontinuity at a depth of 41 cm below the surface.

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS
A

0-10 cm
Brown (10VR5/3) loamy fine sand: weak. very fine granular structure: very
friable; many tree roots; noneffervescent; clear smooth boundary.

E

10-41 cm
Very pale brown (10VR7 /3) loamy fine sand; single grained; loose; few tree
roots; noneffervescent; abrupt smooth boundary.

2Bt

41-52 cm
Yellowish-brown (10VR5/4) sandy clay loam; many coarse distinct yellowishbrown (10VR5/6) mottles and few fine distinct strong brown (7.5VR5/8)
mottles; moderate. medium. subangular blocky structure; friable; patchy clay
films on faces of peds; noneffervescent: clear wavy boundary.

2Btc

52-116 cm
Yellowish-brown (10VR5/6) silty clay; common medium and coarse distinct
brown (10YR5/3) and red (10R4/8) mottles; moderate. medium. subangular
blocky structure; friable; hard strong brown (7.5VR5/8) nodules of ironstone
about 1-2 cm in diameter: few fine ironstone concretions: some of the red
material is slightly brittle; few patchy clay films on faces of peds;
noneffervescent: clear wavy boundary.

2Btv

116-152 cm
Yellowish-brown (10YR5/6) sandy clay loam; common medium and coarse
distinct brown (10YR5/3) and red (10R4/8) mottles; moderate, medium.
subangular blocky structure: friable; common plinthite nodules, red and brown
zones of plinthite are very firm and brittle; common fine and medium pores;
few patchy films on the faces of the peds; noneffervescent.

Table B.19
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 23

Elevation:

Approximately 155 ft (47.2 m) MSL

Soil Series: Albany

B-23

APPENDIX 8

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Low Terrace (T-1)

Parent Material:
Slope:

Loamy, siliceous. thermic Grossarenic Paleudult

Alluvium

<1%
Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine. hickory, gum

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Rolfe Mandel

The Grossarenic feature is the sandy zone from the surface to a depth of
130 cm. There is a lithological discontinuity at a depth of 130 cm.

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-13 cm
Dark grayish-brown (10YR5/2) loamy fine sand: weak. very fine. granular
structure: very friable: many tree roots; clear wavy smooth boundary.

El

13-79 cm
Pale brown (10YR6/3) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose; few tree roots;
noneffervescent: gradual smooth boundary.

E2

79-130 cm
Very pale brown (10YR7 /3) loamy fine sand: single grained: loose: few tree
roots; few brown (10YR5/3) lamallae about 1-3 cm thick: few very fine
ferromanganese concretions; noneffervescent; abrupt smooth boundary.

2Bt1

130-177 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) fine sandy loam: fine and medium distinct strong brown
(7.5VR5/8) mottles: weak. medium. subangular blocky structure: friable: clay
bridging between some sand grains; clay coatings on some sand grains:
noneffervescent: gradual smooth boundary.

2Bt2

177-215 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) fine sandy loam: common medium and coarse distinct red
(2.5YR4/8) mottles and common fine and medium light brownish-gray
(10YR6/2) mottles: weak. medium. subangular blocky structure: slightly hard:
friable: noneffervescent.

Table B.20
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 24

Elevation:

Approximately 153 ft (46.6 m) MSL
B-24

SOIL DESCRIPTIONS

Soil Series:

Albany

Taxonomic Class:
Landscape:

Low Terrace (T-1)

Parent Material:
Slope:

Loamy, siliceous, thermic Grossarenic Paleudult

Alluvium

<1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Mixed forest of loblolly and shortleaf pine. hickory. gum
Rolfe Mandel

The Grossarenic feature is the sandy zone from the surface to a depth of
80 cm. There is a lithological discontinuity at a depth of 80 cm.

HORIZON DESCRIPTIONS

A

0-12 cm
Dark grayish-brown (10YR5/2) loamy fine sand: weak. very fine granular
structure: very friable: many tree roots; clear smooth boundary.

E1

12-61 cm
Pale brown (10YR6/3) loamy fine sand: single grained; loose: few tree roots:
noneffervescent: gradual smooth boundary.

E2

61-80 cm
Very pale brown (10YR7 /3) loamy fine sand; single grained; loose: few brown
(10YR5/3) and yellowish-brown (10YR5/6) lamallae about 1-4 cm thick; few
very fine ferromanganese concretions: noneffervescent: abrupt smooth
boundary.

2Bt1

80-96 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) fine sandy loam: common fine and medium distinct strong
brown (7.5YR5/8) mottles; weak, medium, subangular blocky structure:
slightly hard; friable: clay bridges between some sand grains, clay coatings on
some sand grains; noneffervescent: gradual smooth boundary.

2Bt2

96-157 cm
Brown (10YR5/3) fine sandy loam; common medium and coarse distinct red
(2.5YR4/8) mottles and common fine and medium light brownish-gray
(10YR6/2) mottles; weak, medium, subangular blocky structure; slightly hard;
friable: noneffervescent.

B-25

APPENDIX 8

Table B.21
Exposure:

Backhoe Trench 25

Elevation:

Approximately 150 ft (45.7 m) MSL

Soil Series:

Tuscumbia

T&fxonomic Class:

•

Landscape:

Floodplain (T-0)

Parent Material:
Slope:

Fine. mixed. nonacid. thermic family of Vertie Haplaquepts

Alluvium

<1%

Vegetation:
Described by:
Remarks:

Bottomland hardwood forest with palmetto understory
Rolfe Mandel

The upper 142 cm of the profile appears to a clayey overbank deposit
typical of Tuscumbia soils. The fine sandy loam below a depth of 142 cm
resembles Deweyville material.

HORIZON DESCRIPTION

A

0-15 cm
Very dark gray (10VR3/1) clay: moderate. coarse. angular blocky structure:
very firm: very hard when dry. very sticky and very plastic when moist:
many tree roots: noneffervescent: clear wavy boundary.

Bg1

15-142 cm
Very dark grayish-brown (10YR3/2) clay: moderate. coarse. angular blocky
structure: very firm: very hard when dry. very sticky and very plastic when
moist: many tree roots: noneffervescent: abrupt smooth boundary.

2Bg2

142-210 cm
Brown (10VR5/3) fine sandy loam: many medium distinct yellowish-brown
(10VR5/6) mottles and a few fine faint light olive brown (2.5VR5/6) and
yellowish-brown (10VR5/6) mottles: weak, medium, subangular blocky
structure: slightly hard: friable: clay bridges between some sand grains: clay
coatings on some sand grains: few fine ferromanganese concretions:
noneffervescent.

B-26

APPENDIX C: SITE DESCRIPTIONS
Leland C. Bement
This appendix provides narrative descriptions of the 46 prehistoric sites recorded
in the Lake Creek survey. Historic components at 41MQ104. 41MQ110. 41MQ111 and
41MQ117 are subsumed under their respective prehistoric site description. Only the
abandoned sawmill site at 41MQ104 meets the 50 year age criteria for historic site
designation and only a collapsed hand dug well remains to mark the early historic use
of the location.
Because the Lake Creek area has attracted few relic hunters. only two of the 46
sites were either known to local landowners or were disturbed by digging for artifacts.
In order to preserve these sites until they can be scientifically investigated. exact site
locations or information that might lead to their vandalism has been omitted from the
site descriptions.
General site environments are provided in the context of the
topographic setting typology described in the body of this report. For convenience in
reference. the seven-part division of the landscape is repeated here.

Upland valley margin minimally of Pleistocene age
Late Pleistocene/Early Holocene terraces
above modern floodplain
Setting III: Modern floodplain
Setting IV: Isolated mounds on modern floodplain
Setting V:
Modern floodplain bisected by perennial streams
providing sandy overbank terraces
Setting VI: Late Pleistocene/Early Holocene terraces bisected
by perennial streams providing overbank deposits
Setting VII: Upland valley margin bisected by perennial
streams providing overbank deposits
Setting I:
Setting II:

Specific assessments are offered with the understanding that enlargement of the
sample by future survey may well result in a reordering of site priority.

41MQ75
This site lies in Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek. A small seep sprmg
contributes to an ofd creek channel in the floodplain below the site.
Dominant
vegetation is mixed pine/hardwood forest. Soils consist of loose sand over sandy clay
with the depth of the sand ranging from 60 centimeters to over 1.1 meters. One of
the four shovel probes produced cultural material to a depth of 1 meter within the
loose sand.
Cultural material recovered includes secondary and tertiary chert and
quartzite flakes. one parallel-sided stem of a dart point - possibly a Kent. one sandtempered sherd, two grog-tempered sherds and burned clay lumps. The site size is
estimated at 1600 square meters. Artifact density averages 6.5 artifacts/20 centimeter
level with a maximum of 8 artifacts/level.

APPENDIX C
This site has the potential to contribute information about dart point/ceramic
associations. and possibly the geomorphic history of this topographic setting along a
major perennial tributary to Lake Creek.

41MQ76
This site lies in Setting VI alongside perennial Mound Creek.
Dominant
vegetation consists of pine and hardwood forest. Soils are loose sand overlying sandy
clay. The loose sand ranges in depth from 60 centimeters to a little over 1 meter.
Four shovel probes recovered cultural material to a depth of 80 centimeters below the
surface with most occurring in the 40 - 60 centimeter level. Artifact materials include
one Gary dart point. one sand tempered rim sherd. one bipolar cobble. chert debitage,
burned rock shatter and burned nut hulls. The average density of cultural material
recovered in the shovel probes is .9 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum of 4
artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. Site size is estimated to be 9375 square meters.
This site may contain data on the association of dart points and ceramics in this
region.
The burned nut hulls indicate that some charred material is available for
radiocarbon dating. The sandy matrix of the site. however. is susceptible to mixing so
that any information obtained could be very general.

41MQ77
This site is located on Setting I - an isolated upland hill overlooking the Mound
Creek drainage. Vegetation consists of pine/hardwood forest overstory. Recent logging
activity has allowed fairly dense understory of yaupon and vines to intrude. Loose
sand, ranging from 40 to 100 centimeters thick, overlies orange sandy clay.
Eight
shovel probes produced cultural material to a maximum depth of 80 to 100 centimeters,
with most occurring at the 40 - 60 centimeter level. Cultural material includes chert.
petrified wood and quartzite debitage, burned flakes. and one burned chert cobble. The
average density of cultural material is 1.4 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum
of 8 artifacts/20 centimeter level. The site size is estimated at 5000 square meters.
based on the positive correlation of cultural materials and shovel probes.
One shovel probe within the site proper produced one large chunk of charcoal in
Level 5 (80-100 cm bs). This material was collected in aluminum foil and submitted
to Beta Analytics. Inc. for radiocarbon assay. The assay rendered a modern age for
this sample (Beta 17595), suggesting substantial historic modification of the site. The
charcoal may result from tree fall or stump burning. The limited exposure provided by
the shovel probe is insufficient to detect pit sides or other evidence of the nature of
disturbance. Prior to the results of the radiocarbon assay, this site was assessed as
relevant to identifying geomorphologic processes and perhaps rates of this process.
However. the radiocarbon date raises doubts about the integrity of the site's deposits
and the value of further testing.

C-2

--------------~-----

----

---·~------------

-

--

·-

-----~----

--------------

-------

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

41MQ78
This site is located on Setting VI along the east bank of perennial Mound Creek.
Vegetation consists of dense overstory of pine and hardwoods. allowing little sunlight
for understory growth.
Soils are loose sand at least 1 meter deep overlying sandy
clay. Three shovel probes excavated to a depth of 1 meter produced a light scatter of
lithic debitage in the 40 to 80 centimeter range. An average density of .8 artifacts/20
centimeter level was observed in these probes with a maximum density of 3
artifacts/20 centimeter level recovered from level 4(60-80 cm bs) of one probe. Site
size is estimated at 3750 square meters based on the areal extent of shovel probes.
Due to the scant cultural material. this site is not viewed as productive of data
beyond that gained by survey. No further work is recommended at this time.

41MQ79
This site is located on Setting VI along the east bank of perennial Mound Creek.
A dense overstory of pine. oak and sweetgum limits the understory growth to grasses
and occasional ya upon.
Soils are sand over 1 meter deep underlain by sandy clay.
Cultural material. consisting of chert and silicified wood debitage and burned rock
shatter. is distributed from 20 to 100 centimeters below the surface. Artifact density
from the four shovel probes is .9 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum of 3
artifacts in one 20 centimeter level.
Site size is estimated at 6375 square meters
based on the horizontal extent of cultural material recovered from shovel probes.
The shovel probe recovery suggests that this site does not have the potential to
supply unique or quantitatively significant data.
No further work on 41MQ79 is
recommended at this time.

41MQ80
This site lies in Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek. Vegetation in the site
vicinity includes an overstory of pine. oak and sweetgum with a limited understory of
yaupon. greenbriar and grasses. The soils consist of an upper loose sand zone of 1
meter minimum depth and. presumably. a lower zone of sandy clay beyond the reach of
the shovel probes. Cultural material. limited to secondary and tertiary flakes of chert
and silicified wood and charcoal flecks. was recovered from all levels of the upper zone
to the 1 meter depth of the three shovel probes. The density of artifacts averages 1.8
artifacts /20 centimeter level with a maximum density of 5 artifacts /20 centimeter level.
Estimated site size. based on the horizontal extent of productive shovel probes. is 750
square meters.
Because of the narrow spectrum of artifact classes recovered. 41 MQ80 does not
appear to contain the quality or quantity of cultural deposits required to produce
significant data. No further work is recommended at this time.

C-3

- - -

----------

---

-

APPENDIX C

41MQ81
This site lies in Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek. An overstory of pine.
oak and sweetgum has been recently logged. allowing the expanded growth of an
understory including yaupon, greenbriar and grasses. The soils consist of loose sands
to a depth of 1 meter overlying a thin marble-sized gravel layer and sandy clay. Four
shovel probes produced cultural material in the loose sand deposits.
The artifact
density averages .8 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum recovery of 4 artifacts
in one 20 centimeter level. Recovered cultural material includes secondary and tertiary
flakes of chert. quartzite and silicified wood along with burned quartzite shatter and a
few charcoal flecks. The site size is estimated at 3600 square meters based on the
horizontal placement of the shovel probes.
The sparseness and character of the cultural material recovered suggests that
41MQ81 does not contain unique data. No additional work is recommended at this
time.

41MQ82
This site is located on Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek.
Overstory
vegetation includes pine. oak. sweetgum and elm with an understory of yaupon.
greenbriar and grasses. Sands a meter in depth overlie sandy clay. Six shovel probes
produced cultural material at all levels within the sandy zone.
Cultural materials
include primary. secondary and tertiary flakes of chert. quartzite and silicified wood,
burned shatter. a burned cobble and one sand-tempered body sherd. The density of
cultural material recovered from shovel probes averages 1.9 artifacts/20 centimeter level
with a maximum recovery of 8 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. The site size is
estimated at 2000 square meters on the basis of the horizontal extent of artifact
producing shovel probes.
From the sample of artifacts recovered. one occupation
the Ceramic Period. Other time periods may be represented
artifact is a pottery sherd.
This site does not appear
quantitatively significant cultural deposits. No additional work
time.

of 41 MQ82 was during
but the sole diagnostic
to contain unique or
is recommended at this

41MQ83
This site lies in Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek. Dominant vegetation
includes an overstory of pine. oak. sweetgum and elm and an open understory of
yaupon .. green briar and grasses. Soils consist of a loose sand upper zone varying in
depth from 60 centimeters to 1 meter. over clay mottled compact sand changing to a
sandy clay. Six shovel probes recovered cultural material within the upper zone sands.
The cultural materials include chert secondary and tertiary flakes, burned shatter, a
burned pebble and one arrow point tip.
The artifact density within the -six probes

C-4

---

-----~---~-------

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
averages .5 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum of 3 artifacts in one 20
centimeter level.
The site size is estimated at 5000 square meters based on the
horizontal extent of shovel probes producing cultural material.
The recovery of the arrow point tip suggests that 41MQ83 was occupied
during the Late Prehistoric Period. probably the Late Ceramic Period.
Other
occupations cannot be identified at this time.
Because of the sparse artifact
this site does not appear to contain significant amounts of data. No further
recommended at this time.

at least
possible
density.
work is

41MQ84
This site is located on Setting I in the upland zone at the edge of the Mound
Creek basin. Vegetation in the site vicinity is dominated by an overstory of pine. oak
and sweetgum with a sparse understory of yaupon. vines and grasses.
The soils
consist of loose sands to a minimum depth of 1 meter. Presumably the sands overlie a
sandy clay. but the latter was never reached in the shovel probes. Cultural materials
including chert secondary and tertiary flakes and burned shatter were recovered from
two shovel probes.
Two additional probes in the area did not produce cultural
material. The artifact density for the two productive probes averages .9 artifacts/20
centimeter level with a maximum recovery of 4 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level.
Based on the horizontal placement of the two productive probes and the limits provided
by the culturally sterile probes. site size is estimated at 1200 square meters.
Due to the uncommon topographic setting of this site and its potential to provide
data on valley margin exploitation and geomorphological processes. 41MQ84 is
recommended for limited testing.

41MQ85
This site lies in Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek.
The vegetation
consists of a dominant overstory of oak. pine. sweetgum. elm and hickory with a
sparsely vegetated understory of yaupon. vines and grasses. Soils consist of sand to
1.3 meters in depth. presumably overlying sandy clay. This is indicated by a few clay
mottles seen 1.3 meters below the surface.
The six shovel probes produced cultural
material throughout the sand zone.
These were chert. quartzite and silicified wood
secondary and tertiary flakes. burned shatter. and very friable sandy paste ceramics
including one rim and two body sherds. An average artifact density of 2.1 artifacts/20
centimeter level with a maximum recovery of 7 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level was
produced by the six shovel probes. The horizontal placement of these probes indicates
a site size of approximately 7500 square meters.
The high density of artifacts suggests that a significant quantity of material of
possible early ceramic age is buried in the site deposits. Site 41MQ85 is recommended
for limited testing.

C-5

APPENDIX C

41MQ86
This site is located in Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek.
Vegetation in
the site vicinity consists of an overstory of pine, oak, sweetgum, elm and hickory, with
an understory of yaupon, vines and grasses. The soil. as indicated by three shovel
probes. consists of a minimum of 1 meter of sand probably overlying sandy clay.
Cultural material, including tertiary chert and silicified wood flakes, one ceramic body
sherd and a burned nut hull. was recovered from 20 to 100 centimeters below the
surface. The average density of this material is 1.1 artifacts/20 centimeter level with
a maximum recovery of 6 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level.
The site size 1s
estimated at 1000 square meters based on the areal placement of the shovel probes.
The sand-tempered sherd indicates that 41MQ86 was occupied at some point in
the Late Prehistoric Period.
Other occupations may have contributed to the site
deposits. however. no temporally diagnostic artifacts indicative of these were recovered.
This site is not recommended for further work at this time.

41MQ87
This site is located on Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek. Vegetation in
the site vicinity includes a sparse overstory of pine, oak and sweetgum with a well
developed understory of yaupon. vines and limited grasses. The soil consists of sand
to a minimum depth of 1.2 meters, probably overlying a sandy clay.
Eleven shovel
probes produced cultural material throughout the sand deposit. Lithic debitage, burned
lithic shatter, burned nut hulls, fired clay chunks, a hammerstone. a biface tip, three
sand-tempered sherds and three grog-tempered sherds. including one notched rim sherd.
were recovered from the shovel probes. The maximum artifact recovery was 9 artifacts
in one 20 centimeter level with the average recovery of 2.3 artifacts per 20 centimeter
level. The site size is estimated to be 11.250 square meters based on the horizontal
placement of positive shovel probes.
This site is the second largest found during the survey and contains a variety of
cultural materials indicative of manufacture and subsistence activities. The presence of
grog-tempered ceramics suggests that at least part of the cultural deposits were derived
from late Ceramic Period occupations. Extensive testing of this site is recommended
based on its potential for stratified deposits containing a quantity and variety of
artifactual and subsistence related materials.
The large site area holds hope for
elucidating intrasite patterning or areal distributions indicative of an aggregation site as
specified in the settlement pattern.

C-6

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

41MQ88
This site is located on Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek.
A sparse
overstory of pine. oak. sweetgum and hickory has allowed the establishment of a dense
understory dominated by yaupon. vines and grasses.
Soils consist of sand to a
minimum depth of 1 meter, probably overlying sandy clays.
Four shovel probes
recovered cultural material to the 1 meter vertical extent of each probe. The cultural
material consists of chert and silicified wood secondary and tertiary flakes. burned
shatter, a burned nut hull. one utilized flake. and a probable Gary dart point preform.
Density of the cultural material averages 1.2 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a
maximum recovery of 5 artifacts in a 20 centimeter level. The site size is estimated
at 900 square meters based on the horizontal extent of the shovel probes.
This site is not recommended for further work at this time because of the
sparsity and monotony of cultural materials recovered. The limited technological data
provided by the dart point preform is probably duplicated at other sites that can
provide a significantly larger sample.

41MQ89
This site lies in Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek. Vegetation in the site
vicinity includes an overstory of pine. oak. hickory and sweetgum with a dense
understory of yaupon. vines and. to a lesser degree. grasses. Soils consist of loose
sands to a minimal depth of 1 meter overlying a probable sandy clay. Three shovel
probes produced cultural material to a minimum depth of 1 meter. The depth of the
probes. restricted by shovel length. failed to plumb the full extent of the sand deposits
and their associated cultural debris. Cultural materials include secondary and tertiary
flakes. one biface tip and a burned nut hull. The average density of cultural material
recovered in the shovel probes is 1.1 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum
recovery of 4 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. The site size is estimated at 1600
square meters based on the areal extent of shovel probes producing cultural material.
The site deposits at 41 MQ89 do not appear to contain significant amounts of
cultural material. The site location at the edge of Mound Creek and the Lake Creek
floodplain is. however. unique. Therefore. 41MQ89 is recommended for limited testing
with an emphasis on collecting subsistence data.

41MQ90
This site is located on Setting VI along perennial Mound Creek.
A thinned
overstory of pine. oak and sweetgum has promoted the growth of a dense understory
of yaupon. greenbriar and grasses. The soil consists of loose sand to a depth of 1.2
meters. A sandy clay probably underlies the sand but shovel probing could not reach
the contact point. Seven shovel probes produced chert and silicified wood secondary
and tertiary flakes. burned shatter. one biface tip and six sand-tempered ceramic sherds.

C-7

---------~--

APPENDIX C

including one notched rim and one red "filmed" body sherd. The density of artifacts
recovered averages 3.1 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum of 14 artifacts in
one 20 centimeter level.
Lithic artifacts and ceramic material were concentrated
between 60 and 100 centimeters below the surface.
Site size is estimated at 8000
square meters based on the horizontal placement of shovel probes.
A short. intermittent drainage separates 41MQ90 from 41MQ87. The prox1m1ty
of the two suggests the possibility of coeval occupation. an observation pertinent to
determining seasonal subsistence and/or settlement patterning.
Testing of 41MQ90 is highly recommended and should focus on determining
intersite relationships with 41MQ87.
The depth of the material-bearing deposits and
the extent of the buried ceramics may indicate the re-use of this site during the Early
Ceramic period. a sequence that could be determined by testing and excavation.

41MQ91
This site lies in Setting VI along Fish Creek.
Vegetation includes a scattered
overstory dominated by pine and oak with a dense understory of yaupon, vines and
annuals (Beauty berry).
The soil consists of loose sand to a minimum depth of 1
meter. A sandy clay stratum beneath the sand is indicated by clay mottles in the 80
to 100 centimeter levels of the shovel probes. A total of seven shovel probes produced
cultural material in all levels of the 1 meter deep probes. Chert and silicified primary.
secondary and tertiary flakes. chips. burned shatter. and one sand-tempered body sherd
were recovered. Artifact density averages .8 artifacts/20 centimeters with a maximum
recovery of 4 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level.
Site size is estimated at 6500
square meters based on the horizontal extent of shovel probes producing cultural
material.
Site 41MQ91 does not appear to merit further work because of the limited
quantity of cultural debris scattered over a large area.
No further work is
recommended at this time.

41MQ92
This site 1s located on Setting VI along intermittent lower Fish Creek.
Vegetation consists of a sparse overstory of pine, oak and sweetgum with a
corresponding dense understory of yaupon. vines and grasses. Soil consists of sand to
a minimal depth of 1.2 meters.
None of the five shovel probes reached beyond the
sand into the probable sandy clay below. Primary. secondary and tertiary flakes and
chips of chert. silicified wood and quartzite. burned shatter. one utilized flake. one sandtempered undecorated rim sherd. and three grog-tempered sherds. including one
undecorated rim sherd. were distributed throughout the sandy deposits with
concentrations in the 40 to 80 centimeter levels. The site size is estimated at 1600
square meters. reflecting the areal distribution of shovel probes.

C-8

-------------------

--------------

--------------

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
The grog-tempered sherds suggest that at least part of the cultural debris
resulted from an occupation during the beginning of the Late Ceramic Period.
Site
41MQ92 may contain significant cultural material from that time. Limited testing may
be warranted if similar data is not obtained at other more profitable sites. No definite
recommendations can be made at this time.

41MQ93
This site lies in Setting VI along intermittent lower Fish Creek.
Vegetation in
the site vicinity includes pine. oak and sweetgum with a dense understory of yaupon
and vines.
Soil consists of loose sand to a depth of 50 centimeters. Below. to a
minimum depth of 70 centimeters. is compact sand with numerous concretions. Two
shovel probes produced cultural material in the loose sand layer. Two additional probes
were barren and encountered the compact sand and concretion zone within 20
centimeters of the surface. Cultural materials include a light scatter of secondary and
tertiary flakes and one sand-tempered rim sherd of Goose Creek Incised.
Artifact
density is very low. at an average of .9 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum
of 2 artifacts/20 centimeter level. Site size is estimated at 400 square meters based
on the horizontal location of the two positive probes and the two sterile probes.
Site 41MQ93 may represent a single component site used in the Late Prehistoric
as evidenced by the single sherd of Goose Creek Incised. The scant artifactual remains
and the shallowness of the deposits probably signify a low probability for intact
deposits. No further work is recommended for 41 MQ93 at this time.

41MQ94
This site 1s located on Setting VI along the intermittent portion of Fish Creek.
Vegetation in the site vicinity includes an open overstory of pine. oak. sweetgum. elm
and hickory with a dense understory of yaupon thickets. vines and grasses. Soils are
sandy loam and sand to a minimum depth of 1 meter. None of the four shovel probes
delved beyond 1 meter. Cultural material. including numerous chert and silicified wood
primary. secondary and tertiary flakes. one quartzite primary flake. chips, burned
shatter. two silicified wood core fragments and three sand-tempered undecorated body
sherds. were recovered from all levels of the probes.
Artifact density averages 4.4
artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum recovery of 9 artifacts in one 20
centimeter level.
The site size is estimated at 3600 square meters based on the
horizontal extent of artifact-producing shovel probes.
The sand-tempered sherds indicate that 41MQ94 was definitely occupied during
the Late Prehistoric and probably during earlier times as well. based on the thickness
of the artifact-bearing sands.
Site 41MQ94 is recommended for extensive testing
because of its potential for deep, stratified. Late Prehistoric and earlier occupation data.
It can also provide paleoenvironmental information concerning the intermittent nature of
Fish Creek. a spring-fed perennial that goes underground before reaching this stretch.

C-9

APPENDIX C
41MQ95
This site is on Setting VI along the intermittent segment of Fish Creek.
Vegetation in the site vicinity includes an open overstory of pine. oak. sweetgum and
elm with a dense understory of yaupon. vines and grasses.
Soils consist of loose
sands to a minimum depth of 1 meter. One shovel probe produced chert and quartzite
debitage and burned shatter from all levels.
Three additional probes were culturally
sterile. The average artifact density from the single probe is 3 artifacts/20 centimeter
level with a maximum of 7 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. Site size is estimated
at 400 square meters based on the relationship of the one positive probe to the three
sterile probes. Site 41MQ95 is not recommended for additional work because of the
limited distribution and nature of cultural material.

41MQ96
This site is located on Setting VI along the intermittent section of Fish Creek.
Vegetation consists of an open overstory of pine. oak. sweetgum. elm and hickory with
a corresponding dense understory of yaupon and vines. The soil consists of loose sand
to a minimum depth of 1 meter. Three shovel probes produced cultural material to a
depth of 60 centimeters with a single flake recovered at 80 to 100 centimeters.
Cultural material is limited to chert and silicified wood debitage and burned shatter at
an average density of .9 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum of 5 artifacts in
one 20 centimeter level.
Site size is estimated at 1200 square meters based on the
horizontal placement of the shovel probes.
Site 41MQ96 does not appear to contain unique or quantitatively significant data
pertammg to the prehistoric exploitation of the Lake Creek area.
No further work is
recommended for this site.

41MQ97
This site is located on Setting VI along the intermittent stretch of Fish Creek.
Vegetation in the site vicinity includes an overstory of pine. oak. sweetgum and hickory
with a dense understory of yaupon and vines. Soils consist of loose sand to a depth
of 1 meter with sandy clay mottles appearing at 1 to 1.2 meters. Five shovel probes
extending to a maximum depth of 1.2 meters recovered cultural material to 1 meter
below the surface.
Included are chert and silicified wood debitage. burned shatter. a
burned biface fragment. a burned nut hull. one Perdiz arrow point. one Alba arrow
point. and three sand-tempered sherds. including two rim sherds. Overall density of
artifacts averages 2.2 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum recovery of 14
artifacts in one 20 centimeter level.
Site size is estimated at 3200 square meters
based on the horizontal placement of positive shovel probes.

the

The presence of both Perdiz and Alba arrow points. along with ceramics, suggests
possibility that 41MQ97 may hold stratified deposits of Late Ceramic age.

C-10

----------

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
Quantitatively significant numbers of artifacts resulting from these occupations may be
present on the site if the artifact density is consistent.
Extensive testing of site
41MQ97 is recommended.

41MQ98
This site lies in Setting VI along the intermittent section of Fish Creek.
Vegetation in the site vicinity includes an overstory of pine. oak and sweetgum with a
dense understory of yaupon and vines.
Soils consist of loose sand to a depth of 1
meter with a few sandy clay mottles observed between 80 and 100 centimeters. Three
shovel probes produced cultural material to a depth of 1 meter. Included are secondary
and tertiary chert and quartzite flakes. chips. three sand-tempered ceramic sherds (one
with undecorated rim) and two burned nut hulls.
The average artifact density is 2.4
artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum recovery of 10 artifacts in one 20
centimeter level. Site area is estimated at 1600 square meters based on the horizontal
placement of the shovel probes.
Site 41MQ98 appears to contain the same kinds of material. although not the
variety. as 41MQ97.
Because of the proximity of these two sites. 41MQ98 is not
recommended for further work unless. after the testing of 41MQ97 is completed. this
site rises in comparative importance.

41MQ99
This site is located on Setting VII along lower Lake Creek. Vegetation consists
of an open overstory dominated by pine and oak with a dense understory of yaupon.
vines and grasses.
Soils include sands to a depth of 90 to 100 centimeters above
sandy clay.
Numerous pea and marble size gravels are contained in the sand. Five
shovel probes extended to a maximum depth of 1 meter.
Cultural material was
recovered predominantly from surface to 60 centimeters although a few flakes extended
to 100 centimeters below the surface. The cultural material includes primary. secondary
and tertiary flakes of chert. silicified wood and quartzite. and burned shatter. Artifact
density averages 1.2 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum recovery of 10
artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. Site size is approximated at 2400 square meters
based on the areal extent of productive shovel probes.
The upland location and the amount of deposition over the cultural material place
this site in a unique topographic setting.
The deposits may contain temporally
diagnostic artifacts or materials suitable for radiocarbon dating that could be of
geomorphic and paleoenvironmental importance.
This site is recommended for limited
testing.

C-11

APPENDIX C

41MQ100
This site 1s located on Setting I along the bluff line at the lower end of Lake
Creek Reservoir. Vegetation in the site vicinity includes an open overstory dominated
by pine. oak and sweetgum with a dense understory of yaupon and vines.
Soil
consists of loose sand to a depth of 15 centimeters overlying a dense gravel outcrop.
The gravel contains chert and quartzite pebbles up to 10x5x5 centimeters in size.
Tabular silicified wood is also present. One shovel probe produced cultural material to
a depth of 60 centimeters. Three other probes failed to produce evidence of aboriginal
exploitation of the gravels. Cultural material includes nine primary flakes. six secondary
flakes. four tertiary flakes. three chips. three tested cobbles and two unidirectional
cores.
Artifact density averages 9 artifacts /20 centimeter level with a maximum
recovery of 21 artifacts in the 20 to 40 centimeter level.
A total site area of 900
square meters is calculated from the extent of gravel-producing shovel probes even
though all the cultural material came from one probe.
No evidence of subsistence activities. in particular cooking or heating. was found.
The site represents a single task. lithic procurement locus and as such is recommended
for limited testing.

41MQ101
This site lies in Setting VII along the high bluffs bordering Lake Creek in the
lower portion of the reservoir area. Vegetation in the vicinity of the site consists of
an open overstory of young pine. oak and sweetgum with a correspondingly dense
understory dominated by yaupon thickets and greenbriar. Soil in this area has a upper
sand zone to a depth of 50 to 100 centimeters overlying sandy clay. Cultural material
is restricted to the sandy upper deposits. Five shovel probes produced cultural debris
including primary. secondary and tertiary flakes of chert and silicified wood. burned
shatter. one split cobble. one dart point midsection and a sand-tempered body sherd.
The average density of artifacts from the shovel probes is 3 artifacts/20 centimeter
level with a maximum recovery of 9 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. The site size
is estimated at 2400 square meters based on the horizontal extent of the shovel
probes.
The site's unique location on a high topographic
confluence of a perennial tributary and Lake Creek makes it a
proximity to 41MQ100. the lithic procurement site. and the
point midsection and ceramics provide further justification
41MQ101.

C-12

setting overlooking the
prospect for testing. Its
recovery of both a dart
for additional work at

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

41MQ102
This site is located on Setting VI beneath the high bluffs overlooking the lower
reservoir area. Vegetation in the site vicinity includes an open overstory of pine and
oak with a dense understory of yaupon. vines and grasses.
The soil consists of an
upper sand zone to a depth ranging from 65 centimeters to over 1.2 meters and a
sandy clay lower zone of undetermined thickness. Four shovel probes produced cultural
material from the upper sandy zone. Cultural materials include chert and silicified wood
debitage. burned rock shatter. burned clay chunks. a biface fragment, an arrow point
preform. one sand-tempered body sherd and two grog-tempered body sherds.
The
average artifact density is 7.4 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum artifactual
recovery of 44 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. A site size is estimated at 3200
square meters based on the spacing of shovel probes and the surface exposure of clay
upslope of the site.
Site 41MQ102 1s an excellent candidate for testing due to the deep deposits,
dense cultural material. time diagnostic artifacts and the potential for intact features
suggested by the burned clay lumps. This site has the potential to provide data on
technology. cultural history. subsistence. settlement and the geomorphologic history of
this setting in the Lake Creek basin. Testing is recommended.

41MQ103
This site is located on Setting VII on the high bluffs overlooking the lower Lake
Creek reservoir area. Vegetation includes an open overstory dominated by young pine.
oak and sweetgum with a patchy understory of yaupon thickets. vines and grasses.
Soils consist of loose sand from the surface to a depth ranging from 70 centimeters to
1 meter at which time a compact sand with many concretions is encountered. No clay
was reached in any of the three material-producing probes or the one sterile probe.
The three positive probes contained chert. silicified wood and quartzite debitage and
burned shatter. The average artifact density is 1.9 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a
maximum recovery of 5 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. The site size is estimated
at 4400 square meters based on the horizontal extent of productive and sterile shovel
probes.
Site 41MQ103 does not appear to contain either the variety or quantity of
cultural material that warrants further work.

41MQ104
This site lies in Setting V along Lake Creek in the midst of the reservoir area.
Vegetation consists of pine and oak in the immediate site vicinity. changing to open
grassland in cleared areas. Sandy soils are a minimum of 1.2 meters in depth. The
site contains both prehistoric and historic cultural debris. Four shovel probes produced
lithic debitage. burned shatter and burned nut hull fragments of prehistoric age, and

C-13

APPENDIX C

clear bottle glass. brown bottle glass. metal fragments and one cinder block fragment.
Prehistoric artifact density averages 1.6 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum
recovery of 5 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level.
The prehistoric site size is
estimated at 400 square meters based on shovel probe placement.
Historic debris was intermixed with the prehistoric. with one brown glass fragment
at 80 centimeters below the surface.
Recent extant structures stand atop the hill at
the end of the dirt road leading from the oil fields.
According to Frank McWhorter
(personal communication. 1986). landowner. a steam-powered hardwood speciality mill
was erected at the base of the slope in the now-cleared pasture in the 1920s.
Temporary shacks and a hand-dug well above the mill overlapped the prehistoric
component. All that remains of the mill facilities is the collapsed well. now full of
trash.
The one extant building. a hunting camp. and the stock pens are of recent
origin.
Site 41 MQ104 is not recommended for further work because of the obvious
disturbance to the prehistoric deposits by recent historic occupation and use. The mill
remains have also been almost completely eradicated. lowering the historic significance
of the site.

41MQ105
This site is located on Setting VI along the upper portion of Lake Creek
Reservoir.
Vegetation in the site vicinity consists of pasture grasses with fencerow
trees and shrubs. Soils are loose sand to a depth of 30 centimeters where sandy clay
is encountered. Four shovel probes revealed cultural material only in the sandy upper
zone. Cultural material recovered includes chert. quartzite and silicified wood debitage.
and burned shatter with an average artifact density of 3.7 artifacts/20 centimeter level.
The maximum recovery was 8 artifacts in a single 20 centimeter level.
Site size is
estimated at 600 square meters based on the placement of shovel probes.
The shallow extent of culture-bearing deposits and the numerous gopher mounds
in the area suggest that the site deposits have undergone horizontal and vertical
displacement. This site is not recommended for further work at this time.

41MQ106
This site is situated on Setting V along upper Lake Creek Reservoir. Vegetation
in the site area includes a grove of oak. elm. hackberry and sweetgum bordered by
open grassy pastureland. Soils consist of a sand upper zone 60 to 100 centimeters
thick overlying a sandy clay. The southern extremity of the site consists of a natural
black clay depression that intermittently holds water.
Three shovel probes produced
cultural material including chert secondary and tertiary flakes and chips. burned shatter.
a burned nut hull. three bone-tempered body sherds and a stem fragment of a fine
sandy-paste pipe.
The pipe is probably of aboriginal manufacture. although historic

C-14

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
tradeware has not definitely been ruled out. The artifact density obtained from the
three shovel probes averages 1.3 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum recovery
of 5 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. Site size is estimated at 1600 square meters
based on the horizontal extent of shovel probes and the natural depression.
The presence of bone-tempered ceramics and the possibility of a tradeware pipe
suggests that 41MQ106 is of protohistoric - historic age.
Additional work is
recommended to attempt to solve the question of site age. The location of this site
near a natural intermittent waterhole is unique in the reservoir area and lends further
support for additional work.

41MQ107
This site occupies Setting IV along Lake Creek in the upper portion of the
reservoir area. Vegetation consists of an overstory limited to a large water oak and a
couple of hackberries with a low understory of grasses, palmetto and vines. The soil
exposed by the three shovel probes consist of sandy loam to a depth of 1.2 meters.
No lower zone of sandy clay was hit. Cultural material was recovered from all levels
to a maximum probe depth of 1.2 meters.
This material includes chert debitage,
burned shatter, burned clay chunks, burned bone. burned nut hulls, mussel shell. a
biface fragment, an arrow point preform and one sand-tempered body sherd.
Two
intact hearths were encountered. Both consisted of burned clay lumps, burned rock and
heat-compacted bottoms. One was reburied undisturbed. The shape or plan of either
feature could not be ascertained in the limited shovel probes.
The artifact density
averages 4.1 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum recovery of 16 artifacts in
one 20 centimeter level.
Site size is set at 2100 square meters based on the
horizontal limits of the mound containing the site deposits.
Site 41MQ107 has the potential to provide data on technology, culture history.
hearth design and function. subsistence, intrasite patterning and the geomorphologic
history of this setting in the Lake Creek floodplain.
This site should be intensively
tested.

41MQ108
This site is located on Setting VI along the upper portion of Lake Creek
reservoir.
The area has been cleared of all trees except along fencerows and
creeksides. permitting the establishment of grassland pasture. Five shovel probes to a
maximum depth of 1.2 meters revealed only loose sand.
Cultural material was
recovered from all levels to 1 meter below surface. Included in this material are chert
and silicified wood tertiary flakes, chips, a burned nut hull and a biface tip.
The
average density of cultural material was .9 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a
maximum recovery of 6 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. Site size is estimated at
12,800 square meters based on the horizontal extent of artifact producing shovel
probes.

C-15

APPENDIX C

The large site size but relatively low artifact density suggests that 41MQ108 is
not capable of producing significant amounts of data. However. the shovel probes were
able to locate a fairly dense artifact accumulation in one portion of the site. Tes ting
in this area may provide data pertaining to temporal placement of site occupation. site
type and subsistence activities. The deep sands may contain Middle or Early Archaic
materials. Site 41MQ108 is recommended for limited testing.

41MQ109
This site lies in Setting IV along Lake Creek in the upper area of the proposed
reservoir. The overstory and viney understory have been cleared for the production of
grassy pasture. Soils consist of deep sands in excess of 1.2 meters on the top of the
mound. decreasing to 50 centimeters on its side. Sandy clay underlies the sand upper
zone. Beyond the periphery of the mound. the soil is black clay of modern floodplain
origin.
Five shovel probes produced cultural material from the sandy upper zone.
Artifacts include chert and quartzite secondary and tertiary flakes, burned shatter. a
burned nut hull. bone and one bone-tempered body sherd.
The density of cultural
material averages 2.2 artifacts/20 centimeters level with a maximum recovery of 7
artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. Site size is estimated at 3200 square meters based
on the extent of the sandy knoll and shovel probes.
Site 41MQ109 may contain stratified deposits. including some dating from the
Late Prehistoric and possibly Late Ceramic periods as suggested by the single bonetempered ceramic sherd.
The recovery of a burned nut hull and bone fragment
indicates that organic material. potentially useful for radiocarbon dating. is preserved in
the site deposits. Testing of 41MQ109 is recommended.

41MQ110
This site is located on Setting V along Lake Creek in the midsection of the
reservoir area.
Vegetation in the site vicinity includes an overstory of pine. and
sweetgum with a dense understory of vines and grasses.
The soil consists of loose
sand to a minimum depth of 1 meter.
One shovel probe produced artifacts of
prehistoric and modern age. A historic homestead including a house. two outbuildings
and a well are associated with the 1940s site of a sawmill some 100 meters to the
east (McWhorter. personal communication. 1986). Prehistoric material consists of the
light recovery of chert debitage with a density of .4 artifacts /20 centimeter level with a
maximum of 1 artifact in one 20 cm level. A tentative prehistoric site size is set at
1600 square meters based on the horizontal location of non-producing shovel probes.
Site 41MQ110 is not recommended for further assessment of its prehistoric
component. The historic component does not meet minimum age requirements for site
status.

C-16

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

41MQ111
This site lies in Setting V along Lake Creek in the upper reaches of the reservoir
area. Vegetation in the site area consists of an open grassland pasture. bordered by
wooded creek bottoms. Four shovel probes aided by a soil auger reveal a sandy upper
zone to a depth of 1 - 1.8 m with a 10 cm transition zone of sand and sandy clay
mottles. followed by sandy clay of undetermined thickness.
Cultural material was
recovered from the sandy upper zone down to the clay contact at 1 meter in one of
the four shovel probes.
Recovered cultural materials include chert and silicified wood
secondary and tertiary flakes. a reduced split cobble. one utilized flake. biface
fragments, a burned nut hull. a Gary-like dart point. one sand-tempered body sherd and
one grog-tempered body sherd. The overall density of cultural material averages 1.3
artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum recovery of 6 artifacts in one 20
centimeter level.
The bulk of the cultural material was recovered from the 60-80
centimeters level. including the sand and grog-tempered sherds.
The bone-tempered
sherd came from Level 3 and the Gary-like dart point came from Level 5. directly
b€1ow the concentration. Site size is estimated at 2500 square meters based on the
horizontal extent of artifact bearing shovel probes.
This site also contains a collapsed structure that appears to have been a barn or
storage shed related to 20th century ranching pursuits. Historic age artifacts recovered
in the shovel probes include a rusty wire nail. a piece of barbed wire and a rifle shell
casing.
The historic component on this site does not warrant further in-field
assessment but informants place an early gin and mill in the general area of the left
bank of Ford Lake.
No trace of either was found by this survey but future
investigators should be alert to the possibility of remnant foundations or debris from
these early industrial sites.
The prehistoric component. however. contains a deeply
buried artifact concentration with diagnostic artifacts and burned organic materials that
provide the potential for developing a culture history.
The prehistoric component at
41 MQ111 is recommended for intensive subsurface testing to determine its possible
significance.

41MQ112
This site is located in Setting V along Lake Creek in the upper portion of the
reservoir. Vegetation is open grassy pasture with wooded tracts along creek banks and
old meander scars.
The soil consists of loose sand to a maximum depth of 5
centimeters near the creek and a minimum depth of 120 centimeters away from the
creek. Beneath the sand is a sandy clay that was only identified in the shovel probe
near the creek. Five shovel probes produced cultural material to a maximum depth of
1.2 meters. Included were chert and silicified wood secondary and tertiary flakes and
chips. burned nut hulls. bone. mussel shell. one mano and a sand-tempered body sherd.
The average artifact density is 1 artifact/20 centimeter level and the maximum number
of artifacts recovered from a single 20 centimeter level is 5. Site size is estimated at
2400 square meters based on the horizontal placement of shovel probes.

C-17

APPENDIX C
Site
nut hulls
survey.
placed on

41MQ112 contains a varied inventory of subsistence residues including bone,
and mussel shell. and the only mano or pitted stone recovered during the
Based on this data. 41MQ112 warrants testing with a suggested emphasis
subsistence reconstruction and dating.

41MQ113
This site is located in Setting V along the upper reaches of Lake Creek
Reservoir.
Vegetation consists of open grass pasture surrounded by pine and oak
woodlands. The soil consists of loose sand to a minimum depth of 1 m. None of the
three shovel probes delved deeper than 1 m. Cultural material. including secondary and
tertiary flakes. were recovered from all levels of the shovel probes.
Artifact density
from the probes averages . 7 artifacts /20 centimeter level with a maximum recovery of
3 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level.
Site size is estimated at 4800 square meters
based on the horizontal area defined by positive and sterile shovel probes.
Site 41MQ113 does not appear to contain either the quantity or quality of
cultural material to warrant additional work.

41MQ114
This site is located in Setting V along the midsection of the reservoir area. The
vicinity of the site has been cleared of all trees and shrubs and is now grassy pasture.
Soils consist of a silty sand to a minimum depth of 1.2 meters. above a trans1t1on
zone of sand and sandy clay mottle.
Soils on the creekward side of the site were
often capped by a dark clay of recent flood origin.
Four shovel probes recovered
cultural material. including primary. secondary and tertiary flakes and chips of chert.
silicified wood and quartzite. burned shatter. a piece of bone. and a bone-tempered rim
sherd.
The artifact density recovered in the shovel probes averages 1.6 artifacts/20
centimeter level with a maximum occurrence of 7 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level.
Site size is estimated at 1800 square meters based on the horizontal extent of shovel
probes.
Site 41MQ114 contains a varied inventory of cultural remains m a buried context
unique in this survey and of geomorphologic importance. This site 1s recommended for
further work.

41MQ115
This site is located in Setting VI in midreservoir. The site v1c1n1ty is cleared of
most trees and is currently maintained as pasture. Soils on the site consisted of a
raised sandy toe slope with sands to a depth of 95 cm. becoming very compact with
clayey mottles probably turning to clay by 1.5 meters.
Four shovel probes produced
cultural material to a depth of 1 meter. Cultural materials include chert tertiary flakes

C-18

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
and chips.
The average density of artifacts is 1 artifact/20 centimeter level with a
maximum recovery of 3 artifacts in a single 20 centimeter level. Site size is estimated
at 2400 square meters based on shovel probe placement and recovery of cultural
materials.
Site 41MQ115 does not appear to contain either quantitatively or qualitatively
significant cultural remains and is not recommended for further work at this time.

41MQ116
This site occupies a unique position in Setting Ill on the bank of an abandoned
meander of Lake Creek in the midreservoir area.
Vegetation consists of a duality
between open pasture grasses and wooded tracts along the meander scar.
Soils are
dark loamy clay to a depth of 15 centimeters. changing to a gray clay 5 centimeters
thick, grading to tan clay of unknown thickness. One shovel probe to a depth of 35
centimeters revealed that the cultural material was restricted to the grey clay (15-20
centimeters below surface).
Cultural material includes chert secondary and tertiary
flakes, one utilized flake and a biface tip. A total of 15 artifacts was recovered from
the single shovel probe and all material was contained in the 5 centimeters of thick
gray clay. No site size could be determined due to the density of the clayey soils.
Site 41 MQ116 is the only site in the clay floodplain of Lake Creek found during
survey. This site is recommended for further work to gain a better understanding of
the geomorphologic processes and their depositional rates in this setting. as well as to
obtain any temporal and cultural affiliations of the occupation.

41MQ117
This site is located in Setting VI along a perennial stream in the upper reaches
of the Lake Creek Reservoir area. Vegetation in the site vicinity includes an overstory
dominated by pine and sweetgum, with a composite understory of grasses in the
openings and vines in the wooded areas. Soils consist of a loose sand upper zone to
a depth ranging from 50 - 100 centimeters above a sandy clay lower zone.
Three
shovel probes produced cultural material within the sandy upper zone. Cultural material
includes secondary and tertiary flakes of chert and quartzite. The average recovery rate
is .6 artifacts/20 centimeter level with a maximum of 2 artifacts in one 20 centimeter
level. Site size is estimated at 2500 square meters based on the horizontal distribution
of positive shovel probes. An historic structure with an outhouse is located in the site
area. Construction consists of a board frame covered with corrugated steel siding and
roof. No historic materials were recovered from the shovel probes.
Site 41MQ117 is not recommended for further work because of the low artifact
density and lack of tools. The historic component is of recent 20th century origin and
as such does not qualify for site designation.

C-19

APPENDIX C

41MQ118
This site is located in Setting V along a perennial stream in the upper portion of
the Lake Creek Reservoir.
Vegetation includes wooded blocks in the vicinity of the
tributaries with open grassy pasture between drainages.
The soil consists of loose
sand to a minimal depth of 1.2 meters.
Three shovel probes produced primary.
secondary and tertiary flakes and chips of chert. silicified wood and quartzite. Burned
shatter. burned clay. burned nut hull. burned bone. a modified deer metapodial. one
utilized flake. one biface proximal corner. one drill/perforator proximal end, one
expanding stem quartz arrow point. nine sand-tempered body sherds, one sand-tempered
rim sherd. two grog-tempered body sherds, two grog-tempered rim sherds. and two
bone-tempered body sherds were also recovered. The average density of material in the
shovel probes is 12.5 artifacts/20 cm level with a maximum recovery of 33 artifacts in
one 20 centimeter level.
Site size is estimated at 3600 square meters based on the
horizontal distribution of shovel probes and the close proximity of the perennial stream.
The recovery of artifacts from the probes on this site is quantitatively and
qualitatively high.
Recovered temporal diagnostics include one arrow point and 16
ceramic sherds.
Two of the sherds are decorated with intersecting parallel lines. a
design similar to that seen on the Caddo utility wares identified as Canton or Maydelle.
The flattened rim suggests a close relationship to Canton. a type assigned to the Late
Ceramic Period (ca. AD 1000).
Unfortunately. the arrow point does not conform to
any defined type and can only provide a broad temporal assignment to the Late
Prehistoric Period.
The deer metapodial fragment has been altered by the removal of the joint and
fractured at the midpoint of the shaft.
Both actions represent stages in the
manufacture of socketed bone projectile points and suggest that this artifact is a
manufacturing failure or discard.
The Caddo-like grog-tempered sherds. the sand-tempered ceramics. the arrow point
and the deer metapodial fragment were found in Level 5. 60 - 80 centimeters below the
surface.
Beneath this level are sand-tempered sherds. while above sand. grog and
bone-tempered wares are found. These preliminary assortments -- based on less than
adequate sample size -- suggest that stratigraphic clusters may be present in the site
deposits.
Burned materials in these levels may provide radiocarbon ages to further
substantiate the chronology based on artifact types.
Site 41MQ118 contains numerous and varied artifacts in a generally stratigraphied
context.
This site is recommended for extensive testing with data recovery geared
toward subsistence and chronology building.

C-20

----------

-

- - - -

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

41MQ119
This site is located in Setting V along a perennial stream in the upper portion of
the Lake Creek reservoir area. Vegetation in the site vicinity consists of grass pasture
with wooded tracts along the drainages.
A single shovel probe produced cultural
material and loose sand deposits to a depth of 1 meter. The cultural material includes
secondary and tertiary flakes and chips. burned shatter. burned nut hulls and two sandtempered body sherds. The average artifact density is 1.2 artifacts/20 centimeter level
with a maximum recovery of 4 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level.
Site size is
estimated at 1600 square meters based on shovel probe locations.
This site is located 85 meters downstream from 41MQ118 and probably contains
similar materials although not with as high a density. Additional work at this time.
however. is not recommended unless limited testing of its deposits could enhance or
clarify the role of 41MQ118 in the overall settlement pattern.

41MQ120
This site is located in Setting V along a perennial stream in the upper portion of
the Lake Creek Reservoir area.
Vegetation in the site vicinity has been affected by
clearing. resulting in grassland pasture and linear wooded tracks along drainages. Soils
consist of an upper zone of loose sand to a depth of 30-100 centimeters and a lower
zone of sandy clay to an undetermined depth. Three shovel probes produced cultural
materials in the sandy upper zone.
Cultural materials include chert and quartzite
primary. secondary and tertiary flakes. burned shatter. bone. a burned nut hull. two
arrow point fragments and one bone-tempered and three sand-tempered body sherds.
The average density of materials recovered from the shovel probes is 6.1 artifacts/20
cm level with a maximum recovery of 13 artifacts in one 20 centimeter level. Site size
1s estimated at 3000 square meters based on shovel probe locations.
Site 41MQ120 is located directly across a perennial stream from 41MQ118 in the
same topographical setting.
The artifact inventory is also very similar. This site is
recommended for further testing because of the quality and quantity of artifacts.
topographic setting and proximity to 41MQ118.

C-21

--------------------

----

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX D: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS
Leland C. Bement
CERAMICS
A total of 73 ceramic sherds was recovered from 24 of the 46 recorded sites
(Table 7.2). Only a descriptive analysis of the total ceramic collection was undertaken
due to the small sample size. Sherds were first sorted into three groups according to
aplastic tempering materials: sand. grog. and bone (Table D.1-D.3). Sand-temper was
the largest group with 48 sherds followed by grog with 16 and bone with 9. Each
group was further divided into body. rim and decorated categories. A final step in the
analysis was the comparison of the various categories with the defined ceramic types
from the Upper Texas Coast area (Aten 1983) and the Caddoan area to the north
(Suhm and Jelks 1962. Story 1981b).
The ceramic type collection housed at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, UT-Austin. and the ceramics recovered from Conroe Reservoir (Shafer 1968)
and. to a lesser extent. Livingston Reservoir (McClurkan 1968) provided comparative
materials which aided in all aspects of the analysis.

Sand-Tempered Ceramics
Forty-eight sherds contain only sand grains in the clay matrix of the sherd (Table
D.1). The sand may be a natural component of the clay used by the aboriginal potter
and/or may represent the intentional tempering of an otherwise sand-free clay. Neither
alternative can be substantiated by the gross optical analysis utilized here. Thirty-eight
of the sherds are from the body of the vessel and only one of these is decorated.
This
The decoration consists of red ochre rubbed on the exterior of the vessel.
fugitive coloring defines the ceramic type known as Goose Creek Red Filmed (Aten
1967:11. Aten and Bollich 1969:247).
The remaining sandy tempered or sandy paste body sherds fall into the general
category of Goose Creek Plain (Suhm and Jelks 1962:57). Attempts to subdivide this
type based on sand grain size (Shafer 1968. Aten and Bollich 1969) culminated in the
definition of the type 0 'Neal Plain (Aten 1983:238). however. most results have been
inconclusive (Aten and Bollich 1969:246).
Of the ten rim sherds from sand-tempered or sandy paste vessels. three taper in
a rough stair step fashion to the exterior surface of the vessel (Fig. D.1a.b:41MQ92.
41MQ118. 41MQ76 - not shown). Three sherds taper smoothly to the exterior surface.
two actually depositing clay on the exterior surface (Fig. D.1c-e:41MQ75, 41MQ97.
41MQ98). One sherd is from a rounded rim (Fig. D.1f:41MQ97) and two sherds are
slightly tapering rims with shallow incised notches (Fig. D.1g,h:41MQ90, 41MQ93).
One of these has three incised lines on the exterior surface paralleling the rim and an

-

-~--~---------

Table 0.1
LAKE CREEK CERAMICS:
Site
Number

Lot
Number

Body

Rim

Max. Dimensions
(mm)
L
w
T

)::.

""O
""O

Sand Tempered

~

t:::i

Exterior

Core

Interior

Temper

6

Brown

Black

Gray

Coarse sand

Decoration

S(
t:::i

41MQ75

3

x

32

39

41MQ76

1

x

22

24

4

Tan

Black

Tan

Coarse sand

41MQ82

1

x

18

13

l1

Tan
Burnished

Tan

Tan

Medium sand

1

x
x

7
16

5

2

10

5
5

Tan
Tan

Tan
Tan

Black
Tan

Medium sand
Medium sand

41MQ86

1

x

14

11

5

Black

Black

Bleak

Coarse sand

41MQ87

2
2
3

x
x
x

29
16
20

23
13
13

6
4
5

Tan
Black
Tan

Black
Black
Tan

Black
Black
Tan

Coarse sand
Coarse sand

41MQ90

2
3

x

15
13

15
12

5
5

Black
Black

Red
Black

Medium sand
Medium sand

4
5

x

64

.....

25

33
14

5
5

x
x

i8
10

13

8

7
7
5

Red
Black w/
Fugitive
Red
Tan/Orange
Brown
Brown
Tan

Black
Red
Red
Tan

Orange
Brown
Brown
Tan

Coarse
Medium
Medium
Coarse

41MQ91

1

x

13

11

6

Tan

Tan

Tan

Coarse sand

41MQ92

1

x

25

23

7

Gray

Black

Tan

Coarse sand

41MQ93

1

x

33

52

4

Tan

Black

Gray

Medium fine
sand

41MQ94

1
2
3

x
x
x

25
27
19

23
20
15

9
4

Gray/tan
Tan
Gray

Black
Black
Tan

Black
Tan
Gray

Medium sand
Coarse sand
Coarse sand

2
3

x

28
20
28

24
14
25

7
8

Orange
Gray
Tan

Orange
Gray
Black

Orange
Gray
Black

Coarse sand
Coarse sand
Fine/medium
sand

41MQ85

0I
!\,)

41MQ97

5

x

x
x

6

6

6

.. Notched .rim
Fugitive red
filmed

sand
sand
sand
sand

Incised, notched
rim

TABLE D.l cont'd.
Mnx. ])j,mens:l ons
Lot
Number Number
_" ___ -------1
41MQ98
1
1

(mm)

Site

0I

w

Body

Rim

x
x
x

L

w

T

Exterior

Core

Interior

--------

Temper

Decoration
---~--,.----·-----···

40
37
24

40
31
15

6
6
7

Brown
Tan
Tan

Black
Tan
Tan

Black
Black
Tan

Coarse sand
Coarse sand
Coarse sand

41MQ101

1

x

21

17

4

Red

Black

Red

Medium sand

41MQ102

1

x

19

13

4

Yellow/tan

Black

Black

Coarse sand

41MQ106

1

13

12

5

Tan

Tan/
Gray

Tan

Fine sand

41MQ107

1

x

25

21

6

Red

Red

Red

Coarse sand

41MQ111

1

x

27

21

8

Brown

Orange/
Tan

Brown

Coarse sand

41MQ112

1

x

19

15

8

Tan

Tan

Tan

Coarse sand

41MQ118

1
2
3
3
3
3
4

x

7
18
33
15
17
13
10
13
22

8
4
7
8
5
6
8

Tan
Tan
Red
Tan
Brown
Black
Tan
Red
Brown
Black

Black
Black
Black
Tan
Red
Brown
Tan
Tan
Black
Black

Tan
Tan
Red
Brown
Black
Black
Tan
Tan
Brown
Black

Coarse
Medium
Coarse
Coarse
Coarse
Coarse
Medium
Coarse
Coarse
Coarse

sand
sand
sand
sand
sand
sand
sand
sand
sand
sand

:j

Brown
Black

Brown
Black

Medium sand
Medium sand

r,

Tan
Tan
Black

Tan
Tan
Brown

Medium sand
Coarse sand
Fine/medium
sand

41MQ119
41MQ120

x

6

x

7
8

x
x

12
21
19
55
16
15
26
16
22
32

1
2

x
x

34
27

32
25

5
6

Brown
Brown

3
4
5

x
x
x

43
15
33

28
13
28

5
7
5

Tan
Tan
Brown

x
x
x
x
x
x

13

5

8
6

*Possible pipe
fragment

):..

::i;:,

~

""'!
i;::,

I]
~
=t;

:j
0

:c:::
(./)

APPENDIX D
inverted triangle filled with parallel incised lines perpendicular to the rim (Fig.
Such decoration is characteristic of Goose Creek Incised (Suhm and
D.1h:41MQ93).
Jelks 1962).

PIPE FRAGMENT
An unique ceramic fragment was recovered from a shovel probe at site 41MQ106
(Table D.1). This artifact appears to be the flattened end of a pipe stem. The paste
is very fine-grained with some minute particles of sand and possibly grog. A carbon
streak is masked by a tan slip. The lip was flattened leaving a narrow ridge near the
interior side.
If this ridge represents a mold line, this artifact could be a European
trade good. However, the sand and possible grog temper inclusions in the fine paste,
the carbon streak. and the slip, which masks all inclusions and gives the artifact a very
finished, high grade appearance. support aboriginal manufacture of this artifact.

Grog-Tempered Ceramics

Sixteen sherds have grog or ground sherds used as tempering materials (Table
D.2). Each of these has sand inclusions either as a joint tempering agent or a natural
element of the clay. In most cases, the grog particles are outnumbered by large sand
grams.
The identification of grog as a tempering agent is confounded by the opposing
perspectives on the nature of grog presented by Aten (1983) and Porter (1984). Aten
(1983:239) notes the difficulty of recognizing grog tempering in the Galveston Bay and
Southeast Texas areas because the grog often blends into the paste of the new vessel.
In this case. identification must rely on the different orientation of sand grains and.
more often. on the presence of clay masses.
Porter (1984:156). on the other hand.
demonstrates that clay masses or globs are often inadvertently picked up during the
rolling and handling of the potters clay. When the vessel is fired. these unintentional
clay inclusions stand out as color changes or textural unconformities. leading to their
misidentification as grog tempering. In this limited sample. the occasional inclusion of
grog-like particles in the otherwise sandy paste does not warrant classification in the
grog tempering category.
When a larger sample of sherds is accumulated during
testing or mitigation. thin section analyses following the techniques of Porter (1984)
should be undertaken.
Twelve sherds are vessel body fragments.
sets of parallel lines (Fig. D.1i:41MQ118).

One has been incised with opposing

Four rim sherds of grog tempered vessels were recovered. One is very similar to
the incised body sherd and may be from the same vessel. The sherd flares slightly to
the exterior and has a flattened rim. Opposing sets of incised parallel lines originate
at the rim and intersect well below the rim leaving a triangular shaped block between
the sets (Fig. D.1j:41MQ118). The design pattern and execution on this rim and the
one body sherd are similar to that of Maydelle or Canton Incised types (Suhm and

D-4

ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

b

a

d

I.

f

c

.---1

f'l'"-~.~~~

;~~~~-~,
. -.-'"-\

-----

g

h

k

j

n

FIGURE D.1. Rim and decorated sherds.
bone-tempered.

a-h) sand-tempered i-m) grog-tempered n)

D-5

Tablfl 0.2
LAKE CREEK CERAMICS•:

Site
Number

Lot
Number

Body

Rim

Max. Dimensions
(mm)
w
L
T

'I

)::,.

"'tl
"'tl

Grog Tempered

~

t::')

Exterior

Core

Interior

Temper

Brown
Burnished
Brown
Burnished

Black

Black

Black

Black

Large sand
& grog
Large sand
& grog

Black

Black

Black

Dark
Gray
Dark
Gray

Tan

Decoration

S(
t::')

41MQ75

41MQ87

41MQ92

0I
O"I

41MQ102

5

x

16

9

8

5

x

15

14

7

50

40

10

1

x

4

x

17

16

6

Tan

4

x

16

12

6

Tan

57

33

7

Tan

Black

Black

1

x

Tan

Medium sand
& grog
Large sand
& grog
Large sand
& grog
Coarse sand
& grog
Coarse sand
& grog
Coarse sand
& grog

1

x

44

34

7

Tan

Black

Black

1

x

27

25

7

Tan

Black

Black

2

x

50

40

7

Brown
Burnished
Brown
Burnished

Black

Black
Burnished
Black
Burnished

Medium sand
& grog
Medium sand
& grog

2

x

25

22

6

41MQ111

3

x

29

26

6

Tan

Tan

Black

Coarse sand
& grog

41MQ118

2

x

23

36

8

Black

Black

Black

7

x

22

21

6

Brown

Black

Black

Black

Black

Black

Black

Coarse
& grog
Coarse
& grog
Coarse
& grog
Coarse
& grog

Tan

Tan

41MQ120

7

x

40

30

8

8

x

51

41

8

Brown
Burnished
Black

3

x

19

17

7

Tan

Black

Nicked rim

sand

Bay.town pf.ah1
San Jacinto var.

Bay.town plain
San Jacinto var.

Can.ton. or MaydeU.e
-<.n.wed

sand
sand
sand

Medium sand
& grog

Can.ton. or MaydeU.e
-<.n.wed

ARTIFACT DEKCR/PTIONS
Jelks 1962). The flat rim is more characteristic of the Canton type but is sometimes
present on Mayde/le vessels as well. Of the remaining three grog tempered rim sherds.
one has a rounded rim. one tapers to the exterior surface and one has shallow. incised
notches on a predominately flat rim (Fig. D.1k-m:41MQ92. 41MQ118. 41MQ87). The
undecorated sherds are similar to those described as Baytown Plain in the Galveston
Bay area (Aten 1983).

Bone-Tempered Ceramics
Nine sherds. all undecorated. including one rim (Fig. D.1n:41MQ114) and eight
body fragments. contain varying amounts of crushed bone as a tempering agent (Table
D.3). Sand grains are also included in all sherds. The single rim is rounded with a
small excess left on the interior surface (Fig. D.1n).

LITHICS
Twenty-nine lithic artifacts were recovered from 19 sites in Lake Creek Reservoir
(Table D.4). Collections were limited to items of use in determining site age. function
or lithic technology. Projectile point types follow definitions given in Suhm and Jelks
(1962). All measurements are in centimeters: an asterisk implies that the artifact is
broken along this dimension.

Bipolar Cobble
This cobble is heavily battered and fractured on one end and lightly battered on
the other. Such a pattern suggests that this cobble failed to break along its vertical
axis using the bipolar reduction technique. The material is coarse-grained opaque chert.

L: 6.3 cm

W: 3.0 cm

T: 2.6 cm

Prov:

41MQ76 - 2

Split Bipolar Cobble
This specimen is half of a chert cobble that has been split along its long axis.
Two decertification flakes were removed after the initial split. Approximately 60% of
the dorsal surface retains cortex.

L: 4.0 cm

W: 2.8 cm

T: 1.5 cm

Prov:

41MQ101 - 2

Bifacially Reduced Split Cobble
This artifact is ovate in outline. piano-convex in cross section and is bifacially
reduced around its circumference.
The dorsal (convex) surface retains 30% cortex.
The cobble is fine-grained silicified wood. Natural fissures in the cobble hampered the

D-7

------

-

~

---

--------

):;,.
""1:1
""1:1

~

t:i

Table D.3
LAKE CREEK CERAMICS :

:>(
Bone Tempered

t:i

Max. Dimensions
Sile

Number

00

(mm)

Body

Rim

L

w

T

Exterior

Core

Interior

Temper

Brown

Large sand
& bone
Large sand
& bone
Coarse sand
& bone

Decoratl.on

2

x

17

13

6

Red

2

x

11

10

3

Red

.Red/
Black
Gray

3

x

16

14

3

Red

Gray

Red

41MQ109

1

x

28

25

8

Red/tan

Tan/
Black

Black

Medium sand
& large bone

41MQ111

2

x

20

16

6

Black

Black

Black

Coarse sand/
few bone chunks

41MQ114

1

28

24

7

Tan

Black

Tan/
Black

Medium sand/
lots of bone

41MQ118

7

x

23

20

7

Brown

Black

Black

7

x

20

17

6

Brown

Black

Black

Medium sand
& bone
Medium sand
& bone

2

x

28

22

5

Gray

Gray

Gray

41MQ106

0I

Lot
Number

41MQ120

x

Red

Coarse sand/
bone - large
chunks of bone

ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

Table D.4
LAKE CREEK LITHICS
Site
Number
41MQ75
41MQ76
41MQ77
41MQ78
41MQ79
41MQ80
41MQ81
41MQ82
41MQ83
41MQ84
41MQ85
41MQ86
41MQ87
41MQ88
41MQ89
41MQ90
41MQ91
41MQ92
41MQ93
41MQ94
41MQ95
41MQ96
41MQ97
41MQ98
41MQ99
41MQ100
41MQ101
41MQ102
41MQ103
41MQ104
41MQ105
41MQ106
41MQ107
41MQ108
41MQ109
41MQ110
41MQ111 .
41MQ112
41MQ113
4lMQl14
41MQ115
41MQ116
41MQ117
41MQ118
41MQ119
41MQ120

Cobbles

Dart
Points

Bipolar

GaJr..y

Arrow
Points

Bifaces

Utilized
Flakes

Ground
Stone

Ken.t

Fragment

Tip
Preform

Hammerstone
x

Tip
Tip
x

Pvz.diz,
Alba

Split

Midsect.
Preform

Preform
Tip
Reduced

Gan.y-like

x

Mano

Untyped
Fragment

D-9

Tip

x

Corner,
Drill base

x

APPENDIX D
reduction process. causing step fractures and breaks that probably resulted m the
discard of this piece.

L: 5.1 cm

W: 3.0 cm

T: 1.4 cm

Prov:

41MQ111 - 1

Dart Points

DART POINT PREFORM
This diamond-shaped specimen is piano-convex in cross section.
The dorsal
surface retains 20% cortex. including a small patch at the distal and proximal ends.
The remainder of the dorsal surface and all of the ventral surface have been bifacially
reduced. Its outline suggests a progression toward a contracting stem dart point. A
lateral break in the shoulder region probably led to the discard of the piece.

L: 4.9 cm

W: 2.7 cm

T: 1.3 cm

Prov:

41MQ88-1

GARY
This projectile point has a contracting stem. square shoulders and straight blade
edges (Fig. D.2a).
The specimen is lenticular in cross section.
A small patch of
cortex remains at the base of the projectile. One of the shoulders exhibits the color
change that is usual near the cortex. The material is coarse-grained opaque reddishgray chert.

L: 4.3 cm

W: 2.8 cm

T: 0.6 cm

Prov:

41MQ76 - 1

GARY-LIKE
This dart point has a contracting stem and straight base (Fig. D.2b).
shoulders are square and slightly asymmetrical.
The body edges are straight.
cross section is bi-convex with the thickest segment occurring at the shoulders.
material is translucent. light brown chert with small crystal inclusions.

L: 3.8 cm

W: 2.0 cm

T: 1.0 cm

Prov:

The
The
The

41MQ111 - 4

DART POINT BASE
This specimen is the stem and base of a dart point. possibly of the Kent type.
The stem and base are straight. It is' bi-convex in cross section. There is no hint of
the shape or proximity of the shoulders. The material is opaque brown chert.

L: 0.8 cm

W: 1.1 cm

T: 0.6 cm

Prov:

41MQ75 - 4

D-10

--------------

---

----------------

-------------------

-----------~----------

ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS

e

FIGURE D.2. Lithic and bone artifacts. a) Gary dart point. 41MQ76 b) Gary-like dart
point. 41MQ111 c) Perdiz arrow point. 41MQ97 d) Alba arrow point.
41MQ97 e) untyped arrow point. 41MQ118 f) socketed bone projectile
point failure. 41MQ118.

D-11

APPENDIX D

Drill/Perforator Base
This light brown chert specimen has a broad bulbar base. The perforator point
1s missing. The break shows the tip was piano-convex in cross section.

L: 1. 9 cm*

W: 1. 7 cm

T: 0.5 cm

Prov:

41MQ118-5

Biface Fragments
BIFACE MIDSECTION
This specimen is a midsection of a biface - probably a dart point. It 1s lenticular
in cross section and has straight sides. The material is opaque tan chert.

L: 1.0 cm

W: 1.6 cm

T: 0.6 cm

Prov:

41MQ101 - 3

BIFACE TIPS
Of five bifacially flaked tips, two are the distal tips of projectile points and three
are indeterminate. All are lenticular in cross section. Three have straight edges; the
other two have convex edges. All are chert: 2 tan. 2 gray. and 1 red.

*L: 2.2 cm
*L: 2.2 cm
L: 2.0 cm
L: 1.6 cm
L: 2.4 cm
* = projectile

W: 1.5 cm
W: 1. 7 cm
W: 3.1 cm
W: 2.1 cm
W: 1.9 cm
point tip

T:
T:
T:
T:
T:

0.2
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.2

cm
cm
cm
cm
cm

Prov:
Prov:
Prov:
Prov:
Prov:

41MQ108-1
41MQ90-1
41MQ116-1
41MQ89-1
41MQ87-0

BIFACE PROXIMAL CORNER
This specimen has a straight, bifacially thinned base. A lateral edge of either an
expanding stem dart point or triangular biface joins the base at a jagged corner. The
material is opaque tan chert.

L: 1.0 cm

W: 2.0

cm

T: 0.4 cm

Prov:

41MQ118 - 5

Arrow Points
ARROW POINT PREFORM
Two thin. bifacially flaked artifacts are classified as arrow point preforms because
of their subtriangular shape with an incipient stem similar to that of the Cliffton type,
suggesting these are preforms of the Alba or Perdiz type. Both have lenticular cross
sections and are missing the distal tip.

L: 1.8 cm

L: 2.7

cm

W. 2.2 cm

T: 0.5 cm

W: 2.5 cm

T: 0.5 cm

Prov:
Prov:

41MQ107-2
41MQ102-1

D-12

~---------

----

-

ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS
PERDIZ
This arrow point has a contracting stem and long contracting barbs (Fig. D.2c).
One of the barbs and a section of the blade are missing. The remaining blade edge is
concave.
The extent of the concavity is probably due to multiple refashioning or
resharpening of the edge.
The specimen is bifacially flaked and lenticular in cross
section. The material is a reddish-gray coarse-grained opaque chert.

L: 2.3 cm

W: 1.6 cm*

T: 0.3 cm

Prov:

41MQ97-4

ALBA
This specimen is badly fractured due to direct contact with fire (Fig. D.2d). One
barb and the distal tip are missing and one surface of the blade is marked by large
spalls. The remaining portions include a bulbar stem. short pointed barb. and straight
serrated blade edge. The projectile point is bifacially flaked. The cross section of the
blade is no longer determinable. The material is opaque red chert.

L: 1. 9

cm*

W: 1.8 cm*

T: 0.3 cm*

Prov:

41MQ97-1

MISCELLANEOUS ARROW POINT
This projectile point has a short. narrow stem that expands slightly just prior to
connecting with a straight base (Fig. D.2e).
Although both barbs are broken, they
appear to have been produced by corner notching.
The distal tip is m1ssmg.
One
edge was produced by unifacial flaking. The material is white quartz.

L: 1.7 cm*

W: 1.1 cm*

T: 0.4 cm

Prov:

41MQ118-2

ARROW POINT FRAGMENTS
Three arrow point fragments were recovered during the survey.
The first
(41MQ83-1) is a bifacially flaked distal tip of tan chert. The second (41MQ120-2) is
the bifacially flaked contracting stem of a Perdiz-like point of red chert.
The third
(41MQ120-1) is the bifacially flaked distal tip, one edge and barb of an untypable
arrow point. This brown chert specimen is lenticular in cross section.

Utilized Flakes
The five utilized flakes were all unifacially altered by the manner of their use.
apparently in scraping.

L: 1.2 cm
L:
L:
L:
L:

2.5
2.0
2.5
3.1

cm
cm
cm
cm

W:
W:
W:
W:
W:

1.4
1.4
1.5
1.3
2.5

cm
cm
cm
cm
cm

T:
T:
T:
T:
T:

0.3
0.5
0.2
0.4
0.5

cm
cm
cm
cm
cm

D-13

Prov:
Prov:
Prov:
Prov:
Prov:

41MQ92-2
41MQ88-2
41MQ111-2
41MQ118-1
41MQ116-1

APPENDIX D

Hammerstone Fragment

This specimen 1s one battered end of an elongated cobble of dense. black
quartzite. One flake has been removed.
Mano

Approximately half of a fine-grained quartzite cobble has been smoothed on one
broad surface leaving a slight depression near the center. One of the lateral surfaces
also appears to have been smoothed. The end is battered and small flakes have been
removed.
L: 6.3 cm*

W: 6.9 cm

T: 5.3 cm

Prov:

4HIQ112-2

BONE AND SHELL

Bone samples were collected from three sites in the Lake Creek Reservoir area:
All fragments are from medium to large mammals.
Only one specimen from 41MQ118 could be
probably representing deer and bison.
identified to species and element.
This bone is the proximal half of the right
metapodial of a white-tailed deer.
The epiphysis has been removed by a diagonal
break. possibly using a cut-and-snap technique. The shaft exhibits a spiral fracture
with the remnant of a jagged protrusion (Fig. D.2f). The pronounced vascular groove
on the posterior surface identifies the species as Odocoileus virginianus (white-tailed
deer). The removal of the epiphysis and fracture pattern of the shaft suggest this
fragment is a failed attempt to manufacture a socketed bone projectile point.
41MQ87, 41MQ107 and 41MQ118.

Fresh water mussel shell was recovered from two sites: 41MQ107 and 41MQ118.
Neither specimen was large enough to permit species identification.

D-14

REFERENCES CITED
Alford. J.J. and J.C. Holmes
1985
Meander Scars as Evidence of Major Climate Change in Southwest
Louisiana. Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75:395-403.
Alford. J.J., C.R. Kolb and J.C. Holmes
1983
Terrace Stratigraphy in the Tunica Hills of Louisiana.
19:55-63.
1985

Quaternary Research

Terrace Stratigraphy along the Lower Red River. Louisiana.
Geology 26:47-51.

Allen, Ruth
1961
East Texas Lumber Workers.
Almonte, Juan N.
1925
Statistical Report
28(3):177-222.

on

University of Texas Press.

Texas.

Southwestern

Southeastern

Austin.

Historical

Ambler. J. Richard
1967
Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar Bayou. Galveston Bay Area.
State Building Commission Archeology Program Report 8.

Quarterly

Texas

1970

Additional Archeological Survey of the Wallisville Reservoir Area. Southeast
Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Report 6.
The
University of Texas at Austin.

1973

Excavation in the Trinity River Delta: The lost River Phase.
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

Texas

Aronow. Saul
1976
Notes on the General Geology and Some Geologic Problems in the Field
Trip Area.
In: Forest/Soil/Geology Relationships at Selected Southeast
Texas Forest Sites: A Field Trip Guidebook.
Edited by D. Moehring.
Department of Forest Science Science Research Note 3. Texas A & M
University. College Station.
1986

Personal communication to Rolfe Mandel. August. 1986.

Aronow, S .. L. Nordt and C. T. Hallmark
1986
Geology and Soils of Eastern Madison County. Texas.
Tour Guide.
Department of Soil and Crop Sciences. Texas A & M University and the
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, College Station.
Aten, L.E.
Excavation at the Jamestown Site (41lB2).
1967
Houston Archeological Society Report 1.

liberty

County.

Texas.

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

1971

Archeological Excavation at the Dow-Cleaver Site. Brazoria County. Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Technical Bulletin 1. The University of
Texas at Austin.

1979

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast: Ethnohistoric and Archeological
Frameworks. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. Department of Anthropology.
The University of Texas at Austin.

1981

Determining Seasonality of Rangia cuneata from Gulf Coast Shell Middens.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:179-200.

1983

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast.

Academic Press.

New York.

Aten, L.E. and Charles N. Bollich
1969
A Preliminary Report on the Development of a Ceramic Chronology for the
Sabine Lake Area of Texas and Louisiana. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 40:241-258.
1981

Archeological Evidence for
213:1375-1376.

Pimple

(Prairie)

Mound

Science

Genesis.

Aten. L.E .. C.K. Chandler. A.B. Wesolowsky and R.M. Malina
1976
Excavations at the Harris County Boy's School Cemetery.
Analysis of
Galveston Bay Area Mortuary Practices.
Texas Archeological Society
Special Publication 3.
Bailey, T.L.
1923
The Geology and Natural Resources of Colorado County, Texas.
Geological Survey Bulletin 2333. Austin.
Barnes. V.E.
1974
Geologic Atlas of Texas. Seguin Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Texas

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Bartholomew. Wayne S.
1986
A Cultural Resource Evaluation and Assessment for Selected Sites in a TenCounty Area. East Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin
93. The University of Texas at Austin.
Beard. J.H .. J.B. Sangree and L.A. Smith
1982
Quaternary Chronology. Paleoclimate. Depositional Sequences. and Eustatic
Cycles. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin 66:158-1569.
Bernard. H.A.
1950
Quaternary Geology of Southeast Texas.
Louisiana State University.

R-2

Unpublished Ph.D.

dissertation.

-

REFERENCES CITED

Bernard. H.A. and R.J. LeBlanc
1965
Resume of the Quaternary of the Northwestern Gulf of Mexico Province.
In:
The Quaternary of the United States. Edited by H.E. Wright and
D.G. Frey. pp. 137-185. Princeton University Press. Princeton.
Bianchi. T.H.
1984
The Surficial Stratigraphy of State Highway 16 within the Amite River
Valley.
In: CRMP Level II Cultural Resource Investigations along Route
La. 16 between Watson and Amite. Edited by A.F. Servello.
Louisiana
Department of Transportation and Development. Baton Rouge.
Binford, Lewis R.
1979
Organization and Formation Processes: Looking at Curated Technologies.
Journal of Anthropological Research 35(3):255-273.
1980

Willow Smoke and Dogs' Tails: Hunter-Gatherer Settlement Systems and
Archaeological Site Formation. American Antiquity 45 (1) :4-20.

1982

The Archaeology of Place.

Birkeland. P.W.
1984
Soils and Geomorphology.

Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 1:5-31.

Oxford University Press.

Blair. W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.

Oxford.

Texas Journal of Science 11(1):93-116.

BoeUstorff. J.D.
Chronology of Some Late Cenozoic Deposits from the Central United States
1978
Transactions of the Nebraska Academy of Science
and the Ice Age.
9:35-50.
Bolton. Herbert E.
1970a Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century: Studies in Spanish Colonial History
and Administration Reprint. Austin.
1970b

Athanase de Mezieres and the Louisiana-Texas Frontier. 1768-1780 2 vols.
reprinted in one. New York.

Bond, Clell L. and William C. Moore
1980 Archeological Investigations in the Davy Crockett National Forest. Cultural
Resources Laboratory Report 1. Texas A & M University. College Station.
Boulware. Narcissus
1986
Personal interview with Mrs. Narcissus
Montgomery. Texas by Dan K. Utley.

Boulware.

August

14.

1986.

Boyd. Douglas K. and Van Tries Button
1985
Overview of Ethnohistorical and Archeological Resources of the Proposed
Reservoir Locations for the San Jacinto Project, Montgomery and San
Jacinto Counties, Texas. Bureau of Reclamation Report BR-SJ-CRl-001.

R-3

------------------

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR
Branda. Eldon Stephen. editor
The Handbook of Texas Ill.
1976

Texas State Historical Association.

AUstin.

Brown. D.O.
In: Eagle Hill. A Late Quaternary Upland Site in
1982
Ceramic Analysis.
Western Louisiana. Edited by J. Gunn and D.O. Brown. pp. 260-277.
Center for Archaeological Research Special Report 12. The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Brown. Ken M.
1976
Fused Volcanic Glass from the Manning Formation.
Archeological Society 47:189-207.

Bulletin of the Texas

Brown. T.M .. K.Killen. H. Simons and V. Wulfkuhle
Resource Protection Planning Process for Texas.
1982
Conservation Plan. Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas. Beaumont Sheet.
of Texas at Austin.
Bureau of Reclamation
1985
San Jacinto Project, Texas:
Southwest Region. Amarillo.

Plan

Scale 1:250,000.

Formulation

Texas

Heritage

The University

Working

Document.

Butler. Sonny Boy
1986
Personal interview with Mr. Sonny Boy Butler, September 12. 1986, Mostyn.
Texas by Dan K. Utley and Solveig A. Turpin.
Campbell. T.N.
1983
The Coahuiltecans and Their Neighbors. In: Handbook of North American
Indians. W.C. Sturtevant, editor, Vol. 10: Southwest. Alfonso Ortiz. volume
editor. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Castaneda. Carlos E.
1976
Our Catholic Heritage in Texas. 1519-1936 7 vols. reprint.
Cole. E.W.
La Salle in Texas.
1946

New York.

Southwestern Historical Quarterly 49(4):473-500.

Dall. W.H.
On a Brackish-Water Pliocene Fauna of the Southern Coastal
1913
Proceedings of the U.S. National Museum 46:225-237.

Plain.

Dalton. George
In: Exchange Systems in
1977
Aboriginal Economies in Stateless Societies.
Prehistory. Edited by T.K. Earle and J.E. Ericson. Academic Press. New
York.

R-4

REFERENCES CITED

Darton. N.H .. L.W. Stephenson and J. Gardner
1932
Geologic Map of Texas (preliminary edition).

U.S. Geological Survey.

Davenport. Samuel
1808
Noticias de las Nasiones Ynds. de la Prova. de Texas.
The University of Texas at Austin.

Bexar Archives,

Davis. W.I.
1956
Interview with W.I. Davis. March 20. 1956. by Robert S. Maxwell.
History Collection. Stephen F. Austin University. Nacogdoches.

Forest

Day. P.R.
1965
Particle Fractionation and Particle-Size Analysis.
In: Methods of Soil
Analysis. Edited by C.A. Black et al.. pp. 545-567. Agronomy 9. Part 1.
American Society of Agronomy. Inc. Madison, Wisconsin.
Deussen. A.
1914
Geology and Underground Water Resources of Southeastern Part of Texas
Coastal Plain. U.S. Geological Survey, Water - Supply Paper 335.
Dillehay. Tom D.
1975
Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity River Delta. Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 51. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Doering, J.A.
1935
Post-Fleming Surface Formations of Coastal Southeast Texas and Southern
Louisiana.
American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin
19:651-688.
1958

Citronelle Age Problem.
Bulletin 42: 764-786.

American Association of Petroleum Geologists

Domingo. Cristobal
1811
Letter to Salcedo. Nacogdoches. January 11. 1811.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bexar Archives. The

Dort, W .. Jr.
1985
Field Evidence for More than Two Early Pleistocene Glaciations of the
Central Plains. In: TER-QUA Symposium Series 1. Edited by W. Dort.
Jr.. pp. 41-51. Nebraska Academy of Sciences. Inc. Lincoln.
Dougherty. John P.
1980
Streamflow and Reservoir - Content Records in Texas. Compilation Report.
January 1889 through December 1975.
Texas Department of Water
Resources 244.
Dumble. E.T.
1894
Cenozoic Deposits of Texas.

Journal of Geology 2:549-567.

R-5

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

1918

The Geology of East Texas.
Austin.

Texas Geological Survey Bulletin 1869.

Ensor. H.B.
The Cinco Ranch Sites. Barker Reservoir. Fort Bend County. Texas.
1986
Archeological Research Laboratory Report of Investigations 3. Texas A &
M University. College Station.
Ensor. H.B. and D.L. Carlson
1986
The Crawford Site, Central Trinity River Uplands, Polk County, Texas.
Draft report presented to the Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation. Austin.
Esparza. Blaz
1816
Diario de Operaciones de Blaz Esparza (of a trip from the Brazos to
Atascosito). Bexar Archives. The University of Texas at Austin.
Ewers. John C., editor
1969
(Jean Louis Berlandier).
The Indians of Texas m 1830.
Institution Press. Washington. D.C.
Faulk. Odie B.
1965
A Successful Failure.

Smithsonian

Austin.

Fenneman. George
Physiography of Eastern United States.
1938
York.

McGraw-Hill Book Company, New

Fields. Ross
1978
Report on the 1977 Investigations at the George C. Davis Site. Caddoan
Mounds State Historic Park. Cherokee County. Texas. Report submitted to
the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department by the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory. The University of Texas at Austin.
Fields. R.. M.D. Freeman and S.M. Kotter
1983
Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at Addicks Reservoir. Harris
County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates. Inc. Reports of Investigations 22.
Austin.
Fields. R.C., M.F. Godwin, M.D. Freeman and S.V. Lisk
1986
Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at Barker Reservoir. Fort
Bend and Harris Counties. Texas. Prewitt and Associates. Inc.. Reports of
Investigations 40. Austin.
Fillon. R.H.
Continental Glacial Stratigraphy, Marine Evidence of Glaciation and Insights
1984
into Continental-Marine Correlations.
In: Principals of Pleistocene
Stratigraphy Applied to the Gulf of Mexico. Edited by N. Healy-Williams.
pp. 149-211. IHRDC Publishers. Inc. Boston.

R-6

REFERENCES CITED

Fisk. H.N.
Geology of Grand and LaSalle Parishes.
1938
Bulletin 10.
Terrace

Journal of Geomorphology

1939

Depositional
2:181-200.

1944

Geological Investigation of the Alluvial Valley of the Lower Mississippi River.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Mississippi River Commission.

Folmer. Henri
1940
De Bellisle on
44(2):204-231.

the

Slopes in

Geological Survey

Louisiana

Texas

Louisiana.

Coast.

Southwestern

Forest History Collection
ms.
Steen Library. Stephen F. Austin University.

Historical

Quarterly

Nacogdoches.

Freund. Max. translator
1954
Gustav Drese/'s Houston Journal: Adventures in North America and Texas.
1831-1841. University of Texas Press. Austin.
Gagliano. S.M. and B.G. Thom
1967
Deweyville Terrace. Gulf and Atlantic Coasts.
Bulletin 1:23-41. Louisiana State University.

Coastal Studies Institute

Griffith. J.M.
1986
Personal interview with Mr. J.M. Griffith. September 11. 1986. Dobbin.
Texas. by Dan K. Utley and Solveig A. Turpin.
Hallberg, G.R .. J.R. Lucus and C.M. Goodmen
1978
Semi-quantitative Analysis of Clay Mineralogy. In: Standard Procedures for
Evaluation of Quaternary Materials in Iowa.
Iowa Geological Survey
Technical Information Series 8:5-21. Iowa City.
Hallman. Leon Charles
1965 A Geographic Study of Montgomery County, Texas.
Southern Methodist University. Dallas.

Masters thesis.

Hallmark. C.T.
1986a Soil Descriptions and Analysis.
In: The Cinco Ranch Sites. Barker
Reservoir. Fort Bend County. Texas. by H.B. Ensor. Archeological Research
Laboratory Report of Investigations 3: Appendix Ill.
Texas A & M
University. College Station.
1986b

Soil/Sediment Analysis.
In: The Crawford Site. Central Trinity River
Uplands. Polk County. Texas. by H.B. Ensor and D.L. Carlson.
Draft
report submitted to the Texas Department of Highways and Public
Transportation. Austin.

R-7

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Hatcher. Mattie Austin. translator
1919
Texas in 1820. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 23(1):47-68.
Hayes. C.W. and W. Kennedy
Oil Fields of the Texas - Louisiana Gulf Coastal Plain.
1903
Survey Bulletin 212.

U.S. Geological

Heinrich. P.V.
1986a Geomorphology of the Barker Reservoir Area. In: Inventory and Assessment
of Cultural Resources at Barker Reservoir. Fort Bend and Harris Counties.
Texas. by R.C. Fields. M.F. Godwin. M.D. Freeman and S.V. Lisk.
pp. 148-176.
Prewitt and Associates. Inc.. Reports of Investigations 40.
Austin.
1986b

Geomorphology of Seven Sites at the Jewett Mine Project.
In: National
Register Assessments of Archeological and Historical Resources at the
Jewett Mine. Leon County, Texas, by R.C. Fields. S.V. Lisk. J.M. Jackson.
M.D. Freeman and G.L. Bailey.
Prewitt and Associates. Inc. Reports of
Investigations 48. Austin.

Helm. June
1972
The Dogrib Indians.
In: Hunters and Gatherers Today, Socio-economic
Study of Eleven Such Cultures in the Twentieth Century. M.G. Bicchieri.
editor, pp. 51-89. Holt. Rinehart and Winston. Inc. New York.
Holliday. V.T.
1986
Observations on the Stratigraphy and Origin of the Cinco Ranch Mounds.
In: The Cinco Ranch Sites. Barker Reservoir. Fort Bend County. Texas, by
H.B. Ensor. Archeological Research Laboratory Report of Investigations
3:appendix Ill. Texas A &. M University. College Station.
Hollon. W. Eugene and Ruth Lapham Butler. editors
1956
William Bollaert's Texas. University of Oklahoma Press.

Norman.

Holloway. Richard G.
1986
Appendix IV. Analysis of Floral Remains from 41PK69. In: The Crawford
Site. Central Trinity River Uplands, Polk County. Texas. by H.B. Ensor and
D.L. Carlson.
Draft report submitted to the Texas Department of
Highways and Public Transportation. Austin.
Holloway, R.G .. L.M. Raab and R. Stuckenrath
1987
Pollen Analysis of Late Holocene Sediments from a Central Texas Bog.
Texas Journal of Science 39:71-79.
Houston Chronicle
1940
December 5. 1940 (page unnumbered).
Genealogical Society. Conroe.
1981

December 28, 1981.

Section 6. page 1.

R-8

Files of Montgomery County

REFERENCES CITED

Hunter. Cristi A.
1986 Analysis of Faunal Remains from 41PK69. In: The Crawford Site, Central
Trinity River Uplands. Polk County, Texas, by H.B. Ensor and
D.L. Carlson.
Draft report submitted to the Texas Department of
Highways and Public Transportation. Austin.
Ippolito, John
1983
A Cultural Resource Overview of the National Forests
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Forest Service. Lufkin.
lsphording, W.C. and G.M. Lamb
1971
Age and Origin of the Citronelle Formation.
Bulletin 82:775-779.

m

Texas.

Geologic Society of America

James. Bela M. and Dan L. Wilkinson
1985
Environmental Resource Information and Evaluation of a Proposed Reservoir
Site for the Texas San Jacinto Project. Continental Shelf Associates. Inc ..
College Station, Texas.
Johnson. Leroy Jr.
1962
The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas. with a preliminary
definition of the La Harpe Aspect.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 32:141-284.
Joutel, Henri
1962
A Journal of La Salle's Last Voyage.

D.B. Rutman. New York.

Keene, Arthur S.
1981
Prehistoric Foraging in a Temperature Forest, A Linear Programming Error.
Academic Press. New York and London.
Kennedy, W.
1891
A Section from Terrell. Kaufman County. to Sabine Pass on the Gulf of
Mexico. Texas Geological Survey Annual Report 3:43-125.
Kotter. Steven M. and Ross C. Fields
1983
National Register Testing of Site 41HR436. Addicks Reservoir. Harris
County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates. Inc. Reports of Investigation 23.
Austin.
Krinsley. D.H. and J.C. Doornkamp
1973
Atlas of Quartz Sand Surface
Cambridge.

Textures.

Cambridge University Press.

Lopez Prieto. Pedro
1810
Letter to Salcedo, Trinidad, April 17. 1810.
of Texas at Austin.

Bexar Archives. The University

R-9

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Magan. Charles
1986
Personal interview with Charles Magan. August 15. 1986. The Woodlands.
Texas by Dan K. Utley.
Malone, James M.. G.H. Greer and H. Simons
Kirbee Kiln: A Mid-19th-Century Texas Stoneware Pottery.
1979
Commission. Austin.

Texas Historical

Martin. Howard N.
1986
Personal interview with Mr. Howard N. Martin, September 25. 1986. Austin.
Texas by Dan K. Utley.
Maxwell. Robert S. and Robert D. Baker
1983
Sawdust Empire: The Texas Lumber Industry. 1830-1940.
University Press. College Station.

Texas A & M

McClintock, W.. T. Galloway, B. Stringer and L. Andrew
Soil Survey of Montgomery County. Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture.
1972
Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Government Printing Office.
Washington.
D.C.
McClurkan, Burney B.
1968
Livingston Reservoir 1965-66: Late Archaic and Neo-American Occupations.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 12. Austin.
McGuff. Paul R. and Wayne N. Cox
1973
A Survey of the Archeological and Historical Resources of Areas to be
Affected by the Clear Creek Flood Control Project. Texas.
Texas
The University of Texas at
Archeological Survey Research Report 28.
Austin.
McWhorter, Frank
Telephone and personal interviews with Frank McWhorter. July and August
1986
1986. by Solveig A. Turpin and David G. Robinson.
Mock, Charles
1986
Personal interview with Charles Mock. August 14. 1986. Magnolia. Texas by
Dan K. Utley
Montgomery County Genealogical Society, Inc.
1981
Montgomery County History. Hunter Publishing Company.

Conroe.

Montgomery County Patriot
1845
Volume I. No. 10. July 25. 1845
Montgomery. Robin
1975
The History of Montgomery County.

R-10

Jenkins Publishing Company.

Austin.

REFERENCES CITED
Morfi. Fray Juan Agustin
In two volumes. translated by Carlos
1967
History of Texas. 1613-1119.
E. Castaneda. Reprint. Albuquerque.
Nelson. H.T. and E.T. Bray
1970
Stratigraphy and History of the Holocene Sediments in the Sabine - High
Island Area. Gulf of Mexico.
In: Deltaic Sedimentation. Modern and
Ancient. Edited by J.P. Morgan and R.H. Shaver. Society of Economic
Tulsa.
Paleontologists and Mineralogists Special Publications 11 :48-77.
Oklahoma.
Newcomb. W.W .. Jr.
1980
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times.
Texas Press. Austin.
ms.

Historic Indians of the Waco Region.

University of

Manuscript in preparation.

Otvos. E.G .. Jr.
1973
Mississippi Gulf Coast Pleistocene Beach Barriers and the Age Problem of
the Atlantic - Gulf Coast Pamlico - Ingleside Beach Ridge System.
Southeastern Geology 14:241-250.
Owen. Bessie Smith
1986
Personal interview with Bessie Owen. August 14. 1986 Montgomery, Texas.
by Dan K. Utley and Solveig A. Turpin.
Patterson. L.W.
1974
A Harris County Woodland Site.
47:3-4.

Houston Archeological Society Newsletter

1979

A Review of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast.
Texas Archeological Society 50:103-123.

1985

Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:133-209.

Bulletin of the
Southeast Texas.

Peebles. Ruth
1968
The Westward Migration of the Alabama and Coushatta Indians.
thesis. Sam Houston State University. Huntsville.

Masters

Porter. James W.
1984
Thin Section Analysis of Ceramics.
In: The Robinson's Lake Site. by
George R. Milner.
American Bottom Archaeology FAl-270 Site Reports
10:133-170. University of Illinois Press. Urbana and Chicago.
Rader. Jack Douglas
1971
The Spanish Failure at El Orcoquisac.
Texas at Arlington.

R-11

Masters thesis. The University of

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Reed, St. Clair G.
1941
A History of the Texas Railroads.

St. Clair Publising Company.

Houston.

Rehkemper, L.J.
1969
Sedimentology of Holocene Estuarine Deposits. Galveston Bay. In: Holocene
Geology of the Galveston Bay Area.
Edited by R.R. Lankford and
J.J.W. Rogers. pp. 12-52. Houston Geological Society.
Renfrew, Colin
1975
Trade as Action at Distance: Questions of Integration and Communication.
In: Ancient Civilizations and Trade. Edited by J.A.
Sabloff and C.C.
Lamberg-Karlovsky. School of American Research, Advanced Seminar Series.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Rosen. N.C.
1969
Heavy Mineral and Size Analysis of the Citronelle Formation of the Gulf
Coastal Plain. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology 39:1552-1559.
Ruhe. R.V. and P.H. Walker
1968
Hillslope Models and Soil Formation I. Open Systems. Transactions of the
9th Congress of the International Soil Science Society 551-560. Adelaide,
Australia.
Saucier. R. T.
1977
The Northern Gulf Coast During the Farmdalian Substage: A Search for
Evidence.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Waterways Experiment Station
Report. Vicksburg, Mississippi.
Sellards. E.H.
1940
Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee County. Texas.
Geological Society of America 51:1627-1658.

Bulletin of the

Servello. A.F. and T.H. Bianchi
1983
Geomorphology and Cultural Stratigraphy of the Eagle Hill Area of Peason
Ridge.
In: Fort Polk Archaeological Survey and Cultural Resources
Management Program. Edited by A.F. Servello. University of Southwestern
Louisiana. Lafayette.
Shafer. Harry J.
1966
Archeological Surveys of Honea. Pat Mayse and Halsell Reservoirs. Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports 1. The University of
Texas at Austin.
1968

Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin. Montgomery
County. Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project 13. The
University of Texas at Austin.

1975

Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 46:249-254.

R-12

REFERENCES CITED
Shafer. H.J .. E. Baxter. T. Stearns and P. Dering
1975
An Archeological Assessment of the Big Thicket National Preserve. Texas.
Anthropology Laboratory Research Report 16.
Texas A & M University.
College Station.
Shafer, Harry J. and Thomas 8. Stearns
1975
Archeological Investigations at the Scotts Ridge Site (41MQ41). Montgomery
County. Texas. Anthropology Laboratory Research Report 17. Texas A &
M University. College Station.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
1951
The Bidai Indians of Southeastern Texas.
Texas at Austin.

Masters thesis. The University of

Soil Survey Staff
1981
Soil Survey Manual, Chapter 4.
U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Conservation Service. U.S. Printing Office. Washington, D.C.
Soil Conservation Service
Texas,
1982
National
Resources
Inventory
1985
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Temple. Texas.

Statistical

Soil

Tables.

Solis. R.F.
Upper Tertiary and Quaternary Depositional Systems. Central Coastal Plain.
1981
Texas: Regional Geology of the Coastal Aquifer and Potential Liquid Waste Repositories.
Bureau of Economic Geology Report of Investigations
108. The University of Texas at Austin.
Stokes. Janelle and Joe Woodring
1981
Native-Made Artifacts of Clay.
In: Archeological Investigations at the
George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory Occasional Papers 1.
The
University of Texas at Austin.
Story. Dee Ann
1981a An Overview of the Archaeology of East Texas.
26(92) :139-156.

Plains Anthropologist

1981b

Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site. Cherokee County.
Texas: Summers of 1979 and 1980.
Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory Occasional Papers 1. The University of Texas at Austin.

1982

The

Deshazo

Site,

Nacogdoches County. Texas.
Volume I.
Texas Antiquities Committee. Austin.

Texas

Antiquities Permit Series 7.

Strahler. A.N.
1958
Quantitative Analysis in Watershed Geomorphology.
American Geophysical Union 38(6):913-920.

R-13

Transactions of the

LAKE CREEK RESERVOIR

Suhm. DeeAnn and Edward B. Jelks (editors)
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Texas Archeological
Society Special Publication 1. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4. Austin.
Taylor, Walter W.
1964
Tethered Nomadism and Water Territoriality: An Hypothesis.
Actas y
Memorias 2. XXXV Congreso Internacional de Americanistas, Mexico (1962).
Texas Historical Commission
1985
Marker files. Historical Markers Guidelines and Application Form.
Texas Water Development Board
1977 Continuing Water Resources Planning and Development for
Austin.

Texas 4(2).

Tharp. B.C.
1986
Telephone conversation with Mr. B.C. Tharp, Lake Creek. August 1986 by
Dan K. Utley.
Trowbridge, A. C.
1932
The Tertiary and Quaternary Geology of the Lower Rio Grande Region.
Texas. Geologic Society of America Bulletin 65:793-812.
Udden. J.A .. C.L. Baker and E. Bose
1916
Review of the Geology of Texas.
Austin.

Texas Geological Society Bulletin 44.

Van Siclen. D.C.
1978
Geologic Study of Faulting at Addicks Dam, Buffalo Bayou, Harris County,
Texas. Report on file. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Galveston District.
Galveston.
1985

Pleistocene Meander-Belt Ridge Patterns in Vicinity of Houston, Texas.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
35:525-532.

Verbeek, E.R. and U.S. Clanton
1981
Historical Active Faults of the Houston Metropolitan Area, Texas.
In: Houston
Area
Environmental
Geology: Surface
Faulting,
Ground
Subsidence, Hazard Liability.
Edited by E.M. Etter. pp. 13-27.
Houston
Geological Society.
Webb. Walter Prescott. editor
The Handbook of Texas I. II.
1952

Texas State Historical Association.

Austin.

Wells. Charles E.
1971
Letter •n Mrs. Smith Owen. December 28, 1971.
Copy on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. The University of Texas at
Austin.

R-14

- · - c . - ·- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

REFERENCES CITED
Werner. Frederick T.
1986
Planning Aid Report for the San Jacinto Project. Montgomery and San
Jacinto Counties. Texas. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Houston.
Winfrey. Dorman
1962
Julian S. Devereux and the Val Verde Plantation.
University of Texas at Austin.

R-15

Ph.D. dissertation. The

