ARCHEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL INVESTIGATIONS
IN THE NORTH CENTRAL AUSTIN GROWTH CORRIDOR
Travis County, Texas

Technical Bulletin 66

PART I
THE FULKES HOMESTEAD, 41TV638

PART II
THE BIRD CABIN, 41TV643

Henry B. Moncure

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
1984

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Btllconn Research Center
10,100 Burntt Road

EDITORS

Deborah L. Smith
Abbi e Treece

A report submitted to Nash Phillips/Copus, Inc. in partial
fulfillment of the terms of a letter of agreement
~1ay.

1983

ABSTRACT
During April, 1983, the Texas Archeological
Survey,
The
University of Texas at Austin, conducted an archeological and
historical assessment of the Albert A. Fulkes Homestead, 41TV638,
located on a residential development of 159 acres within the North
Central Austin Growth Corridor, Travis County, Texas. This assessment
was conducted by request of Nash Phillips/Copus following their
consultation with the Texas Historical Commission and follows but was
not included in a cultural resource survey of a larger area of this
growth corridor. That survey is reported in Texas Archeological
Survey Technical Bulletin 63, June 1983, which serves as a base
document for this assessment.
The archeological and historical assessment of the Fulkes house
shows that only the basic frame may be original due to extensive
modifications and additions in the twentieth century. The associated
outbuildings and features show those present today are of recent
origin or have undergone extensive modification.
The shallow well
excavated, proved a poor repository for artifacts of an early date.
The archival search and informant interviews turned up several
features which once were present but are now known only from those
An
sources; a barn, a tenant house, a turkey pen and bee hives.
informant also gave the general location of an unmarked grave which
she recalls from her childhood on the
property.
This
last
circumstance leads to a recommendation that the alleged location of
the grave be avoided during development or that any essential
development activity take place in that area only under careful
monitoring to insure appropriate measures are taken should the grave
be found.
Site 41TV643, the Bird Cabin, was recorded during the intensive
survey and further investigated to determine if its associations with
the Bird family, its previous occupants, its prior utilization or its
inclusion with other cultural resources created a significant
potential for adding to the archeological/historical record. The site
was found to be a tenant/renter occupied house, built in the 1880s,
and now beyond preservation. The structure and environs are lacking
in
specific association with persons, groups, events or other
connections which would significantly reward further research or
result in either State Historical Landmark or National Register of
Historic Places consideration.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The author thanks all those who made the investigation of the Fulkes
Homestead and Bird Cabin possible. Deborah Smith assisted ably in the
field investigation and excavation of the Fulkes Homestead, then typed
and edited much of the manuscript. Carol Fabac produced the drawings
and provided editorial assistance. Kit Brooking and Herb Eling con­
verted the authorts photographs and those of the TNRIS into printworthy
results. Abby Treece assisted in the typing and composition of the
tables. Solveig Turpin provided editorial and compositional expertise,
Michael Guarino of Nash Phillips/Copus, Inc. produced an architectural
assessment of the building remains and laid the groundwork for historical
investigation.
Mrs. Geneva Catherine Chancels assistance was invaluable. Her willing­
ness to make a trip to the Fulkes Homestead and share her recollections
of her childhood there are greatly appreciated. Those recollections
greatly reduced the amount of conjecture regarding the sitets components
at a given time and provided welcome corroboration of the archeological
and written records. The interviews with Mrs. Mary Jane Palmer Elwell
and the late Charles D. Fulkes~ Jr. provided corroboration of a number
of important points and their assistance is appreciated. A plaudit is
due the description of the well by Dora D. Bonham. Her publication cited
rare detail having direct bearing on the investigation.
Archival investigation of the Bird Cabin benefited immeasurably from
documents supplied by William Anderson Bird (Mrs. W.R. Bird). The loan of
her personal documents is greatly appreciated.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART I.

THE FULKES HOMESTEAD

Abstract . . . . . . .
Acknowledgements . . .
Introduction . . . . .
....
Environmental Background
Archeological/Historical Background
Research Design . . . . . . . .
The Homestead Complex . . . . .
Conclusions and Recommendations
PART II.

1

3
4
6
9
30

THE BIRD CABIN

Introduction . . . . . . . .
Environmental Background.
Research Design . . . . .
Land Ownership Chronology
Site Description and Analysis
Conclusions
Recommendations
References Cited

32
32
32
35
36

40
40
41

List of Figures
Fi gure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Project Location Map . . .
The Fulkes Era Homestead.
1937 TNRIS Aerial Photograph . .
Features of the Fulkes Homestead
Braced Frame Construction
The Palmer Era Homestead . . .
The Palmer Era House . . . . .
Remains of the Bird Cabin
Artifacts from the Bird Cabin

2
8
10

13
17

23
24
33
38

List of Tables
Table
Table
Table
Table

1.

2.
3.
4.

Environmental Summary. . . . . . . . . . . . 3
The Homestead Complex . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Artifacts Recovered From the Well
26
. . . . . . . . . . . 29
Standard Nail Lengths

INTRODUCTION
An intensive level cultural resource survey of designated areas
of Travis County, Texas was conducted for Nash Phillips/Copus, Inc.
(NPC) by the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin (TAS), during February, 1983 (Moncure 1983).
The Albert
A. Fulks Homestead was recorded as a site, but specifically excluded
from archival research during that survey. The area will be part of
an urban subdivision which will include much of the homestead land
tract.
Through prior arrangement with the Texas Historical
Commission, this site was scheduled for architectural and historical
evaluation by Michael S.
Guarino of NPC's staff. In addition to
Mr. Guarino's study, the Texas Historical Commission requested a
detailed archeological examination of the homestead to include
excavation of a feature tentatively identified as a root cellar and
the mapping of remains attributable to the original homestead (NPC
letter of February 22, 1982).
In April, 1983, the Texas Archeological Survey conducted the
mapping, recording, excavation and those archival and oral history
investigations necessary to confirm, where possible, the archeological
findings.
The general objectives of this investigation were to
provide data on the specific nature of the cultural resources present,
. to determine those attributable to the Fulks Homestead, to excavate,
record and analyze the contents of the "root cellar", and to recommend
disposition of those resources or further mitigative actions, if
required. This study was designed and carried out in conformance with
criteria and guidelines set forth by the Texas Historical Commission.
It is also intended to provide compliance with the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 and its implementing regulations, 36 CFR part
800;
the National Environmental Policy Act
and
its
related
regulations, 50 CFR4, as implemented by the Environmental Protection
Agency.
The study area is an irregularly shaped segment on Walnut Creek
in the North Central Austin Growth Corridor (Fig. 1). It is located
within the 300 acre tract purchased by Albert A. Fulks in 1854 (Travis
County Deed Records:Book K:684).
It was part of the 162.78 acres
still held by Fulks at his death in 1885 and is described in the
probate records following the death of his wife, Elizabeth, in 1913
(Travis County Probate Records:3854).
The focal point of the
investigation was the abandoned dwelling and included investigation
and mapping of all the surrounding structures and features which could
have belonged to the original Fulks Homestead.
The specific aims of the study were to provide the sponsor with:
1) a detailed inventory of the cultural resources attributable to

Figure 1. Project location map

~

.

••

'..

"

.................

:
:

,/ '

"

••Bird

,•

I

I

,,......... _,
,,,

I

.', ......,......

:

-..,.,
#

,

•

•

.

,
,•
,,

.

,,

I

I

•

"

/#
......

...... ,..
....

"­

/

#

I

o

.5
miles

Cabin

"

,/l

>\

,#

--'"
Fulkes
Homestead

;~

.,

~

3

the Fulks Homestead after considering the full range of structures,
remains and features within the study area;
2) documentation of the excavation and recording of the feature
tentatively identified as the >lIroot cellar ll ;
3) a map of the Fulks Homestead remains;
4) an evaluation of the scientific or historic significance of
the resources identified; and
5) recommendations for
lessening,
avoiding or otherwise
mitigating adverse effects on the identified resources where
appropriate.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The Fulks Homestead lies within the study area addressed in Texas
Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin No. 63 (Moncure 1983). The
environmental background ;s covered in detail in that report to the
same sponsor, Nash Phillips/Copus, and is not repeated here. For the
convenience of those not having ready access to the previous report, a
tabular outline of the environment is shown in Table 1.
Table 1.

Environmental Summary

Location Physiography Surface Geology Structural Geology Soil s Hydrology River Basin Stream Drainage Climate Vegetation Region Biotic Province Archeologically Signi­
ficant Circumstances -

Central Travis County, Texas
West Gulf Coastal Plain/Blackland Prairie
(Fenneman 1938:100-103).
Cretaceous limestone deposits (Sellards,
Adkins & Plummer 1966:450).
Balcones Fault Zone (Garner 19874:101).
Silty clay, clay sediments, clay loams and
gravelly clay loams (SCS 1974:sheets 24, 25,
34 and 35).
Edwards Acquifer - Balcones Fault Zone ­
Austin Region (Muller & Price 1979:15, fig.6).
Colorado River
Walnut Creek
Mesothermal, humid, winter dry season and
occasional drought (Carr 1967:7; Russell
1945: 43-46).
Blackland Prairie (Gould 1975:2).
Texan (Blair 1950:101).
•
Episodic bottomland flooding.
table.

High water

4

Since the field examination of the study area, the Army Corps of
Engineers has announced a plan to build two flood control dams on
Walnut Creek. One of these, a 62-foot high, 2000-foot long dam in the
eastern section of Walnut Creek Metropolitan Park adjacent to the
former Fu'l ks property, woul d form a retention pond whi ch woul d extend
well into the study area. The Corps plan is currently under study and
subject to modification (Austin American-Statesman, July 3, 1983:B1).
ARCHEOLOGICAL/HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The archeological background of the study area is treated in
detail in the prior report (Moncure 1983), and is not repeated in full
here. The historical background of the Fulks Homestead effectively
commences with Anglo-American settlement of the area.
John C. Brooke, a resident of San Augustine County, acquired
part of the headright of one Thomas D. Bundick issued in 1838 (Travis
County Deed Book K:186). Brooke's holdings included 1,280 surveyed
acres on Walnut Creek and the Bundick certificate to one third of a
league adjacent to the surveyed land. The property under study is
within this third. Brooke patented the 1,280 acres in August of 1845
(General Land Office Abstracts of Original Texas
Land
Titles
vol. 3:910 certificate 143 patent 400 vol. 1). Neither Brooke nor
Bundick lived on the land.
The city of Austin was six years old when Brooke obtained his
patent to the Walnut Creek property in 1853.
One of Austin's
residents was lawyer and land speculator Henry W. Sublett, a member of
the Fifth Texas Legislature representing Bastrop, Burnet and Travis
counties (Texas Legislature 1962:18). Originally from San Augustine,
Sublett may have been personally acquainted with Brooke when he
purchased the right of title to Brooke's survey and the certificate of
the Bundick one third league (Travis County Deed Records G:253,
G:252). In October, 1854 Sublett sold 300 acres, the bulk of his
holdings north of Walnut Creek, to Albert A. Fulks (Travis County Deed
Book K:684-685). The property, when sold, was described as being ten
miles north of the city.
Albert A. Fulks, a native Virginian, had been in Texas at least
two years when he bought the Walnut Creek property. He was 37 at that
time and his wife, Elizabeth, from Tennessee, was twelve years his
junior.
Their first child was born in Texas in 1852, two years prior
to the Walnut Creek land purchase. By 1860 there were four Fulks
offspring, two boys and two girls, including a daughter born only a
month prior to that year1s census (Gracy and Gentry 1967:58).
Three
of these children had been born at the Walnut Creek homestead and a
comparison of the census records with the list of heirs in 1914 shows
as many as nine Fulks children may have been born there.
The Walnut Creek area was sufficiently populated when the Fulks
family moved in to support the foundation of the Walnut Creek Baptist
Church (Rock Church) in 1856 which had an initial membership of ten

5

(Barker History Center ms. 10861).
The church, still holding
services, is located about a mile downstream from the Fulks property.
Several neighbors of Fu"lks (or Fulkes, the spelling adopted by many of
his heirs) show up in the church's membership rosters. Among them was
J.D. Fulkes, a brother, baptized there in 1863 (Bonham 1962:6).
Family tradition has it that Albert Fulkes furnished the labor of his
slaves toward the building of the church (ibid.:2). In 1855 Fulkes
was taxed on ownership of eight slaves (Travis County Tax Records
1855:24).
These slaves, after emancipation, are said to have
continued to live on the Fulkes property "in several little houses"
(Bonham 1962:2).
Though Dora Dieterich Bonham, a granddaughter of
Albert Fulkes, used the "several little houses" quote based on
information from a cousin, she personally recalls only a single house.
Mrs. Bonham was born in 1902 in the Watters (sic) Park community near
the study area and visited her grandmother often.
The original 300 acre farm sold to Fulkes by Sublett was reduced
several times by purchase and sale prior to Fulkes' death. In 1854,
along with the Sublett holding, Fulkes purchased seven acres from his
neighbor, J.W. Bird.
This property was west of and adjacent to the
300 acres and constituted a small spur of land north of Walnut Creek
owned by Bird, who had considerable holdings south of the stream.
From this high of 307 acres Fulkes tailored his farm by mutual
agreement with his neighbors. He sold 20 acres at the north end to
Wayman Wells in 1856 and 50 more to Charles Dodge, his neighbor to the
northeast, in 1867 (Travis County Deed Books K:735 and W:577). In
1870 he sold a narrow strip, described as a lane, to Wells and 62.25
acres to James Smith in 1873 (Travis County Deed Books T:320 and
Y:31). No acreage is given for the sale of the lane but since the
probate records for Elizabeth Fulkes show the total land in her estate
to be 166.75 acres, the lane sale was .97 acre.
The death of Elizabeth Fulkes in 1913 sparked a probate of her
will which was complicated by her having outlived the designated
executor of her estate. The proposed division of the estate was to be
made among eight heirs and six of their spouses, until the untimely
death of one of the heirs. That circumstance caused a trust to be set
up for the minor children of the deceased heir and further complicated
the estate's disposition.
The heir who died in 1914, just prior to inheriting part of the
property,
was Anni e Ful kes Di eteri ch, daughter of A·I bert and
Elizabeth, born in 1876. Her marriage in 1898 to Roy F. Dieterich
resulted in two children who inherited her share of the estate. One
of these was Dora Dieterich Bonham who later authored a book on her
paternal grandfather, Francis Dieterich, an early German settler and
merchant in Texas. The book contains a number of references to the
Fulkes Homestead and its composition which have been useful in
augmenting the findings of this study and are quoted or referred to in
this report.

6
Disposition of Elizabeth's estate was accomplished by the sale of
the property to E.A. Palmer in 1914 in a series of transactions
necessitated by separate acquisition of seven eighths of the estate
from the named heirs and one eighth from the trustee of the Dieterich
children. Palmer was a son of the man for whom Parmer Lane, the road
to the north of the study area, is named though misspelled (Chance
1983:personal communication).
Edward Allen Palmer owned and operated the farm and may have
occupied the house from 1914 on but there is evidence that it had
deteriorated to the point that it may not have been his regular abode.
Several marriages had taken place linking Fulkes descendents to the
Payton and the Palmer families and Edward furthered these ties by
wedding Myrtle Freda Payton in 1922. The former Miss Payton was one
of Albert Fulkes' granddaughters. Geneva Katherine Palmer Chance, a
daughter of this union, was interviewed by the author while she
graciously conducted a tour of her father's and great grandfather's
former homestead.
She states that her mother and father had lived
several months with her paternal grandfather after their 1922 marriage
while her father renovated and expanded the Fulkes house to make it
liveable (Chance 1983:personal communication).
Her father, Edward,
was an accomplished carpenter according to Mrs. Chance and much of
the present structure is attributable to his work in 1922 and
subsequently.
Specifics are included in the analysis section of this
report. Also interviewed was Mrs. Mary Jean Palmer Elwell, another
daughter of
Edward
and Myrtle
Palmer (Elwell 1983:personal
communication). Both informants were found as a result of their names
being included in the probate records of Edward and Myrtle Palmer
(Travis County Clerk's Records, Probates 15720 and 20690).
Edward
Palmer maintained ownership of the property until 1937, overcoming a
series of financial difficulties during the Depression.
The significant occupancy of the homestead thus includes the
A.A. Fulkes/Elizabeth Fulkes era, 1854 to 1913; the E.A. Palmer era,
1914 to 1937. After 1937 the property was owned by a series of'
absentee landlords and occupied by renters until Nash Phillips/Copus
acquired it in 1977 (Guarino 1983b:appendix).
,
RESEARCH DESIGN
The scope of investigation at the Fulkes Homestead, 41TV638,
hinged on identification of those features within the study area which
are attributable to the Fulkes and early Palmer occupancies.
The
separation of these from later features, alterations, additions and
renovations required an archival review, the field location and
identification of period-specific artifacts, structural techniques and
methods and the location and interviewing of
informants.
As
recommended by the Texas Historical Commission (Herrington to Guarino,
letter of January 13, 1983), the farm complex was surveyed and the
well feature was subjected to limited testing.

7

Methodology
ARCHIVAL RESEARCH
Archival research was conducted in the files of the Travis County
Deed
Records, Travis County Commissioners Court, Travis County
Collection of the Austin Public Library, the General Land Office of
the State of Texas, the Barker History Center at The University of
Texas at Austin, the libraries of The University of Texas at Austin,
and the records of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
Pertinent information was obtained from each of these sources.
Probate records supplied the location and married names of descendents
of the Fulkes and Palmer families and led to useful informant
interviews.
INFORMANT INTERVIEWS
Three informants were contacted who had varying degrees of
personal knowledge of the homestead. Mrs. Geneva Catherine Palmer
Chance kindly followed up a telephone interview with a visit to the
site, supplying a variety of useful data unavailable from archival or
archeological evidence. Her knowledge of the site stems from her
residency there as a child, followed by long and frequent association
with the homestead and its occupants. Information obtained from the
other two informants, Mrs. Mary Jean Palmer Elwell and the late
Mr. C.D. Fulkes, Jr., corroborated hers in every detail where they had
knowledge of the circumstance in question (Elwell 1983, Fulkes
1983:personal communication).
FIELD INVESTIGATION
Each feature within the study area was examined prior to visiting
the site with Mrs. Chance. Attention was directed to architectural
detail, materials used, methods of construction employed and the
presence of diagnostic artifacts. After Mrs. Chance's visit, those
features which she stated were present at the site prior to the 1930s
were re-examined. Her identifications were, in every case, consistent
with the archival and archeological evidence.
Figure 2 shows a map of the pre-1930s homestead. Oescriptions of
individual features and a few artifacts from the excavation and
surface collections or structural components, are described below.
Excavation of the "root cellar" feature was carried out as requested
and the results are included below.
SITE DOCUMENTATION
The site was recorded on a standard Texas Historical Commission
site survey form.
This initial recording was augmented by details
noted during this study and additional photographs.
The site had
already been designated within the trinomial system used to identify
archeological sites, 41TV638.

Fi(mre 2.

The Fulkes Era Homestead

COf)rO

lJr

• fJlolI/r
fie/a

ea

·•·

\
80

··.•
••.
••
•.
••.
••
·•.,
.•.
.•
•

•
1 House

2 Root cellar
3 Possible foundation
WALNUT

4 Water tower'
5,6,7 Outbuildings
8 Well head
Arrows show location

of barbed wire samples.
(From TNRIS 1937 aerJal photograph)

- - - ---- -

9

Artifacts collected during
the
study
and
the
original
documentation with data generated from archival, informant, field
examination and analysis are curated and filed with the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, The
University of Texas at Austin.
THE HOMESTEAD COMPLEX
Central to the homestead complex at the time of examination are
the house remains. Near these are a water tower, the "root cellar,"
the remains of three outbuildings, an apparent foundation, a relict
orchard and remnants of fencing (Fig. 2). At some distance from this
central complex were additional fencing and a well head.
Each of
these features was examined for materials and methods used in their
construction and compared with the historical record and the testimony
of Mrs. Chance.
Those features which were not part of the homestead
when it was occupied by Fu"lkes or his wife are briefly treated, while
those attributable to the Fulkes era are discussed separately.
Features Later Than 1936
THE WATER TOWER
This structure, a hollow rock masonry square base with iron
corner bracing topped by a cylindrical metal holding tank, was quickly
identified as relatively modern.
The plumbing materials, pipes,
fittings, valves and supports are all recent. They include plastics
and metal alloys not developed until the 1930s.
Additionally, the
date 1952 was cut into one of the stone surfaces of the west wall of
the tower's base.
Mrs. Chance stated the tower must have been
constructed after her father, E.A. Palmer, moved his family into
Austin in 1935, since it was not present when she lived on the
homestead.
Further, the feature is not present in an aerial photo
dated 1937 (Texas Natural Resources Information System, 1937, Travis
County No. 58) (Fig. 3).
THE OUTBUILDINGS
The remains of three roofed structures lie near the house and
The materials used in these structures, where
water
tower.
diagnostic, are modern. All nails are wire cut round types, available
no earlier than ca. 1890 (Nelson 1963:3). The lumber is undercut
stock milled to less than 1/4 inch increments. This characteristic is
not usually found in local saw mill lumber, but is indicative of
pre-cut stock avaiblable from lumberyards (Blackburn 1974:32-33).
Lumberyard service was available in the area late in the nineteenth
century. The main roofing material is corrugated, zinc coated steel.
In
most
instances,
the protective zinc coating has not yet
deteriorated. Some corrugated, plexiglas, plastic roofing is also

-- -

---

-

----

-

-

- - - - -

--

-----

11

present, a material not available until the 19305. No artifactual
evidence of earlier than ca. 1950 was found in the sheet refuse on the
ground surrounding these structures. The TNRIS 1937 photo does not
show buildings where these remains now stand. Mrs. Chance stated that
none of these structures were a part of the homestead when she lived
there.
The outlines of three other buildings appear in the 1937
photograph (Fig. 3). One of these was a tenant rental house according
to Mrs. Chance (see the Palmer era homestead).
Nothing remains of
the other two. The area in which they were located has been modified
by the construction of a power line tower. It is possible that the
two southernmost outbuilding remains present in 1983 are those two
buildings in new locations.
In summary, based on artifactual, archival
and
informant
evidence, none of these shed structures were part of the Fulkes
Homestead.
FENCING
The types of barbed wire utilized in the fences shown in Figure 2
were sampled at the points indicated by arrows. Three separate
varieties of wire were present. The earliest patent date among them
is November 12, 1874 for a specimen of Glidden Winner barbed wire
(Clifton 1970:99). All three wire types are still manufactured.
Mrs. Chance stated that these fences were strung by her father,
which would place their origin no earlier than the mid 1920s. No
evidence suggests that these present fences replaced earlier ones. It
is likely that the posts from pre-barbed wire fences would have been
utilized to string the wire if they had been available, but no support
post showed evidence of earlier rail attachment. It appears that most
of these fences did not replace prior fencing of the same areas. What
may be a rail fence remnant is immediately west of the house in the
form of a post and rail gate which formerly allowed access to the
orchard (Fig. 2). The 1937 TNRIS photograph shows probable fencelines
in most of the locations of those found during the study.
It seems likely, then, that the barbed wire fences were e~ected
in the 1920s by Palmer. The rail fence remnant, if it is such, may
date to the Fulkes occupancy.
THE FOUNDATION
South and slightly east of the house structure at the edge of the
dirt road is an area where the soil has been removed from the rock in
the shape of a rectangle nine feet from north to south and four feet
from east to west.
A small amount of undercut modern lumber of
unknown origin lay on and adjacent to this rectangle.
The cleared
area is too regularly shaped to be anything but cultural in origin;
however, no definitive associated material is present that provides a

- - _.......................................

_­

12
clue
to
its function.
Mrs. Chance could not assist in the
identification of this feature, placing its construction at a date
later than 1935.
The rock is not intrusive; it is natural to the
location and the tentative identification as a foundation is based on
its regular shape and size, which are sufficient to have provided the
foundation for a small shed. However, no such structure appears in
the 1937 aerial photograph.
Features Earlier than 1936
THE WELL HEAD
The location of the well head is shown in Figure 2.
The
facility, if not the present well head casing, is a feature of the
early homestead. Dora Dieterich Bonham (see Archeological/Historical
Background) describes this well as the "big spring" on Big Walnut
Creek (Bonham:1958:8), and states the 'big springs' on Big Walnut
Creek, in Travis County. Texas, north of Austin, were called the
'Fulkes Springs', the people naming the springs after Mrs. Elizabeth
Fulkes, and attributes this information to a 1957 interview with
Mr. Albert Means of Fiskville (op cit:187).
The well is located
directly upslope from the point where the springs flow out of the
creek bank and obviously derives its water from the same underground
source.
Mrs. Chance was able to proceed, uncued, directly to the well and
stated it was in operation as far back as she could recall. She did
not confirm the present concrete casing and well head but remembers a
lower walled version.
The present casing is concrete, with a tank
which had once been electrically pumped. The remnants of electrical
Wlrlng, insulators, and their supports are present. The manner in
which the wire remnants are insulated and the composition of the wire
alloys date them no earlier than the 1940s. The development and
widespread use of insulating flexible plastic began at this time as a
replacement for rubber and cloth. The use of dissimilar copper and
steel alloys in twin wire electrical lines was developed about the
same time.
In summary, this well was a part of the early homestead but has
been greatly altered from an upslope tap of the flowing aquifer to an
above ground, pumped storage facility. As a result, its archeological
significance as an entity is slight.
Its importance lies in its
status as the main water source for the homestead during its early
period.
The 1937 photograph shows trails to the well area, but the
specific location is obscured by tree canopy and insufficient photo
resolution.
THE ORCHARD
This feature is a botanical artifact. The 1937 TNRIS photograph
clearly shows the regular pattern of planted trees. The photograph
was taken several months before E.A. Palmer sold the property in 1937;

-----"------------------­

13

thereby dating the orchard, at latest, to the Palmer era. The
relict orchard is composed of a few stunted trees of
fruit-producing species now losing out to long grasses, scrub
and pines. The former regular, rank and file pattern is still
but is frequently broken where trees are now missing.

current
several
juniper
evident

No archival reference to the orchard was found in the land
transaction records or in Bonham's description of the homestead.
Mrs. Bonham1s familiarity with the area spans her first five years in
residence there, 1902-1907, and eleven years in a nearby home,
1907-1918. She described the pecan groves along the creek, the crops
on the tilled land and even mentions the vegetable garden near the
house (Bonham 1958:8). The orchard may not have been present at the
time, or its description may have been omitted. There is, however, no
indication of a separate area which could have contained 'a vegetable
garden in the 1937 photograph, suggesting that the vegetable garden
was converted to an orchard at some time after 1918. Because of its
location near the house, it is reasonable to assume that the orchard
area could originally have served as a "kitchen garden", to be
eventually augmented or replaced by the planting of fruit trees.

THE IIROOT CELLAR II - WELL
A small feature located 11.9 meters west of the house remains and
adjacent to the orchard was included in the scope of work requested by
the sponsor following a recommendation for exploratory excavation from
the Texas Historical Commission.
The outward appearance of the
feature was that of a root cellar or vegetable kiln (Fig. 4a).
The
timber-covered top, the rectangluar shape and size (1.88 meters by
1.36 meters), and its location all supported this identification.
Excavation began with the removal of the timbers forming the top,
and it was almost immediately apparent that the feature was not a root
cellar. A terra cotta drain pipe was visible at the west end of the
feature, 0.45 meters below the level of the ground surface, angled to
allow gravity flow of water away from the feature (Fig. 4b).
A few
inches below the pipe lip the soil being removed became wet, at 1.22
meters water filled the void left by soil removal. The feature was a
shallow well tapping a high water table. The capping limestone had
been removed to form the rectangle and the drain inserted to prevent
overflow and uncontrolled runoff. Results of excavation at both ends
and at the center of the rectangle were the same - at a depth of 48
inches below the surrounding ground surface water rapidly filled the
hole. It was obvious that during periods of more rainfall than that
of early 1983, the well would have required the overflow pipe and was
really a surface tap of the water table hardly deserving the
designation of well.
A description of the excavation details is
included in a following section.
Mrs. Bonham supplied the following description of
appears to fit this one's characteristics:
A few steps from the house was what we called

a well

a well

that

which

----1

l
l

Figure 4.

Features of the Fulkes Homestead.

l

a.

The topless well.

b. Ceramic pipe
found in the well.

c. Fulkes
House, 1983.

15

had no top. Usually wells had covers, or casings, made of
pine boards. Over this was a pulley through which a rope
was threaded, making it easy to draw up a bucket of water.
But this particular well had no top. Therefore, it seemed
that we "dipped up" ice-cold water from ground level .... Near
the well without a top grew the vegetable garden.
(Bonham
1958:8).
Mrs. Chance did not recall the well in operation during her stay
at the homestead, pointing out a location just south of the house and
now covered with rock rubble as having been a shallow well with a
IItop".
Her statement, coupled with that of Mrs. Bonham, would place
the excavated well in operation in the first two decades of this
century, replaced by the second shallow well in the latter part of the
third decade. Mrs. Chance stated that the main water source was the
large well at "Ful kes Springsll and that the small well near the house
was used to water the garden.
Mrs. Bonham's statement implies
drinking water use. Since the location pointed out by Mrs. Chance is
at ground elevation about 0.5 meters lower than the excavated well, it
is possible that a second well represented an attempt to obtain better
water flow during drier periods by moving a bit downslope.
Additionally. there ;s a tree next to the location pointed out by
Mrs. Chance which has wear marks on several of its branches.
Mrs.
Chance recalled being able to direct her rope swing, hung from that
tree, out over the well while playing as a child. Some wear marks may
be attributable to the swing and others to the support of a pulley for
raising water from the well.
The 1937 photograph does not support the use of the excavated
well at that time. The resolution is not sufficient to discern any
evidence of its existence either by the feature itself or by paths to
its location. The well location pointed out by Mrs. Chance is beneath
the tree canopy in this aerial photo.
In sum, it is reasonable to assign the excavated well to at least
the latter part of the Fulkes era of occupancy on the basis of the
archival record. Its existence as part of the homestead at a time
earlier than the recollections of Mrs. Bonham (1902-1918) is a matter
The few artifacts recovered during
excavation,
of conjecture.
discussed in a subsequent section, do not extend the well's origin any
further back in time, a result to be expected since their deposition
in most cases would have followed the well's abandonment. Such items
as may have found their way into such a shallow well during its actual
use could have easily been recovered by hand, and would surely have
been removed if the well were used for drinking water.

16
THE HOUSE
Part of the abandoned remains of the Fulkes house are still
standing.
They
incurred
relatively severe damage during the
installation of a nearby water line. There is also evidence of some
vandalism. Approximately half the structure has collapsed, apparently
knocked down by a large, tracked, earth moving machine (Fig. 4c). The
portion of the house which is still more or less intact represents
several construction episodes involving major
changes
to
the
structure.
These episodes are evidenced from the foundation to the
roof.
The Foundation
The most recent supports are stone and concrete piers, augmenting
a few wooden piers which are still in place. The newer piers raised
the house approximately ten centimeters above the level of the wooden
piers, suggesting an attempt to level the house. The wooden supports
are saw-shaped, not hewn, and may not be original, since none are
primary supports but are posit ioned beneath joists, gi rders, and
floors.
The Basic Frame
The construction type used here is the braced frame (Fig. Sa).
Braced frame construction developed from post construction and evolved
in this county through several phases (Upton 1981:59-60).
By the
eighteenth century, a form termed mature Chesapeake framing system had
been devised. It is characterized by the use of lighter timber than
its predecessors in order to allow concealment of the frame within the
walls. The frame of such houses commonly used pit sawn, squared
timbers but the Fulkes house has some hewn frame members, suggesting
these were acquired and shaped on the site.
Although the framing style of the Fulkes house is braced frame,
not all of the framing components are of the same vintage. In the
single-pile (one-room-deep) version of the braced frame style, the
basic components are a heavy sill, heavy upright posts supported by
the sill and continuing to the top member (a heavy plate), light
vertical studs running sill to plate, and diagonal braces from sill to
post and plate to post (Fig. 5b). In the Fulkes house, the sill and
posts show hewn characteristics while the plates, studs and braces are
undercut, lumberyard lumber.
It is reasonable to attribute the
lumberyard sized material, secured in most cases with round, wire cut
nails, to the renovation efforts of E.A. Palmer in 1922
(see
Archeologcial/Historical Background section).
The sills and posts,
the least movable and most massive portions of the frame, are probably
of earlier vintage and may be as early as the initial period of Fu1kes
occupancy of the premises.

---~~-------~~

~~

Figure 5.

Braced Frame Construction.

a.

I n the Fulkes House.

b.

Schematic illustration.
Heavy plate

~
~

~

~

~
/

\~

~

I

11/1/1
After Blackburn, 1974

Foundation

I--­

~

___ Br ace

Heavy

post

Light studs

Heavy sill

\~

18

The Floors, Girder, Joists, and Wall Framing
The floor boards are lumberyard cut and secured to the joists and
girder with a variety of nail sizes and types. Round, wire cut nails
predominate, but some square nails are present. Re-use of the square
nails is suggested.
The girder is the central support beam running the length of a
structure.
It;s used when the distance between sills exceeds a span
of approximately 16 feet. Additional support is then needed for the
floor joists. The Fulkes girder is supported in the center and at its
south end by a rock and concrete pier.
The north end is off its
support, but appears to have abutted the north sill of the current
remains and rested on a similar rock and concrete pier.
The girder
shows circular sawn characteristics which, in combination with its
late vintage supports, suggests it is either a replacement feature or
an addition.
The south room, or pen, of the house is still intact,
measuring 15 feet 7 inches from east sill center to west sill center.
Such a pen, by itself, would not normally require a girder. The
addition of the kitchen room at the rear (east side) of the house
increases the span to 24 feet from east to west and necessitates one
be used. No materials distinctly attributable to the nineteenth
century were found in the kitchen room's remaining materials and it is
suggested that this room is a later addition to the house. in keeping
with the apparent age of the girder.
The joists remaining in place are not uniform. Some are circular
sawn and undercut and some are full cut without circular saw marks.
Reuse of some of them is suggested. The wall framing is, in most
cases, undercut lumber. Exceptions show nailing patterns indicating
reuse. The frame posts and wall studs also evidence nailing patterns
different from that used to attach the present siding.
Doors, Windows and Associated Hardware
The door frames and window frames
utilize
non-diagnostic
construction methods and contain materials readily available since the
last two decades of the nineteenth century, and obtainable for a
decade or more prior to that. No hardware with an early origin date
and a finite cut off date prior to the E.A. Palmer renovation period
(1922 and later) was found. Even the six over six light sash windows,
sometimes an indicator of nineteenth century origin when encountered
in Texas (Alexander 1966:89), have tension spring holding devices in
the sash frames, a twentieth century development (Harrison 1973:265).
mullions are now missing as is most of the glass. The remaining glass
is not attributable to an early date.
The use of iron glaziers's
points was noted;
these, however, may be the result of pane
replacements. The doors, too, are non-diagnostic. Their hardware
locks, hinges, knobs and screws - are equally non-specific, having
been available for all or most of the period since Fulkes acquired the
property. The screw types date from ca. 1846 (Sloane 1965:25) and are
still in use. The hinges are loose pin butts available at least since

•

19
1868 (Towne 1904:175) and are also still in use. One lock type was
first adopted by Yale and Towne in 1879 (ibid:94).
Only cosmetic
changes were made in this lock type through the period of the Palmer
occupancy of the house. The other two locks found were warded types
operated by a round key. 'Such locks were in use for vi rtua lly the
entire period of the Fulkes and Palmer occupancies of the homestead.
The south gable end door was "secured" by such a lock. The two knob
sets and spindles which remained in place have no markings indicating
a specific manufacturer, but the knob type has been available for the
entire era under study.
The Chimneys and Fireplace
The fireplace is rubble construction stone with a brick lining
and firebox.
The brick is of two types but neither is of sufficient
age to have been part of an original Fulkes construction. One type is
unbranded, pressure molded brick lacking a frog. It is composed of
fire brick clay. Processing of such material was not common in Texas
until the late nineteenth century (Hall 1905:894). The second type is
marked STANDARD and is pressure formed wire cut brick. The brand name
appears in this century in the inventories of those produced by
unassociated companies operating in Elgin and Palmer, Texas. By 1920,
the Palmer based company had listed its products with a national
organization of brick manufacturers, and the Elgin based company had
merged with two other companies and ceased to use the term IISTANDARD II
in its name (Brick and Clay Record 1920:57:6:40).
The manufacturing
method is a product of the brick industry's progress in the last
decade of the nineteenth century, but was utilized by the Palmer
company just after the turn of the century.
A second, smaller brick chimney is found in the kitchen, located
in the rear addition to the house. This chimney served a stove. The
brick remains are those of pressure extruded, wire cut brick.
It is
unmarked, without a frog and is face or common brick having no unusual
This chimney appears to be a Palmer
heat resistant qualities.
addition. Its presence and function were confirmed by Mrs. Chance.
Walls and Wall Coverings
The material used to produce a smooth surface on the inside walls
included undercut lumber, particle board and plywood, where intact
walls could be examined. None of these carries an early diagnostic
date.
Several wall papering materials were also encountered. These
included burlap sacks, newspapers, and several varieties of commercial
wallpaper.
The newspapers dated to 1952. Their location beneath two
types of wallpaper established a very recent date for these three
layers.
A near perfect match for the remaining wallpaper pattern was
found in a sample issued with the Fall 1922 issue of the Sears,
Roebuck Catalog. The burlap sacks in use, where company markings were
present, were those of the Harper Seed Farms of Martindale, Texas and
Kasch Breeding Farms of San Marcos, Texas. Neither firm predates
World War II.

20
The outer wall covering is novelty siding applied shiplap style,
secured, for the mast part, with wire cut round nails. Although this
material has been available since the late nineteenth century (McKee
1970:2), here it is power sawn, tapered and shaped such that its
origin must be relatively late in the sequence of additions to the
house.
Mrs. Chance states it was not in place when she lived on the
premises. This places its installation in the late 1930s at the
earliest.
Porches
A rubble masonry rock and cement porch and steps had been
constructed at the front (west) side of the house. The material used
;s the same as that in the fireplace and support piers and therefore
is probably of similar late vintage. The points where this porch
adjoins the house are at a height in consonance with the height of the
later piers, further indicating a contemporary origin. Mrs. Chance
recalled a wooden porch in the same location during her stay in the
house.
A wooden stoop or small porch was located on the south side of
the house. The risers of the steps had nail holes evidencing reuse as
did the steps themselves. The step frame appears to be early due to
the condition of the wood, the lack of circular saw marks and the
presence of several square, cut nails.
No definitive diagnostic
characteristic, however, was found. Mrs. Chance recalls such a wooden
stoop.
The Roof
There have been at least four roofing episodes in the house1s
history. Juniper shakes, pine shingles, corrugated metal sections and
composition shingle are all present. Given the current condition of
the remains it is not possible to state whether this collection of
materials came about as four full roofings/reroofings or is the result
of repair.
These materials are layered, showing their order of
installation, but this does not date them or even guarantee that the
lowest layer is the original. The nails used are predominantly round,
wire cut types in wide use since about 1890.
Past Components of the Homestead
On her visit to the site, Mrs. Chance identified the spots where
a barn,.a tenant or rent house, a garage, bee hives, a turkey pen and
a possible grave site had once stood. No remains of any of these
features can be discerned.
The barn was once located southwest of the house in the vicinity
of the dirt road which runs south toward the creek crossing. The
barn, actually a barn complex according to Mrs. Chance, had six
stalls, two milking parlors, an adjacent hog fattening pen and a
brooder hog pen. It burned down during the 1930s and was not rebuilt.

21
No trace of
(Fig. 6).

it

remains.

The road now runs through the former site

The tenant or rental house was located in a tree grove southwest
of the house and northeast of the Fulkes Springs well. The 1937 TNRIS
photographs shows this house or its remains (Fig. 6).
According to
Mrs.
Chance, the house was sometimes empty and sometimes occupied by
persons assisting her father in running the farm. She recalled using
the house as a convenient place to change clothes when she and other
children swam in the creek. She describes the house as a s;ng1e room
with no inside wall covering and of frame construction with no
foundation. The room was partitioned into four sections. No trace of
this building remains. Grass and shrubs cover the site and there is
no sign of even a trash scatter. Only the cleared spot in the tree
grove supplies physical evidence of its former existence. It is
tempting to link this building with those occupied by former Fulkes
slaves mentioned by Bonham but no concrete evidence of this can be
shown even though the location is appropriate (Bonham 1962:2).
In
Mrs. Bonham's recollections she is able to recall only a single house
but cites her first cousin, Clifford Palmer, as remembering more than
It should be noted that Mrs. Bonham does not claim the houses
one.
she references were slave quarters but only that they were built on
her grandmother's property and lived in by former slaves (ibid.).
The garage was a one car shed north-northeast of the house in the
area now bisected by the dirt road (Fig. 6). There is no discernible
trace of this building in the area which has been further disturbed by
the water line construction which damaged the house. Since it was a
garage, it was a late addition to the homestead in any case.
The bee hives and turkey pen were located northwest of the house.
a location concealed by tree canopy in the 1937 TNRIS photograph
(Fig. 3). Some chicken wire and assorted lumber scraps are in this
location but, unsupported by other evidence, they are as unremarkable
as several other debris collections in the former yard, some resulting
from various construction projects including the installation of the
water main. No sign of a bee hive remains.
Mrs. Chance remembers a grave site but not its specific location.
She recalls her mother's warning to all the children to stay away from
it during play and remembers it as a small, unmarked mound under a
large tree. Mrs. Chance pointed out the general area of the grave as
immediately east of a small intermittent tributary to Walnut Creek and
on the terrace slope of the creek (Fig.
6). Several trees of
sufficient age are in that area.
The following table lists the components and
homestead, their age and the supporting sources.

features

of

the

· '''22
Table 2.

The Homestead Complex

Feature

Era of Origin

Source

House

Ful kes (frame)

Barn
Garage
Turkey pen
Beehive
Topless well
"Swing" well
Spri ng we 1"I head
Fences (wire)
Garden
Orchard
Rent house
Water tower
Foundation
"Outbuildings" (3)
Grave site

Palmer (at least)
Palmer
Palmer
Palmer
Fulkes
Palmer
Fu"1 kes
Palmer
Fu'l kes
Palmer
Fu"1 kes
Post 1937
Post 1937
Post 1937

Material type and
Upton, Bonham
Chance
Chance
Chance
Chance
Bonham
Chance
Bonham
Chance
Bonham
Chance, TNRIS
Bonham
Dated, TNRIS, Chance
TNRIS, Chance
TNRIS, Chance
Chance

?

The Palmer Era House
It would ordinarily be very difficult to make definitive
statements regarding the features of the intact building due to the
unfortunate damage done during the water main installation.
However,
Mrs. Chance was able to supply an excellent description of the
structure during the 1930s. The standing remains are little more than
half the structure of that era.
The house had a west-facing central hall flanked by mirror image
pens north and south. In back of the south pen was the kitchen and
behind the north pen was a storeroom. The rear (east) portion of the
hall had a partition and door which converted that section into a
dining room with doors to the kitchen and storeroom. The south pen is
more or less intact; the kitchen and hall are heavily damaged. The
rest of the structure has collapsed. The current rock and concrete
front porch replaced a wooden one which had vertical posts and a top
rail. Like the remaining south pen, the north pen had a fireplace and
chimney.
Mrs. Chance recalls that this fireplace was neither as
elaborate nor as efficient as the one in the south pen.
It was
sometimes blocked off because it tended to smoke when a fire was lit
and let in a great deal of cold air when not in use.
Given the old
frame materials in the south pen and the chimney performance which
points to a construction difference, it is easy to speculate that the
destroyed section of the house may have been an addition to the
original. Unfortunately evidence to prove or refute this speculation
is lacking. Though the framing still in place does change to dressed,

-----

- - - - -------- - - - - -

-

~~-----~-

~-

---~-~--~~~~

~~-

FiQure 6.

The Palmer Era Homestead.

C

0l110
'lJ" /)1.

011;0Q'
flelQ'

.,,,

,
"':,.

)(

09

It ., '...
\

,,
,

.,.
..
\

1:6600

80

WALNUT,."

(From TNRIS

1937

aerial photograph)

"

- '?r
CREEK

"..-,,\

/

X

I'-_/ /

I

1
2
3
4
5,6,7
8

House
Root cellar
Possible foundation
Water tower
Outbuildings
Well head
9 Rent house
10 Barn
11 Garage
12 Beehives & turkey pen
13 Topped well
X Grave

24

undercut lumber at the hall in both the east and west facades, there
are hewn and full cut remnants among the north pen debris. Thus it is
possible that the change represents work done on the hall to convert
it from a dog trot between two pens to a hall and dining room and is
not evidence of an addition including both the hall and the north pen.
The kitchen had an auxiliary chimney for a woodburning cooking
stove.
This brick chimney extended through a roof which was covered
with the same material (during the 1930s) as the main gable but was
pitched less steeply in the classic shed room add-on fashion. Its
frame style and the materials used would place the kitchen/shed room
contemporaneous or very nearly so with the pen to which it was
attached.
The entrance to the hall, at the center of the west facade, had a
wide transom with sidelights flanking the door. The north sidelight
is no longer intact. None of the materials used in this entranceway
shows definitive early characteristics.
In sum, the 1930s house was as shown in Figure 7.
There are
indications that this configuration was reached by means of additions
to a single pen structure but other reconstructions are possible.
Figure 7. The Palmer Era House.
Rock porch (has replaced wood porch)
OrigInal door had
top- and sidelights

- ..~- I - - ­

I
_ _ _ _ ..J

I

I

I
Hall

I

-+- ­
Kitchen

Dining

---'I-~./""
Exta'nt structure

-- - -

Storeroom

I
I

_-1

Destroyed portion of original structure

EX,CAVATION OF THE WELL

After photographs, measurements and sketches were made of this
feature excavation was begun. Ten partially decomposed timbers topped
All were placed north-south spanning the
the feature (Fig. Aa).

25
shorter dimension (I.36m) of the rectangular structure. Two timbers
were found to have partially deteriorated railroad type spikes still
imbedded in them. Traces of a thin metal covering were also present.
Examination of the feature after the removal of the timbers
showed it penetrated the thin (0.2m) surface soil layer and cut into
the underlying limestone rock. The granular, unevenly fractured sides
showed no obvious marks revealing how this was accomplished but the
material broke loose when struck with a small, four pound, hand
drilling hammer.
A man using a wedge and an eight pound, standard
sledge hammer would have experienced little difficulty in shaping the
feature.
Shovel excavation of the west end of the feature was begun with
concurrent dry sceening of the fill. At this point the undisturbed
fill surface was O.60m (23.6 inches) below the surrounding ground
surface.
At a.77m (30.3 inches) the fill soil was noticeably wet, a
condition which increased until the soil removed was replaced by water
at approximately 1.2m (47.24 inches). Thus water filling occurred
approximately a.60m (23.6 inches) below the fill surface and less than
4 feet below the ground surface during a period when precipitation in
the aquifer area was several inches below average.
Shovel excavation of the east end of the feature produced similar
results.
Damp earth was met at O.75m (29.5 inches) and water fill at
I.22m (48 inches). A sharpshooter/drain spade was used to sink a test
hole in the center of the feature; the same damp soil to water fill
took place at approximately the same levels.
Excavation was
terminated at this point. Fill screening produced a small number of
artifacts (Table 3).
Among all the items recovered from the well only the Bennington
style marble is attributable to the Fulkes era. Glazed clay marbles
such as this one were available in the U.S. as imports from the time
of initial settlement and were manufactured in the U.S. beginning in
1884. Domestic manufacture of glass marbles began in 1882 and
achieved an economic advantage over clay ones in 1901 with the
development of a semi-automatic machine for their manufacture.
By
1905 commerical manufacture of domestic clay marbles was virtually a
thing of the past and imports ceased with World War I (Baumann
1970:19-22).
As previously stated the shallow character of this well would
have permitted easy removal of objects dropped into it. Thus most of
the items found are from the period following abandonment of the well.
The railroad spikes in the covering timbers presumes the arrival of
the railroad in Travis County in the 1870s and the availability of
used ties following a period of original use. A long term study of
tie use life involving the marking of ties with dated nails extended
from the turn of the century until the 1970s. Ties, still in use,
bearing nails from the 1920s are not uncommon and earlier ones may be
found less commonly, perhaps as much due to collectors removing them
as to tie replacement. The use life is measured in decades and those

Table 3.

Artifacts Recovered From the Well

Item
tip section,
metal fishing rod

Description
wire-wound ferrule, all metal
ti p, 33 in long

automobile license right 1/3 of plate with IISII
1146" and tl7411 impressed
plate fragment

Side
Remarks
west no identifying marks
20th century bait casting
style
west dated 1946, liS" is
probably last letter of
Texas
west 20th century

clothespin spring

wire tension spring

railroad spike

nearly intact, 5~"-~ .. wHb
standard railroad head

west

not earlier than 1870s
in area

railroad spike
carriage bolt
with washer, nut
stove bolt frag.
cream ware rim
sherds (3)

lower 4~1I of iron spike
2 3/4 11 bol t with bevell ed
square head
upper 1~", threaded to head
glaze craZing, plain white

west
west

same
non-diagnostic

west
west

non-diagnostic
plate or saucer, available
from 1790 to present
(Miller 1980:29)
non-diagnostic
1 rim sherd with beaded edge
non-diagnostic
bent at one time
recent composition material
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic

amber
clear
1i ght green
iron, 1~1I
imitation stone, masonry
brown alkaline glaze, 3/8"
7/8 with countersunk head,
single slot, sharp end
wire cut nails (4) 3d, 6d, 8d, 16d size, flat
head, diamond point
1" size
fence staple
glass sherds (3)
clear, no pattern
clear, molded pattern, ribs
glass sherd
cream ware sherds plain white, thicker than
(2)
those of west side
pearl shell button 22 lignes, fisheye center
(2)
2 holes, 1 has raised rim
plastic button
brown, 22 lignes and gr.ay
(2 )
20 lignes, 4 holes
handmade marble
brown, black, white, no
gloss glaze, 19 mm.
Bennington type with many eyes
glass sherds (2)
glass sherds (5)
glass sherds (3)
fence staple
tile fragment
stoneware sherd
wood screw

11

west
west
west
west
west
west
west

east available circa 1890
(Nelson 1965:1)
east drawn wire type
east curved as part of vessel
east curved as part of vessel
east no join possible
east spans 19th-20th century
post-1909, probably 1930
(Luscomb 1967:19)
east not later than 1905
(Weitzman 1976:143)

east

27

used over the well could have been placed there at a time well into
the twentieth century even if they were among the first used by the
railroad in the area. In sum, the feature is probably an early part
of the homestead based on the archival evidence but its contents are
basically representative of the period following its abandonment,
ca. 1936.
NAILS
The presence of square nails in the standing structure and the
north end debris required an investigation. A sample was taken to
ascertain the presence or absence of early types and to locate them in
a context indicating original use.
Nails in their crudest form date well into antiquity but the 100
year period beginning in the late eighteenth century saw a series of
manufacturing inventions and improvements which changed nails from a
limited production/limited use artisan's product to a universally
available, mass produced item.
It would be most helpful if one
identifiable type of nail supplanted another in an orderly sequence
Some early
but such is not the case. Nails types are persistent.
types continue in production today, claiming certain advantages over
more recently developed ones. Supported by collateral evidence of
age, however, nails are useful time indicators and the lack of the
later developed types in a structure can be significant.
Identified by mode of manufacture, from earliest to most recent,
the major nail types are wrought, cast, plate cut and wire cut.
Wrought nails are produced by shaping the heated metal stock with
hammer blows while that stock is held in or against a forming base in
As a
the classic blacksmith hand tool operation with no automation.
result, no two wrought nails are alike. Wrought nails are commonly
square in cross section (Hodge 1964:118). Cast nails are produced by
melting the metal stock and pouring it into molds. Most cast nails
were made by utilizing a mold pattern plate with a choice of head
sizes and shapes to obtain a series of head blanks. The full mold was
then produced by pressing a pointed hand tQol into the center of the
head impression to create the desired shank length and girth (Lenik
1977:45-46). Cast nails, as a result, are less individual than
wrought nails, particularly those cast in the same episode. Their use
in the United States is rare. Finding either of these types in the
Fulkes Homestead was unlikely due to the advent of plate cut nails.
The process for manufacturing plate cut nails, whereby the nail
is cut from metal plate stock and rolled or compacted to a suitable
thickness, dates from the late eighteenth century.
Eighty-eight
patents for machines to make plate cut nails were issued between 1791
and 1815 (Nelson 1963:2).
Improvements to the process continued
through the nineteenth century, resulting in hundreds more patents.

-------.~~.....

----------~-~

.............................

--~

..

28
In general, plate cut nails can be divided into five phases,
identifiable by the cutting and heading methods used. These, with
their approximate span of manufacture, are:
1. Both sides of the nail shank cut from the same side of the
stock, hammered head, 1790s-1820s.

plate

2. Shank sides cut from opposite sides of the plate (a cut was
and the plate reversed, hammered heads, 1810-1820s.

made

3. Shank sides cut from opposite sides,
1820s-1830s.
4. Shanks cut from opposite
1820s to the present.

sides,

crude

precision

machine-made
machine-made

heads,
head,

Opposite or common shank cutting can often be determined by the
cross section of the nail if it is in fair condition. The cutting
process leaves shear
marks,
slight
lipping
of
the
edges,
representative of the direction of the cutting stroke. Care must be
exercised to distinguish the major shear, that of the cutting stroke,
from those produced by the return of the cutting blade. Hammered
heads differ from machine-made heads in their asymetry.
Making this
distinction is often hampered by deterioration of the nail.
Wire cut nails are formed from rolled, rodded metal stock drawn
into a wire of suitable diameter, cut and headed by machine. These
are highly uniform nails within their size categories and are easily
distinguished by their round shanks. Machines for quantity production
were in use around 1890. This late date often makes their appearance
in any historic building more indicative of additions to the structure
than any early building date.
Most nails are sized by a relict measurement system which was
based on the price per hundred expressed in English pennies (Noel Hume
1969:252). Sizes extend from the smallest 2 penny, 2d, up to 60
penney or 60d. A 2d nail is one inch long, a 60d is six inches. From
2d to 16d, length increases in one-quarter inch increments;
above
16d, increments are one-half inch. These penny sizes are currently in
use but there have been variations in the past (Table 4).
To complicate matters, length in square, wrought, cast and cut
nails is measured tip to tip while in wire cut nails, it is measured
from beneath the head to the pOint except when the head is countersunk
(C F and I Steel Corporation 1982:9). Nails shorter than an inch are
called brads or tacks and do not fit into the penny measuring system.
Nails and spikes are not consistently differentiated but most sources
apply the term spike at the 30d size and general agreement is reached
at 60d.
Within these various lengths, there may be several shank
diameters expressed in wire gauge size. A 3d nail comes in nineteen
different wire gauges from .283 to .054 inch. Shank diameter, in
incomplete specimens, does not reflect penny size.

29
Table 4.

Standard nail lengths (inches)
KnIght

Simmons

Baldwin

SIZE

1876

1884

1891

2d

1
1 1/4
1 112
13/4
2
21/4
2 1/2
2 3/4
3
3 1/4
31/2
4
41/2

1
1 1/4
1 '1/2
1 11/16
2
23/16
2 1/2
2 3/4
2 13/16
31/8
3 11/16
41/8
41/2
416/16
S 7/16

3d
4d
5d
6d
7d
8d
9d
10d
12d
16d
2Dd
30d
40d
SOd

5·
6 1/2"

c

Tremont
185.~ to
present

Troutwine
cut
1888

1 5/16
1 9/16
2 1/16
21/4
29/16
2 3/4

1
1
2
2
2

1
1
1
2
2
2

3
33/16
3 3/4
41/4
45/8
51/16
S 9/16

3
31/4
31/2
4
41/2·
5"
5 1/2·

1/2
3/4
1/4
1/2

1/4
1/2
3/4
1/4
1/2

3
31/4
4
41/2
6
5 1/2

Salem
wire
1888

CF&I
wire
1982

1
1 1/4
1 1/2
1 3/4
2
21/4
2 1/2
2 3/4
3
31/4
31/2
4
41/2
6
51/2

1 1/4
1 1/2
1 3/4
2
21/4
21/2
2 3/4
3
31/4
3 1/2
4
41/2
6
5 1/2

·Splke

The nails recovered from the Fulkes Homestead showed none of the
characteristics of casting
lack of edge lipping, sprue marks and
mold seam marks at the juncture of the head and shank - nor of molding
tapering
on all four shank sides, hand-hammered heads and
hand-hammered points. All 40 specimens of square nails were plate
cut, a manufacturing process dating from the late eighteenth century.
The specimens included 20 6d, 17 8d, 2 10d and 1 16d sized nails.
Each one has the clout type head, a precision machine made type
commonly used where siding is to be attached (Tremont Nail Company
1983:2).
Examination of the cross sections of specimens in good
condition showed 19 with opposite side shank cutting in the manner of
The nails post date precision machine made
those still produced.
heads but could have been available for use by E.A. Palmer in 1922,
either new or from a supply obtained earlier. Additionally, reuse
cannot be ruled out. Those specimens taken from the early frame (4
nails) do not differ from the remainder with one exception. A single
specimen removed from the south plate near the southeast corner has
the shank size and head size of a 6d nail but the length of an 8d
nail.
Its condition is excellent and it ;s not a partially
deteriorated 8d. Though it may be an anomalous 6d manufacturing error
it is probably just a smaller gauge 8d type.
The oft-quoted turn of the century date for the supplanting of
square nails by wire ones (Mercer 1968:238; Fontana and Greenleaf
1962:50) no longer holds true. In fairness to Mercer, his work on
nails was carried out in a limited area of Pennsylvania in the 1920s
and was intended for local use. Fontana and Greenleaf relied on an
anonymous section in the Encyclopedia Americana (1959:Vol. 25. p.
605-607) which marks 1902 as the point when wire nails became the
dominant type but did not necessarily supplant the earlier styles.
Nelson (1963:3) maintains many builders continued to use square nails
wel~ into the twentieth century.

30

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The current structural remains at the Fulkes Homestead site are a
composite of a limited amount of nineteenth century material with a
considerable amount of later material. The basic frame of part of the
house is early. and that of the south pen may indeed be that of the
original Fulkes house. Outside of that frame, and possibly some
reused material, the majority of the structure is much later in
origin. The remembrances of excellent informants support extensive
twentieth century additions and modifications. Further evidence of
modification beyond that known to the informants lies in the materials
used in the foundation, porch, chimney, roof, siding, girder, floors,
hardware and wall coverings; all are of twentieth century origin.
The structure in its current state shows no unusual use of materials,
no rare examples of technique or method and
no outstanding
architectural features not found elsewhere within the general area in
a better state of preservation.
The house is not associated with events, circumstances, groups or
individuals of clearly uncommon note in a national, regional or local
context and is thus limited with respect to National Register
potential.
The features associated with the house which are attributable to
the nineteenth century homestead; the well head, topless well, the
orchard, and possibly the tenant house and grave, are, in the case of
the first three named, not unusual to the area and considerably
modified from their original state. The latter two features are known
only through informants statements.
The physical remains of the
tenant house are now absent and the exact location of the grave
unknown.
Preservation of the first three adds nothing to the
archeological record not already recorded and there is nothing to
preserve in the case of the tenant house.
It is recommended that the older materials of the homestead be
made available for use in the restoration of other structures where
appropriate. It is further recommended that the general area of the
grave site be avoided and left undisturbed if possible (Fig. 6). If
this should prove unfeasible, any earth disturbing actions in that
general area should be closely monitored and such actions should be
accomplished exercising extreme caution to allow appropriate measures
to be taken should the grave be located.

~~-

...................

-.----~-.---

...

-.~.

-~---

-­

...

Part II

THE BIRD CABIN, 41TV643

32

INTRODUCTION
During the intensive survey of designated areas of the North
Central Austin Growth Corridor, site 41TV643, the remains of a log
building, was recorded (Moncure 1983).
The ruined structure was
located on the south side of Walnut Creek opposite the Fulkes
Homestead (41TV638) and lay within the right of way of the extension
of Metric Boulevard.
The meager remains exhibit no unusual use of
materials, techniques or architectural composition, and its nearly
destroyed condition does not warrant preservation. As a consequence,
the site's potential for further investigation and eligibility for
National
Register
consideration rests on the demonstration of
significant association with a person, group, event or circumstance of
local, regional or national note.
A follow-up investigation was
contracted for by the sponsor to ascertain that potential.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The site is located on the south side of Walnut Creek on the
chalky ridge overlooking the cut bank (Fig. 1). It once fronted on
Walnut Creek Road, a former Travis County secondary road
now
abandoned. This road is now nearly undetectable on the ground (Travis
County, Commissioner's Court Road Records, Precinct 2:330-331).
The
road provided primary access to this site and at least two other
dwellings along its route between Lower Georgetown Road (now IH35) and
Upper Georgetown Road (now State Route 1325). The generalities of the
environmental setting are shown in Part 1 (Table 1).
RESEARCH DESIGN
GENERAL
The physical remains at site 41TV643 are extremely sparse. Those
present employ commonly available materials using equally common
techniques in an architectural form far better preserved elsewhere.
Significance, then, if the site has that quality to the degree which
would warrant further action, lies in any association the site may
have with persons, groups, events or circumstances having local,
regional or national prominence. Accordingly, the key queries for
this study are answerable principally from archival and informant
sources with the physical remains filling a support role.

--

-

~

b

~V

<;s;:::,>·U

-,,-- _ 8.
.,. 1;; 5MiKl

Remains of the Bird Cabin.
UiLAJ )

_

:&

a.

b_

The Cabin

Detail: Saddle-notched
corner joints

c.

Detail: Separated front
sill j oi nt

34

KEY QUERIES
A series of questions pertinent to assessing the significance
41TV643 are as follows:

of

1) What is the chain of ownership for the property?
2) Which, if any, of the owners occupied the property?
3) What utilization was made of the property
residence?

by

owners

not

in

4) When ;s the structure first known in the archival record?
5) Based on ownership, utilization, occupancy and age, does the
site hold unusual historical interest in terms of what further
investigation may potentially add to knowledge of local, regional or
national cultural history?
6) Can the site be associated with other structures or features
as part of an assemblage which cumulatively has a significance
exceeding that of the site alone?
METHODOLOGY
The queries shown above are those used to commence the
determination of 41TV643 1 s potential for further investigation. The
following records facilities were researched for pertinent entries.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

The
The
The
The
The
The
of
The
The

General Land Office of the State of Texas.
Travis County Commissioner's Court.
Deed Records of Travis County, County Clerk's Office.
Travis County Collection, Austin Public Library.
Barker History Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Map Collection, Perry - Casteneda Library, The University
Texas at Austin.
Texas Natural Resources Information System, Austin.
Genealogical section, the Texas State Archives, Austin.

Informants were searched out based on their appearance in
documents included in the archival search and on the advice of other
potential informants contacted. Archival and informant information
was compared one to the other and with that obtained by examination of
the physical remains.
DOCUMENTATION
The site was recorded on a standard Texas Historical Commission
site form.
A Texas Log Cabin Register form was also completed and
forwarded (Moncure 1983:Appendix 1). A photographic record was made
and environmental, locational and current condition data was recorded.
Artifacts collected during the parent survey (Moncure 1983) and all

35
documentation
are
filed with the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory at Balcones Research Center, The University of Texas at
Austin.
LAND OWNERSHIP CHRONOLOGY
The property has an ownership lineage beginning with the bounty
warrant of Bexar Siege veteran Thomas W. Bundick, no. 1556 issued in
1854 for his 1835 service to the Republic (Miller 1967:140). Bundick,
a Matagorda County resident, did not exercise the warrant. Its
issuing was the result of its assignment for a fee to D.E.E. Braman
also of Matagorda County (General Land Office, Bounty file 761).
Similarly, Braman did not exercise his rights as assignee but sold the
warrant to Columbus Boatman and Albert Foulkes [sic] in 1874. A
survey was finally conducted in December of that year (ibid.).
In
1877, Columbus Boatman and his wife sold the 41 acres of the Bundick
warrant land south of Walnut Creek to John W. Bird, including it in a
parcel with 117 acres of land in the adjacent John C. Brooke survey
(Travis County Deed Records 40:424-425 and original deed to the
property of William R. Bird, Jr.). John W. Bird sold the property to
his brother, Thomas Bird, in 1883 (Travis County Deed Record
58:194-196).
Neither John nor Thomas Bird occupied the property
(William Anderson Bird 1983:personal communication).
The property, still referred to as 41 acres in bounty certificate
1556, the T.W. Bundick survey, was sold by Thomas Bird to William
R. Bird in October, 1887 (Travis County Deed Record 80:259 and
original
deed,
the
property of William R. Bird, Jr.).
This
transaction is the first to refer to the property as
having
improvements in the body of the deed.
William R. Bird died in 1894 willing the property to his wife,
Mary E. Bird (Lewis Publishing Company 1893:323 and Travis County
Probate Record 1839). Mary and William R. had two sons, William
R. Jr. and Thomas, who inherited the property jointly from their
mother in 1923 (William Anderson Bird 1983:personal communication).
Their joint ownership continued until Tom1s death in 1973 when his
spouse, Bessie Bird, inherited his share.
That joint ownership
continued until Nash Phillips/Copus acquired the property.
OCCUPATION AND UTILIZATION OF THE PROPERTY
T.W. Bundick and D.E.E. Braman never exercised their warrant to
the property. Columbus Boatman and Albert Foulkes [sic] (A.A. Fulks)
undoubtedly visited the property but both kept their residences
elsewhere (Gracy and Gentry 1967:39, U.S.D.C. 1880 U.S. Census Travis
County, Texas, Austin City). John W., Thomas, William R., Mary E.,
William R. Jr. and Thomas Bird all resided nearby (Lewis Publishing
Company 1893:323 and William Anderson
Bird
1983:personal
communication). No owner lived on this property.

36
Thomas Bird was the first owner to apply improvements to the
property.
He
bought
the
1and
in 1883 and sold it, wi th
"improvements", to William R. Bird in 1887. William was a stockman
specializing in the ralslng of Percheron horses for carriage use
(Lewis Publishing Company 1893:323). This occupation meshes well with
the remnant post and rail corral at the site. The structure there is
first positively documented in the U.S.G.S. 1900 Austin Quadrangle Map
which was based on 1896 field data. However, the phrasing of the
Thomas Bird to William R. Bird deed of 1887 suggests the structure
was built some time between that date and 1883.
In 1880 William R. Bird, then a bachelor, lived on the property
he acquired in 1874.
His household contained five other persons,
including a family of three. All four of the adults were in his hire
(1880 U.S. Census Travis County, Texas, precinct 4, page 5). His
several land acquisitions during the period from 1874 to 1894 indicate
his business was successful and expanding and it is reasonable to
attribute occupancy of the structure during the period to his hired
help. Census records show no one ethnic background for those known to
have been in his hire. Those noted in the 1880 census do not appear
in the 1900 census records for Travis County in the applicable
precinct. The 1890 census records, which might have offered further
information, no longer exist, having been destroyed by fire. William
R. died in 1894. Commencing in 1897, his wife rented the property to
a series of lessors (Travis County Deed Records 161:64, 165:40,
173:52, 188:183, 216:8). Occupancy of the structure by hired help or
tenants of the lessors is recalled by William R. Bird Jr. (personal
communication). By 1920 the structure was unoccupied and used for
crop storage and by the 1930s was suffering the consequences of the
lack of maintenance (William Anderson Bird, Mrs. Geneva Catherine
Chance: personal communications).
In sum, the structure appears to have been built between 1883 and
1887 and housed a series of hired hands, tenants or renters until
about 1920. It was then used to store crops until its condition
reached advanced deterioration. Located some distance from the homes
of its several owners, it was not a part of a given homestead or
farmstead complex as an outbuilding. Occupancy by a single ethnic
group cannot be established, the archival record indicating this was
not the case.
SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS
Site 41TV643 is the sparse remains of a log building (Fig.
8).
A map compiled by the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) from data
collected in 1896 shows the symbol for a building in the location of
the site (USGS 1900 Austin quadrangle 15 minutes). A 1937 aerial
photograph (Fig.
3) on file at the Texas
Natural
Resources
Information System (TNRIS) offices shows the structure and two
additional, apparently associated, structures (TNRIS Travis County
photograph no. 58, Edgar Tobin Aerial Survey 1937). The corral sized
area shown as fenced in the 1937 photograph is today the remnants of a

37
post and rail fence. There can be little doubt the site is that shown
in the 1937 photo. In that photograph the roof of the structure is
clearly intact, in marked contrast to the circumstances shown in the
current photographs (Fig. 8). The other structures shown in the 1937
photograph have been completely destroyed. The presence of squatters
shacks or shanties in the general area was noted in the parent report
(Moncure 1983:11) and there is evidence of a series of cooking or camp
fires set in their vicinity. The builders of these shanties may have
utilized material
from
the two vanished structures in their
construction and material from these and the log structure as fuel.
The log structure remains are so fragmentary as to allow only
partial description of the building form and its characteristics. The
two basic structural units in American folk or vernacular houses are
square and rectangular volume units. The square form may be traced to
England and has as its most common dimensions, for a single volume
unit, 16 feet by 16 feet. The rectangular form traces to Northern
Ireland, the origin of the early Scots-Irish settlers in this country.
This unit is most often encountered having measurements of 16 by 20 to
16 by 24 feet (Vlach 1973:117; Bealer 1978:23, 24;
Wilson 1970:25,
26).
The ruins of site 41TV643 show a rectangle with measurements
The approximation is forced by the
approximating 20 by 30 feet.
deteriorated condition of the site. The long dimension is east-west
oriented and the remains of the fireplace/chimney base are in the
center facing or opening to the east. From these circumstances the
structure appears to have been a single volume rectangular form to
which a second volume was added at the chimney end to form a classic
saddlebag shape. Alternatively the house may have been originally
constructed as a saddlebag, two volume rectangular form but the
hearth's orientation favoring the east volume more strongly suggests
an addition.
Only a small portion of those characteristics which serve to
differentiate house types after basic form can be determined for this
site. The corner joining method is single cut saddle notching, the
most rare of the major notch types (dovetail, "VII, square, and saddle)
used in Texas houses through 1889 according to the records of the
Texas Log Cabin Register (Jordan 1978:81). Thereafter it becomes
overwhelmingly the most used type especially when the wood used is
cedar as is the case here (ibid.:58, 76). The front sill ;s lap
jointed and the joint has separated. From the holes present in the
two sections it is not possible to absolutely determine whether the
joint was spiked or pegged but the absence of any sign of a
deteriorated peg indicates the former, with subsequent removal of a
No further wood construction characteristics are
reusable item.
available from the remains and such indicators as the position of
doors, windows, and joists, the presence of 10ft joists, plate log and
rafter joinery. roof framing, roofing material and rafter joining are
unavailable. Though it is tempting to ascribe the lack of materials
for flooring, floor joists, girders and piers to the construction of
the house directly upon the ground, thereby disposing of the need for
them, the degree of preservation of the sill logs is not in full
accord with such a circumstance if an early origin is postulated. If,

Fi ure 9.

Artifacts from the Bird Cabin

b.

Branded, frogless brick from the
cabin's chimney.
"Absorbine" liniment bottle

c.

Clear glass pharmeceutical corker

J.

~--------------------------------------------------------------------------------~

39

however, a late nineteenth century date is assigned, the degree of
preservation is more acceptable.
The firebox of the chim~ey contained branded, frogless, fire
brick attributable to the Parker Russell Mining and Manufacturing
Company of St.
Louis, Missouri (International Brick Collectors
Association 1983) (Fig.
9a).
The chimney fall contained common
molded brick with characteristics in consonance with local manufacture
but lacking date diagnostic features.
The fence remnant of post and rail construction is undoubtedly
the corral shaped structure shown in the 1937 TNRIS photograph. This
type of fence was in common use in Texas from the mid nineteenth
century on, especially prior to the widespread use of barbed wire
which occurs after about 1870 (Glover 1980:1;
Cae 1966:15-18;
Clifton 1970:1-7).
The fence had been repaired with barbed wire but
none of the three types present were patented earlier than 1874 and
all are still manufactured. The post and rail fence continued in use
for pens, corrals and chutes enclosing relatively small areas even
after the ready availability of barbed wire because it is less likely
to injure penned animals yet retains the strength to contain them
(Taylor 1979:182-189).
The domestic sheet refuse scatter was examined during the
intensive survey described in the parent report. The sector of land
to the rear and downslope of the structure contained the heaviest
concentration and was the least disturbed. Its complement of glass,
ceramics, and metals revealed, with few exceptions, an array lacking
tightly datable characteristics or having recognizably late origin.
Bottle parts showed round seam bases (1903 to present), seams to the
top (1920 to present), clear and brown color (1880 to present) and
crown caps (1895 to present) (Newman 1970:70-75). Tin can remains had
locked side seams (not earlier than 1897 and not dominant until ca.
1920) or were hole-and-cap condensed milk types (1849 to present)
(Busch 1981:103).
Whiteware and stoneware ceramics were found as
These
small sherds lacking identifiable ~atterns or maker's marks.
have been available during the entire period of possible site
occupancy. The few metal items found were more notable for the
absence of items than for what was present, a few chain links, two
wire nails and a cast iron hook and ring. The absence of nails in
quantity and square nails in any quantity may be significant because
of the advent of wire cut nails about 1890 and their assumption of
nearly all of the market about 1900 (see page 28). This near absence
of nails also rules out in large measure the destruction or
disintegration on site of the house's wooden structural remains since
larger quantities of the nails would have remained. The exceptions to
the otherwise undistinguished artifact array are described below.
Few artifacts recovered stand out as useful time markers.
The
Palmer Russell Mining and Manufacturing Company brick (Fig. 9a) has
already been mentioned and its use could not pre-date 1866, the date
of founding for that company. The more likely period of its use is

40
1890-1910 when St. Louis fire brick was shipped to Texas
(Moncure 1983:31, Roberts 1950:4).

in

quantity

A second significant artifact is a bottle which once contained a
9b).
Absorbine is the linear
liniment called Absorbine (Fig.
successsor of Young's America Liniment which was first advertised in
1876 and was itself the immediate predecessor of Absorbine Jr., a
twentieth century product (Baldwin 1973:35). Absorbine was produced
primarily for use on horses, its successor for use on humans. Just
when Young's became Absorbine isn't clear but it was in the late
nineteenth century.
Bottles have been found with Absorbine markings
which predate the automatic bottle making equipment developed in 1903.
However, this specimen has all the hallmarks of automatic bottle
making machine manufacture from base to lip. The base includes a cue
to its lineage in the inscription IIW.F. Young Inc., Springfield,
Mass ll •
A second bottle recovered downslope from the building remains is
a clear glass pharmaceutical corker (Fig. 9b). Its side mold seams
run from the base to within 1/4 inch of the top.
These are
characteristic of semi-automatic bottle machine manufacture. Further,
the compound shoulder has a lateral seam indicative of a three piece
mold.
These bottle manufacture characteristics are dated as 1880 ­
1913 for the former and 1810 - 1890 for the latter. In combination a
1880 - 1890 date span is obtained.
CONCLUSIONS
The archival evidence for a 1883-1887 construction date ;s in
keeping with the archeological findings. The construction date is
appropriate to the availability period for the firebrick used and the
manufacture/use period of the bottles recovered. The post and rail
fence ;s undatable in specific terms, but would have been a facility
appropriate to William R.
Bird's horse raising business.
The
archival/informant record shows the structure was occupied by tenants
or hired help from the 1880s until ca. 1920 and was afterwards used as
a crop storage facility.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The Bird Cabin is not associated with persons, groups or events
meriting its consideration for National Register or Texas State
Historic Landmark nomination. The structural remains do not show
extraordinary, unique or unusual material or use of materials for the
geographic area or temporal era. Some scavenging and/or vandalism of
the site is apparent. The surrounding area has been extremely altered
by recent road improvements.
The
potential
for
contributing
significant archeological information is considered to be lacking. As
a consequence, no further investigation is recommended.

~---~~---

~---~~.~-------

..- - - - ----.- ..

~.--~~~

--

..

----~~~~~~

41

REFERENCES CITED

A.

Baldwin Company, Ltd.
1891
Catalogue of ~ Baldwin and Co. Ltd. W. St. John
and A. Baldwin Co. New Orleans.

Alexander, Drury B.
1966 Texas Homes of the 19th Century.
Press. ------XUSt1rl.­ - ­

The

University

Austin American Statesman
1983
2 Walnut Creek dams called parkland threat.
Section B:r:­ - ­

July

Wolseley

of Texas

3,

1983.

Baldwin, Joseph K.
1973 A Collector's Guide to Patent and Proprietary Medicine
Bottles of the--Nineteenth Century.
Thomas Nelson, Inc.
Nashvill e-.
Barker History Center
1956 Manuscript 10861 Church
Church. Austin, Texas.
Baumann, Paul
1970 Collecting Antique Marbles.
Moi nes, Iowa.
Bealer, Alex W.
1978 The Log Cabin.

Records.

Walnut

Creek Baptist

Wallace-Hometead Company.

Barre Publishing.

Barre, Massachusetts.

Bird, William Anderson
1983
Personal communication to Henry B.

Moncure.

Austin.

Bird, William R. Jr.
1983
Personal communication to Henry B.

Moncure.

Austin.

Blackburn, Graham
1974
Illustrated Housebuilding.
New York.

-- -------------------

---------

Des

The Overlook Press.

Woodstock,

------------------ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

42
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
2(1) :93-117.
Bonham, Dora Dietrich
1958 Merchant to the Republic.
Texas.
1962

The Texas Journal of Science

The Naylor Company.

San Antonio,

Manuscript. Travis County Collection C3450(63).
Walnut
Creek Baptist Church of Travis County, Texas. Austin.

Brick and Clay Record
1920 Trade Names Now in Use on Face Brick and Other Clay Products
57:6:40.
Busch, Jane
1981 An Introduction to
15:94-104.

the Tin

Can.

Historical

Carr, John 1.
1967 The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
Board Report No. 53. Austin.
C F and I Steel Corporation
1982 ~ f and 1 Nail Catalog.

Archaeology

Water Development

Pueblo, Colorado.

Chance, Geneva Catherine Palmer
1983 Personal communications to Henry B. Moncure.
and April 13, 1983. Austin.

April 11, 1983

Clifton. Robert T.
1970 Barbs, Prongs, Points, Prickers and Stickers.
Oklahoma Press. Norman.

University of

Coe, Auburn S.
1966 Barbed Wire on the Range.
Elwell, Mary Jean Palmer
1983 Personal communications to
1983. Austin.

Western Collector 4(11):15-18.
Henry B. Moncure.

Encyclopedia Americana
1959 Steel Wire and Nail Making.
Vol. 25:605-607.
Corporation. New York, Chicago and Washington.

April

11,

Americana

Fontana, Bernard L. and J. Cameron Greenleaf
1962 Johnny Ward's Ranch: A Study in Historic Archaeology.
Kiva. 28(1-2):1-115. Tucson, Arizona.

The

Fulkes, Charles D. Jr.
1983 Personal communications to Henry
1983. Round Rock, Texas.

12,

B.

Moncure.

April

43
Garner, L. E.
1974 Environmental Geology - An Aid to Urban Planning:
Austin
Area, Texas.
Approaches to Environmental Geology. Report
of Investigations 81:101-122. Bureau of Economic Geology.
The University of Texas at Austin.
General Land Office
ms.
Abstracts of Original Texas Land Titles.
Certificate 143, patent 400, Vol. 1. Austin.
ms.

Bounty Warrant File 761.

Glover. Jack
1980 The "Bobbed Wire ll Bible
Texas.

---- ----

Vol. 3:910,

Austin.
VI.

Cow Puddle

Press.

Sunset,

Gracy. Alice Duggan and Emma Gene Seale Gentry
1967 Travis County, Texas, The Five Schedules of the 1860 Federal
Census. Privately printed. Austin.
Guarino, Michael
1983a Letter to Dr. Solveig A. Turpin.
Subject: The Fulkes Homestead.

Februa ry

22,

1983.

1983b A Brief Architectural and Historical Analysis of the Albert
Fu~ Homestead.
Manuscript on file at the Texas
Archeological Survey. The University of Texas at Austin.
Hall, Charles E.
1905 Clay Products. Manufactures of the United States.
of the Census, 877-885. Washington, D.C.
Harrison, Henry S.
1973 Houses.
Realtors National Marketing Institute
National Association of Realtors. Chicago.

Bureau

of

the

Herrington, LaVerne
1983 Letter to Michael Guarino, Juanary 13, 1983. Disposition of
remains of historic structure in North Central Austin, MUD
1. Office of the State Historic Preservation Officer,
Austin.
Hodges, Henry
1964 Artifacts.

Federick A.

Praeger.

New York, London.

International Brick Collectors' Association
1983 Brick Manufacturers Files complied
records. Copperas Cove, Texas.

from

the

members'

44
Jordan, Terry G.
1978 Texas Log BUildings.
London.

University of Texas Press.

Knight, Edward H.
1882
Knight1s American Mechanical Dictionary.
and Company. Boston.
Lenik, Edward J.
1977 A Study in Cast Iron Nails.
Lewis Publishing Company
1893
History of Texas.

Austin and

Houghton

Mifflin

Historic Archeology 11:45-47.

Chicago.

Luscomb, Sally C.
1967 The Collector1s Encyclopedia of Buttons.
Inc. New York.

Crown

McKee, Harley J.
1970 Amateur1s Guide to Texas Historic Buildings.
Society, Rochester,~York.
Mercer, Henry C.
1923 The Dating of Old Houses.
Doylestown, Pennsylvania.

Publishers,

The

Landmark

Bucks County Historical Society.
Reprinted 1968 and 1976.

Miller, George L.
1980 Classification and Economic Scaling
of
Ceramics. Historical Archeology 14:1-40.

19th

Miller, Thomas Lloyd
1967 Bounty and Donation Land Grants
of
Texas
University of Texas Press. Austin ana-London.

Century

1835-1888.

Moncure, Henry B.
1983 A Cultural Resource Survey and Assessment in the North
Central Austin Growth Corridor, Travis County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 63. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Muller, Daniel A. and Robert D. Price
1979 Ground-Water Availability in Texas.
Water Resources Report 238. Austin.

Texas

Department

Nelson, Lee H.
1963
Nail Chronology as An Aid to Dating Old Buildings.
News 19:1. Technical Leaflet No. 15. Nashville.

of

History

· . 45
Newman, T. Stell
1970 A Dating
Key
for
Post-Eighteenth
Historical Archaeology 4:70-76.
Noe 1 Hume. Ivor
1969 Historical Archaeology.

Century

Alfred A. Knopf.

Bottles.

New York.

Roberts, Clarence N.
1950 A History of the Firebrick and Refractories Industry in
Missouri.
University of Missouri School of Mines and
Meta 11 urgy . Bu 11 et in No. 75. Ro 11 a .
Russell, Richard Joel
1945 Climates of Texas. Annals of -the
- Association
Geographers 35(2):37-52.
Sears, Roebuck and Company
1922 Sears, Roebuck catalogue.

Houston, Texas.

Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins and F.B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas. Vol. 1: Stratigraphy.
of Texas Bulletin 3232. Austin.
Simmons Hardware Company
1894 Simmons Hardware Catalogue.
Sloane, Eric
1965 A Reverence for Wood.

of American

St.

The University

Louis.

Ballantine Books.

New York

Soil Conservation Service
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County. Texas.
United
Department of Agriculture. Washington, D.C.

States

Taylor, Lonn
1979 Rails, Rocks and Pickets: Traditional Homestead Fences in
Texas.
In: Built In Texas. F.E. Aberneth, editor. Texas
Folklore Soc
Publication 13:182-184.
E-Hart
Ross.
Waco.
Texas Legislature
1962 Members ----"-=.;;..;;.;..;;;..
of the
Legislature 1846-1962.

Austin.

Texas Natural Resources Information System
1937 Travis County Photograph 58. Edgar Tobin
TNRIS files. Austin.

Aerial

Travis County Commissioners Court
1902 Road Records Precinct 2.

Page 331.

Survey.

46
Travis County Deed Records
ms.
Deed Record Books Vol/pg: G/2S2, G/2S3, K/186, K/684-685,
K/735, T/320, W/577, Y/31, 40/424-425, 58/194-196, 80/259,
161/64, 165/40, 173/52, 188/183, 216/8.
Travis County Probate Records
ms.
Files 3854, 15720 and 20690
1894

Estate of W.R.

Bird, Cause Number 1839.

Travis County Tax Records
ms.
Records for 1855, p.

24.

Towne, Henry R.
1904 Locks and Builders Hardware.
York. -

John

Wiley

Trautwine Company
1888 Pocket-Book.
In:
Buil ders I
Hardware.
Architect and Building News 24:660:72.
Tremont Nail Company
1983 10th Annual Catalogue of General
Massachusetts.

and

Sons.

New

The

American

Merchandise.

Wareham,

Upton, Dell
1981 Traditional Timber Framing. In: Material Culture of the
Wooden Age.
Brooke Hindle, editor. Sleepy
ow-Press.
Tarrytown, New York.
U.S. Department of Commerce
1880 U.S. Census Travis County, Texas.
1900

U.S. Census Travis County, Texas. Microfilms on file at
the Barker History Center, The University of Texas at
Austin.

U.S. Geological Survey
1900 Map. Austin Quadrangle 15 minute.
On file in the map
collection of the Perry - Casteneda Library, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Vlach, John M.
1973
Form and House Types in American Folk Architecture.
In:
Introduction
to
Folklore.
Robert J. Adams, editor.
Preliminary edition, pp. 116-154. Collegiate Printing Inc.
Columbus, Ohio.

47
Weitzman, David
1976
Underfoot.

Charles Scribner1s Sons.

Wilson, Eugene M.
1970 The Single Pen Log House
2(1) :21-28.

in

the

New York.

South.

Pioneer America

