Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch,
Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8107
HJN 170042 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Georgetown ISD
Georgetown, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

July 2017

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch,
Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Georgetown Independent School District
603 Lakeway Drive
Georgetown, Texas 78628

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 170042 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8107

July 2017

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by the Georgetown
Independent School District (Georgetown ISD), to conduct an intensive cultural resources
inventory and assessment of an approximately 7.2-hectare (17.7-acre) proposed elementary
school tract at Wolf Ranch in Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas. The project area is located
in a lightly wooded, largely undeveloped area approximately 0.6 kilometer (0.4 mile) south of the
intersection of State Highway (SH) 29 and D.B. Wood Road on the western side of the city of
Georgetown. The proposed undertaking would consist of construction of an educational facility.
For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is considered to consist of the
entire 7.2-hectare (17.7-acre) tract.
The proposed project is being sponsored by the Georgetown ISD, a political subdivision
of the state of Texas. Consequently, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resources Code of 1977, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this
time, no federal permits, funding, or licenses have been identified for the project. As the project
represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact potentially significant
cultural resources, the project sponsor was required to perform a cultural resources inventory and
assessment of the project area. The cultural resources survey was conducted under Texas
Antiquities Permit No. 8107.
On July 19, 2017, Horizon staff archeologist Stephanie Mueller, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of
the project area to locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologist traversed the 7.2-hectare (17.7-acre) project area
and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area is situated on a lightly wooded upland landform overlooking the
incised channel of an unnamed, intermittent tributary of the South Fork of the San Gabriel River
that flows roughly eastward along the northern margin of the project area. Extensive exposures
of limestone bedrock and decomposing limestone gravels are present on the modern ground
surface across the project area, and only a very thin veneer of sediment is present overlying
bedrock or dense clay subsoil in most areas.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 1 shovel test per 2.0 acre for project areas measuring

HJN 170042 AR

v

Management Summary

between 1.2 and 4.0 hectares (3.0 and 10.0 acres) in size. Thus, a minimum of 9 shovel tests
would be required within the 7.2-hectare (17.7-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a total of
10 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project
area of this size. The pedestrian survey and shovel testing typically revealed shallow gravelly
clay loam sediments overlying limestone bedrock.
No cultural resources, prehistoric or historic-age, were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated during the survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) according to 13 TAC 26. Horizon
recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,” and no further archeological work is
recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both
prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that
any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction,
use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work
should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery, and the Texas Historical
Commission (THC) should be notified immediately.

vi

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 6
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 8
2.4
Flora and Fauna ............................................................................................ 9

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (9,200 to 6,000 B.C.) .....................................................11
3.2
Archaic Period (6,000 B.C. to A.D. 800) .......................................................12
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 800 to 1600) ...................................................12
3.4
Historic Period (A.D. 1600 to Present)..........................................................12

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................19

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................23

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................29

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................31
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................31
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................32
7.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................33
7.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................33

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................35
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 170042 AR

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .................................... 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 3
Distribution of Mapped Soils within Project Area ....................................................... 7
Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Kilometer of Project Area ..............................20
Overview of Project Area (Facing South-Southeast) ................................................24
Limestone Bedrock Exposed on Modern Ground Surface (Facing North) ................24
View of Gravel Road Traversing Project Area (Facing East-Northeast) ...................25
Overhead Telephone Line ROW within Project Area (Facing West) ........................25
Locations of Shovel Tests within Project Area .........................................................26

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.
Table 2.

viii

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area ......................................................... 6
Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Kilometer of Project Area ..........21

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by the Georgetown
Independent School District (Georgetown ISD), to conduct an intensive cultural resources
inventory and assessment of an approximately 7.2-hectare (17.7-acre) proposed elementary
school tract at Wolf Ranch in Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas. The project area is located
in a lightly wooded, largely undeveloped area approximately 0.6 kilometer (0.4 mile) south of the
intersection of State Highway (SH) 29 and D.B. Wood Road on the western side of the city of
Georgetown (Figures 1 and 2). The proposed undertaking would consist of construction of an
educational facility. For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is considered
to consist of the entire 7.2-hectare (17.7-acre) tract.
The proposed project is being sponsored by the Georgetown ISD, a political subdivision
of the state of Texas. Consequently, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction of the
Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resources Code of 1977, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this
time, no federal permits, funding, or licenses have been identified for the project. As the project
represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact potentially significant
cultural resources, the project sponsor was required to perform a cultural resources inventory and
assessment of the project area.
On July 19, 2017, Horizon staff archeologist Stephanie Mueller, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of
the project area to locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed undertaking. The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an
intensive pedestrian survey of the project area, and the production of a report suitable for review
by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical
Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council
of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports. The
cultural resources survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8107.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods.
Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents

HJN 170042 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

2

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 170042 AR

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

4

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located on an undeveloped, lightly wooded tract of land on the western
side of the city of Georgetown in central Williamson County, Texas. Williamson County is situated
near the southern end of the Lampasas Cut Plain in Central Texas and close to the common
junction of three significant physiographic provinces—the Lampasas Cut Plain, the Edwards
Plateau, and the Blackland Prairie (Hill 1901; Hill and Vaughn 1900; Johnson 1931:125). The
Blackland Prairie, the narrow physiographic zone between the Edwards Plateau to the west and
the Gulf Coastal Plain to the east, is a low, rolling land that extends in a narrow band along the
eastern edge of the Balcones fault zone from the Red River Valley in northeastern Texas to the
southern edge of the Edwards Plateau. This is an area of low topographic relief and poor drainage
in which water often ponds after rainstorms and streams flow at very gentle gradients. The
Edwards Plateau and Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs
across Texas to form a distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone
bedrock and lower plains composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked
by an abrupt scarp (the Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the
entire length of this transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock, hydrology,
soil, vegetation, and animal life.
The Lampasas Cut Plain is a roughly triangular area of rolling hill country in central and
north-central Texas situated between the Brazos and Colorado rivers ranging in elevation from
230.0 to 400.0 meters (754.4 to 1,312.0 feet) above mean sea level (amsl). The Lampasas Cut
Plain forms a limestone upland that has been dissected by the Brazos River and its tributaries,
resulting in landforms characterized by generally rounded uplands cut by moderately broad,
shallow valleys. Soil is thin to absent on the bedrock and supports a mixed savanna flora,
whereas soil is moderately deep in valley floors, where it supports mixed riparian woodlands and
forests. Karst features include sinks, caves, and rockshelters, but such are neither common nor
extensive. Edwards chert is locally abundant but not widespread across the Lampasas Cut Plain
and is of high quality in some places.
Hydrologically, the study area is situated within the Brazos River basin. The project area
is located on a dissected upland formation adjacent to an intermittent, unnamed tributary of the
South Fork of the San Gabriel River. The unnamed tributary forms the northern margin of the

HJN 170042 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

project area and flows generally eastward into the South Fork of the San Gabriel River
approximately 500.0 meters (1,640.0 feet). The South Fork of the San Gabriel River flows
eastward into the main body of the San Gabriel River north of Georgetown, which in turn flows
generally eastward to its confluence with the Little River in Milam County. The Little River, in turn,
flows a short distance eastward and empties into the Brazos River. The Brazos River flows
southeastward across the Blackland Prairie and Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately discharging into the
Gulf of Mexico a short distance northeast of East Matagorda Bay.
Elevations within the project area range from approximately 240.9 to 251.5 meters
(790.0 to 825.0 feet) amsl. Drainage within the project area is to the northeast toward the
unnamed tributary of the South Fork of the San Gabriel River.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Geologically, the project area is situated on the Lower Cretaceous Edwards Limestone, a
member of the Frdericksburg Group (Barnes 1974). This geological formation is composed of
limestone, dolomite, and chert deposits. The chert deposits associated with the Edwards
Formation were extensively exploited by the aboriginal inhabitants of Central Texas.
Geomorphologically, the project area is situated on two specific soil types (Figure 3; Table 1).
Soils within the project area consist of residuum weathered in situ from underlying limestone
bedrock. No Holocene-age soils are mapped within the project area.
In Central Texas, aboriginal archeological sites are commonly located adjacent to streams
as well as in upland environments. The physiographic setting of the project area on a series of
gravel terrace benches and upland formations adjacent to the South Fork of the San Gabriel River
suggests that the project area possesses high potential for aboriginal cultural resources. The
antiquity of the limestone upland and shallow soils suggest that any aboriginal cultural resources
present within the project area would be present on the modern ground surface or in very
shallowly buried subsurface contexts in eroded settings lacking integrity.

Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Parent Material

Typical Profile
(inches)

Location within
Project Area

ErE

Eckrant-Rock
outcrop
association, 1 to
10% slopes

Residuum weathered
from limestone on
ridges

0-4: Very cobbly clay (A1)
4-11: Extremely cobbly
clay (A2)
11-80: Bedrock (R)

Western and
northern margins of
project area (30%)

GsB

Georgetown stony
clay loam, 1 to 3%
slopes

Clayey residuum
weathered from
limestone on ridges

0-7: Stony clay loam (A)
7-35: Cobbly clay (Bt)
35-60: Bedrock (R)

Majority of project
area (70%)

Source: NRCS (2017)
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

6

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

Figure 3. Distribution of Mapped Soils within Project Area

HJN 170042 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). Bryant
and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas from
the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial period
(14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence from the
Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was considerably
cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was more heavily
forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway 1985). The Late
Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow warming and/or drying
trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were gradually replaced by
grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During the Post-Glacial period,
the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable. The deciduous forests
had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The drying and/or warming
trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the mid-Holocene, at which point there
appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to
5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental
conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Williamson County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern
climate is typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate
is influenced primarily by tropical maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified
by polar air masses. Tropical maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature manifest regional
clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east to west and mean
annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast (Larkin and Bomar
1983:18, 50). Climate has fluctuated from subtropical humid to subtropical subhumid in western
Williamson County. Average annual precipitation totals 81.3 centimeters (cm) (32.0 inches) and
temperature averages 19°C (67°F) annually, ranging from 36°C (96°F) in August (the warmest
month) to 15°C (59°F) in January (the coldest month). During this time, however, drier periods
lasting from 3 to 7 years, when total annual rainfall ranged from 30.5 to 63.5 cm (12.0 to
25.0 inches), were followed by abnormally wet years with 114.3 to 127.0 cm (45.0 to 50.0 inches)
of rainfall.
Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf storm
trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall (Baker
1975). Two extreme examples are the excess of 91.4 cm (36.0 inches) of rain that fell within an
18-hour period in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 55.9-cm (22.0-inch)

8

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

deluge that fell in less than 3 hours near O’Harris, Texas, in May 1935 (Baker 1975). Lower
rainfall amounts are characteristic of winter and late summer. In winter, frontal storms pass so
frequently that there is little time for moisture to increase, and prevailing upper-level winds from
west to east often dominate over meridional flow, meaning that much of the available moisture is
derived from the Pacific rather than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer, cool fronts rarely
penetrate into the region and rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal convective storms.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

The project area is in the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province (Blair 1950),
an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces and the
grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some species reach the limits
of their ecological range within the Texan province. The boundary, characterized as
“approximate,” between Blair’s (1950) Texan and Balconian provinces passes through western
Williamson County in the vicinity of the project area.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces.
Common mammalian species include white-tailed deer, opossum, eastern cottontail rabbit,
raccoon, striped skunk, hispid cotton rat, white-footed mouse, nine-banded armadillo, and fox
squirrel. Common bird species include northern bobwhite, eastern meadowlark, mourning dove,
killdeer, field sparrow, red-tailed hawk, turkey vulture, belted kingfisher, and mockingbird. Reptile
and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include six-lined racerunner, rat snake, eastern
hognose snake, Gulf Coast toad, Texas spiny lizard, rough green snake, copperhead, western
diamondback rattlesnake, green treefrog, Blanchard’s cricket frog, diamondback water snake,
Houston toad, and green anole. Although small herds of bison and antelope were common during
the late prehistoric and early historic periods, these species are no longer native to this region
(Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

HJN 170042 AR

9

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Central Texas archeological region. The indigenous
human inhabitants of Central Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and gathering lifestyle
throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to much of the rest of North America, mobility and
settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (9,200 TO 6,000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists have historically discounted claims of much earlier human
occupation during the Pleistocene glacial period. However, recent investigations of the Buttermilk
Creek Complex in Bell County, Texas, have raised the possibility that a pre-Clovis culture may
have been present in North America as early as 15,500 years ago (Waters et al. 2011).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented by
the PaleoIndian period (9,200 to 6,000 B.C.) (Black 1989). This stage coincided with ameliorating
climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the extinction of
herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods within this
stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate projectile
points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers, gravers, and bone
foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Central Texas are
known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of
plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is little
evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in
North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced
throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into 2
periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point styles. These include the Early
PaleoIndian Period, which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile points (i.e., Clovis,

HJN 170042 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period, which is
characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview, Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (6,000 B.C. TO A.D. 800)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic stage
(6,000 B.C. to A.D. 800). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant reorientation
of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less pronounced in Central
Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding decrease in the big game
populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified resource base composed of
smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this hunting and gathering pattern is
characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more diversified tool kit, the
development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general decrease in the size of
projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows greater diversity
during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods. In
Central Texas, the Early Archaic subperiod extends from 6,000 to 3,000 B.C., the Middle Archaic
subperiod extends from 3,000 to 1,000 B.C., and the Late Archaic subperiod covers the
1,000 B.C. to A.D. 800 timeframe. Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as
markers differentiating these subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as
well. Perhaps most markedly, burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod,
continuing into the Late Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic
subperiod. In addition, the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered
to constitute evidence of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least
partially accounts for the lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 800 TO 1600)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 800 to 1600) (Black 1989) is defined by the
appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas, unifacial
arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The Late
Prehistoric period is generally divided into 2 phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin phase
sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to suggest
that the Austin phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north who lacked the
ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1600 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de Vaca crossed
South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay. However,

12

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The first half of
the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as the first
effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social systems.
This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where burial data suggest population
declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased participation on the part of the
Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that heavy settlement of Texas began in
the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was greatly diminished.
The earliest known historical occupants of Williamson County were the Tonkawa Indians.1
The Tonkawa traditionally followed buffalo herds on foot and periodically set fire to the prairie to
aid them in their hunts. During the 18th century, however, they made the transition to a horsebased culture and used firearms to a limited extent. Decimated by European diseases and by
warfare with the Cherokee and Comanche, the Tonkawa were generally friendly toward the early
settlers of Williamson County but were nevertheless removed from Central Texas by the 1850s.
Lipan Apaches and Comanches were also associated with the area that would become
Williamson County. Before the arrival of Europeans in the area, the Lipan Apaches ranged
through the western part of present Williamson County, and, after Spanish missions were
established on the San Gabriel River in the 18th century, the Indians frequently raided the
missions for horses. Their enemies, the Comanches, arrived in the area in the 18th century and
lived in parts of the territory of Williamson County until as late as 1838. After they were crowded
out by Anglo settlers, the Comanches continued to raid settlements in the county until the 1860s.
There also appear to have been small numbers of Kiowa, Yojuane, Tawakoni, and Mayeye
Indians living in the county at the time of the earliest Anglo settlements.
While Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca may have traveled through the area in the 16th
century, it was probably first explored by Europeans in the late 17th century, when Capt. Alonso
De León sought a route between San Antonio and the Spanish missions in East Texas that would
serve as a drier alternative to the more southerly Camino Real. The new route passed through
the area of Williamson County along Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel River and was called
Camino de Arriba. In 1716, 2 explorers in the Spanish service, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis and
Domingo Ramón, led an expedition that passed through the area and camped on Brushy Creek
and the San Gabriel River, naming them respectively Arroyo de las Bendítas Ánimas and Rio de
San Xavier. The San Xavier missions, which were founded in the mid-18th century and occupied
a series of sites along the San Gabriel River, were just across the eastern border of Williamson
County in present-day Milam County, and the area was extensively explored by the Spanish.
During the Mexican period, parts of the county were awarded as land grants, first to several
Mexican families, then as part of Robertson’s colony, but no settlement resulted from these
grants.
Anglo settlement began during the Texas Revolution and the early days of the Republic
of Texas, when the area was part of Milam County. In 1835, in an attempt to strengthen the
frontier against Indian attack, a military post was built near the headwaters of Brushy Creek in

1

The following discussion of Williamson County history is adapted from TSHA (2017).

HJN 170042 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

what would become southwestern Williamson County and was named for Capt. John J.
Tumlinson, Jr., the commander of the company of Texas Rangers who garrisoned the post. The
post was abandoned in February of 1836, when its garrison was withdrawn to deal with the
Mexican invasion. In 1838, the first civilian settlement was established by Dr. Thomas Kenney
and a party of settlers who built a fort, named Kenney’s Fort, on Brushy Creek near the site of the
present-day crossing of the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad. Several other sites on Brushy
Creek were settled soon after, but Indian raids kept Anglo settlement in check, and a number of
the early pioneers, including Kenney, were killed by Indians over the next few years.
In 1842, many of the early farms were abandoned when Governor Sam Houston advised
settlers to pull back from the frontier. The Indian threat eased after 1846, and part of the influx of
settlers who came to Texas after its annexation traveled to the frontier along Brushy Creek and
the San Gabriel River. By 1848, there were at least 250 settlers in what was then western Milam
County, and in the early months of that year 107 of them signed a petition to organize a new
county. Recognizing that the petitioners needed a seat of local government that was considerably
closer to them than Milam County, the Texas legislature established Williamson County on 13
March 1848, naming it for prominent judge and soldier Robert M. Williamson. Georgetown, the
county seat, was laid out during the summer of that year, and the district court was in session by
October. According to the census of 1850, Williamson County had a population of 1,379 Anglos
and 155 slaves living in agricultural communities on Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel. As was
common in other frontier counties, most of the improved acreage was used to grow corn. Three
families owned 15 or more slaves in 1850, but family farms and subsistence agriculture remained
the norm prior to the Civil War. While most of the settlers had moved to Texas from other southern
states, particularly Tennessee, a substantial contingent came from Vermilion County, Illinois, and
this latter group remained pro-Union and Republican in its political orientation during the
secession crisis.
On the eve of the Civil War, Williamson County had moved beyond the frontier stage and
was a populous, agriculturally diverse county. The Anglo population tripled between 1850 and
1860 to 3,638, while the slave population grew even more dramatically to 891, six times the
number of slaves in 1850. Agricultural pursuits were quite varied and reflected the county’s
geographical diversity. Farmers used the rich Blackland soils in the eastern half of the county to
grow wheat and corn. Cotton was introduced in the 1850s, but only 271 bales were grown in
1860, and it was not an important cash crop for most farmers. The early settlers had found large
herds of wild cattle in the 1840s, and cattle ranching for both home consumption and the market
was widespread throughout the county by 1860. The number of cattle on county ranches had
more than tripled from 11,973 head in 1850 to 38,114 head in 1860. Similarly, the number of
sheep grew from 2,937 producing 3,499 pounds of wool in 1850 to 16,952 sheep and
32,994 pounds of wool in 1860.
Williamson County was marked by political divisions during the secession crisis, divisions
that were carried over into the Civil War and Reconstruction. Unionist sentiment was strong in
the county, and a resolution denouncing secession was adopted by a Texas Constitutional Union
party meeting in Round Rock in 1860. One of the county’s delegates to the secession convention,
Thomas Proctor Hughes, was among the 8 who voted against the ordinance of secession. When

14

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

the ordinance was referred to a statewide election, Williamson County was one of 19 counties to
oppose it, rejecting secession by 480 to 349 votes. When the war came, most of the citizens of
Williamson County supported the Confederate cause, and at least 5 companies were raised in
the county: an independent “spy” company under James O. Rice, a company of Texas Rangers
for border defense under William C. Dalrymple, and companies in the Fourth, Seventh, and
Sixteenth Texas Cavalry regiments. While some of those who had opposed secession became
active Confederate supporters, others remained loyal to the Union and fled to Mexico or the North,
and a number enlisted in the Union army. In July 1863, 8 Williamson County men were caught
by Confederate troops while traveling to Mexico and were hanged near Bandera, Texas, and
other Unionists were persecuted during the war. The pattern of violence within the community
continued into the summer following the end of the war, when several men were arrested for
“flagrant crimes” and “illegal persecution of Union men.” In September 1865, a mass meeting of
the citizens of Williamson County was held on the San Gabriel River near Georgetown, and the
gathering set a general tone of reconciliation, which seems to have characterized the
Reconstruction period in Williamson County, a period that ended with the return of county
government to conservative Democratic control in 1869. Freed slaves formed several new
communities, and the county seems to have been free of much of the political and racial strife
that occurred in other Texas counties during Reconstruction. On the other hand, there was a
great deal of crime, much of it violent, in the latter 19th century. Horse and cattle thieves and
some of the more famous outlaws of the day, such as Sam Bass and John Wesley Hardin, preyed
on the property of citizens, and long-term family feuds and drunken brawls at the various saloons
in the towns added to the toll of homicides.
Though the Civil War had caused little material damage in the area, the county was a
much poorer place in 1870 than it had been in 1860. The total value of farms had fallen from
$833,418 to $389,239 and the value of livestock from $823,653 to $341,794. The economic
recovery in the 1870s was aided by the growth of the cattle and sheep industries and a dramatic
expansion of cotton farming. Various feeder routes to the Chisholm Trail passed through
Williamson County, and many cattle drives passed through or originated in the county from the
1860s through the early 1880s. With the coming of the railroads to the county in the 1870s,
Taylor, in the eastern part of the county, became an important rail center for the cattle trade.
Cattle-raising, after declining somewhat in importance in the early 20th century, was again a major
part of the agricultural economy by 1950, and in 1969 ranchers owned a record 65,093 cattle.
Sheep- and goat-raising followed a similar pattern. Sheep ranching recovered its pre-war level
by 1880 and peaked at 39,961 sheep and 171,752 pounds of wool in 1890, then declined in the
late 19th and early 20th centuries to 13,397 sheep and 39,458 pounds in 1920. The industry
revived in the 1930s and reached a new high of 59,919 sheep and 336,494 pounds of wool in
1959. Mohair became a significant agricultural product by 1930 and reached a peak in 1959,
when 44,668 goats produced 209,098 pounds of mohair. Cotton, the second boom industry in
Williamson County, developed at about the same time as the cattle industry. As early as 1869,
the editor of the Georgetown Watchman was advising farmers to “make cotton, but do not, by any
means, neglect the grain crop-diversity.” Cotton production, which had been insignificant before
the war, rose to successive heights of 4,217 bales in 1880, 33,945 bales in 1890, and
80,514 bales in 1900. In 1900 to 1901, Williamson County ginned more cotton than any county

HJN 170042 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

in Texas except Ellis County. The number of improved acres increased almost tenfold from 1870
to 1880 and doubled again to 306,881 acres by 1890. The proportion of cropland used for cotton
production moved from about 1/3 of the total in 1880 to a high of 77% in 1910, and cotton was
grown on 73% of the cropland as late as 1930. Dramatic changes in land tenure attended the
shift to cotton production. As late as 1880, 1,183 of the 1,538 farms, or 77%, were still worked
by owners. By 1890, only 43% of the farms were operated by owners, and the percentage of
owner-operators remained at 40% until the 1920s, when it dropped still further to 29% in 1930.
Farm tenancy rates began to decline during the Great Depression with the shift away from cotton
and other staple crops and by 1959 had dropped to 36% of the county’s farmers.
Both the cattle and the cotton booms were aided by the improved communications
available in the county in the later 19th century. The International-Great Northern Railroad, which
later was consolidated with the Missouri Pacific, was built across the eastern part of the county in
1876 and led to the founding of Taylor (now Williamson County’s third largest city) and Hutto and
to the relocation of Round Rock. It also opened up large areas in eastern Williamson County to
commercial farming. The Taylor, Bastrop, and Houston Railway, which was eventually
consolidated with the Missouri, Kansas, and Texas Railway, was built in the 1880s and aided in
the development of Taylor, Granger, and Bartlett. Roads were generally poor throughout the
county in the early 20th century. There were 11,882 automobiles in the county by 1930, and
extensive improvements, including blacktopping, of all major roads took place in the 1930s.
The county also became more ethnically diverse in the later 19th and early 20th centuries.
While there were only 111 inhabitants of foreign birth out of a population of 6,368 in Williamson
County in 1870, significant numbers of Scandinavians, Germans, Czechs, Wends, and Austrians
moved to the county in the 1880s and 1890s. The proportion of foreign-born in the county
population remained at about 10% from 1890 to the 1930s. Mexican immigration reached a
significant level by about 1910, just as Europeans stopped arriving in the county. There were
294 Hispanics in 1900, 732 in 1910, and 4,967, or 11% of the population, in 1930. In 1980,
9,693 residents, or again 11%, were of Hispanic origin. The immigrants added their distinctive
customs and architectural styles to the mix of county life and introduced new religious
denominations. By the time of the Civil War, Williamson County had a number of Baptist and
Methodist churches and several different factions of the Presbyterian Church. Churches of other
denominations were built after the war, and the new emigrants established Lutheran, Catholic,
and Czech Moravian congregations. By 1930, Williamson County had a culturally diverse
population of 44,146 inhabitants. The economy was still overwhelmingly agricultural; only
29 manufacturing establishments employed 347 workers that year. While cotton production was
near its peak in terms of percentage of cropland, the cotton industry was already undergoing a
rapid transformation.
The combined effects of soil depletion, overproduction, and the influx of the boll weevil
had already injured the profitability of the industry by the late 1920s, and the situation of cotton
growers was further worsened by the depression. The black population seems to have been
particularly hard hit by the depression. Of the 944 county families on relief in 1933, 442, almost
half, were black, though blacks constituted only 16% of the population. Various federal relief
programs benefited farmers with farm loans and subsidies, and in 1936 a total of $204,000 in

16

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

subsidy checks was issued. The Depression encouraged diversification among farmers and a
shift away from staple crops to livestock. Between 1930 and 1940, the number of acres used for
cotton-growing fell by almost half, and cotton production went from 68,266 to 36,890 bales.
Cropland acreage used for corn production increased over the same period by about half, and
wool and mohair production more than doubled to 342,983 and 102,517 pounds, respectively.
While cotton continued to be an important crop in eastern Williamson County, farmers increasingly
turned to other crops like sorghum and wheat and to livestock-raising in the latter 20th century.
Along with such traditional livestock as sheep and cattle, poultry farming played a significant role
in the economy by 1950, when the county was fifth in the state in the production of eggs and
chickens. In 1980, it was 10th in the state in the production of turkeys.
The agricultural diversification of the middle decades of the 20th century was followed by
significant social and economic changes in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. The black population,
which had remained at between 15% and 18% of the total in the early and mid-20th century,
began to decline, both proportionately and in real numbers, from the 1940s on and had fallen to
4,111, or about 5%, by 1980. As in other areas of Texas, blacks were relegated to segregated
and inferior housing and educational facilities until the 1960s, when some improvements were
brought about by federal desegregation policies. Along with changes in racial composition,
Williamson County experienced a dramatic increase in population during this period, growing from
37,305 inhabitants in 1970 to an estimated 85,700 inhabitants in 1982, making it 34th in population
growth among counties in the US in the 1970s.

HJN 170042 AR

17

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon performed background archival research on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) for information on previously recorded cultural
resources sites and historic properties in and near the proposed project area as well as previous
cultural resources investigations conducted in the vicinity of the proposed project area. Based on
this archival research, 10 previously recorded archeological sites are present within a 1.0kilometer (0.6-mile) radius of the project area (Figure 4; Table 2). All 10 sites consist of aboriginal
burned rock middens and/or scatters of lithic artifacts. Most sites have been dated only to
undetermined prehistoric timeframes, though projectile points diagnostic of the Early to Late
Archaic periods have been observed on at least two of the sites, and the burned rock midden
sites are inferred to be associated with the Archaic period as well. All of the previously recorded
sites are located well beyond the boundaries of the project area and would have no potential to
be affected by the proposed undertaking. No cemeteries or historic properties listed on the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or designated as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL)
are present within the project area or within the desktop archival study radius.
No prior cultural resources surveys have been conducted within the project area.

HJN 170042 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 4. Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Kilometer of Project Area

20

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

Table 2. Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Kilometer of Project Area
Site
No./Name

Potential to
be Impacted
by Project?

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility Status1

Distance/Direction
from Project Area

41WM460

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Recommended
ineligible

0.8 kilometer
northwest

No

41WM541

Aboriginal burned rock
midden (probably Archaic)

Determined
ineligible within
investigated area

0.7 kilometer south

No

41WM542

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(Archaic)

Determined
ineligible within
investigated area

0.7 kilometer south

No

41WM555

Aboriginal burned rock
midden (probably Archaic)

Recommended
eligible

0.5 kilometer east

No

41WM558

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(Early to Middle Archaic)

Determined
ineligible within
investigated area

0.8 kilometer
southwest

No

41WM596

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(Early Archaic)

Undetermined

0.7 kilometer
southeast

No

41WM1048

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible

0.8 kilometer east

No

41WM1148

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible

0.6 kilometer
northwest

No

41WM1149

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible

0.3 kilometer
northwest

No

41WM1359

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible

0.7 kilometer
southwest

No

Archeological Sites

1

Determined eligible/ineligible = Site determined eligible/ineligible by SHPO
Recommended eligible/eligible = Site recommended as eligible/ineligible by site recorder and/or sponsoring
agency but eligibility has not been determined by SHPO
Undetermined = Eligibility not assessed or no information available

NRHP National Register of Historic Places
SAL State Antiquities Landmark
SHPO State Historic Preservation Office

HJN 170042 AR

21

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

On July 19, 2017, Horizon staff archeologist Stephanie Mueller, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of
the project area to locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologist traversed the 7.2-hectare (17.7-acre) project area
and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area is situated on a lightly wooded upland landform overlooking the
incised channel of an unnamed, intermittent tributary of the South Fork of the San Gabriel River
that flows roughly eastward along the northern margin of the project area. Extensive exposures
of limestone bedrock and decomposing limestone gravels are present on the modern ground
surface across the project area, and only a very thin veneer of sediment is present overlying
bedrock or dense clay subsoil in most areas. An overhead telephone line and an unimproved
gravel road cross the project area, but the project area is undeveloped for the most part (Figures 5
to 8).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 1 shovel test per 2.0 acre for project areas measuring
between 1.2 and 4.0 hectares (3.0 and 10.0 acres) in size. Thus, a minimum of 9 shovel tests
would be required within the 7.2-hectare (17.7-acre) project area. Horizon excavated a total of
10 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the TSMASS requirements for a project
area of this size (Figure 9). The pedestrian survey and shovel testing typically revealed shallow
gravelly clay loam sediments overlying limestone bedrock. The pedestrian survey and shovel
testing typically revealed shallow, gravelly clay loam sediments overlying limestone bedrock or
dense clay subsoil at depths of 5.0 to 20.0 centimeters (2.0 to 7.9 inches) below surface.
Sediments excavated from shovel tests were screened through 0.64-centimeter (0.25-inch)
hardware cloth. Specific shovel test data are presented in Appendix A.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic log
was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources. Diagnostic
artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were
described, sketched, and/or photo- documented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed during the survey, the collections
policy was not brought into play.

HJN 170042 AR

23

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5. Overview of Project Area (Facing South-Southeast)

Figure 6. Limestone Bedrock Exposed on Modern Ground Surface (Facing North)

24

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

Figure 7. View of Gravel Road Traversing Project Area (Facing East-Northeast)

Figure 8. Overhead Telephone Line ROW within Project Area (Facing West)

HJN 170042 AR

25

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 9. Locations of Shovel Tests within Project Area

26

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3.

HJN 170042 AR

27

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

No cultural resources, prehistoric or historic-age, were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated during the survey.

HJN 170042 AR

29

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:



Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.



Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for designation
as SALs.



Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the project area and to make preliminary determinations of whether or
not the resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important
historic events and/or personages. Under the Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources
are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological
resources for designation as SALs.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

HJN 170042 AR

31

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least on one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

32

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

On July 19, 2017, Horizon staff archeologist Stephanie Mueller, under the overall direction
of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator, performed an intensive cultural resources survey of
the project area to locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the
proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologist traversed the 7.2-hectare (17.7-acre) project area
and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area is situated on a lightly wooded upland landform overlooking the
incised channel of an unnamed, intermittent tributary of the South Fork of the San Gabriel River
that flows roughly eastward along the northern margin of the project area. Extensive exposures
of limestone bedrock and decomposing limestone gravels are present on the modern ground
surface across the project area, and only a very thin veneer of sediment is present overlying
bedrock or dense clay subsoil in most areas.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of 1 shovel test per
2.0 acre for project areas measuring between 1.2 and 4.0 hectares (3.0 and 10.0 acres) in size.
Thus, a minimum of 9 shovel tests would be required within the 7.2-hectare (17.7-acre) project
area. Horizon excavated a total of 10 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the
TSMASS requirements for a project area of this size. The pedestrian survey and shovel testing
typically revealed shallow gravelly clay loam sediments overlying limestone bedrock.
No cultural resources, prehistoric or historic-age, were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated during the survey.

7.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify

HJN 170042 AR

33

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends a finding of “no
historic properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended in connection
with the proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are
protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or
burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery, and the THC should be notified
immediately.

34

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Baker, V.R.
1975
Flood Hazards Along the Balcones Escarpment in Central Texas—Alternative
Approaches to the Recognition, Mapping, and Management. Geological Circular
No. 75-5. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Barnes, V.E.
1995
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Austin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Black, S.L.
1989
Central Texas Plateau Prairie. In From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation
in Central, South, and Lower Pecos, Texas, by T.R. Hester, S.L. Black, D.G. Steele,
B.W. Olive, A.A. Fox, K.J. Reinhard, and L.C. Bement, pp. 17-38. Research Series
No. 33. Arkansas Archaeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water Development Board, Report No. 53,
Austin.

HJN 170042 AR

35

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hill, R.T.
1901
Geography and Geology of the Black and Grand Prairies, Texas. Twenty-First Annual
Report of the United States Geological Survey 1899-1900. United States Geological
Survey, Washington, D.C.
Hill, R.T., and T.W. Vaughn
1900
Physical Geography of the Texas Region. Topographic Atlas, Austin, Folio 76. United
States Geological Survey, Washington, D.C.
Johnson, E.H.
1931
The Natural Regions of Texas. University of Texas Bulletin 3113. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas. US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.

36

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
National Park Service (NPS)
2015
National Register Information System. <http://nrhp.focus.nps.gov/natreghome.do?
searchtype=natreghome>. Accessed July 18, 2017.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2017
Web Soil Survey, <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed July 18, 2017. US Department of Agriculture.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Prewitt, E.
1985
From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in
the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B. Collins,
pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2017
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas. <http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/>. Accessed July 18,
2017.
Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2017
Williamson County. The Handbook of Texas Online: A Digital Gateway to Texas
History.
<http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hcw11>.
Accessed
July 20, 2017.
US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2014
Digital orthophoto quarter-quadrangle, Williamson County, Texas. National Agriculture
Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.

HJN 170042 AR

37

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

US Geological Survey (USGS)
1982
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Georgetown, Texas, quadrangle.
1987

7.5-minute series topographic maps, Round Rock, Texas, quadrangle.

Waters, M.R., S.L. Forman, T.A. Jennings, L.C. Nordt, S.G. Driese, J.M. Feinberg, J.L. Keene, J.
Halligan, A. Lindquist, J. Pierson, C.T. Hallmark, M.B. Collins, and J.E. Wiederhold
2011
The Buttermilk Creek Complex and the Origins of Clovis at the Debra L. Friedkin Site,
Texas. Science 331:1599-1603.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

38

HESI_170042_AR_Wolf_Elementary 17.7ac._Tract.docx

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
17.7-acre Elementary School Tract at Wolf Ranch, Georgetown, Williamson County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

SM1

623453

3389056

0-20

Dark brown gravelly clay loam

None

SM2

623550

3389009

0-15

Dark brown gravelly clay loam

None

15+

Bedrock

None

Soils

Artifacts

SM3

623543

3388895

0-20

Dark brown gravelly clay loam

None

SM4

623514

3388808

0-15

Dark brown gravelly clay loam

None

15+

Bedrock

None

0-10

Dark brown gravelly clay loam

None

10+

Bedrock

None

SM5

623614

3388851

SM6

623632

3388916

0-15

Dark brown gravelly clay loam

None

SM7

623950

3388850

0-10

Dark brown gravelly clay loam

None

10+

Bedrock

None

0-10

Strong brown gravelly clay loam

None

10+

Bedrock

None

0-5

Strong brown gravelly clay loam

None

5+

Bedrock

None

SM8

SM9

SM10

623847

623739

3388906

3388922

623712

3388985

0-5

Dark brown gravelly clay loam

None

623712

3388985

5+

Bedrock

None

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

HJN 170042 AR

A-1

