TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT
OF THE BIG BROWN LIGNITE PROJECT

Freestone'.County, Texas

H; G. Wooldridge

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
tECHNICAL8ut..t.ETIN NO; 29
1979

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

BaJcones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT
OF THE BIG BROWN LIGNITE PROJECT
Freestone

By:

County~

Texas

H.G. Wooldridge

Principal Investigator:

David S. Dibble

A report submitted to Texas Utilities Generating Company by
the Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at
Austin, in fulfillment of the terms of Purchase Order 1-37920.
October 1979

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction . . .

1

The Project Area

1

Physiography and Geological Setting

4

Regional Background

6

Previous Archeological Research

9

Research Procedures

10

Survey Results . . .

11

Site Descriptions

13

Conclusions

24

References Cited

26

Acknowledgements

29

Appendix A . . . . .
by David S. Dibble

30

List of Figures
Figure 1.

Project Area Map

Figure 2 .

41FT48 Site Map

Figure 3 .

Feature 1 at Site 41FY48

· · ·
.

· · · ·
. . . . · · · · ·

41FT48 Site Map showing extent of
of tested area
Figure 5a. General view of 41FT48
. . . .
b. Feature 3 at Site 41FT48
Figure 4.

2

19
21

· · · · ·

32

·····

34

INTRODUCTION
A cultural resource survey and assessment of a 4,000
acre tract of the Big Brown Lignite Prospect in Freestone
County, Texas was conducted by the Texas Archeological Survey,
the University of Texas at Austin, for Texas Utilities Generating
Company (TUGCO). During the months of July and August, 1979,
an intensive field inspection was carried out by staff members
H.G. Wooldridge, Ray D. Kenmatsu and James R. Pliska. The
results of this study are to serve the sponsoring agency in
support of an application to the Texas Railroad Commission
for a permit to mine lignite in this area. The objectives
of the study are to provide:
1) the precise location and description of any resource,
area or feature, to be affected, either directly or indirectly.
by the proposed mining;
2) an evaluation of the identified resources in terms of
their scientific or historic value;
3) recommendations to the company to lessen any predictable
adverse affects on identified resources; and
4) recommendations for any additional studies related to
the interpretation of resources which may be beyond the investi­
gative scope of this study.
The research was specifically designed to adhere to the
criteria and guidelines established by the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation (National Register of Historic Places)
for assessment of endangered cultural resources.
THE

PRO~IECT

AREA

The Big Brown Lignite Prospect is located in the uplands
in East-Central Texas (Fig. 1) at the contact point of the
Blackland Prairie and Eastern Deciduous Forest. The climate
is characterized as humid and sub-tropical with hot summers

--~~-

-~----~-~~------~-~---

FIGURE I
-

f

I
I

116'0(30"

/

/

I
I

47' iii"

/

fo US 287

I

I

I

\':v"--'/J/1
...

\

f

I

,

I
I

I

." I

45

\.);AIRFIELD

/~19-........
o

(
,

".;

LOCATION

5

mi

/

o~o

~
'Vr~'

Project Area

•

Strip Mine

Prehistoric

Site

~
Historic Site

o

"

Roads

~

(

\"-"'~"'--

Streams

)"--"~
r~.~;

\.

.

,.

,-.--"

L,
\

to Fairfield

I
PROJECT

LOCATION:

BIG BROWN LIGNITE PROSPECT
FREESTONE

COUNTY.

TEXAS

-3­

and mild winters (Carr 1967: 19). A long growing season of
approximately 260 frost-free days with monthly temperature
averages of 42 0 F. in January and 90 0 F. in August typifies
the area. Rainfall averages 37 to 41 inches per year (ibid).
From about 1874 to 1950 most of the cultivated land was seeded
in cotton but it is now utilized as pasture (Truett 1972: 3).
The major drainage system is that of the Trinity River
which flows some five kilometers east of the survey area.
Two small ephemeral drainages, Pin Oak and Prairie creeks,
originate within the project boundaries. Both these third­
ranked streams are fed by seep springs near their head­
waters. The archeological implications of these features
will be discussed in the IIConclusion section of this
report. The nearest urban center, the city of Fairfield,
lies eight kilometers southwest of the project's southern
boundary.
The lignite prospect is divided into two sections (Fig.
I) which are designated as the IInorthern sector and the
"southern sectorll. The southern sector, a roughly square
area of about 2,000 acres, is defined by F.M. 488 to the west,
F.M. 1124 to the east, the Day Cemetary Road to the south,
and the Fuel Depot Road to the north. The land, except for
a few small wooded areas, has been cultivated in the past and
is currently utilized as pasture. Only limited surface
modifications connected with the lignite mining have occurred.
Various plant facilities and access roads from the mining area
to the power plant have been constructed in a small area in the
northern part of the southern sector.
The roughly rectangular northern sector also includes
approximately 2,000 acres. Its boundaries are defined as the
existing permit boundary to the west, F.M. 1124 to the south
and east, and a line paralleling F.M. 1124 to the north. The
ll

ll

'-"-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ­

-5­

riparian biotic provinces (Blair 1950: 98-102). Where these
provinces overlap, as in the present study area, a transitional
or ecotonal situation exists whereby the characteristic
components of both communities may be exploited (Richner and
Lee 1977: 5-6).
The floral component of the Austroriparian province is
composed of hardwoods, pines, and the associated community
typical of the vegetation stretching east to the Atlantic
Ocean (Blair 1950: 90). The vertebrate faunal inventory
includes 47 species of mammal, 29 species of snake, ten of
lizards, two land turtles, 17 anurans, and 18 urodels (Blair
1950: 99). In addition, 48 to 56 species of fish inhabit the
tributary headwaters of the Trinity River today and would
probably have been available prehistorically although pollution
has limited this habitat in historic times (U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers 1979: B-23).
The floral component of the Texan province includes the
oak-hickory forests and bluestem prairie grasslands (Blair
1950: 101). The vertebrate faunal inventory underscores the
ecotonal situation, since 41 of the 49 mammals also
inhabit the Austroriparian province (ibid.). In addition,
both species of land turtles, nine of the 16 species of lizard,
23 of the 29 species of snake, all five species of urodele,
and 13 of the 18 species of anuran are also found within the
Austroriparian province. With such overlapping of floral and
faunal elements, exploitation of both resource bases by the
human component would have been a highly successful adaptation.
In the study area proper, remnants of both the Blackland
Prairie and Eastern Deciduous Forest plant communities remain
although land modification has blurred the original contact
lines. Early settlers must have had quite a different view
of the landscape:

-4­

land is approximately one-half oak-hickory forest; the rest
is currently in pasture. An estimated one-third of the sector
has been severely affected by land modifications including
support facilities for lignite mining. These modifications
and their impact on archeological resources are discussed in
the section titled "Site Distribution
ll

•

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGICAL SETTING
The project area lies within the Coastal Plain physio­
graphic province which is characterized by gently undulating
hills. The elevation va~ies from approximately 100 meters
AMSL along the creek floodplains to 143 meters on the higher
knolls.
The underlying bedrock is the Calvert Bluff member,
Rockdale formation of the Wilcox Group, an Eocene nonmarine sedimentary strata (Sellards, Adkins and Plummer
1932: 592). It exhibits heterogeneous mixtures of sands,
clays, and lignites averaging 65% sandy clay, 20% sand, 10%
siliceous clay, 3% lignite, and 2% large concretions (ibid.).
A typical cross-section of the lithology would feature
massive cross-bedded sand, large broken chunks of petrified
wood, lentils of black lignite, and large boulder-like
concretions (ibid.).
The principal soil in the project area is the Pa1eustalf
Great Group of fine sandy loams (Soil Survey Staff 1979).
Six soil series within this association are pertinent to our
study and are described in the site descriptions. Elements
common to these soils, which may have influenced prehistoric
habitation, are their location on terraces and uplands above
the normal flood level, their well-drained nature, the type
of biotic community that they tend to support, and the
relative ease of tillage compared with bottomland clay soils.
The Trinity River, five kilometers east of the project
area, is roughly the boundary between the Texan and Austro­

-6­

When white men first saw the Freestone County area, the
trees (mostly post oaks) were large and scattered and
the bluestem grasses were waist-high on the uplands. The
county was park-like, and one could see for quite a distance,
even in the wooded bottomlands. There was very little
underbrush. Some areas were completely open, and were
essentially prairie. (Truett 1972: 3)
The clearing of wooded areas and the plowing under of open
zones for cotton farming evidently had a drastic effect as
undergrowth closed in the woods by the 1930s.
REGIONAL BACKGROUND
A detailed review of the cultural history of the region
will not be discussed herein. Interested readers are referred
to in-depth treatises of prehistoric reconstructions such as
may be found in the proposed Tennessee Colony Lake (Richner and
Lee 1976: 71-133; 1977: 31-68) or the Trinity River Basin
reconnaissance report (Richner and Bagot 1978: 51-96).
At least three cultural stages are recognized in the
regional prehistory. These stages are based on the subsistence
strategy and/or artifactual associations that are usually
temporally and geographically localized. Cultural material
from all three stages has been documented for the region and
it may be inferred that the project area would produce similar
data. A brief summary of these stages and of the historic
period follows.
Paleoindian Stage (Pre-lO,000-8,000 B.P.)
This, the earliest recognized cultural petiod, began
some time before 10,000 B.P. The validity of earlier sites
such as the Lewisville Site near Dallas, which was radiocarbon
dated to 37,000 B.P. (Crook and Harris 1957), and the Malakoff
Heads geologically dated to 70,000 B.P. (Sellards 1941) is
questionable due to problems with the dating associations.
The conclusion of this stage is usually associated with

-7­

the terminal Pleistocene and is linked with the extinction of
the mega-fauna, the traditionally hypothesized subsistence base
for this period.
Although the typically associated projectile point types
(CZovis, Folsom, SaottsbZuff, Plainview, Meserve, San Patriae)
have been recovered in the area, no in situ Paleoindian

occupation sites have been positively identified (Richner and
Lee 1977: 33). All such material has been either from isolated
finds or deposits mixed with artifacts of later cultural stages.
The exploitation pattern of the area at this time has been
questioned and a more generalized hunting/gathering economy
suggested instead of a big game hunting strategy.
Archaic Stage (8,000-1,200 B.P.)
This cultural stage is defined by a myriad of material
traits and an economy based on hunting and gathering. At
the fundamental level, it might be characterized as that
period after the extinction of the Pleistocene mega-fauna and
before the appearance of such technological innovations as
agriculture, ceramics and the bow and arrow. Archaic sites
are numerous in the area but few have been excavated that are
undisturbed. (Site 41FT46 produced diagnostic artifacts from
this cultural stage.)
In addition to the lithic assemblages recognized for this
period, such cultural features as hearths, pits, burials, trash
middens and burned rock concentrations have been associated
with Archaic sites although no Archaic habitation structures
have been found (Burton and Connors 1979: 14).
Late Prehistoric Stage (1,200 B.P.-European contact)
This period is better documented than either of the
previous stages and apparently is better represented in the
area. A complex material trait assemblage is used to differentiate
between culturally similar groups. The project area is situated
on the fringes of both the Caddoan area of East Texas and the

-8­

Central Texas Late Prehistoric culture area and shares a
number of affinites with both (Richner and Lee 1977: 39).
The bow and arrow, ceramics and agriculture are important
cultural indicators of this period. (Site 41FT44 produced
a ceramic sherd and Site 41FT45 a Bonham projectile point
indicating that these sites were occupied during the Late
Prehistoric stage.)
Historic Period (A.D. 1,600-Present)
A massive, well-illustrated volume detailing the
history of Freestone County has recently been published
by the Freestone County Historical Commission (1978). In
addition, a historical perspective of the area may be found
in volumes dealing with the Tennessee Colony Lake project
(Richner and Lee 1976: 109-138; 1977: 46-52).and interested
readers are referred to these reports. Only a summary of
historic events relating to the project area are dealt
with herein.
The first recorded European contact with the Indians
of Freestone County was by Athanase de Mezieres in 1772
(Bolton 1914: 289). Mezieres reported sighting a "Tuacana"
(Tawakoni?) village of some 36 huts near the confluence of
Tehuacana Creek and the Trinity River. Archeologists from
Southern Methodist University indicate that they may have
located the site and have designated it Site X41FT23 (Richner
and Lee 1977: 123).
Deterred by hostile Indians, few settlers came to the
Freestone County area until a treaty was signed 1n 1843
(Browne 1925: 37). In 1850, part of Limestone County was
redefined as Freestone County by the Texas Legislature
(Gommel 1898: 821-822) and Fairfield was named the County
Seat. By 1859, all the Indians in the area had been removed
to a reservation in Oklahoma (Winfrey 1960: 338-340).

~-~-~~-~~~

-9­

PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Little of the archeological research conducted near the
present project area has yet been reported. The published
works on the Tennessee Colony Lake (Richner and Lee 1976, 1977)
are in many ways directly relatable to the TUGCO project. The
Tennessee Colony Lake study was an initial assessment designed
to sample the variety of cultural resources within each
environmental zone to be affected by the lake. Unfortunately,
the transects were primarily limited to the lake impoundment
area and do not appear to include upland areas drained by
ephemeral streams. Despite the differences in ecological
orientation, the Tennessee Colony Lake data furnish a valuable
base for comparison.
The published study of Chambers, Richland and Tehuacana
creeks (Burton and Connors 1979), located north of the project
area, is also concerned with major Trinity River tributaries
and thus is of limited value to this report.
The Keechie Archeological Report (Meade 1978) and the
Turlington Archeological Report (Meade 1977) are studies of
upland areas east and southeast of the Big Brown Lignite
Prospect.
Little information is currently available about the
activities of prehistoric populations in the Texas uplands
away from major drainages. It has been proposed that sites
in this type of environmental setting represent temporary,
task-specific occupations, not permanent settlements - at
least during the Archaic stage (Richner and Lee 1977:61;
1976: 84). The data from Tennessee Colony Lake indicate
that lIonly small sites are encountered towards the headwaters
of the smaller tributaries (Richner and Lee 1977: 88) and
that IIno large sites have been recorded on the tributaries
(draining the Oak-Hickory Biome) except at the confluence
with the main Trinity River floodplain (Richner and Lee
ll

ll

~---~

-10­

1977: 8), Richner and Lee (1977: 61) also state that some
evidence of specialized Archaic sites is present in the study
area. ,
Small sites along the upland edge (e.g., Sites
X41HE85 and X41AN20) and near springs away from the floodplain
seem to represent short-term hunting camps." (my underlining).
The above situation would conform to an adaptive hunter/
gatherer subsistence strategy termed lithe central-based,
wandering model" (Beardsley et at. 1956: 136). In its basic
form, it could be characterized as groups centering around a
base-camp which was occupied for several periods during the
year. The remainder of the year, the groups divided into
smaller segments for exploitation of seasonal resources. At
Tennessee Colony Lake, large sites~ thought to be base-camps,
were situated at terrace edges whereby the resources from the
bottomlands, uplands, and terraces could be easily exploited
Conversely. however, the sites in the Big Brown Lignite
Prospect may not have functioned in this manner but rather
were semi-permanent camps themselves.
Cultural resource
surveys similar to the one reported herein are currently
being conducted in other potential lignite mining areas near
the Big Brown Site. When the results of these assessments
are reported, the settlement patterns and exploitation of the
upland regions by aboriginal groups can be more fully understood.
II

RESEARCH PROCEDURES
Prior to the field work, an examination of the records
and files of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
the University of Texas at Austin, and the Texas Historical
Commission, Austin, was conducted. No sites had been reported
within the project boundaries although several had been
recorded in the immediate vicinity.
Assistance from the curator of the Freestone County
Historical Museum, Ms. C.D. Childs, was invaluable in

-11­

delineating potentially significant historic areas. Avocational
archeologists were contacted about their knowledge of the
project area. Two persons had collected artifacts from the
area, but subsequent investigation determined that both local­
ities had been destroyed by prior land modification.
Commencing in July, 1979, an intensive surface inspection
of the 4,000-acre project area was undertaken. The field
surveyors walked a zig-zag pattern along transects ten meters
apart. The usual problems with surface exposure were compounded
by much higher than normal spring rainfall which turned the
normally dense vegetation into lush ground cover. Special
attention to erosional features, cutbanks, and rodent burrows,
combined with sub-surface probes, somewhat offset the visibility
limitations.
The location of each site was plotted on U.S.G.S. 7.5'
topographic maps and 1":400' aerial photo-mosaics provided
by TUGCO. A standard site reporting form, photographs, and
any diagnostic artifactual material collected from each site
were filed with the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
at Balcones Research Center, the University of Texas at Austin.
TUGCO provided a backhoe to facilitate sub-surface
investigations. The size and nature of the cultural deposits.
the site's integrity, and the depositional sequences were thus
evaluated. This information was assessed to derive recommend­
ations for further work and to evaluate the significance of the
site for regionally based research problems and possible nomi­
nation to the National Register of Historic Places.
SURVEY RESULTS
Seven archeological sites were recorded within
adjacent to the Big Brown Lignite Prospect. Six of
are prehistoric sites, five of which lie within the
boundaries. The other prehistoric site, 41FT44, is

or
these
project
situated

-12­

outside the western project boundary in an area currently being
mined. This site has been destroyed by construction of access
roads and control lines. A portion of the seventh site, the
historic community of Young which was established in the early
1870s, lies within the project boundaries.
Site Distribution
All five of the prehistoric sites within the project area
are clustered in an area of about two square kilometers in the
southern sector. Four of the sites, 41FT45, 46, 47 and 48, are
situated on the east terrace overlooking Pin Oak Creek. All
are in close proximity to several seep springs that occur in
this area. Site 41FT49 is located on a terrace directly across
Pin Oak Creek from Site 41FT46. A seep spring running between
sites 41FT45 and 46 feeds into Pin Oak at the foot of that
terrace.
The other prehistoric site, 41FT44, is in the northern
sector on a very high terrace, 27 meters above Pin Oak Creek
and approximately 400 meters from the creek. Surface inspec­
tion and sub-surface probes at this site recovered very little
material, and any determination of site function or character
is precluded by the severely disturbed condition of the area.
As mentioned previously, an estimated one-third of the
northern sector was disturbed by prior land modification.
An active spring feeds into Prairie Creek just west of the
community of Young; considering the distribution of sites in
the southern sector, this area seemed to be a prime locality
for prehistoric occupation. However, earth-moving, resulting
from road construction, has deposited from two to seven feet
of overburden on the terrace overlooking the spring. Any
cultural materials that may have existed on this terrace have
been buried or displaced.

-13­

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
41FT44
This prehistoric site is situated on the uppermost
terrace approximately 400 meters due west of, and overlooking,
Pin Oak Creek. The area is stabilized by a mature post oak
woodland vegetation community; post oak (Queraus stellata) is
the principal dominate. The overstory is composed of red
cedar (Juniperus virginiana)~ winged elm (UZmus alata) , black
hickory rCarya texana)~ and blackjack oak (Queraus marilandiaa).
The soil is a moderately well drained~ loamy fine sand of
the Padina Series occuring on uplands and high terraces (Soil
Survey Staff 1979).
The site lies outside the project boundaries and within
a lignite strip mining area for which TUGCO has held a permit
for a number of years. Cultural materials exposed in areas
cleared for control lines and access roads include an undecor­
ated brownware ceramic sherd of possible Caddoan affiliation
and ten flakes of red, white and gray chert.
Numerous shovel tests were executed in and around the
areas of cultural debris with negative results. These sub­
surface probes indicate that the site has been destroyed by
land clearing and that no further work is necessary.
41FT45
This prehistoric camp site is situated on a west­
sloping terrace overlooking Pin Oak Creek approximately
100 meters from the creek. The area would be classified
as "improved pasture" (Truett 1972: 13), having been fer­
tilized and planted in pasture grasses. The principal ground
cover at 41FT45 is common bermuda and hybrid coastal bermuda
(Cynodon daatyZon).
Near the western perimeter of the site
along Pin Oak Creeks a riparian community thrives; water

----~-

~----~-

----~-

---

~

-~--

~

---~~---

-14­

oak (Que~cus nig~a) is the principal dominate. Other overstory
species include hackberry (Celtis oaaidentalis) , black willow
(Salix nig~a), winged elm (Ulmus alata), American elm (Ulmus
ame~iaana), and cottonwood (Populus deltoidea).
Toward the
uplands, this vegetative community gradually gives way to a
sub-climax community classifed as "post Oak-Elm Savannah
(Truett 1972: 12) found along fence rows and road sides. Post
oak (Que~aus steltata), winged elm (Ulmus alata), and patches
of brush such as greenbriar (Smilaa bonanox) , grape (Vitis
app.), yaupon (Itex vomito~ia), and rattan (Be~ehemia saandens)
are the principal constituents of this community.
Sediments are composed of loamy, fine sands of two
Series, the Nimrod and the Silstid (Soil Survey Staff 1979).
The Silstid Series is characterized by a brown to pale brown
sand "A" horizon and a brownish-yellow to reddish-yellow
sandy clay loam
horizon over a weakly compacted sandstone
(Soil Survey Staff 1974). This soil occurs in upland areas
stabilized by rangeland grasses. The Nimrod Series is
characterized by a grayish-brown to pale brown fine sand All
horizon and a light gray, reddish-yellow sandI or yellowish­
brown sandy clay loam "SII horizon overlying a mottled, red
sandy loam lIe" horizon (Soil Survey Staff 1973). These soils
occur on undulating upland slopes of scrub oak wooded pastures.
The site was defined on the basis of scattered cultural
debris within an area 150 meters in diameter and included one
arrowpoint (Bonham), one quartzite hammerstone, numerous
fragments of fire-fractured rock, and seven flakes of chert.
Shovel tests revealed additional cultural material and
the possibility of subsurface intact features. Five backhoe
trenches were placed about the site boundaries. A total of
130 meters of trenching revealed a very mixed sandy deposit
varying in depth from 75 cm. at the terrace peak to 10 em.
in the lower, sheet-washed erosional areas. Sample screening
II

IISII

II

-15­

recovered additional cultural material, but no in situ features
were recognized in the trench profiles.
Test trenching at 41FT45 revealed severe deposit mixing
probably resulting from past clearing and plowing. Because
of the disturbed nature of the ~te, there is little evidence
indicating that intact cultural features remain. No further
work is recommended.
41FT46
This large site is situated on a western-sloping terrace
approximately 100 meters south of Site 41FT45 and 150 meters
from Pin Oak Creek. The site measures 140 meters north-south
by 95 meters east-west and sits betwee~ two erosional gulleys;
a third gulley bisects it near its southern boundary. These
rills may evidence seep springs in the past; the ground water
is presently only some 12 to 15 feet below the surface (Ivy
1979). Approximately three-fourths of the site has been
cleared and may be classified as "improved pasture II (see
description of 41FT45) with the accompanying vegetation.
The northwestern section appears but little modified and
the vegetation is a remnant post oak woodland community.
Sediments are composed of fine sandy loams of the
Axtell Series (Soil Survey Staff 1979). The Series is
characterized by a grayish-brown fine sandy loam "A" horizon,
a yellowish-red to coarsely mottled brown clay loam "BII
horizon, and a brown to pale brown sandy clay loam "e" horizon.
These soils occur in upland and ancient terraces and are
moderately well drained with slopes of 0 to 12% (Soil Survey
Staff 1977).
The site area was defined on the basis of the areal
extent of cultural materials exposed on the surface and by
subsurface probes. A concentration of fire-fractured rock
was noted eroding from an old pasture road which centrally

-16­

bisects the site in an east-west direction. Cultural materials
were also recovered along the base of the terrace and in the
cutbanks of the erosional gullies. A surface collection
produced three dart point proximal fragments, one projectile
point distal fragment, one bifacially worked tool, several
unmodified flakes of chert and siliceous wood, and numerous
fire-fractured rocks. Machine trenching at six localities
around the site revealed that the extent of undisplaced
cultural materials was in fact limited to the relatively
undisturbed northern portion of the site tested by Test Trench
1. Test trenches 2 through 6 indicated severely mixed deposits
ranging in depth from 50 cm. of fine sandy loam to exposed
reddish clay in the eroded areas. Past clearing and plowing
probably caused the sheet-washing action that has occurred
over the lower denuded portions of the site. Recovery from
sample screening of the backdirt from Test Trench 1 included
a Wells dart point, a Cliffton arrow point, one dart point
distal fragment, four modified flakes, three hammerstones,
three hammerstone fragments, and numerous unmodified flakes
of chert and siliceous wood.
The profile showed only slight mixing in the upper 10
cm. and approximately 40 cm. of relatively undisturbed sandy
soil over reddish clay. Although no intact features were
visible, the prolific artifact recovery compared to the other
sites investigated, would suggest that additional investigation
in this area of the site was warranted. Preliminarily, the
data suggest several occupations through time including at
least the Late Archaic (Wells projectile point) and Late
Prehistoric (Cliffton projectile point).
During the evaluation phase the week of October 1-5,
three test units were placed in the northern section of the
site. A 2 x 2 meter unit and two 1 x 1 meter units were located
on the site grid and excavated in arbitrary 20 cm. levels. The
cultural materials recovered included fire-fractured rock~

- ....

~-

.....- - . - - - .....

--------­

-17­

burned and unburned siliceous wood, and several flakes of
unmodified chert. No intact features were encountered and the
fire-fractured rock appeared randomly scattered. No time­
diagnostic material was recovered. A comparison of the profiles
of the test unit and the backhoe trenches indicates that the
northern area is also disturbed to the point it is doubtful if
intact cultural features exist. Without site integrity there
;s little potential for meaningful data recovery. No further
work ;s recommended.
41FT47
This site is situated on a western sloping terrace over­
looking Pin Oak Creek some 150 meters distant. A light scatter
of cultural material was exposed in rodent burrows and erosional
features in an area approximately 40 meters in diameter. The
site is cross-cut in an east-west direction by two erosional
gulleys which isolate the terrace. No time-diagnostics were
evident on the surface and shovel tests indicated a thin,
mixed deposit. The area has been cleared of native vegetation,
is currently seeded in coastal bermuda grass (Cynodon daotyZon),
and would be classified as "improved pasture (Truett 1972: 13).
Sediments at 41FT47 are composed of fine sandy loams of
the Axtell Series (Soil Survey Staff 1977). The Series is
charcterized by a grayish-brown fine sandy loam "A" horizon,
a yellowish-red to coarsely mottled clay loam "8" horizon,
and a brown and pale brown sandy clay loam "e" horizon. These
soils occur on upland and ancient terraces and are moderately
well drained with slopes of 0 to 12% (Soil Survey Staff 1977).
Five backhoe trenches were placed in areas showing
cultural materials. Severe post-depositional disturbances were
observed, including mixing presumably caused by clearing,
agricultural activities and bioturbation. The extreme northern
end of Trench 3 exposed a dark gray stain. No cultural materials
were found in association. The other trenches indicated a
ll

-18­

range from 50 to 5 cm. of sandy soil overlies red clay.
Because of the severe disturbances noted above, the
site holds little potential for significant archeological
data recovery unless the unidentified dark stain is cultural
in origin.
During the evaluation phase, a 1 x 1 meter test unit
was excavated through the dark stain. No cultural materials
were recovered. The profile showed a plow zone of 10-15 em.
of mixed tannish noncohesive sand overlying approximately 5
cm. of undisturbed yellowish-brown sand. The dark grayish­
black stain, varying from 7 to 10 cm. thick, underlies this
zone. The mottled yellowish-brown sand clay loam under the
stain is approximately 5 cm. thick and overlies the red clay.
The exact origin of the stain is undetermined; a possible
cause is past land clearing and leveling. No relationship
to the prehistoric occupation is evident. No further work
is recommended at 41FT47.
41FT48
This prehistoric site is situated on a western-sloping
terrace overlooking Pin Oak Creek. It is bounded both north
and south by erosional gulleys similar to the setting of Site
41FT47. An active seep spring is at the western edge adjoin~
ing the creek. The area is currently ~Janted in coastal ber­
muda grass (Cynodon dactyZon) and would be classified as
lIimproved pasture" (Truett 1972: 13). Extensive timber
clearing and agricultural activities have severely modified
the land forms and mixed the deposits.
The site was defined on the basis of a light scatter of
cultural material visible in rodent burrows and on the eroded
western face of the terrace. Fire-fractured rock, both of
quartzite and siliceous wood, and unmodified flakes of chert
were observed in an area of approximately 100 meters north­

~TO:K
-¢tf T:NK

I

1\

f
2

FIGURE

)

''-,

/(

"

---­

/"

\

_/

EXTENT OF

--~~)

\
A>

,

/

1,;

"'"

---

,---,-------

///-

./

'\..

~'-'/

FE ATURE, 2 ___

\

_/ - "

/

I

,

f

o \

v \

~

\ II "

'1-,

\

x40lft

I

I
Q)

®

.-

_________

,,0­

/

,

N
FEATURE

___ ----.. ___

MN

'\>
',,~

SEEP
SPRINGS

\

~

BACKHOE

\~

)

\-

1l

\

~ - N 950/W 1042 to N 950/W 1000

~ - N 910/W 1110 to N 890/W 1080

I
,

<>'

«' "

<P

o

«,\

<>'

'"o

-1-\
\

200 m

)'---

TRENCHES

(j) .- N 1000/W 1000 to N 970/W 1000

/

\
(">

o

"

MATERIALS

/

/ ' / I~~~

,> ~
-

\

CULTURAL

/
---~
'\

/_----­

/

~

----

,

'

---

,~

/;

I

/'

- ---'

.---'

"

--­

./'

SITE

)

PLAN

MAP -

t

SITE

41 FT 48

-20­

south by 60 meters east-west. Shovel probes revealed severely
mixed deposits and very limited cultural materials.
The sediments at 41FT48 are of the Axtell Series of fine
sandy loams (see Series descriptions under 41FT46 or 41FT47)
found in uplands and ancient terraces (Soil Survey Staff 1977).
Sediments vary from 70 cm. of mixed sandy loam over red clay
to exposures of the red clay in the sheet-washed areas of the
site.
Three backhoe trenches were placed around the site during
the evaluation phase the week of Oct. 1-5 (Fig. 2). A burned
rock feature was detected in the east wall of Trench 1. The
overburden was removed and the feature exposed (Fig. 3). The
rock feature appears intact, measures approximately 0.5 meters
in diameter and is composed of sandstone and quartzite cobbles
42 cm. below the present ground surface in uniform tannish­
brown sandy loam and approximately 40 cm. above the red clay.
A second feature, similar to the first, was detected in the
north wall of Trench 2. As it was being investigated, however,
the trench wall slumped, destroying the feature. Although no
other cultural materials were observed, the presence of the two
intact features is sufficient to indicate that significant
archeological data may be recovered at the site. Further test­
ing of 41FT48 is recommended.
41FT49
This prehistoric site is situated on an eastern sloping
terrace overlooking Pin Oak Creek 300 meters south of the con­
fluence of Pin Oak and a smaller, unnamed tributary. Site
41FT46 lies due east and across Pin Oak Creek from 41FT49. The
site is estimated to be 50 meters in maximum diameter.
The local vegetation is composed of various weeds and
grasses and would be classified as ItBluestem Meadow" by Truett
(1972: 13). This type cover indicates farm land that has lain

I

;'

Figure 3.
a.

Rock feature exposed in wall of backhoe
trench 1 at 41FY48

b.

Rock feature in wall of backhoe trench
after clearing

-22­

fallow for several years and has been taken over by the bluestem
community, notably splitbeard bluestem (Andropogon ternarius)
and its relative subspecies (Truett 1972: 13).
The sediments at 41FT49 are composed of fine sandy loams
of the Nahatche Series, coarse sandy loams of the Thenes Series,
and fine sandy loams of the Axtell Series (Soil Survey Staff
1979). Both the Nahatche and Thenes soils are predominantly
floodplain associated, occuring along the lower slopes of the
site. The terrace is of the Axtell Series as described
earlier. Nahatche soils are characterized by a brown clay
loam "A" horizon with grayish-brown and yellowish-brown
mottles, the absence of a "B" horizon, and a brownish-gray
to dark gray clay loam "G" horizon with distinct brown and
yellowish-brown mottles (Soil Survey Staff 1977). The Thenes
Series is characterized as possessing a pale to dark brown
fine sandy loam "A" horizon, a yellowish to dark brown fine
sandy loam "B" horizon with pale brown to light brownishgray mottles, and a mottled yellowish brown to light gray
sandy clay loam "G" horizon with thin strata of sandy loam
and loamy sand interspersed.
The site was defined on the basis of cultural material
visible in rodent burrows and along an old farm road. Three
modified flakes of chert, several unmodified flakes of chert
and siliceous wood, and fire-fractured rock were recovered on
the surface. Shovel tests revealed additional subsurface
material including a hammerstone and flakes of quartzite.
Six backhoe trenches were placed around the site to assess
site integrity and to define the site boundaries. Deposition
varied from 20 to 50 cm. of sandy soil overlying red clay.
The profiles of these trenches showed moderately developed
horizons with some mixing evident. A possible hearth was
encountered sitting on the clay hardpan. Its position and
the lack of discernible associated features such as charcoal,

-23­

burned clay, or fire-fracturi~g may indicate the downward
movement of the materials through the sand lenses.
During the evaluation phase the w~ek of October 1-5,
four 1 x 1 meter test units were excavated at the site.
Two were placed near the previously exposed feature and
indicated that it rested within the plow zone and had been
scattered. The two other units were placed where deeper
sediments appeared in the trenches. No diagnostic artifacts
and only a few fragments of fire-fractured rock were
recovered. The main occupational area was apparently small,
is contained within the plow zone, and has been disturbed.
Therefore, no additional work at this site is recommended.
41FT50
The project boundary bisects 41FT50, the historic
community of Young. Established in the early 1870s, it
was named in honor of one of the area's first settlers,
Dr. Tolbert Fannin Young. An excellent historical back­
ground of the community may be found in IIHistory of Free­
stone County'l published by the Freestone County Historical
Commission (1978).
No extant structures within the project area remain
except for the Round Prairie Baptist Church. This church
was established in 1883 and moved to its present location
in 1892. Since then, the building has undergone several
renovations. Local informants pointed out the locations
where the post office and general store once stood. Surface
inspection indicates nothing remains of these structures.
The post office site is now used for pasture, and a modern
dwelling has been built upon the store site.
No structures of the original community are extant;
no further work is recommended.

-24­

CONCLUSIONS
The intensive field survey of a 4,000 acre tract of the
Big Brown Lignite Prospect documented six prehistoric sites,
five of which are within the project boundaries (Fig. 1).
These five sites cluster around several seep springs which
feed into Pin Oak Creek.
The proximity of all of these sites to seep springs may
indicate that water was not permanently available prehistorically
elsewhere within the southern sector, and that Pin Oak Creek
was probably intermittent then as it is today. Information
gained from surveys in areas comparable to that of the present
project indicates a similarly direct association of archeolog­
ical materials with the sparsely scattered water sources of
the upland environments. It seems logical that encampments
were customarily and repeatedly located near water. Although
the upland environments were undoubtedly exploited, for hunting
and collecting at least, these prehistoric activities would
have resulted in extremely scant and ephemeral archeological
evidence, far more difficult to locate and document, and more
susceptible to degradation.
An analogous water supply, the active spring feeding into
Prairie Creek in the northern sector of the prospect, has been
severely modified by road construction. As a result, it is
no longer possible to determine whether the same pattern of
clustered sites existed around this water source as well.
The one prehistoric site located just outside the project
boundaries of the northern sector was too disturbed to allow
functional interpretations.
The project boundary bisects the historic community of
Young. A single structure, the Round Prairie Baptist Church,
is still standing although several renovations and structural
modifications have lessened its potential for historic or
architectural significance. Two additional localities, the

-25­

old post office site and an early store site, have both been
destroyed.
Other historic structural remains within the project
boundaries have been evaluated in light of consultations
with Ms. C.E. Childs, curator of the Freestone County Museum,
Dr. P.O. Browne, historian from Baylor University, Waco, and
descendants of the original settlers still living within the
area. These interviews, and inspection of the surficial remains,
indicate no sites of historic significance remain within this
Big Brown Lignite Prospect tract.
Assessments and Recommendations
All cultural resources within the project area will
eventually be destroyed by the proposed lignite mining.
Four of the five prehistoric sites within the project area
are severely disturbed; little meaningful archeological data
could be recovered. Site 41FT48 contained intact cultural
features and has the potential to provide significant information
about the prehistoric exploitation of this region of the East
Texas uplands. This site is recommended for additional
investigation.

-26­

REFERENCES CITED
Beardsley, R.K., P. Holdor, Alex Krieger, B.J. Meggars, J.
Rinaldo and P. Kutshie
1956 Functional and Evolutionary Implications of
Community Patterning. in Seminars in Archaeology,
Robert Wauchope (Editor). Memoirs of the Soaiety
for Ameriaan ArahaeoZogy 11: 129-157.

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.

Texas Journal of

Saienae 11 (1) .

Bolton, H.E.
1914

Athanase de Mezieres and the Louisiana-Texas
Frontier 1768-1780. Vols. 1 and 2.
The Arthur
H. Clark Co., Cleveland.

Browne, Phillip Dale
1925 The Early History of Freestone County to 1865.
Unpublished master1s thesis. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Burton, Susan and Deborah T. Connors
1979 An Archeological Evaluation of Chambers, Richland
and Tehuacana Creeks, Navarro and Freestone Counties,
Texas. Archeology Resource Consultants, Dallas.
Carr, John T., Jr.
1967 The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas
Water Development Board Report No. 53, Austin.
Crook, W.W., Jr. and R.K. Harris
1957 Hearths and Artifacts of Early Man near Lewisville,
Texas, and Associated Faunal Material. Bulletin
of the Texas ArahaeoZogiaaZ Soaiety 28: 7-97.

Freestone County Historical Society
1978

The History of Freestone County.

Gommel, Hans Peter N.
1898

-~----

The Laws of

A

..- . - " - .

in.

._-_....

Texas~

1822-1897.

Fairfield.

Gommel Book Company,

--~

...... ~....

Ivy, Raymond (TUGCO Field Engineer)
1979 Personal communication, tape on file at TAS.
Meade, C. Wade
1977 An Archeological and Historical Survey of the
Turlington Area, Freestone County, Texas.
Report submitted to Dow Chemical Corporation.

-27­

1978

An Archeological and Historical Survey of the
Keechi Area, Freestone County, Texas. Report
submitted to Houston Lighting and Power.

Richner, Jeffrey J. and J.T. Bagot (assemblers)
1978 A Reconnaissance Survey of the Trinity River Basin
1976-1977. Southern Methodist University Archaeology
Research Program Research Report No. 113, Dallas.
Richner, Jeffrey J. and Reed Lee
1976 Cultural Resources at Tennessee Colony Lake.
Report submitted to the National Park Service,
Southern Methodist University Archaeology
Research Program, Dallas.
1977

Archaeological and Ethnohistorical Survey at
Tennessee Colony Lake 1975. Southern Methodist
University Archeology Research Report No. 104, Dallas.

Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins and F.B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas. Vol. 1: Stratigraphy.
University of Texas Bu~Zetin No. 3232, Austin.
Sellards, E.H.
1941 Stone Images from Henderson County, Texas.
American Antiquity 7(1): 29-38.
Soil Survey Staff
1921 Soil Survey of Freestone County.
Service, USDA.
1973

Nimrod Series Soil Description.
Service, USDA.

1974

Silstid Series Soil Description.
Service, USDA.

1977a Axtell Series Soil Description.
Service, USDA.

Soil Conservation
Soil Conservation
Soil Conservation
Soil Conservation

1977b Nahatche and Thenes Series Soil Description.
Conservation Service, USDA.
1979

Soil

Preliminary Field Data and Soil Map of Freestone
County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service, USDA.

Truett, Joe C.
1972
An Ecological Survey of the Lignite Mining Area
of the Big Brown Steam Electric Station, Freestone
County. Texas. Report submitted to Industrial
Generating Company.

-28­

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District
1979 The Trinity River Project, General Design
Memorandum, Phase I, Appendix 3: B-23.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Personnel of the sponsoring agency, Texas Utilities
Generating Company, most especially Richard E. White,
Leggett Garrett, Barrett Sledge and Becky Donaldson,
were most cooperative and greatly assisted in the completion
of this survey and assessment. The provision of equipment
and personnel for subsurface testing expedited the evaluation
of the recorded sites. The assistance provided in housing
and other logistical arrangements was greatly appreciated
by the entire crew.
The assessment of the historic resources of the Big
Brown Project area owes a great deal to the advice and
counsel of Dr. P.O. Browne of Baylor University and Mrs.
Sylvia Childs of the Freestone County Historical Museum.
Staff members of the Texas Archeological Survey who
participated in the field work were Ray D. Kenmatsu, James
R. Pliska and David G. Robinson. David S. Dibble served
as principal investigator and ultimately supervised the
project. The final manuscript was edited and prepared
by Solveig Turpin. Figures were drafted by Bruce Wilson
and photographs were prepared by Jack Grieder. The efforts
of all these people in the production of this report are
appreciated.

./

~TOCK

~
./'

-/

FIGURE

T:NK

~

'~"'-,

\

---'\--

/

"V

'"

-~-~-_/ '\

/
-

~14

./'

\..

FEATURE 2_

\

/

\

~\

\

\

---~

SEEP
MN

SPRINGS

F

~-ro
- ,

MATERIALS

1')

BACKHOE TRENCHES

­

()o~;

N 10001 W 1000 to N 9701 W 1000
N9501 WI042 to N9501 WIOOO
N9101 WIIIO to N890/WI080
4 N 9801 W 980 to N 10001 W 980
5 N 9401 W 960 to N 9801 W 960
6
N 9801 W 940 to N 10201 W 940
7 N 9801 W t020 to N 10201 W 1020
8 N 9601 W 1040 to N 9801 W 1040
N960/WI020 to N960/WI040
9
10 N940/W980 to N940/WI020
II N 9 001 W 1000 to N 9401 WI 000
12 N 10401 W 940 to N 1040 I W 980
13 NI020/W 960 to NI040/W960
14 N 10401 WIOOO to N 10401 W 1040
15 NI020/WI040 to NI040/WI040
16 NI020/WI000 to NI040/WI000
I
2

k6-' /
/

3

FEATURE

FE,TURE'

~ ~--------------~ , / / ' /~

----)

\~

CULTURAL

/

~------)

\
''.,

//

((

'\"
\
l'1l \
«'­

'"o
ril

«,\

"1--\
o

407 " /

I~,>--~ ~~/

Y'

N

1.

(;1
~I I-~:]1

J~2~5t~'

-

o \

~\

'5\"////~/~~
._
l'v.~/i6 13-

/ /

I

EXTENT OF

"~

,<::,

w

~

'"o
ell

-~-------------

\

200 m

J'---._'---

4

~~

---

\

f

­

../'~

- ---:::::::~--=:::::~--=

-----

-.--------- --------

-

-

---I

-:----~
.-----­
w

u

Z

w

"­

///:

--

----

.------­

----

/'

SITE

)

PLAN

MAP -

t

SITE

41 FT48

-33­

Lithic concentrations similar to these from ~lFT48 have
been reported from the Lake Limestone area. Mallouf (1979)
describes small circular concentrations of sandstone apparently
deposited on a flat surface. The fragments are reported as
highly friable and heat discolored, and are associated with
charcoal, bone and burned clay lumps leading to a possible
functional interpretation of lined roasting ovens although
no pit outlines are visible in the sandy matrix.
The sandstone concentrations at 41FT48 also appear to
have been laid on a flat surface. Both are contained within
a noncohesive sandy matrix at equivalent depths below the
ground surface. There is no evidence of aggrading sediments;
it is possible that these features were flooring for intrusive
pits and the modern surface approximates the prehistoric
living surface. Cultural material contemporaneous with the
construction of these features would then be contained within
the modern plow zone. The noncohesive nature of the surrounding
sediments would not be conducive to the retention of pit
outlines, particularly with the active bioturbation charac­
teristic of the area.
The extensive sampling, except for the exposure of these
rock fragment concentrations, was almost completely negative
in isolating prehistoric cultural residues. The rock con­
e e n t rat ion s the ms e 1 v e s rem a i n pro b1 em a tic ali n f u nc t ion.
Because of the evidence for heat alteration of the rock
fragments and their concentrated position it is assumed they
are man-made features of probable prehistoric age. Probably
they served as hearths or ovens, possibly in the floors of
excavated pits. The absence of fuel traces, fire-affected
sediments or pit outlines cannot rule out these suggested
uses in light of heavy leaching typical of the loose, coarse
sediments forming the site matrix and the evidence of extensive

Figure 5.
a.

General view of 41FT48 after extensive
backhoe testing

b.

Rock feature 3 exposed in the wall of
backhoe trench after clearing

-35­

biological activity.
The above findings lead to the conclusion that the
locality does not retain sufficient preservational potential
to justify further investigation. However, the documentation
of these curious features may be important in the future if
similar, better preserved examples are found.

REFERENCE CITED

Mallouf, Michael G.
1979 Archeological Investigations at Lake Limestone
Fall and Winter, 1977. Texas Archeological
Survey Research Report No. 71, The University
of Texas at Austin.

APPENDIX A:

A REPORT ON FURTHER SUBSURFACE TESTING AT
SITE 41FT48

David S. Dibble

~.----

........ - - -

---

..........-

-..

~---

