TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

ZORN TO COMFORT PRO.IECT
A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources
to be Affected by a Proposed Transmission Line

Carolyn Ekland-Olson

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

The University of Texas at Austin

Technical Bulletin No. 40
1980

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS 78758

Balcoms Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

ZORN TO COMFORT PROJECT
A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources
to be Affected by a Proposed Transmission Line

By: Carolyn Ekland-Olson
Principal Investigator: David S. Dibble

A report submitted to the Lower Colorado River Authority by the
Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at Austin.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Researc h Procedures................................... 2
Zorn to Comfort Zone."

11""

,II."""""""." •••• " • • • • • • • • • • • • •

3

Previous Archeological Investigations ..............•.. 8
Conclusions ........ "."."" . ",." .. """"",, .............. "''''''''''' 9
Recommendations ....... ,,"

ill"" •• " •••••• " ••••• " . . . . . . . ""."

11

Bi bl i ography .....................................•.•. 13

INTRODUCTION

At the request of the Lower Colorado River Authority,
the Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at
Austin, conducted a preliminary assessment of the archeol­
ogical and historical resources within a zoned area extending
from Zorn to Comfort, Texas. This area, which includes the
central portions of Kendall and Comal counties, the southern
tip of Hays and the northern edge of Guadalupe counties, is
being examined for the placement of a 345 KV transmission
line. The results of this assessment are to serve as a guide
for planning the final route of the proposed transmission
1 in e .
The following objectives were outlined for the study:
1)

To conduct a search of the files at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory and the Texas
Historical Commission to determine the location
and nature of any archeological or historical sites
which fall inside the proposed zone;

2)

To examine published and unpublished records in
the libraries and files of the named institutions
to determine whether areas within the proposed
zone have already been subjected to cultural
resource investigations;

3)

To evaluate this information in order to derive a
first approximation of the general pattern of site
locations in the zone;

4)

To recommend to the sponsor measures that would avoid,
lessen or minimize adverse effects to prehistoric
and historic cultural resources within the proposed
zone; and

2

5)

To recommend that additional cultural resource
investigations be undertaken when plans for the
transmission line are finalized.
RESEARCH PROCEDURES

The records of the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, the University of Texas at Austin, the central
repository for archeological site information in the state,
were examined. The location of any recorded sites found
within the proposed transmission line zone boundaries were
plotted on U.S.G.S. topographic maps. Any available
information pertaining to the condition and cultural affiliation
of the sites was recorded. The files of the Texas Historical
Commission were then examined for historicl or archeological
sites listed on, or nominated to, the National Register of
Historic Places. The published and unpublished literature
was then evaluated to determine the extent, nature and results
of cultural resource surveys conducted in this area.
The locations of recorded sites within the zone have
been plotted on U.S.G.S. topographic maps which accompany
this report. The sponsor is requested to restrict the
distribution of this information in order to minimize
destruction of the sites by vandalism. Other information of
interest contained in this report include:
1)

Information about the location, cultural affiliation
and current condition of sites in the zone if
such information exists in the files and reports.

2)

A listing of sites placed on, or nominated to, the
National Register of Historic Places;

3)

An evaluation of the nature and intensity of
previous archeological investigations which are
relevant to the area of study:

3

4)

Projected expectations concerning the area's
archeological site sensitivity based on what is
known about current land use; and

5)

Recommendations for routing the transmission line
within the proposed zone so as to minimize the
impact of construction on the cultural resources.
ZORN TO COMFORT ZONE

The area under consideration includes the central portions
of Kendall and Comal counties along with small portions of
Hays and Guadalupe counties; all sites recorded fall within
the Kendall and Carnal county portions of the zone. An
inventory of sites in the corridor is presented according to
7.5 minute Texas quads moving from east to west; this is
followed by a summation of total sites in the county and
sites in the zone per county.
Texas Quads

County

San Marcos South
Hunter
New Braunfels East
Devils Backbone
Sattler
New Braunfels West
Fischer
Smithson Valley
Bat Cave
Spring Branch
Anhalt
Kendalia
Bergheim
Sisterdale
Boerne

Hays, Guadalupe, Comal
Hays, Coma 1
Coma 1 , Guadalupe
Hays, Comal
Carnal
Coma 1 , Guadalupe
Blanco, Carnal
Carnal
Bexar, Carnal
Blanco, Kendall, Carnal
Kendall, Carnal
Kendall
Kendall, Bexar, Comal
Kendall
Ke nda 11 , Bexar, Comal

---~-------------

Sites in Zone
0
0
0

1
8
6
5

2
0

2
6
6

1
2
2

. - - - - - - - - - -.... - -

.. ~

..-

.......

------­

4

Texas Quads

Cou'nty

Rafter Hollow
Waring
Ranger Creek
Comfort

Kendall
Kendall
Kendall, Bandera
Kendall, Kerr

Sites i n Zone

Total

0
1
0
0

42

Sites in
Zone/County

County
Kendall
Comal
Hays
Guadalupe

Totals

13
29
0
0

120
149
25

42

372

78

National Register Sites in Zone - 2
The following information on the forty-two sites found
within the zone was compiled from the files and published
and unpublished reports for the area under consideration.
Twelve sites, all of which are in Comal County, were recorded
as part of investigations prior to the construction of
Canyon Lake. Six of these sites were reported by R.L. Stephenson
in 1949; 41CM6, 41CM15 and 41CM16 are occupation sites
with burned rock middens, 41CM12 is a rockshelter and 41CM19
and 41CM24 are small single burned rock middens with little
or no occupational debris (Stephenson 1951). A number of
these sites have since been inundated by Canyon Lake. Later
surveys in the same area have resulted in the recording of

5

a number of additional sites; 41CM4 is reported to be an
open site with midden debris, 41CM37 (the same site as 41CM40)
and 41CM38 are burned rock middens, 41CM13 is an occupational
site with scattered burned rock midden debris, 41CM35 is a
buried midden and 41CM39 an open camp site. The majority of
these sites were once situated on elevated land, such as
a bluff or ridge, along the Guadalupe River, the water of
which has since been impounded by Canyon Dam. The
diagnostic artifacts recovered from the sites suggests a
heavy Archaic occupation.
Three additional surveys have been conducted in the
Kendall/Carnal portion of the zone. In the southeastern
portion of Comal County, the Texas Archeological Survey
conducted a reconnaissance of areas to be affected by
Blieders Reservoir (Shafer 1963). Sites 41CM28 through
41CM31 were recorded, all of which were surface sites and
some of which are of suggested Archaic cultural affiliation.
A 1970 survey along the Guadalupe River in the area close to
the Kendall/Comal county line resulted in the recording of
eight sites on terraces along the river; six of the eight
are open sites, one is an overhang and one a rockshelter. No
information pertaining to the cultural affiliation is given.
Further to the west, also on the Guadalupe River, a 1975
reconnaissance carried out prior to the construction of the
Dam 7 Reservoir, recorded sites 41KE55 and 41KE56 (Hester,
Kelly and Bass 1975). The first site is a burned rock midden,
the second an open occupation; both sites are believed to
be Archaic.
Thirteen other prehistoric sites, which were not recorded
as part of a systematic reconnaissance, have been reported
in the zone area. The following information on these sites
was obtained largely from site forms on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory. It should be kept in
mind that the individuals who recorded these sites vary

6

greatly in their amount of archeological training.
brief description of each of these sites follows.

A

41CM32 - A site of unknown cultural affiliation located
on Bear Creek. The site is said to be affected
by cattle and a picnic area.
41CM50 - An Archaic or Late Prehistoric site situated
on the Guadalupe River. The condition is
excellent with the exception of minor erosion.
41CM52 - A site of undetermined cultural affiliation
located on a bluff along the Guadalupe River.
The site is said to have been disturbed by a
bulldozer.
41CM53 - A possible Archaic site evidenced by points
scattered along the stream bed of Deep Creek.
41CM54 - An aboriginal quarry in the city of New Braunfels.
A house was built on the site.
41CMI03 - A small midden from which projectile points
and lithic debris have been recovered.
41CMI04 - An occupation site with two middens on the
bank of the Guadalupe River.
41CMI06 - A quarry site in the Guadalupe River bed.
41KEI0 - A burned rock midden of Archaic and Late Prehistoric
affiliation. The site has been cultivated and
potted.
41KE21 - A Middle Archaic site on the North side of Curry
Creek. The site contains a burned rock zone
with midden deposits.
41KE22 - A lithic scatter of unknown cultural affiliation
on a terrace along the Guadalupe River.

7

41KE23 - A small occupation site of Archaic cultural
affiliation, located on an arroyo.
41KE66 - A rockshelter with pictographs on the Guadalupe
River.
Three historic sites have also been recorded in the
zone area. 41CM91 and 41CM92 are both in the Guadalupe
River State Park. The first consists of an 1879 German-built
house with sheds, a garage and a stone wall enclosure; the
second is a 1917 wood frame house and outbuilding complex.
Site 31CM47 is a German church located close to New Braunfels.
An examination of the files at the Texas Historical
Commission indicated that several National Register sites
are located either within, or on the edge of, the proposed
zone's eastern boundary. Within the zone is the Gruene
Historic District in the town of Gruene. The district
contains examples of mid-19th-century German Colonial houses
with Victorian additions along with late-19th-century
commercial buildings (Texas Historical. Commission 1979). The
city of New Braunfels also contains a number of old German
structures on the National Register; however, these are in the
central city, some distance from the zone's edge.
Further west is the community of Sisterdale which contains
the Sisterdale Valley District, a National Register site
consisting of several historical German structures, the best­
preserved of which lie directly to the north of the zone in
the complex known as Badenthal. This district was settled
in the 1840 ' s and 1850 ' s by a group of German intellectuals;
one individual, Ernest Knapp, started a hydropathic institute
here (Texas Historical Commission 1979).
Directly south of Sisterdale in the town of Boerne,
two sites, the Kendall Inn and the Kendall County Courthouse,
have been placed on the National Register of Historic Places;

8

both of these sites fall directly outside the zone. However,
other structures of historic interest likely remain in
Boerne for the town was one of the early German communities
in Kendall County.
On the far western edge of the corridor in the city of
Comfort, is the Comfort Historic District. This large
National Register site contains 121 structures of historic
interest. The zone as it is now defined does not include
this district; however, careful attention should be directed
toward avoiding the numerous structures of historical
value found in the general area.
An examination of historical documents dealing with
early German settlements in the state indicate that German
colonies were established at New Braunfels in Comal County
and Fredericksburg in Gillespie County by the mid-1800's.
From New Braunfels, German expansion continued rapidly to the
south, east and west. The three communities of Boerne,
Comfort and Sisterdale were settlements established around
1850 (Jordan 1966). As many of these immigrants were farmers,
it can be anticipated that aside from the structures in
these early settlements, remnants of early German farms should
be scattered throughout the area.
PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
A number of major projects in the areas adjacent to the
zone have been conducted in recent years; it seems appropriate
to review them briefly as the findings may be applicable to
the area of concern here. As was mentioned previously, a
significant amount of work was conducted in the Canyon
Reservoir before impoundment. Most sites were examined only
briefly; however, three sites, the Wunderlich site, the
Oblate site and the Footbridge site, were subjected to
more intense investigations (see Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962).

9

Excavations at these three sites, along with data from the
earlier survey of the area, suggest a prehistoric occupation
by small transient hunting and gathering groups spanning
the Archaic and Late Prehistoric stages.
To the east in Hays County, a survey of the upper San
Marcos River Watershed conducted by the Texas Archeological
Survey in 1974, located twenty-two sites. The recovery of
only a few diagnostic artifacts made it difficult to assign
the sites to any particular cultural stage; the nature of
the sites appeared to be directed toward the procurement of
lithic resources (Patterson 1979). Beginning in 1974, the
Center for Archaeological Research, the University of Texas
at San Antonio, undertook a series of investigations in
portions of the Comal River Watershed (see Hester, Bass and
Kelly 1975; Kelly and Hester 1975a; Kelly and Hester 1975b).
Again, prehistoric occupational activities in this area seemed
to be linked to the procurement and processing of lithic
materials.
One final project that should be mentioned briefly is
the reconnaissance of the Upper Cibolo Creek Watershed in
Kendall, County. The thirty-nine sites located in this
region suggested an occupation span from Paleoindian to Late
Prehistoric times; however, most diagnostic material
recovered date from the Archaic cultural stage. The nature of
the majority of the sites indicated the area was inhabited by
hunting and gathering groups who occupied sites for only
brief periods of time.
CONCLUSIONS
At the present time forty-two sites have been reported
within the area being considered for the placement of a 345 KV
transmission line; thirty-nine of these sites are prehistoric.
The nature of many of these sites suggests that the prehistoric

10

inhabitants were hunters and gatherers occupying sites for
only short periods of time. Reconnaissance work in areas
adjacent to the zone suggest that an abundance of naturally
occuring chert made the region especially suited to the
procurement and processing of lithic materials.
Occupations tended to be centered near water sources,
often on the terraces found along major streams. It is
anticipated that elevated land along waterways will show a
high degree of archeological site sensitivity. Although
work at several sites in the area shows an occupation span
extending from the Paleoindian to the Late Prehistoric stage,
it is the Archaic period which is best represented. This high
incidence of Archaic materials can most easily be accounted
for by the extreme length of the Archaic cultural stage which
continued in the central Texas area for nearly 8000 years.
Three historic sites are recorded within the zone.
Several historic communities such as the Gruene Historic
District and the Sisterdale Valley District, listed on the
National Register of Historic Places, also fall within or
adjacent to the zone area. Other structures with major
historic value can be found in cities such as Comfort and
New Braunfels which were early settlements for German immigrants.
Remnants of historic German farms likely remain scattered
throughout the zone in areas currently used for grazing
purposes.
Although this preliminary assessment indicates that the
area under consideration can be considered sensitive to both
prehistoric and historic remains, it is believed that given
the width of the final corridor, line placement can be carried
out so as to avoid any damage to cultural resources.

11

RECO IVIIVl ENDA TION S

It is emphasized again that this summation of currently
reported archeological and historical sites in the zone is
only a IIfirst approximation" of definable resources. Based
on the information from the files and literature. some
preliminary reommendations can be made:
1)

Prehistoric sites can be expected to occur along
major water sources. such as the Guadalupe River,
within the zone. However. pre~ious systematic
archeological surveys within the confines of the zone
are few and have been confined largely to areas
endangered by water development projects. The
capability to predict prehistoric site frequency
or character is thus limited -- particularly in
upland areas. Intensive on-site surveys of the
proposed transmission line route prior to its
construction would allow the use of flexibility in
corridor clearance and tower placement to avoid
prehistoric resources.

2)

A search of the history of land ownership and the
original land grants for the corridor area should
help identify sites of early farms and other structural
remnants of possible historical significance. As
several early German settlements were established
in New Braunfels, Sisterdale, Comfort and Boerne,
all of which fall along the zone boundaries, the
impact on the historic resources would be lessened
by selecting a route falling more toward the
interior portions of the zone.

3)

A current proposal for refining the planned Zorn­
to-Comfort corridor has been offered. This routing

12

would utilize approximately 23.5 miles of an
existing 138 KV corridor from near the Smithson site
to a point just east of Boerne, four miles
emanating from the Zorn terminus and about one mile
running eastward from the Comfort end of the
line. Presuming that this substantial use of
existing corridor segments would result in much less
line preparation than would otherwise be the case,
the potential of adverse effects on cultural resources
due to construction should be significantly lessened.

13

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Hester, Thomas R., Thomas C. Kelly and Feris A. Bass, Jr.
1975 An Initial Archaeological and Historical Assessment
of Three Proposed Dam Sites in Gonzales and Kendall
Counties, Texas. The Center for Archaeological
Research> the University of Texas at San Antonio>
Regional Studies No.2.

Hester, Thomas R., Feris A. Bass Jr. and Thomas C. Kelly
1975 Archaeological Survey of Portions of the Comal River
Watershed, Carnal County, Texas. The Center for
Archaeological Research> the University of Texas
at San Antonio> Archaeological Survery Report No.6.

Johnson, Leroy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The
Wunderlich, Footbridge and Oblate Sites. Texas
Memorial Museum~ Bulletin No.5.
Jordan, Terry G.
1966

German Seed in Texas Soil: Immigrant Farmers in
Nineteenth-Century Texas.
University of Texas Press,

Austin.

Kelly, Thomas C. and Thomas R. Hester
1975a Additional Archaeological Survey in the Dry Comal
Watershed, Carnal County, South Central Texas, The
Center for Archaeological Research> the University of
Texas at San Antonio~ Archaeological Survey Report

No. 10.
Kelly, Thomas C. and Thomas R. Hester
1975b Archaeological Investigations at Four Sites in the
Dry Coma1 Watershed, Comal County, South Central
Texas. The Center for Archaeological Research> the
University of Texas at San
Survey Report No. 15.

Antonio~

Archaeological

Patterson, Patience Elizabeth
1974 Upper San Marcos River Watershed Hays County, Texas:
An Archeological Survey of Areas Proposed for
Modification. Texas ArcheoZogical Survey~ Research
Report No. 42, Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1963 An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of
Bleiders Creek Reservoir Comal County, Texas. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, the University of Texas
at Austin.

14
Stephenson, Robert L.
1951 A Preliminary Survey of Canyon Reservoir, Comal
County, Texas. Mimeographed report of the River
Basin Surveys, Smithsonian Institution.
Texas Historical Commission
1979 The National Register of Historic Places. Austin, Texas.

