THE 100 CONGRESS AVENUE PROJECT
HISTORICAL AND ARCHEOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF
THE EASTERN HALF OF BLOCK 5,
ORIGINAL CITY OF AUSTIN, TEXAS

Henry B. Moncure

Principal Investigator:

Solveig A. Turpin

Texas Archeological Survey
Tee.hnic.a1. Bu.etwn 94

The University of Texas at Austin
1986

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The sponsorship of this project by Lincoln Property Company is
greatly appreciated. The company backed up its sponsorship with ful I
cooperation and assistance in the archeological effort wherever
needed.

The coordinating efforts of Kevin Fleming in insuring access

to the appropriate people involved in the work of demolition,
On site the
excavation and site management is appreciated.
cooperation and advice of Bill Hami Iton, Bi II Broom and Bi I I Chaney
was outstanding.
Bencor Corporation engineer, Dennis Stanko's
opinions during the excavation were especially helpful in interpreting
the river terrace strata.
L.P.C.'s Stacey Dockery always supplied
essential information when it was needed and smoothed out possible
problems before they became such. The assistance of the staff of the
Austin History Center,
Austin
Public Library,
particularly
Ms. Strieber is gratefully acknowledged.
This report IS the product of Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory staff members Deborah Smith, who typed and edited the
manuscript, Abby Treece, who prepared the illustrations, Herb EI ing
and Daniel Julien, who developed and printed the photographs, and
Dr. Solveig Turpin, who oversaw the whole process. The author would
also like to express his appreciation to fel low archeologist Wayne
Bartholomew for his assistance in recovering the tusk remains and
especially for keeping a tight hold on the rope used to raise and
lower screening equipment during that excavation. Without him I might
sti II be in the bottom of the hole.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Acknowledgments . .
Introduction .
Historic Background.
Monitoring
Problems Encountered and Recommendations
References

..

i
1

2
24

42
44

LIST OF FIGURES
1.
2.
3.

4.
5.
6.
7.

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.

Sanborn Map of Austin, 1877
Sanborn Map of Austin, 1885
Sanborn Map of Austin, 1889
Sanborn Map of Austin, 1894
Sanborn Hap of Austin, 1900
Sanborn Map of Austin, 1935
Southeast corner of Block 5, 1888
Tamale House.
·. ··
The study area in 1937 .
Decorated bricks ·
Dated bricks . . · · ·
Block 5 Plan Map, 1984 .
Bottles
...·.··
Saucer fragments · ·
Mastodon/mammoth remains .

.

ii

4

. . . .

6

8
10
12
14
18
21
22
27
29

31
34
36

40

INTRODUCTION
Recently Lincoln Property Company acquired that parcel of land
comprising Block 5 of the original 1839 platting of the City of
Austin. Th&. structures on lots 1 through 6 of this block, fronting
on Congress Avenue between 1st and 2nd streets, were scheduled for
demo I ition and subsequent excavation to accommodate construction of a
multistory office bui Iding. Prel iminary investigation by the Historic
Landmark Commission of the Land Development Department of the City of
Austin showed no extant structures worthy of Texas Historic Landmark
status but did reveal incidences of former ownership of several lots
by persons notable in Austin's and Texas' history. Accordingly, the
Historic Landmark Commission requested an examination of the property
during demo I ition and excavation for the presence of wei Is, cisterns,
priVies, original bui Iding foundations and the
development
of
information relative to earl ier and original uses of the block. The
Texas Archeological Survey (TAS), The University of Texas at Austin,
sponsored
by
Lincoln Property Company, undertook archeological
monitoring of the demol ition/excavation of lots 1 through 6 and the
archival research of the past uses of those lots. The findings of
that research/monitoring effort are presented in this report.

1

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
In January, 1836, Texas was a place of turmoi I. In the face of
the probabi lity that Santa Ana's Regular Army troops would soon arrive
to enforce and maintain Mexican sovereignty some settlers prepared to
flee in what was to become known as the Runaway Scrape. Others joined
mi I itary units to face the Mexican troops already in Texas.
With
attention focused on the threat from Mexico, the Indian population
seized the opportunity to step up hostilities against the settlers.
Their activities provide the earl iest references to the study area as
a settlement location.
Shortly after the initial settlement of DeWitt's Colony, a fami Iy
with the surname Hibbins settled there. In 1835, Mrs. Hibbins, after
a visit to her native Tennessee, returned to Texas accompanied by her
mother and her two small chi Idren.
Her husband met the party in
Houston and the group set out for home.
Near the present site of
Austin, Comanches attacked the group, ki lied the husband and his
mother-in-law and captured Mrs. Hibbins and her chi Idren.
When the
sma I lest child cried at night the captors kil led it. Mrs. Hibbins
escaped a day or so later. SI ipping away from her captors at night,
she waded down Shoal Creek to its junction with the Colorado River.
Fol lowing the river bank, she eventually came upon a herd of domestic
cattle and continuing down the river reached the cabin of Jacob
Harrell (Brown 1893:88-90j
Wi Ibarger
1935: 220-223j
Smithwick
1935:118-123).
Help from the rangers at Tumlinson's Blockhouse was
sought.
They were able to overtake the Comanches and
rescue
Mrs. Hibbins' other child. The incident places Jacob Harrel I in the
present study area in 1836 with the probabil ity that he had bui It his
cabin there at least by 1835.
Harrell was occupying one of those land surveys which was to be
condemned in 1839, by statute of the Republic, as a site for the new
capital. There is some evidence that he initially bui It near the
junction of Shoal Creek and the Colorado and in short order moved to
what was to become Block 5 (Malone 1958:7).
Frank Brown, in his
encyclopedic Annals of Travis County manuscript, records that Harrel I
moved "to the bluff or-the river near the foot of the present Congress
Avenue" in 1838 and that Harrel I "bui It the first residence on land
now included in Austin". Brown goes on to state that the Harrel I
Cabin was located "on the site now covered by a portion of Block 5,
the dwel ling fronting west towards near the present Colorado Street
and the fami Iy garden occupying a portion of the ground now covered by
Jett's cotton yard and the two lots adjoining on the north" (Brown
1893:V, 30-32).
Jett's cotton yard occupied lots 1,2 and 3 by 1889
and the firm maintained a storage yard on part of those lots unti I the

2

early 1900's (Sanborn Insurance Map 1889, Austin City Directory 1906).
In the 1800's, spurred on by the disastrous fires in Chicago in
1871, Boston in 1872, and many other lesser fire losses, insurance
companies began sponsorship of large scale fire insurance maps.
Although a number of firms were involved in the production of such
maps, the Sanborn Map Company was the acknowledged leader in the
field. The company began operations in 1866 as the National Insurance
Diagram Bureau and by 1873 had produced more than 600 maps of cities
across the United States. Changing its name to that of its founder,
Daniel A. Sanborn, the map company began to open branch offices in the
midwest and west (Wright 1983:2).
Sanborn first mapped Austin in
1877. The Sanborn series of Austin maps (Figs. 1-6) illustrates the
changes in Block 6 through time.
Jacob Harrel I was host to President Mirabeau Lamar and his party
on a buffalo hunt in the fall of 1837 or 1838 and it is this visit
that is alleged to have swayed Lamar's choice of a location for the
capital of the Republic (Terrel I 1911:113-114). In November 1838, the
third regular session of the Texas Congress introduced a bi II cal ling
for the permanent location of the seat of government. Lamar approved
this bi I I in January 1839, and the two houses appointed a commission
to provide the location. The commission's unanimous choice was the
site of Waterloo on the Colorado which by this time had a population
of four fami lies, including Harrell's (The Morning Star, April 16,
1839; Hardy 1938:43). The presence of another settler at the future
site of Austin is revealed in connection with an 1839 petition to the
fourth Congress of the RepUblic on behalf of a Richard Bul lock.
A
footnote in Harriet Smither's printed edition of the journals of that
congress, referring to the petition, states that Bul lock was second on
the Austin scene after Harrel I, thereby supporting both Bullock's
presence and Harrell's precedence (Smithers 1903:140n).
Condemnation procedures procured 7,736 acres for the new capital
at at cost of $21,000. Eight men were compensated for the condemned
land. Jacob Harrel I was the owner of the sma I lest tract affected, a
labor, just slightly more than 177 acres. Despite the fact that his
property was the only one on which the owner had bui It and was in
residence, he received the lowest price per acre l $3.00, of any
claimant (Police Court Records of Bastrop County Book A:61). A ninth
man, James F. Perry, executor of the Stephen F. Austin estate, was
also named as a claimant. Perry claimed "al I of the said land as the
property of the succession of said Stephen F. Austin, deceased"
This claim was
(Pol ice Court Records of Bastrop County Book A:61).
not honored at the time but litigation continued for decades. The
congressional act cal led for an agent to survey part of the purchased
land and Lamar selected Edwin Waller for the job in March 1839.
Waller announced that fol lowing the survey there would be a public
sale of lots in the new town on the first day of August, 1839.

3

--,

s:::
S­

o

.0

s:::

ttl
V)

4­

o

s:::

o

.j...)

u

Q)
V)

0..,

4

Waller, also commissioned to erect the necessary publ ic buildings at
the new capital, had overseen the construction of more than 20 prior
to the sale of lots. Lot sales in August 1839 centered around these
public bui Idings and were largely those lots within the area north of
Pecan Street (6th St.), south of Col lege Avenue (12th St.), and
extending two or three blocks east and west of Congress Avenue. Block
In
5 lots were not among those purchased in the original sale.
February of the fol lowing year, 1840, Jacob Harrel I purchased lot 2
Both purchases may
and his son, Anderson Harrel I, acquired lot 3.
have been spurred by the speculative purchase of lot 9 in the block by
cattleman Joseph Barnhart in January of that year and the sale of lot
6 to Asa Brigham in November of 1839. Harrel I must have realized that
his homestead was occupied under squatter's rights and not titled
ownership and that the town was expanding in his direction. Jacob
Harrel I 's patent notes that he had made improvements to his lot (GLO
Travis County, City of Austin fi les 75,76, GLO records 1840:1:4).
By the end of 1840 the Harrel Is owned two (lots 2 and 3) of the
six lots in the study area and Asa Brigham had acquired a lot from the
original grantee and also owned two lots (4 and 6) (GLO Travis County,
City of Austin fi les Patents 10,11,14,49). Dr. Moses Johnson patented
lot 5 in 1846 and Jacob Harrel I saw fit to acquire lot I, which he had
used for nearly a decade, in 1847, thereby returning the last parcel
of the half block fronting Congress Avenue to private ownership (GLO
Travis County, City of Austin fi les 80,250).
Original Lot Owners
JACOB M. HARRELL (lots 1 and 2)
Jacob M. Harrel I was in his early 30s when his was one of five
pioneer fami I ies living at the Reuben Hornsby Settlement on the
Colorado River in 1835. Shortly thereafter he moved his fami Iy north
of the river to the present site of Austin, eventually bui Iding a
cabin on the lot 2, Block 5 (Malone 1958:13). At the 1839 founding of
the city, his was the first building within its limits. Turning from
the pioneer frontier I ife to that of a city dweller, he established a
butcher pen near 12th Street and Waller Creek, accommodating the needs
of his new neighbors and there is some evidence he engaged in
blacksmithing in a smithy next to his lot 2 home (Malone 1958:40,
Scarbrough 1980:84). He was elected to the post of city alderman in
1840, 1841 and 1846 and to the office of mayor in 1847. In 1842, when
Mexico sent troops under General Rafael Vasquez to capture San Antonio
and many settlers fled eastward, Harrell stayed in Austin and was a
member of a vigilance committee charged with preserving order and
securing transportation for the women and children (The Weekly Texian,
March 9, 1842). In 1843} he represented the city in a convention at
La Grange cal led to express dissatisfaction with the

5

......

.6

/.

r-------------~- --~-~

---"'

c·'-"

0.111.

;1~~~.:I___.

,.ft?'

/

6'HEEr·

Q-.

"'"

---W.-r.1VE~K-----~-~--~---·
.

'\

".

1Qir.'.r-~ -I~lf~~

~~I".-:r;1

no'

'e
•

,> ­

~>~" .•

O'l

$(/:

"".

..

~...

I.

~~- ~.
.,

"

FIGURE 2.

Section of Sanborn Map of Austin, 1885.

Republic's policies in the western part of the county after President
Houston had moved the seat of government away from Austin to
Washington-on-the-Brazos (Webb 1952:773).
Frequently involved In
public works, Harrell was commissioned in 1844 to sel I shares in the
Colorado Navigation Company formed to provide river transportation to
Austin and, in 1846, he was court appointed overseer of street
maintenance in the city, both difficult and largely frustrating tasks
(Webb 1952:772, Hardy 1938:165). Harrel I abruptly moved from Austin
to Round Rock in 1848, helping to found that community. He signed the
residents' petition which led to the formation of Wi I liamson County,
served on the committee which recommended Georgetown as the county
seat, and was one of the first Wi I liamson County commissioners
(Makemson 1984:12, Georgetown Watchman, June 25, 1870).
Harrel I is
known to have farmed in the Brushy Creek area as early as 1838 under
the protection of Fort Kenney's garrison (Scarbrough
1980:84).
Harrel I died at his home on Brushy Creek in 1853 (Makemson 1966:18;
Webb 1952:773).
ANDERSON J. HARRELL (lot 3)
Anderson Harrell, son of Jacob, moved to the present location of
Austin with his father and acquired lot 3, Block 5 next to his
father's homestead on the same day his father reacquired legal title
to the land.
During the period fol lowing the Vasquez raid on San
Antonio in 1842, the younger Harrell is included among those single
men who remained in Austin when most settlers fled and the seat of
government relocated (Brown 1893:IX:7). He was Travis County Clerk in
1845.
Anderson Harrel I acquired lots 1 and 2 from his father in 1847
just a year before the elder Harrel I left the city (Travis Co. Deed
Book C:114).
He does not appear to have done much with the property
and he sold the lots formerly owned by his father to a group of
investors immediately after his father departed for Round Rock (Travis
County Deed Book C:449). The fol lowing year, Anderson sold lot 3 to
the same group of land investors headed by an Army doctor, Charles
M. Hitchcock (Travis Co. Deed Book 0:222).
ASA BRIGHAM (lots 4 and 6)
Asa Brigham was born in Massachusetts about 1790 and arrived in
That year saw his
Texas via Louisiana in 1830 (Kemp 1944:25).
election to the first of many political offices in Texas when he
became sindico procurador (a sort of city attorney/notary) for the
precinct of Victoria within the Spanish Texas municipality of Brazoria
(Barker 1918:246).
In 1831 he was elected Comisario for the same
precinct and in 1832, treasurer for the Brazoria district.
In 1836
Brigham was a merchant in Brazoria when elections were held to select
four
delegates
to
the
Constitutional
Convention
at
Washington-on-tne-Brazos.
He received more votes than any other
candidate. He was seated at the Convention and was appointed auditor

7

..............

~

~--.---.

­

8

of the Republ ic by interim president David G. Burnet. He was one of
the signers of the Texas Declaration of Independence. Later that year
President Houston named Brigham Treasurer of the Republic. He was
reappointed to that office by Mirabeau B. Lamar in 1839 and was also
sworn in to the office of alderman of the city of Houston (Kemp
1944:26-28).
Another of the Brazoria delegates to the 1836 convention was
Edwin. Waller, who, as previously stated, conducted the sale of
Austin's city lots and oversaw the construction of its first public
buildings. Waller's signature appears just above Asa Brigham's on the
Texas Declaration of Independence. Brigham, who had recognized the
speculative possibi lities of the property in his letter to James
Perry, purchased at least nine Austin lots, including lots 4 and 6 in
Block 5 (Perry 1839) Just two days after lot 6 was patented to him,
Brigham, suffering from i I I health and largely unable to perform his
duties as Treasurer of the Republic, was removed from that office by
President Lamar. Brigham moved to Austin where his friend Edwin
Waller had been elected mayor.
In the following year, President
Houston promptly reappointed Brigham as Treasurer of the Republic.
When
President Houston
moved
the seat of
government to
Washington-on-the-Brazos, Brigham moved with it.
He died there in
1844 (Kemp 1944:26-30).
Brigham's Austin residence was not located on his Block 5
property as those lots were without improvement when his wi II was
probated (Brazoria County Records,
Probate Court Folder 74,
The Treasury Bui Iding of the Republ ic was located on lot
1844-1852).
4, Block 53. Brigham owned lots 1 and 2 of Block 53 and lots 1
through 4 of Block 52. At the time of his death, a furnished house in
Block 57 was included in his property and was awarded to his wife in
1852. (Probate minutes of Brazoria County D:118; Rochel Ie 1956:118).
MOSES JOHNSON (lot 5)
Dr. Moses Johnson, whose actual medical training seems to have
been I imited to a preceptorship in Woodstock, New York, arrived in
Texas in 1838 and came to Austin while the new capital was being built
in 1839.
In 1840 he, like Jacob Harrel I, was elected city alderman
during the mayorial term of Edwin Waller. Johnson received the most
votes of any of the aldermanic candidates and became Acting Mayor
during the prolonged absences of Waller (Coleman 1971:16, Webb
1952:917).
In 1840, Johnson was elected Austin's third mayor and
concurrently, Justice of the Peace.
During the mayoralty of Asa
Brigham, Johnson, I ike Jacob Harrel I, was appointed to the vigilance
committee but unl ike Harrell, Johnson did not remain in Austin when
President Houston elected to remove the seat of government from the
city.

9

~,

.1\\J

SS~H9NO~

""

'"
~

r
I

~
. po"

:E

.~

.....l

I

""~

len

-I

I

\Z
0

I

.:­

(}llYt"fHI"·

i

s:::
......

\

I

I

b

-,

11

'I L'

NQ~,I

+.>

\,

VI

::::s

c::C
4­

o

0..

CJj
,y

II

ttl

::::

--l

~/ml1~J;

s:::

S­

o

.0

.,.,,0
'l:

Fdlra

s:::
ttl

"

(/)

.Y:79J.JIJ7

I s:'Ct'3j.VlOM;(? 1.(

4­

o
s:::
o

....+.>
u

(])
(/)

.-._-".',

':..,''''

:'.r\ ~ ",.,"'"

"',
t,.

,,,1

10

J~;

,~

1

When Anson Jones attained the presidency of the Republ ic in 1844
he appointed Moses Johnson Treasurer of the Republic. The question of
whether to remain an independent republic or seek annexation to the
United States as a slave state had assumed major proportions and Jones
cal led for a constitutional convention in Austin in 1845.
Johnson
returned to Austin with his slave, Cambridge, for the convention but
left his fami Iy at Washington-on-the-Brazos (Coleman 1971:18).
On his return to Austin, Johnson reoccupied the log house he had
abandoned three years earlier, finding it in better shape than he
expected. He rebuilt the fence with old pickets from the nearby
grounds of the temporary capitol building which was located on lots 9
- 11 of Block 98 (Colorado St. between West 8th and 9th).
Johnson,
disliking the few blocks walk to the Treasury Bui Iding in Block 53,
lot 4 (W. 5th St. between Guadalupe and Lavaca) moved the archives of
the Treasury to his refurbished house.
Within a week after the
constitutional convention, in September 1845, a fire at Johnson's home
destroyed both the house and the archives (Coleman 1971:19j Webb
1952:917).
Johnson, during the 1845 convention period, wrote numerous
letters to his wife which are preserved at the Barker History Center,
The University of Texas at Austin. His writings constitute nearly all
of the written evidence for everyday conditions in Austin at the time,
describing social gatherings, places to dine, political maneuverings,
Indian horse thefts and the shortage of medicines as wei I as the
refurbishing of his house and fence and his moving the archives to the
house (Johnson 1845).
There is no evidence that Moses Johnson ever built on his Block 5
property although he saw fit to acquire it only a few months after the
fire which destroyed his Austin home. In the year he died, 1853, he
is recorded as owning lot 11, Block 57, the former house of Asa
Brigham which had been probate awarded with its furnishings to
Mrs. Asa
Brigham
in
1845
(Kemp 1944:30).
Mrs. Brigham and
Mrs. Johnson were both residing in Washington-on-the-Brazos at the
time and knew each other wei I. Mrs. Brigham had no need of a house in
Austin and no reason to move back there after her husband's death.
Fol lowing the 1845 fire, the Johnsons had need of a house in Austin
and it is probable that Johnson's acquisition of the former Brigham
premises resulted from this circumstance. In short, he did not need
to bui Id on Block 5.
In a separate 1842 transaction, Johnson acquired lots 4 and 6 of
Block 5 from Brigham (Travis Co. Deed Book 0:121). In 1850, he traded
al I three Block 5 lots to Thomas Haynes, a land speculator, receiving
a similar number of lots in Block 50 (Rio Grande and 5th St.) in
exchange (Travis Co. Deed Book 0:121).

11

~ ~-;-=-;~
I

'Co

} P~F

~ ~::r.

=

=

=

h

D,

T'
1-'
till$

'31,
~I

c

«

,

o...J
o
....
tv

_"".on..

0

:>:

orr",
y

<3:

j
I

~

!

"-,­

0::

~

.ttf

r:ED

o

~ == =~ ~ ~ =

IYOI?~S

cJ)1
(I)::

~
~.

_____

CJ

"I

.~

{OIlL

"

I

I

J

~

~.

.}
tJ

KOllSF , , - -

Q.I

..J

LrJ
0:::
G:

Z,

0:

-'"

U:

5

~: ~

!/;/>i/JER

5MIlL!

PILES

10

~I

).J

~I
~~

IYOOiJ

YRR

0

CortO/( rtHRE I/o

................_~_----' 20
(orrON

BIlIEI>

"",!Io;­
.2'J~

,,~

IN

STI1FET

%

ST.
;/.7

1;1

I(l.Y

,(/1
0'\1?!

FIGURE 5.

l!'J

/(/5
wI

~

~

'I"

101

oil

Section of Sanborn Map of Austin, 1900.

-----0-1

G

Moses Johnson's term as Treasurer of the Republic ended In
February 1846. He moved to Lavaca a few years later, where he served
as inspector and col lector of revenue for the port. He died there in
1853 of yel low fever (Belo Corporation 1984:637, Webb 1952:917).
The foregoing places the Austin residences of the original owners
of lots 1 through 6, other than that of Jacob Harrell, as being
elsewhere than their Block 5 lots. Original owners Jacob Harrel I, Asa
Brigham, and Moses Johnson had all moved from Austin by 1850.
Original owner Anderson Harrell had sold lots 1 through 3 to the
Charles M. Hitchcock speculator group by 1849 and Thomas Haynes l
another speculator, owned lots 4 through 6 by 1850.
Land Speculator Owners
Once in the hands of Charles M. Hitchcock, lots 1, 2 and 3 saw
little use for a quarter of a century. Hitchcock, his army service as
a surgeon completed, departed the city. Returning for a visit in 1856
he learned that lots comparable to those he and his partners had
purchased in the 1840's for as little as $20 were now selling for $250
(Coleman 1971:34).
Apparently he thought he could afford to hold on
to the property for further appreciation and it was 1870 before he
granted a power of attorney to a local banker, C.R. Johns, to dispose
of his extensive Austin holdings (Travis Co. Deed Book T:179).
Johns
sold the lots the same year to Fred Carleton "in trust for the use of
the Young Men's Real Estate and Bui Iding Association of the City of
Austin and Carleton's successors as president of the association"
(Travis Co. Deed Book T:479).
Similarly, but with a greater turn over frequency, lots 4, 5 and
6 passed through the ownership of speculative investors. The three
lots owned by Thomas Haynes in 1850 became the property of Edward
R. Oliver in 1851.
Oliver sold them to James Cole in 1852. Cole
disposed of them to Alexander H. Banes In 1853 (Travis Co. Deed
Records E:264, G:171, G:86).
The Nineteenth Century Development of Block 5
Austin's economic environment during the Antebellum era was
anything but stable, in part due to the unsettled question of whether
or not the city would remain as capital city of Texas.
This
uncertainty was not resolved with finality unti I 1872. During the 33
year interim, attempts to move the capital, war with Mexico, union
with the United States, attempts to split the state into two or more
smaller states, secession from the Union, the Civi I War and
Reconstruction all affected Austin's growth and property uti lization.
Inflation was the major trend. One Austinite boasted in 1860 that a

13

"(' n""

w.

'~

2Nj)

b··", /'

:,

J'
~~--II"

.1::

.,_",."

J'

.-......

~

I

'jIIO~"'1
_-,-___
'£ __ " -fI

t

IR,

'C;

'~'.

" •• -

0 I~~
"

Dlf1J6J

_~ -: ;;:~5~-::~~' ~

; .m::::::

. ;tt

"
~

~

~

S

-,
. ,;~~};l

~~:iin_

OIL

•

.. ru::n

~

i

.,j

.l" ~ I

fI!~ ..·ol

,
,.

EN:6;:~~~"~~~ --', ...'

I

~;

::'::':-'::J:.:

-~-

f-'

~

S

.,~-

.1:>.

~
~

J
--------S.,
..
-------____ '!.£!,.T._~ ~

""""-<J:l..J

I

a.rv.

­

-;- ...Ir?~

~.

o

-

t

• '"

-;1
.,-1,

i!~1
~I

Rc.sr4
...~ .~t:"
J

. - -,.. ,.,
Sr• •t

(iRO

I~WH(J

/?iJ'
110

~I

fi"WI'

'~

w,

~

153

J:

-.J; '-'\I

lOS

I

. .,

S'

• Z

•

~

IfUI't-pr

tS~

IT
Q

t!!f1L _~_...

~

~

I

!::,.
• -*j
r"V~l~''''''''
.......... tJ·,.·.... "
~.
06f
~

J.. _2.0 ' \ ~
G"

0

~, "

,~..

...

"""'I '"

~\'~~
" ...t//6T~

eo·

HIt'

S T.

rl/

-~

Ej,.,.... -'ff'

~

I' C>£ /JrPT

N

.J

~,

-~

FIGURE 6.

L R M R R

PIfRK

Section of Sanborn Map and Publishing Company of Austin,
1935.

lot he had purchased for five dollars brought an offer of $100 in 1858
and $500 in 1860. He had refused both offers because he expected to
get $1,000 when the railroad reached the city (Coleman 1971:35). But
the inflationary rise of property values came to an abrupt end as
speculative markets of all types were turned upside down by the Civi I
War and its aftermath.
Once mi litary controls were established after the war, economic
conditions in Austin improved.
Federal authorities imposed stamp
duties, occupation taxes and income and manufacturing taxes In 1866,
but the aggregate of these and state, county, corporation and
municipal taxes was a total less than the tithe tax the Confederacy
had had to impose and business slowly regained momentum with the
occupying troops furnishing an instant currency source (Coleman
1971:44).
Turnover of
real
property
accelerated
early
during
Reconstruction, fueled in part by expansion of government facil ities
and speculation on the location of the State University provided for
in the 1866 constitution and the appointment of a committee to
administer it in 1867. By 1870 Austin was a boom town with lots
sel ling for $300 to $3,000. The town was now so crowded that, not
unl ike some of Austin's present day residents, the editor of the Dai Iy
Journal newspaper said, "No more visitors are wanted. The city is
ful I and overrun" (Coleman 1971:45). During this period bui Iding was
the order of the day and the supply of brick and lumber never met the
demand during the 1870's decade.
In the period from 1875 to 1877 alone Congress Avenue saw the
construction of the Charles Lundberg Bakery Bui Iding (1006 Congress),
six adjoining buildings in the 900 block (The Lamour Block 906-916
Congress), the Townsend-Thomson Building (718 Congress), the Walter
Tips Bui Iding (712 Congress), the Edward Tips Bui Iding (708 Congress)
and the Sutor Buildings (308-314 Congress). AI I had to conform to a
city ordinance passed in 1870 which required structures on the avenue
to be of brick, rock, concrete, or cast iron with a fireproof roof.
Also in 1876, the first structure since Jacob Harrell's cabin was
bui It on Block 5.
The first Austin Sanborn map (Fig. 1) shows the first structure
since Harrell's cabin to be bui It in Block 5, the Capital City Flour
Mi I I. This two story stone structure facing on Water (1st) Street,
was constructed in 1876 by the firm of Emerson and Sprinkle. The
firm, which was actually owned in large measure by Austin Mayor Thomas
Wheeler, bought lot 1 of the block from Wheeler (Travis County Deed
Book 37:24) who had speculatively acquired lots 1 through 3.
This
relationship may explain why the engine room and office of the flour
mi I I bui Iding extended past the lot 1 property line into lot 2 by
about four feet~ Wheeler owned it also.

15

Unfortunately, from the standpoint of recovery of archeological
evidence of the Harrell cabin, Frank Brown's placement of the cabin
site locates it such that the construction of the mi I I bui Iding and
its rear office addition must have severely affected it. Although the
flour mill was not placed directly where the cabin is alleged to have
stood, it occupies the space immediately to the south and construction
operations must have taken place on the site. The installation of the
steam boi ler that provided power for the mil I must have entai led a
major disturbance of the site. The 1877 Sanborn map shows no evidence
of the cabin. Since this map series recorded structures as small as
outhouses and the presence of combustible material even if not part of
a structure (later maps of this block show the presence of lumber
pi les, cotton bales in the street, etc.) it appears that the cabin did
not even survive as log remains by this time, some 30 years after
Jacob Harrel I moved out of it.
By 1885 the flour mill no longer operated. The lower floor of
the bui Iding was vacant and the second floor functioned as a cigar
factory (Sanborn map 1885). Lots 2 and 3 remained vacant.
Lots 4
through 6 were the property of the A. Gardiner Company and a lumber
planing mi I I manufacturing sashes, doors, and bl inds had been erected.
Gardiner, diversifying his operations, set an early pattern for the
shops and businesses which would eventually uti lize most of the block
when he opened a blacksmith shop facing on the avenue and extended a
power shaft from his steam engine-operated lumber mil I to the smithy.
Next to the smithy was his wagon shop. A small furnace, used in
shaping the fittings of iron bound wheels, was to the right rear of
the smithy (Fig. 2). A curious structure was located on lot 6 at the
corner of Congress and W. Live Oak (2nd St.). Facing on W. Live Oak,
it is described by the Sanborn investigator as part dwel I ing, part
meat market, and part storage. Behind it, on the avenue, was a sma I I
smoke house.
The eaves of the portion devoted to the meat market
extended beyond the nominal property I ine into the Congress Avenue
right-of-way.
Four years later, when the Sanborn firm updated its insurance
map, Gardiner had acquired lots 10, 11, and 12 across the al ley
opposite lots 1 through 3. He had extended his planing mi I I operation
to those lots, incorporating the one existing dwelling (on lot 10) as
a shop. His planing mil I
smithy
wheelwright business, with
several add-on shed rooms, stil I occupied all of lots 4 and 5 and the
rear half of lot 6. The front half of lot 6 held a grocery store
addition to the meat market - dwel ling and the smoke house had been
shifted from lot 5 to lot 6 (Fig. 3).
In lots 1 through 3 the old flour mi II bui Iding was stil I housing
the cigar factory on its second floor. Minor shed room additions
accommodated its new (1887) first floor occupant, a cotton broking
firm, E.J. Bryne and Company. At the rear of lot 3 was a sma I I shed,

16

erected between 1885 and 1889, that had been damaged by
rest of lots 2 and 3 were used for cotton bale storage.

fire.

The

In 1894 the scene, according to the Sanborn updated map (Fig. 4)
had altered but little. Gardiner's mil I was storing lumber on lot 3
and the additions to the rear of the smithy now enclosed the steam
driven power shaft from the mi I I. Cigar making had ceased in the old
flour mi I I building and the cotton brokerage had taken over that
space. Otherwise things were externally much the same as in 1889.
At this juncture, it is noted that the stone flour mil I bui Iding,
even though it fronted on W. Water (1st) Street, was in compliance
with the 1870 city ordinance requiring Congress Avenue bui Idings of
stone, brick, concrete or cast iron construction.
The Gardiner
complex, mi I I, dwel I ing and meat market, al I with W. Live Oak Street
addresses, did not comply, even though the smithy, wheelwright shop,
grocery and side wal I of the meat market al I abutted Congress Avenue.
In fact the smithy, the wheelwright and a cobbler who opened a shop in
the front part of Gardiner's lumber shed between 1889 and 1894, al I
did business with Congress Avenue addresses and shop entrances.
A photograph in the Travis County Collection of the Austin
History Center (Fig. 7) shows the blacksmith shop of P(eter) Thompson
and the wheelwright, carriage and wagon shop of George Craven.
Thompson is first listed at the 106 Congress address in the Austin
Street Directory of 1883 and did business there unti I 1893. The shed
room, at the rear of the smithy in the 1889 map but not there in the
1885 version, is also absent in the photograph, indicating the picture
was taken prior to 1889. In the photograph no structures are visible
in the eastern (Congress Ave) halves of lots 1, 2 and 3, which IS In
accord with the Sanborn maps through 1894.
The 1900 Sanborn map update shows the cotton buying business had
prospered.
It notes that bales are out in the right-of-way of First
Street. The cotton broker, at this time E.W. Jett, had constructed a
sma I I building at the corner of Congress and 1st streets for use as an
office. The single story, rear addition to the old flour mi I I, part
of that structure since at least 1877, had been removed. E.W. Jett
replaced E.J. Bryne as buyer about 1895.
The construction of a single story blacksmith shop on the
southeast corner of lot 2 in 1899 began a series of smithy operations
at that location that lasted unti I 1910. The bui Iding is described as
brick nogged, meaning a wood frame with brick fi I I ing the spaces
H. Harrison, blacksmith and wheelwright, was
between the studs.
awarded the address 104 Congress causing a renumbering of other
addresses along the block.

17

Figur e 7.

The southeast cor ner of Bl ock 5, 1888.
Lo t 2.

Bl ac ksmi t h sho p is on

The Gardiner planing mi I I complex, now known as the Haldeman and
Company Planing Mi I I and Lumber Mi II, continued to operate with
buildings in lots 4 5 and 6 and wood stored in lot 3.
The lumber
sheds bui It by Gardiner which paralleled the alley were replaced by
simi lar sheds which now ran at right angles to it. The grocery store
meat market operation occupying the northeast portion of the block
in lot 6 became Cisco's Sausage Factory and did business at 122
Congress, its bui Idings I ittle altered since the late 1880's.
1

The Twentieth Century
The first five years of the new century brought I ittle change to
the block. Jett sti I I brokered cotton at 100 Congress and added wool
and hides to the commodities traded without altering the structures.
Harrison continued to shoe horses and repair wagons at his 104
Congress address. The Gardiner mi II began to use 118 Congress as its
address in the 1890's instead of 105 W. Second Street, a change that
involved no structural alterations (Fig. 5). When Haldeman took it
over, he continued the use of that address.
The second five years (1906-1910) saw manifold changes. In 1907,
Jett moved his cotton brokerage office to the old flour mill and
turned over the sma I I 100 Congress office to a shoemaker, Charles
J. Stohl.
John A. Sheehan and Thomas Frias took over the Cisco
Sausage Factory and operated a meat market and a grocery in the
buildings which had seen much the same usage since the 1880's. The
planing mill, now Hume Lumber Company, kept an office now numbered 118
Congress.
John Hazelwood and R.L. Johnson, successors to H. Harrison
as blacksmith - wheelwrights, kept up the shop at 104 Congress until
1908.
In that year the center of the block fronting on Congress
Avenue was fi I led In with a series of commercial brick front
bui Idings.
These bui Idings, occupying the frontage of lots 3, 4 and 5,
remained, in altered form, unti I the demo I ition activities of the
current project. They were characterized by brick cladding, flat
roofs with parapets, cornice denti Is, display windows, recessed double
The
doors with panel led glass, party walls and a narrow, deep shape.
series was significantly altered in frontal appearance by the fil ling
in of upper story windows, installation of metal and wooden facades,
rear extensions, and changes to windows and entrances. The original
one story bui Idings, actually a story and a half in height, became two
story versions with interior alterations. Groceries, meat markets,
cafes, and hardware stores predominate as tenants in these central
block buildings.
For short periods some housed tenants such as a
Pentacostal Mission, a drug store, a pool hal I, a saloon, and a firm
called the Austin Motor Car Company.

19

A two bay brick front was also erected on lot 2.
It began its
commercial life as a hardware store, was turned into a cafe and held a
variety of short term tenants, finishing up as Reagan - Bush pol itical
campaign headquarters in 1984.
At the north and south extremes of the block different
circumstances prevailed. The lot 6, W. Second Street, Congress Avenue
corner, vacated by meat market operator Sheehan in 1911, housed a
grocery and then a restaurant which underwent several ownership and
name changes. A tire sales and automotive repair firm that purchased
lots 5 and 6 converted the brick front on the former to a long narrow
brick - faced concrete block repair and sales faci lity, turning lot 6
and the rear of lot 5 into paved driveway, parking and storage areas.
The paving, installation of hydraulic auto lifts and the extension and
interior alterations of the lot 5 buildings erased the last traces of
the lumber yard and planing mi II.
At the other end of the block, Charles Stohl, the cobbler, stayed
in business at First and Congress until the 1920's when the corner
location and the advent of automobiles in quantity made the spot a
natural for a gasoline service station. Grayburg Oi I Company, Station
Number 2, commenced operation there in 1924. In 1935 the station was
Magnolia Petroleum Company, Station Number 1222 and sported four gas
pumps and a car wash (Fig. 6).
A thirteen foot high stone wall,
erected between the cafe next door, extended to the former flour mi II,
now a grocery warehouse. The station remained in operation under
various gas companies through the early 1950's, being known as Brown's
Service Station, Rader Brothers Gas Station and Cartwright's, among
others.
In 1953 the station building, which faced neither 1st street
nor Congress Avenue but the angle between them, became home to Thomas
Bird's Key and Lock shop.
For a short time it was a used car lot
office and then stood vacant. Finally in 1962, undergoing internal
and roof modifications, it became Moses S. Vasquez' Tamale House, an
Austin institution for the next twenty odd years (Fig. 8).
The area of lot 1 which was to become a gas station In the
1920's, between Stohl's shop at 100 Congress and lot 2, was the site
of the Thomas J. Cristal and Henry Wukasch general merchandise store
from 1906 through the World War I era when it was demolished. The
Wukasch operation expanded to include the old flour mi 1 I bui Iding and
a warehouse addition before leaving the business (Fig. 9).

20

FIGURE 8.

The Tama l e House, the former mi ll and the
south s ide of 104 Congress, 1984 .

FIGURE 9.

The study area in 1937. Note Wukasch grocery annex
behind modified mill, service station and car wash
on the corner and lack of privies shown in 1935
Sanborn Map.

Summary
That half of Block 5 fronting on Congress Avenue saw the first
structure in what is now Austin. However, the designation of the area
six or more blocks north of it as the focus of the new town and the
erection of public bui Idings there, quickly relegated the block to
outskirt status. It was not among those blocks whose lots were
purchased
during
the
initial
sale.
Speculative
purchasing
characterized the motives of early owners, excepting the Harrel Is, and
their property entered the speculative category once Jacob moved away.
Development did not commence unti I 1876 when proximity to the city's
water company made steam operation of a flour mi I I possible. This
source of power also enabled the establ ishment of the planing mi I I and
its adjunct smithy and wheelwright shop.
Once the railroad arrived, the block was below the tracks and
situated outside the developing retai I business district to its north.
Its businesses leaned more toward wholesale operations, products
requiring on site adjustments and food and drink sales, than toward
those engaged in retai I sales of goods or professional services.
The
area's residents and those of the city wards closest to it were, from
an early period, primari Iy minority groups. Unti I recently the area
was known as the "warehouse district" and it is sti I I referred to
under that name occasionally. In 1931 Nel lie Hi Ibish completed a
Masters thesis at The University of Texas entitled The Trend of Rents
~ the Major Shopping Area of Austin, Texas, Over ~ PerTod of
Seventeen Years. She I~out the area in which BTOCk 5 is included,
dismissing it as fol lows:
The section of the street beginning at First Street on the
river and continuing to the south side of Fifth Street
contains, in addition to the several wholesale houses, a
section which is largely taken up by furniture stores, and
other concerns which deal in a class of cheap merchandise
and whose rental pol icy is known to be that of selecting
locations outside the major retai I area in order to secure
lower rents. (Hi Ibish 1931:4).
Her characterization of the area's businesses covering the period from
1913 to 1930 is, at least in part, borne out by the business tenants
of the structures in Block 5. Not until the increased demand for
business office space, cued by the rapid growth of Austin, did the
area begin to break out of the character establ ished early In this
century.

-~~~-----------~~-----~

23

-~

~~

---

-------

--~

--~~

-

~-~---~--~

-~---

- - - ----

MONITORING AT 100 CONGRESS
Demolition Phase Monitoring
An agreement was drawn up between the sponsor, Lincoln Property
Company,
The
City of Austin, the demo I ition company and the
archeologist that provided for modifications of demolition activities
to permit the archeological and historical study of areas of the block
when appropriate. The city requested examination of the original
ground surface for evidence of wei Is, cisterns, privies, original
building foundations and the like.
Provision for documentation of
artifacts having archeological and historical significance to the City
of Austin was also included in the agreement.
Prior to demolition, the abandoned structures and those areas of
the block not covered by paving or structures were examined for
surface traces of former utilization.
The
results
of
these
examinations were compared with the historical use of the block as
researched from archival sources. The standing bui Idings in Block 5
could not be attributed to the work of a notable architect or master
bui Ider nor did their construction embody design elements, style,
materials, detai I or craftsmanship representative of a significant
architectural type or innovation. When it became evident that the
extant above ground features were, with the exception of the former
flour mi I I stone structure, those bui It and modified during the
twentieth century, the single exception was re-examined. Once that
examination showed that the mill structure had been modified in the
extreme;
all features unique to nineteenth century usage had been
removed, altered or replaced except the outer stone wal Is, there was
no impediment to demolition.
During the demolition of the bui Idings and the removal of their
component materials, repeated and regular observations were made on
site. Particular attention was given to noting unusual construction
materials and
component material use and placement.
Whenever
demolition reached ground level, the foundations and underlying or
surrounding ground were examined. Removal of foundations and paving
was observed and an examination of any resulting excavations was
performed. The shal low subsurface excavation, site level iog and clean
up which completed the demolition phase were monitored.

24

RESULTS OF DEMOLITION PHASE OBSERVATIONS
The structural materials of the Block 5 bui Idings conformed to
those in regular use in Austin for the period ascribed to them
archivally. No instances of material anomalous to known construction
dates were observed.
No instances of architecturally significant
material use or placement were noted, nor were particularly fine
examples of architectural techniques present. Carpentry, joinery,
masonry, fasteners, framing and roofing were unremarkable with respect
to uti lization, time period employed, sequence and placement. Every
modification
to
bui Iding examined showed evidence of repeated
accommodate tenants.
Internal modifications were most pronounced in
104 Congress. Its most recent use as Republ ican Party headquarters
resulted in the installation of an elevator, additional plumbing,
heating, air conditioning, a sound stage, a large amount of
communications and electrical wiring, stairs and partitioning wal Is.
These changes were accompl ished on a structure which had already seen
its front and rear windows modified by brick infi I I ing and its front
facade changed to accommodate a modified entrance.
Other bui Idings
less,
but sti I I significant, modification.
To outward
showed
appearances the most common changes were the infilling of windows and
the appending
of
rear additions to the original structures.
Internally, other than the extremes encountered in 104 Congress, most
modifications involved partition placement, installation of counters,
and construction of storage facilities, racks, shelves and bins.
Replacement of window and door glass, and the resurfacing of roofs was
also evident. Regretfully from an archeological point of view, most
first story flooring was not original and there was evidence of
disturbance of the subfloor ground surface when replacement flooring
was installed.
No evidence of foundation material attributable to nineteenth
century bui Iding was noted anywhere other than the former flour mi I I
wal I footings. The inside of that bui Iding had a concrete replacement
floor, poured with drains and other plumbing, that attested to its
more recent status. The area north-northwest of this building was
examined during the removal of the mi I I wall footing and the addition
to 104 Congress for any evidence of the Harrel I cabin but none was
noted.
The remnants of that structure, even if any survived the 1876
construction of the flour mi I I, would have been directly affected by
the
twentieth century addition that was built right over the
archivally indicated location for the cabin.
Former privy locations, those most recently in use, are shown on
the 1935 Sanborn map.
A comparison of this map with the
pre-demolition configuration of the Block 5 bui Idings shows that rear
extensions to those in lots 4 and 5 cover former privy locations.
Asphalting of lots 2 and 6 extended over two other mapped locations.
Additionally, installation of uti I ities and several pavings of the

25

al ley impinged on another lot 2 privy location.
The wood frame,
grocery warehouse addition to the flour mi I I bui Iding, shown in the
1935 insurance map, and removed wei I prior to the present project,
would have covered sti I I another probable privy location in lot 1.
Despite these known disturbances, these locations were examined during
the excavation phase of the project.
The possibi I ity of roof-fed cisterns adjacent to the early
structures is lessened by the fact that piped water was avai lable from
the nearby city source as early as 1876, as can be seen In the 1877
Sanborn map (Fig. 1). The proximity of the river may also have served
to lessen the necessity to construct such water catchment faci I ities.
In any event, additions to many of the bui Idings and the paving of
some areas would have obscured surface evidence of such features if
they were the subsurface type and caused the above ground type to be
removed. Likely locations for subsurface cisterns, if once present,
were noted for examination during the excavation monitoring.
ARTIFACTS FROM THE DEMOLITION PHASE
The demo I ition phase monitoring produced few artifacts
of
archeological
or historical import.
As previously stated, the
materials and their manner of use were in keeping with usual practices
for
the
time of construction and were, with few exceptions,
unremarkable. The exceptions were confined to the use of a quantity
of enigmatically marked brick, notable for several bas rei ief designs
and the del iberate dating of at least three bricks that were placed in
the lowest corners of the three structures erected in 1908.
The decorated bricks (Fig. 10) were the product of Andrew
Zi Iker's
short-I ived Austin Brick Company.
From 1902 to 1912
A.J. Zi Iker operated a brick plant, winning clay from the area that is
now a park bearing his name. The plant, its faci lities and some of
its clay deposits, were sold or leased to the Butler Brick Company in
1912 (Park 1963:6, Butler 1973:23). During the life of the Austin
Brick Company, most of its products were plain, unmarked "commons".
However, for a reason not yet known, the company also produced more
than a score of decorated varieties.
These decorated bricks were
produced from the same clay stocks as their plain contemporaries and
apparently were transported to job sites mixed with each other and the
plain type.
In the first four brick courses of the wal I between 110
and 112 Congress, at the junction of lots 2 and 3, eleven different
decorated varieties, totaling 490 bricks were intermingled with the
plain brick. AI I of these bricks are decorated on one of their two
largest surfaces and, in common with their plain contemporaries, are
laid with that surface as a join between courses.
The decorative
designs are not visible in the completed wal I. Since the plain face
of a decorated brick that is visible in the finished masonry is
indistinguishable from the corresponding face of a plain brick, the

26

Figure 10.

B.

D.

Bri cks .

A.

Austin Br ic k Company
f lower ed br i c k .

C.

Austin Bric k Company
morning glories .

Aust i n Br ic k Com pany
bunch of grap es.

Austin Grick Company
decorated bri ck from
a single wall of
106-108 Congress.

reason for decorating is not clear. This concealment of the decorated
surface holds true for the placement of decorated Austin Brick Company
brick in all known cases of original use yet observed (Claunch,
Buckbee, Kuebel;
personal communications, 1985). In al I, at least
4,688 decorated bricks were found in the seven Block 5 bui Idings.
That figure represents only those not broken in the demolition process
and which were cleaned of mortar on site, plus a few broken ones free
enough of mortar to reveal a design. During the clean up of the
demolition phase, several thousand bricks not yet subjected to mortar
cleaning were simply loaded in dump trucks for transport away from the
site. How many of these carried designs and their disposition IS
unknown.
Since the Austin Brick Company suppl ied brick for a
considerable amount of construction in the city and its surrounding
communities and a number of these bui Idings are stil I standing, no one
knows how many decorated bricks included in them are currently hidden
Certainly they cannot be regarded as rare but they are
from view.
both interesting and time diagnostic when found in a structure where
reuse can be ruled out. In this instance their use occurred at just
about the midpoint of the Austin Brick Company's corporate I ife and it
is interesting to note that, in six years of existence, the company
produced at least eleven decorated varieties.
The specifically dated bricks (Fig. 11) were placed in the lower
wal I courses of three adjacent bui Idings occupying lots 3, 4 and 5.
Their positions are superficially consistent with use as corner stones
but examination shows the dates were incised into their surfaces
before firing. Thus a more likely explanation is that they represent
dai ly production lots for some unit of the brick plant. They are
dated 3-25-08, 3-31-08 and 4-13 blank.
The year in the latter
inscription was obliterated when another brick, its mark clearly
visible, was stacked on the dated brick whi Ie the clay was still
plastic, ruJ ing out incIsIng after firing. It is not uncommon for
bricks to carry tally marks or figures representing the daily output
of a plant or plant unit.
These markings al low payment of a
brick-making crew on a production basis. Specific dates, inclusive of
day and month, applied at the plant are more unusual. In this case,
they supply a specific, not-earlier-than date for the construction of
the buildings in which they were found.
Three bricks were recovered bearing the letter M, apparently
produced by the point of a trowel prior to firing. A review of the
1908 Austin Directory showed several Austin Brick Company employees
with that initial in either first or last name and further attribution
was not possible. The inscription COMPA appears as raised dots in
another marked brick. Embossed prior to firing, this mark would have
required either that corresponding indentations had to be made in the
mold or that plastic clay had to be painstakingly dripped on the brick
after molding and before firing. Given that such a mold would have
produced a number of marked brick and only one was found, and the

28

FIGURE 11.

Dated Bricks:
and Apr; 1 13.

March 25, 1908

crudity of the inscription, it is probable the dripped clay method was
used. Possibly, this is one of a series of bricks that were marked to
read Austin Brick Company.
Excavation Phase Monitoring
The excavation phase monitoring was expected to present problems
related
to the magnitude of the area involved, the means of
excavation, and the fact that the surface soi I was highly disturbed
during the demo I ition phase and subsequent clean up activities. Owing
in great measure to outstanding cooperation on the part of the
excavators, monitoring was greatly enhanced. Excavation personnel,
from managers through heavy equipment operators to
hand
tool
excavators, al I showed a sensitivity to the possibi I ity of significant
artifact presence in accomplishing their jobs and when cultural
material
was encountered, brought it to the attention of the
archeologist.
Monitoring concentrated on observing earth moving operations in
those areas where prior surface disturbance was bel ieved, from
archival research, to be the shal lowest. All areas known to have been
the sites of former buildings and areas likely to have been used for
such activities as waste disposal, were given special attention.
Particular attention was also given to those areas where privies,
wei Is and cisterns would logically have been located, although in
these cases prior disturbance of the origin al so; I su rface was, at
this point, obvious.

RESULTS OF EXCAVATION MONITORING
Excavation of the block fronting on Congress Avenue revealed that
foundation construction of the twentieth century bui Idings had in no
case utilized previous bui Iding footings. In all cases, the recent
bui Idings exceeded the earlier ones in areal extent and usually in
number of stories, necessitating the foundation excavations to an
extent that removed all trace of those earlier bui Iding foundations.
Paving of the rear areas of lots I, 2, 3 and 5 and al I of lot 6
obi iterated any shallow cultural deposits that may have once been
present. The rear extensions bui It onto 104 and 112 Congress, the
mid-twentieth century bui Iding at 120 Congress and the twentieth
century construction and subsequent removal of the warehouse at 108
First Street, had an even greater effect on any former cultural
deposits. A comparison of the pre-demolition block plan (Fig. 12),
the 1930's photograph (Fig. 9) and the 1935 insurance map (Fig. 6)
shows the areal extent of these comparatively recent disturbances.

30

.....
E

<.n

~~ ~I; ;~
i

<;

"­

I

\tJ'/

A,j
I

~
I
\

.....
c...

I

to
.;,,(.

U

o

I

r­

eo

I

l

N
...-I

I)-0--­

I

31

Installation of underground uti lities, sewer I ines, water lines
and gas lines to the bui Idings and the running of uti lity main lines
down the east side of the al ley which divides the block, may also have
impinged on cultural resources.
Evidence of a fire could be seen in the soi I at a point closely
corresponding with the area of lot 3 bordering the al ley where such an
event is indicated on the 1889 insurance map (Fig. 3). The blackened
area did not contain artifactual remains which could be attributed to
that era nor any date diagnostic material, thus the particular fire's
effects are not claimed but only indicated as a possibi lity.
Two areas along the frontage of Congress Avenue showed evidence
of waste disposal activity. From a point just below the lower extent
of the pavement in front of the bui Idings to a depth varying from 3 to
10 feet below the modern ground surface, trash disposal was evident,
extending nearly the width of lot 2. The same sort of deposits were
present in front of lot 4 from its south border to approximately 3/4
of its width. In both cases, it was obvious that the upper limit of
the deposits was defined by the construction of the sidewalk above it
and the western extent by the respective bui Iding foundations.
These
deposits consisted of unevenly distributed glass, ceramics, metal
hardware, butchered animal bones, ash, and a humic matrix showing a
high organic content and evidence of exposure to fire.
ARTIFACTS FROM THE EXCAVATION PHASE
The above mentioned trash deposits produced most of the artifacts
found during the excavation phase. Due to the extent of prior surface
earth disturbance, including that of the demo I ition phase, artifacts
from this phase are those located at least two feet and often more
below the present ground surface.
These trash deposits are probably not solely from the properties
they front. They appear to be lateral impingements of the "infamous"
Congress Avenue ditch. This ditch, which fronted the avenue, was an
irregularly shaped, generally riverward sloping, combination storm
sewer and wastwater, trash and garbage disposal. Drainage after heavy
rains caused deep gul lies at the foot of Congress Avenue, flooding the
street which was not paved for much of the period.
A sewer
paralleling Congress Avenue was not constructed unti I 1885, although
privately owned sewers, some emptying into the Congress Avenue ditch,
were bui It as early as 1877 (Coleman 1971:57). The least perishable
rubbish - glass, ceramics, bone, and some metal
survived In the
ditch after it was buried.
The trash deposit artifacts, by the nature of their situation
below the pavement and in front of the early twentieth century
bui Iding foundations, should date to an era prior to 1908 and this,

32

-----------~~~~~~~~-

where diagnostic characteristics were present, was the case. An
attempt was made to determine the existence of age stratification in
these deposits, by examining the found depth of datable items, but the
time span involved in their dates of manufacture proved too sma I I to
provide
such
evidence.
Those
items
with
tightly
datable
characteristics clustered about the turn of the century, usually with
I imits not more than 20 years either way and in a pattern of dates
overlapping each
other.
There
were
no
instances
of
non-contemporaneity of manufacture among datable items.
Selected Artifacts
GLASS
The bottles recovered from the two trash deposits show a variety
of nineteenth century and early twentieth century manufacturing
techniques and are consistent with a disposal date near the turn of
the
century.
Those blown into a two piece mold (1845-1913)
predominate where automatic equipment is not indicated, with a few
three piece mold (1810-1890) examples. Tops (neck finish) show either
the use of a lipping tool (1857-ca. 1905) or, more commonly, the Owens
process
neck
finish
(1903-present).
Most
were clear glass
(1880-present) or light aqua (non-diagnostic), with two carbon colored
amber specimens (non-diagnostic) and a single "black glass" dark green
example (1815-1885). Some bases show automatic bottle machine round
seams (1903-present), with a few marked examples, al I of which were
manufactured early in the twentieth century (Newman 1970:72-74;
Mi I ler and Sui I ivan 1984:84, 95;
Peffers 1905:851, 855; Lorrain
1968:40). The combination of manufacturing technique dates gives a
date span of 1880 to 1905, with most of the specimens showing
not-earl ier-than 1903 automatic bottle making characteristics (Fig.
13) .
Embossed examples were few in number. Those found in undisturbed
provenience were produced by companies in operation in the early
twentieth century and were products of the Owens process, thus dating
no earl ier than 1903.
Few whole glass specimens were encountered.
This may
be
attributed in part to the weekend activities of bottle diggers who got
on the site shortly after the commencement of the excavation phase.
The two exposed trash deposits showed the effects of their activities.
Both deposits extended laterally from within the project bounds to an
unknown point beneath the Congress Avenue sidewalk right-of-way, and
Glass
both deposits were dug into beyond the extent of the project.
fragments were discarded by these diggers and whole speCimens,
assuming there were some, were taken.
The contractor
appl ied
additional security measures and the site was not subjected to further
unauthorized digging.

33

---~-----~

-~----~---~-

-----

----~-

-~--

--

~---~~------~-----~------~~-----

----~----~----------~--------~-

---

Fi gu r e 13.

Bo t tl es.

A.

B.

Bottl e base showing
circular base and heel
seams. 1903 on.

Bo t tle produced in a
thr ee pi ece mold.

c.

Pre-1900 Worchester, England sauce
bottles and late 19th century two
piece mold with applied lip.

Embossed
specimens}
fragmentary
and
whole}
were}
when
identifiable} in chronological agreement with the date range indicated
by glass manufacturing methods. Specimens produced by the Mississippi
Glass Company} in business in the late 1880's, the Fairmont Glass
Works, Pittsburgh, Pa., which began operations about 1889; A I D.H.
Chambers, Pittsburgh, Pa., manufacturing glass from the early 1880's;
C.F. Rumpp and Sons, Inc., Philadelphia, Pa.} a trademark registered
in 1892;
and Lea and Perrins sauce bottles of a type known to have
been produced up unti I 1900 by the Albion Bottle Company of
Worchester, England (Wi Ison 1981:84,113,121; Pullin 1986:125,275;
Rinker 1968:27) were recovered.
CERAMICS
Ceramic specimens of earthenware, stoneware and porcelain, all of
them fragmentary, were present in the trash deposits and as isolated
finds throughout the block.
Among the earthenwares the fol lowing types were present:
Blue transfer printed ware (Fig. 14a)
This was a technique developed in the 1750's but not in use on
earthenware unti I the early nineteenth century.
Although it was
mostly of English manufacture during the nineteenth century, America
was the primary market. It is sti II manufactured and owning to this
long period of production, is not date diagnostic unless a specific
maker's mark can be utilized to do so.
None of the specimens
recovered show a maker's mark.
Flown blue transfer printed ware (Fig. 14b)
This was a product much like blue transfer printed except that
the final firing includes a chlorine addition that causes the blue
coloring to diffuse into the covering glaze and the body paste, making
the design image somewhat blurred. Like blue transfer printed, it has
a manufacturing span (late 18th century to present) that make it
diagnostic only when a specific maker's mark is present; none were.
Feathered edge ware (Fig. 14c)
This was a decoration motif found on plate and sometimes cup rims
which consists of a blue band with its interior edge painted to
resemble the edge of a feather.
Most specimens show molding
indentations along the decorated rim perpendicular to the interior
face of the plate. A very popular style, feathered edge was primarily
of Engl ish manufacture and is common on nineteenth and early twentieth
century sites in Texas.

35

A

E

n

o

Figure 14.

Saucer fragments of whiteware fro m Syracuse, New York and Bursten,
England. Sherds of blue transfer ware, fl own bl ue transfer ware,
and feather edge ware.

White paste, clear glaze.
These undecorated sherds of white paste, clear glaze earthenware
are probably the most often found Historic era artifacts, with the
possible exception of square nai Is. This ware is the nineteenth and
early twentieth century ceramic of choice, owing mainly to it being
This class of earthenware,
both inexpensive and relatively tough.
undecorated and lacking maker's marks in fragmented finds, is
virtually valueless as a date marker. At this site three specimens
These were traced to the Onondaga
revealed partial maker's marks.
Pottery Company of Syracuse, New York, establ ished in 1871;
the
Wal lace and Chetwynd firm of East Liverpool, Ohio, operating under
that name from 1882 to 1901; and a Burslem, England example, company
unknown (Kovel 1975:95; Gates and Ormerod 1982:305). Burslem~s chief
industry, like that of East Liverpool, Ohio, is the manufacturing of
ceramic products and dozens of companies have operated at both
locations.
Stoneware
This ceramic category was represented by a few crockery sherds
having a tan salt glaze.
The type IS common in Texas and
non-diagnostic without a maker's mark, decoration or label.
Porcelain
A few sherds of ceramic material, from the same cup judging by
their proximity to one another and their uniformity of thickness and
curvature, appear to be fired sufficiently high to qual ify as
porcelain.
These could not be used for diagnostic purposes as they
lacked both decoration and maker's mark. An additional porcelain item
found was an insulator of the type used in open wire electrification,
radio aerials, and lightning protection systems.
The latter use
appears most probable, given the insulator was found in the trash
deposit in front of 104 Congress Avenue.
METALS
Identifiable metallic objects from the excavation phase were, as
expected, primari Iy horse shoes and ferric remnants. Considering the
known presence of a series of smithies and wheelwrights on the block,
any dearth of such artifacts would have been surprising. None of the
horse shoes were remarkable in shape, manufacturing technique or found
location.
AI I were worn sufficiently to be classified as discards,
and several bore nai I remnants in place. This factor mediates against
their use as examples of the local smiths' work since they could have
been made anywhere and simply discarded here when replaced by those
made on the site.

37

Ferric remnants having no readi Iy recognizable patterned form
were present In the trash deposits and occasionally were found
elsewhere on the site. Other than the trash deposit concentrations,
no pattern of deposition was apparent, but it must be remembered that
demolition and clean up had disturbed the site to the point where no
such pattern could be expected. Most of these rusted iron fragments
can be attributed to the activities of the smithies and wheelwrights,
although doubtless some are remnants of construction fasteners (nai Is,
screws, staples) and hardware from former bui Idings, sheds and fences.
Metallic artifacts provided no diagnostic information other than
to attest to the correctness of the archival record with respect to
smithing operations on the site.
BONE
The trash deposits contained a considerable quantity of bone
material.
Much of this was in a soft, spongy deteriorated condition
owing to very moist soi Is. Masses of this material could be cut out
and removed with a trowel, and had the consistency of a poor grade of
potter's clay. On drying, the material crumbled to a fine powdery
residue which lost the bone form outl ines sometimes visible in the
freshly uncovered material.
Intermingled with the heavi Iy deteriorated bone were a small
number that retained ful I form and consistency. AI I of these were
large bone segments showing butchering marks wherein a section of bone
is left in the cut of meat. The significant notation here is that no
small bones, no complete bones, no teeth and no bone sections
indicative of initial butchering were observed. The recognizable bone
deposits appear to consist primari Iy of meal waste bones, although
doubtless many whole bones of sma I ler size have deteriorated.
PALEONTOLOGICAL FIND
Cultural material finds during the excavation phase had ceased
altogether by the time a depth of ten feet had been reached. In most
areas such finds ceased at more shal low depths. Excavation continued
downward through a brown sand si It with a high calcareous material
content. This alluvium deposit contained some fine rock flour, very
fine sands, and a sma I I clay component and showed slight plasticity.
At a depth of 23 to 25 feet below ground surface this layer was
underlain by an alluvium characterized by well rounded rock fragments,
brown gravelly sand, and coarse calcareous inclusions with some whole
shel I fragments.
This stratum continued to about 35 feet below
original ground surface. At this point the dark gray clay - shale
I imestone formation termed the Eagle Ford/Bouldin was encountered and
At this point
continued to a depth of 42 to 44 feet below surface.
the very dark gray, calcareous clay
shale Eagle Ford/Cloice

38

Formation began, a thin fine sand marking the juncture in some cases.
A paleontological find occurred in that sand.
Imbedded in the thin sandy layer was a mammoth or mastodon tusk
fragment (Fig. 15a).
Such a fragment is difficult to assign to a
specific classification beyond the fami Iy, in this case Proboscidea,
since the tusks of mammoth and mastodon may be very similar. The
distinction can often be made if the entire tusk is present and is
quite easy if any of the other teeth are found. Careful excavation of
the find area revealed no other remains beyond two fist-sized
fragments of the same tusk and a number of sma I ler pieces.
The larger fragment is 2'8" long (81.3cm), measured along its
curve.
Its structure and relative size indicate it belonged to a
juveni Ie animal (Lundelius, personal communication 1985).
Adult
mastodon tusks may be as much as ten feet long and those of the
several
mammoth
species even
longer
(Kurten
and
Anderson
1980:344-354).
Both animals had curved tusks, the mammoth more so,
but the curvature of the specimen is insufficient to assign it
definitely to either one.
Accepted extinction dates for mastodons in America, based on
radiocarbon dating, range from 9,000 to 12,000 years BP (before
present). Those for mammoth approximate 11,000 years BP.
Both
families have been identified in previous Texas finds (Kurten and
Anderson 1980:344, 351; Savage and Russel I 1983:382).
The circumstances of this find; the geological strata, matrix,
and the absence of additional bones or teeth, mediate toward its
having been stream deposited on an ancient sandbar after having been
washed downstream from the location of the animal's death. The depth
below the surface, nearly three times that of the recent finds further
up Congress Avenue, rules out association or contemporaneity with that
site. It is probably much the older of the two sites.
The tusk
fragments were taken to the Vertebrate Paleontology Laboratory at
Balcones Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin, for
further study and possible use in ongoing paleontological research.
Summary
Archeological monitoring of the demolition of existing bui Idings
in the eastern half of Block 5 of the original city of Austin and
concurrent archival research produced a history of the ownership, use
of the block and a measure of that area's historic significance.
Artifact recovery during this phase produced an unusual number of
specially patterned bricks which were produced over a short period of
time and are therefore date diagnostic. No remains attributable to
Austin's earliest bui Iding, the Harrel I cabin, known from archival

39

A

B

Figure 15.

Paleontologica l Finds: A) Mastodon or mammoth tusk fragments
from a juvenil e animal. B) Person at center marks find site of
tu s k fragment. Retaining wall top is at pre-excavation grou nd
surface.

references, were encountered. The probable reasons for this lack of
remains;
abandonment and salvage, and subsequent construction on the
site, were documented.
The affinial , architectural and material
significance of the structures were examined and assessed as not
meeting existing criteria for preservation or salvage for curation.
During the monitoring of foundation
excavation operations
artifactual finds were analyzed and found to be in consonance with
archival records with respect to type, age and location.
Congress
Avenue ditch deposits contained artifacts of glass, ceramics, metal
and bone. None of these were of unusual archeological or historical
significance which would further the interpretation of this site.
An isolated juveni Ie Proboiscean tusk was made at a depth of 43
feet
below the
present
land surface (Fig. 1Sb).
Its chief
significance is that it adds to the record of incidence of such finds
in Texas and serves notice that other such specimens may be present in
the river terrace deposits of the Colorado.

41

PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The status and disposition of artifacts found during a project
involving demolition needs clarification prior to the onset of the
project. The company which performs the demolition work generally has
salvage rights and therefore tends to regard anything found as its
property. During this project there were several incidences where
archeological interest was expressed in an item and demolition
personnel appeared to translate this interest into the conception that
the items were valuable in a monetary sense. They were reluctant to
allow such items off the site. Fortunately most of the items were
eventually released as it became obvious that their real value was
diagnostic.
A case In point was that of the Austin Brick Company decorated
bricks.
Initially the demolition company was most reluctant for any
of these to be removed until they discovered there were hundreds of
them and that they brought only a sma I I premium over any other brick,
and then only in sma I I quantities from a very limited group of buyers.
By the end of the project the demo I ition company personnel had ceased
to even separate these brick from the others. One brick collector who
visited the site bought a couple at a sl ight premium but in a later
visit complained that he had been to the used brick dealer where he
could have obtained a large number of them at no premium at all. This
sort of scenario was repeated to an extent with some of the bottles
found and even with the tusk. The workman who initially found the
tusk felt he should be allowed to have it and that it was saleable.
Fortunately each of these incidents was resolved but they point
out a potential future problem in handling similar projects. There
have been, and no doubt wi II be in the future on sites such as this
one, finds which do have significant monetary value as wei I as
historical and scientific significance.
The current practice of
including salvage rights as a perquisite of the demolition company
needs a clause regarding items of unusual historic or scientific
significance that would at least make them avai lable for study and
analysis.
Site security during the initial stages of excavation suffered
somewhat when, owing to an incomplete security fence, entrance to the
area was available by trespass to bottle col lectors and metal detector
'treasure' hunters. The trash deposits fronting Congress Avenue were
dug into one weekend to a considerable depth back under the existing
sidewalk.
The diggers left neat piles of broken glass next to the
earth they removed. Providing the items removed were not unusual
types} that which remained provided adequate information concerning
the deposits. The completion of the security fence and barrier after

42

this incident occurred prevented repetition of the problem.
It is recommended that the site's historical significance to the
City of Austin be acknowledged in a plaque placed on the premises. It
IS suggested that the plaque read essentially as fol lows:
Block 5 of the original City of Austin
On Lot 2 of this block stood the first building in Austin.
The cabin of pioneer Jacob M. Harrel I was erected here about
1837 and it was here that Harrel I hosted President Mirabeau
B. Lamar prior to the selection of the area as the site of
the capital of the Republic of Texas/ a vist which affected
Lamar's choice. Harrell, Austin's mayor in 1847, moved from
the city in 1848. The cabin/ abandoned, was destroyed prior
to 1876 and no trace of it was found during the construction
of this bui Iding.

43

REFERENCES CITED
Austin City Directory
1883 and 1906.
Barker
1918

The Government of Austin's Colony, 1821-1831.
Historical Quarterly 21:245.

Bastrop County
1839 Pol ice Court Records.

Southwestern

Book A:51

Belo Corporation
1984 The Texas Almanac.
Brazoria County
1844- 1852.

Probate minutes Book 0:118, Probate folder 74.

Brown, Frank
1893 Annals of Travis County and the City of Austin (from the
Earl iest Times
to
the Close of 1875).
Unpublished
manuscript, 36 volumes. Travis County Collection, Austin
Publ ic Library and Barker History Center. Austin.
Buckbee , Joe
1985 Personal communication to
Austin.

H.B. Moncure.

Butler , Michael S.
1963 The Elgin Butler Brick Company,
publ ished by the company.
Claunch, John
1985 Personal communication to
Austin.
Coleman, James H.
1971
Aesculapius

~

H.B. Moncure.

the Colorado.

44

1873 -

Brick

col lector.

1963.

Privately

Brick

collector.

The Encino Press.

Austin.

Gates, Wi I I iam C. Jr., and Dana E. Ormerod
1982 The East Liverpool Pottery District: Identification of
Manufactures and Marks. Historical Archaeology 16:1, 16:2.
General Land Office, State of Texas
ms.
Travis County, City of Austin, fi les 75,
II, 14, 49, 80, 250.
1840 Book 1:4
Georgetown Watchman
1870 June 25, 1870 edition.
Center. Austin.

On

fi Ie at

76.

the

Patents 10,

Barker

History

Hardy, Aloise
1938 A History of Travis County, 1832-1865. Unpublished Master's
thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hi Ibish, Ne I lie Luc i I Ie
1931
The Trend of Rents in the ~ajor Shovpin g Area of Austin,
TeXas, ~ ~ PerTOd of eventeenears. -gaster's thesis,
The UniverSity of Texas at Austin.
Johnson, Moses
1845 Mss. Letters to his wife, Austin, Texas, July and August,
In the papers of Moses Johnson, Barker History
1845.
Center.
Kemp, Louis Wi Itz
1944 The Signers of the Texas Declaration of
Anson Jones Press. Houston.

Independence.

Kovel, Ralph M. and Terry H.
1975 Dictionary of Marks _ Pottery
Publ ishers, Inc. New York.

Porcelain.

Kuebel, Kim
1985 Personal communication to
Austin.

and

H.B. Moncure.

Kurten, Bjorn and Elaine Anderson
1980 Pleistocene Mammals of North America.
Press. New York.

45

Brick

The

Crown

col lector.

Columbia University

Lorrain, Dessamae
1968 An Archeologist's Guide to Nineteenth
Glass. Historical Archaeology 2:35-44.
Lundel ius, Ernest L. Jr.
1985 Personal Communication to H.B. Moncure.
Professor of Vertebrate Paleontology,
Texas at Austin.

Century

American

John A.
Wi Ison
The University of

Makemson, W.K.
1904 Historical Sketch of First Settlement and Organization
Wi I liamson County.---Sun Press. Georgetown, Texas.

of

Malone, Billy Charles
Unpublished
1958 An Early History of Austin, Texas, 1839-1861.
Master's thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Miller, George L., and Catherine Sullivan
1984 Machine-made Glass Containers and the End of Production for
Mouth-Blown Bottles. Historical Archaeology 18(2)83-96.
Morning Star, The
1839 April 16,1839 edition, (Houston).
Austin.

The Texas State Library.

Newman, T. Stell
1970 A Dating Key
for
Post-Eighteenth
Historical Archaeology 4:70-75.

Century

Bottles.

Park, Phocion
1963 Brickmaking in Early
23(5):1-7. Austin.

Junior

Historian

Austin.

The

Peffers, H.B.
1905 Glass. Department of Commerce and Labor, Bureau of the
Census.
Manufacturers 1905 Part III. Special Reports on
Selected
Industries.
--COvernment
Printing
Office.
Washington, D.C.
Perry, James Frankl in
1839 Letter. Asa Brigham to Perry (typescript James F. Perry,
Stephen S. Perry, Sr., and James F. Perry, Jr.). Papers,
Archives, Barker History Center. Austin.

46

Pul I in, Anne Geffken
1986 Glass
Signatures,
Trademarks
Wal lace-Homestead. Des Moines.

and

Trade

Names.

Rinker, Meryle
1968
"A Dash of This . . A Pinch of That", A Bottle Col lector's
HIstcii=Y of----siuces -and Sp ices. Pr i vate Iy pub I i shed by the
author. Ashland, Oregon.
Rochel Ie, Leronne
Unpublished
1956 The Life and Times of Asa Brigham.
thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Sanborn Map Company
1877 Map, Aust
1885 Map, Aust
1889 Map, Aust
1894 Map, Aust
1900 Map, Aust
1935 Map, Aust

n,
n,
n,
n,
n,
n,

Texas.
Texas.
Texas.
Texas.
Texas.
Texas.

Avai lable at the Barker History Center.

Savage, Donald E. and Donald E. Russel I
1983 Mammal ian Paleofaunas
of
the
World.
Publishing Company. Reading, Massachusetts.
Scarbrough, Clara Stearns
1980 Land of Good Water.
Georgeto~Texas.

Master's

Third,

revised

Smithers, Harriet (editor)
1903
Journals of the Fourth Congress II.
Barker History-Center. Austin.
Smithwick, Noah
1935 The Evolution of a State.
compi ler.
1935--edTtion of
Company. Austin.

Addison-Wesley

edition.

Texas

Sun

Press.

State Archives.

Nanna Smithwick Donaldson,
1900 or igina I .
Gammel Book

Terrell, A.W.
1911 The City of Austin from 1839 to 1865. The Quarterly of
Texas State Historical Association 14:114-128.
Travis County
ms.
Deed Records, Book C:106, 114; D:121, 222;
E:264;
171; T:179. County Clerk's Office. Austin.

47

the

G:86,

Webb, Walter Prescott (editor)
1952 The Handbook of Texas
Association. Austin.

1.

Weekly Texian, The
1842 March 9, 1842 edition (Austin).
Center. Austin.

The Texas State Historical

Photostat,

Barker

Wi Ibarger, J. W.
1935 Indian Depredations in Texas.
1935 edition
original. Hatchings Printing. Austin.
Wi Ison, Rex
1981 Bottles on the Western
Press. iUcrn.

Frontier.

University

History

of

of

1890

Arizona

Wright, Helena
1983 Insurance Mapping and Industrial Archeology.
IA - The
Journal of the Society for Industrial Archeology 9(I):I-la:­

48

