TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

SOUTH TEXAS PROJECT TO WALKER COUNTY PLANT
A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources
to be Affected by a Proposed Transmission Line Corridor

Carolyn Ekland-Olson

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas at Austin

Technical Bulletin No. 37
1980

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS 78758

Balcones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

SOUTH TEXAS PROJECT TO WALKER COUNTY PLANT

A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources
to be Affected by a Proposed Transmission Line Corridor

By: Carolyn Ekland-Olson
Principal Investigator: David S. Dibble

A report submitted to Central and South West Services, Inc. by the
Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at Austin, in
filfillment of the terms of Purchase Order 2457.

June 1980

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction ........ ".... ., ...... .... ~ " .......................... '" .....," . ,. ...................... " . " .......... 1
Research Procedures ..... "...... ~ "., . ~. ~ ~" .. ~., .. ~ ~ " ~ ......... " " ................

to . . . . . . . . . . .

«: ......

2

South Texas Project to Walker County Plant Corridor ......•...•....... 3
Previous Archeological Investigations ................................ 6
Co nc1us; 0 ns.............. ".......

II

......

t: ........

~~

" ...... !

.. "

•.

~

"

II! ..

t!

t

~

• " ............ " ..

f'

"

~

..

..

..

..

....

8

Recommenda t ions. . • . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . •. 9
Bibl iography ...

,,41 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

~

..................... " . . .

II

.....

'I'

..............................

,,"

..

~

........

10

INTRODUCTION

At the request of Central and South West Services, Inc. of Dallas,
the Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at Austin,
conducted a preliminary assessment of archeological and historical
resources within and adjacent to a proposed transmission line corridor
extending from Matagorda County to Walker County, Texas. The proposed
corridor covers an area 152.5 miles long and 3.5 miles wide and encompasses
some 341,645 acres. Within this study area a centralized D.5-mile-wide
corridor, encompassing 2727 acres, is under special consideration for the
final routing of a l5D-foot-wide transmission line corridor.
Texas~

The results of this assessment are to serve as a guide in planning
the final route of the transmission line connecting the South Texas Project
and Walker County Power Plant. In keeping with earlier studies of this
nature (see Kluge, Turpin and Thurmond~ 1979) the following objectives
were outlined:
1) To conduct a thorough search of the files at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory and the Texas Historical Commission to
determine the nature and location of any archeological or
historical sites which would fall within the proposed transmission
line corridor;
2)

To thoroughly examine published and unpublished records in the
libraries and files of the aforementioned institutions to
determi ne whether porti ons of-ffle propose-dc'orrldorn-aveoeen
subjected to previous cultural resource investigations;

3)

To evaluate the information in order to derive a first
approximation of the general pattern of site locations in the
proposed corridor area;

4)

To recommend measures that would avoid, lessen or minimize
adverse effects to any cultural resources within the proposed
corridor; and

5) To recommend that additional archeological and historical studies
be undertaken when plans for the construction of the transmission
line are finalized.

2

RESEARCH PROCEDURES

The records at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, the
University of Texas at Austin, the central repository for archeological
site information in the state, were examined. The location of sites
found within and adjacent to the proposed transmission line corridor
were then plotted on U.S.G.S. topographic maps. If descriptive
information pretaining to the sites' condition and cultural affiliation
was known, it was recorded. The files of the Texas Historical
Commission were then examined for historic and archeological sites listed
on, or nominated to, the National Register of Historic Places. The
published and unpublished literature available for the area under
consideration was then evaluated to determine the extent and nature
of previous cultural resource surveys.
The location of recorded sites and areas that have been investigated
are plotted on U.S.G.S. topographic maps accompanying this report. The
sponsoring agency is requested to restrict the distribution of this
information in order to minimize destruction of the sites by vandalism.
Other pertinent information contained in this report include:
I}

Information about topographic location, cultural affiliation, and
current condition of sites if such information exists in the
files or reports;

2)

A listing of sites listed on, or nominated to, the National
Register of Historic Places;

3) An evaluation of the nature and intensity of previous archeological
investigations which are relevant to the area under consideration;
4)

Projected expectations of an area's archeological site sensitivity
based on what is known about modern land use; and

5)

Recommendations for routing the transmission line within the
proposed corridor to minimize the impact of construction upon
the cultural resources.

The results of the investigations, as well as the recommendations,
are discussed according to mile increments originating at the South
Texas Project plant site. A bibliography of literature pertinent to the
area under study is found at the end.

3

SOUTH TEXAS PROJECT TO WALKER COUNTY PLANT CORRIDOR

Texas Quads

Counties

Sites in Corridor

Blessing S.L
Blessing
Markham
Midfield
Lane City S. E.
Lane City
Pledger
Wharton
Boling
Hungerford
Kendleton
East Bernard
Orchard
Wa 11 is
Fulshear
San Felipe
Brookshire
Sunny Side
Hockley Mound
Hempstead
Waller
Waller N.W.
Howth
Stoneham
Courtney
Navasota
Anderson
Roans Prairie
Richards
Si ngl eton
Lorna
Ga l"il ee
Steep Branch
Crabbs Prairie
Pine Prairie

Matagorda
Matagorda
Matagorda
Matagorda
Matagorda, Wharton
Wharton
Matagorda, Wharton
Wharton
Wharton, Fort Bend
Wharton, Fort Bend
Wharton, Fort Bend
Wharton, Aust"j n, Fort Bend
Fort Bend
Austin, Fort Bend
Fort Bend, Waller
Austin, Waller
Waller, Fort Bend
Austin, Waller
Waller, Harris
Austin, Waller
Waller, Harris
Grimes, Waller, Harris
Grimes, Waller, Washington
Grimes
Grimes, Washington
Brazos, Grimes
Grimes
Grimes
Grimes, Walker, Montgomery
Grimes
Grimes, Walker, Montgomery
Walker
Grimes, Walker, Madison
Walker
Walker
Total

0
0
0

0
0
0
0
2
0
0
0

a
1

a
0

a
3

a
0

0
0
0
0

a
1
0

1

a
a
1
0

0

0
0
0
9

4

Sites in
Corri dor/County

Texas Counties

o

Matagorda
Wharton
Fort Bend
Austin
Wall er
Harris
Grimes
Montgomery
Walker

2
1

o
3
o
3
o
o

Totals

9

47
18
27
52
16
409
80
55
51

755

National Register sites in corridor - 1
The following information was obtained from the files of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory on the nine sites that are presently
known to exist in the corridor. In many instances, specific information
pertaining to site identification, cultural affiliation, and present
condition is lacking. Only two of the nine sites were discovered or
examined as part of a systematic reconnaissance. It should be kept in mind
that some sites were reported a number of years ago and that some were
reported by individuals with little or no formal archeological training.
Two sites are located in close proximity to each other at approximately
mile 40 in the transmission line corridor. One of these two sites (41WH17)
is reported to be a burial in undetermined condition; the second (41WHI8)
is said to be an Archaic site which has been largely destroyed by soil
removal, road building, and plowing. The single site in Fort Bend County
(41FBl) is located at mile 57 close to an oil field and is reported to
have been discovered in the process of II geophysical shooting ll ; no
information as to the cultural affiliation or condition of the site exists
in the files.
Three sites in Waller County fall in the eastern half of the corridor
betweell miles 7Q_-MlSLZI..__Dne previously recorded site, 41WL9, was exam;ne~~_________ -~.
-~-""""'--"'---as-p-art of a reconnaissance-con-duct.ecfTn 1972 bytneTexas Archeological
Survey. First reported in 1970, the site was recognized as a Late
Prehistoric campsite. Two years later archeologists found that the site
had been recently plowed to obtain projectile points. However, it was
felt that the site still exhibited enough potential to warrant further
investigation (Dillehay and Mallouf, 1972). Information pertaining to
the other two sites (41WLl and 41WL7) is 1acki ng.
One site (41GM3) located on the western edge of the corridor at mile
104 was uncovered during road construction activities; the site was tested

5

and several Paleoindian artifacts were recovered. The historic site~
the Fanthrop Inn (41GM79) in the town of Anderson, is located at mile
119; this site has been placed on the National Register of Historic
Places as part of the Anderson Historic District. The last site
(41GM59) ;s a lithic scatter recorded as part of a survey covering the
area of the proposed Gibbons Creek lignite mine and steam electric
station; the site falls on the far western edge of the corridor at
approximately mile 128.
All prehistoric sites for which the topographic locations are
available are said to be on elevated land such as hills, terraces, or
ridges, in close proximity to a creek or stream.
The paucity of archeological sites within the proposed study area is
more reflective of a lack of systematic investigations than a lack of
prehistoric and hi~toric habitation, for only small portions of 1b~sJudy
area nave been surveyensee Previous -Archeological Inves-tlgations).
-~---~-An examination of the files at the Texas Historic Commission has
indicated that the 3.5-mile-wide study corridor includes an area of
substantial historical significance at approximately mile 118 through
mile 120. In Grimes County the western half of the study corridor
runs through the National Register site known as the Anderson Historic
District (Texas Historical Commission, 1979). In the community are a number
of intact structures which reflect the pre-Republic history of the state
of Texas. Among the more important are the Anderson County courthouse,
the Fanthrop Inn, the B.B. Goodrich home, the Anderson Baptist Church,
and the Vernacular Palladian house. Aside from these, a number of other
structures are mentioned as being of National Register quality including
several plantations and houses.
In addition, the study area includes portions of the original
Stephen F. Austin colony, especially in Austin, Waller and Fort Bend
counties. A high incidence of early house sites of historic significance
canoe~expected, especially in proximity to the Brazos River.

6

PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS

Although the 152.5 mile corridor covers an area where little
archeological reconnaissance work has been conducted, a number of
systematic investigations have been carried out in regions adjacent to
the proposed corridor. To the south in Matagorda County, Fritz (1975)
surveyed portions of the Matagorda Bay area as part of the Matagorda
Bay-Estuarine Resource Management Study; she recorded ninety-four
prehistoric and historic sites~ the majority of which were shell middens
located along the coastline. The findings of this investigation are
not appl icabl e to _the area und~L_consic!~ratjonL_fQ~the corrLc!Qr Ites
well above the zone where one would expect to find marine shell middens.
Further studies have been conducted in that portion of Matagorda County
to be occupied by the South Texas Project and the associated
transmission lines (see Hall and Ford. 1973; Hall. Grombacher and Dibble,
1974; Dillehay et al, 1975; and Dibble and Freeman, 1979). A survey
of the plant site produced no evidences of prehistoric habitation. A
number of transmission line corridors emanating from the plant were also
evaluated for their archeological potential and some areas suspected to
have high archeological value were later surveyed and tested. The
results of the corridor studies were relatively negative. Based on the
outcome of these studies. it can be anticipated that areas of modified,
leveled terrain used for agricultural purposes will yield little in
the way of intact, identifiable prehistoric resources except in areas
such as well-developed drainage systems.
A further study, the results of which are applicable to the region,
is the reconnaissance of areas to be affected by the Allen's Creek Nuclear
Generating Station and its associated transmission lines in Austin.
Waller, Fort Bend, and Harris counties (Dillehay and Mallouf, 1972). The
plant site, while not within the-Studyarea itself, lies adjacent to the
western edge at approximately mile 62; the proposed and alternate
transmission lines emanating from the plant cross the study corridor
in four places between miles 52 to 56 and miles 67 to 70.
The 1972 survey located thirty-four prehistoric sites and nine
historic sites. Sites in the area were fairly intact and are situated
on bluffs or along Allen's Creek. The artifacts recovered from the pre­
historic sites suggest that occupation spanned the Archaic and Late
Prehistoric cultural stages. One site, the Ernest Witte site, was
placed on the National Register of Historic Places and was later intensively
excavated; this large prehistoric cemetery has yieldea a wea1th-oT--··~-·
prehistoric remains (Hall. n.d.),
Based on the results of the Allen's Creek survey, an equivalent
high site density can be expected in similar topographic or environmental
settings, especially in the area of the Brazos River which runs parallel
to and ;s crossed by the corridor in this general region.

7

Two major investigations have been conducted -in the far western
portions of Harris County, one of which was concerned with an area
adjacent to the 3.5-mile-wide study corridor. Wheat's (1953) work in
the Addicks Reservoir area produced a great deal of information about
the prehistory of the region; this area has since been inundated. A project
aimed at sampling the 320 square miles of the Cypress Creek drainage basin
demonstrated that substantial and potentially important cul tural resources
exist in that area (Hale and Freeman, 1978). Although the watershed
extends -into the corridor from approximately mile 80 to mile 94, the
20 percent sample selected for the reconnaissance did not include any
portion of the corridor. It should be noted that this general region has
been severely altered by farming and ranching and urban development;
thus, many archeological sites have probably been destroyed. This same
hls10ry of la-nd rriOdfffcation s aIso~beneved-fobe-r-etfpons fbl e for the
archeologists' inability to locate any prehistoric resources in a
reconnaissance of an area stretching from Hempstead to Bellville in Waller
,and Austin Counties to the west (Pliska, 1979).
.
In 1976 a series of investigations were begun at the site of a proposed
lignite mine in Grimes County (Fletcher, 1979; Ippolito, 1979; and Seelinger,
1979). An examination of the area to be occupied by a steam electric
station and cooling reservoir, along with an additional 5,000 to 6,000
acres slated for mining, proved somewhat disappointing in that few sites
were discovered. However, the investigators believe that the lack of
prehistoric remains may be more apparent than reCil, forlheJJ;CQnnaissllnce
was seriously hariipered-Dy~aense-ground cover and 1inifuCl access to much oT-~
the land. One of the sites located during these investigations falls on
the edge of the study area at mile 128.
A reconnaissance along the Navasota River on the Grimes County!
Brazos County border located fifty-four prehistoric sites, the majority
of whi ch were s itua ted on sandy knoll s or terraces (Sorrow and Cox, 1973).
Although it was difficult to make an assessment, the investigators felt
that the sites represent the total spectrum of aboriginal occupation from
early hunters to historic times. It is noted that although a number of
sites were discovered, the investigators felt that these were but a small
portion of those that probably exist in the region. To the east in
Montgome!.Lj:QLlntYL~~~6!)2I!rve,i" in tbe Lake Conroe regjQI1 yi~lded thtrty-fQur____
sites-of Archaic and Late Prehistoric cultural affiliation~hafer, 1966).­
Both of these areas fall well outside the corridor but still demonstrate
that the region was favored for prehistoric habitation.

8

CONCLUSIONS

At the present time only nine sites are recorded within the
boundaries of the 152.5-mile-long, 3.5-mile-wide study area. No sites
have been reported within the 0.5-mile-wide central corridor. This lack
of prehistoric and historic remains is more reflective of a lack of
systematic survey than a dearth of prehistoric and historic occupation,
for only small portions of the study area have been investigated. The
results of investigations in adjacent areas do demonstrate, however,
that the area under consideration cannot be considered to be void of
cultural remains.
Between miles 0 and 20 of the study area, little in the way of
intact identifiable prehistoric remains can be expected due to land
modification for farming purposes; this interpretation is supported by
archeological investigations carried out in conjunction with earlier
South Texas Project studies. Between miles 20 and 28, the crossing of
the Colorado River system may be more archeologically sensitive; however,
modifications for irrigation and drainage purposes may have obliterated
sites that would normally be expected to occur on terraces. Sites
have been recorded in the general vicinity of Caney Creek and Peach Creek
at miles 35 and 38 respectively; however, the sites fall outside the
proposed centralized 0.5-mile-wide corridor. Evidence of prehistoric
habitation can be anticipated in that portion of the study area between
miles 41 and 46 traversed by the San Bernard River.
From approximately mile 44 to mile 92, the general study area runs
through portions of the Stephen F. Austin Colony; attention should be
focused on this region for possible historic remains. Aside from historic
structures, prehistoric remains may occur between miles 58 and 78 where
the study area is crossed by the Brazos River and its tributary systems;
this vicinity maintains a high degree of archeological sensitivity
as has been demonstrated by work in the Allen's Creek area adjacent to
the study corridor.
The portion of the 3.5-mile-wide corridor extending from mile 92 to
the Walker County Power Plant has seen little in the way of systematic
investigations. This area will probably retain a certain degree of arch­
eological sensitivity, especially on elevated terrain near waterways;
this may not be immediately apparent, for habitations along streams and
rivers in this area are reported to be covered with dense vegetation.
Attention should be directed toward avoiding historic remains associated
with the Anderson Historic District which lies within the western half
of the study area at miles 118 to 120.
Although this preliminary assessment indicates that portions of the
study area can be considered sensitive to both prehistoric and historic
remains, it is believed that given the lateral flexibility of line placement
within the 3.5-mile-wide corridor, damage to any archeological or
historical resources can be avoided.

9

RECOMMENDATIONS

It is emphasized again that this summation of currently reported
archeological and historical sites within the study area is only a
"first approximation" of definable resources. Based on an examination
of the files and literature some preliminary recommendations can be
made:
1)

The 3.5-mile-wide corridor includes an area of known historical
importance, most notably the Anderson Historic District and
the original Stephen F. Austin Colony. The Anderson Historic
District lies in the western half of the proposed corridor and
can be circumvented to the east.

2)

A thorough search of the original land grants and the history
of land ownership in the Stephen F. Austin Colony should
identify the sites of early plantations and other structural
remnants of possible historic significance. As the majority of
the original settlers chose to build in close proximity to the
Brazos River, the impact would be lessened by selecting the
final route to avoid both the prehistoric and historic resources
which tend to cluster along this major river.

3)

Prehistoric occupation sites, as evidenced by the surveys in
the vicinity of Allen's Creek and Cypress Creek, can be
expected to occur along well-developed drainage systems
within the corridor. Intensive on-site surveys of the route of
the transmission line prior to the finalization of construction
plans would allow the use of flexibility in tower placement
to avoid located prehistoric resources.

10

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Dibble, David S. and Martha Doty Freeman
1979 An Archeological and Historical Survey of Areas to be Affected by
Construction of STP Modified Transmission Line Routes, Matagorda
Colorado, and Fayette Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin No. 25, Austin.
Dillehay, Tom D. and Michael G. Mallouf
1972 An Archeological Reconnaissance of Areas to be Affected by the
Proposed Nuclear Power Plant, Austin County, Texas and Associated
Power Transmission Lines in Austin, Waller, Fort Bend, and Harris
Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Research
Report No. 16, Austin.
Dillehay, Tom D., Kerry A. Grombacher, Elton R. Prewitt, and David S. Dibble
1975 An Evaluative Synthesis of Impact on Cultural Resources of the
South Texas Project Transmission Network. Texas Archeological
Survey Research Report No. 51, Austin.
Fletcher, Charles S.
1979 Gibbons Creek Lignite Project: Survey and Appraisal of Cultural
Resources in the First Five Year Mining Area. Tereas A & M University
Cultural Resources Laboratory~ Report No.3, College Station.
Hale, Thomas H. Jr., and Martha Doty Freeman
1978 A Reconnaissance Survey and Assessment of Prehistoric and Historic
Resources, Cypress Creek Watershed in Harris and Waller Counties,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No. 68, Austin.
Hall, Grant D.
n.d. Allen's Creek: A Study in the Prehistory of the Lower Brazos
River. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No. 61,
manuscript in preparation.
Hall, Grant D. and Mary Margaret Ford
1973 South Texas Nuclear Project Site, Matagorda County, Texas.
Archeological Survey Researah Report No. 38, Austin.

Texas

Hall, Grant D., Ke~ry A. Grombacher, and David S. Dibble
1974 A Study of the Archeological and Historical Resources to be
Affected by Proposed and Alternate Transmission Line Routes, South
Texas Project. Texas Archeological Survey Researah Report
No. 39, Austin.
Ippolito, John E.
1979 The Gibbons Creek Steam Electric Station Project: An Archeological
Test and Survey Supplement. Texas A & M AnthpoPolOgy Labo~atopY
Report No. 47, College Station.

---------

----------------

11

Kluge, Margaret J., Solveig A. Turpin, and J. Peter Thurmond
1979 Central and Southwest System: A Preliminary Assessment of the
Cultural Resources to be Affected by Proposed Transmission Line
Corridors. Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin
No. 28, Austin.
Pl i ska, James R.
1979 A Cultural Resource Assessment of the Bellville South to Waller
Transmission Line. Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin
No. 29. Austin.
Seelinger, Terry
1980 Archeological Reconnaissance of a Proposed Pipeline at Gibbons
Creek, Grimes County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin No. 35, Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1966 Archeological Survey of Honea, Pat Mayse, and Halsell Reservoirs,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports
No.1, Austin.
Sorrow, William M. and Wayne N. Cox
1973 A Reconnaissance of the Archeological and Historical Resources
of the Navasota River Basin, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report No. 26, Austin.
Texas Historical Commission
1979 The National Register of Historic Places, Austin, Texas.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 The Addicks Dam Site, An Archeological Survey of the Addicks
Dam Basin, Southeast Texas. Smithsonian Institution, River
Basin Survey Papers No.4, Washington, D.C.

