CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED
GILLELAND CREEK WASTEWATER INTERCEPTOR CORRIDOR
Travis County, Texas

Leland C. Bement

With a Contribution by Dan K. Utley

Texas Antiquities Permit 659
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory

Technical Series 2

The University of Texas at Austin

1988

CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED
GILLELAND CREEK WASTEWATER INTERCEPTOR CORRIDOR
Travis County, Texas

'

Leland C. Bement

With a Contribution by Dan K. Utley

Principal Investigator: Solveig A. Turpin

Tex as Antiquities Permit 659

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
Technical Series 2
The University of Texas at Austin
1988

------------

-----

---

-

COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory· Sponsored Projects
10100 Burnet Road· Austin, Texas 78758-4497• ( 512 )835-3120

A report submitted to:
Bernard Johnson, Inc.

In partial fulf illrrent of

A Profeseional Services Agreerrent
dated January 14, 1988

ABSTRACT
Under contract to Bernard Johnson Incorporated. the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory. The University of Texas at Austin. conducted a cultural resource survey
along the route of the City of Austin's proposed Gilleland Creek Wastewater Interceptor
route. Travis County. Texas in compliance with the terms of Antiquities Permit No.
659.
An intensive pedestrian survey of a 500-foot wide corridor along the proposed
route resulted in the recording of five prehistoric sites. one prehistoric site with a
historic component. and one historic site.
Sites were located in floodplain. floodplain
margin and valley margin settings. Three prehistoric sites (41 TV1365. 41 TV1369 and
41 TV1371) have been recommended for further investigation in the form of subsurface
testing if the corridor can not be rerouted to avoid disturbing the buried deposits.

Ill

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
In addition to the assistance provided by the staff of Bernard Johnson. Inc ..
Dwight Reagan and Jerry Hsu. the landowners and leasees of the land were most
cooperative in permitting access to the corridor.
In particular. Dr. Ben Eppright and
Dr. Charles Hackett provided information about the cultural resources along the
proposed Gilleland Wastewater Interceptor route. In addition. Mr. Mark Denton of the
Texas Antiquities Committee facilitated the speedy completion of the project.

IV

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract

Ill

Acknowledgments

IV

Introduction .

1

Environmental Background

3

Cultural Background

5

Methods

9

Survey Resu Its

11

Recommendations

17

References Cited

19

List of Figures

Figure 1. Route of proposed wastewater interceptor corridor

VI

Figure 2. Central Texas prehistoric chronology .

7

Figure 3. Site environments. 41 TV1365 and 41 TV1369

12

Figure 4. Historic components. 41 TV1366 and 41 TV1370

14

v

!

~

'

~J

~
~

\

\

' ;-.. ___ ,.,.,,-_,\ -,

.......

.,,...,

'

I

I

~----_.-~,

{

\_{~--

\

' ,_

... - ..... \

\

I
I

I

J

/

N

Figure 1.

\

\

\

I

Kll.orieters

I

I
I

1

r'

D

.

MN

I

I

\

v

\
I

I

~o

'O' /,,,, __

,,_o

~o

' .... _.,. ,,.

/

I

,.
'

\

_...

I

(

\

./

I

/
'-._/

\

\

/

\

I

'
I

,,.

'\

vi

I
I

,,

'

'

\

Project area map.

- "\;""'

---

/

I

/
/

/

I

'

INTRODUCTION

Under the terms of Antiquities Permit 659. issued to the City of Austin. and a
contract between Bernard Johnson Incorporated and The University of Texas at Austin.
The Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) conducted a pedestrian survey
for cultural resources within a 500-ft corridor along Gilleland Creek from just north of
Manor. Texas southward to just east of Dunlap. Texas - a total of 10 miles (Fig. 1).
The pedestrian survey was conducted 'by Leland C. Bement and David G. Robinson of
TARL between January 15. 1988 and January 22. f988.
The historic sites were
further researched by Dan K. Utley. Five prehistoric sites. one historic site and one
prehistoric site with a historic component were located and recorded by this survey.

1

This page intentionally left blank.

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

Geology

The geology of eastern Travis County is characterized by the dark clays of the
Navarro and Marlbrook Marl divisions of the Upper Cretaceous age deposits (Barnes
197 4). Capping the upland interfluves of these units are Quaternary-age gravel deposits
locally known as Uvalde Gravels (Byrd 1971).
More recent surface geologic units in
the project area include alluvium deposited along tributaries of the Colorado River.
Major alluvial deposits were noted along Gilleland Creek where flood deposits have
buried recent tires and other garbage under 2 meters of silty loam.
Geological attributes that are particularly pertinent to the archeological record in
this area are the chert-rich Uvalde Gravels. These deposits provided a ready supply of
chert and quartzite cobbles suitable for the production of stone tools.
One of the
prehistoric sites recorded during this project was atop a Uvalde Gravel deposit or
outcrop. reworked to a lower setting in the drainage basin.

Soils
Soils traversed by the project transect are characteristically clays with high shrinkswell cycles governed by surface water fluctuations (Werchan. Lowther and Ramsey
1974:4).
Large cracks formed during dry periods are filled with A-horizon materials.
thus precluding the development of a B horizon. Soil associations defined for this area
include the Houston Black-Heiden. Austin-Eddy. Burleson-Wilson. and Ferris-Heiden
(Werchan. Lowther and Ramsey 1974:4). A typical profile of these soils describes an
upper layer of dark grayish brown clay and a lower layer of grayish brown mottled
clay.

Hydrology

Noted distribution and catchment patterns of available water resources along the
project route were primarily limited to surface features related to runoff. None of the
surface expressed geologic units contain aquifers or aquifer potential although an
unnamed tributary to Gilleland Creek is purported to be spring fed.
The catchment
basin is comprised of a dendritic system of intermittent streams emptying into larger
drainages which. due to increased discharge quantities from nearby towns. have become
perennial streams. During the period of fieldwork. the only water observed was in the
now-perennial Gilleland Creek and behind the stock dams on the valley margins.

3

4

/

GILLELAND CREEK

Flora and Fauna

The project transect crosses a narrow band of Blackland Prairies that abuts the
Edwards Plateau to the west and intermingles with the Post Oak Savannah to the east
(Gould 1975:3).
Common floral inhabitants of the Blackland Prairie include little
bluestem. Schizachyrium scoparium. as a climax dominant accompanied by Andropogon
gerandii. Sorghastrum nutans and other grasses (Gould 1975:3).
Fauna inhabiting the Blackland Prairies are part of the Texan Biotic Province
which is characterized as a transition zone between the Austroriparian in the east and
the Balconian to the west (Blair 1950:100). The Texan is termed "transitional" as it
contains no endemic species of vertebrates but is a composite of eastern and western
faunas. The overlapping of faunas has stocked the Texan Province with a wide array
of animal resources which served as potential food items for prehistoric man.
Climate

Travis County has a humid. subtropical climate with an average annual rainfall of
32 inches.
Periods of maximum precipitation occur during early spring and early
autumn. A mean annual temperature of 68 degrees F. is bounded by a maximum low
temperature in January and highs in August.
Winds are generally from the southsouthwest with major directional changes resulting from cold air masses entering the
region from the north during the winter months.

CULTURAL BACKGROUND

Prior to the survey of the proposed Gilleland Wastewater Interceptor. 1364 sites
had been recorded in Travis County. Texas (TARL n.d.). Most of these sites were
recorded as a result of cultural resource assessments in preparation for ground
disturbing activities associated with housing. utility. parks and road development
projects (eg., Moncure 1983. Espey Huston and Associates 1986. Lynn and Fuszek
1981).
Sites have been assigned to one of two broad time periods--Historic and
Prehistoric.
The historic began with the Spanish advances into the area during the
17th Century and continues to the present. Prehistoric sites are those which are preColumbian age and can date as far back as the end of the Pleistocene (ca. 12.000
years before present [B.P.]). Each of these broad categories has been further divided
into time periods delineated by changes in tool forms. technology or major cultural
events.
The Historic Period

The Historic Period has been divided into four major periods. each subdivided into
shorter time lengths related to major historical events.
I.

Indian Era:

II.

Conquest and Colonization (1519-1835).

Pre-European arrival in 1519.

A. Early exploration and missionaries (1519-1690).

B. Mission period and Spanish domination (1690-1793).
C. Spanish decline and filibustering era (1793-1821 ).

D. Mexican era and Anglo-American colonization (1821-1835).
Ill.

Revolution and Republic (1835-1845)
A. Revolution (1835-1836).
B. Republic (1836-1845).

5

6 / GILLELAND CREEK

IV.

Texas in the United States (1845-present)
A. Pre-Civil War (1845-1861).
B. Confederate State (1861-1865).
C. Reconstruction (1865-187 4).
D. Early economic development (1874-1899).
E. Industrialization and Urbanization (1899-present).

In terms of local history. Manor was named for james Manor who settled in the
area before the Civil War (Barkley 1970). He received a land grant of 1.280 acres in
1838.
In 1871. Manor granted the right-of-way for the Houston and Texas Central
Railroad. assuring the further development of the town which was formally founded in
1872.
The State Historical Marker. commemorating the centennial of the town's
founding. mentions other pioneers including David Eppright and Sterling Chamberlain.
both later associated with site 41TVl366 recorded by this survey. The other early
settler who left his name on the study area is James Gilleland, whose headright lay at
the mouth of the creek named for him (Webb 1952).
The Prehistoric Period

The long prehistoric period has also been subdivided. Beginning with the oldest.
these subdivisions are: Paleoindian (12.000-8000 B.P.}. Archaic (8000- 1500 B.P.) and
Late Prehistoric (1500-500 B.P.).
Each of these has been divided into sections
reflecting stylistic and technological variations within specific geographical regions. The
Gilleland Creek area falls within the Central Texas cultural zone for which an elevenpart chronology has been devised for the Archaic Period and two divisions for the Late
Prehistoric Period (Prewitt 1981. 1985) (Fig. 2).
Sites recorded in the Central Texas area can be attributed to a particular time
period based on a diagnostic tool type--usually a projectile point style.
Multiple
occupations are indicated by two or more diagnostic point types.
The Central Texas cultural region consists of the Edwards Plateau west of the
Balcones Escarpment and the Blackland Prairies to the east.
Both physiographical
subdivisions contain distinct site types and features directly attributable to the lithic
resources of each sub-area. Sites along the Balcones Escarpment and on the Edwards
Plateau often contain large cooking or heating features composed of limestone cobbles.
These burned rock middens have received the bulk of archeological investigations in the
limestone areas. To the east. the limestone bedrock is replaced by thick clays and
sandy clay bedrock often capped by deposits of Uvalde Gravels.
Features and site
types in this sub-area utilize the chert. quartzite and sandstone cobbles in the cooking
and heating features. The change in heating/cooking feature morphology between the

CULTURAL BACKGROUND / 7

Summary of Key Index Markers
Central Texas Chronology
Key Index Markers·

/\ I\ -/\-a-11:~°'~~ ~.:~},J;.On
¥z ~ LJ
l1s6:~e \j;'9q,'>- Ceramics

l'l{Jln

1

t----1------~----

Driftwood

.....
j
Q)

Twin Sisters

Ma ho met

Ll

Cemetenes

HV_are
Bifa~·

-/\"San-.~~
LJEnsor.. _

·&!1th
Biface

~.

~

(J .

?

t------~-

Uval de

-M-arc-os--1--__,_t"'-Ma-rsha~U

-- 4--Sa-n

9

1--------..Jl---

Archaic Round Rock

IPedemales

Clear Fork
· Oakalla

V

Middens

Burned Rock
Middens

-~ ......_M_a_rs_h_al_l_---1-_ __,,__,_1-(\Bulverde
Ford

-f\-:urnf'd Rock

U -~U

}/\-

Burne(:l._.Rock
·Middens

------------1
Bur_n_esi.._~ock
Middens

Burned. Rock

}arrell

Paleoindian

Figure 2.

Central Texas cultural chronology (adapted from Prewitt 1981).

8 / GILLELAND CREEK
two areas may equate to subsistence resource changes or simply the availability of
differing materials for hearth construction.
The Gilleland Creek drainage within the
project area falls in the eastern Central Texas sub-area and thus. site and feature types
are more similar to those in Bastrop County than those in western Travis County.
Previous archeological work in the Blackland Prairies has shown that prehistoric groups
consistently lived along drainages and on high promontories overlooking the Colorado
floodplain (Kenmotsu 1982. Bement 1984. Robinson 1987).
Previous work along Gilleland Creek in the area about the proposed wastewater
interceptor is too specialized to identify any patterns of prehistoric settlement in the
drainage.
The few sites previously recorded consist of lithic procurement and open
campsites associated with the Uvalde Gravel deposits on the valley margins and
interfluves (Bement 1987: Wilson n.d.).
Gilleland Creek lies in the little known area between the heavily investigated
Balcones Escarpment zone and the western Bastrop County area.
Any information
beyond the survey level currently available that can be gained in the Gilleland Creek
valley will contribute to defining the prehistoric settlement pattern in this area.
Until
subsurface excavation are carried out. the temporal framework essential to detailed
interpretations remains obscure.

METHODS
The intensive pedestrian survey of the proposed route of the wastewater line was
conducted by two archeologists walking zigzag transects in the right-of-way (ROW)
corridor.
Shovel probes were dug in areas where surface visibility was low or soil
depth was sufficient to contain buried cultural materials.
Each probe was dug in 20
cm levels and all dirt was screened through 1/4 in. hardware cloth.
Due to the
deflated nature of deposits along the valley margin and the dense clays in the
floodplain. few shovel probes were dug.
Those probes placed in the alluvial terraces
along tributaries and Gilleland Creek failed to produce cultural materials. All prehistoric
sites were identified by the lithic debitage eroding from the banks of Gilleland Creek.
distributed m plowed floodplain fields or scattered over the surface of Uvalde Gravel
deposits.
Historic sites were identified on the basis of materials older than 50 years of age.
The historic component of 41 TV1366 was further researched in state. county and
Texas Historical Commission archives and through informant interviews to determine its
age and potential significance.
All sites were recorded using State of Texas site data forms and plotted on
USGS 7.5 minute quad maps. A daily journal was kept to record the progress of the
survey and color and black and white photographs were taken to augment the written
descriptions of sites and settings.
Only artifacts recovered in shovel probes were
collected in the absence of temporally diagnostic surface finds. All materials. records
and photographs are curated at T ARL.

9

------------

This page intentionally left blank.

SURVEY RESULTS
The pedestrian survey identified and recorded six prehistoric sites - one with a
historic component - and one historic site along the proposed route of the wastewater
line.
Three of the prehistoric sites (41 TV1365. 1367 and 1369) were found in
floodplain settings (Fig. 3a). while two prehistoric sites (41 TV1366 and 1371) were
located on the floodplain margins (Fig. 3b). and one ( 41 TV1368) was locate on a
valley margin ridge covered by the upland Uvalde Gravels.
The valley margin site
contained the debris associated with initial testing a~d reduction of chert cobbles for
tool manufacture.
The floodplain and floodplain margin sites held some cobbles
indicating that initial reduction was performed: however. most of the debris was of
secondary reduction and tool manufacture accompanied by subsistence-derived debris
including grinding stones and burned rock from cooking fires. Formal tools were found
only at 41 TV1366. 41 TV1369 and 41 TV1371.
Cultural material was limited to the
surface of the gravel deposits in the case of 41 TV1368.
The depth of cultural
materials or deposits containing cultural materials could not be determined on sites
41 TV1367 and 41 TV1369 due to recent plowing and planting and appears limited to a
zone 20 to 30 cm beneath the surface at 41 TV1365. Site 41 TV1371 contained buried
deposits to a depth of 50 ems. Deposits attributable to alluvial action were identified
at 41 TV1365. 41 TV1367. and 41 TV1369. and possibly at 41 TV1366 and 41 TV1371
where overbank flooding had covered portions of the sites with thin silty drapes.

Site Descriptions

41TV1365
Site 41 TV1365 is a prehistoric site located in the floodplain of Gilleland Creek
(Fig. 3a) near the north end of the proposed wastewater interceptor.
The site was
identified by the erosion of flakes and small amounts of burned rock from the cutbank
along the Gilleland Creek channel at a depth ranging from 25 to 30 cm. The proposed
line traverses the floodplain some 80 meters west of the cutbank.
In order to
determine the extent of the site. survey on the west side of the line was conducted.
Here. a small quantity of cultural material was found in the dam of a stock pond. No
cultural material was observed in the undisturbed pasture between the cutbank and the
stock dam.
The heavy dense clays of the floodplain rendered shovel testing
unproductive.
Site size has been tentatively set at 40 meters north/south by 60
meters east/west. Cultural material consisted of a light scatter of flakes. chips. cores
and burned shatter.

11

12 / GILLELAND CREEK

Figure 3. Site environments. a) 41TV1365 in tl!e floodplain of Gilleland Creek :
b) 41TVl369 at the juncture of floodplains beneath a gravel-capped ridgeline.

SURVEY RESULTS / 13

41TV1366

This site is located on a sloping nose of the north-south trending ridge line east
of the interceptor route.
Here. colluvial materials and gravels interfinger with the
alluvial flood deposits at the edge of the floodplain. Prehistoric cultural material was
found in the deep furrows of a recently plowed and planted field overlooking the
No temporally diagnostic artifacts were located. however.
modern creek channel.
substantial quantities of burned rock. chips. flakes. bifacially reduced cobbles. one mano.
a subtriangular biface and a small piece of freshwater mussel shell were noted. Two
shovel tests failed to recover any cultural material beneath the plow zone. suggesting
the site may have been surficial or. at least. less than 30 cm deep.
Site 41 TV1366 also contains a historic compon~nt in the form of a house site
(Fig. 4a). No standing structures remain. Unmarked brick. window glass. bottle glass
and a concrete-collared well mark the location. A telephone interview with Dr. Ben
Eppright. the current owner. clarifies the history of the historic component.
Dr.
Eppright purchased this tract in the J. Manor survey on November 1. 1944.
The
property had been conveyed to the Bankers Life Company of Des Moines. Iowa in a
sheriff's sale in 1937 (Travis County Deed Records Vol. 754:15). The county seizure
of the property resulted from a suit filed by the corporation against D.E. Chamberlain
and wife Athlyn. Minnie E. Chamberlain. Annie M. Chamberlain and Lucie
J. Chamberlain (44th Judicial District Court of Dallas County. Cause No. 27357-B).
Kate E. Chamberlain. who owned several large tracts of land in the general vicinity.
was the daughter of David and Mary Ann Eppright.
David Eppright. a native of Maryland. came to Texas in 1846 (Lewis Publishing
Company 1893).
He and his wife. the former Mary Ann Smelson of Missouri.
eventually settled in the Manor area. where he amassed considerable property, both
farm land and town lots. their homestead southeast of 41 TV1366 but well outside the
proposed line. During the 1870s. he gave his children 600 acres each. retaining his
homestead and surrounding farmland. Ben Eppright placed the original Eppright home
southeast of 41 TV1366 but well outside the proposed line. During a site visit. a small
frame structure. now used for storage. was observed outside the line and may be part
of the relocated Eppright home. Dr. Eppright thought. however. that the original house
was dismantled in 1900.
The Epp right' s daughter. Kate. a later owner of 41 TV1366. also lived on another
farm. Her home was noted in an oil and gas lease (Travis County Deed Records Vol.
387: 100) as part of the Oliver Buckman grant.
According to Ben Eppright, the
Chamberlain house stood atop a hill east of the proposed line.
Mr. Eppright also recalled several rent houses stood along FM 973 when he
purchased the property in 1944 but he did not remember which. if any. were extant at
that time. The record of the 1944 transaction establishes that the property was then
used for rental purposes (Travis County Deed Records Vol. 754:15).
Although none of the observed artifacts at 41 TV1366 appear older than the
1940s. the 1936 highway map of Travis County reveals that several structures were
then located on the east side of what is now FM 973. The close proximity of the

14 / GILLELAND CREEK

Figure 4.

Historic components.

b) 41 TV1370 . log cribs.

a) 41TVl366. former tenant house site :

SURVEY RESULTS / 15

structures and their location adjacent to the road seem to support Dr. Eppright's claim
that they were rental properties.
According to him. some of the houses were later
moved to nearby farms for storage purposes. A shovel probe placed in the supposed
house foundation area uncovered charcoal. burned brick and melted glass. indicative of
intense heat.
Apparently. the destruction of the house can be attributed to burning
rather than relocation to another site.
Despite the site's ownership by a family of
local prominence. the archival. informant and artifactual evidence suggest that
41 TV1366 was a tenant house of uncertain construction date. later destroyed by fire.

41TV1367
Site 41 TV1367 is located in the floodplain nearer the Gilleland Creek channel than
the toe slope of the floodplain margin.
A light scatter of chert flakes and tested
cobbles was found in the deep furrows of a plowed field. Cobbles from the nearby hill
slope are scattered across the field and probably mark the extent of colluvial reworking
of the upland gravels in the area. a distribution now enhanced by plow movement. No
formal tools were located and only a few small pieces of burned rock tell of activities
other than lithic reduction. The cultural deposits appear shallow.

41TV1368
Site 41 TV1368 consists of the tested cobbles. large primary and secondary flakes
and chips resulting from the initial reduction of lithic materials at the source. in this
case. the Uvalde Gravels.
The site is located on the moderate to steep slopes of a
gravel-strewn ridge that parallels Gilleland Creek on the east side. The gravels promote
erosion in the sense that no dirt accumulates on the slopes. Thus. all cultural materials
are restricted to the surface. The extremely cobbly and steep slopes remain uncleared
for agriculture.
Vegetation in this area 1s very dense and ground visibility was
hampered by a thick layer of leaf litter.

41TV1369
Site 41 TV1369 is a prehistoric site located at the juncture of the Colorado River
and Gilleland Creek floodplains.
Some 500 meters south of the Uvalde gravel-capped
ridgeline tbat demarcates the Colorado floodplain. the site lies adjacent to a swale in
the floodplain (Fig. 3b). This swale is possibly an old. filled channel of Gilleland Creek
or perhaps an ancient Colorado River scar.
Cultural material. consisted of a light
surface scatter of flakes. reduced cobbles, a single subtriangular biface. a sandstone
mano and a concentration of burned rock. All material had been worked to the surface
by plowing. and the limited areal extent of the burned rock suggests that recent
plowing had disturbed a buried hearth.
No subsurface probes were attempted in the
newly-planted field.
Coring by geologists for the City of Austin (report not yet available) identified
alluvial deposits to a depth of 1.5 meters in the area directly north of the site. Thus.
deep alluvial deposits from either the Colorado River or Gilleland Creek may now cover
intact cultural deposits.
The light surface scatter contained no temporally diagnostic
artifacts but indicated that at least some of the alluvial deposits are of Holocene age.

16 / GILLELAND CREEK
The apparent buried nature of the site materials makes 41 TV1369 a potentially
significant cultural resource for understanding prehistoric occupation of the Gilleland
Creek entrance into the broad Colorado River floodplain.
Plow damage is not as
extensive as that noted at 41 TV1366.
The minor displacement of burned rocks. a
probable hearth. suggests that buried materials may retain some stratigraphic integrity.

41TV1370
Historic site 41 TV1370 consists of two log buildings (Fig. 4b) located on the
southern slope of the ridge line that parallels Gilleland Creek on the east. The log
buildings appear to have functioned as storage buildings - probably associated with a
house site on top of the ridge. The use of rounded cut nails. saddle jointing and
milled lumber for floor boards suggests this site was ·constructed sometime after the
beginning of the twentieth . century.
A scatter of brick downslope from the log
structures may be the remains of other outbuildings. A road leading from FM 969
passes just east of the buildings and continues toward the crest of the ridge and on to
a gravel pit. Historic debris along the road and around the buildings include bricks.
white. brown and green bottle glass. nails and metal cans.

41TV1371
Prehistoric site 41 TV1371 is an open campsite located on a valley margin rise
overlooking the confluence of a purported spring fed creek with an old meander scar of
Gilleland Creek.
The site is elevated some 8 meters above the floodplain. thus
protected from most floods along Gilleland Creek.
Cultural material consisting of
bifacially reduced cobbles. thick bifaces. flakes. utilized flakes. biface fragments. the
distal end of a dart point. freshwater mussel shell and burned rock is exposed on the
surface.
A shovel probe placed 15 meters from the bluff edge produced cultural
material to a depth of 50 ems. Soils exposed by this probe consisted of a dark brown
clay loam to a depth of 50 ems. under which was a tan clay of undetermined
thickness.
Geologic borings in the site area reveal the upper dark zone averages
thicknesses of 40 to 60 cm. and the underlying tan clay from 4 to 8 meters thick. To
the north of the site. the valley margin rises slightly and is covered with Uvalde Gravel
deposits which have been reworked by gravitational forces and. more recently. by the
plowing and planting of the slopes. It is possible that the site area was once under
cultivation. which could account for some of the buried cultural materials. The density
of cultural material at this site surpasses that seen on any other site recorded during
this survey.

RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendations for site avoidance or testing have been based on proximity of
the site to the proposed wastewater line route. planned tunnelling under portions of the
route and potential of a site to contain significant information on the prehistoric or
historic lifeways of groups utilizing the Gilleland Creek drainage basin. The corridor
surveyed during this project was 500 ft. wide in order that final placement of the line
could be predicated on site locations. Prehistoric site 41 TV1367. over 100 ft. west of
the planned route, is the only site that will require no. further assessment based solely
on proximity to the final line.
Planned tunneling of select portions of the line affects the recommendations for
The City of Austin plans to
prehistoric site 41 TV1368 and historic site 41 TV1370.
tunnel under FM 969 and the adjacent ridge segment.
Both sites 41 TV1368 and
41 TV1370 are located on this ridge portion and thus will not be affected by line
construction.
The remaining three sites would be affected in some way by the construction of
the wastewater line as it was originally staked. Site 41 TV1365. at the northern end of
the line. appears to be a thinly distributed scatter of cultural material over a broad
area of the Gilleland Creek floodplain and adjacent lower hillslope. It is known ·only
from surface-disturbed materials in a stock dam and the eroding cutbank of Gilleland
Creek. Although the deposit is buried up to 30 cm deep in the floodplain. the scarcity
of materials does not indicate major habitation of this area.
However. due to site
41 TV1365's buried condition. a limited subsurface testing program is recommended.
Site 41 TV1366 displayed the most artifactual materials of any of the sites
recorded during this survey. Shovel probing. however. demonstrated shallow deposits.
either surficial to begin with or totally displaced by successive years of plowing and
planting with modern equipment. Only the very edge of this site will be affected by
line construction and the historic house component will remain intact. Shovel probes
indicate that the densest artifact concentration and thus main site area is that portion
As a
This area has already been truncated by FM 973.
nearest Gilleland Creek.
result. Site 41 TV1366 is not recommended for any further investigation unless rerouting
of the line is planned.
Site 41 TV1369. located just south of FM 969. is in the vicinity of the
termination of the planned tunneling under FM 969 and the ridge to the north. thus
will be directly affected by the tunneling efforts as well as trenching during line
construction.
Its proximity to a filled channel scar suggests the site may be of
considerable antiquity but no temporally diagnostic artifacts were recovered during
survey.

17

18 / GILLELAND CREEK
The area of densest artifact concentration appears to have been only slightly
disturbed by plowing - a burned rock concentration provides evidence of a recentlyexposed hearth.
Finished tools. including a triangular biface and a mano. and the
slightly disturbed feature suggest this site was an open campsite. Due to the buried
nature of these deposits. the potential for undisturbed cultural materials is felt to be
high. If this site cannot be avoided by rerouting the pipeline. testing to determine the
age. nature and extent of the buried cultural deposits is recommended.
Site 41 TV1371. located on a rise overlooking an old meander scar of Gilleland
Creek. is in direct conflict with the proposed wastewater route. Restricted by the creek
channel to the west and FM 973 to the east. the route can not be realigned to avoid
the site. Shovel testing indicates that cultural material is buried to a depth of 50 cm
at a point along the midline of the proposed route. Ground disturbance across the site
area by pipeline construction is estimated at 50 feet wide for the entire length of the
site from north to south - approximately 80 meters. Since avoidance is not a viable
alternative, site 41 TV1371 is recommended for intensive testing to determine the
significance of the site deposits.
In summary. three of the seven sites (41TV1365. 41TV1369 and 41TV1371)
recorded during this survey are recommended for further work if they can not be
avoided.
A field assessment with Mark Denton of the Texas Antiquities Committee
confirmed the need for additional investigation at sites 41 TV1365 and 41 TV1371. Site
41 TV1365 is recommended for limited testing through the placement of backhoe
trenches across the portion of the floodplain to be affected by pipeline construction.
Sites 41 TV1369 and 41 TV1371 are recommended for extensive testing through the use
of both backhoe trenching and hand excavated units across the segments that will be
affected by pipeline construction.

REFERENCES CITED
Barkley, Mary Starr
1970
A History of Central Texas.

Austin Printing Company. Austin.

Barnes. Virgil E.
1974
Geologic Atlas of Texas. Austin Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology. The

Bement. Leland C.
1984
Intensive Investigations of 41BP191 and 41BP192. The Powell Bend
Prospect. Bastrop County. Tex as.
Tex as Archeological Survey Research
Report 87. The University of Texas at Austin.
n.d.

Report in
Intensive Excavations at 41BP19. The Kennedy Bluffs Site.
preparation for
the State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation. Austin.

Blair. W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.

Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.

Byrd. Clifford L.
1971
Origins and History of the Uvalde Gravel of Central Texas.
Geological Studies Bulletin 20. Baylor University Press. Waco.

Baylor

Dallas County
n.d.
44th Judicial District Court of Dallas County, Texas. Cause No. 27357-B.
Espey. Huston and Associates
1986
Environmental Assessment of the City of Austin's Proposed CKT 3125 345KV Transmission Line Project. Austin. Texas.
Gould. F. W.
1975
Texas Plants - a checklist and ecological summary. Texas A&M University.
Texas Agriculture Experiment Station MP-585/Rev .. College Station.
Kenmotsu. Ray D.
1982
Cultural Resource Investigations at the Powell Bend Prospect. Bastrop
County. Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 84. The
University of Texas at Austin.

19

20 / GILLELAND CREEK
Lewis Publishing Company
History of Tex as Together With a Biographical History of
1893
Williamson. Bastrop. Travis. Lee and Burleson Counties. Chicago.

Milam.

Lynn. Warren M. and John R. Fuszek
1981
Walnut Creek District Park. Archeological Testing at the Wells Site
41 TV368. City of Austin. Travis County. Texas.
Parks and Recreation
Planning Associates. Inc .. Austin.
Moncure. Henry B.
1983
Archeological and Historical Investigations at the Fulkes Homestead. Travis
The
County. Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 66.
University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt. Elton R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Society 52:65-89. Austin.
1985

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

From Circleville to Toyah:
Comments on Central Texas Chronology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeo/ogica/ Society 54:201-238. Austin.

Robinson. David G.
1987
Bastrop County Historical Commission Sesquicentennial Project:
Cultural
Resource Investigations along the Colorado River. Bastrop County. Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Archeology Series 2. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Tex as Archeological Research Laboratory
n.d.
County site files and records. The University of Texas at Austin.
Travis County
n.d.
Travis County Deed Records
Webb. Walter P.
1952
The Handbook of Texas: Volume 1.
Austin.

Texas State Historical Association.

Werchan. Leroy E.. A. C. Lowther. and Robert N. Ramsey
Soil Survey of Travis County. Texas.
United States Department of
1974
Agriculture. Soil Conservation Service and the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station.
Wilson. A. M.
n.d.
Unpublished notes on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
The University of Tex as at Austin.

