A CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY FOR THE RIVERSIDE WSC
HUNTWOOD PLANT PROJECT IN WALKER COUNTY TEXAS
Antiquities Permit 6357

By
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 262

2013

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
RIVERSIDE WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION HUNTWOOD PLANT PROJECT
IN WALKER COUNTY TEXAS

William E. Moore
Principal Investigator

BVRA Project 12-06

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Riverside Water Supply Corporation
Post Office Box 194
Riverside, Texas 77367

ABSTRACT
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) conducted a Phase I archaeological
survey for the Riverside Water Supply Corporation (WSC) Huntwood Plant Project under
Antiquities Permit 6357. The project area is 0.5 acre in size. William E. Moore was the
Principal Investigator, and he supervised the survey No new sites were found, and it is
recommended that construction be allowed to proceed as planned. The site is viewed as a
low probability area because of its distance to the nearest major stream (1070 meters) and
a shallow sandy mantle. Copies of the final report are on file at the Texas Water
Development Board, Texas Historical Commission, Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, BVRA, Everett Griffith, Jr. and Associates, Inc., and Riverside WSC. The
records are curated at the Sam Houston Memorial Museum.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to the following individuals for their participation in this project. Debbie
Fitzgerald, General Manager at Everett Griffith, Jr. and Associates in Lufkin provided
maps of the project area and answered specific questions regarding the methods of
construction. The client was very helpful and I appreciate the assistance provided by
Phillip Burnett (General Manager), Cindy Drake (Office Manager), Virgil Puckett (Field
Supervisor), and employees Justin Roberson and Quinn Ashworth. Jean Hughes is the
Assistant Curator of Records at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, and she
assisted with the background research. Lili G. Lyddon of LL Technical Services prepared
the figures that appear in this report and edited the manuscript.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ..................................................................ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ........................................................iii

INTRODUCTION ................................................................1

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................5

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ................................................7

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ....................................................10

METHODS ...................................................................12

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS ...................................................14

RECOMMENDATIONS ..........................................................15

REFERENCES CITED ...........................................................16

Appendix I: Letter from S. Chris Caran requesting archaeological survey
Appendix II: Backhoe Trench Log

iv

Figures
Figure 1. General Location ........................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area .............................................. 3
Figure 3. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangle ......................... 4
Figure 4. The Southeastern Region of Texas .............................. 8
Figure 5. Backhoe Trench 1 Profile (facing north) ......................... 13

v

INTRODUCTION
The Riverside WSC plans to construct a control building and gravel drive on an
undeveloped tract of land adjacent to an existing water plant in northeast Walker County
(Figure 1). The size of the area to be investigated is 1/2 acre. Figure 2 depicts the
footprint of the existing plant and the area where the new construction is proposed.
Funding for this project will be provided by the Texas Water Development Board, and
the representative for this agency is S. Christopher Caran. In a letter from Mr. Caran to
Debbie Fitzgerald and Craig Largent (Appendix I), he justifies the need for an
archaeological investigation because “there are a number of known archeological sites
nearby, the closest of which is potentially significant and located on the same landform
as the proposed new construction area.” Harmon Creek is the major stream in the area,
and it is 1070 meters to the west. The nearest source of water is an unnamed tributary
of Harmon Creek that is 185 meters to the east. Caran also states “this area appears to
have potential to support breeding and nesting activity by birds protected under the
Migratory Bird Treaty Act.” Any required studies for endangered and threatened species
for this project will be conducted by an environmental firm not affiliated with BVRA. The
project area is depicted on the 7.5' USGS topographic map Riverside (3095-432) (Figure
3). The cover photo shows the exposed surface in the foreground and the existing plant in
the background.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area

3

Figure 3. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangle
4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The project area is located within the Austroriparian biotic province as defined by
Blair (1950) and includes the Gulf coastal plain from the Atlantic Ocean to eastern Texas.
The western boundary of this province in Texas is approximated by a line running north
from western Harris County to western Red River County. The western boundary of the
Austroriparian is also the western boundary of the main body of the pine and hardwood
forests of the eastern Gulf coastal plain (Blair 1950:99). According to Thornthwaite (1948),
these forests are limited on the west by available moisture.
The Project Area is located within the loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, and upland
hardwood plant community as defined by the United States Forest Service for the four
National Forests in East Texas. According to Ippolito (1983:6-7), the major forest cover
types in this community include loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, slash pine, post oak, southern
red oak, white oak, black oak, blackjack oak, black gum, sweet gum, American elm, red
maple, hickories, and beech. Approximately 70 percent of East Texas is currently
occupied by the Piney Woods with Post Oak Savannah and Blackland Prairie in the rest of
the region (Boyd and Howard 1988:4). Keller (1974:139-156) believes that deciduous
trees may have been more numerous during most of the Holocene and were probably
more important resources to prehistoric populations than the modern flora would suggest.
The vertebrate fauna of the Austroriparian is considered typical of that to the east.
Blair (1950:99) states that at least 47 species of mammals occur or have occurred there in
recent times. Known types include at least 29 species of snakes, 10 lizards, 2 land turtles,
17 anurans, and 18 urodeles. Ippolito (1983:11) states that there is an inadequate sample
of faunal material for the area in an archaeological context. Therefore, assumptions
concerning prehistoric exploitation of animals must be based on historical accounts and
current populations.
A study by Keller (1974:78-81) of the paleoecology of the middle Neches region lists
those mammals most likely to have been hunted in the area. They are Whitetail deer,
Cottontail rabbit, Swamp rabbit, Grey squirrel, Fox squirrel, Flying squirrel, Raccoon,
Opossum, Red fox, Grey fox, Woodchuck, Bobcat, Spotted skunk, Striped skunk, Mink,
Otter, Long-tailed weasel, and Muskrat. According to Ippolito (1983:11), this list excludes
many species of birds, especially migratory fowl, and fish that can still be found in the area.
Species not found in the area today include black bear, beaver, and wild turkey. These
were once numerous but were eradicated by uncontrolled hunting and timber harvesting
that irreparably altered their habitats. Bald Eagles nest in the general area. Since they
prefer to build a nest close to water, it is unlikely that the project area could be considered
a likely habitat for this species because the nearest dependable source of water is Harmon
Creek 1070 meters to the west. There are only about six trees in the project area, and it is
not likely that a pair of eagles would nest where humans are present on a daily basis.
5

The weather consists of hot summers and cool winters. An occasional cold front
may cause temperatures to drop below freezing, sometimes quite suddenly.The January
mean minimum temperature for Walker County is 38 degrees Fahrenheit, while the July
mean maximum temperature is 94 degrees Fahrenheit. An annual growing season of 234
days above freezing is typical. Prevailing winds are from the south-southeast. Rainfall is
uniformly distributed throughout the year, and snowfall is rare. The climatic information
was taken from the Texas Almanac: 2004-2005 published by the Dallas Morning News
(2004).
According to the Soil Survey of Walker County (McClintock et al. 1979), the project
area is located within the Falba-Almina-Arriola association. Soils in this association consist
of moderately deep and deep, sandy and loamy, nearly level to sloping soils on uplands.
In the project area the soils consist of one or both of the following types:
Elmina association, gently undulating (11)
These are deep soils on interstream divides. Emina soils have a surface layer of loamy fine
sand about four inches thick. Between four and thirty-two inches the soil is very friable,
strongly acid loamy fine sand with scattered yellowish-brown mottles in the lower part.
Clay is present to a depth of about sixty inches at which point the underlying material
changes to strongly cemented sandstone. This soil is somewhat poorly drained and has a
low available water capacity. Permeability and runoff are very slow (McClintock et al.
1979:11).
Falba fine sandy loam, 1 to 5 percent slope (13)
This is a moderately deep soil found on convex uplands. Falba soils have a surface layer
of very friable, strongly acid fine sandy loam about seven inches thick. Clay is present from
seven to twenty-four inches. Sandy clay loam appears between twenty-four and thirty-three
inches at which point the underlying material changes to tuffaceous fine sandstone. This
soil is somewhat poorly drained and is often saturated during the winter and spring months.
Permeability is very slow and runoff is medium (McClintock et al. 1979:11-12).

6

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
According to a bibliography prepared by William E. Moore (1989) and published by
the THC, the project area is located in the Southeastern Region of Texas (Figure 4). Most
of the early information for Walker County is based on projects in neighboring counties
such as the Lake Livingston reservoir study in Polk and San Jacinto counties (Nunley
1963, McClurkan 1967, 1968; Ensor and Carlson 1988), Lake Conroe in Montgomery
County (McNatt 1978; Shafer 1968; Shafer and Stearns 1975), Lake Creek Reservoir in
Montgomery County (Bement et al. 1987), and the Gibbons Creek Mine in Grimes County
(Rogers 1993, 1994). Most of the archaeological work in Walker County revealed the
presence of sites associated with the Late Prehistoric period of Texas prehistory based on
the presence of arrow points and ceramics. Sites dating to the Paleo-Indian period are
rare and are usually identified by isolated finds of early projectile points found on the
surface without a direct association of subsurface cultural materials. Sites dating to the
Early Archaic or pre-ceramic period are also rare, although examples are known. In 1985,
a statistical overview of prehistoric sites in Texas was published by the Office of the state
Archeologist (Biesaart et al. 1985). At the time of this publication, Walker County contained
no Paleo-Indian sites, three Archaic sites, and fifteen Late Prehistoric sites. This source
provides statewide, regional, and county statistics. Although it is outdated, it provides
valuable comparative data for what was known at that time and the current status of Texas
archeology. It is known that the number of recorded sites in Walker County at the time of
this study represents an increase from 18 sites in 1985 to 307 sites due to archaeological
surveys by professional archaeologists, amateur archaeologists, members of the Houston
Archeological Society, and Sandra Rogers (Steward).
Two of the earliest sites in the area are 41MQ41 and 41WA99. At the time site
41MQ41 was investigated, it represented the oldest remains recovered in the Lake Conroe
area, and Shafer and Stearns (1975) considered it to be one of the more significant preceramic sites in the area. Another probable early site is 41WA99. Shovel testing revealed
a large dart point, flakes, and no ceramics (Moore et al. 1999). Both sites are located in
the uplands and this appears to confirm an earlier hypothesis that prehistoric sites having
considerable antiquity are present on older landforms in the area. Earlier work in the area
tended to sample sites situated on more recent landforms; therefore, the materials from
these sites are relatively late. Additional evidence of early sites in Walker County is known
from a surface-collected Angostura point at 41WA116 (Moore 2001), a possible Angostura
point found on the surface at site 41WA100 (Moore 1990), and a San Patrice point found
on the surface at site 41WA83 (Moore 1983).

7

Figure 4. The Southeastern Region of Texas
(After Moore 1989)

8

Sites that can be considered pure Archaic are also not common. The mixing of
cultural materials in the sandy mantle may be responsible for making it difficult to isolate
Archaic components from Late Prehistoric components. Also, sites belonging to these
two periods are found on the same basic landforms. Late Prehistoric sites contain
ceramics and arrow points that are sometimes found in the same stratum as Gary and
Kent dart points.
Sites attributed to the Caddo are not known in the area. However, a Holly Fine
Engraved sherd found on the surface of site 41WA55 may be evidence of Caddoan
interaction in the area (Moore 1986). Sites containing artifacts that date to the time of
contact between Europeans and native Indians are also rare in the area. The project area
was part of the area inhabited by the historic Akokisa (Newcomb 1986), but no direct
evidence of sites associated with this group has been documented in Walker County. Two
sites containing artifacts associated with the historic Alabama-Coushatta have been
documented in adjacent San Jacinto County. Site 41SJ67 is the best documented
evidence of a site associated with this tribe. It yielded European-made artifacts associated
with burial that included glass trade beads, clothing decorated with glass beads, and other
burial items that date to the 1840s or 1850s (Hsu 1969).
There are several reports that discuss the archaeology of Southeast Texas and
synthesize past work in Walker County. These are a file and literature search that
assesses seventeen sites in Walker County (Fields 1979), an overview of National
Forests in Texas that includes Walker County (Ippolito 1983), a planning document
compiled by the Department of Antiquities Protection (Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993);
Roger G. Moore's (1995) Ph.D. dissertation entitled The Mossy Grove Model of Long-Term
Forager-Collector Adaptations in Inland Southeast Texas; Volume 66 of the Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society which reviews the current state of Archeology in Texas and
contains a chapter devoted to Southeast Texas (Patterson 1995); and a database by
Moore Archeological Consulting (Moore et al. 1999) created from encoding site data for all
known sites in Walker County at the time of his project.

9

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
A substantial amount of work by professional archaeologists has been carried out
in Walker County. A review of the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas revealed 92 reports
and other documents related to Walker County. These manuscripts date from the 1970s
(n=6), 1980s (n=23), 1990s (n=28), and 2000 through 2010 (n=35). The majority of
work in Walker was conducted by BVRA (n=14), Moore Archeological Consulting (n=7),
and the State Department of Highways and Public Transportation (now TxDOT) (n=6).
The first investigation in the area by professional archaeologists was associated
with the proposed Livingston Reservoir in Polk, San Jacinto, Trinity, and Walker counties in
1961 and 1962. This study was performed by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project with
assistance from members of the Houston Archeological Survey. This study recorded the
first seven sites (41WA1 – 41WA7) in Walker County (Nunley 1963).
The next large-scale survey to take place in Walker County was conducted by
William E. Moore (1976). This informal survey identified 34 previously unrecorded sites
(41WA53; 41WA55 – 41WA80; and 41WA83-41WA89). Sites 41WA74, 41WA75, and
41WA89 are located on landforms adjacent to Harmon Creek. Site 41WA89 is the closest
to the project area at a distance greater than 2000 meters. It is located on a sandy hill
about 30 feet above Harmon Creek. At the time of the visit by Moore in 1975, the area was
covered with trees and brush. Artifacts observed consisted of 1 Gary point, 1 dart point that
resembles the Gary and Kent types, 1 biface fragment, two plain ceramic body sherds,
several flakes, and a piece of manning fused glass. The two points and the biface
fragment are curated at TARL, but the location of the other artifacts is not known. The
artifacts mentioned above were found on the surface of two dirt roads in an area that had
been platted for a subdivision. It was not possible to make a statement regarding the
research potential of this site based on a single visit that did not incorporate shovel testing.
Site 41WA74 yielded numerous artifacts including dart points, arrow points, plain and
decorated ceramic sherds, miscellaneous bifaces, numerous flakes of local material, and
one flake of manning fused glass. The artifacts were found in a garden high above
Harmon Creek. It was viewed to have research potential. Site 41WA75 yielded a few
projectile points and some pottery, and not enough information was available to determine
its research potential.
James E. Corbin (1990) conducted a survey for the Riverside WSC water line
expansion project in Walker and San Jacinto counties. His methods included Pedestrian
10

Survey and shovel testing. A large portion of the project area consisted of replacement of
existing lines in already highly disturbed county road rights-of-way and little reconnaissance
was conducted in these areas. His efforts were concentrated on new line construction.
This survey involved the east side of Percy Howard Road that forms the eastern boundary
of the project area. Corbin did not report any sites or cultural materials in this area. That
part of his survey nearest the project area is depicted in Figure 3.
Roger G. Moore conducted an in-depth analysis of prehistoric sites in Walker
County and coded for distances from sites to water, site distribution by elevation above
water, and site distribution by Walker County stream codes (Moore et al. 1999:Appendix
IV). He found that sites were most likely to be found 0 to 250 meters from a dependable
water source. One site was recorded at 601-650 meters, and one site was recorded at 651
to 700 meters. No sites had been recorded at a distance greater than 700 meters.
The most recent large-scale survey to have taken place in Walker County was
conducted by Perttula and Nelson (2008). This study recorded eight sites (41WA289 –
41WA296). Seven are prehistoric and site 41WA295 contained both prehistoric and
historic artifacts. Six of the prehistoric sites are in the uplands, and two are on terraces.
The majority of the prehistoric sites were identified on the basis of lithic debris and could
not be assigned to a temporal period. The vast majority of knapping debris consisted of raw
materials that are available in local stream gravels and included quartzite, silicified wood,
and chert. The exceptions to this was a single flake of novaculite and flakes of gray (and
possibly red) chert that are believed to be non-local. Sites 41WA295 and 41WA296 yielded
ceramic sherds that date to sometime between A.D. 1000 and A.D. 1200 or later. One
sherd at 41WA296 was tempered with grog and exhibits horizontal brushing marks and
fingernail punctuations. This sherd may represent the remains of a cooking jar that was
made by a Caddo potter sometime after A.D. 1200.

11

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, the Texas Archeological Site Atlas and the files at
TARL were checked for previously recorded sites and past surveys in the project area
and vicinity. Several documents were reviewed during the planning stages of this
project. These are various contact reports, a planning document (Biesaart et al. 1985), a
bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas (Moore 1989), and all volumes of the
Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology, all published by the THC. The interested
reader is referred to these sources for additional information regarding the prehistory of
this area. The soil survey for Walker County (McClintock, Jr., et al. 1979) was reviewed
in order to identify the general soil types present in the APE.
The surface visibility was virtually 100%, and the entire site was examined for
displaced cultural materials on the surface. The subsurface was examined by one
shovel test and seven backhoe trenches (see Appendix II for specific information for the
trenches). Excavated soil was screened using ¼ inch hardware cloth. Since the soil
profiles at each trench location were fairly uniform, only one backhoe trench profile is
illustrated in this report (Figure 5). The first two trenches were dug to depths of 180 cm.
Since the sandy mantle never exceeded 32 cm, it was not considered necessary to dig
the remainder of the trenches deeper than 100 cm. Backhoe Trench 7 was terminated
at 50 cm because of buried trash. This project was documented by project notes,
backhoe trench log, and digital photographs. Photographs were taken of selected
backhoe trenches, and these are part of the records curated at the Sam Houston
Memorial Museum.
12

Figure 5. Backhoe Trench 1 Profile (facing north)

13

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The archival research confirmed that the Huntwood Plant is located in an area
where significant archaeological sites are present. Prehistoric sites in this part of Texas
are usually found on sandy hills and terraces adjacent to or in close proximity to
dependable sources of water such as rivers, streams, and springs. The nearest
recorded prehistoric site to the project area is 41WA89, and it is more than 2000 meters
from the current project area. This site is on a sandy hill overlooking Harmon Creek, one
of the major drainages in the county. The only information available for this site is a
one-time visit by William E. Moore who collected a few artifacts from the surface.
Therefore, it was not possible to make a determination regarding its significance.
No evidence of a prehistoric or historic site was found during this investigation.
The area was thoroughly investigated by a surface inspection and backhoe trenches.
Distance to water is probably the major factor in an absence of prehistoric utilization of
the project area. The nearest stream is an unnamed tributary of Harmon Creek that is
185 meters to the east. It is more likely that prehistoric groups would have chosen to
occupy landforms closer to Harmon Creek, one of the major drainages in the county,
and several such localities are depicted on the Riverside topographic quadrangle.
Based on a review of this map, it is my opinion that most archaeologists would consider
the site where the new construction is proposed to be a low probability area for a
significant prehistoric site. The sandy mantle is shallow in this area with the average
depth of fine sand loam over clay between 25 and 30 cm. Since trees with mature root
systems have been removed to provide a clearing for future construction at the
Huntwood Water Plant, it is highly unlikely that any buried cultural materials would still
be in the context in which they were deposited.

14

RECOMMENDATIONS
Since no previously unrecorded archaeological sites were found in the project
area, it is recommended that construction be allowed to proceed as planned. Should
cultural materials be exposed during any phase of the construction phase of this project,
all work must cease until the situation at the locus of the find can be assessed by the
TWDB and THC. Also, should the route of the water line or the location of any auxiliary
facilities such as water treatment plants be changed, the TWDB and THC must be
notified in case additional survey by a professional archaeologist is required.

15

REFERENCES CITED
Bement, Leland C., Rolfe D. Mandel, Jesus F. de la Teja, Dan K. Utley, and Solveig A.
Turpin
Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake Creek Reservoir,
1987
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report 97, The University of Texas at Austin.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
1985
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28, Texas Historical
Commission.
Blair, W. Frank
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
11(1):93-116.

Boyd, Douglas K., and Margaret A. Howard
Archeological Testing at 41WA97, Sam Houston National Forest,
1988
Walker County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Technical
Reports, Number 3.
Corbin, James E.
1990

Archaeological Survey of the Riverside Water Supply Corporation
Proposed Water Line Expansion Project, Walker and San Jacinto
Counties, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report Number 90-1.

Dallas Morning News
Texas Almanac: 2004-2005. Distributed by Texas A&M University
2004
Press Consortium in College Station, Texas.
Davis, Michael W., Jan Guy, Marybeth S. F. Tomka, and Daniel J. Crouch
Archeological Investigations at Huntsville Fish Hatchery, Walker
1994
County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Cultural
Resources Program. Austin.
Ensor, H. Blaine, and David L. Carlson
The Crawford Site, 41PK69, Central Trinity River Uplands, Polk
1988
County, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division, Contract Reports in
Archeology Number 4.

16

Fields, Ross C.
1979

Hsu, Dick Ping
1969

Ippolito, John E.
1983

Cultural Resources of the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston, Angelina,
and Sabine National Forests of Texas. Report submitted under
Contract No. 53-432P-8-00219 to the United States Department of
Agriculture, United States Forest Service, by the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

The Arthur Patterson Site: A Mid-Nineteenth Century Site, San
Jacinto County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Survey
Report 5.

A Cultural Resource Overview of the National Forests in Texas.
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Lufkin,
Texas.

Keller, John Esten
1974
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of
East Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula (editors)
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
1993
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.
McClintock, William R., Jr., Joseph J. Castille, Michael Stewart, and L. E. Andrew
1979
Soil Survey of Walker County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and Forest Service in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
McClurkan, Burney B.
Excavations at Livingston Reservoir – 1965 Season. Report
1967
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
1968

Livingston Reservoir, 1965-66: Late Archaic and Neo-American
Occupations. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
Number 12.

17

McNatt, Logan D.
1978

Moore, Roger G.
1995a

Moore, William E.
1976

Archeological Investigations at the Kaygal Recreation Area Site
(41WA82), Walker County, Texas. Texas A&M University,
Anthropology Laboratory, Report 44.

The Mossy Grove Model of Long-Term Forager-Collector
Adaptation in Inland Southeast Texas. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Rice University, Houston,
Texas.

Archeological Survey of Walker County, Texas. Unpublished
manuscript prepared by the author and on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

1983

A San Patrice Point from the Gourd Creek Site (41WA83) in Walker
County, Texas. Texas Archeology 27(1):4-6.

1986

A Holly Fine Engraved Sherd from the Reese Site (41WA55) in
Walker County, Texas. Journal of the Houston Archeological
Society 85:19-21.

1989

Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 31, Texas Historical
Commission.

1990

A Paleo-Indian Point from the Derrick Adams Site (41WA100), A
Late Prehistoric Site in Walker County, Texas. Journal of the
Houston Archeological Society 95:16-17.

2001

An Angostura Point from Walker County, Texas. Journal of the
Houston Archeological Society 127:6.

Moore, William E., Roger G. Moore, and Lee Nordt
An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Trinity River Authority
1999
Water Line Project, Walker County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 171.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
1986
University of Texas Press (seventh paperback printing).
18

Nunley, John P.
1963

Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Livingston Reservoir,
Polk, San Jacinto, Trinity, and Walker Counties, Texas. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project.

Patterson, Leland W.
1995
The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:239-264.
Perttula, Timothy K., and Bo Nelson
2008
Archeological Investigations of ONEOK, Inc.’s Proposed Arbuckle
NGL 16-Inch Pipeline, Spread 3, Navarro, Freestone, Leon,
Madison, Walker, San Jacinto, Liberty, and Chambers Counties,
Texas. Report of Investigations No. 93, Archeological &
Environmental Consultants, LLC, Austin and Pittsburg, Texas.
Rogers, Robert
1993

1994

Shafer, Harry J.
1968

Data Recovery of Three Prehistoric Sites at the Gibbons Creek
Third Five-Year Mine Permit Area, Grimes County, Texas. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc. Document Number 910529.
Excavations at Site 41GM224 in the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine
Permit 38A Area, Grimes County, Texas. Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc. Document Number 930476.

Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin,
Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Number 13.

Shafer, Harry J., and Thomas B. Stearns
Archeological Investigations at the Scott's Ridge Site (41MQ41)
1975
Montgomery County, Texas. Archeology Laboratory, Report
Number 17. Texas A&M University.
Thornthwaite, C. W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
Geography Review 38:55-94.

19

APPENDIX I
LETTER FROM S. CHRIS CARAN REQUESTING
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Dear Ms. Fitzgerald and Mr. Largent,
I reviewed the Texas Historical Commission's Archeological Sites Atlas
and other information. The WSC will need to complete a full EA covering the
additional project elements, including separate coordination with the required
regulatory agencies. The scope of the addenda is roughly equivalent to the
original project. The new project area is adjacent to the existing facility, but the
property is undeveloped and largely undisturbed. There are a number of known
archeological sites nearby, the closest of which is potentially significant and
located on the same landform as the proposed new construction area. This area
appears to have potential to support breeding and nesting activity by birds
protected under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act.
I have other commitments all day today (Monday) through Wednesday
and will then be out of the office the rest of this week and all of the following
week. If you wish to discuss the project I will be happy to do so during the week
of August 27. In the interim, I recommend discussions with a general
environmental consultant that has both a qualified archeologist and biologist on
staff or with archeological and biological consultants, because the project area
should be surveyed for cultural resources and wildlife. There is no need to wait
for a separate recommendation from the TWDB to the THC - the archeologist
can prepare materials and begin a dialog as part of an application for a survey
permit.
The project area is small and completion of the surveys and preparation
of the EA should not pose a significant delay or expense. Follow the TWDB's
current guidelines for preparation of EA and agency coordination. Submit the
draft EA to the TWDB for review prior to requesting reviews from the regulatory
agencies.
Best wishes

Chris Caran

APPENDIX II: BACKHOE TRENCH LOG
Backhoe Trench 1
This trench was dug in the approximate center of the site. Backhoe Trench 1
was dug 23 meters from the southern boundary and 33 meters from the eastern
boundary. At this trench, fine sandy loam was present to a depth of 32 cm
before encountering firm clay. The size of the trench was 60 cm (width) by 281
cm (length), and it was dug to 180 cm.
Backhoe Trench 2
This trench was dug 5 meters from the western boundary and 3 meters from the
southern boundary. At this trench, fine sandy loam was present to a depth of 23
cm before encountering firm clay. The size of the trench was 60 cm (width) by
268 cm (length), and it was dug to 180 cm.
Backhoe Trench 3
This trench was dug 6.5 meters from the eastern boundary and 3 meters from
the southern boundary. At this trench, fine sandy loam was present to a depth of
29 cm before encountering firm clay. The size of the trench was 60 cm (width)
by 230 cm (length), and it was dug to 100 cm.
Backhoe Trench 4
This trench was dug to the north of Backhoe Trench 3. It was placed 6.6 meters
from the eastern boundary and 3 meters north of Backhoe Trench 3. At this
trench, fine sandy loam was present to a depth of 25 cm before encountering firm
clay. The size of the trench was 60 cm (width) by 230 cm (length), and it was
dug to 100 cm.
Backhoe Trench 5
This trench was dug in the northeast corner, and in the same area as Shovel
Test 1. It was placed 3 meters from the eastern boundary and 2 meters from the
northern boundary. At this trench, fine sandy loam was present to a depth of 30
cm before encountering firm clay (same as the shovel test). The size of the
trench was 60 cm (width) by 230 cm (length), and it was dug to 100 cm.

Backhoe Trench 6
This trench was dug to the west of Backhoe Trench 5. It was placed 2 meters
from the northern boundary and 32 meters to the west of Backhoe Trench 5. At
this trench, fine sandy loam was present to a depth of 13 cm before encountering
firm clay. The size of the trench was 60 cm (width) by 230 cm (length), and it
was dug to 100 cm.
Backhoe Trench 7
This trench was at the gate to Devon Road and west of Backhoe Trench 6. It
was placed 3 meters from the western boundary, 2 meters from the northern
boundary, and 27 meters west of Backhoe Trench 6. The surface was covered
with reddish clay mixed with rock that had apparently been brought in to create a
firm surface for vehicles. Instead of a clean stratum of fine sandy loam, various
pieces of trash including a large piece of carpet were encountered. It was
decided that this was a disturbed area, and the excavation of this trench was
terminated at a depth of 50 cm. The size of the trench was 60 cm (width) by 150
cm (length), and it was dug to 50 cm.

