THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
RANCH ROAD 12 TO SAN MARCOS
PROPO
TRANSMISSION LINE
Hays County, Texas

Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulle n 56

David

Principal Investigator: David

o.

Brown

s. Dibble

A report submitted to the Lower Colorado River Authority in
partial fulfillment of the terms of a Memorandum of Agreement
dated October 25, 1982 and to the Texas Historical Commission
in conformance with the provisions of State Antiquity Permit 252
April 1982

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract . .

iv

Introduction

1

Environmental Background.

2

Survey Procedures

5

Site Descriptions

6

Conclusions and Recommendations

18

Bibliography . . . . • . . • . .

21

List of Figures
Figure 1.

Project and Site Location Map

7

List of Tables
Table 1.

Site Characteristics . . .

9

ABSTRACT
During October of 1981 the Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin, conducted an archeological
survey of 4.5 miles of proposed transmission line corridor
west of San Marcos for the Lower Colorado River Authority.
Eight new sites were recorded and three previously recorded
sites which lie aZong the proposed route were examined.
Seven of these sites are primarily lithic resource procurement
areas; four appear to be occupational or non-quarry activity
areas. AZl of the sites are essentially surficial and most
are highly disturbed by natural and recent cultural processes.
Recommendations centered upon avoidance of potentially un­
disturbed activity areas outside of the corridor.

iv

INTRODUCTION
At the request of the Lower Colorado River Authority,
the Texas Archeological Survey (The University of Texas at
Austin) conducted a cultural resource survey of a proposed
transmission line corridor west of San Marcos. The pro­
posed route, approximately 4.5 miles in length, runs from
the existing substation on Ranch Road 12 west of San Marcos
to a planned substation at Hilltop on the northeast edge of
town. The entire corridor is within Hays County.
The aims of the survey are explicitly specified in the
original proposal:
1)

a detailed inventory and evaluation of the
scientific or historic significance of cultural
resources within the corridor;

2)

an estimate of the nature of the impacts of the
project on such resources; and

3)

recommendations for lessening any adverse effects
on the identified resources.

The survey was undertaken under the authority of Anti­
quities Permit No. 252, and in accordance with the general
and specific guidelines set forth by the State Antiquities
Committee. Field survey for the project was conducted
during the latter part of October, 1981, by the author under
the supervision of the principal investigator, Dr. David S.
Dibble, TAS director. No artifacts were collected during
the survey; all site records, field notes and photographs
will be placed on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory at the University of Texas.
As a result of the survey, eight new sites were re­
corded and three previously recorded sites were revisited.
Several specific recommendations were made in order to mini­
mize potential construction impacts to the sites. These
recommendations, discussed in their site specific contexts
and repeated in the final section, were actually implemented
during the construction phase .

.

------------------------------------------­

2

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
CLIMATE
The climate of the study area is humid and subtropical ~ith
hot summers (Grimshaw 1976). Mean annual temperature is 19.9 C
(68 0 F). Mean maximum daily temperature in July is 35.6 0 C (96 0 F).
and the mean minimum daily temperature during the month of January
is 4.4 0 C (40 0 F) (Grimshaw 1976; Pass and Harris 1979). Growing
season length (average number of frost-free days) is 254 days.
Winters are generally mild, punctuated by waves of southward
moving polar air masses which may bring brief periods of sub­
freezing temperatures.
Mean annual total precipitation for San ~1arcos is 86 cm.
(33.75 in.), with peak rainfall occurring during the spring and
1a te summer-earl y fa 11. Some of thi s ra i nfa 11 is due to spri ng
and summer thunderstorms, intensified due to the orographic
effect of the Balcones escarpment, where moisture-laden gulf
coastal air masses are cooled as they are lifted up onto the
plateau. This latter effect may result in extreme rainfall
events and catastrophic flooding along and below the escarpment
(Baker et at. 1974:11).
GEOLOGY
The proposed transmission line corridor lies along the
Balcones Escarpment at the margin between the major physiographic
provinces of the Edwards Plateau (Fenneman 1931) and the West
Gulf Coastal Plain (Fenneman 1938). The Escarpment is a visible
manifestation of the most active portion of the Balcones Fault
Zone, a major Miocene fault system which stretches eastward
from Del Rio through San Antonio and San Marcos to north of
Waco (Weeks 1945; Abbott 1973). The combi ned throw of all of
the faults in the San Marcos area is about 415 meters (Grimshaw
1976). The transmission line runs parallel to one major north­
east-southwest trending fault trace along the entire length of
its western leg, while the eastern leg. from the Freeman Ranch
fence of the proposed Hilltop sUDstation, crosses a half dozen
or more fault traces (Barnes 1974; Grimshaw 1976).
BedrocK along the survey corridor is composed almost en­
tirely of Lower Cretaceous sediments which outcrop at the surface
along much of the route. Outcropping along the entire western
leg of the proposed line and perhaps along as much as a third
of the eastern segment are the hard limestones and dolomites
of the Person Formation, the upper unit of the Edwards Group
of the Comanche Series (Grimshaw 1976). In addition to being
a major aquffer, this carbonate stratum is a major source of
chert (AbDott 1973).
East of the Person Formation outcrop, the greater part
of the remainder of the transmission line is underlain by

3

various formations of the more recent Comanche Series. These
include, in order from oldest to youngest, the Georgetown For­
mation, the Del Rio Clay and the Buda Formation. The only
outcrop of Upper Cretaceous Gulf Series sediments, a small area
of Eagle Ford Formation, underlies the proposed Hilltop substa­
tion at the eastern terminus of the study area. (Grimshaw 1976)
SOILS
Soils in the project area are primarily residual, developed
in place over limestone bedrock (Grimshaw 1976). They are gen­
erally shallow, stony and calcareous. Almost three-quarters of
the transmission line is mapped as Eckrant series, previously
designated as Tarrant (Grimshaw 1976). This series is classi­
fied as a clayey-skeletal, montmorillonitic, thermic Lithic
Haplustoll (Werchan et at. 1974). These soils, with a repre­
sentative profile of 8 inches (20 cm) of dark grayish-brown
stony clay over limestone, developed under tall grass and an
open canopy of trees (Werchan et at. 1974:39).
A large part of tne remainder of the transmission corridor
crosses mapped areas of Speck series soils. This series, a
clayey, mixed, thermic Lithic Arguistoll, developed under a
cover of mid and tall grasses (Werchan et at. 1974). In the pro­
ject area, these soils occupy broad, gently sloping hilltops
of Edwards limestone and are slightly deeper than the Eckrant
series. A representative profile has 14 inches (35 cm) of non­
calcareous, reddish-brown clay over a 4 inch (10 cm) stratum
of dark reddish-brown gravelly clay which is underlain by
limestone bedrock (Werchan et at. 1974:37).
Several small areas along the eastern leg of the proposed
route are mapped as Denton, Ferris and Doss series. Denton
series soils are classed as fine, montmorillonitic~ thermic
Vertic Haplusto11s and are moderately deep, clayey soils on
gently sloping ridges and side slopes (Werchan et at. 1974).
In the project area they are mapped on a small, gently sloping
area of Del Rio Clay. Ferris series soils are fine, montmoril­
lonitic, thermic Udorthentic Chromusterts, described as deep,
clayey soils on steep, complex slopes (Werchan et al. 1974).
In the project area these soils occur on steeply sloping out­
crops of Del Rio Clay, Both of these soils developed under
grasses. No classification is available for Doss series soils
but it is described as about 11 inches (28 cm) of gravelly silty
clay over hardened limestone (Grimshaw 1976:91). In the project
area it occurs on gently sloping ridge crests of Eagle Ford
Formation sediments.

4

BIOTA
The study area 1s located within Blair's (1950) Balconian
Biotic Province, and Gouldts (1962) Edwards Plateau Vegetational
Area. Climax vegetation in the local Edwards Plateau area is
tall and mid grasses with brush and open savannah areas (USDA
SCS 1978). The major plant community in the study area is the
Oak-Juniper association. In addition to live oaks, shinnery
oaks and juniper, mesquite, cactus and xerophytic brush such
as agarita. are the predominant upper story plant types. Com­
mon grasses include sw;tchgrass. bluestems, gramas, indiangrass,
wildrye. curly mesquite and buffalograss (USDA SCS 1978).
Whitetail deer are common and an important economic re­
source in the county, Other economically important mammals
are the furbearers such as racoons, opossums, ringtail, coyote,
gray fox. nutria, skunk and bobcat. Game birds are the turkey,
quail and dove. but these are only a small fraction of the 294
species of birds reported from the county, Some of the more
interesting endemic fauna are the aquatic invertebrates which
include various ground-water and cave species, as well as a
large freshwater prawn (USDA SCS 1978),
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The early history of the archeological studies in the
Central Texas region has been chronicled by Suhm (1960). Since
that time a number of studies have attempted to refine the
cultural history of the area. Jelks (1962) confirmed the di­
vision of the Late Prehistoric Period (formerly the Central
Texas Aspect) into two phases: the earlier Austin phase (500 A.D.
- 1200 A.D.) and the later Toyah phase (1200 A.D. ~ historiC).
The earlier Archaic Period (formerly the Edwards Plateau
Aspect) has also been subjected to considerable refinement.
Johnson et aZ. (1962) first proposed a subdivision of the Archaic
into four parts: Early, Middle, Late and Transitional. Occur­
rences of even earlier Archaic assemblages prompted the recog­
nition of a Pre-Archaic Period by So11berger and Hester (1970).
These five temporal units generally equate with the five phases
proposed by Weir (1976) for the Central Texas Archaic: San
Geronimo, Clear Fork, Round Rock, San Marcos and Twin Sisters.
Within the immediate vicinity of the project area. several
archeological studies have been undertaken in conjunction with
floodwater retarding structures currently under construction
by the Soil Conservation Service. The original survey, con­
ducted by Patterson (1974) for the Texas Archeological Survey,
located 22 archeological sftes~ nine of whfch were m~rked for
further investigation, Scott and Prewitt (1976) conducted
archeological assessments at seven of these sites, They con­
cluded that two of these sites, 41HY75 and 41HY86, were eligible
for nomination to the National Register of HistoriC Places.
These two sites have been subsequently placed on the Register,

5

making a total of eight archeological and historical sites
from Hays County recorded on the National Register.
A later survey for the floodwater retarding structures
(Cole 1978) examined several borrow areas adjacent to the
study area but found no sites in these areas. The most recent
archeological work in the vicinity of the project area has
been done by Gary Moore, of Science Applications, Inc., who
directed mitigation investigations at both 41HY75 and 41HY92,
sites endangered by SCS construction activities. After com­
pletion of the mitigation, the sites were destroyed during
construction.
Three of the sites located during the Patterson (1974)
Survey extend into the present study area: 41HY74, 41HY77
and 41HY83. Her description of these sites is included in
the section of this report describing the sites located during
the survey. Because of an error in site numbering during
transfer to the permanent map files at Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, 41HY74, which is located along the route
of the transmission line corridor, was mislabeled at 41HY75,
the recently mitigated National Register site. This error has
since been rectified in the files at both TARL and the Texas
Historic Commission.
SURVEY PROCEDURES
Prior to initiation of the field survey, archeological
site files at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
were checked to determine the location and status of nearby
sites. Relevant environmental, geological and archeological
source materials were also consulted. Field survey was con­
ducted by the author. Each segment of the line was walked
twice, with special emphasis on the areas where tower loca­
tions were indicated. Sites within the right-of-way were
examined, recorded and photographed. Artifact identifications
were made i.n the field. and observed artifactual materials
were left in situ. No collections were made. In addition to
the examination of naturally exposed soil profiles where
available, several shovel probes were conducted, both on and
off of sites. All of the probes encountered rock at a depth
less than ten centimeters beneath the surface,

6

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
41HY74
This large lithic resource procurement site is located
on the top and sides of a hill southeast of the Soil Conserva­
tion Service Floodwater Retarding Structure S-3R on Sink Creek
(Fig. 1). The maximum dimensions of the site are approximately
450 m. northeast-southwest by 200 m. nort~west-southeast and
the total area is probably about 70,000 m. This site is the
northernmost of a series of six large quarry sites which follow
a natural sheet outcrop paralleling the western leg of the pro­
posed transmission line. The primary criterion used in this
survey for dividing between these sites was not material con­
centrations, but drainages; for archeological settlement pattern
studies they might be better divided into either two dozen or
so discrete activity area concentrations or one large resource
area.
Patterson (1974) initially recorded this site in her
survey of the S-3R damsite and reservoir area. Her description
is quoted below.
The site is characterized by an abundant
concentration of flint cobbles and also 1 ithic
residue from chipping activities. Limestone is
evident on the surface as well. The area is
heavily overgrown with various species of cacti
and other xerophytic vegetation, however, in areas
where there are concentrations of flint and lime­
stone the vegetation is less and the cultural
evidence is abundant. Cultural materials found
at this site include bifacia1 preforms and depleted
cores; other lithic debris was noted in the area
as well.
Reinspection of this site during the current survey con­
firmed this description: chipping debris in the form of cores,
crude bifaces and debitage was scattered about the site, appar­
ently concentrated where shallow soil and bare rock limited the
amount of vegetation. Site boundaries were revised, however,
to include a large area of low density lithic scatter on the
flat upper surface above the bluff and a slightly more concen­
trated area on the slope to the north where a portion of the
site has been destroyed by dam construction.
The limestone strata which underlie this site are tenta­
tively mapped as belonging to the Person Formation of the Edwards
Group (Grimshaw 1976). Soil along the hil1s10pe is mapped as
belonging to the Eckrant series, while the slightly deeper soils
on the crest of the hill are mapped as Speck series (Grimshaw
1976), Where there is sufficient soil, the slopes are covered
with low, brushy xerophytic vegetation and some juniper. The
crest of the hill is covered by short grasses with a few
scattered oaks and junipers,

7

...:::s
G>

-z-_

0)

.­
LL

N

..­-.,
E

t\j
iI:)

0,

.....

..,
"'"
t..,
~

~

!Ii
'i
0

I-:

