A CULTURAL RESOURCE INVENTORY AND ASSESSMENT
OF MCGREGOR GUIDED MISSILE RANGE
Otero County, New Mexico

Michael R. Beckes
David S. Dibble
Martha Doty Freeman

PART I:

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
Research Report No. 65, Part I
1977

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR
David S. Dibble
EDITOR
Solveig A. Turpin
E. Suzanne Carter
TYPING
Deborah Smith
Suzanne Meinke
Jerry Henderson
Melinda Giles
DRAFTING
Peter Sprouse
Virgina Christie
Jane Laurens
Woody (H.G.) WooZdridge
Joe Freeman
DARKROOM PHOTOGRAPHY
Christopher Williams
David S. Dibble
Virginia Christie

Submitted to the Fort Worth District, Corps of
Engineers, by the Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin, in Partial
Fulfillment of the Provisions of Contract
DACA 63-7S-C-0207

A CULTURAL RESOURCE INVENTORY AND ASSESSMENT
OF McGREGOR GUIDED MISSILE RANGE
OTERO COU~TY, NEW MEXICO
A Research Report
In Three Parts

PART I: THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE
The Prehistoric Resource
The Historic Resource
The Cultural Resource Base:
Assessment of Significance

PART II: SPECIAL ARCHEOLOGICAL STUDIES
Descriptive Report of Test Excavations
Descriptive Analysis of Projectile Points
Lithic Material From McGregor Range:
Mineral Types and Their Source Areas
Analysis of Ceramic Materials
Preliminary Technological Analysis of EZ Paso
Brownware and Design For Further Research
Osteometric Analysis of Two Human Burials

PART III: BOTANICAL & GEOLOGICAL STUDIES
The Botanical Research
Reconnaissance Geology: Implications For
The Analysis of Human Occupation

iii

PART I:

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE

Contents
THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

Miahael R. Beakes & David S. Dibble
Abstract .
Introduction .
Environmental Setting.
A Summary of Prior Archeological Research.
Research Goals .
Inventory of Prehistoric Sites .
Prehistoric Resource Summary .
References Cited •

1
1

. '.

6

·
·
•
·
·

19
25
33
63
79

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Martha Doty Freeman
Abstract • •
Introduction .
Some Apache Encounters, 1541-1850.
The Rancho de Ysleta Grant:
Early Grazing on McGregor Range .
The Military Comes to the Range, 1849.
The Ranching Boom.
The El PaSo and Northeastern Railroad:
The Basin Opens Up.
Orogrande and Sacramento City:
Boom to Bust.
Homesteaders Have Their Turn
The Military Returns, 1945 .
Summary and Recommendations.
Afterward.
Acknowledgements .
Bibliography .

· 89
• 89
· 92
.101
.105
.112
.132
.136
· 141
.155
.160
.169
.173
.175

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE:

ASSESSMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE

Michael R. Beckes and David S. Dibble
Abstract.
The Prehistoric Cultural Resources in Regional
Perspective.
Regional Research Needs and the Archeological
Resource .
Assessment of Observed Impacts and Suggested
Alternatives for Mitigation.
References Cited.
GENERAL ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

.193
.193
.196
.202
.209
.21 1

.

Figures
I-I

1-2
1-3
1-4
1-5
1-6

1-7
1-8
1-9
1-10
1-11

1-12
1-13
1-14
1-15
1-16
1-17
1-18
1-19

Location Map for McGregor Range ,
McGregor Range Project Survey Coverage.
Topography of McGregor Range.
Vegetative Zones,
Ecozones.
A. General View of Lower Tularosa Basin
B. General View of Hueco Mountains
Ecozones.
A. General View of Otero Mesa Surface
B. General View of a Canyon Segment in Sacramento
Mountains
Idealized Ecological Profile:
McGregor Range .
Site Frequency by Type.
Distribution of Site Types by Physiographic
and Vegetative Zones .
Distribution of Site Types by Physiographic
and Vegetative Zones
Site Types.
A. Rock Shelter
B. Exotic Material Cache
C. Possible Fortification, Site M493
D. Isolated Bedrock Mortar on W. edge Otero Mesa
Map of New Mexico, 1727 .
Plat of the Rancho de Ysleta.
Map of the Tularosa Basin, 1855
Map of the Country from Austin to El Paso ,
Views of Fleck's Ranch.
Views of Oliver Lee's Ranch.
Water, the Lifeblood of the Range
Langford Ranch and Sacramento City.

vi

. viii
2

5
8
13

15

· 17
· 35
· 38
, 39
43

· 95
.103
.107
· III

.119
· 127
.129
.143

Figures
1-20
1-21
1-22
1-23
1-24
1-25
1-26
1-27

continued

Homesteading in EI Paso Canyon.
Homesteading On or Near Otero Mesa.
Homesteading in the Huecos.
Views of Foster Ranch and Campbell School Flats .
Material Remains.
Fleck's Dugout.
Ellis Wright's Cabin.
Foster Ranch.

.147
.149
.151
.153
.159
.163
.165
.167

Tables

I-I
1-2

Summary of Site Attributes.
Sites Eligible for National Register.

vii

--- -

---~~-~~~-------------------

. 49
.194

."
C)

c:
::D

m

...,

I

II
I
I
I

"~

M

A

A

.AA..

/':A.
~

A

/,J\-~

_

-?\

A

~

X-A
A
A

.x:_____

t.,.

r-- - I
I

x­

j('

X'
- - -

.At­

M---­

~

-'7\

~.-A

_ -1::!,Ey<~~C.2.- _
TEXAS

-

1'(

.A

~W_MEXICO
CHIHUAHUA - - -

0y,.i ~ ---­
'us

~

I

A

-­

"

,""n

I

""-MEXICO- J

LOCATION

\~

MAP

FOR

.....
'1
Oc.

~\!
»,»

~

\....

McGREGOR

I
I

\
"IOUO '.76

I

KILOMETERS

RANGE

~

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE
MICHAEL R. BECKES
& DAVID S. DIBBLE

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

Michael R. Beckes and David S. Dibble

ABSTRACT
A sampZe intensive surpey and reconnaissance covering
34% of the McGregor Guided'Missile Range has been conducted
revealing a spectrum of temporal and functional site types
reflective of diverse exploitations of arid land ecosystems.
Structured to provide maximum input to the development of a
concise cultural resource management scheme for cultural
sites within the Range~ this investigation served to identify
those sites worthy of further investigation and critical
interpretation.
Of the 414 prehistoric sites identified in
this survey~ 22 sites are considered to hold potential for
contributing to regional diachronic and synchronic study.
INTRODUCTION
In the summer of 1975, the Texas ~rcheological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin, initiated a reconnaissance
survey of the cultural resources of McGregor Guided Missile
Range in Otero County, New Mexico (Fig. I-I) for the Department
of the Army, Fort Bliss, Texas.
McGregor Guided Missile Range
occupies approximately 693,000 acres (1,090 square mile~) of
Otero County.
The Range is primarily used for the firing of
tactical air-defense missiles and artillery, with a secondary
use for both small and large-scale surface maneuvers.
In
addition to military use, eastern portions of the Range are
leased for livestock grazing under joint administration with
the Bureau of Land Management.
Approximately five square miles
of the northern portions of the Range lie within the Lincoln
National Forest and are jointly managed by the Department of

.wl~-

-1­

."

~=

G')
C

::7:1

t

"

rn

~

f\,)

120S

~

~

-0-

McGREGOR RANGE PROJECT

~

SURVEY COVERAGE

~

,:-VI

PRIORITY AREA

SPOT COVERAGE
COHlOUa IHTUVAL .too un

---

"

DROP ZON ES

KM

__.--s

012345

MI

ARTILLERY ARC

INTRODUCTION

3

the Army and the United States Forest Service.
The range ex­
tends northeast from the Texas - New Mexico border near EI Paso
for a distance of approximately 55 miles.
It is 33 miles wide
near its northern boundary and averages about 22 miles in
width.
The reconnaissance of the cultural resources was conducted
to achieve three primary goals:
first, to implement a sampling
inventory of broad representative areas within the limits of
the range; secondly, to contribute a specific data on the type,
age, distribution, and significance of prehistoric sites within
the study area for an Environmental Impact Statement prepared
by the Fort Worth District of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
for the U.S. Army - Fort Bliss; and thirdly, to generate a body
of objective, primary data which would facilitate future,
problem-oriented research in the ~egion.
This study represents an attempt to broadly define the
character of the prehistoric cultural change within the McGregor
study area from aa. 8000 B.C. as evidenced by the survey findings.
For the purpose of the analysis, it is assumed that prehistoric
culture change:
1) is adaptive in nature; 2) can be discerned
in material cultural remains and site distributions; and 3) is
a function of both environmental and social factors.
A general description of the contemporary environment of
McGregor Range, in terms of geology, climate, vegetation, hydro­
logy, and soils, is presented in the following section entitled
The Environmental Setting.
Specialized environmental and paleo­
climatic information with an emphasis on evidence of change
through time is presented in Part III of this report.
Due to
the dynamic character of the Range environment, an understanding
of both the contemporary environment, and of such short term
changes as cyclical droughts (Part III: 95-151) or culture
related changes in vegetation distributions (Part III: 1-87), is
fundamental to the interpretation of the cultural resources.
Adaptation to the environment of McGregor Range can be described
as environmental possibilism, in which open human cultural
systems interact with the social and physical environments in
the most efficient pattern possible during a specific time
period.
A summary of the archeological background and previous
research in the vicinity of McGregor Range is presented.
An
intensive review of the pertinent literature revealed that
professional research in the study area had been quite limited
in comparison with similar parts of the southwestern Un~ted
States.
A series of interviews with local residents, ranchers,
Army personnel, local amateur archeologists, and other persons
familiar with the region supplementad the informatian gathe.red
during the literature research.
The multistage research design developed to meet the project
needs is discussed in the section entitled Research Goals.
The tactics or methods applied, and limitations of the data
thus acquired, are outlined.
A discussion of the methods and

4

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

results of limited test excavations at twelve widely separated
prehistoric sites, with supporting empirical data, and
descriptive analyses of temporally significant projectile
points and ceramics recovered during the surface survey and
the test excavations, follow in Part II: Special Archeological
Studies.
The taxonomic scheme developed to classify the wide
variety of functional and temporal site types recorded on
McGregor Range may be found in the section entitled Inventory
of Prehistoric Sites.
The definition of what constitutes a
site, as well as histograms delineating the distribution of
defined site types within all major physiographic and ecolog­
ical zones, are presented.
The analysis of the relative
frequency of all site types, in relation to each other and to
major physiographic and ecological zones, appears in chart
form.
Finally, a complete inventory of all discovered sites
is tabulated (Table I-I); specific site attributes include:
elevation, physiographic zone, ecological zone, temporal
affiliation, functional type, site size and degree of
preservation.
An atte.mpt to logically order and interpret the large
body of empirical data generated during the reconnaissance,
the se.ction Prehistoric Reaearch Summary, advances certain
preliminary observations and hypothssea regarding the special
character of pre.h.istoric cultures utilizing the atudy area from
the Folsom Period th.rough the abandonment of the area by For­
mative stage populationa.
Conclu~ions on specific aspects of
adaptive changes in human cultural responses to fluctuations
in the social and physical environment are offered for each
se.
tneooservedaoversemil1 tary--impac t on
the prehistoric resource appears in the final section of Part
I, The Cultural Resource Rase: Assessment of Significance.
Four alternative recommendations for mitigation of the ob­
served impacts are presented.
Tables summarizing the
discussion of sites deemed eligible for nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places are included.
A number
of broad suggestions for future research in the study area
are offered as a result of field work and subsequent analyses.
Specific problems in Tularosa Basin prehistory which became
apparent during this study are presented.
Two preliminary versions of this report have been pre­
viously submitted to the Department of the Army, in Dec~mber
1975 and August 1976, for inclusion in preliminary and final
environmental impact statements (Department of the Army
1976). Artifact collections, field notes, photographs, tapes
of informant interviews, and other original field documen­
tation resulting from work on that portion of the Range
controlled by the U.S. Army is currently housed at the
Directorate of Facilities Engineering, Fort Bliss, Texas.

-----------.--~

......

FIGURE

'-3

It'U

"""'iii"I

:;;

::
8
~

ii

]

...
..
i

!

~

:;:

.,...
lUI

U.
I'~

.ll:­

1:.

6

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
This section is intended to briefly characterize the
contemporary natural environment of McGregor Missile Range.
In the in teres t 0 f e f fi ciency', the presen ta t ion here is
generalized.
More complete and area11y specific data gathered
as part of our reconnaissance appears in Part III of this
report under the title "Botanical and Geological Studies".
The reader is also directed to Wyatt's (1976) study contained
in the original environmental assessment of McGregor Range.
General ecozone classifications used in this report were
derived from this appendix.
The study area falls within the southern portion of the
Sacramento section of the Basin and Range physiographic
province (Fenneman 1931).
It is a region characterized by
extensive parallel mountain chains and large intermontane
valleys and basins, often with interior drainage.
The area
lies within a broad belt of arid country stretching from
eastern-Arizona across southern New Mexico and west Texas,
which is generally referred to as the northern Chihuahuan
Desert (Clark 1973, Dice 1943, Shreve etat 1939).
While
some portions of the study area exhibit conditions represen­
tative of a true desert, most of it is higher, cooler, and
more humid than classic Chihuahuan Desert country and may be
considered as semi-desert or steppe-desert.
PHYSIOGRAPHY
The approximately 1000-square-mi1e area now encompassed
by the boundaries of McGregor Range can be conveniently
divided into four major physiographic zones (Fig. 1-3).
In
th~ south, the study area is composed of pOEtions of the
Hueco Bolson, a typical low relief intermontane basin, and
part of the Hueco Mountains, a complex of highly eroded
limestone hills which reach a maximum height of about 5600
feet above mean sea level within the study area.
The central
portion of McGregor Range is about equally divided between
segments of the Tularosa Basin or "valley floor" in the west,
and the higher flat grasslands of Otero Mesa to the east.
The
Tularosa Basin can be characterized as continuous with the
Hueco Bolson.
A precipitous west-facing escarpment ranging
from 200 to more than 800 feet in height separates the sandy
lowlands of the basin from the Otero Mesa grasslands on the
east.
Th~ presence of both mesic and xeric habitats along the
rugged pediment of Otero Mesa significantly adds to the
diversity of potentially exploitable resources available to
aborigiria1 inhabitants of the study area (see Part III: The
Botanical Research).
The entire northern perimeter of the

------- ---------

----

------

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

7

Range is defi.ned by tILe foothills and south.ern escarpment of
the Sacramento Mountains.
In this part of the study area,
the flat sandy lowlands of the central basin grade into tILe
coalesced alluvial fans and pediments of th.eSacramento foot­
hills in a complex, interdigLtated pattern. 'Rapid changes
in elevation, exposure and soil occur in relatively short
distances, again giving rise to environmental dive.rsity.
The study area can be characterized primarily as a
mountain-bounded, arid basin.
With the exception of a few
isolated, intrusive uplifted hills and buttes, the central
portion exhlbits generally low relief.
The basin landscape
is characterized by flat, sandy terrain, occasionally broken
by extensive fields of large, semi-stabilized sand dunes.
Shallow relict lake depressions, or playas, are common in the
basin.
Approaching the highlands along the eastern and
northern boundaries of th~ study area, a much greater variety
of landforms is encountered (Fig. 1-31.
The interface
.
between the basin lowlands and bordering highlands usually
consists of a sloping pediment characterized by rough
unconsolidated sediments and deeply entrench~d intermittent
stream channels.
This gives way to a complex series of
canyons and outlying ridges as the higher areas are reached.
The lower portions of the study area are currently receiving
substantial amounts of colluvial material from th.e adj acent
highlands, especially during intermittent, intense thunder­
storms.
Evidence of the extent of this depositiou is given
by King (1935) who repor t s unconsolida ted deposits to a dep th.
of 4,920 feet in an exploratory oil well near the southern
edge of the Range.
VEGETATION
Wyatt (1976) has divided the study area into five
extensive vegetative associations, or macro-zones, for the
purpose of his ecological study of McGregor Range (Fig. 1-4).
His division was found to be generally useful for an initial
consideration of arch~ological site distribution.
It consists
of the following;
Zone

Percent of the
Total Area

Sand dune/Mesquite

25%

Alluvial fan/Creosotebush

15%

Foothill draWS/Yucca-Grasslands

15%

Otero Mesa/Grasslands

35%

Mountain Canyon/Pinyon-Juniper

10%

Total

100%

."
G')

c:
::rI

m
.j:>o

~t.;: :._~~;£~ ~?,l~

..!....!!.L­
17\ S

~

VEGETATIVE

-0­

ZONES

MODIFIED AFTER WYATT (1975)

~

SANO OUNE/MESQlI/TE

ALLUVIAL FAN/CfiEO$OTE BUSH

FOOTHILL/YUCCA GfiASSLANO
MESA/GRASSLANDS
CONTOUIt

' .... UtvAL

.M

4.00 fUT

012345

""

,.

MOUNTAIN CANYO/V/PINON-';UNIPER

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

9

The utility of this system is that it allowed the distribution
of archeological sites to be viewed against a broad ecological
backdrop across the study area.
Determination of the place­
ment of a particular prehistoric site within a specific zone
was facilitated by prior oriintation of crew members by the
project botanical specialist.
Wyatt's associations can be
briefly outlined:
Sand dune/Mesquite occurs primarily in the desert low­
lands of th£ southern and central portions of the study
area.
Predominant species include dwarf mesquite
stabilizing coppice sand dunes, with soap tree yucca, sand
sage, broom snakeweed, and four-wing saltbrush in inter­
dune areas.
Alluvial Fan/Creosotebush occurs on an extensive series
of coalesced alluvial fans paralleling the Hueco-Otero
Mesa-Sacramento highlands along the eastern and northern
perimeters of the study area.
The predominant species
is creosotebush with tarbus~ ocotillo, sotal, whitehorn
acacia, Spanish dagger, cacti, and various coarse grasses
also occurring.
Mesa/Grasslands occurs atop the eastward-dipping table­
land of Otero Mesa.
The predominant vegetation consists
of a variety of grama grasses (blue grama, side oats
grama), vine mesquite, and drop seeds.
Shallow draws
and arroyos are often lined with desert willow and other
low shrubs.
Foothills/Yucca Grasslands occur primarily along the
rough breaks, pediment area of the Hueco-Otero Mesa­
Sacramento escarpments.
The rugged, broken terrain of
this area has resulted in a complex mosaic of varying
slope, elevation, and exposure which has greatly
affected the nature of floral communities in this zone.
Common species include agave, acacia, sotol, lechuguilla,
yucca, cacti, and coarse grasses.
Terraces along inter­
mittent stream channels or canyon bottoms support more
mesic species, including desert willow and Apache plume.
Mountain Canyon/Juniper occurs only along the
highest portion of the northern perimeter of the study
area at elevations approaching 6,000 feet or more ab:ove
mean sea level.
Below 6,000 feet, dry slopes and ridges
exhibit communities of parry agave, sotol, ch.olla, yucca,
acacia and sparse grasses.
At higher eleYations,
__ pinyon pine, juniper, and -mountain mahogany grow_.___

------ ----------

THE PREHIBTORIC RESOURCE

10

CLIMATE
A wide variety of climatic conditions are found within
the present boundaries of McGregor Range.
This is largely
due to the vast extent of th~ study area and to the diversity
of landforms and elevations found on the Range.
Elevations
vary from a low of about 4,000 feet above mean sea level on
the valley floor in the southwestern portion of the study
area to about 7,200 feet above mean sea level in the
Sacramento Mountains along the northern perimeter.
The
elevated tableland of Otero Mesa averages about 5,000 feet
ahove mean sea level and generally exhibits a 200 to 800 foot
relief with the adjacent Tularosa Basin floor.
Such marked
differences in relief result in equally marked contrasts in
local temperature ranges and, especially. in the distribution
of available moisture.
The present climate of the study area is typical of
many high., arid mountain-ringed basins in adj acent portions of
Arizona, Utah, and west Texas.
General climate type can be
described as continental, with hot summers and cold winters.
Local relief exerts a strong influence on the distribution
of available precipitation.
Low humidi~y and strong prevail­
ing southwest winds result in great extremes in daily
temperature. The presence of eroded petrocalcic horizons,
braided stream deposits alternating with poorly sorted mud
flows, relict and paleosol horizons, topographic expression of
old pediment surfaces and terrace strand lines, and multiple
superimposed caliche hDrizons indicate that the contemporary
climate i.s not rep1;'esentative .0£ past conditions and that
several humid/arid oscillations have occurred since the
Pleistocene (see Part III: Reconnaissance Geology).
SOILS
The development and distribution of soils over the vast.
expanse of McGregor Range p~esents a complex study in its own
right.
A complete, definitive analysis of soils is not
currently available.
Consequently. this section draws
heavily on existing i.nformati.on such as preliminary Soil
Conservation Service field data presented in the McGregor
Missile Range Environmental Impact statement distributed in
1976 (Department of Army 1976: A-9-l7 - A-9-30).
Additional
pedologic data, restricted largely to the definition of Great
Soil Groups was generated by our study team and is described
in Part III of this report.
In general, the surface sediments of the Hueco-Tularosa
Bolson are composed of reddish sands of varying grain size
and thickness. Water easily penetrates these sediments and
moisture retention is low.
In places, isolated fields of

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

11

coppice dunes occur.
These are usually semi-stabilized by
mesquite CPposopis JuZiflopa)l and sparse patches of grasses
and annuals.
Many dune fields appear largely inactive,
possibly indicating a slightly more humid climatic trend at
present.
The dune fields ar~ interspersed with areas of fine
silts and less extensive areas of fine caliche.
Occasionally,
extremely large, solitary dunes occur in the basin.
These
may more properly be termed lee accumulations since they
occur on the lee sides of isolated extrusions of volcanic
rock which protrude into the basin and trap wind-borne sand.
The basin lowlands are bordered on the east by an
extensive area of coalesced alluvial fans extending generally
westward into the basin from th~ adjacent highlands of the
Hueco Mountains and Otero Mesa.
The sediments of the lower
portion of this zone are usually composed of broad expanses
of unstructured clays, sands and gravels.
Approaching the
highlands. these border-like colluvial soils grade into
accumulations of irregular pieces of limestone rubble and
debris.
Due to the generally steep gradient and high porosity
of these deposi.ts, water retention is minimal.
In th_e intermediary canyons incising the Hueco Mountains,
Otero Mesa, and Sacramento Mountain fronts, soils tend to be
thin, poorly developed, and sparse.
Extensive areas of lime­
stone rubble and exposed bedrock are interspersed with areas
of poor soils.
Sparse vegetative cover and high gradients
contribute to rapid runoff and severe erosion during inter­
mi.ttent summer storms.
The elevated table land of Otero Mesa makes up a sub­
stantial portion of the study area.
Wyatt (1976) has
characterized the soils in the area as ".
. mixed, shallow,
overlie a limestone base, and (having) a substantial water
intake capacity." The soils are generally a light grey, fine­
textured, silty loam.
The combination of shallow, porous
soils overlying a porous limestone formation results in a
high rate of percolation, with little surface runoff or
ponding.
Soils on the mesa are easily disturbed and trans­
ported by the wind.
At elevations above 6,000 feet above mean sea level,
soils tend to be shallow, poorly developed, rocky and acidic.
High gradient again contributes to rapid runoff, but erosion
is less severe than at lower elevations because of the more
dense vegetative cover.

.1

,

cf. PPOS
8 gZandulo8a T<'>rr. var. 'i!oppeyema {Benson) M. C.
Johnst. See also Part III: The Botanical Research.

12

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-5.

The General Environmental Setting of McGregor Range

A.

A general view of the Lower Tularosa Basin

B.

A general view of the Hueco Mountains

FIGURE 1-5

A

B

14

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-6.

The General Environment Setting of McGregor Range
.--~-<::

A.

A general view of the surface of Otero Mesa

B.

A general view of a canyon segment in the Sacramento
Mountains

F IGURE 1- 6

A

B

16

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

WATER RESOURCES
As is the case in many similar arid regions, water, or
more precisely the availability of water, is the single most
critical resource to both flo't'al and faunal communities.
Pri­
mary drainage of the study area can be characterized as interior.
An extensive system of intermittent streams, washes, and
arroyos channel runoff wBter from brief, intensive summer
storms out onto the alluvial fans where it is quickly lost to
evaporation.
Precipitation, falling on Otero Mesa, or reaching
it in the form of runoff from ths adjacent Sacramento Mountains,
quickly seeps into the ground.
The same situation is charac­
teristic of the Tularosa Basin.
There, precipitation is
either quickly absorbed into the highly porous bolson fill, or
it accumulates in a number of shallow playa lake beds where it
is soon lost to evaporation.
The Sacramento River and its tri­
butaries are the major drainage in the northeastern portion of
the study area.
After issuing from the Sacramento Mountains,
it flows out onto Otero Mesa where the water either percolates
into the ground or evaporates (Department of the Army 1976).
As there are no perennial sources of surface water within
the Range, the accumulation of wBter in playa lakes, rock
cavities or tinadas was undoubtedly of major significance to
prehistoric occupants of ths area.
The series of small playas
which occur along the central valley were apparently heavily
utilized by various prehistoric groups.
Artifactual material
from th~ Folsom occupation of aa. 10,000 years ago through late
Formative materials as recent as A.D. 1300 - 1400 were discovered
in association with many of these relict lakes.
The playas
are to be found from th~ extreme southwestern edge of the study
area, northward up the basin, nearly to the Sacramento foothills.
Sediments on the floors of these low-lying areas differ
markedly from the surrounding sandy lowlands.
They are often
composed of a light gray silt with sufficient clay content to
greatly retard the absorption of water.
During brief, intense
summer storms, several playas were observed to collect water
to a depth of 12 inches.
Many of the playa lakes are presently
adjacent to extensive dune fields.
If this was the case during
the Formative occupation, the percolation of water through the
highly porous sands into the less permeable playa soils may
have added to their efficiency in catching and retaining surface
water, and to their importance to early horticulturalists.
At
present, the agricultural potential of the sediments i~ and
around these features has not been determined.
In a few in­
stances, near-surface 'deposits o£gypsum contamina,te precipi­
tation held in certain playas.
Ground water in th~ study area lies at great depths, is
hi~hly mineralized, and is of poor or marginal quality for
drinking (Department of th~ Army 1976).
There is a distinct
possibility that isolated reef or perched acquifers may have

IDEALIZED ECOLOGICAL PROFILE:
VALLEY FLOOR
SAND DUNE - MESQUITE

AND

SLOPES
I

RIDGES

ALLUVIAL FANS - CREOSOTE BUSH

II

McGREGOR RANGE
MESA

MESA, GRASSLANDS

IV

III

MOUNTAINS
I

MTN, CANYON - PINYON, JUNIPER

V

18

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

been of considerable significance to prehistoric occupants of
McGregor Range.
See Part III: 130-135 for a further discussion
of the hydrology.
CONTEMPORARY FAUNA
Faunal resources presently within the study area are quite
varied.
Larger mammals sighted during the course of the project
include mule deer, antelope, mountain lion. coyote, and bobcat.
Jackrabbits and cottontail rabbits are abundant, as are numerous
small desert rodent species.
Reptiles are common, including
Texas horned lizards as well as prairie rattlesnakes, gopher
snakes, and the western patch-nosed snake (Wyatt 1976: A-39).
Other herpetofauna identified during the survey are western
diamondback rattlesnake, desert sidewinder, and common rock
rattlesnake or barred tail rattlesnake.
The present distribution of floral and faunal communities
is not thought to be representative of conditions much before
about A.D. 1800.
Significant changes prior to the ranching
era were probably related to post-Pleistocene climatic in­
stability.
Major alterations in the type and distribution of
plant species in the lowlands of the central basin is generally
attributed to the effects of overgrazing of the native grasses
in the period 1880-1920 (see Part III: 39-47) (Gardner 1951;
Buffington and Herbal 1965; York and Dick-Peddie 1969).
The
distribution and abundance of potentially useful plant and
animal species during the various aboriginal occupations of the
study area are not completely understood.

PRIOR ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH

19

A SUMMARY OF PRIOR ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
A review of the available archeological literature for
the greater Southwestern Culture area provides a general out­
line of the prehistoric cultures thought to have inhabited
south central New Mexico anad adjoining portions of Texas.
Little information exists which deals specifically with the
area now encompassed by McGregor Range.
The following comments
are intended to provide a general cultural framework of the
prehistory of the study area, and are drawn from studies of
adjacent or comparable areas (Cosgrove 1947; Lehmer 1948;
Wendorf 1954, 1960; Irwin-Williams 1965, 1968; Judge 1973;
Henderson 1976).
The 1973 Survey of the Tularosa Basin report
by Human Systems Research is an invaluable source of basic
archeological and ethnohistorical information from a regional
perspective - specifically, the Tularosa Basin and its environs.
In addition, reports of the survey and excavation efforts of
the El Paso Archeological Society (e.g., Brook 1966, 1967;
Phelps 1966; Hammersen 1972; Bilbo 1976) proved to be of great
assistance, particularly those which represented work in the
immediate study area.
The earliest well-documented evidence for prehistoric man
in this part of New Mexico can be ascribed to nomadic hunters
of the Paleoindian culture.
Radiocarbon dates from well­
preserved Folsom sites in adjacent states and other parts of
New Mexico tend to cluster about 10,000 B.P.
A previously
known Folsom site in the vicinity of the Range was defined on
the basis of diagnostic projectile points located in a deflated
area near a playa in the Tularosa Basin lowlands (Quimby and
Brook 1967: 31).
In addition, several private collectors and
amateur archeologists in the El Paso area indicate that isolated
occurrences of Folsom artifacts have been found near relict
lakes in the immediate vicinity of McGregor Range.
This
apparent association of Folsom sites with formerly existing
water sources is maintained on McGregor Range.
This may reflect
the distribution of large extinct bison species which are
thought to have been the main prey of Folsom hunters.
The
finds tentatively assigned to the Paleoindian period on McGregor
Range are apparently residues of short duration camps, mostly
located in areas of slightly greater relief adjacent to relict
playas in the lower basin.
Folsom culture is thought to have been an outgrowth of
the earlier Clovis period and to have been adapted to a late
Pleistocene environment (Irwin-Williams 1965; Brolio 1971).
It
has been further suggested that changing glacial-pluvial
climatic conditions could conceivably have attracted Folsom
hunters from the High Plains - more central to the known dis­
tribution of Folsom material - into the area which includes
McGregor Range.

20

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

By about the beginning of the eight~ millenium B.C. this
portion of southern New Mexico began to be occupied by a
series of late Paleoindian cultures known primarily on the basis
of distinctive projectile poipt styles.
Like the cultures of
the preceding period, these groups seem to have been well
adapted to the exploitation of big game animals.
Cultural
materials tentatively assigned to this period are defined by
the presence of large laneeolate projectile points (see Part
II for the description of the diagnostic artifacts from Mc­
Gregor Range).
Most of the specimens found on the Range were
recovered from deflated surface contexts in the lower basin,
often in association with relict lake systems.
It is likely
that this pattern of site distribution reflects a reliance of
exploitable game species on formerly existing water sources,
with a concomitant effect on the distribution of the hunting
populations.
Continued post-Pleistocene climatic dessication
of this part of the Southwest wa.s apparently a primary environ­
mental stressor acting upon these groups (Martin 1963; Haynes
1965; Irwin-Williams and Haynes 1970).
With continued climatic alteration, the environment of
the southern Tularosa Basin began to more resemble that presently
found in the McGregor Range area.
From various parts of the
Southwest prehistoric cultural remains dating from about 7000­
6000 B.P. indicate a marked shift in subsistence patterns.
While archeologists and paleo-climatologists are far from
reaching a consensus on specific aspects of this shift, there
is general agreement on some of its basic attributes.
The
cultural stage developed after the onset of this presumed climatic
shift is often referred to as the Archaic or Desert Archaic
(Jennings 1'57).
Throughout New Mexico and adjacent parts of
Arizona, Utah, and Texas, it is interpreted as a shift towards
a more diverse exploitative pattern.
The Archaic Period is generally considered to have lasted
approximately 5,000 years, although no definitive chronology
referable to this region has been developed.
The more diverse
exploitation patterns adopted during the Archaic should not be
seen as a sudden innovation or disruptive event. :Rather, it
probably developed gradually over time in response to continued
climatic ch.ange and concomitant fluctuations in type and avail­
ahllty of floral and faunal resources.
Evidence for such a
climatic modification in the Carlsbad area of southeastern New
~~_~ex:Lf.o has ~een dif):<:,:t,lssed--.!'.ecently by Henderson (l976~-,__<,-;-~-.:<~_«««< ~~~ __ _
The~idea that the exploitative tech-niques which are c ar­
acteristic of the Archaic are of considerable antiquity is
supported by radiocarbon dates from the Sulphur Springs stage
of the Cochise Culture in southwestern New Mexico and south­
eastern Arizona (Sayles and Antevs 1941).
These dates range
from ea. 9350 to 8300 B.P. (Irwin-Williams 1968), and are
associated with an apparently well-developed plant resource
processing tool kit.
This suggests both that the early hunting

PRIOR ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH

21

cultures may not have been as limited in their subsistence
strategy as is sometimes thought, and that a body of more
varied exploitive techniques was already in existence at an
early da,te.
As more diverse subsist~nce systems became established
throughout the Southwest, a number of changes appeared in the
material culture remains.
Such systems necessitated a seasonal
movement over the landscape, with group movement scheduled
to coincide with differences in availability of floral and
faunal resources.
In areas exhibiting the degree of relief
and ecological diversity common on McGregor Range, such move­
ments probably followed a transhumance pattern from the valley
floor to higher elevations and back again.
Rockshelters and
caves were probably occupied sequentially, and visited season
after season once the cycle became established.
In the present study area a variety of sites have been
located which can be assigned tentatively to the Archaic Period.
All are characterized by an absence of ceramic materials, by
the presence of known or suspected Archaic projectile point
styles, and by the presence of a variety of ground stone arti­
facts.
These sites tend to be relatively small and to exhibit
a wide distribution throughout the various physiographic zones
in the study area.
Several rockshelter sites of potential sig­
nificance were discovered by our reconnaissance of McGregor
Range, in addition to a wide variety of non-ceramic open sites.
Further systematic and intensive study of this type have the
potential to expand our understanding of the Archaic in
southern New Mexico in terms of its span and variability.
In
this region, the Archaic is the least understood period.
Re­
sources available for its study are therefore of special
scientific significance in terms of what is now known of the
regional culture history.
Much of the present data on late Archaic or transitional
cultures in the vicinity of McGregor Range have been derived
from sites in the Hueeo Mountains.
This area, some of which
lies within the present Range boundary, has received a sub­
stantial amount of study, due primarily to the excellent
preservation conditions present in many dry caves and rock­
shelters.
The culture defined from the data recovered over a
number of years of study has been termed "Hueco Cave Dweller"
(Sayles 1935), "Hueco Basketmaker" (Cosgrove 1947), or- "Hueco
Phase" (Lehmer 1948). Lehmer views the culture 80S a late
Archaic manifestation of a widespread basic Cochise pattern,
with affinities to cultures in southwestern New Mexico ~nd
southeastern Arizona (1948: 73). Wheatfs (1955) interpretation
suggested a much stronger relationship between Hueco Phase
materials and cultures related to those in the Big Bend region
of Texas, and disagreed with the concept of an ancestral
Cochise base.
Kelley (1966) believed that Lehmer's Hueco Phase
was related to, or part of, a poorly defined series of cultures
ranging throughout the Sangre de Cristo, Sacramento, Franklin-

t

22

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

Orggn,
and Guadalupe Mountan chains.
The regional emergence of sedentary, agricultural popu­
lations is not well understood.
Lehmer (1948) carried out a
number of excavations and suryeys in and around the Tularosa
Basin which enabled him to develop a general chronological
framework for the region.
His basic culture unit definitions,
particularly as they relate to the definition of phases within
the sedentary cultures of the region, still provide the basis
for current treatments of culture history.
Although the ab­
solute dating of these phases is currently the subject of con­
siderable debate, his unit definitions are still widely
utilized in discussions of regional Formative stage populations.
According to Lehmer, the generalized hunting and gathering
cultures of the Hueco Phase had adapted a sedentary lifeway
from more advanced Puebloan groups in the Rio Grande valley by
ca. A.D. 900 (1948: 77).
He terms this the Mesilla Phase of
his Jornada Branch of the Mogollon.
The Mesilla Phase is
characterized by small pithouse villages of square or circular
dwellings located near major water sources.
The most common
ceramic type is El Paso Bro~n~are.
Some intrusive styles in­
clude Mimbres Black on White and San Francisco Red from the
Mogollon colonies in the Rio Grande Valley (1948: 76).
The material culture of the Mesilla Phase groups shows
enough similarity to Hueco Phase assemblages for Lehmer to
have postulated a direct development from the Hueco Phase
through the Mesilla.
Little botanical reconstruction has been
carried out in the region, but recent work at Fresnal Shelter
in the Sacramento Mountains suggests that maize had been intro­
duced to the area at a very early date (Wimberly and Eidenbach
1972).
Presumably the development of an agricultural subsis­
tence base was incremental and slow.
In summarizing the period, Lehmer states: f l .
.the Mesilla
Phase was a continuation of the Hueco Phase with the distin­
guishing traits, architecture and pottery derived from the
Mimbres Branch via the San Marcial Phase.
It is the first
pottery making, village dwelling horizon in south central New
Mexico, and left a definite cultural tradition which lasted into
the later phases in the area" (1948: 78).
Aten's (1972: 21)
research at the Northgate site near El Paso produced radiocarbon
dates (TX-1940 - A.D. 800-850, TX 1451 - A.D. 750+70) suggesting
that the Mesilla Phase started somewhat earlier than Lehmer's
original estimate.
The data collected by Aten suggests a
Mesilla Phase origin ca. A.D. 800-850.
Further study a~
several of the Bro~n~are sites discovered on McGregor Range
could greatly refine the chronological framework of the Jornada
Branch.
The Do~a Ana is the most poorly defined of Lehmer's phases,
due largely to the lack of excavated sites.
Several sites ten­
tatively assigned to the Do~a Ana Phase on the basis of pottery
types were located on McGregor Range.
Further study of these

-------

---

~-------------

---------- - - - - - -

---------

----

PRIOR ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH

23

sites has the potential for refining our understanding of the
key "transitional" phase in southern New Mexico.
In the succeeding El Paso Phase, the Jornada Branch
Mogollon cultures of the region reached their g~~atest develop­
ment.
Lehmer interprets the transition from Dona Ana to EI
Paso Phase (ca. A.D. 1150-A.D. 1250) as a crystallization and
intensification of traits already present in the complex (1948:
80).
In the EI Paso Phase, pit houses were abandoned totally
in favor of above ground rectilinear or multilinear pueblos
ranging in size from 10 to more than 100 rooms.
Most structures
were oriented along an east-west axis, although some were built
around central plazas.
Sites ascribed to the El Paso Phase are numerous on Mc­
Gregor Range.
They tend to be located in areas of the basin
lowlands where extensive fields could be maintained by a water
control technology similar to that in use in the Mimbres Valley.
It must be emphasized here, hnwever, that no direct evidence of
control structures were observed during our reconnaissance.
Such sites are characterized hy very dense concentrations of
broken ceramics; large village middens; and in two instances,
at M-410 and M-377, the presence of the remnants of adobe walls
visible from ground level.
Small-scale test excavations at a
large EI Paso Phase site, the Escondida site (M-4l0), on the
northern portion of McGregor Range, yielded a charred roof beam
which was uncovered in situ on a packed adobe floor and pro­
duced an uncorrected date of A.D. 1260+70 years (TX 2341) (see
Part II: 30-36).
­
A poorly understood comb~nation of environmental fluctua­
tions, possibly coupled with the movement of intrusive popu
lations from the north, led to a marked decline in the Mogollon
cultures of this area.
By A.D. 1375-1400 the lower Tularosa
Basin seems to have been vacated by sedentary Indians (Lehmer
1948: 86).
There is some evidence that the relatively large
populations, indicated by numerous large EI Paso Phase sites,
may have been reduced by a series of disastrous droughts and
a continued trend towards a more erratic rainfall pattern.
The
remnants of the sedentary populations once common to the Basin
eventually may have moved to the north and south, where they
added to the populations of large villages like Gran Quivira of
the Jumano villages (Sauer 1934).
Schroeder (1960, 1973) has studied in detail the Mescalero
Apache occupation of the region of which McGregor Range forms
a part.
Initial contact by Europeans with Apache groups in the
region were reported by Spanish chroniclers in the sixteenth
century. Mescalero groups continued to include the area in
their range of occupation until the creation of a reservation
in the late nineteenth century.
It is possible that certain
archeological sites or site components discovered during the
survey on the Range are the results of Mescalero or other
Apachean groups.
At present~ h.owever, no localities can be

24

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

attributed with any degree of confidence to such a derivation.
Early historic use of the Tularosa Basin area was limited.
The Spanish and sedentary Indians who settled around present­
day El Paso to the south apparently avoided the area to the
north and east, including the' present location of McGregor
Range.
Currently, archeological investigations in the region,
stimulated largely by the activation of a vigorous program of
cultural resource management by the U.S. Army, promise to add
greatly to our knowledge of prehistory in southern New Mexico.

25

RESEARCH GOALS
A number of project goals were established at the beginning
the survey.
The most important was to carry out a pre­
liminary sampling inventory of the archeological and historical
resources of McGregor Range; to provide preliminary information
on the type, age, location and significance of identified sites,
broadly distributed a·cross the study area.
Detailed observations
on the state of preservation and security of discovered
sites was necessary for future cultural resource management and
planning at the Range.
Those areas where current or past
military activity adversely affecting identifiable resources
could be demonstrated (e.g.~ missile impact zones, maneuver
areas or military construction), and areas where future adverse
impact could be reasonably foreseen, were given priority in
the intensive survey effort.
A secondary, but no less important, goal of the survey
was an attempt to discover data which could increase and refine
the limited understanding of regional cultural history and
chronology in this part of southern New Mexico.
In addition,
data were sought which would address the problem of delineating
the nature of long-term adaptive changes in aboriginal
cultures inhabiting the study area.
The approach was necessarily
conservation-oriented; and is viewed as a preliminary step in
a continuing program of archeological ahd historical research
at Fort Bliss.
The first step in approaching the McGregor Range survey
was to carry out a thorough review of the existing archeological
and h~storical literature.
This review revealed that the area
encompassed by th.e McGregor boundaries had received relatively
little professional attention.
However, findings in comparable
and adjacent areas generally helped to define the outlines of
the present study area.
The relative lack of comparative materials, the resource
management orientation of our reconnaissance, and the very real
problems of access, logistics, and crew safety associated
with explorations on an active guided missile firing range,
all affected, to one degree or anoth~r, th~ development of the
research plan.
It was imperative to strike a balance between
what was desirable and practical under the special conditions
of the project, and what was theoretically possible unde:.r more
normal field conditions.
A survey crew consisting of a Project Director, a Field
Supervisor, three survey Team Leaders, and seventeen crew
members was assembled.
Special skills represented in the crew
included cartography and field photography.
In addition, two
experienced geomorphologists, a botanist, a field lab super-'
visor, and an historian provided specialized ancillary data
and skills.
Th.is taam performed the initial 17 week reconnais ....
sance in 1975.
~f

- - - - - - _.... _ - - _ ..

_ _ .._ - - - _........ _ ­

26

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

Field work in the study area totaled 26 weeks; the basic,
most extensive observations were carried out over a 17 week
period in June through October 1975.
Subsequent work, primarily
the limited subsurface testing and additional surface survey,
was accomplished in November and December of 1975. A period
of 5 weeks with reduced crews, was spent in July and August,
1976 filling in known or suspected gaps in the previous season's
work.
PHASE I
The first portion of the multistage research plan developed
for the McGregor survey was exploratory in nature.
It was
designed to provide preliminary field data for use in developing
more specific guidelines for subsequent stages of the project.
This phase included efforts along four major lines of inquiry.
The first step was a basic exploratory survey designed to
familiarize the crews with the study area, and to produce pre­
liminary data on the nature of environmental and cultural
variability across the Range.
Prior research enabled a division
of the study area into a number of different physiographic areas,
broadly defined ecological zones (Wyatt 19]6), and soil
associations.
Examination of the archeological literature and
discussions with local residents and military personnel revealed
the existence of several sites which warranted preliminary
examination.
The survey crew was divided into small, mobile, three-to­
five person teams.
These were assigned the task of carrying
out a program of widely dispersed spot checks or "grab-samples"
throughout the Range area.
This effort was intended to
determine the accuracy and utility of Wyatt's (1976) ecozone
scheme, to test the accuracy of existing soil and geologic
maps, and to acquaint the personnel with the various types of
cultural remains which might be found in the area.
In addition,
this activity resulted in the recording of a number of pre­
viously unknown sites.
Close examination of topographic maps and aerial photo­
graphs, including low angle oblique shots, enabled us to direct
the mobile crews to areas whexe evidence of prehistoric activity
was vis ible from the air Ci. e. susp ec ted wall depr essions or
hearths}.
Areas show~ng signs of severe recent impact or ex­
posure due to military action, and areas with particular topo­
graphic features commonly thought to be productive of sites,
for example, potentially inhabitable rockshelters, were given
particular attention during this preliminary reconnaissance.
Th_is apparent bias, of looking for si tes where local infor-­
mation, literature references, or field judgement indicated
they might be, was counterbalanced by an equally strong effort
to cover areas where no sites were expected, or about which we
had no preconceptions.
Widely dispersed locations where topo­

------------

RESEARCH GOALS

27

graphic features, hydrology. or exposure characteristics did
not seem conducive to prehistoric use were examined in an
effort to field test these generalizations.
In addition to the discavery of a substantial number of
previously unknown sites, and' th~ investigation of several
locally known sites, this effort provided us with crucial
preliminary information on the range of variability in site
types and exposure characteristics w~thin the study area.
The
dynamic nature of the McGregor landscape became more evident
after a month of intensive fieldwork.
Finally, this activity
allowed us to make a series of first hand observations of
site impact and site preservation affected by a wide variety
of military exercises across the expanse of the study area.
A second line of enquiry. consisting of a widely dis­
persed geological and botanical survey. was pursued while the
initial archeological field work was underway.
This was
intended to provide specialized field data to be used in the
design of subsequent stages of our overall effort.
One of the underlying tenets of our survey project was a
belief in the utility of viewing the prehistoric population as
an integral part of a dynamic ecosystem in the arid and
diverse environment.
Th~refore, particular attention was
directed to opeationalizing Wyatt's (1976) ecosystem scheme
for the delimiting of archeological site distribution.
At the
same time. geological studies were carried out as a means of
assessing certain environmental factors which may have affected
site location, distribution and density; it was also considered
important to have a basis for estimating how natural processes
may have differentially affected site visibility and preser­
vation.
Helicopter support provided by the base commander proved
to be invaluable as an aid to site location.
A significant
number of potentially important archeological sites were
observed from the air, or on the photographs taken during the
flights.
Whenever possible, landings were made to check
apparent evidence of prehistoric activity.
This technique
proved especially useful in directing ground crews to potential
site locations in the more inaccessible areas of the Bueco
Mountains and Sacramento foothills.
A lack of heavy ground
cover, good atmospheric conditions, and excellent pilots all
contributed to the productivity of th~s part of the survey.
Phase I lasted six weeks.
Upon completion of this explo~
ratory effort, the preliminary data was reviewed by the' Proj ect
Director and Field Supervisor, with specific input from the
Survey Crew Leaders.
Additional specialized information pro­
vided by the various consultants was reviewed.
Strategies
derived from the preliminary information on the type, density,
and distribution of prehistoric and historic sites in portions
of the study area were discussed and considered in light of
the environmental data and our specific project orientation.

28

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

The necessity of striking a balance between dispersed spot
coverage and intensive concentration on large areas of proven
site density where documented or predicted adverse military
impact had occurred and was ~ccurring did not support the use
of a purely random selection for systematic, intensive ground
coverage.
Nor did the on-going missile and weapons firing,
which eliminated areas on the Range from observation.
To
elaborate on this point let us consider the definition.
"A
random sample is one that is selected so that each and every
available elementary unit of the population has the same pro­
bability of being included" (Chao 1969.; 123).
When the "popu­
lation" is the entire ground surface of a guided missile range
in which portions are inaccesible for security reasons or
serve as active impact areas, a purely random approach is
impractical and hazardous to apply.
Allowances for crew safety
meant that certain areas were available only for short-term,
opportunistic spot coverage rather than systematic viewing.
Consequently, a coordinated plan. allowing intensive concen~
tration of survey effort in areas of greatest suspected
density and greatest susceptibility to adverse impact, coupled
with a continued widely dispersed scheme of extensive spot­
coverage was developed.
It was clearly understood that such
a non-random approach would not produce statistically predictive
data.
However, it was felt that intensive examination of a
sizeable portion of the study area supported by widely dis­
persed extensive survey efforts would allow the formulation
of substantive judgemental statements on areas not surveyed.
These discussions led to the development of a pragmatic
research plan, tailored to the specific goals of our project and
to the special conditions under which the study was assumed.
PHASE II
In Phase II the widely dispersed exploratory approach
of the preceding stage was supplemented with systematic
intenSive-study of six quadrats, or "priority areas".
The
selection of the priority areas was non-random, in that four
of the six quadrats were specifically placed in areas of
known site frequency and demonstrated past military impact.
The remaining two quadrats were located partially on the
basis:of observed degradation of the prehistoric cultural
resource by vandalism or recreation associated erosion"(e.g.,
off-road vehicle use by hunters, or campers, and recreational
use of trail bikes). Most importantly the location of these
two quadrats cross-cut the area of greatest relief~controlled
ecological diversity in the area, and facilitated our effort
to gain a sample of variability in the defina6le natural
areas.

29
REJSEJARCH GOALS

QUADRAT I
Loc: Hueco Mountain Complex
Area: 36 square miles
Phys. Zone: Hueco Mountains
Ecozones: Alluvial Fan Terrace
Yucca/Grassland
Mesa/Grassland
Relief: 4480 ft. to 5780 ft. M.S.L.
QUADRAT III
Loc: Tularosa Basin Complex
Area: 36 square miles
Phys. Zone: Tularosa lowlands/Playas/
Buttes
Ecozones: Alluvial Fan Terrace
Relief:

4000 ft. to 4365 ft. M.S. L.

QUADRAT V
Loc: Otero Mesa Complex
Area: 36 square miles
Phys. Zone: Otero Mesa
Ecozones: Yucca/Grassland
Mesa/Grassland
Relief:

~

~

~~~~~~--

~

4367 ft. to 5415 ft. M.S.L.

-----~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

-~

~~~--~--~~~~~~~~

QUADRAT II
Loc: Tularosa Basin Complex
Area: 36 square miles
Phys. Zone: Tularosa rowlands/Playas
Ecozones: Mesquite/Sand dune
Alluvial Fan Terrace
Yucca/Grassland
Relief: 4400 ft. to 4757 ft. M.S. L.
QUADRAT IV
Loc: Sacramento Complex
Area: 36 square miles
Phys. Zone: Sacramento foothills/Canyons/
Alluvial Fan Terrace
Ecozones: Yucca/Grassland
Pinon-Juniper
Relief: 4600 ft. to 7000 ft. M.S.L.
QUADRAT VI
Loc: Sacramento/Otero Mesa Complex
Area: 36 square miles
Phys. Zone: Sacramento Foothills/Otero
ECQzones: Mesa/Grassland
Yucca/Grassland
Pinon-Juniper
Relief: 5000 ft. to 6600 ft. M.S.L.

Mes~

30

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

The first step was the definition of six townsh,j.p:::si.zed
(6x6 mi.) quadrats, or priority areas.
These intensive-study
areas were located, in four instances, to coincide with high
military impact zones and probable high site density; they
were designed to include substantial areas where variety of
major ecological and topographic zones within the four major
physiographic areas of the Range could then be demonstrated.
The intensive-study quadrats included portions of all major
physiographic and ecological zones previously defined on Mc­
Gregor Range and were sufficiently large to allow working
hypotheses on the distribution and density of sites within
their boundaries.
The six priority areas were defined in the field by
surveyed corner stakes and azimuth sigh~ings with a pocket
transit to known landmarks. As much of the total area with~n
a quadrat as was feasible was intensively and systematically
examined.
Ideally, in open areas of low relief this was ac­
complished by spacing surveyors along a line at 30-70 meter
intervals which allowed visual overlap in ground surface
examination between adjacent surveyors. Vis'ual examinations
of the ground surface were made as the surveyors moved across
a particular section of a quadrat.
In more rugged areas survey
crews split into smaller teams to inspect individual canyons,
ridges, drainages, etc.
Orientation was facilitated by th,e
use of standard Department of Defense topographic ~aps
furnished by the U.S. Army as a scale of 1:50,000.
These maps
are based on the Universal Transverse Mercator grid system and
are broken down into a one kilometer grid intervals.
As work
proceeded in a quadrat, locational control was maintained by
multiple sightings to known landmarks.
Coverage estimates
were based on percentage of specific one square kilometer grid
units examined in a given quadrat.
Weekly reports of coverage
were submitted along with regular field logs, field survey
forms and maps. Making allowance for lapses of coverage due
to human error, problems of access due to military activity,
and discounting such topographic features as vertical cliff
faces (lacking shelters or rock art) good coverage of the land
area within each priority quadrat was gained.
As is always the
case, human error is occasional in any inspection of this sort.
Individual variation in ability to perceive features of archeo­
logical interest is always significant.
Expressing this approxi­
mation numerically, it is estimated that 80 to 90% of t~e
surface area of each quadrat was examined.
Over 300 previously unknown archeological and historic
sites were located and recorded during Phase II.
The sites were
located, mapped, photographed and recorded on standardized
University of Texas Site Survey forms.
Detailed observations
on the condition and potential security of each site were made.
Generally small surface collections were made to facilitate
the temporal or functional placement of a site and to aid in

---~

31

RESEARCH GOALS

determination of prehistoric site variability.
The total area
intensively examined within the priority area is 216 square
miles, or 19.8% of the total Range area of nearly 1,090 square
miles.
A second aspect of Phase II was the continuation of the
wide ranging series of spot-checks initiated at the start of
the field season.
These were designed to fulfill several
important functions.
First, this procedure added a substantial
number of previously unknown sites to the preliminary inventory.
In addition, it allowed the expansion of our surface coverage
by approximately another 15% of the total Range area and en­
abled us to monitor the effects of a variety of military
activities scattered over the Range and not observed within
the basic quadrats, and included opportunistic checking of
portions of intensive military use.
This procedure also proved
to be quite efficient in providing a separate body of field
data against which the working hypotheses and apparent patterns
of site density and distribution emerging in the intensive study
quadrats could be further evaluated.
Finally, this activity
allowed new ideas concerning the nature of site variability
from very large areas of the Range to be compared.
Information
derived in this manner, however, is of limited usefulness in
quantitative comparisons.
The geographic extent of the combined quadrat sampling
and spot checking is illustrated on a small scale in Figure
1-2.
This procedure allowed for observation of the great
majority of that portion of the Hueco Mountains and pediments
on the Range (Quadrat I plus spot checks); large portions of
the Tularosa Basin lowlands (Quadrats II and III plus spot
checks); the Otero Mesa-Tularosa Basin interface (Quadrat V
plus spot checks); Otero Mesa (southern portion of Quadrat
VI plus spot checking of significant stream corridors including
EI Paso Draw, End-of-the-Line Draw, Mack Draw, Castner Draw,
and the Sacramento River); Sacramento Mountain Complex (Quadrat
IV and the northern portion of Quadrat VI plus spot checks of
major canyons and canyon sides entering the Range area,
including Ellis Wright, Bug Scuffle, Culp, Grapevine, El
Paso (upper portion), and Sacramento River canyons).
The
Sacramento foothills and high elevations within the northern
Range boundary were sampled by quadrats and spot checks.
Marked
U.S. Army topographic quadrangle maps showing the extent of
the spot checks have been provided to the U.S. Army - Fort
Bliss.
The general distribution of sites discovered, both
historic and prehistoric, are illustrated at small scale in
Figure II-I.
Phase II was mostly completed in December, 1975, with the
formal small-scale testing of twelve sites (see Part II: 3-39).
Additional work associated with this testing program was done
in the period of July and August, 1976.
Sites selected for
testing were spread throughout all major physiographic zones:

......

-~~.~----~~-

.....

-~.~.-~

.....

-~.~.--

.....

......

_._-_......_ - - ­

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

32

Sacramento Mountains (three sites); Otero Mesa (one site);
Tularosa Valley (five sites); and the Hueco Mountains (three
sites).
The extent of subsurface testing is considered .minimal in
that it represented such a small proportion of the total sample.
Certainly, these efforts did not satisfy the need for exploratory
exposure perceived at the end of Phase I.
The final selection
was based on basic information requirements - particularly those
related to site depth, internal structure, evidence for post­
depositional modifications, states of preservation, or site
content.
PHASE III
Phase III, the final aspect of the project, consi~t~d of
intensive laboratory analyses of selected materials gathered
during the primary field season.
The technical reports re­
sulting from this effort appear as sections to this report.
These analyses and a review of field documentation revealed
several areas where further surface survey was necessary.
This continuation of the survey for a five week period in July
and August 1976 was directed toward specific areas of the study
area where missile firing or artillery use had previously
curtailed our movement, or where other lapses of coverage had
been sensed.
As noted, collection of surficially exposed artifacts and
miscellaneous cultural residues was light, and usually taken
in a unidirectional linear transect across the site surface.
Ceramics represented the bulk of this sampling and averaged
well under 100 sherds per defined Ceramic Period site.
The
nature and systematics of the collecting was noted on the
original site survey forms.
In retrospect, some of the collecting
was probably too heavy for the purposes of this inventory.
However, in all but a minority of cases it is felt that the
existing integrity of surface exposed concentrations was not
seriously impaired.

33

INVENTORY OF PREHISTORIC SITES
INTRODUCTION
The sampling inventory cerried out on McGregor Range has
resulted in the discovery for further delineation and assess­
ment of 414 sites of aboriginal origin.
Although a number of
these localities were known and documented in existing site
record files or in brief published form, the great majority were
unreported.
The designation of "site" as used during this study, is
not so rigidly restrictive in the quantitative sense but adheres
generally to such definitions as HThe site is a spatial cluster
of cultural features or items or both" (Binford 19641, or even
more simply lIa spatially definable locus of human activity".
Obviously, the designation of naite lt under such a relatively
non-restrictive definition necessitates a judgmental evaluation
beyond that of simply counting th.e numbers of artifacts or
other cultural residues occurring within an arbitrarily estab­
lished unit of space. A recently reported archeological
survey provides an example of the latter practice by defining a
site ".
.at minimum, as five artifacts per square meter"
(Donaldson 1975: 3). Although such an approach admits to a
degree of consistent application this sort of criterion is not
suitable to the highly varying conditions of post-depositional
environment and wide variability of site types noted on McGregor
Range, and further, is believed inherently biased toward the
over representation of certain site types.
For example, post­
depositional processes such as the migrating Newman sands in
the western portion of the Range (Pigott, Part III), which can
result in the quick burial of archeological materials, tend to
bias in favor of the eroded, highly visible clusters such as
large Formative stage sites which are characterized by extensive
ceramic scatters.
Conversely, pre-ceramic lithic sites and
specialized limited use areas are more likely to be obscured
in their entirety.
During and after field work, site reports submitted by
crew leaders were reviewed.
In many cases "site" designations
were rejected on the basis of recorded evidence or as a result
of revisits to the location.
Singular artifact occurrences
without other significant evidence of associated human activity
were, for example, immediately disallowed as were single site
definitions applied to extensive areas characterized by. the
observer as widely separated exposures of surficially exposed
cultural litter.
In the latter example, separate site desig­
nations were applied to the spatially discrete exposures.
The
operative limits of our accepted site definition allowed for
the accounting of such varying localities as isolated fire
hearths with associated artifacts or other cultural debris to
prehistoric "village" sites exhibiting evidence of house

34

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

remnants and midden scatters extending over several acres.
Of the total inventory only 6 sites (1.8%) yielded evidence
of recognizable lithic artifa~ts dating to the Paleoindian
period.
In all cases, the Tularosa Valley lowlands in which
these sites are located are eroded, resulting in the loss of
primary stratigraphic associations (Part III: pages 101-130).
Approximately 30% of the observed sites are without visible
ceramic artifacts.
At th£ present stage of analysis a sub­
stantial number of the sites in this category may be tenta­
tively assigned to the Archaic period on the basis of
diagnostic projectile point styles.
Sites with ceramic age
components are by far the most numerous in the preliminary
inventory (Fig. 1-8). Defined localities yielding pottery com­
prise 56-56% of the total.
A further grouping of sites, i.e.,
isolated bedrock mortars without obvious association with other
features or cultural materials, buried fire hearths exposed in
cutbanks without other visible cultural associations, etc.,
cannot be assigned even tentative chronological position on
the basis of reconnaissance data.
ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE CLASSIFICATION
As indicated, a wide variety of chronologically and
situationally discrete archeological sites were identified
during the course of the McGregor Range investigation.
For
purposes of preliminary ordering these known localities have
been segregated into 11 categories; this initial site unit
classificaiton utilizes a variable set of attributes upon which
distinctions are made.
These attributes include site setting
(e.g., open or sheltered); demonstrable extent; and type,
number and variability of associated tools, miscellanceous
cultural residues and structural features.
A basic two part
distinction is first made between:
(1) sites which exhibited,
or were highly suspected of containing, evidence of multiple
on-site activities, and (2) those sites which yielded evidence
of on-site activities which were relatively limited in range.
In essence the first major category includes those sites where
general, relatively long term occupation or shorter term but
recurrent "base camp" occupation is indicated or suggested;
the second major grouping includes those sites where aboriginal
use appears limited to such activities as short term camping or
specific resource procurement (e.g., isolated hearths,
quarry sites, etc.).
Th£ adequate determination of site function is recognized
as being very difficult and rarely evident at the level of
investigation implemented at McGregor Range.
Although the
current site classification system must in some manner address
the issue of function, it should be emphasized that ascriptions

FIGURE

1-8

SITE FREQUENCY BY TYPE
VILLAGE COMPLEX

(30)

7.3%

COMPLEX CAMp, CERAMIC

(132)

COMPLEX CAMp, NONCERAMIC

(24)

ROCKSHELTER

( 29)

ISOLATED HEARTH

( 24)

LITHIC SCATTER

5.8%
7.0%
5.8 %

( 38 )

9.2 %

( 66)

BURNED ROCK LOCUS, CERAMIC
BURNED ROCK LOCUS, NON CERAMIC

(53)

QUARRYI WORKSHOP

{5}

1.0%

ISOLATED BEDROCK MORTAR

(3)

0.7%

ISOLATED CERAMIC SCATTER

( 4)

1.0%

CACHE/OFFERING

( 1)

0.2 %

FORTIFICATION

( 1)

0.2 %

o

15.9%

12.8%

1.2%

(4)

ROCK CIRCLE

32.0%

40
PROPORTION OF TOTAL NUMBER OF SITES (N:414)

SPROUSE 1976

10

20

30

50%

36

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

of general (e.g.; "village", "camp" or "cache") function are
considered open to modification resulting from further work.
The "mixing" of functional and morphological criteria in this
classification is recognized.
The following site categories are recognized at this time
(number of occurences in parentheses):
I.

Habitational Sites
1.
2.
3.

Village Complex, Ceramic
Complex Camps
(a)
ceramic
(b)
non-ceramic
Rockshelters

(30)

(132)
(24)
(29)

II. Limited Activity Loci
4.
5.

6.
7•
8.
9.

10.

II.
12.

Tsolated Hearths
Lithic Scatters
B.urned Rock Loci
(a)
ceramic
(b)
non"'caramic:
-Q u a r iyWorkS1fcfp s .
Rock Circles
Isolated Bedrock Mortars
Isolated Ceramic Scatters
Exotic Material Cache
Possible Fortification

(24)
(38)
(66)
(53)
(5)

(4)
(3)

(4)
(1)
(1)

These initial site categories are further defined:
1. Village Complexes (Fig. 1-9):
This type includes all sus­
pected Formative Stage (ceramic) "village" settlements.
Such
sites are characterized by:
an exposed areal extent of 3 acres
or more; suspected or partially visible house remnants;
dense scatters of ceramic and lithic artifacts; trash middens;
observable discrete concentrations or particular classes of
artifacts or features; and the presence of substantial quantities
of non-portable artifacts such as extremely heavy metates.
In
addition, such sites are often located adjacent to a water
source and extensive areas suitable for horticulture.
2.
Complex Camps ceramic and non-ceramic (Fig. 1-9):
Includes
apparent multi-activity, open camps.
Sites of this type may
include macro-band seasonal camps for the pre-ceramic period,
or "field house" stype outlier camps dating from the ceramic
period. Attributes include:
areal extent usually less than
3 acres; no visible habitation remnants; dense scatters of
ceramic/lithic or lithic artifacts; generally less extensive

INVENTORY OF PREHISTORIC SITES

37

trash middens than "village" category; fewer activities indicated
by discrete concentrations of specific artifacts or features;
and the presence of grinding implements of readily transport­
able size.
3.
Rockshelters (Fig. I-I0):
Includes open camps apparently
occupied for a short duration.
This class is characterized by:
the presence of one or more small, isolated concentrations of
fire-effected rock or ash; associated sparse scatters of
ceramic or lithic artifacts; the absence of non-portable ground
stone, milling implements; and the absence of discrete con­
centrations of artifacts or features suggesting special activity
loci.
Exposures of buried hearths in arroyo cutbanks are in­
cluded in this class.
Generally, sites of this type are thought
to represent limited duration camp sites for small groups or
individuals, engaged in hunting, gathering, travel, etc.
5.
Lithic Scatters (Fig. 1-9): Includes a varied class of
sites broadly distributed throughout the study area, and char­
acterized by diffuse scatters of lithic artifacts, cores,
flakes, and other debitage.
The absence of ceramic materials
and structural features is a shared characteristic. Areal
extent ranges from a few square meters to an acre or more.
At presen~ surficial evidence is too scanty to warrant a func­
tional interpretation.
It is suspected that some of the mo~e
extensive lithic scatters may represent the debris of many
small groups or individuals returning to a favored area over
an extensive time span.
The location of most lithic scatters
is in foothill or mountain areas possessing nearby exposures
of naturally siliceous rock.
6.
Burned Rock Loci (Fig. 1-10):
Includes a class of sites
characterized by the presence of five or fewer specialized,
discrete, burned rock features.
Ring middens and large
mUltiple-use hearths are the most common visible feature.
Areal
extent is generally less than 1 acre.
Ceramic sherds and/or
lithic artifacts are often associated with these sites, a1­
thnugh some examples lack any observed tools in association.
Structural features suggesting extended habitation are
absent.
Discrete concentrations of specific artifact classes.
implying multiple activities, are not observed. At present
it is suspected that this class represents specialized vegetal
resource procurement/processing stations apparently utilized
on a seasonal basis.
7.
Quarry/Workshops:
This class consists of five sites
possessing natural exposures of siliceous rock, which exhibit
signs of chipping and battering.
Extraction and primary
modification of lithic raw material is evidenced by the presence

."

Iil

c:

:tl

DISTRIBUTION OF
VILLAGE COMPLEXES
PHYSIOGRAPHIC

DISTRIBUTION OF COMPLEX
CAMPS (NON - CERAMIC)

ZONE
(3,3)

HUECO MOUNTAINS

(280)

(9l:l)

TULAROSA BASIN
OTERO MESA

(33)

(ABSENT)

SACRAMENTO MOUNTAINS

1J)6,O}

VEGETATIVE ZONE
SAND DUNE/MESQUITE

(24.0)

(7ti7)

ALLUVIAL FAN/CREOSOTE BUSH

(24.0;

(23.3)

FOOTHILL/VUCCA GRASSLAND

(ABSENT)

MESA /GRASSLANDS

(ABSENT)

MOUNTAIN CANYON/PINYON JUNIPER

(ABSENT)

{24.0)

(240)

o

20
40
60
80
100
PROPORTION OF TOTAL NUMBER OF VILLAGE COMPLEXES (N'30)

o

20
40
60
80
100
PROPORTION OF TOTAL NUMBER OF NON-CERAMIC COMPLEX
CAMPS IN'25)

DISTRIBUTION OF
LITHIC SCATTERS

DISTRIBUTION OF COMPLEX
CAMPS (CERAMIC)
PHYSIOGRAPHIC

ZONE
HUECO MOUNTAINS

(1U5I

(23.3J
~46.S)

TULAROSA BASIN
OTERO MESA

U3.2)

(9.3)

SACRAMENTO MOU/HAINS

(13.7)

(209)

VEGETATIVE ZONE
SAND DUNE/MESQUITE

{13.2i

140.3)
(28.7)

ALLUVIAL FAN/CREOSOTE BUSH
FOOTHILl/YUCCA GRASSLAND

(737}

(18.6,

MESA/GRASSLANDS

(&5)

MOUNTAIN CANYON/PINYON JUNIPER

o

20
40
60
80
100
PROPORTION OF TOTAL NUMBER OF CERAMIC COMPLEX
CAMPS (N"29)

SPROUSE 1976

o

20
40
SO
80
100
PROPORTION OF TOTAL NUMBER OF LITHIC SCATTERS (N'3S)

m

'"

DISTRIBUTION OF ROCKSHElTERS

DISTRIBUTION OF
ISOLATED HEARTHS

PHYSIOGRAPHIC ZONE
HUECO MOUNTAINS
TULAROSA BASIN

('o.•)

(20.0)

•

('0.01

(Ui

OTERO MESA

(272)

(20,0)

SACRAMENTO MOUNTAINS

VEGETATIVE

(.44.0)

£"0,0)

ZONE
SAND DUNE/MESQUITE

(ABSENT)

ALLUVIAL FAN/CREOSOTE BUSH

(ABSENT)

{"'.<>l
("o,O}

FOOTHILL/YUCCA GAASSLAND

{"""I

MESA/GRASSLANDS
MOUNTAIN CANYON/PINYON JUNIPER

(28.DJ

(U,O)

(ABSENT)
__

(olD)

o

20

40

60

80

100

PROPORTION OF TOTAL NUMBER OF ROCKSHELTERS (N-29)

o

w

~

00

~

~

PROPORTION OF TOTAL NUMBER OF ISOLATED HEARTHS (N-2S)

DISTRIBUTION OF BURNED
ROCK lOCI (NON - CERAMIC)

DISTRIBUTION OF BURNED
ROCK lOCI (CERAMIC)
PHYSIQGRAPHIC ZONE
HUECO MOUNTAINS

(27.31

(IU)

TULAROSA BASIN

(11.1)

OTERO MESA
SACRAMENTO MOUNTAINS

VEGETATIVE

tao:!)

(64.8)

ZONE
SAND DUNE/MESOUITE

(....1

ALLUVIAL FAN/CREOSOTE BUSH

(1U;

(ZU)

(3t81

FOOTHILL/YUCCA GAASSLAND

(34.8)

MESA/GRASSLANDS

(42AU

(7.'1

MOUNTAIN CANYON/PINYON JUNIPER

ItSl

o

(14.8)

20

40

60

80

100

PROPORTION OF TOTAL NUMBER OF CERAMIC BURNED ROCK
LOCI (N-66)

o

w

~

00

00

~

PROPORTION OF TOTAL NUMBER OF NON-CERAMIC BURNED
ROCK L.OCI (N'54)

:!!
G)

c:

:u

m

.....
o

SPROUSE 1976

40

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

ot; quantities of chi.pp:tng de.bris, flakes, and primary cores,
associated directly with exposed veins or nodules of cheTt,
etc.
In most observed instances it appears that cores produced
at th.e extraction site were Temoved a shortdtstance for the
production of quarry blanks or tools.
8.
Rock circles:
Four sites exhibiting circular arrangements
of rock were recorded.
In ~ost instances the features consisted
of a single line or irregular pieces of limestone, arranged in a
circular pattern.
The diameter of these features ranges from
3.5 to 6.0 meters.
In two instances lithic artifacts and hearths
are associated with rock circles.
Some examples have no surfi­
cially observable associated artifactual material. At present
insufficient data pTecludes a functional interpretation although
a strong similarity to classic Northern Plains "tip! rings" is
apparent.
9..
Isolated Bedrock Mortars:
(Fig. I-IIA} Three sites were
recorded which exhibit evidence of human modification in the forma
of bedrock mortars or metate facets.
Generally no ceramic or
lithic artifacts were associated.
It is assumed that these
sites once functioned as camps or processing areas.
10.
Isolated Ceramic Scatters:
Three very small sites consisting
of sparse scatters of surficially visible sh.erds were recorded
during the course of the survey.
These may represent chance
breakage or loss as no other artifacts suggesting a special
activity were noted.
Conversely. such scatters may represent the
"tip of-the-iceberg" and be the first portion of a larger site
being exposed by active deflation.
This must remain an enigmatic
site type until future testing produces further information.
11.
Exotic Material Cache:
(Fig. I-lIB)
A unique offering or
cache of exotic shell, bone, crystal, and turquoise artifacts was
recorded.
At present it is impossible to determine the exact
function of this isolated and interesting site.
It is hoped
that further comparative work now in progress will yield more
interpret i ve da ta (Edi to r t s no te:
see Woo ldridge 1(79).
12.
This represents a potentially defensible
posit
cons sting of both natural outcrops and constructed
features which offer commanding visual advantage and protection.
The one site found exhibited numerous circular and semicircular
rock arrangements which are assumed to have served as protected
emplacements.
The relative frequencies of these established site
categories are illustrated by the histGgram in FigureI-S.
The
known occurences of the most common groups with respect to the
major physiographic divisions on the Range (Hueco Mountains,
Tularesa Basin, Otero Mesa and Sacramento Mountains) and to

INVENTORY OF PREHISTORIC SITES

41

Wyatt's (1976) vegetative zones are similarly shown in Figures
1-9 and 1-10.
SITE INVENTORY
During the 1975-76 periods of reconnaissance on McGregor
Range, 414 prehistoric sites were defined and documented.
The
designation "prehistoric" follows common usages of the term,
complying closely, for example, with a definition provided re­
cently by the Department of the Interior, National Park Service
(1977} and published in the Federal Register.
As defined
therein, prehistoric data"
. . are data useful to the study and under­
standing of human life during the prehistoric
period, i.e., at all time periods prior to
substantial contact between the native people
of the United States and literate societies.
The end point of the prehistoric period varies
from area to area within the United States
(Department of the Interior, National Park
Service 1977:
5375).
The sites tabulated in the following section can, with a
few exceptions, be assumed to be of prehistoric age; certainly
they are all of Native American derivation.
Sites which
cannot be assumed to date to the prehistoric period include a
small number of localities which may be of Apachean origin.
While these sites may date to the locally recognized historic
period, no hard evidence was found which clearly indicates the
time span of the suspected Apachean residues.
All sites of
obvious historic origin are listed and described in detail
by Freeman (this volume).
The following table is designed to provide basic site
attributes of the documented prehistoric localities.
Further
information relative to ceramic and lithic artifact association,
and more precise chronological placement (based on recovered
ceramic types or the results of limited radiocarbon dating)
can be found in Parts II and III of this report.
Additionally,
12 of the sites listed in this table were tested.
The results
of these investigations are described in Part II "Descriptive
Report of the Test Excavations."
Table I-I provides the following information:
1.

Temporary Site Number

The letter "MI! preceeding each numerical site designator
stands for McGregor.
Upon submission of original site

42

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-11.

Site Types

A.

Typical Rock Shelter

B.

Exotic Material Cache

C.

Possible Fortification at Site M-493

D.

Isolated Bedrock Mortars on W. Edge of Otero Mesa

FIGURE

A

c

B

o

1-11

44

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

survey forms to the Laboratory of Anthropology, Museum
of New Mexico, permanent Laboratory of Anthropology
designators will be applied, thus keying the properties
into the standard New Mexico state system.
It should
also be noted that several of these sites have been
previously recorded by the El Paso Archaeological Society
and given "EPAS" designations.
The bulk of these
localities are north of New Mexico Highway 506.
Further
attempts to correlate our site definitions with those of
this Society will be made prior to submission of these
site records to the Laboratory of Anthropology.
2.

Site Type

The following symbols refer to the site type classifica­
tion scheme devised for this reconnaissance.
Habitational Sites:
V
-Village complex (ceramic)
Cl
-Complex camp (ceramic)
C2
-Complex camp (non-ceramic)
R
-Rockshelter
Limited Activity Loci
IH
-Isolated Hearth
LS
-Lithic Scatter
BRL-C -Burned rock locus (ceramic)
BRL
-Burned rock locus (non-ceramic)
-Quarry/workshop
Q
RC
-Rock circle
1M
-Isolated bedrock mortar
IC
-Isolated ceramic scatter
X
-Exotic material cache
F
-Possible fortification
3.

Estimated Age

Estimated age refers to broad age categories--our estimate
of the general temporal position of the sites.
In the
great majority of cases such time markers as identified
ceramic types and/or age-diagnostic projectile point
styles served as the criteria for judgement.
The mere
absence of observed ceramics was seldom used since our
observations were baSically surficial and largely without
the benefit of stratigraphic information.
The following
symbols denote broad time periods used in this report:
P - Paleo indian
A - Archaic
F - Formative

- - - - - - - .... _ - - - - - - _....._ _..._ .._ _..._ - ...

INVENTORY OF PREHISTORIC SITES

45

The highly conservative age assignments reflect, as
noted, the nature of our investigation.
Only two sites
are herein cons idered to represen t dis tinguishab Ie la te
Paleo indian sites, and this on the basis of typological
considerations.
Other finds of distinctive Paleoindian
projectile points (see Part II, page 41 ff.) were either
singular finds, without associated residues, or surfi­
cially mixed with materials of clearly younger age. Much
difficulty was encountered in confident placement of
non-ceramic localities.
Because of the lack of reliable
regional lithic tool seriations, and the ever-present
possibilities that later Ceramic Period groups are
represented by localized non-ceramic residues, it is very
difficult to identify remains of the post-Paleo indian/
pre-ceramic time span.
Formative (i.B., Ceramic) Period sites are not further
delimited in this age breakdown.
In a detailed ceramic
analysis Smiley has more definitively estimated the age
of these sites on the basis of associated pottery types
(see Part II, Tables 11-36 and 11-31).
In both of.
these studies, age estimates are based ~lmost exclu~iyaly
on the~bserved or collected ceramic matetials.

4.

Physiographic Zones

The following symbols refer to the position of each site
with reference to the broad but clearly defined physio­
graphic zones represented on McGregor Range:
TB
H
OM
S
5.

-

Tularosa Basin Complex (includes Hueco Bolson)
Hueco Mountain Complex
Otero Mesa
Sacramento Mountain Complex

Ecozone

Ecozone indicates the position of each site with respect
to vegetative areas derived from Wyatt's (l916) ecolo­
gical analysis of the Range. Wyatt's initial system is
somewhat modified in Kenmotsu's characterization of the
bo~any of the study area (~ee Part III, page 6).
The
following code is used:
I-A
II-B
III-D
IV-C
V-E

-

Sand dune/mesquite
Alluvial fan/creosotebush
Foothill-draws!yucca-grassland
Mesa/grasslands
Mountain-canyons/pinyon-juniper

- - - - - - -...........

~

......

------

46

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

6.

Elevation

This refers to elevation'above mean sea. level; it is an
estimate of the centering elevation as far as could be
determined from standard Department of Defense maps
utilized during the reconnaissance (contour interval:
40 f t . ) .

7.

Estimated Site Size

estimation of site size in square meters is based on
the extent of surficially exposed cultural material.

Th~

8.

Soil Association

This classification utilizes a preliminary soil assocation
breakdown supplied by the Soil Conservation Service and
utilized in the McGregor Guided Missile Range Draft Envi~
ronmental Impact Statement (Department of the Army, Head­
quarters Training and Doctrine Command 1976: 1-25-26).
Twenty-three soil associations are used in this system.
Discovered sites are indicated by their immediate spatial
association with these mapped soil association units;
sites occurring near or on transitional boundaries are
indicated by listed numerical designators of both defined
units (e.g., 10/19). These named units are indicated on
the table by number coding as follows:
Code
1

2
3
4

5
6

7

8
9

10
11

12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

21
22
23

--~-

..... - - -

Soil Unit
Arch-very fine sandy loam
Bluepoint-Qnite-Wink
Deama-rock outcrop
Dona Ana-Berino
Ector-rock outcrop
Holloman-Reeves
Jerag-Philder
Lozier gravelly silt loam
Lozier gravelly silt loam-rock outcrop
Mimbres-Tome
Nickel-Tencee
Pena-Vale-Kerrick
Philder very fine sandy loam
Philder-Arch
Pintura-Dona Ana
Pintura-Typic-Torriorthent-Dona Ana
Reakor-Tome-Tencee
Reyab-Arch
Rock outcrop-Lozier
Rome silt loam
Calciustoll-Haplustoll
Typic Torriorthents
Mimbres

INVENTORY OF PREHISTORIC SITES

47

In an innovative scheme, Pigott (see Part III, page 139)
has related site occurrence to geologic and pedologic
units established as a partial result of geological
reconnaissance carried out as part of our archeological
investigations in the study area.
The reader is directed
to this study which has utilized pedogenic soil Great
Groups (7th Approximation).
9.

Condition

This refers to an unquestionably subjective judgement of
the physical condition of the site at the time, or times,
of observation.
In theory it serves to provide an index
of the degree to which post-depositional processes have
affected the physical "integrity" of the site.
These
relative judgements are the result of detailed observations
made on-site regarding the degree of natural erosion
(or potential for erosion) or damage from culturally­
caused or -stimulated activity (e.g., vandalism, military
or ranching activity, etc.). Although related to judge­
ments of archeological "significance," it should not be
understood to closely equate with such assessments.

Poor.

The site is severely damaged by natural pro­
cesses, human activities, or a combination of such
factors.
These sites are judged to have potential for
only a limited number of archeological studies.

Fair. The site is somewhat disturbed by natural forces,
military activities, vandalism, or a combination of
these factors.
The site retains undisturbed sections
or offers other, recognized data-yielding potential.
Good.

The site has sustained limited damage from
natural forces, military activity, or vandalism.
The
potential data yield for further specialized studies
appears high.

ExaeZ"lent.

The site has suffered little or no dis­
cernable post-depositiDnal disturbance. Damage from
erosion, military activity, or vandalism is minimal.
It has the potential to yield excellent data for a
wide variety of specialized studies.
10.

Ceramic Type Association

Ihis notes the basic 26 categories of identified ceramics
collected and/or observed at the various Formative Period
sites.
These categories are further broken down and
discussed in Smiley (Part II, page 129 ff.).
These
categories are identified thn y:

48

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

1 -

E~

Paso Brown

2 - El Paso Po~ychrome
3 - Chupadero Black on White

4 - Three Circ~e Red on White~ Mimbres Black on White
Lincoln Blaok on Red~ Three Rivers Red on Terracotta~
San Andres Red on Terracotta
6 - Jornada Brown
7 - Playas Red
8 - Casas Grandes Plainware
9 - AZma P~ain
10 - White Mountain Redware
11 - Ramos Polychrome
12 - VilZa Ahumada Polychrome
13 - Corra~its PoZychrome~ Inoised
14 - Seeo Corrugated
15 - Tucson PoZychrome
16 - Convento Patterned Incised Corrugated
17 - Mata Red on Brown
18 - Galisteo Black on White
19 - GiZa Po~ychrome
20 - San Francisco Redware
21 - Tularosa Indented Corrugated
22 - Ochoa Corrugated~ Brown Indented
23 - Reserve Plain Corrugated
24 - El Paso Corrugated and Tool Impressed
5 -

25 - Unidentified Painted wares
26 - Unidentified plain wares

11.

Location

During the course of the preliminary reconnaissance of
McGregor Range, all discovered archeological and historic
sites were accurately plotted on U.S. Army topographic
maps.
This information has been turned over to the con­
tracting agency, and is available on key copies supplied
to the sponsors.
"Map Reference" refers to numbered
sheets of series V781, Department of Defense, U.S. Army
Topographic Command, Washington, D.C.

49

o

2.3

1.2

TABLE 1-1.

3.15 3.8

7.17

6.1

4.9

Summary of Site Attributes.

8.2

9.5

11

N=414

Ml

BRL-C

F

OM

II·B

4650

1200

11

poor

1.2

48481 V

M2

?

OM

II·B

4650

720

11

poor

none

48481V

M3

IH
IH

?

OM

II-B

4700

3

poor

none

4849111

M4

BRL-C

F

OM

II·B

4700

13500

11
11

fair

1.2

4849111

M5

R

F

OM

111·0

5100

15

19

good

1,2,5

4849111

M6

C 1-2

A-F

TB

II-B

4450

18750

11

fair

1,3

4849111

M1

R

?

OM

111-0

5050

4

19

good

none

4849111

M8

C 1

F

OM

111-0

5150

15000

19

good

1.2,3.26

4849111

M9

R

?

OM

111·0

5050

2

19

good

none

4849111

Ml0

IH

?

S

II-B

4800

und

11

poor

none

4849111

Mll

C 1

F

H

II·B

4800

18772

23

fair

1,2,3,5,

474811

M12

C1

F

H

II·B

4580

3300

23

fair

1,2,3,7,

474811

7,15,16
26

M13

C 1

F

H

II-B

4580

80000

23

good

M14

C 1

F

H

II-B

4580

17500

23

good

M15

BRL-C

F

H

II-B

4600

3600

23

M16

C 1

F

H

11-0(1) 4820

210000

M17

R

F

S

111-0

4850

M20

BRL·C

F

H

111·0

M21

C 1

F

H

II·B

474811
1,2,3,10

414811

fair

1

474811

19

fair

1,2,9

474811

525

19

fair

1,2,3

4849111

5020

7500

19

fair

1

484711

4820

3600

19

poor

474811

M23

BRL·C

F

H

II-B

4600

10000

19

fair

M24

C 1

F

H

II·B

19800

19

fair

1,3

474811

M25

C 1

F

H

II-B

4600
4620

8125

10/11

fair

1,2,5,7,
9,20,25

474811

M26

C 1

?

H

II·B

4600

1000

11

fair

2

474811

M27

V

F

TB

I·A

4140

und

10

good

1,2,5,6,

474811

474811

11,26
. 474811

poor

1,2

19

fair

1

48481 V

1680

10

fair

474811

4000

350000

10

fair

',2
1,2,26

111-0

4150

324

10/19

good

H

111-0

4860

5525

19

good

none

4848111

H

II-B

4760

14850

19

good

none

4848111

M28

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4200

M29

1M

F

OM

IV·C

5000

nla

M30

C 1

F

TB

II-B

4000

M3l

V

F

TB

I·A

M32

LS

?

H

M33

BRL

?

M34

LS

?

500

10/19

474811
4848111

50

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

TABLE 1-1.

(Continued).

M35

LS

?

H

III-D

4900

600

19

M36

?

H

IIt-D

4900

2000

19/10

M37

BRL
BRL-C

F

H

III-D

4950

500

19

fair

M38

C 1

F

H

111-0

4950

5000

19

poor

1

4848111

M39

C 1

F

H

II-B

4900

10850

8/10

fair

1,2,9

4848111

M40

BRL

?

H

II-B

4950

5000

8

poor

none

4848111

M41

F

H

III-D

4950

700

10/19

fair

2

4848111

M42

BRL-C
BRL

?

H

III-D

5100

30

19/8

fair

none

4848111

M43

R

?

H

III-D

5250

3

19

good

none

4848111

M44

C 1

F

H

III-D

5100

3600

8/19

excellent

1,2,3,5

4848111

M45

BRL-C

F

H

III-D

5100

50

19/8

poor

1,2

4848111

M46

BRL

?

H

111·0

5100

800

19

poor

none

4848111

M47

R

?

H

111-0

5500

5

19

excellent

none

4848111

M48

Q

?

H

111-0

5550

2

19

excellent

none

4848111

M49

R

?

H

III-D

5550

6

19

good

none

4848111

M50

R

?

H

II 1-0

5400

4

19

good

none

4848111

M51

C 1

F

H

111-0

5150

3000

8

poor

M52

1M

?

H

III-D

5300

2

19

good

none

4848111

M53

R

?

TB

II-B

4344

32

19

poor

none

474811

M54

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4133

17500

10/16

fair

1,2

474811

M55

BRL

?

TB

I·A

4100

490

16/10

poor

none

474811

M56

C2

?

TB

I-A

4109

52500

16

poor

none

474811

M57

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4130

50400

16

fair

M58

IH

?

TB

I·A

4080

450

16

poor

31900

16

fair

474811

400

15

poor

474811

fair

none

4848111

poor

none

4848111
4848111

4848111

474811
none

474811

M59

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4109

M60

C 1

F

TB

I-A

M61

BRL-C

F

TB

I-A

450

15

poor

M62

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100
4100
4100

18400

15

fair

M63

LS

?

TB

I-A

4100

6800

15

poor

none

474811

M64

p

TB

I-A

4000

9700

15

poor

none

474811

M65

BRL
C2

?

TB

I-A

4100

70650

15

poor

none

474811

M66

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

31400

15

poor

1

474811
474811

474811

INVENTORY OF PREHISTORIC SITES

TABLE 1-1.

51

(Continued)
I

t

M67

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

160000

15

poor

474811

M68

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

81000

15

poor

474811

M69

IH

?

S

II-B

4750

7

11

poor

none

4849111

M70

BRL-C

F

S

II-B

4350

300

11

poor

1,2

4849111

M71

BRL-C

F

S

II-B

4450

50

11

poor

1,4

4849111

M72

Cl

F

H

111-0

5600

204000

19

fair

1,2,5,10,
14,16

4848111

M73

C 1

F

H

II-B

5100

31250

8

poor

1,2,4,6,7, 4848111
8,9,16,17,
20,25,26

M74

BRL

P

TB

I-A

4080

21010

15

poor

none

M75

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4080

6250

15

poor

M76

BRL

?

TB

I-A

4080

7000

15

poor

none

474811

M77

BRL

?

TB

I-A

4075

12250

15

poor

none

474811

M78

C 2

?

TB

I-A

4100

19200

15

fair

none

474811

M79

C 1

F

H

II-B

5150

13038

8

fair

1,6,26

4848111

M80

C 1

F

H

II-B

5150

4200

8

poor

1,2,4

4848111

M81

C 1

F

H

II-B

5200

5625

8

fair

1,2,4,9

4848111

M83.

C 1

F

H

111-0

5200

21375

8

fair

1,2,4,6,
8,16,26

4848111

M84

BRL-C

F

H

II-B

5200

21372

8

poor

M85

C 1

F

H

111-0

5250

193080

M86

C 1

F

H

111-0

5350

5000

M87

C 1

F

H

111-0

5400

M88

C 1

F

H

111-0

M89

C 1

F

TB

M90

C 1

F

M91

C 1

M92

474811
474811

.J,2

4848111

fair

1,2,4,6,
7,26

4848111

8

poor

1,4

4848111

3240

8

poor

1,6

4848111

5400

31250

8

fair

1,2,3

4848111

I-A

4080

20250

16

fair

TB

I-A

4080

6600

15116

poor

,474811

F

TB

I-A

4080

13875

16

poor

474811

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

22500

M93

C 1

F

H

II-B

5200

10000

8

fair

M94

BRL-C

F

TB

I-A

4108

33000

15

poor

1,2

474811

M95

BRL-C

F

TB

I·A

4120

2835

15

poor

1,2,3

474811

M96

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4110

7500

16

poor

1,2,3

474811

8/19

poor

474811

1,2,3

474811
4848111

52

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

(Continued)

TABLE 1-1.

.!i:!

§:

~.

I­

.&

.&

~

"0

<b

.&

!&
<:;o:;r

~w

w
r:::

[S'r:::
._
0

~'"

~

J

r:::~

.g§
!f
.....
<b<b

"0

'&lJ
!C?s

'­
i\;
t::.&€

Clj

tlJ

if

M97

C 1

F

TB

M98

C 1

F

TB

M99

C 1

F

TB

II-B

4250

175000

M100

C 1

F

OM

IV-C

5050

121410

Ml01

R

F

H

111-0

5200

M103

R

F

H

111-0

M104

V

F

TB

M105

V

F

TB

Clj

.gr:::
'~'ij
rJ?o
:J1

i

r:::

r:::

a

.~<I)

lEw

f!!§:

r:J1­

f!J
r:::
Q.1!:
~'tf

iiJ.:p

o:;r
Ct'
l.4JC?s-­

I-A

4100

29700

15

fair

1,3

II-B

4108

49063

16

fair

1,2

474811

20

good

1,2,3

474811

?

excellent

1,2,3,4,
6,8,9,20,
26

48481

150

19

poor

2

474811

5200

600

19

excellent

1,2,7,8,
19,26

474811

I-A

4103

20235

20

fair

1,2,3,
7,26

47481

I-A

4100

125000

20

good

1,2,5,7,
10,11,14,
23,24,25,

47481

47481

-­

474811

26
M106

V

F

TB

II-B

4200

750000

11

fair

1,2,3,4,
7,25

M108

V

F

TB

II-B

4130

250000

20

good

1,2,3,4,5, 47481
6,7,8,9,11,
12,14,15,
20,23,24,26

Ml09

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

und

?

fair

1,2,3,4,
5,6

Mll0

V'

F

TB

I-A

4150

und

20

good

1,2,3,4,5, 47481
8,9,10,11,
14,23,26

M111

BRl-C

F

TB

I-A

4100

30

20

good

1,2,3,4,5,
6,7,8,9,
10,11

47481

M112

V

F

TB

I-A

4068

560000

20

good

1,2,3,4,6

47481

M113

V

F

TB

I-A

4090

144300

20

poor

1,2,3,4,5,
6,7,8,9,
10,16,25

47481

M114

V

F

TB

I-A

4120

20235

15/20

fair

1,2,3,4,6,
8,16,F'
20,2 ,26

47481

M115

V

F

TB

I·A

4120

14400

15/20

good

1,2,3,4,6, 47481
7,8,11,12,
26,26

M116

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4100

4047

20

good

47481

Ml17

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

18000

20

good

1,2,3,4,5,
6,7,8,26

47481

47481

53

INVENTORY OF PREHISTORIC SITES

TABLE 1-1.

(Continued)

;g'
20·

good

1,2,4,6,7

47481

40470

20

fair

1,2,3,4,5,
6,7,8,9,
10,25,26

47481

4100

49400

20

good

1,2,3,4,5,
6,7,8,17,
20,24,26

47481

I·A

4100

20235

15

fair

1,2

47481

TB

I·A

4120

23200

20

fair

1,3,8,9,
10,1

F

TB

I·A

4100

10

15

poor

47481

IH

F

S

111·0

4750

1012

19

fair

4849111

M125

C 1

F

S

III·D

4650

125000

M126

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4120

M127

C 1

F

TB

I·A

M128

BRL-C

F

TB

I·A

M129

C 1

F

TB

M130

C 1

F

M131

C 1

M132

Ml18

BRL-C

F

TB

I·A

4080

900

M119

V

F

TB

I-A

4070

M120

V

F

TB

I·A

M121

C 1

F

TB

M122

C 1

F

M123

IH

M124

e

47481

11/19

good

1,3

4849111

266

20

poor

1,2,9

47481

4140

6300

15

fair

1,2,3,10,
11,14,26

47481

4150

60705

15

poor

1,2,3

47481

I-A

4131

2024

15

fair

1,2,3,5

47481

TB

I·A

4180

und

15

poor

1,2

47481

F

TB

I·A

4100

2100

15

poor

1,2

47481

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4100

8094

15

fair

474811

M134

C 1

F

S

III·D

4600

20235

19

fair

4849111

M135

C 1

F

TB

II-B

4255

und

11

fair

1,2

47481

M136

BRL-C

F

TB

I·A

4100

1963

15

good

1,2,3,4

47481

M137

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4100

10000

15

excellent

1,2,3,
10,25

47481

M138

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

200000

20

fair

1,4

47481

M139

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4100

und

1

poor

3

47481

M140

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4100

11250

15

poor

l:I.7481

15

good

47481

fair

47481

M141

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4100

490000

M142

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4085

12141

16/15

M144

V

F

TB

I·A

4120

40470

20

good

1,2,3,11

47481

M145

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4160

4500

20

poor

1,2,3

47481

M146

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4150

60000

fai r

1,2

47481

M147

C 1

F

OM

II·B

4850

400

poor

1

4848IV

10/20
11

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

54

TABLE 1-1.

(Continued)

Ml48

BRL-G

F

OM

II-B

4800

11250

10

poor

48481V

M149

BRL-G

F

OM

II·B

4850

und

10

poor

48481 V

Ml50

R

F

'"-0

5300

excellent

1,2

48481 V

V

F

II-B

4900

und
31250

19

M151

OM
OM

11

excellent

1,7

48481V

M152

R

F

OM

111-0

4950

20

19

good

M153

G 1

F

TB

I-A

4050

180000

10

poor

1,3,6,26

48481V

M154

R

?

OM

111-0

5000

12

19

fair

none

48481 V

M155

IH

F

OM

II-B

4800

1012

10

poor

1

48481 V

M158

BRL-G

F

OM

IV-C

5175

10600

8

fair

1,2

48481V

M159

V

F

T8

I-A

4050

und

10

fair

1,2,3,5

48481V

M160

V

F

T8

I-A

4050

150000

10

good

1,2,3,4,

48481 V

48481V

5,7,8

M161

R

?

OM

111-0

5150

nla

19

fair

M162

R

F

OM

111-0

nla

19

excellent

1

48481V

M163

C 1

F

OM

IV-G

5000
4900

125000

?

poor

3

48481

M164

BRL-C

F

OM

III-D

M165

R

A

OM

M166

C 1

F

M167

C 1

M168

48481V

2500

19

fair

1

48481V

111-0

5200
5000

30

19

excellent

none

48481V

OM

IV·C

6060

10000

11

good

F

S

111-0

4500

2588881

11

fair

1,2

4849111

C1

F

TB

II-B

4305

10050.1

16

good

',2,3,4,
26

4849111

Ml69

BRL-G

F

S

111-0

4650

4047

19

good

1,2,3,4

4849111

M170

BRL-G

F

S

II·B

4500

161800

15

fair

1,2

4849111

M171

V

F

1B

I-A

4120

202350

10

poor

1,2,3,4

47481

Ml72

C 1

F

T8

I-A

4130

121410

15

poor

1,2,3

4849111

M200

Q

?

H

111·0

5000

20113

19

good

none

474811

M201

IH

?

H

111·0

4900

1

19

poor

none

474811

M202

BRL

?

H

II·B

4700

18750

23

poor

none

474811

M203

BRl-C

F

H

II-B

4800

50

19

fair

1,2,7,9

474811

M204

BRL-C

F

H

II·B

4750

100

19

fair

M205

BRL

?

H

111-0

5000

1000

19

good

none

474811

M206

BRL

?

H

111-0

5000

750

19

good

none

474811

M207

BRl-C

F

H

111-0

5000

12000

19

good

1,2,6,
8,26

474811

48481 V

474811

55

INVENTORY OF PREHISTORIC SITES

TABLE 1-1.

(Continued)

M208

BRL-C

F

TB

II-B

4294

16250

M209

C 1

F

TB

II-B

4350

und

M210

C 1

F

TB

4350

12500

M211

IH

?

TB

4400

M212

BRL-C

F

TB

II-B
II-B
II·B

M213

V

F

TB

M214

IC

F

TB

fair

1,2

47481

poor

1

47481

11/19····

fair

1

47481

und

11/19

poor

none

474S1

4250

20000

15/11

poor

1,2,3

47481

I·A

4150

264000

15

fair

1,2,3,5,6,
7,S,9,10,
11,12

47481

II·B

4350

75

19

poor

1,10,16

47481

15

poor

1,2,3

47481

19/20
19

M215

BRL-C

F

TB

I·A

4220

7850

M216

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4250

100000

15

fair

1,2

47481

M217

Q

?

TB

II-B

4050

12500

19

good

none

47481

M218

BRL

?

TB

I-A

4350

und

19

fair

none

47481

M219

C 1

F

OM

IV·C

5400

20000

?

fair

',2,3,4,5,
6,8,25,26

48481

M220

C 1

F

S

IV-C

5480

1400

14

good

1,2,3,9,26 48491

M221

C 1

F

H

II·B

4520

52500

23

poor

1,2,3,9,24 474811

M222

BRL-C

F

H

II-B

4540

500

23

poor

1,2

474811

M223

Q

?

H

4760

525

19

fair

none

474811

M224

BRL-C

F

H

4600

500

23/19

poor

1,2

474811

M225

IC

?

H

II·B
II·B
II·B

4630

3

10

poor

1

474811

M226

C 1

F

H

II·B

4600

9375

10

poor

1,2

474811

M227

BRL-C

F

H

II·B

4550

19600

10

poor

M228

C 2

?

TB

I·A

4150

600

10

poor

none

47481

M229

C 1

F

H

III·D

4800

7200

19

fair

1,6

474811

M230

IH

?

H

4650

und

19/23

poor

none

474811

M231

IH

F

H

4550

17600

19

fair

1,2

474811

M232

C 1

F

H

II·B
II-B
II·B

4720

19200

23

fair

M233

C 1

F

H

II·B

4720

23400

23

fair

1,2,4

474811

M234

V

F

H

II·B

4700

100000

23

good

1,2,3,4,7,
13,16,20,
25,26

474811

M235

C2

?

H

III-D

5000

16000

19

good

none

474811

M236

C 1

F

H

III-D

5040

36000

19

fair

1,2,3,8

474811

474811

474811

56

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

TABLE 1-1.

(Continued)

M237

C 1

F

OM

IV-C

5200

50000

?

fair

1

48481

M238

C 1

F

OM

IV-C

5200

7200

?

fair

1

48481

M239

IH

?

OM

IV-C

5100

450

?

poor

none

48481

M240

C 1

F

S

111-0

5750

45000

fair

3

484911

M241

LS

?

TB

I-A

4100

2300

10

poor

none

474811

M242

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

6800

15

poor

1

474811

M243

BAL-C

F

TB

I-A

4110

500

10/15

poor

1

474811

M244

IH

F

TB

I-A

4100

550

10

poor

1

474811

M245

BAL-C

F

OM

IV-C

5200

12000

?

fair

1,2

48481

M246

BAL-C

F

OM

IV-C

5180

12000

?

poor

M247

BAL

?

OM

IV-C

5170

und

?

fair

none

48481

M248

C 2

?

OM

IV-C

5160

10400

?

fair

none

48481

M249

C 1

F

OM

IV-C

5180

6

?

good

1,2,3,4,
5,6,8,9,
17,20,26

48481

M251

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

280000

15

poor

26

474811

M252

BRL-C

F

TB

I-A

4100

12000

15

poor

1,4

474811

M253

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

17 5000

15

poor

M255

C 2

?

OM

IV-C

5220

12500

?

fair

none

48481

M256

C 1

F

OM

IV-C

5260

13980

?

poor

1,4,6

48481

unident.

48481

14/19

48481

474811

M257

C 1

?

OM

IV-C

5280

2450

?

fair

M259

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4040

140000

15

poor

M261

SAL

?

TB

I-A

4100

90000

15

poor

none

474811

M262

C 1

F

S

111-0

5800

8125

12

good

1,2

484911

M263

BRL-C

F

S

111-0

5750

9900

11

fair

1,2,3,5

484911

M265

IH

?

S

111-0

5800

und

11

poor

none

484911

M266

C 1

F

S

111-0

5800

8000

11

excellent

1,2,3,26

484911

M268

BRL-C

F

S

111-0

5800

5500

5/11

excellent

1,2,3,5,
26

48491'1

M269

LS

?

S

111-0

5800

2400

5/11

excellent

none

484911

4080

240000

15

poor

none

474811

474811

M270

LS

?

TB

I-A

M272

IC

F

TB

I-A

4100

400

15

poor

M274

IH

?

S

111·0

5600

1600

19

good

none

484911

M275

C 2

?

S

111·0

5800

15000

19

good

none

484911

474811

57

INVENTOIU OF PREHISTORIC SITES

TABLE 1-1.

(Continued)

M276

C 1

F

s

III-D

5600

20000

19

good

1,2,3

484911

M277

C 2

?

S

III-D

5520

37500

14/19

good

none

484911

M278

C 1

F

S

III-D

5600

4500

19

fair

1,2,3

484911

M280

C 1

F

S

III-D

5480

11250

19

good

1,2

484911

M281

C 2

?

S

V-E

5800

3750

5

fair

none

484911

M282

BRL

?

S

V-E

5840

2400

5

fair

none

484911

M283

C 2

?

S

V-E

5700

10000

19

fair

none

484911

M284

IH

?

S

V-E

5760

500

5

fair

none

484911

M285

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

30000

15

poor

474811

M286

LS

F

TB

I-A

4092

465999

16

fair

474811

M287

C 2

?

S

V-E

5880

und

5

good

none

484911

M288

LS

?

S

V-E

5960

und

5

good

none

484911

M289

BRL

?

S

V-E

5880

10000

5

good

none

484911

M290

C 1

F

S

V-E

5800

2500

5

good

484911

M291

C 1

F

S

V-E

5960

3750

5

fair

484911

M292

C 1

F

S

V-E

5920

3000

5

fair

484911

M293

C 1

F

S

V-E

5980

6000

5

fair

1,2

484911

M294

C 2

?

S

V-E

5800

12250

5

fair

none

484911

M295

C 1

F

S

V-E

5800

5000

19

fair

M296

BRL

?

S

V-E

5800

und

19

fair

M297

BRL-C

F

S

V-E

5880

10000

5

fair

M298

?

S

S

V-E
5920
6000
5
V-E --,6...1...
00...----.1~4
..0"'0.----~5- ­

fair

M299
M300

BRL
BRL
IH

?

TB

I-A

4075

314

15

poor

none

474811

M302

IH

F

TB

I-A

4080

100

15

poor

1

474811

M303

BRL

?

S

II-B

5200

12500

11

fair

none

4849111

fair

none

4849111

-~-?-

fai r

484911

none

484911
484911

none

484911

-n-o-ne-~~~~~~-'4.,.,8"..49,..,lrrl---~~~~~~~~~~~~~-~~~~~-~~~~~

M304

BRL

?

S

II-B

5450

49

5/11

M305

BRL-C

F

S

II-B

5350

770

11

poor

1,3

4849111

M306

BRL-C

F

TB

I-A

4060

90000

?

poor

1

4748111

M307

C 1

F

S

II-B

4900

20000

11

fair

1,3

4849111

M308

C 1

F

S

11-B

4650

10800

11

fair

1,2

4849111

M309

C 1

F

S

II-B

4750

10900

11

fair

1

4849111

M3l0

V

F

TB

II-B

4240

462000

20

fair

1,2,3,4,5,
6,7,8,26

474811

-

~

------

58

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

TABLE 1-1.

(Continued)

~.

M311

C 1

F

S

II-B

4700

28750

19

fair

M312

R

F

S

111-0

4850

15

19

good

M313

BRL

?

S

4800

1000

19

fair

M314

C 1

F

S

4700

80000

11

fair

M315

?

S

4700

37500

19

fair

none

4849111

M316

BRL
BRL

?

S

5180

9243

19

good

none

4849111

M317

C 1

F

S

II-B
II-B
II-B
II-B
II-B

4850

150000

19

fair

1,5,26

4849111

M318

R

F

S

111-0

5100

70

19

good

M319

R

F

S

111-0

5100

22

19

good

1,4

4849111

M320

R

F

S

111-0

5250

und

19

poor

1,2,3,26

4849111

M321

BRL

?

S

5400

1800

19

poor

none

4849111

M322

C 1

F

S

II-B
II-B

5400

45000

19

good

2

4849111

M323

C 1

F

S

111-0

5650

_322000

19

good

M324

C 2

?

S

H-B

5000

240000

19

fair

none

4849111

M325

IH

?

S

II-B

5350

2250

19

fair

none

4849111

M326

LS

?

S

111-0

5300

3500

19

good

none

4849111

M327

BRL

?

S

II-B

5200

9000

19

fair

none

4849111

M328

C 2

?

S

II-B

5300­
5400

31500

19

fair

none

4849111

M329

LS

?

S

111-0

5350

15000

19

fair

none

4849111

M330

LS

?

S

111-0

5200

11500

19

fair

none

4849111

M331

C 2

?

S

II-B

5250

81000

19

fair

none

4849111

M332

BRL-C

F

S

111-0

5250­
5350

50000

19

good

M333

?

S

II-B

5300

3750

19

fair

none

4849111

M334

BRL
BRL

?

S

II-B

5250

2000

19

poor

none

4849111

M335

LS

?

S

111-0

5900

9000

19

fair

none

4849111

M336

LS

?

S

111-0

5950

1440

19

poor

none

4849111

M337

LS

?

S

111-0

5950

750

19

fair

none

4849111

M338

LS

?

S

111-0

5850­
5900

7200

19

fair

none

4849111

M339

BRL-C

F

S

II-B

5750

4000

19

fair

1,3

4849111

M340

LS

?

S

111-0

5800­
5900

22500

19

fair

none

4849111

----

----

3

4849111
4849111

none

4849111
4849111

4849111

4849111

4849111

INVENTORY OF PREHISTORIC SITES

TABLE 1-1.

59

(Continued)

M341

LS

F

S

111·0

5800·
5850

M342

BR L

?

S

111·0

M343

R

?

S

M344

BR L

?

M345

LS

M346

8000

19

fair

5

4849111

5150

900

19

fa ir

none

4849111

111-0

5600­
5700

134

19

good

none

4849111

S

II-B

5500

2000

19

fa ir

none

4849111

?

S

111·0

5550

2500

19

fair

none

4849111

BR L

?

S

111·0

100625

19

good

none

4849111

M347

LS

?

S

111-0

5750

1600

19

fair

none

4849111

M348

LS

?

S

111·0

5550

8750

19

fair

none

4849111

M349

LS

?

S

111-0

5700

52500

19

BR L

?

S

111·0

5650·
5700

30000

19

none
none

4849111

M350

poor
good

M351

C 2

?

S

II 1-0

5600

6000

19

fair

none

4849111

M352

BRL-C

F

S

111·0

5550

5000

19

fair

1,2,6

4849111

M353

BRL-C

F

S

111·0

5550

4750

19

good

3,5,23

4849111

M354

BR L

?

S

111·0

5650

5000

19

fair

none

4849111

M355

C 1

F

S

111-0

5750

7500

19

good

3,5

4849111

M356

LS

?

S

II 1-0

5700­
5800

65625

19

good

none

4849111

M357

BRL-C

F

s

111·0

6200

20000

19

fair

3

4849111

M358

LS

?

II 1·0

5650

5000

19

poor

none

4849111

M359

BRL-C

F

s
s

111·0

5700·
5800

112500

19

good

3

4849111

M360

R

?

s

111·0

5550

28

19

poor

none

4849111

M361

BRL

?

s

II 1·0

5550

46500

19

poor

none

4849111

M362

X

F

V·E

7200

2

19

good

2

484911

M363

BRL

?

s
s

II 1-0

4800­
4900

144000

19

fair

none

4849111

M364

LS

?

S

II·B

5050

3500

19

poor

none

4849111

M365

C 2

?

TB

I·A

4120

21875

20

fair

none

474811

M366

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4160

11250

20

fair

1,2

474811

M367

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4111

20000

16

fair

M368

LS

?

TB

I·A

4111

200

16

poor

none

474811

M369

C 1

F

TB

I·A

4160

375

20

poor

',2

474811

5800·

5850

4849111

474811

60

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

TABLE 1-1.

(Continued)

M370

LS

?

S

111-0

5750

30000

11

fair

none

4849111

M371

BRL

?

S

111·0

5500

24000

11

poor

none

4849111

M372

LS

?

S

111·0

5450

20000

19

poor

none

4849111

M373

BRL

7

S

111·0

5050

3600

19

poor

none

4849111

M374

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4111

52000

16

poor

M376

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4150

375000

20

poor

1,2

474811

M377

V

F

TB

I-A

4200

1500000

15

fair

1,2,3,
4,5,7

474811

M378

R

F

S

111-0

5650

115

19

good

1,2

4849111

M379

C 1

F

S

II·B

4700

160000

11/19

good

1

4849111

M380

LS

?

S

111-0

5550­
5600

10000

19

fair

none

4849111

M381

C 2

?

S

II·B

4550

und

11

fair

none

4849111

M400

C 1

TB

I-A

4100

48564

10/15

fair

M401

Q

?
?
?

S

111-0

5000

n/a

19

excellent

none

4849111

M402

R

?

S

111-0

5200

175

19

excellent

none

4849111

M403

LS

?

S

111-0

4900

9840

19

fair

none

4849111

M404

C 1

F

H-TS

II-B

4300

8094

19

fair

1,2,3

474811

M405

LS

F

S

V-E

6000

80852

19

fair

3

4849111

M406

R

?

s

V-E

6000

100

19

excellent

none

4849111

M407

R

?

S

111-0

5500

2834

11/19

excellent

none

4849111

M408

R

F

S

V-E

6000

48

19

excellent

1,2

4849111

M409

BRL

?

S

V·E

6100

2024

19

poor

none

4849111

M410

V

F

TB

II-B

4125

3000

15/16

poor/
excellent

1.2,3.4.5.
7.8,9,10,
14.26

4849111

M411

V

F

TB

4400

120000

good

1,2.4,9,
25,26

4849111

M413

R

?

S

111-0

6000

3000

19

excellent

none

4849111

M414

V

F

TB

II-B

4400

2000000

10

excellent

1,2,3,4,
5,7

4849111

M450

BRL-C

F

V-E

6100

3500

5

fair

1

484911

M451

C 2

?

V-E

6080

3200

5

fair

none

484911

M452

RC

?

111·0

5080

5

fair

none

484911

M453

IH

?

s
s
s
s

111·0

5800

5

poor

none

484911

und

?

474811

4849111

--_. -

INVENTORY OF PREHISTORIC SITES

TABLE 1-1.

61

(Continued)

1050

5

poor

und

5

320

484911

fair

2,3
none

5

fair

none

484911

6000

5

fair

3

484911

1600

5

good

1,3

484911

350000

?

good

111-0

5800
5800
6100
5760
5760
5560

S

111-0

5600

1

F

S

111-0

5600

C 1

F

S

111-0

M463

C 1

F

OM

M464

IH

F

M465

BRL-C

M466

M454

C 1

F

S

111-0

M455

BRL

?

S

111-0

M456

RC

?

S

V-E

M457

BRL-C

F

S

111-0

M458

BRL-C

F

S

III-D

M459

C 1

F

S

M460

1M

?

M461

C 1

M462

484911

484911

19/21

excellent

none

484911

67000

21

excellent

1,2,4

484911

5500

2300

?

good/
excellent

1,3,5

484911

IV-C

5400

50000

?

fair

none

48481

OM

IV-C

5250

3

?

poor

1

48481

F

OM

IV-C

5160

300

?

poor

LS

?

S

III-D

5800

4455

5

poor

none

484911

M467

BRL-C

F

S

I JI-O

5760

15000

5/19

poor

1

484911

M468

C 1

F

OM

IV-C

5400

?

fair

1,25

48481

1111469

BRL-C

F

OM

IV-C

5430

17500
7500

?

poor

1

48481

M470

BRL

?

OM

IV-C

fair

none

48481

BRL

?

OM

IV-C

?

poor

none

48481

M472

BRL-C

F

S

111-0

5720

19

fair

1,5

484911

M473

BRL-C

F

OM

IV-C

5460

?

poor

1,2

48481

M474

BRL-C

F

OM

111-0

5400

?

fair

BRL-C

F

OM

'V-C

5400

?

good

26
1,2

48481

M475

M476

BRL

?

OM

IV-C

5420

und
7500
1040
5000
und
12750
3500

?

M471

5200
5120

?

fair

none

48481

M477

IH

S '"-0

5

good

484911

BRL-C

und

5

fair

484911

M481

V

F

5800
5840
4100

6400

M478

?
?

und

23

fairl

1,2,3,4,

excellent

8,12,26

M482

V

F

TB-H

I-A

4100

1125000

10

fair

1,2,3,4

474811

M483

V

F

TB

I-A

4060

und

15

fair

1,2,3

4849111

M484

RC

?

S

III-D

5800

20

11

fair

none

484911

M485

BRL-C

F

TB

II-B

fair

1

47481

C2

A

S

111-0

1256
20000

10

M486

4200
5050

11

fair

none

4849111

. - - ..- . . .

~-

S

111-0

TB-H. I-A

48481

48481

474811

--------------------------- ---------­

.....

62

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

TABLE 1-1.

(Continued)

474811

M487

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

9000

16

good

M488

C 1

F

TB

I-A

4100

17663

16

fair

1,3

474811

M489

V

F

TB

I-A

4200

240000

16

good

1,2,3,5

4849111

M490

BRL-C

F

TB

II-B

4100

60000

15

poor

',2

4849111

M491

BRL-C

F

TB

II-B

4100

11250

10

fair

1,2,3

4849111

M492

BRL

A

H

111-0

5200

2400

19

poor

none

4848111

M493

Fort?

?

H

111-0

5700

4000

19

excellent

4848111

M494

BRL-C

F

TB

I-A

4100

20000

16

good

474811

M495

IH

?

H

IV-C

5350

und

13

poor

none

4848111

M496

C ,

F

TB

I-A

4120

20000

16

good

1

474811

M497

BRL-C

F

TB

I-A

4060

5000

16

fair

474811

M498

?

H

IV-C

5370

2500

13

poor

4848111

M499

LS
C,

F

TB

II-B

4150­ 2000000

19

excellent

1,2,3

4849111

M500

IC

F

TB

II-B

M501

BRL-C

F

S

111-0

M502

IH

?

S

M503

C 1

?

M504

BRL

M505

4200

2000

?

poor

1,2

47481

6520

32000

3

fair

1,2

484911

111-0

6440

3

good

none

484911

S

111-0

6400

3

good

?

S

111-0

6600

und
30000
5000

3

poor

none

484911

LS

?

S

111-0

6800

1963

3

poor

none

484911

M506

BRL

?

S

111-0

6800

20000

3

fair

none

484911

M507

?

S

111-0

6600

1500

3

poor

none

484911

?

S

111-0

6320

1500

5

poor

none

484911

M509

LS
LS
LS

?

S

111-0

6480

und

3

poor

none

484911·

M510

BRL

?

S

111·0

6600

120000

5

good

none

484911

M511

BRL

?

S

111-0

6600

11250

5

poor

none

484911

M512

BRL

?

S

111-0

6520

19

fair

none

484911

M514

LS

?

S

111-0

6400

7500
20000

3

poor

none

484911

M515

BRL

?

S

111-0

6400

12000

5

poor

none

484911

M516

BRL

?

S

111-0

6680

40000

5

good

none

484911

M517

BRL-C

F

S

111-0

6600

10000

.3

fair

1,3

484911

M518

BRL-C

F

TB

I-A

4100

und

15

good

1,2,3,4,
5,25,26

4849111

M519

V

F

TB

I-A

4100

100

15

good

1,2,3

4849111

M508

484911

63

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE SUMMARY
The preceding sections have presented selected empirical
data generated during the rec~nt archeological reconnaissance
of McGregor Guided <,Missile Range.
These data provide specif ic
information on the type, age, significance, and distribution
of a representative cross section of prehistoric and historic
sites occuring within the study area.
Detailed quantitative
data on the geological, hydrological, and botanical contexts of
the discovered prehistoric sites were generated by various
special field consultants retained by the survey (Part III).
The fact that our study area was largely unexplored in terms of
prior professional archeological research greatly affected the
thrust of our efforts.
A somewhat conservative approach to
producing primary distributional, functional, and chronological
information WaS necessary before refined interpretive methods
could be applied.
We were in effect. producing a primary data
base which had already been worked out thirty years earlier in
other more heavily studied parts of the Southwest.
Missile and artillery firing schedules and on-going
maneuvers greatly hampered our efforts to conduct reliable,
systematized archeological study and inhibited our observations
of the effects of these activities on the integrity of discovered
cultural sites.
The logistical problems posed by the rugged
and inaccessible character of the Range were compounded by
these on-going activities throughout the field season.
RESEARCH DESIGN
The research strategy developed to thoroughly gather archeo­
logical, environmental, and historical information has been
discussed in detail in a previous section.
In brief, this
research design can be described in three phases.
Phase I
Phase I was primarily exploratory in nature and included
four major lines of inquiry:
1.
A primary survey effort consisting of widely dispersed
spot checks of a variety of environmental zones and
physiographic configurations.
This was designed to
provide primary field data on the range of variability
in cultural remains within the study area, and to
familiarized field personnel with major features of
the environmental contexts, as well as the logistical
problems likely to be encountered.
2.
A wide ranging series of geological and botanical
observations were carried out by special field con­
sultants to both field-check existing data and to
explore new lines of inquiry.

64

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

3.

4.

Field crews familiarized themselves witlL existing
trails, roads, hazardous military areas, and tested
the accuracy of existing maps of the area,
An aerial survey of the study area was carried out using
helicopter fligh~s provided by tlLe Army.
Vertical
color and black and white, and low level oblique black
and white photographs proved to be very h~lpful in
locating potential archeological sites, viewing con­
temporary vegetation distributions, and making
geological observations.

Phase II
Phase II supplemented the dispersed, spot sampling of th.e
preceding stage with intensive visual examination of a repre­
sentative cross section of the study area.
Six 36 square mile
intensive study quadrats or "priority areas" were defined on
the basis of preliminary data produced in Phase I.
Intensive
study quadrats were structured to cross-cut representative
portions of all major defined vegetative and geological zones.
On-foot inspection of the surface area within each quadrat was
conducted.
Small three-to-five man survey crews systematically
crossed and recrossed the priority areas.
Allowing for lapses
of coverage due to human error, inaccessability, and conflicts
with military exercises, an estimated 80 to 90% of th~ surface
area of each quadrat was inspected for cultural remains.
The
total area of intensive sampling made on this basis is estimated
at 216 square miles, or approximately 19.82% of the total
study area.
An additional 15% of the range area was extensively
examined in a less systematic manner by small crews continuing
the random grab-sampling effort initiated during Phase I.
Total
coverage of both intensive study of the priority areas and dis­
persed spot coverage throughout the rest of the range area is
estimated at 34% of the 1090 square mile survey area.
Th~
latter portion of Phase II was devoted to limited subsurface
testing at twelve sites (Part II).
Phase III
Phase III consisted of additional intensive survey in areas
where lapses of coverage had occurred due to hazardous military
activity, laboratory analyses of limited surface collections of
cultural materials, geological and botanical studies, and the
development of a viable resource management plan.
A rich and diverse archeological resource was discovered
within the present boundaries of McGregor Guided Missile Range.
Over 400 prehistoric sites ranging in complexity from simple.
fire hearth.s to large Formati.ve Period villages of 50 structures
or more, were recorded.
These ranged in age from small,

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE SUMMARY

65

apparently temporary camps. of Folsom affiliation (ea. 8000 B. C.)
to late EI Paso Phase settlelUents (ea. A.D. 1350). Army
.
control of the Range hBs restr:i,cted public access and minimized
relic collecting. Many of tha discovered sites were relatively
well preserved and had sustai.nedminimal damage from vandalism •.
DISCUSSION
Preliminary conclusions and hypotheses about the abori­
ginal utilization of McGregor Range will of necessity Be some­
what generalized, reflecting the inherent lilUitations of an
exploratory surface survey and the specific limLtations of
research conducted on an active missile testing range.
Paleoclimate
No discussion of the yarious aboriginal occupations of the
McGregor Range area is possible without first considering the
complex problem of post-Pleistocene climatic instability in
this portion of the South.west. A complete analysis of the
conflicting reconstructions of postulated late Pleistocene or
early Holocene climate oscillations and the concomittant
influences on floral and faunal communities were not among the
primary goals of our project, thus will not be attempted here.
One model which has been applied widely in adjacent araas
is that of Antevs (1955).
This lUodel holds that pluvial condi­
tions persisted in the Southwest until the major retreat of the
Late Wisconsin glaciation in the northern U. S.
A cooler, more
mesic climatic regime associated with the late pluvial moisture
fluctuations during glaCial recession may correspond with the
time of Paleo indian (Roberts 19.40, Griffin 1946) occupation of
the Range.
The moister, cooler conditions may have initiated
marked shifts in th.e distribution and dens·ity of flora and
fauna in presently-arid areas.
Antevs model also postulates a long dry and war~ interval,
termed the Altithermal, (1955: 323, 328-329.} for much of the
Southwest.
Cliaracterized by a shift to xeric conditions,
the A1tithermal persisted from 7500 to 4000 B.P. and may have
resulted in altered carrying capacities for many formerly mesic,
higner biomass areas.
This extreme alteration of the environ~
ment is often seen as encouraging a shift towards a more ~£ficient
and diverse subsistence strategy in human populations through­
out the Southwest.
This adaptive shift is quite visible in
the material culture of aboriginal groups, and has Deen termed
the Archaic (Willey and Phillips 19.58, Jennings 195]).
Succeeding the A1tith~rma1, a relatively moist and cool
period ensued which is characte;r:ized by fluctuating degrees of
moisture (Antevs 1955: 329.}.
Several droughts, none com.parable
to the A1tithermal Long Droughx, are indicated, but the general

66

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

trends. are toward relatively more lUesic conditions stmilar to
the present and toward the probable estaDlishment of approximate
patterns of 1nodern floral and faunal distriDutions.
A resolution of the problem of the existence, s·everity,
or effects of the Altitherual hypothesis is Deyond the scope
of this study. However, the bulk of the recent evidence
suggests that while the existence of Late Pleistocene pluvial!
interpluvial climatic fluctuations in the Southwest cannot be
doubted, the eff ec t of S1lch. phen01nena has been over emphasized.
Th.e existence of nU1nerous playa lake Deds, reI ic t s tr and 1 ines,
and braided stream deposits on McGregor Range attest to a far
more mesic climatic regime during the Paleoindian time period
than is currently found in the region,
There was probably
some fluctuation of both territorial extent and density of biota
in response to changes in available precipitation.
In a 1nountain.
bounded environment exhibiting the marked changes in relief
common to the Tularosa Basin. these fluctuations probably were
directly related to elevation and exposure.
Prior to the modern ranching era, the severe, cyclical
droughts which aifec ted the area (see Pigott, Part III) probably
did not result in complete replacement of any floral or faunal
species.
The radical changes which have taken place in the
Basin recently, with. the encroachment of coppice and dunes~ and
the successful invasion of mesquite should be viewed as a product
of recent land-use. These alterations are of a greater order of
magnitude than any similar events in the prehistoric period
(Ru£ fington and Kerbal 196.5. York and .Dick-Peddie 1969,
Kenmotsu Part III},
With the exception of several severe cyclical droughts.
and the recent sand dune/mesquite invasion, the environment of
McGregor Range area has remained essentially stable since at
least 4000 B.P.
The precipitation related changes in the dis­
tribution of biota which did occur were generally gradual, and
involved cbanges in territorial extent and density rather than
complete replacement of species.
Resource Distribution
The contemporary distribution of floral and faunal resources
on McGregor Range can be divided into a number of distinct
zones or associations. Since one of the stated goals of our
research was to delineate the nature of patterned human aaaptive
response to changes in the environment, a strong effort to pro­
duce objective primary data on resource exploitation was made.
For the most part the distinctive distribution of biota is
primarily affected by the availability of water, elevation, and
soil type,
Such secondary factors as slope, exposure, and
drainage also contribute to this zonal distribution\
Wyatt (1976>- defined five -major vegetative associations:

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE SUMMARY

67

which proved to have great utility in interpreting prehistoric
site distribution.
Kenmotsu (see Part III) helped refine and
expand Wyatt"s system through original fieldwork associated with
the McGregor Project. His w'Or:K demonstrates that each of the
major contemporary associati.ons exhibits a distinct assemblage
of potentially exploitaole plant and animal species.
The non­
random distribution and seas-onal availability of these speci.es
greatly affected the patterning of human subsistence behavior
in the study area since at least 4000 B.P.
Given the assumption that no catastrophic or rapid climati.c
fluctuations or concomittant species replacements took place
during the majority of the time preh.istaric man utilized the
study area, a detailed knowledge of cantemparary Diotic resource
distribution has been of great value in formulating hypotheses
of prehistoric land use patterns.
The cautiaus use 'Of ethna­
graphic analagy has facilitated this process.
Abariginal explaitation of the various unevenly distributed
biatic resources of the study area undoubtedly varied thraugh
time.
Both cultural and environmental factors affected the
pattern of utilization.
SIt-ort term cyclical droughts or os­
cillations in effective precipitatian patterns, vertical expan­
sian 'Or contraction of ecological zones~ technological innovations,
and the introduction of cultigens all affected ta one degree 'Or
another the subsistence mode of a period.
ABORIGINAL OCCUPATION OF MCGREGOR RANGE
The Paleoindian Period
During the course 'Of this study, only eight sites with iden­
tifiable Paleoindian artifacts were recarded.
These sites occur
on the Basin lowlands in deflated, eroded cantexts reSUlting in
a loss- of primary stratigrapliici.nformatian.
Of these si.tes, two
are conSidered ta solely represent discrete Paleoindian sites,
while other sites with Paleaindian projectile paints represented
singular, isalated finds 'Or were found in mixed cantexts with
yaunger materials (see Part 11),
The scanty informatian available on the Paleoindian occupa­
tion 'Of the McGregor Range area does not permit a reliable
reconstruction of the lifeway of these early hunters.
There is,
for example, no infarmation on the use of vegetal resources in
the range area at this time period.
In a very general manner
however, some conclusions on the nature of the earliest occupa­
tion of the study area can be advanced.
The data suggest a basic similarity between the Folsom
exploitation of the McGregor Range area and adjacent portions
of New Mexico and Texas.
A basic pattern 'Of pedestrian hunting of
gregarious herd animals (probably bison) is indicated by the
location and distribution of suspected Paleoindian sites.
It
is impossible to reliably dete~~ine the extent of vegetal

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

68

resource exploitation at this time_.
Th_ere is some evidence
that the people J;"esponsible for the production of the later
lanceolate projectile points- in our collection were more familiar
with, or were at least more w~lling to use, the various natural
sources of high quality lith-ic materials- located within the
study area, than were the earlier populations.
Whether this apparently greater know~edge of the uneven dis­
tribution of lithic material sources within the study area
implies a concomittant greater knowledge and us-e of the other
resources of the various ecozones is at pres-ent, a moot point.
The fact that the majority of lanceolate, PZano-like projectile
points were recovered from the desert lowlands near relict
playa features suggests that little alteration in the basic
hunting pattern had occurred between Folsom and Plano populations.
The Archaic
ThroughDut this report the term Archaic has been used to
refer to a broad range of regionally-variable hunting and
gathering cultures, whose materi.al remains indicate a marked
increase in the variety of floral and faunal resources exploited
when compared to the meager data from the preceding pe_riods.
AlthDugh there is some consensus among professional archeologists
as to the specific traits wh~ch ch_aracterized the Archaic in
this part of the Southwest, the present use of the term indicates
rather a participation in a widely distributed subsistence
strategy utilizing a broad variety of available biotic resources
(Willey and Phillips 1958l.
No specific trait list or span of
absolute time is considered definitive.
The marked shift towards the utilization of a more diverse
set of seasonably available biotic resources generally regarded
as characteristic of the Archaic in the study area is often seen
as a function of gradual post-Pleistocene dessication (Martin
1963, Haynes 1965, Irwin-Williams and Haynes 1970).
In keeping
with reservations on certain portions of the popular
Antevs model of drastic climatic deterioration in the Archaic,
the adoption of the hunter/gatherer subsistence mode is viewed
as a logical development and refinement of pre-existing exploi­
tative techniques, under the stimulus of a gradually changing
environment.
A subsistence strategy using broadly directed exploitation
of a variety of resources in a scheduled manner was in all
likelihood in existence during the early phases of the Cochise
Culture (Sayles and Antevs 1941).
Irwin-Williams (l968} refers
to an apparently well-developed plant resource processing tool
assemblage in the Sulphur Springs stage of Cochise at a date
of 9350 to 8300 B,P.
The w~de-spread adoption of such techniques
should be viewed as a gradual response to fluctuations in the
density and distribution of previously exploited Tesources~
rather than as a sudden innovation or change brought about by

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE SUMMARY

69

drastic replacement of species,
Of thB total present site inventory approximately 34% is
without visible cera1llic artifacts' or identifiable Paleoindian
materials.
A substantial number of the localities in this non­
ceramic category can he tentatively assigned an Archaic
derivation on the basis of the presence of known or suspected
temporally diagnostic projectile point types (Martin et al
19_52; Suhm and Jelks 1962; Irwin-Williams 1973) (see Part II).
The distribution of suspected Archaic
tes within the
study area is, as expected, far more diverse than ~s the case
in the preceding period,
This dispersed pattern is however,
non-random, in that a marked preference for thB contemporary
Foothill Draw/Yucca Gras'sland association Ofyatt 1976) in the
H,ueco Mountains, along the Otero Mesa escarp1llen t, and in the
Sacramento foothills, is apparent..
Sus'pected Archaic sites
occur with less frequency below or above this ecozone.
The
elevated tableland of Otero Besa had n~ identifia51e Archaic
sites.
While an in-depth statistical analysis must await further
data, it can be tentatively concluded that significant
differences in the amount of potentially useful floral and
faunal resources in the various defined biotic associations
is a major factor affecting tlie uneven distribution of Archaic
sites within the study area.
The portions of McGregor Range
showing the lowes't density of probable Archaic sites are the
sandy desert lowlands of the central basin and the arid flats
on Otero Mesa.
At present thBre is insufficient data to deter­
mine if this scarcity of sites reflects an actual avoidance of
the semiarid lowlands in favor of biotic zones offering a sig­
nificantly higher resource potential and greater degree of
shelter (Beardsley et al 1956)~ or if the lack of lowland sites
is a function of differential exposure or sampling error.
However~ it would seem axiomatic that small groups practicing
a broad spectrum hunting and gathering subsistence mode would
favor those environmental zones offering the greatest variety
of potentially exploitable resources.
Both xeric and more mesic
habitats~ and consequent biota, are found in thB contemporary
rough breaks zone along the Otero Mesa front, tn the Sacramento
foothills, and in the Hueco Bountains.
In view of our contention
that gradual post-Pleistocene dessication primarily affected
the density and areal extent of these vegetal associations rather
than causing complete species replacement, it seems evident
that Arch~ic populations within the study area were exploiting
an environment very similar to tliat of today.
A major difference
is the recent alteration of the desert lowlands by overgrazing
livestock,
Sites which have been defined as Archaic in the preliminary
project inventory fall into a numbe~ of functional types.
By
far the most common are those classed as burned rock loci

70

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

(noncerami.cL, lithic scatters, and isolated hearths.
Suspected
Archaic components or mate.rials· in Tocksh ters and complex
camp (none eramic 2 local i.t ies are the next mo st common.
Po s sible
Archaic components at quarryJwdrkshop sites occur less frequently.
Th.e type and distrioution of Archaic si tes on McGregor
Range permits certain tentative statements to De made about
the poorly understood social organization of these early popu­
lations.
Generally, the Archaic occupants of the study area
may be characterized as small, mobile groups of hunter/gatherers.
An efficient, multiple-resource based subsistence strategy was
used to exploit a variety of distinctive ecological zones in a
scheduled pattern. Whlle it 1's difficult to determine th.e s'ize
or composition of Archaic groups at this stage of our analysis,
it seems' likely that th.e hasic soci.al unit was the oand C:Radcliff~.
Brown 19.31; Steward 1938; Service 19'62~ Lee and DeVOTe 19_681,
This' unit was probably composed of several related ~ extended
family groups.
Since the McGregor study area was ~rtificially
defined on the basis of Tesource manage1l1ent considerations,
rather than purely to facilitate anth~opological research, the
number of Archaic bands wh.ich used the area at anyone. tiwe is
undeterminable.
It is assumed here. that the postulated Archaic bands utllizing
the study area nucleated into smaller family groups at certain
times of the year, and dispersed widely over the range during
winter, or during such cyclical climatic disrnptions as severe
drough.ts.
Many of the numerous small isolated hearths, several
bedrock 1l10rtar locations, and 1l1any of the less extensive non­
ceramic burned rock loci recorded in the study area are thDught
to be a resul t of Archai.c resource procurement and resource pro­
cessing activities, Most of the suspected Archaic components
in the many isolated rockshelters of th.e Sacramento and Rueco
foothills are viewed as indirect evidence of sporadic small
group hunting and gath.ering.
A transhu1l1ant model of differential
zonal exploitation of seasonally available biotic resources is
likely in a semiarid region exhibiting the dramatic changes in
relief common to McGregor Range.
The discovery of numexous, nonceramic complex camp localities
and extensive nonceramic burned rock loci in precisely those
ecozones defined as Iiolding the gre~test potential for popula­
tions practicing a band level~ hnnting and gathering subsistence
mode, supports the model oeing developed here~
Periodic, probably
seasonal, fusion of nucleated family groups or 1l1icro-bands seems
to have taken place (Steward 1938),
The distinct possiBility
that some of the sites defined here as Archaic may fie tIie result
of functionally spe~cific resource procurement or processing
activities by later Formati~e populations has not escaped our
consideration,
While there does seem to be sufficient data to
postulate the existence of periodic larger aggTegates- of Archaic
level popula t ions, spe.cula t ion on the struc tu re and de.yelop11lent
of these apParent macro-bands must of necessity 6e left for

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE SUMMARY

71

futura, more intensi.ve stlldtes,
S:j.::J:l}tlarly there is currantly
insuffi.c:tant data to parmi't a dafini.tion of alternative schemes
of community- patterning as: 1:'ece.ntly atteJllpted I>y Levine and
Mobely (1976L
The results of the recent McGregor survey ind
te a basic
continuity of Archaic subsistence strategy and 1.Uaterial culture
elements between the study area and adjacent parts of New Mexico,
Arizona, and Texas (Martin et at 1952; ffaury 19'50; Sunm. and Jelks
1962; Irwin-Wi.lliams 19.68; Human Systems Research 1973; Henderson
1976; Whalen 1977).
Th_e data s-uggast scheduled exploitation of
the study araa by band level populattons practicing a broad spec­
trum resource based subsistence mode,
The Archaic is the least known and most poorly understood
period in the McGregor Range area. Further tntensive study of
tha well preserved Archatc localities in th~ study area could
greatly refine our understanding of adaptive cultural change in
this part of the Southwest.
The Formative
Sites with identifiahle Formative Stage OUlley and Phillips
1958 t architec ture, ceramic remains ~ art expres'sions (Schaasfma
1972) ~ or lithic arti.facts· whtch can be defined as Mogollon
(Haury 1936; Wheat 1955; Fitting 19]21 are the most numerous in
the preliminary project inventory. niagnostic Mogollon ceramics
or architectural components were recorded at approximately 52-54%
of the sites. Almost without exception the Formative sites
discovered within the McGregor study area can be assigned to one
or more of th.e southern regional expressions of Lehmer ts (1948)
Jornada Branch of the Mogollon.,
The c las sif ica t ion scheme us ed
here to describe the te1llporal position of the Jornada Branch is
derived from Gladwin (1934) and Willey (1966) and refers to the
Jornada Branch of the Mogollon Subarea (Marshall 1973).
That
portion of the Jornada Branch which iB of greatest concern here
has been further defined as the Eastern Periphery (Wheat 19551.
The major expressions of Jornada culture found on McGregor Range
fall within the three southern. temporal units described by Lehmer.
These are termed the Mesilla, Doia Ana, and El Paso Phases,
Mesilla

Phas~

(A.D. 900 ....1100)

Over 260 Formati.ve sites were dis.covered during the r'ecent
survey of McGregor Range,
Less than 10% of these are i.dentified
as si'ngle component Mesi.lla Phase sites \
The functional slte
types subsumed by this category include;
a small village;
several complex camp or hamlet localities; a few small open sitas
which may be resource processing stations, and several small
rockshelters exhibiting suspected Mesilla components~
A large
number of sites whi.ch. seem to have Mesilla traits, bnt wh~.ch
have been badly disturliedoy military activities or vandalism,

72

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

have not been included in thi.s category.
The apparent Me.silla Phase sites discove.red on McGregor
Range fit Lehmert s (l948t site type/site description model
rather closely.
The larger sites tend to be located predomi­
nantly in upland localities within the Hueco Mountains or
Sacramento foothills.
Such sites are smaller in areal extent
than similar later period habitation areas.
They usually
contain a mixture of EZ Paso Brownwares and Classic Mimbres
intrusive ceramic types, and occur on streamside terrace or
alluvial fans where natural drainage would De sufficient for
dry farming.
Whalents observation (1977) that Mesilla Phase
sites tend to occur in locations which imply tIle exploitation
of a more diverse range of biotic resources than later El Paso
Phase sites is supported by the data from McGregor Range.
This
conclusion is in agreement with Lehmerts idea that Mesilla
Phase populations practiced in a mixed suosistence strategy
utilizing both primative horticulture and Late Archaic (Hueco
Phase} hunting and gathering practices.
Further excavations
at several well preserved stratified Mesilla sites is required
before more detailed interpretations of culture change wit.hin
the period can be attempted~
The larges t Mes ilIa Phase habi ta t ion site (11..,.4111 d iscove red
in the recent survey covers approximately 2,5 acres, and is located
at the mouth of a major canyon drainage.
Several small, rectan­
gular refuse pits, a child burial, and a possible pithouse, were
ob served in prof ile in a natural cu t-oan.k which b lsec t s the site ..
Where visible in inter-dune areas, th~ surface scatter consists
of numerous chipped stone artifacts, apparent flint knapping
loci, and a ceramic inventory composed of approximately 90%
EZ Paso Brownware and 10% Classic Mimbres intrusives.
Two radiocarbon dates of A.D. 666±ZOO (TX2405) and A.D.
770 i 50 (TX2404) were obtained from buried features at this site.
These are in relative agreement with Atents (1972: 21) dates
for probable Mesilla Phase structures at the Northgate Site
near El Paso.
The location, temporal position, and material
culture of the Mesilla Phase sites recorded on McGregor Range
show a basic continuity with Lehmerts 1948 model, and with
other subsequent findings in the immediate area.
The radiocarbon
dated obtained at a single Mesilla Phase village site indicate
that the phase was present in a recognizable form some 300 to
350 years earlier than was originally thought.
Dona Ana Pha

(A.D. 1100-1200)

Sites which can be tentatively assigned to the .Dona Ana
Phase are far more numerouS in. th-e study are~ thBn Mesilla
sites.
This in all protiability reflects a real increase in
population density brought about by the i.ncreasing efficiency
of agriculture based subsistence acti.vities. .DoRa Ana sites
are defined primarily upon the oasis of surface occurences of

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE SUMMARY

73

diagnostic ceramic assemblages, site size and internal complexity,
and upon the presence or absence of key arch~tectural traits
(Lehmer 1948). Probable Dona Ana Phase Sites within the study
area included several apparent villages; a number of complex
camp localities which may represent seasonal hamlets; suspected
Dona Ana components in isolated rockshelters; and several
apparently special function resource procurement and processing
areas.
Dona Ana sites tend to be concentrated in the large draws
and canyons of the Hueco Mountains, although a few were recorded
in the central desert lowlands and along th.e Otero ~esa front ~
Almost wi.thout exception the larger more complex sites which are
defined as habitational, are located adjacent to a highland area.
Smaller, limited activi.ty loci are found tn th.e highlands and on
the desert floor.
This larter class of sites is thought to rep­
resent" scheduled hunting or gathering activities used to supplement
the agricultural component of the subsistence package.
Generally Dona Ana hahita,tion sites are larger and internally
more complex than similar Mesilla sites.
They are characterized
by nUmerous special activity loci or features, including probable
flint knapping areas, hearth. and earth oven features of various
sizes and shapes 1 occasional Durial cairns and suspected pithouse
depressions,
Isolated pictograph panels and quarry areas which
occur near several of the suspect~d Dona Ana settlements in the
Hueco Mountains may be aSSOCiated, although th~.s is difficult
to demonstrate,
None of the Dona Ana Phase settlements recorded on McGregor
Range evidenced signs of above ground adobe structures.
This
is regarded as a probable function of severe sheet washing in
the Dueco Mountains and differential exposure at the few sandy
lowland locations.
Ths majority of these sites contain a dense
surface deposit of chipped stone artifacts; fragmentary basin
and trough metates; middens of mixed ash, fire fractured rock
and cultural debris; and ceramic scatters composed of a mixture
of EZ Paso BY'o1.Jn1.JaY'e" EZ Pas-o Po ZychY'ome" some western Mimbres
intrusive wares, ChupadeY'o BZack on White and other northern
intrusives.
In addition it is in the Dona Ana Phase settlements
that substantial amounts of Sonoran and Chihuahuan trade.ares
begin to appear (see Part II).
A radiocarbon date of A.D. 990±70 (TX2343) was obtained from
a buried hearth in an undisturbed rocks-liel ter (11-103) in ,the
Hueco Mountains.
Directly associated with the feature were
several shards of El Paso BrownwaY'e" EZ Paso PolychY'ome~ Playas
Red1.JaY'e, Casas- GY'andes PZainwaY'e, a single sherd of GiZa PoZy­
chY'ome, and several unidentified plainware fragments. The
presence of this varied ceramic assemblage :tn so early an un­
disturbed context is highly suggestiva.
Chronologically it
would seam to occupy a transiti'onal Late Mesilla/Early Doha Ana
position.
The surprising variety of this dated assemblage

74

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

indicates that the 1)onq Ana Phase. occupants ot the McGregor
Range area were parti:cipa t ing i:n a more e.xtensiveand diverse
economic network than has been hi'the.r to assumed.
PerhapS' tn.e
populations of Wheat "s (l955L Eastern Periphery, we.re not s'o
far removed from tlie 'Mogollon interactron sphere as has been
thought.
Furtner limited testing at this S'ite revealed
several di:stinct lower s'trata which contained only EZ Paso
Bpo1i!nware sherds and a few flakes of local chert.
In most essential aspects the Doila Ana Phase sites discovered
during the recent S'urvey of the McGregor Range conform to Lehmer's
(1948) S'ettlement model~
The data indicate a oaS'ic continuity
between the McGregor Range area and the rest of the southern
Jornada area during this time,
It is suggested that the inhabi­
tants of the study area had closer and more extensive economic
and social ties with surrounding cultures than has previously
been assumed.
El Paso Phase (A.D. 1200-13501)
Sites attributed to the El Paso Phase are the most numerous
Formative localities recorded on McGregor Range.
Of tha more
than 260 ceramic sites discovered, approximately 85% are
assigned to the El Paso Phase.
This period represents the time
of greatest cultural elaboration and population density reached
by the Mogollon derived cultures of the ~outhern Tularosa basin
(Lehmer 1948),
El Paso Phase sites on McGregor Range are identified by the
presence of key architectural and ceramic traits.
Habitation
sites of this period tend to be much more extensive and internally
more complex than earlier sites.
Large villages and hamlets are
characterized by adobe structural remains containing as many as
50 domiciliary and special activity roomS.
Site locations are
marked by extremely dense surface deposits of lithic and ceramic
artifacts; by numerous large, non-portable grinding implements;
by the presence of many discrete concentrations of specific arti­
fact classes indicating activity areas, and by large refuse
middens which attest to sustained habitation.
Large habitation sites occur most frequently in areas of the
lower desert basin where extensive exposures of soils of good
agricultural potential exist~
AlthDugh there is little concrete
evidence of irrigation practices in use in the El Paso }?hase, the
large settlement locations necessitate some form of artificial
water diversion methods.
Whalen (l977) postulates the use of
primitive earth and brush check dams and simple unlined ditches
as the most likely type of technology for El Paso popUlations.
Small scale test excavations at a large EI ~aso Phase village
(M-410} yielded a radiocarbon date of A.D. 1260~70 (TX234l) on
a charred roof beam uncovered in situ on a packed adobe house
floor.
The ceramic assemblage at this and other large El Paso
Phase settlements includes:
El. Paso Bro7JJnwape" EZ Pas-o poZyanpome,

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE SUMMARY

75

Chupadepo Blaok on White~ Thpee~Cipole and Mimbpes Blaok on
White~ Linooln Blaok on Red~ Thpee-Riveps and San Andpes Red on
Tan~ and Jornada Brownwape.
SigniJicant amount of northern
Ch.i.huahuan and western Mogollon wares also occur on maj or habi­
tation sites.
In addition to large, lowland settlements, a substantial
number of seasonal farmsteads and probable resource procurement
and processing stations were recorded.
The former include sites
recorded as complex camps, These lack the architectural features
and extensive midden deposits found at larger habitation sites.
Sites of this type are usually found in upland locations where
soils of good agricultural potential occur near large intermit­
tent stream courses,
It seems likely that some of these smaller
occupations, particularly those on the wind-swept margins of
Otero Mesa, were only utilized during the main growing season.
Temporary wooden or jaoaZ structures would provide sufficient
shelter from the elements, and would leave little trace of sus­
tained habitation.
Other similar sites located in the sheltered
bottoms of large canyons in the Rueco Mountains or Sacramento
foothills may have been more permanently occupied.
Other special activity loci include those interpreted as
seasonal vegetal resource gathering stations.
These are charac­
terized by large numbers of multiple-use hearths and earth ovens,
usually associated with a sparse scatter of brown utility wares,
an occasional Chupadepo Black on White water jug fragment, and
various chipp ed st one scraping and chopp ing imp lemen t s.
Susp ec ted
EI Paso Phase ceramic types at quarry/workshops and isolated camp
locations indicate non-agricultural subsistence activities.
It is evident that although sedentary agriculture carried on
at extensive lowland settlements was the mainstay of the El Paso
Phase economy, there was continued exploitation of seasonally
available floral and faunal resources.
The extensive hearth
and earth oven sites located near the heads of many of th.e Rueco
Mountain canyons and draws attest to th~ scheduled extraction of
sotol, Agave leoheguilla~ and Opuntia. All of these resources
require dry heat baking and mastication in isolated temporary
camps.
Other small upland camps contain primarily projectile
points, chipped stone scrapers and cutting implements, and a few
utilitarian El Paso Phase ceramic sherds; and are defined as
small group hunting camps,
Several of the isolated rock art
panels and quarry/workshop localities may be related to El Paso
Phase activity, although more work is needed to demonstrate this.
In short, a wide variety of Late Formative sites ranging
from large pueblos to tiny, single hunter campsitQs were re~
corded within the McGregor study area.
These preserve a wealth
of data about El Paso Phase economic and social patterns, and
greatly add to the utility and significance of the discovered
resource.
An additional class of El Paso Phase sites, discovered during
the recent survey, consists of several extensive open occupation

76

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

areas located adjacent to a cOJllplex of small playas in the
central basin.
The sites within this category are generally
characterized by very denae concentrations of chipped stone
artifacts, the presence. of portable trough and basin metates,
numerous large hearth or earth, oven features, andyery dense
surface concentrations of ceramic slLerds_
Other than a marked
absence of th.e adobe structural remains found at other lowland
sites exhibiting a similar density of artifactual material, the
nature of th.e ceramic assemblage is th.e most unique feature of
these localities.
Without exception sites of this category
contain the most varied ceramic inventory at any recorded E1
Paso Phase site.
The incidence of imported wares is remarkable in both pro­
portion to indigenous types and in the diversity af points of
origin.
In addition to an abundance of exotic trade cera~ics,
such imported materials as olivella shell beads, and fragments
of glycemeris pendants or bracelets were recorded or reported
by previous invest ators (phelps 1967L
The agricul tural potential and wa. ter resources of th,e
limited area containing this clasS of related sites is not
optimum in comparison to other large EI Paso Phase villages.
The apparent absence of adobe structural remains suggests that
the activity which resulted in the dense scatters of mixed cul­
tural materials was linked to some special function aside from
sedentary agriculture.
The abundance of imported ceramic types,
exotic shell ornaments, the close proximity of the turquoise­
producing Jarilla Mountains, and the lack of surface evidence
of structural remains suggest that this site complex may repre-,
sent special function trade centers.
Seasonal exchange or trade
centers where such local precious materials as turquoise or
azurite were exchanged for imported non-utilitarian objects of
bone, shell, or pottery are not unknown from other parts of
the southwest.
DiPeso t19661 has discussed the probable economic
connections between Casas Grandes and the northern h~nterland,
of which the eastern Jornada area is a principal part.
Willey
(l9-66} has summarized many of the traits indicating an exchange
relationship between Chihuahua and the Mogollon area.
At this stage of our analysis it seems likely that th~
rich turquoise depositB of the Jarilla Mountains were not ig­
nored by the EI Paso Phase occupants of the study area.
It is
difficult to accurately determine at present at what date the
postulated exchange sites on McGregor Range began to be used,
or if the postulated exchange of goods took place directly
with primary merchants or with intermediary Mogollon groups.
The preponderance of Chihuahuan trade ceramics does seem to
indicate that the primary direction of trade was along a north­
south axis, perhaps with secondary involvement by western
Mogollon groups.
A substantial amount of research is necessary
before these tentative hypotheses can be regarded as more than
speculative.

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE SUMMARY

77

A poorly understood combina,tionof environmental fluctua­
tions seems to have led to a marked decline in th-e Mogollon
cultures of the McGregor a-rea.
&"yabout A.D. 1315-~400 the
lower Tularosa Basin seems to ,have been vacated by sedentary
Indians (Lehmer 19.48: 86}.
There is some evidence that the
relatively large population& indicated by the numeroUS and
extensive EI Paso Phase si.tes were reduced by a series of
disasterous drought s an.d a cant inued tr end toward s a lUore erra t i.e
rainfall pattern, Pigott (see Part Ill) sees strong evidence
that the inhabitants of the south.ern Tularosa Basin experienced
severe drought conditions at approximately A~D. 1100 and A.D.
1300.
Another dry cycle occurred ea. A.D. 1850 and caused
severe problems for cattlemen in the McGregor area. Antevs
(1955) "Grea t Drought It postula t ad for the western pueblo area
seems to generally correspond to precipitation fluctuations in
the Jornada area.
The effects of such a dry period would be
more severe on the pueblo plateau than in the Tularosa Basin.
Jelinek (1967) and Dillehay (l97a} both present evidence
for significant economic changes in prehistoric cuI tU.res to
the northeast and east of the Jornada area, at about A,D, 1300.
Henderson (19761 working at Brantley Reservoir near Carlsbad
had evaluated much of the paleoclimatic data available for
the Middle Pecos and th.e e.xtreme Eastern Jornada periphery.
His findings generally support the Antevs model.
Levine and
Mobely (1976) see a sharp decline in Jornada cultural influence
in the Los Esteros Reservoir area near Santa Rosa about A.D.
1350, and support Lehmerts idea of an abandonment of the southern
Tularosa.
Finally it should be noted that none of the later
Rio Grande glaze wares which might indicate a later sedentary
occupation of the basin were observed at any of the McGregor
Range sites.
The remains of the sedentary populations once
common to the basin eventually may have moved to the north and
south, where they added to th-e population of large settlements
like Gran Quivira or the Jumano villages (Sauer 1934, In Human
Systems Research 19J31,
Scnro eder (1960, 1973) nas s tudied the Mescalero Apache
occupation of the Tularosa Basin region.
The Mescalero apparently
continued to intermittently traverse the McGregor Range area
until the formation of a reservation in the late nineteenth
century.
It is possible that several of the rock circle sites
or some of the few unidentified micaeous ceramic sherds re.covered
at several sites may be a result of Athabascan speaking groups
traversing the McGregor area.
At our present stage of analysis
no localities can be.definitely attributed to Mescalero activity.
As indicated in the introductory section of tnis research
report the primary goals at McGregor Guided Missle Range were
to provide cultural resource planners the necessary information
to effectively manage the prehLstoric resources and to develope
an objective, reliable body of priIllary field data to facilitate
further interpretive research in this little known area.
In

78

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

vi.ew of th.e unique set of tactical problems presented hy the
ha.zardous and inaccessable na tureof the research. area, and of
the inherent limitations of a surface survey (Ruppe 19661. the
preceding conclusions are offe-red as preliminary observations
on the prehistory of McGregor Range.

79

REFERENCES CITED

Antevs, E.
1955
Geologic-Climatic Dating in the West.
Antiquity.
20(4): 317-55.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1972
Evaluation of
gate Site, El
gical Salvage
University of

Ameriaan

the Cultural Resources of the North­
Paso County, Texas. Texas Archeolo­
Project Researah Report 5.
The
Texas at Austin.

Beardsley, Richard K., Preston Holder, Alex D. Krieger, Betty
J. Meggers, John B. Rinaldo, and Paul Kutschie.
1956
Functional and Evolutionary Implications of Community
Patterning.
IN Seminars in Archeology:
1955,
Robert Wauchope (ed.), pp. 129-157, Memoirs of the
Soaie ty for Ameriaan Areheo Zogy no. 1 L.
Bilbo, M.
1976
A High Elevation Survey of Castner Range, Fort
Bliss, Texas.
The Artifaat 14(1).
Binford, L.R.
1964
A Consideration of Archeological Research Design.
Ameriean Antiquity 29.
Brolio, F.
1971
An Investigation of Surface Collected Clovis, Folsom
and Midland Projectile Points from Blackwater Draw
and Adjacent Localities, M. S. Thesis
East New
Mexico University, Portales.
Brook, Vernon R.
1966
The McGregor Site. The Artifaet 4(4).
1967

The Sarge Site:

An EI Paso Phase Ruin.

The Artifaet

5 (2) •

Buffington, L.C. and C.H. Herbal
1965
Vegetational Changes on a Semi-desert Grassland
Range from 1858 to 1963. EeoZogieaZ Monographs
35: 139-164.
Chao, Lincoln R.
1969
Statisties: Methods and AnaZyses.
Company, Ne~ York.

McGraw-Hill Book

80

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

Clark, C.A.
1973
Vegetational Analys~s of a Denuded Portion of the
Chihuahuan Desert, EI Paso County, Te~as. M. S •
Thesis, The Univer~ity of Texas, EI Paso.
Cosgrove, C.B.
1947
Caves of the Upper Gila and Hueco Areas in New
Mexico and Texas.
Peabody Museum Papers XXIV (2).
Cambridge.
Department of the Army
1976
Headquarters, Training and Doctrine Command. Appen­
dix A:
A Geological and Soil Evaluation.
Environ­
mental Impact Statement Land Use Withdrawal, McGregor
Range Fort Eli/ut-' Te:x;as.
1976

Headquarters, Training and Doctrine Command.
Intro­
duction and Environmental Setting.
Environmental
Impact Statement Land Use Withdrawal, MaGregor
Range Fort Bliss, Texas.

Department of the Interior, National ar
erv ce
1977
Recovery of Scienti£ic. Prehistoric, HistoriC,
and Archeological Data: Methods, Standards, and
Reporting Procedures.
Federal Register 42(19):
5374-78.
Dice, L.R.
1943
The Biotic Provinaes of North Ameriaa.
of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

University

Dillehay, T.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the
Southern Plains.
Plains Anthropologist 19(65):
180-96.
DiPeso, Charles
Archeology and Ethnohistory of the Northern Sierra.
1966
Handbook of Middle American Indians.
R. Wauchope,
G.F. Ekho1n, G.R. Willey (ed.), The University_of
Texas Press, Austin.
Donaldson, B.R.
1975
An Archeological Sample of the White Mountain'Planning
Unit Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest. Arizona.
USDA Forest Service, Southwester~ Region, Archeolo­
gical Report 6.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
Physiography of Western United States.
McGraw-Hill
1931
Book Company. Inc.
New York and London.

81

REFERENCES

Fitting, James E.
1972
Preliminary Notes on Cliff Valley Settlement Patterns.•
The AY'tifaat 10(4), EI Paso.
Gardner, J.L.
1951
Vegetation of the Creosotabush Area of the Rio Grande
Valley in New Mexico.
Eaologiaal MonogY'aphs 21: 379­
403.
Gladwin. H.S.
1934
The Archeology of the Southwest and Its Relation to
the Culture of Texas.
Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society Bulletin 6: 19-35. Abilene.
Griffin, James B.
1946
Cultural Change and Continuity in Eastern United
States Archeology IN: Man in Northeastern North
America.
Frederick Johnson (ed.). PapeY's of the
R.S. Peabody Foundation foY' AY'anaeology 3: 37-95.
Massachusetts.
Hammersen, Martha M.
1972
The Prehistoric Mogollon Culture and Its Regional
Expression in the EI Paso Area.
The AY'iifaat 10(1).
EI Paso.
Haury, E.W.
1936
The Mogollon Culture of Southwestern New Mexico.
Medallion Papers 20. Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
1950

The StY'atigraphy and AY'cheology of Ventana Cave,
Arizona • . University of New Mexico and University
of Arizona Presses, Albuquerque and Tucson.

Haynes, V.
1965
Geochronology of Late Quaternary Alluvium.
InteY'nal
ReseaY'ah Report GeoanY'on 9. Laboratory, University
of Arizona.

Henderson, Mark
1976
An Archeological Inventory of Brantley Reservoir,
New Mexico.
Southern Methodist University Contri­
butions in AnthY'opology 18. Dallas.
Human Systems Research

19]3

SUY'vey of the Tularosa Basin.
Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Technical Manual.

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

82

Irwin-Williams, C.
1965
Configurations of Preceramic Developments in the
Southwestern United States.
Eastern New Mexico
University Contpibutions in Anthpopology 1(2):
1-9. Portales, New'Mexico.
1968

Archaic Culture History in the Southwestern United
States, IN: Early Man in Western North America.
Eastern New Mexico University Contpibutions in
Anthpopology 1(4). Portales, New Mexico.

1973

The Oshara Tradition:
Origins of Anasazi Culture.
Eastern New Mexico University Contpibutions in
Anthpopology 5(1).

Irwin-Williams, C. and C.V. Haynes
1970
Climatic Change and Early Population Dynamics in
the Southwestern United States. QuateI'naI'Y
ReseaI'ch 1: 59-71.
Jelinek, Anthur
1967
A Preh~storic Sequence in the Middle Pecos Valley,
New Mexico. AnthI'opologicaZ PapeI's Museum of
Anthropology.
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Jennings, Jesse D.
1957
Danger Cave.
of Utah.

Anthpopological Papeps 27.

University

Judge, W.J.

1973

Paleo-Indian Occupation of the CentI'al Rio GI'ande
ValZey in Ne~ Mexico. University of New Mexico
Press, Albuquerque.

Kelley, J.H.
1966
Ths Archeology of the Sierra Blanca Region of
Southeastern New Mexico. Dissertation on file,
Harvard University.
Kenmotsu, Ray D.
1977
A CultuI'aZ ResouI'ce InventoI'y and Assessment of
MaGI'egoI' Guided Missile Range. Part III: Botanical
and Geological Studies.
King, P.B.
1935
Outline of the Structural Development of Trans-Pecos
Texas. American Association of Petroleum Geologists

BuZZetin 19 •

.- . - - - - - -

.............------~-

....

-------~-.-------------.----~-~-

83

REFERENCES

Lee, R. and I. DeVore
1968
Mcm The Huntep.

Aldine, Chi,cago.

Lehmer, D.J.
1948
The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon.
Arizona Bulletin VXIX(2).
Tucson.

University of

Levine, F. and C.M. Mobely
Archeological Resources at Los Esteros Lake, New
1976
Mexico.
Southern Methodist University Contpibutions
in AnthropoZogy 17. Dallas, Texas.
Marshall, M.P.
1973
Background Information on the Jornada Culture Area.
1973 Survey of the TuZaroBa BaBin: TechnicaZ
Manual.
Human Systems Research, Three Rivers.
Martin, P.S., John B. Rinaldo, Elaine A. Bluhm, Hugh C. Cutter,
and Roger Granger, Jr.
1952
Mogollon Cultural Continuity and Change:
The
Stratigraphic Analysis of Tularosa and Cordova
Caves. FieZdiana: AnthropoZogy 40.
Chicago
Natural H~story Museum, Ch~cago.
Phelps, Alan L.
1966
A Burial at the McGregor Site.
El Paso.
1967

Six Stone Balls:
Paso.

A Cache.

The Artifact 4(2)

The Artifaat 5(1) El

Pigott, John D.
1977
A Cultural Resourae Inventopy and Assessment of
McGpegor Guided Missile Range.
Part III:
Botanical
and Geological Studies.
Quimby, B. and V.R. Brook
1967
A Folsom Site Near El Paso, Texas.
5(4): 31-47.
El Paso.

The Artifact

Radcliff-Brown, A.R.
1931
Social Organization of Australian Tribes.
Monographs T.

Oceania

Roberts, Frank H.H.
1940
Developments in the Problem of the North American
Paleoindian, IN: Essays in Historical Anthropology
of North America.
Smithsonian Miscellaneous
Collections 100: 51-116.

84

THE PREHISTORIC RESOURCE

Ruppe, R.J.
1966
The Archeological Survey:
Antiquity 31: 313-333.

A Defens.e.

Ameriaan

Sauer, C.
The Distribution of Aboriginal Tribes and Languages
1934
in Northwestern Me~ico.
Ibero-Ameriaana 5.
University of California Press, Berkeley.
Sayles, E.B.
1935
An Archeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers
XVII.
Gila Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
Sayles, E.B. and E. Antevs
1941
The Cochise Culture. Medallion Papers XXIX.
Pueblo, Globe, Arizona.
Schaafsma, P.
1972
Roak Art in New Mexiao.
Office, Santa Fe.

Gila

New Mexico State Planning

Schroeder, A.B.
1960
A Study of the Apache Indians, Part III:
The
Mescalero Apaches.
Unp~blished Manuscript.
Santa
Fe, New Mexico.
1973

The Mescalero Apaches. Survey of the Tularosa
Basin: Teahnical Manual.
Human Systems Research.
Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Service, E.R.
1962
Primitive SoaiaZ Organization: An Evolutionary
Perspective.
Random House.
New York.
Shreve, Forest, T.D. Mallory, E.B. Shreve and W.V. Turnage
1939
Desert Investigations.
Carnegie Institute of
Washington Year Book 38: 127-136.
Smiley, Nancy Kays
1977
A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of
MaGregor Guided Missile Range.
Part II:
Special
Archeological Studies.
Steward, J.H.
1938
Basin-Plateau Aboriginal Socio~Political Groups.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 120.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology:
Type Descriptions.
Speaial Publiaation 1. Texas Archeological Society
and Bulletin 4.
Texas Memorial Museum.
The Univer­
sity of Texas at Austin.

REFERENCES

85

Wendorf, Fred
1954
A Reconstruction of Northern Rio Grande Prehistory.
American Anthropologist 56: 200-27.
,

1960

The Archeology of Northeastern New Mexico.
Palacio 67(2): 55-56.

El

Whalen, Michael E.
1977
Settlement Patterns of the Eastern Bueco Bolson.
Centennial Museum Anthropological Paper 4.
The
University of Texas at El Paso.
Wheat, J.B.
1955
Mogollon Culture Prior to A.D. 1000. American
Antiquity 20(4) pt. 2. Memoirs of the Society
for American Archeology 10. Salt Lake City.
Willey, G.R.
1966
An Introduction to American Archeology v. 1, North
and Middle America.
Prentice Ball, New Jersey.
Willey, G.R. and Phillip Phillips
1958
Method and Theory in American Archeology.
sity of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Univer­

Wimberly, M. and P.L. Eidenbach
1972
A Preliminary Analysis of Faunal Material From
Fresnal Shelter, New Mexico.
Systems Research
Training Bulletin.
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Wooldridge, H.G.
1979
The Bald Eagle Cache:
Implications of an Early
Exchange System in the Jornada Region of South­
Central New Mexico.
Unpublished Masters Thesis.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Wyatt, J.T.
1975
Annex A, Ecological Analyses,
McGregor Range (New
Mexico).
IN: Environmental Impact Statement Land
Use Withdrawal, McGregor Range Fort Bliss, Texas.
York, J.C. and W.A. Dick-Peddie
1969
Vegetation Changes in Southern New Mexico Dur~ng the
Past Hundred Years.
Arid Lands in Perspective
W.G. McGinnies (ed.).
The University of Arizona
Press, Tucson.

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE
MARTHA DOTY FREEMAN

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Martha Doty Freeman

ABSTRACT
A partial inventory of the historic sites on McGregor Guided
Missile Range was carried out in the fall of 1975.
Simultaneous­
ly~ intensive research was done in order to acquire specific
information about each of the sites, and to throw light on the
history of the entire Range, from the first Spanish reports of
Apache Indian occupation to the more recent phase of military
use.
Research into the history of the southern Tularosa Basin
and analysis of specific sites revealed that the area was impor­
tant in terms of Apache migrations, the nineteenth-century immi­
gration of Anglo civilians and military groups to California~ and
the development of ranching in an arid environment.
The general
paucity of historic sites reflects the difficulty of life in the
Tularosa Basin; however~ several key sites are in excellent condi­
tion, and have the potential, with further study, of providing
information about the adaptation of historic human populations
to the arid Southwest.
INTRODUCTION
Eugene Manlove Rhodes liked to describe his "Little World"
of the Tularosa Basin as a place where people "climb for water
and dig for wood."
It was a country some thought was "blotched
and leprous" (Rhodes 1963: 2, 4) and where rain was remembered,
if at all, by seasons: "Not that it is really dry now--not to
say dry.
Why, we had a rain in April--don't you remember?-­
and it clouded up again in July" (Rhodes 1946: 8).
In the 1770's Don Bernardo de Miera y Pacheco captioned the
area of the Tularosa Basin "Llanos Sin Agua" (Adams 1956: 268);
and Captain S. G. French, attempting to locate a route for a
wagon road from the Gulf of Mexico to E1 Paso, remarked about the
area between the Pecos and the Rio Grande that "when the nature
of the country is seen by those who may hereafter pass over the

90

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

road, it may excite surprise; but it will not be that so prac­
ticable a route has been found, but rather that any was found
at all" (U.S. Congress. Senate 1850: 49).
Until the end of the nineteenth century these, and other
similar, opinions added up to a studied avoidance of an area
that had, by all accounts, little to recommend it.
To the
Spanish the arid lands of the Tularosa were even more extensive
and dangerous than those of the Jornada del Muerto to the west,
and little could persuade them to seek out and develop its
mineral resources or abundant grazing areas.
One reason for such an avoidance was a lack of water re­
sources.
Equally as fearsome was the presence of Apaches from
the Sandias on the north to E1 Paso and northern Mexico on the
south, and from Siete Rios on the east to an area west of the
Rio Grande.
Between 1541, when Coronado ventured to the Canadian
River in the New Mexico/Texas Panhandle area, and 1832, when Don
Antonio Barreiro wrote his Ojeada sobre Nuevo-M~xiao, the Spanish
and Mexicans avoided the southern Tularosa Basin and chose, in­
stead, to travel along the valley of the Rio Grande. For
over 300 years El Paso was plagued by raiding Apaches who left
their strongholds in the Seven Rivers area, in the Sacramentos
and Organs, and on the slopes of Sierra Blanca, to travel across
the Basin and make off with stock from nearby Spanish settlements.
Don Diego de Vargas noted raids on El Paso in 1692; Don Antonio
Valverde Cosio followed the Apache as far as Seven Rivers in the
early 1700's; and in 1776 Hugo O'Conor campaigned against the
Apache in the Sacramentos and near Sierra Blanca.
Only the in­
habitants of the Pueblo of San Antonio de Ysleta, southeast of
El Paso, felt the lure of the virgin grasses of the southern
Tularosa Basin sufficiently to press for official recognition of
their traditional use of the area as a community pasture.
Throughout much of the nineteenth century, Anglo observers
also remarked on the unpleasant aspect of the area.
Events of
the 1840's and 1850's conspired, however, to open up the Basin.
With the end of the Mexican War, Congress initiated action to
survey the United States/Mexican border, and to complete recon­
naissances for the construction of military and wagon roads.
The
California gold strikes encouraged prospective miners, as well as
the United States Army, to explore the territory between Fort
Smith and Santa Fe in order to establish the best route from
there to California.
In September of 1849, Captain Randolpa B.
Marcy made the first official survey of the southern Tularosa
Basin when he left Dona Ana for Fort Smith, crossed San Augustine
Pass, and headed southeast to Hueco Tanks, the first water in an
otherwise tlflat and sandy" valley.
With the settlement of the Mescalero Apache on a reservation
near Fort Stanton in the early 1870's, one of the most serious
impediments to the opening of the Tularosa Basin disappeared, and
within ten years 15 townships in the area of the present-day

91

INTRODIJCTION

McGregor Range had been surveyed and opened up for settlement,
most of them in the Sacramento Mountains, where there was
water, and southeast of what'was to become the town of Orogrande.
Encouraged by the cattle booms of the early 1880's, and attracted
by the undeveloped lands of the Tularosa Basin, cattlemen, many
of them from Texas, began to move west from the Pecos River and
cross over the Sacramento Mountains.
The Lone Star of El Paso
remarked in April of 1884 that "large numbers of Texas and
eastern capitalists are in the southern part of the territory,
looking for cattle and sheep ranges" (April 12, 1884: 4).
And
indeed, they were.
J. H. Nations, one of the largest land owners
in West Texas, extended his holdings into the Basin in the mid­
1880's. Jonathan Wildy, brother-in-law and sometime business
partner of Joseph Calloway Lea, "the father of Roswell," took up
land in the San Andres Range to the west and drilled Wildy Well,
now part of the McGregor Missile Range.
H. L. Newman~ famous for
his experiments with stock-raising on the Laramie Plains, first
came to El Paso in 1881 on a business trip, and later returned to
ranch in the southern part of the McGregor Range.
Other cattle­
men of similar vintage were William Fleck, who put together what
later became the McGregor Ranch; Oliver Lee~ a man who at one
time controlled most of the Basin from the Sacramentos to the
Texas border; and John Prather, Otero Mesa's last and most
tenacious resident.
Despite the hardships they had to endure to live there, many
people were attracted to the Basin by the early 1900's.
Besides
the early ranchers, there were miners, who flocked to the Jarillas
and Huecos and opened the area around Orogrande.
Eager investors
from places as far away as Chicago, and St. Joseph, Missouri,
helped establish new towns such as Sacramento City, while real
estate promoters promised that land values would double in six
months.
Railroadmen became interested in the timber and cQal
resources to the north, and by the early 1880's had started a
project to push a line across the plains from El Paso, Texas, to
White Oaks, New Mexico.
Completed to White Oaks junction in
1899, the El Paso and Northeastern Railroad opened up the Basin,
and created new towns such as Alamogordo, as well as a boundless
amount of optimism about the possibilities of developing the area.
Only water was needed to fulfill the promise of a newly
prosperous valley, and every individual who made a living there
also had to find his own solution to the problem of locating and
developing water resources.
Indeed, it might be said that what
the Apache Indian had been to the Spaniard, drought was to the
Anglo settler, for it seemed that in her treatment of the Basin,
nature had been niggardly, if not spiteful.
Mary Austin once wrote that "not the law, but the land sets
the limit.
Desert is the name it wears upon the maps ... " (Austin
1903: 3).
The land of the Tularosa Basin did much to create
a body of law and custom, and the tenaciouS people who lived

--~~--

----

92

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

in the valley, whether Spaniards, Indians, or Anglos, miners, farm­
ers, townspeople, or ranchers, had to evolve their own methods of
holding both water and land.
Ultimately, whoever controlled the
water controlled the land, and placement of cultural sites, such
as towns, houses, tanks, and wells throughout the area is informed
by that single determinant.
Because of the restraints of water and drought, the McGregor
Range never has had the plethora of historic sites which would be
expected in an area of such enormous size. Many properties which
remain, however, reflect their past occupants' concern with envi~
ronmental setting and attendant problems.
The pipeline which under­
lies much of the northern part of the Range and supplies water to
Mesa Horse Camp, Orogrande, and innumerable ranching sites in
between, is a tribute to and example of the lengths to which people
were forced to go in order to live in an area largely devoid of
springs or rivers.
The ranch developed by Claude Woods and Henry
Foster on the southern part of the Range tells a story, by its care­
ful ~ocation at the base of large drainages, of people concerned
with making optimum use of a minimal amount of water.
Indeed, at a
time when much of the Southwest is concerned with water resources
of the future and how to make best use of them, the entire region
of the Tularosa Basin merits further study as an example of the re­
lationships that can exist between a semi-arid ecosystem and the
various human populations which have attempted to adapt themselves
to that system.
SOME APACHE ENCOUNTERS, 1541-1850
The earliest occupants of the Basin, for whom historical
records exist, were the Mescalero Apache Indians, whose core of
activity was bounded by the Pecos River on the east, the Rio
Grande on the west, Coahuila on the south, and an area near the
34th parallel on the north.
Specific sightings of Apaches within
what is now the McGregor Missile Range were almost nonexistent,
since the region was not crossed by Spanish expeditions.
But it
may be assumed from reports in surrounding areas that Apaches
were present in the Rangel area, since they were reported near
Seven Rivers, in the Sandia, Organ, Sacramento, and Guadalupe
mountains, and on Sierra Blanca. 2
1

Reference is made throughout the following paper to the "Range,!!
and is meant to indicate the property now within the bounds of
the McGregor Missile Range.
Naturally, the area was so desig­
nated long after the events described occurred.
However, the
term is meant to stand as an easily understood referent to the
land contained within the present bounds of study.

----~---

.. -

------­

SOME APACHE ENCOUNTERS

93

Since at least the sixteenth century, the Mescalero have
been part of, or have themselves been composed of, Apache groups
which were recorded by other, names.
Frederick Webb Hodge, and
M. E. and C. H. Opler, for example, agree that a group called
Apaches del Perrillo, which occupied the area near the Jornada
del Muerto in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries "may have
been partly composed of bands later identified as Mescalero
Apache" (Hodge, Hammond and Rey 1945: 307; Opler and Op1er 1950: 1).
Similarly, a group of Apaches who were lineal descendants of the
Sierra Blanca Apaches were branded Faraon Apaches by 1692, a
name derived from the Spanish, "Faraon," meaning "Pharoah," evi­
dently because of their similarity to the hordes of Pharoah
(Hackett 1937: 473).
Eventually, the name "Faraon" was applied
to all Apaches between the Rio Grande and Pecos rivers, and from
Santa Fe south to the present Mexican border from 1692 to 1726;
and to the Apaches in the Sandia-Manzano mountain area into the
1760's (Fig. I-12).
One of the last names applied to the Apaches was "Natage,"
a word which was used by 1726 to identify Apaches in southern
New Mexico, and which was employed until the 1790's.
The name
evidently was applied by residents of the El Paso area, and
probably was derived from "Nataina," the name of a division of
the Mescaleros, meaning "mescal people" (Hodge 1912, II: 34).
It also seems to have been borrowed directly from the Lipan name
for the Mescaleros:-.:..!'Natahe"--a1so meaning IImescal people"
(Hodge 1912, I: 846).3
2

I am indebted for much of the following material on the Mesca~
laro Apache to Albert Schroeder, former~y of the NatioAal PArk
Service in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
While I have checked and re­
checked as many of the original sources cited in Mr. Schroeder's
report as time and resources allowed, it would have been almost
~mposs~ble to sras, t~~ det~!l§
Apa~h@ movementsaqd en­
counters with Spanish observers without his initial work
(Schroeder 1974-).
I am grateful for Mr. Schroeder's help, and
am responsible for any mistakes which may occur in the following
summary of his material.
3
As Peter P. Forrestal noted: "It often happened that the same
group of Apaches was given different names by authors at dif­
ferent periods.
Sometimes these names were derived from the
geographical features of the group's habitat at the time of a
particular author's visit.
But the Apaches were nomads, and
frequently changed the locations of their settlements .•• "
(Forrestal and Lynch 1954: l3n).
See also page gqof this
report for an explanation by Fr. Santa Ana (who campaigned
against the Apaches with Toribio de Urrutia in 1745) of the
plethora of names used to identify the Apache.

94

FIGURE 1-12.

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Map of New Mexico, 1727.

Plano Corographico de el Reyno y Provincia de el
Nuevo Mexico una de las de Nueva Espana ....
(Map courtesy Barker Texas History Center, The
University of Texas at Austin.)
In 1727, Francisco Alvarez Barreiro reported on conditions
Note particularly the positions of the Apaches
Pharaones and Natage relative to El Paso and the area immediately
north in the present vicinity of McGregor Range.
in New Mexico.

tf')

0'1

_

~

,.-11'1

~.

• 1'

Ii'·"

.

.,

.""'J('''- ..
1!'\j"

~.

..

ill"

"";ill""!,,

"'(

.,
......

. . . oW'

"'1'

,...,.

..,"

..

.fII . .

..., W.
., tr •
'-,(~~">r+, I)
I'

96

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

The history of these various Apache groups which were
designated by names other than "Mescalero" has been outlined by
Albert H. Schroeder, who has extracted references to Apache
groups in Spanish documents and other official reports in an
effort to distinguish the origins and history of the Mescalero.
Earliest reports, for example, were made by Coronado and his
chroniclers, who recorded a group of Indians whom they called
"Querechos" on the Canadian River in April of 1541.
In 1581­
1582, the Chamuscado-Rodriguez expedition reported "Vaqueros"
southeast of Pecos Pueblo in October of 1581.
Schroeder believes
that the "Vaqueros" of the Chamuscado expedition were the same
group of people as the "Querechos" of Coronado, and quotes from
Obregon:
"In these plains dwell the coarse, vile and wicked
Querechos, the vaquepos" (Hammond and Rey 1928: 19-20).
From 1581 on, sightings of nomadic groups were incidental,
but numerous.
In the fall of 1581, the Chamuscado expedition
reported seeing a large group of nomadic Indians somewhere near
the San Andres or Oscura mountains, who fled from the approaching
Spanish party (Hammond and Rey 1928: 286).
The Espejo expedition
of 1583 also reported abandoned panahepias and signs of nomads,
and members of the Spanish group stay;d-;ith Indians who lived in
tents and gathered mesquite, calabashes, and prickly pears
(Hammond and Rey 1929: 71, 124-125).
On October 31, 1590, Castano de Sosa's expedition encoun­
tered another group of nomadic pe9p1e near the junction 6f Live
Oak Creek and the Pecos River.
They used a dog and travois ar­
rangement in traveling (Hull 1916: 314), and Schroeder has con­
jectured that they could very well have been Apaches, since the
area appears to have been a favorite with them as late as the
1800's (Schroeder and Matson 1965: 56).
Another group of Indians,
whose signs were encountered near the Pecos a month later in the
form of a pottery olla and ears of recently-shelled corn, may also
have been Mescalero Apaches from the Guadalupe Mountains, coming
"via Dark Canyon to the Pecos to hunt deer" (Schroeder and Matson
1965: 66).
Subsequent reports included that of Onate's nephew~ Vicente
de Zaldxvar Mendoza, who in 1598 led a group from Onate's expedi­
tion to the Canadian River, where they found nomadic Vaquero
Indians (Hammond and Rey 1953: 400-401); and Onate's own expedi­
tion of 1601 to Quivira, which mentioned "rancher1as inhabited by
people of the Apache nation, who are the masters of the pla~ns.
They have no permanent settlements or homes, but follow the
cattle as they roam about" (Hammond and Rey 1953: 749).
These
were the same Indians who were called "Vaquero Apaches" in
testimony about the 1601 expedition given by a participant, Juan
de Leon, before the Valverde Inquiry of 1602 (Hammond and Rey
1953: 852-853).
Some authorities believe that the Vaqueros may have included
the group later known as the Mescaleros.
The Oplers stated in
1950:

- - - - - - ...

-~~-~-~-~

....- - - -....- - ­

SOME APACHE ENCOUNTERS

97

The early history of the Mescalero Apache
Indians of the American Southwest is most
obscure.
The Vaqueros, mentioned by
Castano de Sosa in 1590, are thought by
some to be buffalo-hunting Apache of the
region which is now eastern New Mexico
and western Texas and may have included
the Mescalero (Opler and Opler 1950:1).
Swanton committed himself even further by stating that:
The term Querecho, as well as Vaquero,
was applied rather generally to Apache by
the Spaniards but probably more particu­
larly to the Mescalero and their allies
(Swanton 1952; 329).
As early as the 1630's at least one group of Apaches was
being distinguished: the Apaches del Perrillo, noted by Fray
Alonso de Benavides, and occupying an area west of the Jornada
del Muerto (Hodge, Hammond and Rey 1945: 84).- Whatever "the
specific tribal identity of the Apaches of southeastern New
Mexico, authors of the period were in agreement about the attacks
Pueblo Indians and Spanish settlements suffered from the 1620's
on.
In January 1653, for example, Governor Juan de Samaniego y
Jaca certified that Gran Quivira had been ~ttacked by Apaches,
and that an expedition under Captain Juan Dominguez de Mendoza
had gone to the Sierra Blanca against them (Scholes and Mera
1940: 281).
In 1659, the Apaches were reported attacking the
Camino Real (Hackett 1937: 187), and there was trouble between
Apaches from the Siete Rios area and Indians at Quarai soon
after (Hackett 1937: 143). Generally, Apache attacks came from
the southeast, and in 1672, six pueblos were depopulated: Quarai,
Los Humanas~ Abo, Chililf, Las Salinas, and Senecu (Hackett 1937:
298).
Many of these raids were perpetrated by the Sierra Blanca
Apaches (lineal descendants of the Apaches del Perrillo), who
first were sighted in 1653, and last reported in the 1670's
(Scholes and Mera 1940: 281; Schroeder 1974, I: 483).
Between the 1670's and 1768, there were no further reports
of any Apaches of the northern branch in the Sierra Blanca.
In
1768, however. two groups, reported as Sierra Blanca Apaches and
Natage, sought peace in Albuquerque (Thomas 1940: 162).
The
Hodge, Hammond, and Rey suggested the alignment of Perrillo and
Mescalero Apaches when they wrote that the area west of the
Jornada del Muerto was under exposure "to attack by bands of the
'Apaches del Perril10,' as Benavides terms those bands of the
Mescaleros (mescal-eaters) which infested the region described"
(1945; 307).

98

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Apaches of the 1600's apparently left the Sierra Blanca after
forcing the Pueblo people of the Abo-Gran Quivira-Chilil:t region
to leave their homes in the 1670's (Schroeder 1974, I: 488).
To the south, Apache fires were sighted in the Organ
Mountains in 1681 (Hackett 1942: 202), and a group investigating
the area below Senecu Pueblo, near Socorro, on the east side of
the Rio Grande, found much evidence of Apache occupation
(Hackett 1942: 203).
After 1692, when Governor Vargas reconquered New Mexico, a
new name appeared in reference to Apaches, although the areas in
which their presence was noted remained constant.
Gradually,
the term "Faraones" came to refer to all Apache groups between
the Rio Grande and Pecos, and from Santa Fe to the present
Mexican border. s
In 1720, Governor Antonio de Valverde Cosio
mentioned the presence of Faraones, or Apaches, as far as Seven
Rivers, which he called the "rallying point and headquarters of
the said enemies •.• " (Hackett 1931: 210).
In 1752, Governor
Cachup:tn reported that "the Faraones, who live along the Sierra
del Abo, the Rio del Norte along the road to El Paso, and the
range of the Seven Rivers •.. are causing little injury in the
villa and jurisdiction of Albuquerque" (Thomas 1940: 124).
The last specific mention of Faraones in the Sandia
Mountains was in 1760, when Fr. Juan Sanz de Lezaun wrote that
the Sandia Mission "is a bulwark of defense against the ferocity
of the Apaches Faraones, who are among the rebels; they are
socalled [Faraones, i.e., Pharaohs] because they are such
butchers" (Hackett 1937: 473).
Contemporaneous with Faraon Apache activity in central New
Mexico between the Rio Grande and Pecos rivers, Apaches also
were active in southern New MexiCO, east of the Rio Grande.
Among this group, however, the appellation, "Faraon," seldom
was used, and according to Schroeder, "after the pueblo reb[e]l­
lion, the Indians of southern New Mexico were more often simply
referred to as Apaches" (Schroeder 1974, I: 510).
In 1692 an
Apache was captured near Robledo and admitted taking part in a
raid on El Paso; in November of the same year other Apaches
entered the El Paso area, "located the cattle and had driven
off a small part of them •.. " (Espinosa 1940: 199-200, 249-250).
Schroeder believes that lithe Apaches of the Sierra Blanca moved
north into the Manzano and Sandia ranges, and became known as the
Faraones in 1692" (Schroeder 1974, I: 502).
"The Faraones con­
tinued to be distinguished from the southern Apaches until 1814,
after which date the name disappears from contemporary use"
(Schroeder 1974, I: 506).

SOME APACHE ENCOUNTERS

99

By 1726, the name used to refer to southern New Mexican
Apaches was "Natage,,,6 and in that year Brigadier Don Pedro
Rivera Villalon wrote that: "
If it is wished to possess all the province
of the Natagees, which is in the vicinity
of this presidio of E1 Paso and New Mexico,
to the south of the Sierra de los Organos
and the place of the Seven Rivers, it is a
country with most abundant water and every­
thing else necessary for agriculture
(Hackett 1941: 236).
According to Schroeder. by 1745 the "Natage," often in the
company of Lipan Apache, ranged from southern New Mexico east
to the upper Colorado River area of Texas.
However, their home
base was "on the said Rio Salado [Pecos], where they enter into
the jurisdiction of Conchos." As a group, wrote Fr. Santa Ana 3
in 1745:
The body of these Natages comprises in
itself the Mescaleros and Salineros Indians,
or better, shall I say that they are one and
the same Indians with different names which
the Spaniards have given them in the various
localities [terrenos] in which they have
seen them (Dunn 1911: 266).
In all probability, the Sa1ineros were Apaches who lived
along the Pecos River from the Siete Rios area south.
The name
"Salinero" was used seldom, however, and all southern Apaches
eventually were referred to as Mescaleros or "Natages." Also
from that date on, skirmishes and warfare between the Mescalero
and Spanish became increasingly common.
In the bolson between
Santa Rosa, Coahuila, and Chihuahua~, f<ir exampJ"e, Teodorode
Croix was attacked by Mescaleros in the late 1770's (Thomas
1941: 90).
Some of their raids reached as far south as Saltillo
and Durango.
Attacks on El Paso continued as well, and in 1768,
reports were received for the first time in approximately 100
years of Apaches (probably Sandia Faraones) in the Sierra Blanca.
The Spanish retaliated with attacks on the Apaches.
By the
1770's and 1780's, the Indians had concentrated in the Sierra
Blanca and nearby ranges due to pressure applied by the Spanish
from the Santa Fe and E1 Paso areas, and simultaneous Comanche
6

The use of the name "Faraone" to refer to Apaches in the Organ
Mountains or Siete Rios area seems to have disappeared almost
completely after 1126.

100

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

pressure from the east (Thomas 1932: 61-66, 78-79; 1940: 58­
59).
Schroeder has summarized the, complicated identities of
various Apache groups who might have been present in the Mc­
Gregor Range area in the following manner:
The group that became known as the Mesca~
leros was made up of $Sveza1 components in
the early 1800's.
The unnamed nomads east
of the Piro pueblos in the 1580's and the
Apaches of Perri110 in the same region in
the 1600's became known as the Sierra
Blancas in the last half [sic] of the
1600's.
After the Pueblo Rebellion of
1680 this group, which had moved north,
became known as the Faraones, and by the
1760's they began returning to the Sierra
Blanca Mountain region under Spanish
pressure.
The nomads of the Pecos River,
encountered by Castano de Sosa in the
1590's and the Apaches of the Siete Rios
in the 1600's continued to frequent their
same haunts after the Pueblo Rebellion,
becoming known as Natages in 1726.
By
the mid-1700's those near the Pecos also
were known as the Sa1ineros and those in
the Organ Mountains near El Paso as the
Mescaleros, which term supplanted Natage
in the 1790's and Faraon in the early 1800's
(Schroeder 1974, I; 534).
Specific references to Mescalero in the Range area did not
occur prior to the nineteenth century because Spanish observers
did not travel through the Basin, except along the extreme west­
ern edge near the Organ Mountains.
Evidence of Mescalero 9~tivity, then, is peripheral
nature, whi9h is to say th~t if
Apaches who were known to be in the Sacramento Mountains and
Seven Rivers areas also were known to have raided El Paso, it
could be assumed that at some time they crossed the McGregor
Range.
Vargas, for example, commented in 1692 that the Faraon
Apaches had raided El Paso in November and carried off sixt~en
head of cattle (Espinosa 1940: 199). Don Antonio Valverde Cosio
remarked in the early 1700's that the El Paso area was completely
surrounded by Apaches (Hackett 1931: 208).
In 1775, Fray
DomInguez mentioned repeated Apache incursions on El Paso from
the area surrounding the Presidio (Adams 1956: 270); while only
a few years later, the entire Basin area northeast of El Paso
could be presumed to have been inundated with Apaches as Rubio
reported to Croix that they were being pushed southward from

.....

-~.~

- - -......

..

--~

~.-

......

-~.~.--

.....

-~~.--~----~

RANCHO DE YSLETA GRANT

101

Sierra Blanca to the Organ Mountains and the Rio Grande (Thomas

1932: 63).7
However, despite report~ of intense Apache activity, and
official Spanish avoidance of the McGregor Range area, there is
strong evidence that settlers around El Paso were attracted to
the abundant grass of the southern part of the Range throughout
the period of Apache occupation.
Several nineteenth-century
Anglo observers remarked that, although there was no water
available in the area, there was grass; and as Captain S. G.
French wrote in 1849: "The large plains towards the east [of
El Paso] would afford a place for grazing cattle, were they
secure from the Indians; and were water discovered in abundance,
it might become a pastoral country" (U.S. Congress, Senate 1850:

50).
THE RANCHO DE YSLETA GRANT:
EARLY GRAZING ON MCGREGOR RANGE
Unbeknownst to French, th~ inba1:litan
of Pueblo San
Antonio de Ysleta, southeast of El Paso, had been exploiting
pastures north. and east of the town for a number of years.
As John Pope remarked in 1854, the country between the Rio
Grande and Pecos rivers was "destitute of wood and water •••
but covered with a luxuriant growth of the richest and most
nutritious grasses known to this continent" (U.S. Army, Corps
of Topographical Engineers [1855]: 7).
He pointed out that the
area "had been from time immemorial in undisputed possession of
the Apaches." Yet, in spite of the constant danger and enormous
losses of stock they suffered, "the Mexicans cannot refrain from
pasturing their stock in this region of plenty" (U.S. Army,
Corps of Topographical Engineers [1855]: 30-31).
Officially, the "Mexican" pasture area that Pope wrote about
probably was a part of what had been designated as the Rancho de
Ysleta Grant.
Although it is not known for a certainty when the
inhabitants of the Pueblo of San Antonio de Ysleta began to use
the land to the north (Jenkins N.d,) it is known that by July of
1828, they had petitioned for official recognition in the form of
7

For graphic evidence of Apache occupation in the entire Basin
region into the first half of the nineteenth century, see Welch's
map made to accompany Emory's military reconnaissance of 1846­
1847 (Welch 1847).
See also McCall's comments on the country
occupied by Mescalero Apache in 1850 (McCall 1968: 105-106); and
the Nichols map (1857) which shows an Indian trail down the mid­
dle of the Basin to El Paso, a trail that later evolved into a
military road from El Paso to Fort Stanton (New Mexico, Surveyor
General 1862).

102

FIGURE 1-13.

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Plat of the Rancho de Ysleta, La Prieta, and Jose
Lerma Gran t.
(Map co ur tesy J. J. Bowden's Spanish
and Mexiaan Land Grants in the Chihuahuan Aaquisi­
tion.
El Paso: Texas Western Press, 1971.)

Parts of the Rancho de Ysleta Grant extended into the area
which is now part of the McGregor Range.
Land on the Range which
was once part of the Grant included property around Newman and
Alvarado, and encompassed much of T25S, R7E; T26S. R7E; and T26S.
R8E.

FIGURE 1-13

NEW

MEXICO

fVAN ~ORti

PLAT

OF

THE

RANCHO de YSLETA, LA
AND

JOSE

LERMA

PRIETA,
t

GRANT

I

r'

EL PASO. HUDSPETH, ANO
CULBERSON COUNTIES,
TEXAS

I

104

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

a grant "covering the lands located in the vicinity of Sierra
Alta, which they utilized for a number of years as community
pasture" (Bowden 1971: 171). B
"­
In alIt the grant included 65,628 acres in what eventually
became Otero County, and the majority of that land lay in what
was to become the McGregor Missile Range.
The boundaries of the
grant, as approved on August 13, 1828, by Jose Antonio Arce,
Governor of Chihuahua, and surveyed in September, began at a
monument on the west side of a hill known as La Loma del Tigua;
ran north 55,000 varas to a "monument of earth in the desert";
southeast 52,000 varas to a monument of earth and stone on the
highest peak of Sierra Alta; east 38,000 vara$ to a monument on
a hill northeast of Alamo Springs; southeast" 55,000 varas to
another monument on Sierra Blanca Peak; west 80,000 varas to a
monument on the hill known as Lama de San Juan de Cruz; and
northwest to the place of beginning (Bowden 1971: 171-172).
In
terms of modern-day landmarks in and around the McGregor Missile
Range, the Rancho de Ysleta Grant ran from an area just west of
Newman; north approximately 10 miles to a point directly west of
Alvarado, New Mexico; then on a diagonal line southeast to Sierra
Alta, running through the Hueco Mountains and encompassing much
of T25S, R7E; T26S, R7E; and T26S, R8E (Fig. 1-13).
In July of 1855, Ysleta inhabitants made their first attempt
to secure recognition of the grant from the Rio Grande Commis­
sion t which refused to confirm their claim (Anderson 1907, I:
204-208).
Thirty years later, the City of Ysleta tried t once
again, to prove its claim, and entered into agreements, first
with john P. Randolph, an El Paso surveyor, and then with Ernest
Dale Owen, a Chi~ago attorney and land agent who looked at the
grant as an opportunity to fulfill his dream of promoting agr
cultural development on the mesa lands northeast of El Paso.
Owen's plan was to carry water through a tunnel in the Organ
Mountains from a dam in the Mesilla Valley to the western portion
of the Rancho de Ysleta Grant.
Had he been successful in his
pursuit of the grant for the inhabitants of the City of Ysleta,
he would have been given the opportunity to purchase the entire
area for ten cents per acre (Bowden 1971: 173-174).
Like Randolph, however, Owen was unsuccessful in his efforts,
and on October 21, 1899, the suit was dismissed, the City of
Ysleta losing all hope of ever securing judicial recognition of
the grant.
Today, the primary importance of the defunct Ra,ncho
de Ysleta Grant lies in its long-term impact on a range area
which never has recovered from the intensive grazing of sheep
and cattle when the inhabitants of Ysleta still exercised their
traditional rights.
Indeed, little other evidence remains that
8

See Bowden 1971 for a more complete history of the Rancho de
Ysleta Grant.

THE

MILITARY~

1849

105

the area was used extensively during the Spanish and Mexican
periods. 9
THE MILITARY COMES TO THE RANGE, 1849
Just as documentary evidence of Apache, Spanish, and
Mexican impact on the area of the McGregor Range is scarce, so
there is little visual evidence of nineteenth-century Anglo
military occupation.
However, records of expeditions across the
Range and of encounters and skirmishes with Indians are complete
enough to assume that personnel of the United States Army were
familiar with the territory long before they officially claimed
it in the 1950's.
In 1847, John T. Hughes in his report on
Doniphan's expedition remarked that only a few companies of
American dragoons were needed to put a stop to Apache depreda­
tions in the El Paso area (Hughes 1848: 284-285); and from that
time on, the Tularosa Basin was criss-crossed with military
troops either chasing Apache Indians into the Sacramento Moun­
tains, or fulfilling Congress' directives to locate and develop
wagon and military roads around and through the area.
Most early surveys went near the McGregor Rangebutdid
not pass through it at any point.
Lieutenant W. F. Smith, for
example, who left his camp near El Paso on September 31, 1849,
"to make a reconnaissance of the Sacramento mountains, and as­
certain if there existed a pass through them practicable for
wagons" (U.S. Congress, Senate 1850: 13), probably intersected
present-day Highway 54 where it passes west of Dog Canon.
Similarly, Lieutenant F. T. Bryan chose to circumvent the Range
by leading his party from West Texas directly to the Huecos and
easily accessible water, and then south to the Rio Grande and
El Paso.
On April 4, 1849, however, Captain Randolph B. Marcy re­
ceived instructions from Brevet Brigadier General M. Arbuckle,
U.S.A., which ordered him to "ascertain and establish the best
route from this point [Fort Smith] to New Mexico and California
. " f ! (U.S. Congress, Senate 1850: 169).
Marcy concluded from
his instructions and what he had heard of the country around
Dona Ana that he might be able to shorten the old route through
El Paso by cutting through San Augustine Pass and head~ng
directly southeast for Hueco Tanks (Fig. 1-14).
9

A report by W. B. Bates, a prospector in the Huecos in 1907, of
finding "the dump and workings of a Spanish silver mine" (The
Orogrande Times April 25, 1907; 1) very likely falls into J.
Frank Dobie's category of "traditional legend."

106

FIGURE 1-14.

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Map of the Tularosa Basin, 1855.
Boundary between the United States and Mexico ...
Surveyed in 1855, under the direction of Major W. H.
Emory .... (Map courtesy Barker Texas History Center,
The University of Texas at Austin.)

Emory's map shows extant trails across the Tularosa Basin,
and demonstrates the lack of information about the area.
Marcy's
route from Dona Ana to Ojo del Soledad at the foot of the Organ
Mountains, to Hueco Tanks is the sole trace of tenuous human
activity on the Itf1at and sandy plain."

FIGURE 1-14

'.' nona .\11"

,
I."M.. "m..

Ot:L I'OTIII t.LO

i'III'IIU.,'
:U·,17' Xm1h
.._ .. _u____
",_..,_J.lititudt'
.. _ .._,._,,,_"'_ .. _'"­

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

108

Marcy encountered some difficulty in hiring a guide, for he
found that not only was the area between Dona Ana and the Pecos
almost unknown to the Mexicans, b~t they hardly could be induced
to travel so far into the Apache range.
I found one man, however~ who stated that he
knew the country for fifty miles east of Dona
Ana, and, upon condition that I would deposite
[sial the amount he was to receive with the
commanding officer for the benefit of his
family in case he should be killed in return­
ing, he would consent to accompany us that
distance.
I accordingly engaged him ••. (U.S.
Congress, Senate 1850: 198).
On the morning of September 1, Marcy set off with his party
and headed for the Organ Range and San Augustine Pass, which he
ascended for a distance of 15 miles before reaching the gap and
descending to the other side, where the party camped at a spring.
From his present position he could see the Sacramento Mountains
to the east, and he remarked the following day that the entire
intervening valley between the Organ and Sacramento mountains was
"flat and sandy," and had no water upon it (U.S. Congress, Senate
1850: 198-199).
Later, Marcy concluded his description of the
Range by noting that along the entire course of the road between
Dona Ana and Hueco Tanks "there has been a most luxuriant growth
of grama grass of several different kinds ..• " (U.S. Congress,
Senate 1850: 200); but that, because of the total lack of water,
the Mexican traders who most often used the route had had to
devise a special method of travel across it:
The manner in which the Mexican traders make
these long stages without water ..• is, before
starting, to graze their animals from morning
until about 3 p.m., give them all the water
they will drink, then harness and start them
immediately, and drive until 4 o'clock the
next morning, when they stop three hours to
graze while the dew is on the grass, and
drive until it becomes hot towards the middle
of the day; they then make another halt until
5 o'clock in the evening, when they start
again and push through to the water" (U.S.
Congress, Senate 1850: 199).10
10
Interestingly enough, the route followed by Marcy and used by
the Mexican traders.ppears tb have closely followed one of the
boundary lines of the Rancho de Ysleta Grant surveyed approxi­
mately twenty years before.

- - - - - -..-...- - - - - - - - - - -......

THE MILITARY

"

1849

109

Marcy's route was 30 miles shorter than the one which passed
through EI Paso, but it never was used as frequently as the older,
more southerly route; and mo~t emigrants continued to travel west
via El Paso, thence north to Dona Ana, where they took Cooke's
road to California l l (Fig. I-IS).
Besides Marcy's route across the southwestern end of the
McGregor Range, another trail passed from Fort Fillmore near
Mesilla to the vicinity of Dog Canon, stronghold of the Mescalero
Apache.
James A. Bennett wrote in 1856 of the extreme hardship
troops experienced in making reconnaissances in the area, and
recorded that on one trip in pursuit of Indians who had stolen a
drummer boy at Fort Bliss, 17 horses and mules died of thirst,
and five men were so debilitated by the lack of water that they
had to be left behind on the flats (Brooks and Reeve 1947: 173­
174).
Skirmishes with the Mescalero Apaches kept the United
States Army busy in the Tularosa Basin and surrounding mountains
until at least 1880.
Lieutenant-General P. H. Sheridan's
record of engagements with hostile Indians, gleaned from the
reports of Major General John M. Schofield (1869-1870), and from
Brevet Major General John Pope (1870-1882), lists more than one­
half dozen skirmishes from March 11, 1868, to December 26, 1869,
alone.
One of the most lengthy scouts began in July of 1869
when Captain Frank Stanwood led troops 487 miles through the
Sacramentos, then headed south via Hueco Tanks and Isleta, Texas,
to Fort Bliss (Schroeder 1974, I: 565).
Perhaps the last Indian battle to take place in the vicinity
of the McGregor Missile Range occurred in April 1880, a mere four
years before W. N. Fleck, Oliver Lee, Jonathan Wildy, and other
cattlemen moved in to stake their claims.
On that date, detach­
ments from Companies Hand L of the 9th Cavalry left the main
force of a raiding party near what was to become Orogrande.
They followed an Indian trail that led east across the flats,
and sighted the Mescalero heading into the foothills of the
11
Pope's expedition of 1854 also made a side trip over Marcy's
1849 route.
Following Marcy's example, the group, minus Pope
who had gone to El Paso, crossed San Augustine Pass and camped
on the east side of the pass at San Augustine Springs.
The
party commented frequently on the luxuriant grama grass., but
like Marcy complained about the total lack of water, and the
continuous sand dunes which made travel exceedingly difficult.
The party became so "entangled in some sand-hills" that they
ended up lost and desperate, their animals exhausted after
seventy-two hours without water (U.S. Army, Corps of Topograp..h­
ica1 Engi]lee.rs[185'5]:; 67:';"6B~(,;
Marcy's route., despite all
its drawbacks, appeared on maps of New Mexico and Texas until
at least 1867 (Mitchell 1867).

110

FIGURE 1-15.

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Map of the Country from Austin to El Paso.
Sketch
& observations taken by F. B. E.Browne.oSept .. ,23 ­
1851 (Map courtesy Barker Texas History Center, The
University of Texas at Austin.)

Despite Marcy's pioneering efforts to open a trail from Hueco
Tanks to Dona Ana and Cooke's wagon road to California, 49'ers
preferred the old route from Hueco Tanks to El Paso, thence north.

A'ltrrt,..~

Ilglff611tlf

pff#

aJ
ft'".

5

~

:

~II '
,,

!

i

112

THE HISTQRI9 RiS()UBCE'

Sacramento Mountains.
The conclusion of pursuit came when the
troops entered Dog Canon, and all 60 of them either were killed
or critically wounded by boulders,thrown by the Mescalero from
higher elevations (Tinsley 1956: 45).
On May 29, 1873, Fort Stanton Reservation in the Sacramento
and White mountains wa~off~q1al~y set up for the Mescalero, and
from the late 1870's on they were peaceful for the most part.
Slight disturbances occurred in conjunction with the outbreak of
the Lincoln County War in 1878, and the appearance on the reser_
vation of Victorio.
But for the first time in several hundred
years, and perhaps more, the southern half of the Tularosa Basin
was free of Apache threat, and the stage was set for a vast immi­
gration of Texas cattlemen that began in the early 1880's, and
continued throughout the next decade.
THE RANCHING BOOM
In the five or ten years preceding the settlement of the
McGregor Range, a number of modifications of the range cattle
industry had occurred which made development of the Basin possi­
ble.
First, the invention of well-drilling equipment in the
1870's allowed the tapping of water resources which were too deep
for hand-dug wells.
Thus, windmills allowed the expansion of the
cattle industry into areas where the shortage of surface water
had rendered ranching almost impossible. 12
A second development which gave impetus to a growing cattle
industry was the tremendous expansion of cattle markets which
occurred in the late 1870's.
Railroad lines had increased in
number, making it easier to get cattle to market; and by the
early 1880's, three main cattle trails were in full swing: the
Goodnight, Chisholm, and Western. More importantly the meat
expo'rter, Timothy Eastman, had made his first successful shipment
of dressed beef to England in 1877, and two years later the
volume of trade had reached an all-time high of forty-nine mil­
lion pounds. 13
12
Steel blades for windmills were invented in 1883 and rapidly re­
placed wooden blades since the metal could be curved to capture
more wind force.
However, even with new inventions and deep wells,
good water in the McGregor Range was never easy to come by.
For an
analysis of the water found in the Basin see Meinzer and Hare 1915.
13
Indian reservations and military posts represented a large part
of the cattle market.
Contracts to the Indians alone represented
almost forty million pounds of beef in 1880, and required around
fifty thousand head (Dale 1960: 63-64).

THE RANCHING BOOM

113

Finally, foreign investment, generated by burgeoning markets,
reached a feverish peak among British capitalists (in particular,
the Scottish) by the early 1380's, with companies such as the
Prairie soon becoming owners of enormous range lands in New Mexico
and Texas.
It was no wonder, then, that the Lone star in El Paso
began to remark in 1884 on the large numbers of capitalists who
had turned their gazes on southern New Mexico.
Contrary to the national trend, cattle ranching on the
McGregor Range was an individual, rather than a company, endeavor.
Indeed, except for Captain J. C. Lea's investment*'large oompanies
were almost unknown in the area.
Furthermore, the era that began
with such optimism soon fell on hard times, as periodic drought
and all the problems which were part and parcel of an arid land
began to take their toll.
From 1880 to the 1950's, cattlemen,
railroadmen, m±rters •. land promoters, and hbmeet
ers rod~ a
rollercoaster of hope and despair as they took their turns at
trying to make the Basin pay.
Failure undoubtedly was far from Jobn Wildy's and Joseph
Calloway Lea's minds, however, when the Lone Star announced on
January 12, 1884, that tta large herd of fine cattle are to be
placed in the San Andres mountains by Capt. J. C. Lee [sic]
and brother." "Best known fot-his.·liam.ching~nd development:
activities in the vicinity of Roswell, New Mexico, Captain Lea
was born in Cleveland, Tennessee, on November 8, 1841, to Dr.
Pleasant J. G. Lea and Lucinda C. Lea.
He served in the 6th
Missouri Regiment, Shelby's Brigade, and became a colonel.
Shortly after the end of the Civil War he married Mrs. Douglas
Burbridge, and upon her death, married Sally Wildy, 27-year-old
daughter of a wealthy Yazoo County, Mississippi, planter.
The
Leas moved to New Mexico in 1876, went first to White Oaks where
Lea was instrumental in quelling strike violence, and then moved
to Roswell, where they were living when Sally died on February
20, 1884 (Padgitt 1959: 50-65; Rickards 1966: 34; U.S. Bureau of
the Census 1860; Wier and Beverly 1937: 23).
With the ceming.:of the cattle boom in th~ 1880's, Lea
managed to interest a New York businessman named H. K. Thurber
in carving out a cattle empire.
Together they organized the
Lea Cattle Company, and under the management of Captain Lea they
ran between thirty and fifty thousand head of cattle west of the
Pecos (Padgitt 1959: 61; Hening 1958; 71; Browder 1975: 116­
l17).11t
Thurber was best known as a partner in the legendary Thurber­
Arbuckle Coffee Company.
See Ramon F. Adams (1952: 74-76) for a
description of Arbuckle Brothers coffee and its importance on the
trail.
According to J. Marvin Hunter (1925: 331), green cow
hands were sometimes called "Arbuck1es" on the assumption "that
the boss sent off Arbuckle premium stamps to pay for the extra­
ordinary services of the greenhorn."

114

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

A few years later, Lea seems to have persuaded his 3l-year­
old brother-in-law, John Wildy, to join him in running a spread
in the Tularosa Basin,-to be known as the San Andres Ranch of
Pierce Lea & Co.
Partners in the endeavor were Wildy and Lea,
together with Milo L. Pierce and Alfred E. Lea, all of Lincoln
County (Dona Ana County, Deed Record 7: 157-158).15 Ranch head­
quarters were in the San Andres Mountains, and the operation ex­
tended eastward and included that part of the McGregor Missile
Range around Wildy's Well, site of a gunfight in 1898 between
Oliver Lee and Jim Gilliland on one side, and Pat Garrett and his
deputi~s on the other (Figure I-18c).
Although information about the development of Wildy's ranch
is sketchy, it seems apparent that he enjoyed only a moderate
and short-lived prosperity.
In December of 1885, he had to
mortgage his interest in the San Andres Ranch to Margaret C.
Greaves, together with all water rights, cattle, horses, or
other property appurtenant to the ranch (Dona Ana County, Mort­
gage Record 1: 559).
Only seven months later, Wildy's $3,400
debt was paid to Greaves' satisfaction, but Lea, perhaps fore­
seeing Wildy's eventual demise, or because of more pressing
responsibilities in Roswell, quit-claimed with Pierce and Alfred
E. Lea, "all their interest in the San Andres Stock Ranch situ­
ated about 35 miles northerly from San Augustine and approxi-.
mately 15 miles northerly from Ojo de San Nicolas, all in
Dona Ana County.n16
The purpose of the deed was to make "the
15
Pierce is mentioned by Lily Klasner (1972: 65) as being the first
man, with his partner, Paxton, to have a cow camp on the Pecos River
after the Mescalero were rounded up at Fort Stanton.
The camp was
located above Pope's Crossing on the east side of the river, and
the two men claimed many miles of the river front as their ranch.
With the end of the partnership, Pierce moved to Roswell where he
married Lea's sister, Mrs. Ella Chalfee, and went into the cattle
business with Lea.
Numerous other members of Lea's family were involved in ranch­
ing also.
Ella Chalfee owned 160 acres and a four-room house at
Bosque Grande that had belonged to John Chisum.
In the fall of 1881,
she sold the claim to J. Phelps White, and that was the beginning of
the LFD's (White 1933: 13-14).
Lea's third wife, Mabel Doss Day,
was the widow of a Texas rancher, organizer of the Kentucky corpora­
tion, the Day Cattle Ranch Company, and eventually became known as
"The Cattle Queen of Texas."
In New Mexico she started what is now
New Mexico Military Institute in her Roswell home (Padgitt 1950: 366).
16
Until the formation of Otero County in 1899, most of the present­
day McGregor Range lay in Dona Ana County.

---~----

THE RANCHING BOOM

115

said John H. Wildy the sole owner of the San Andres Ranch and the
sole owner of one-half of the live stock and other personal
property of the said Pierce Lea and Co." (Dona Ana County, Deed
Record 7: 157-158).
Between 1886 and 1889, Wildy's business seems to have looked
up.
He was prosperous enough to lend his neighbor, Samuel Hughes,
$1,410, for which Hughes mortgaged his livestock, wagons, and
tools (Dona Ana County, Chattel Mortgages 1: 60-61); and in Febru­
ary of 1889, he sold one thousand head on one- and two-year-old
steers to Holt and Husler [sic] of Montana for an average price of
$10.50 per head (Daily Hepald February 7, 1889: 1).17
In 1885, five years of average rainfall began, which followed
a period of unusually abundant precipitation and thus appeared to
be a drought (see Part III, Fig. 111- 9).
By 1890, one cattleman
declared that cattle had begun to die by the hundreds for want of
water, and he laid the blame at the doorstep of the cattle boom of
the early eighties:
The boom in cattle raising which caused all
the suitable ranges in the territory and in
Texas to be occupied a few years ago, has been
instrumental in producing the famine that now
exists.
The grazing lands have suffered from
being overstocked and the severe drouth has
settled matters in the territory, at least
unless the rain comes immediately (Daily
Hepald April 24, 1890: 4).18
By 1889 Wi1dy again had to mortgage his ranch, and as of
October 5, 1889, he was in debt to Joseph Lea to the tune of
$10,566.75.
By November 11, he was forced to deliver to Lea
eight hundred head of cattle, twelve head of horses, and miscel­
laneous stock to fulfill the debt (Dona Ana County, Deed Record
11: 379-381).
17
Range history is amazing sometimes for its coincidental quality.
Present at the first and organizing meeting of the Eastern Montana
Livestock Association on October 12, 1883, were not only J. M.
Holt and Henry Tusler, but E. S. Newman (Fletcher 1932: 30) who
with his brother, H. L., lived in El Paso and built up .an ex­
tensive ranch in the southwestern portion of McGregor Range.
18
Tom Fraser of Alamogordo commented in 1942 that "[the] range was
in wonderful condition in [the] early 70's--but deceptive.
Bunches & patches of grass waving in [the] wind looked like more
than there was.
Dry time was just settling in [in] 1885.
Winter
rains brought out a beneficent weed crop, but summer rains didn't
come.
People brought in far too much stock •..• They ate it as fast
as it grew" (Fraser 1942).

--_.__......_ - - - -

-----­

116

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Wildy held on through the worst of the drought, due perhaps
to his good fortune in courting and marrying Jessie Davies,
daughter of Benjamin and Julia Davies who owned the San Augustine
Ranch, now property of the Cox family (Stoes 1957: 61).
By 1893,
however, Wildy had left the country and followed Julia Davies to
Miami in Roberts County, Texas (Kelley 1976: 21), where he pro­
ceeded to sell off a portion of his New Mexican stock, some to
Davies, and some to Thomas G. Hendrick, a rancher with land south
of the San Augustine Ranch.
At the same time he apparently was
attempting to stay in the ranching business by mortgaging his San
Andres Ranch to Lea, to a Kansas firm based in Wyandorf County,
and to Thomas R. Kerr of Jeff Davis County, Texas, all in 1894
(Dona Ana County, Renewals of Chattel Mortgages No.1: 51, 52,
55).
Wildy probably went broke about 1895, and more than one
cowman reported that he had been fatally injured by a falling
horse (Haley and Chesley 1939: 11).
But no matter what his rea­
sons had been for leaving the Tularosa, or when or how he died,
Wildy was not heard of again in the basin where through ten
years of plenty and drought he had learned the_lesson !thodes
talked about in The LittZe WorZd Waddies:
I liked the Little World, and I liked the
people.
But I saw what was coming.
Good
rains--high grass--double your herds every
washday--everything lovely!
Then long comes
old Mr. Drought.
Bing! There you are,
busted.
It's like play4;ng~:Q.ouble or quits;
if you don't pinch your bets, you're going
home talking to yourself.
It's got to be
that way.
So I sold out (Rhodes 1946: 155).19
In 1881 a man came to the Tularosa Basin who had consider­
ably better luck than John Wildy at pinching his bets.
The man
was William N. Fleck, and between the time he first came to
Carrizozo until 1927 when he died in El Paso, he spent almost 50
years learning how to make a living in the Tularosa Basin. 20
Fleck was born in 1853 in Sarnia, Ontario, Canada.
He left
home .as a young man and came to the Texas Panhandle.
There he
worked for Charlie Goodnight, starting as a horse wrangler,
19
Wildy's widow eventually remarried and moved to Kansas (Stoes
1957: 61).
20
Most of the following information about the Fleck family is
taken from an interview with William Fleck's son, Ralph, in EI
Paso, Texas, on October 23, 1975.
Other sources of information
are so indicated in the text.

,THE RANCHING BOOM

117

working the remuda, and then graduating to the rank of cowboy.
On one of his trips to Weatherford, he met Ida McLain, formerly
of Peoria, Illinois, and latex married her.
After working for
some time to build up a small herd of cattle. Fleck made his
first trip to New Mexico, bringing his cattle across Yellow House
Canyon on the headwaters of the Brazos River and trailing them to
Albuquerque, where he sold them to the U.S. Army.
After several such trips, the Flecks decided to move to New
Mexico and settle permanently in the Tularosa Basin.
They started
west of Carrizozo near the San Andres Mountains,21 then moved
south to the area around what was to become Newman.
Around 1895­
1896, when a lake flooded their house, the family moved to the
state line near the Franklin Mountains, and then sold out to
Hubbell and Moss before moving north to Desert. 22 Attempts to
install a hand-dug well failed when Fleck reached 200 feet and
obtained only a seep, so he moved north approximately 15 miles.
There, at a point five miles east of Orogrande, Fleck settled
into his home.
Consisting of a main house, saddleshop, barn, and
blacksmith shop, the buildings were constructed of lumber brought
from the Sacramento Mountains to the house site by way of the
newly-constructed EI Paso and Northeastern Railroad.
It is evident that in his many years on the McGregor Range
William Fleck succeeded in making a living where others failed
because he understood the importance of locating and developing
water resources.
Through experiments, failure, and later, suc­
cess, Fleck came to understand that wells on his ranch hit water
"where the sand hills and the hard land broke off." He also
understood that land was owned and kept only by developing water,
and he made the most of his meagre resources.
Eventually he con­
trolled approximately 400 sections and five wells: the Benton,
Wildy, Headquarters, South, and Campbell (Fig. 1-16).
He also
developed numerous tanks, including Campbell, Haymeadow, and Mack.
In December of 1902 luck played into Fleck's hands, and he
was able to acquire not only the Wildy Well Ranch but Wildy Well
21
A conflicting report in the AZamogordo News at the time of
Fleck's death indicates his first ranching business was at
Berino, but Ralph Fleck is insistent on the accuracy of the
Carrizozo location (March 10, 1927: 1).
22
An article in the El Paso Herald, dated April 17, 1901, refers
to the sale of Fleck's southernmost ranch.
According to the
newspaper, Fleck sold his ranch and cattle north of El Paso to
J •. U. Hubbell for $40,000 cash, and Hubbell intended to raise
cattle on the ranch for markets in Havana, Cuba.
Eugene Porter
indicates that one of Fleck's ranches was sold to G. L. Hitt,
and that it became known as Hitt's Ranch (Porter 1959: l18n).

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

118

FIGURE 1-16.

Views of Fleck's
Tanks.

Ranch~-South

Well and Campbell

One of the first and most successful ranchers on McGregor
Range, William Fleck settled in east of Orogrande just after the
turn of the century.
He built a house and began to expand his
range.

A, B.

South Well
Fleck's South Well was a line camp located about 10
miles south of headquarters on land originally patented
by Hugo and Lottie V. Seaburg of Raton.
Eventually,
the site was developed with a small frame house, a well,
and pens.
The barn was erected by Malcolm McGregor
after Fleck sold out to McGregor's uncle, J. D. McGregor.
The house was constructed with materials largely pro­
vided by the Southern Pacific Railroad, 5 miles east.
Note, particularly, the large cistern located at the
rear of the house and fed with a series of gutters.
(A, view southeast 1976; B, view north 1976)

c~

D. Campbell Tanks
The oldest existing historic structure on McGregor Range
was also one of William Fleck's earliest acquisitions
east of headquarters.
Campbell Tanks was located in a
beautiful swale just west of Otero Mesa, and was devel­
oped with tanks and wells.
The stone dugout, or chosey,
was built by 1907, and numerous examples of graffiti are
visible on the north or entrance side, including the
dates 1908, 7/24/07, and 8/8/09.
Accompanying sy.mbols
and brands are 11 t-F FH R EA ~
In front of the dugout is the foundation for one house,
and the remains of another frame structure which was
built by the McGregors.
(View iouth~li75)

---------~----

CD
,...
1

UJ

a::
:::)

CJ
LL

o

()

120

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

itself.
He had been appointed receiver of the District Court of
the Third Judicial District of the Territory of New Mexico in the
case of Lee Moor 'h Joseph Fitzgey'laZd Moor, alias Fitzgerald Moor;
and upon settlement of the case, paid Oliver Lee, Fitzgerald
Moor's partner, $15,000 for the ranch, the well, and all improve­
ments (Otero County, Bills of Sale Record No.1: 69).23
Fleck continued to expand his holdings.
In 1903 he purchased
approximately 1,800 head of cattle from the Eureka Springs Stock
Company (an Arizona Territory business with offices in Wilcox) for
$18,000 (Otero County, Bills of Sale Record No.1: 72); and in the
same year bought out his neighbors, the Lee Moors, for $5,000
(Richeson 1975: 19).
He also applied for a homestead certificate
on October la, 1907.
The land he was awarded was the NE 1/4 of
the NW 1/4 of section 32, T24S, RlOE, and probably represented an
attempt to firm up his claims to the area around what is now
Campbell Tank.
He built a small dugout (Fig. 1-25), which still
stands, and dug a well and tank (Fig. !-16c;d).
He a1so_p~tented
the 160 acres surrounding his ranch house in section 22, T22S,
R9E, on June 15, 1911 (Otero County, Patent Record 7: 316; Patent
Re cor d 3 4: 15 7) •
One of Fleck's last acquisitions on the Range was transacted
on November 21, 1917, when he purchased the South Well site from
Hugo and Lottie V. Seaburg of Raton, New Mexico, who originally
had selected land out of the public domain.
Located in the SW 1/4
of the NE 1/4 of section 1, T24S, R8E, the property was developed
by Fleck with a well and three-room house (Fig. I-16a,b).
Fleck obviously possessed both good sense and business acumen,
but even so, life couldn't have been easy for him.
Line camps at
Haymeadow, Mack Tank, Campbell Well, and many places in between
had to be visited on a continual basis; and drought, even with
wells and tanks, was a constant threat.
Most ranche~s on the
McG;-egOl:, iR~ng:e 't'#»Hflllpe!j a J-iglH aar~i1e';ht e1i~rV t:hl'ee to <fouy ¥:eafs,
and a severe one every ten to fifteen years.
One of the first in
Ralph Fleck's memory occurred about 1907, when his father had just
settled down east of Orogrande, and had only three wells.
Fleck's
tanks held water for approximately five months, and when they went
dry, he was forced to throw his cattle back on the wells, a risky
business at best.
He generally ran 15 head to the section, and
the combination of drought and overstocking naturally resulted in
the deterioration'of the range.
As the Forest Service pointed out
23

Around 1907, Ralph Fleck moved in, tore down the adobe house of
Pat Garrett/Oliver Lee fame, and erected a two-room frame house
directly over the adobe.
Ralph Fleck's description of the adobe
varies slightly from that of Lee Moor (Richeson 1975: 14).
Ac­
cording to Fleck the structure had three rooms--a kitchen in the
center and bedrooms on either end--and a wooden floor made of
pine.

- - -..

---~--

. . <-<.--_.-.. .

--~

----­

.....- - - -....

THE RANCHING BOOM

121

concerning the dry years of 1916 to 1918, " t here is no easy way
out of the predicament of having more cattle than the range can
support at a time when feed fs scarce and markets are glutted"
(U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service 1948: 5).
At such times, Fleck might have succeeded in supplementing
his income by acting as a cattle broker.
He had a reputation
for raising fine cattle, and on at least one occasion his ranch
was the location of a $22,000 transaction between A. A. Cox of
Van Horn, Texas, and W. W. Cox, from the Organ Mountains (The
Opogpande Times February 1, 1906: 4).
Fleck died in March of 1927 in El Paso, and three years
later his ranch was sold to J. D. McGregor.
Given all the hard­
ships of living in the Basin, his son, Ralph, still cannot
answer why his father preferred the area to any other one.
The
one time William Fleck chose to answer that question, he declared
it was because "it looked like there wasn't anyone to bother him."
The idea of being left along also seems to have been upper­
most in the minds of Fleck's well-known neighbors to the north
and east.
In 1884 two Texas ranchers, Oliver Lee and Berry
Altman, arrived in the Tularosa Basin, intending to acquire some
property and settle down.
In Mescalero, they met William Kellam,
who told them about a location in Dog Canon on the west side of
the Sacramento Mountains where there was plenty of water and
available land.
On seeing the place, and looking over the Basin,
Altman is reported to have said: "Well, Oliver, this country is
so damned sorry, I think we can stay here a long time and never
be bothered by anybody else" (Keleher 1945: 212).24
Lee was a young man when he came to the Basin.
He was born
on November 8, 1865, in Burnet County, Texas, to Mary Altman Lee,
34 years old, and formerly from Alabama.
His father, also named
Oliver, was 63 at the time of Oliver, Jr.'s, birth, and was frmm
New York.
Each parent had been married once before, and living
Although no one has yet written a book about Oliver Lee, there
are literally dozens of short treatments dealing with his life
and ranching activities (Keleher 1945, Hening 19's'8,S,(lIJ'qni;chsen.
1966. and Gibson 1965). Much of the material is a rehash of
evidence concerning the Fountain case, which, except for its
incidental relationship to Wildy Well, has little connection
with the history of the McGregor Range, and tends to de~ract
from Lee's many and varied accomplishments.
Therefore, I will
limit my information to some biographical data on Lee, and to
his efforts to gain control of and retain water and range rights
on McGregor Range proper, paying particular attention to previ­
ously unpublished material, such as court records.
Dave Townsend, who is on the history faculty of the Alamo­
gordo Branch of New Mexico State University, is presently at
work on various aspects of Lee's life.

122

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

in the Lee household in 1870 were four of the five offspring of
Mrs. Lee's first marriage: Amanda, Robert, Bertha, and Mary (U.S.
Bureau of the Census 1870).
'
By 1880 Lee had moved to Taylor County, his father having
died in 1878.
A precocious 14 years old, he was soon famous
throughout the country for his Steel Dust horses, and joined his
26-year-old half-brother, Perry, in listing his occupation as
"stock raiser" (U. S. Bureau of the Census 1880a). 2 5
In 1884, the year of the great March blizzard that hit
Taylor County, Altman and Lee set out for New Mexico in search of
open range, good grass, and markets for their horses.
They took
with them three young Black men, Daniel Sauls (21), Edward [King?]
(15), and Ephraim (17); their livestock; and Oliver Lee's brands,
the Double S for horses, and the Circle Cross (New Mexico Terri­
torial Census, 1885).
By 1885, Lee had established the location
of his ranch at the mouth of Dog Canon, and had begun thinking
about ways to firm up his control of the Sacramento River and the
flats to the south.
Within a few years he either controlled or
shared Wildy Well, and his cattle had begun to spread out from
the foothills of the Sacramentos.
A bill of sale in 1890 indi­
cates that his range informally took in the Sacramento Mountains
as well as unspecified areas in Dona Ana and Lincoln counties
(Dona Ana County, Deed Record 11: 494).
Throughout the 1890's Lee busied himself with acquiring
water rights.
He purchased the Alamo Ranche [sic] and rights
to all water in Alamo Canon (Dona Ana County, Deed Record 18:
350-351), and became interested in the legalized water rights of
the Tularosa Ditch Company.
Then, on November 3, 1897, he began
one of his most ambitious projects.
In an effort to divert water
from the Sacramento River down onto the flats, he started an 11­
mile ditch.
Four years later, with the help of W. H. McNew and
the Gillilands, he completed the project from the river to the
Upper Juniper Reservoir, and water began to flow through an open
25
Bob Beverly once said of Oliver Lee that he:
was one of the best horsemen on the range I
ever knew, and his Double S ponies were known
everywhere in the Southwest where cowboys rode
for endurance and stability.
Any time a cow­
boy craved a little exercise of a cold morning,
all he had to do was run his thumbs down one of
those double S ponies' neck and he had to sit
low down in his weod or he had a horse loose
with his saddle out on the range (Beverly 1952:
159).
Perry Altman returned to Taylor County in 1886 to marry Emma
Wooten whose brother, Horace, was one of the founders of Abilene,
and whose father had been an early rancher around Buffalo Gap
(Duff 1970: 38-39, 62-63, 90, 282).

THE RANCHING BOOM

1Z3

channel that was 1 l/Z feet wide at the bottom, 5 feet wide at
the top, and almost 11 inches deep (Jensen 1961: 89).
While most of Lee's interest prior to 1890 seems to have
been directed at his Dog Ca;on property, he had been involved
since approximately 1889 in a loose partnership with a man named
Fitzgerald Moor, who first was reported ranching on government
land east of Orogrande in the mid-1880's (Richeson 1975: 8).
Moor was born in Alabama around 1843, and had served in the
Civil War as a physician, during which time he was wounded.
In 1869 he married a woman named Salley Neely, and they had
one son, Lee, born November 21, 1870.
J. F. apparently de­
serted his family, remarried and had two more children, and
then moved to the McGregor Range area where he raised stock
and had numerous business dealings with Oliver Lee (Richeson
1975: 3-8; New Mexico Territorial Census, 1885).26
In fact,
Lee Moor recalled that his father and Oliver Lee collaborated
on many livestock and land deals until 1902, when they were
hard-hit by drought and had to sell Wildy Well to W. N. Fleck.
In 1898, Moor paid Lee $8,000 for a herd of cattle (Otero County,
Bills of Sale Record 1: 3); and in the same month lent Lee
$6,842 at 12% interest, for which Lee mortgaged his Tularosa
town and water rights, partial interests in stock running near
Dog Canon, Three Rivers, and on the Dona Ana and Lincoln County
ranges, as well as his interest in a promissory note held joint­
ly by Lee, Moor, and W. W. Cox (Dona Ana County, Mortgage Re­
cord 4: 586-591).27
In August of 1899 the E1 Paso Herald re­
ported that Lee had sold his Wildy Well Ranch and six hundred
head of cattle to Moor (August 23, 1899: 5), a scant three years
before Fleck acquired the property.28
26
J. F. Moor died in El Paso on May 17, 1914 (Herald May 18,
1914: 9).
For a history of his son, who was famous in El Paso
for his philanthropies, see Richeson 1975.
27
W. W. Cox was Oliver Lee's brother-in-law.
In October of
1898, Lee married Miss Winnie P. Rhodes, sister of Mrs. Cox,
in San Antonio, Texas (Alamogordo News December 18, 1941: 1;
Coan 1925, III: 134-135).
28
Wildy Well appears to have been used heavily by Lee, ~nd at
the time of his shoot-out there with Pat Garrett on July 12-13,
1~98, was thought of as being an extension of his Dog Canon out­
fit.
Another tenant was Lee Moor, who lived at Wildy shortly
after his marriage to Beulah Johnson in 1900, and occupied the
old adobe house.
Moor cared for the place and was paid about
$25.00 per month to keep railroad hands at Orogrande supplied
with fresh beef.
Eventually, Lee Moor acquired his own sheep
ranch east of Orogrande, but sold out to W. N. Fleck in 1903
(Richeson 1975: 13-19).

124

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

By 1905, Oliver Lee had firm control of most of the northern
part of the McGregor Range.
Just ou~§1d. of the .Range limits to
the north was his Circle Cross Ranch headquarters, a huge ram­
bling ranchhouse surrounded by fruit trees and outbuildings, and
lying near the Sacramento River.
His ditch began on the river,
ran southwest across the divide and down through Grapevine Canyon
where he had a line camp called the Grapevine Horse Camp. Midway
between Grapevine Horse Camp and Wildy Well, and situated on the
open ditch, was the site known as the Old Ditch Camp (Fig. I-17A).
Several hands stayed at Ditch Camp on a more-or-less permanent
basis, including Carmen Baca, and Ed and Ella King.
Baca, who
worked for Lee approximately 25 years, lived at the camp and was
responsible for maintaining the acequia which ran from the Sacra­
mento River.
He was aided in his work by the Kings, and the three
of them built corrals, and repaired ditches for the three tanks:
Gravel Tank, Drinking Water Tank, and Boom Tank (Baca ~.d~).
Oliver Lee's son, Don, also visited Old Ditch CamPr and :he
remembers that :::tt was fJ'l1:S of,the sign±ftcari1i _watelr:llng--pl.~cija
in a range which included Grapevine, Cox's Well, and Wildy Well.
He recalls that between 1904 and 1918 his father farmed approxi­
mately 1,000 acres at Old Ditch Camp, and planted such crops as
wheat and corn (Lee 1975).
Such cultivation would hardly seem possible today, but Lee
remembers that the combination of irrigation from the ditch,
slightly greater rainfall, and heavier winter snows in the Sacra­
mentos assured the sUCceSS of Oliver Lee's planting efforts.
Interestingly enough, this was the time when the Campbell System
of dry farming was becoming popular, and articles about farming
successfully on arid and semi-arid land appeared regularly in
The Orogrande Times (March 1, 1906: 2; see also Schlebecker 1963:
21-22, and Buffum 1909, for discussions of the origins and spread
of dry farming).
Finally, this was the period when Lee was in­
volved with a group of speculators in the Sacramento City promo­
tion, and part of their approach to potential investors included
demonstrations of successful farming in the vicinity of the city
(The Orogrande Times November 14, 1907: 1; December 5, 1907: 1).
Important as the waters of the. Sacramento were to him and to
his cattle on the McGregor Range, Lee decided to sell a portion
of his water rights to the South West Smelting and Refining Com~
pany so that they would have sufficient water to run their plant
in Orogrande.
On August 19, 1905, Lee and his wife sold their
ditch and water rights for $25,000, reserving 50,000 gallons of
water a day, as well as those rights due their neighbors, M. V.
Jeffers and J. B. Wright (Otero County, Bills of Sale Record 1:
141-143).
Meanwhile, 50,000 gallons a day was a sufficient amount of
water to allow Lee to keep his southern range going, and to ex­
pand as well.
He ran a pipeline all the way from the Sacramento
River and Rim Tank (Fig. I-18a) to Otero Mesa, and developed Mesa

THE RANCHING BOOM

125

Horse Camp, a large complex of buildings, corrals, and tanks
(Fig. I-18a).
Lee appears to have felt that it was more prac­
tical to run a pipeline than'to drill wells on Otero Mesa, where
1,000- to 1,500~foot depths were not unusual.
He was aided in
his enterprise by Joe Morgan and Senator A. B. Fall around 1907
(Gilliland N.d.).
According to the El Paso HeraZd, Lee and Fall
built approximately 9 1/2 miles of pipeline from Rim Tank to the
Mesa; Will L. Rutherford, who appears to have purchased part of
the ~ee-Fall concern, added 1 mile of pip~ with Lee's help, and
intended to add 6 more during 1916 (March 28, 1916: 11).
In 1921, Lee extended the pipe still further south to the
BT Ranch, which he had acquired through the Circle Cross Cattle
Company.
Eventually, he controlled almos~ the entire northern
portion of the McGregor Range through a series of carefully
developed pipes and tanks, including Grapevine, Old Ditch Camp,
Cox's Well, Culp Tank, Mesa Horse Camp, the BT, Poe Tank, Double
Tank (Fig, I-18Q), and Martin Tank (Lee, October 25, 1975).
The history of Oliver Lee's ranch and business dealings
until 1931, when the Circle Cross Cattle Company folded and the
livestock were disposed of, is too complex to cover briefly.
However, Lee does appear to have been extraordinarily adept at
selling his ranch to numerous companies of which he was a board
member, and then managing to buy his land back when the companies
went bankrupt.
One of the first promotional groups with whom he
had business dealings was the Sacramento Valley Irrigation Com­
pany, of which he was an officer, along with C. A. Thompson,
R. M. Nichols, and M. A. Gleason (The Orogrande Times February
28, 1907: 1).
In 1916, Lee became involved with the newly-formed Sacra­
mento River Cattle Company, to which he sold his livestock in
three s,parate transactions- during May and November of 1916
(Otero County, Bills of Sale Record No.1: 473, 474, 556).
The
company was incorporated formally on May 13, 1916, and listed as
its objectives buying, selling, and raising livestock; and the
acquisition and cultivation of farm land.
Capital stock was
$200,000; incorporators were Oliver M. Lee, J. W. Stockard, James
G. McNary, and Charles M. Newman. 29
On May 18, 1916, Lee sold the company his rights to Cox's
Well, and eleven days later, quitclaimed for $5,000 more than
29
McNary was the president of the First National Bank of El Paso,
and was involved in ranching deals with Lee for over 15 years
(McNary 1956). Newman was the son of E. S. Newman, himself a
large ranch owner in the southern part of the McGregor Range.
The Newman Ranch eventually was purchased by the Circle Cross
Cattle Company, successor to the Sacramento River Cattle Company.
According to the El Paso HeraZd, Lee's cattle were gathered
and tallied at the Ditch Camp prior to their transfer to the
Sacramento River Cattle Company (March 28, 1916: 11).

126

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-17.

Views of Oliver Lee's Ranch; Ruins of a Cattle
Empire.

A. Old Ditch Camp
Old Ditch Camp was developed by Oliver Lee and manned
by hands Carmen Baca, and Ed and Ella King.
It was
located south of Grapevine Horsecamp on the ditch
which ran from the Sacramento River to Orogrande.
Weather has taken its toll, leaving only low walls of
melted adobe.
(View southeast 1975)
B. Cox's Well
Midway between Old Ditch Camp and Orogrande was a cow
camp known variously as Cox's Well, the Sacramento
River Cattle Company, and Tom Bell's Ranch.
Named
originally for Lee's brother-in-law, the site became
an active camp after 1900.
Ruins in the foreground
are the foundations of Tom Bell's house, dating from
the 1940's, and built after Bell bought 46 sections
from Lee's bankrupt Circle Cross Cattle Company, suc­
cessor to the Sacramento River Cattle Company.
(View
north 1975)
C, D. El Paso Canyon
Louis F. Powell patented 640 acres in EI Paso Canyon
on April 29, 1937, but the structure, as well as an
early surveyor's notes and maps, indicate that the
area was used considerably earlier, probably by the
Sacramento River Cattle Company.
Remains include a
bunkhouse and dugout, the latter of which has been
repaired extensively over a period of time.
El Raso
Canyon was a natural extension of Oliver Lee's cattle
empire since it had good water and plentiful grass.
(C, view south 1976; D, view north 1976)

o

«

128

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-18.

Water, the Lifeblood of the Range.

Oliver Lee did more than any other single person to make the
Range habitable.
He accomplished this feat by drilling wells,
digging tanks, and where water was too deep and rainfall too un­
sure, extending a pipeline system from the Sacramento River.
A.

Mesa Horse Camp
In the foreground is Lee's tank.
The water visibly
gushing from the pipe has been conveyed many miles from
Rim Tank, located in the Sacramento Mountains, far
distant in the background.
(View north 1975)

B.

Double Tank
Frequent surface water, such as that provided by Double
Tank, and fed from Lee's pipeline, was a necessity on
Otero Mesa, where water could be as much as 1,500 feet
under the ground.
(View south 19'15)
c

c::..

Wildy Well
After Oliver Lee's shootout with Pat Garrett, Wildy Well
became the most infamous historic site on the RaUge.
The
well was named for Jonathan Wildy, another early rancher,
and owned variously by J. Fitzgerald Moor, Oliver Lee,
and William Fleck.
Nothing remains of the adobe where
Lee and Garrett exchanged gunfire--it was torn down by
Ralph Fleck around 1907.
(View northeast 1975)

D.

Rim Tank
Near the Sacramento River, Rim Tank still supplies water
to Otero Mesa.
(View northeast 1976)

w
a:
::J

"
LL

Q

u

130

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

1,000 acres, including the area around his Sacramento River ranch,
the Old Ditch Camp, and Grapevine Horse Camp (Otero County, Quit
Claim Deed Record No. 37: 271-272).
Other transactions followed,
including three on May 29, 1916, in which the Lees received
$70,000 for various parcels of land on the Sacramento River; and
for their rights to water from the river, in the Mesa Pipe Line,
and to Carrizo Springs (Otero County, Deed Record 34: 160-164).
By 1923, the Sacramento River Cattle Company had fallen on
hard times, and was replaced by the Circle Cross Cattle Company,
incorporated on June 5, 1923, and comprised of many of the same
men who had been behind the Sacramento Company.30
Authorized
capital was $800,000, and corporation objectives were identical
to those of the Sacramento River Cattle Company.
By 1929, the Circle Cross also was in trouble, and had been
purchased by the First Mortgage Company of El Paso (Times Febru­
ary 14, 1929: 1).
In 1930, ;h~ Circle Cro~s cattle wer~~sold ahd
ehe 0 tero InNes tmeMI &i::QI)lpany wa~ 0 rgarlh:ed to take over th-e' !!'anch.
The Circle Cross was put into receivership, and Lee was appointed
as receiver until 1939, during which period approximately 75,000
acres were sold off. s1 One of those who was able to purchase a
30
Holdovers from the Sacramento River Cattle Company included
W. M. Cady, James G. McNary, Robert L. Holliday, and O. M. Lee.
Other incorporators were Tom B. Newman, W. L. Tooley, C. J. Mapel,
and W. W. Turney (Otero County, Corporation Record 51: 279).
31
The Otero Investment Company, again under the directorship of
James G. McNary, patented thousanas of acres of public land on the
McGregor Range during the 1930's.
But not even that action was
enough to save the company from the twin threats of drought and
depression.
The quasi-legal nature of the relationship between the Circle
Cross and Otero Investment companies Came to light in a suit filed
in 1932 against the First National Bank, James G. McNary presi­
dent.
Mrs. Tillie Jardina Carman accused McNary, a stockholder
in the Circle Cross, of investing her money in the company, know~
ing that its notes were worthless.
Furthermore, she believed that
the Otero Investment Company had been formed to take over the
property of the Circle Cross, and that the former company had been
insolvent from the time of its creation (Times February 18,.1932:
N.p.).
Mrs. Carman's accusations concerning the link between the
Circle Cross and the Otero Investment Company ring true in the
light of patents filed by the latter company on Mesa Horse Camp,
along the pipeline between Ditch Camp and Cox's Well, and on
land in the foothills of the Sacramentos above Otero Mesa (see
appropriate township plats in the Otero County Courthouse, Map­
ping Section.)

-~~.~~~.-------.-~---

THE RANCHING BOOM

131

portion of the ranch was Tom Bell of El Paso, who went to work
for Lee in 1918.
After the ranch went into receivership, Bell
sold anough cattle to buy 46'sections of the ranch on which he
ran three hundred head (Jensen 1961: 5).
Headquarters were
located just southeast of Paxton Siding, and were in the area
formerly known as Cox's Well (Fig. I-17b).
Oliver Lee died in 1941, but not before he had left his
mark on a large part of southern New Mexico.
By the time he was
75, he had controlled nearly 300~OQO_dcres sf~Qt~ra:-County"
been a president of the New Mexico Cattle Growers Association,
a state senator, and a director of the Federal Land Bank for
New Mexico.
Landmarks on the McGregor Range with which he still
is associated are Mesa Horse Camp, Grapevine Canyon, Cox's Well,
Old Ditch Camp, and perhaps most of all the incredible pipeline
system which supplies water to dozens of tanks and reservoirs.
Oliver Lee was not only a "product of the rugged times on the
open range in a region where there was little law and a man must
defend his own as best he could," as George Curry liked to
describe him (Hening 1958: 100).
He also formed and shaped the
land of the McGregor Range, making it work for him, and render­
ing it more productive than anyone would have thought possible.
Oliver Lee and William Fleck were the most successful of
the early ranchers in dealing with the McGregor landscape.
How­
ever, three other ranchers on the extreme southern end of the
Range also had a try before turning to other enterprises and
geographical areas.
One, J. H. Nations, is best known for his
West Texas ranches; the others, E. S. and H. L. Newman, are more
often remembered for their banking and railroad interests.
J. H. Nations came from a ranching family, and so it was
natural for him to pursue that business. 32 His father, Eli
Nations, had left Gonzales County, Texas, in 1883 to move to
West Texas; and so J. H. followed suit, moving first to Limpia
Canyon in Presidio (now Jeff Davis) County, then to El Paso in
1886, where he built a meat packing plant.
Apparently, Nations remained actively involved in ranching
during his residence in El Paso, because by 1890 he owned or
controlled immense amounts of property in Jeff Davis County,
Texas, and in the vicinity of the McGregor Range.
A mortgage
deed made on August 20, 1890, gives an indication of the extent
of his holdings: for a loan of $30,545.92, he mortgaged to
Fitzgerald Moor "all cattle running in and near the Sacramento
32
Nations' parents, Eli and Eliza Austin Woodruff Nations, were
engaged in the cattle business in Gonzales County, Texas, where
J. H. was born on January 5, 1857.
All biographical data on
Nations is taken from Johnson 1914, IV: 1971; Paddock 1975, II:
480; The CattZeman January 1929: 28; Times November 28, 1928:
N.p.; HeraZd August 2, 1905: 1; and HeraZd March 2, 1912: 3.

132

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Mountains in Dona Ana and Lincoln counties, and counties ad­
joining in New Mexico and Texas branded 0 on left shoulder and 0
on left hip." He also mortgaged horses,-cows branded other than
in the above manner, cattle on his range in Jeff Davis County,
more than ten sections of land in West Texas, and land in the
Sacramento Mountains and near Las Cruees (Otero County, Lincoln
County Transcripts, Vol. A. Miscellaneous: 18-23).
Although Nations appears to have pulled out of the McGregor
Range by the turn of the century, and to have turned his atten­
tions to his El Paso business and West Texas property, he con­
tinued to deal with land owners on the Range.
In 1904 he sold
Fitzgerald Moor 1,946 heam of sheep, formerly purchased from
W. W. Cox (Otero County, Bills of Sale Record No.1: 109); and
in 1914 began a series of transactions with a man named Manuel
Ribera [sia] over land in T26S, R8E on a site near what is
known now as Nation's Hot Well (Otero County, Quit Claim Deed
Record No. 37: 212; Mortgage Record 46: 279-280; Deed Record 57:
304).
J. H. Nations had a negligible place in the history of
McGregor Range.
However, two other entrepreneurs had a signifi­
cant and long-term impact.
At various times bank presidents,
cattle barons, and land developers, H. L. and E. S. Newman in­
volved themselves deeply in the financial affairs of El Paso,
one of their more important ventures being the construction of
the El Paso and Northeastern (or White Oaks) Railroad.
THE EL PASO AND NORTHEASTERN RAILROAD:
THE BASIN OPENS UP
By the time the Newman brothers arrived in El Paso, most
of their significant ranching experience was behind them.
Prior
to their arrival, they were among a number of cattlemen who had
become renown for the discovery that cattle could live and
flourish on the northern plains year-round.
They capitalized
on the idea, and became heavily involved in ranching, banking,
and shipping throughout the Midwest, Southwest, and Rocky
Mountain regions.
H. L. Newman, who eventually owned a sizable ranch in the
southern portion of the McGregor Range, was born in Lexington,
Kentucky.
In the early 1860's he went to Leavenworth, Kansas,
and began an active business career.
He became involved in
freighting in a store owned by Russell of Russell, Majors and
Waddell, and then received lucrative contracts of his own that
enabled him to start a banking venture.
In the years that
followed, Newman promoted several banks, including one in Salt
Lake City~ and one in St. Louis--the National Stock Yard Bank.
Simultaneously, he engaged in various ranching activities with

EL PASO AND NORTHEASTERN RAILROAD

133

his brother, E. S. Newman, the two of them being listed in St.
Louis directories as president and vice-presid~nt of the
Niobrara Cattle Company.
By'1883 they had land and cattle in
Montana, Wyoming, Nebraska, Indian Territory, and Texas, E. S.
Newman handlin~ the management, and H. L. the banking (Burns
1953: 22-23).3
H. L. Newman became interested in El Paso in 1881 when
Charles Robert Morehead persuaded him to take part in the set­
ting up of a bank in that city.3~
His first visit to El Paso
took place in 1881 when he came to arrange for the establishment
of the State National Bank and to meet with Joseph Magoffin
(Matkin 1966: 152; Jones 1966: 62).
In the late 1880's, the Newmans decided to leave St. Louis.
By 1888, they had made El Paso their permanent home and were
pursuing business as usual.
Soon after the move, E. S. was
listed as the owner of a new ice plant in the city (Times June
14, 1888: 8); by 1901 he had aided in forming the new Union
Stock Yards (Hepald August 12, 1901: 1); and the following year
was listed as an officer of the Lowdon National Bank (Hepald
April 2, 1902: 1).
His brother, H. L., was treasurer of the
Beaumont and El Paso Oil Company, and also an officer of the
Lowdon (Hepald May 5, 1901: 4; September 27, 1902: 8).
Ranching interests appear to have become peripheral for
the Newmans.
H. L. acquired a large amount of land along the
Texas/New Mexico border east of present-day Newman and extending
to the Hueco Mountains, directly south of Fleck's Ranch.
How­
ever, he did not use the property for any significant period of
time.
Eventually, he leased the ranch to William Randolph
Hearst, who brought cattle from Bovito, his ranch in Chihuahua,
Mexico, to put on the Otero County range; and later sold the
ranch to a company whose purpose was to make yucca soap and
baskets in commercial quantities.
That company, in turn, leased
the range to the McElroy Corporation of El Paso for grazing,
until C. J. Mapel, E. S. Newman's son-in-law, purchased the
property (McGregor 1975; Fleck 1975; Lewis and Atk ins 35 1975).
33

For more information on the Newmans' ranching and business ac­
tivities see: Abbott and Smith 1939: 101-102, 107f., l13f., 122,
232; Sandoz 1935: 34, 74-75, 83-84; and Gomez Cattle Company 1891.
34
Another backer of the State National Bank was Oscar T. Bassett
of Fort Worth, Texas, whose last name appears on landmarks in the
southeastern part of the McGregor Range, and on a lake just out­
side of the Range boundary.
35
Atkins' father, John, worked as foreman under Eddy Ardoin, Jr.,
on the Newman/Hearst Ranch, and eventually leased the area that
had been the Newman Ranch; his deeded land lay west of Highway
54.

134

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

If the Newman brothers' ranching enterprises did not leave
a lasting effect on the McGregor Range, their railroad interests
certainly did.
In fact, it has been said that no other single
incident had as great an impact on the Range as did the construc­
tion of the El Paso and Northeastern Railroad, and the Newmans
were instrumental in the initial capitalization of the project.
From the early 1880's there had been considerable interest
in a railroad line that would run north out of El Paso.
White
Oaks in Lincoln County had a product El Paso needed badly: coal.
In addition, there were valuable timber stands in the Sacramento
Mountains.
However, both resources had remained all but inacces­
sible due to the impassibility of the Flats, and the slowness of
available transportation.
In 1881, the Santa Fe system had considered the project
briefly, but failed to take eyen initial steps.
The following
year, however, a group of individual capitalists, one of whom
was S. H. Newman, organized the El Paso and White Oaks Railroad
Company.
A critical survey of the route was made, and a geolo­
gist hired to assess the mineral wealth of the White Oaks coal
fields, and the Jarilla, San Andres, and Organ mountains.
Yet,
despite favorable reports and the involvement of the Texas and
Pacific Railroad, the project failed to get off the ground (Times
April 7, 1888: 2).
If money was in short supply, enthusiasm was not.
In 1885
the railroad idea received renewed support, and a committee of
five solicited sufficient contributions to grade a few miles of
line.
Two years later, another group of El Paso investors re­
vived the idea of a railroad and on November 10, 1887, chartered
the El Paso and Northeastern Railway Company of Texas.
The
charter interested a group of St. Louis and Kansas City business­
men who took over and renamed the line the Kansas City, El Paso
and Mexican Railroad.
H. L. Newman was named vice-president of
the line, and was instrumental in raising the $100,000 that was
deemed necessary to complete the line to the New Mexican border.
When the first 10 miles were completed on November 30, 1888,
Newman, by now president of the company, was one of four initi~
ators of the project who drove the spikes which tied down the
last of the track (Rabe 1971: 8-17).
Although the track went to no particular destination, El
Paso seemed pleased to see something begun; the Times was plainly
ecstatic.
Unfortunately, the general delight was shortlived,
since three suits were filed by the El Paso National Bank, B. F.
Hammett (representing the railroad), and the Texas and Pacific
Railway within a week, charging that Morris Locke, the contractor,
owed them more than $20,000 (Rabe 1971: 18).
Things went from bad
to worse, and within a short time all work ceased.
With the apparent failure of the Kansas City, E1 Paso and
Mexican Railroad, the Newman brothers' contribution to pushing a
line across the McGregor Range area came to an end.
And yet, in

EL PASO AND NORTHEAS'11ERN RAILROAD

135

their roles as promoters, financial supporters, and officers
of the railroad, they had succeeded in building a small amount
of track, and in keeping alive the idea of a rail line across
the Tularosa Basin.
Just as it began to seem as though the line would never
be completed, one of the Southwest's most daring and successful
promoters, Charles B. Eddy, became interested in it and even­
tually formed the company which constructed the road.
Builder
of irrigation projects, and a railroad in the Pecos Valley of
New Mexico, he visualized a line which would start at El Paso,
skirt the Sacramento Mountains with their timber resources,
take in the ranch country, and terminate in White Oaks with
its gold and coal mines.
In addition, Eddy would achieve the
satisfaction of demonstrating to the entire Southwest that he
could build a railroad through a country in which "a lizard and
a horned toad could survive only with difficulty" (Keleher 1945:
242).
Eddy conceived of a line which would tap not only the coal
reserves of White Oaks, but the military establishment at Fort
Bliss; mining and smelter enterprises in Texas, Arizona,and
Mexico; cattle industry of the McGregor Range area; gypsum
dunes of White Sands; timber of the Sacramento Mountains; the
Mescalero Indian Reservation and Fort Stanton; and the towns of
Tularosa, Three Rivers, and Oscura.
It was, in short, a pro­
moter's dream.
As the first step in carrying out his plan, Eddy purchased
Jay Gould's 10 miles of the Kansas City, El Paso and Mexican
Railroad track, as well as an extra 10 miles of graded roadway.a6
He then approached the Rock Island Railroad interests and pointed
out that a line could be built from Liberal, Kansas, to Clayton,
New Mexico, to connect with his proposed line, and thus give the
Rock Island an entry to El Paso (Keleher 1945: 244).
For two years Eddy worked to prove that the resources of the
Tularosa were sufficient to merit investment.
By November 1,
1897, his efforts had paid off when he managed to raise enough
capital to incorporate the El Paso and Northeastern Railroad
Company (Rabe 1971: 70-71).
Construction began almost immediate­
ly, and by February 1, 1898, the crews had crossed the New Mexico
state line.
The rails rapidly extended north, following a survey
east of the Jarilla Mountains and approximately 3 miles west of
Lee and Moor's Wildy Well.
On June 15, 1898, the crew Teached
the new townsite Alamo Gordo, the land for which Lee had sold
36

Wealthier men than the Newman brothers blanched at the idea of
crossing the Flats, and Jay Gould was one of them.
In 1892 Gould
bought the Kansas City, El Paso and Mexican Railroad out of re­
ceivership sight unseen, but cut his losses and returned East
after a trip to El Paso and a look at the proposed route.

-.--------- -_._-------_...._ - -

- - . - - - - - -....- - - -..~-....- - - -.... - - -...- - . - -....- - - - - - - - _.... ------~

136

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Eddy in December of 1897 37 ; and on August 3, 1899, track was
completed to White Oaks junction on the Carrizozo flat (Rabe

1971: 72-73).

~

Just as Eddy and other promoters before him had predicted,
the area between Alamogordo and White Oaks boomed.
There was a
scramble for government land, and 4,000 acres of public domain
were filed Dn near La'Luz only a few days after the railroad
reached there; town lots in Alamogordo sold quickly; and the
people in the upper valley found El Paso easily accessible for
the first time in the history of the Tularosa Basin.
The railroad also had an impact on the Flats to the south.
The line was a boost to ranchers like Lee and Fleck who could
load their stock at a nearby siding instead of driving herds to
points as far away as El Paso or northern Mexico.
The railroad
also made its presence known in other, more subtle, ways.
At
W. N. Fleck's dugout, for example, the bond beams are railroad
switch ties, as are the upright beams in the corners of his South
Well house, while innumerable corrals at Wildy Well, Mesa Horse
Camp, and Cox's Well are made with railroad ties and telegraph
poles.
Above all, the railroad made building materials available
as never before, and the house at Foster Ranch, as well as the
Fleck homestead, was constructed only after it was possible to
purchase lumber milled in the Sacramentos and brought to the
Flats via the railroad.
Just as the El Paso and Northeastern Railroad had an imme­
diate and visible impact on the McGregor Range, so it also had a
long-term effect on the area around the Range.
It brought the
entire southern Basin out of an environmentally-imposed isolation
and made the people living there susceptible to a new optimism.
In short, the railroad created an atmosphere suitable for further
development, and within ten years after the completion of the
line, much of the McGregor Range found itself in the clutches
of a small boomer movement.
OROGRANDE AND SACRAMENTO CITY:
BOOM TO BUST
The new spirit of optimism which resulted from the comple­
tion of the El Paso and Northeastern had an immediate effect· on
Lee managed to turn a handsome profit on the sale of the Alamo­
gordo townsite, proving once again his excellent business sense.
In December of 1896, he paid Mr. and Mrs. Eli L. Reynolds $500
for property known as the Alamo Ranche and Alamo Canon and ranch
property, "said particular 40 acres being the desert land entry
of said Eli L. Reynolds, No. 142 ... " (Dona Ana County, Deed

--

......-

- - -......

~

-

..- . - - -. .

•.....- -. . .

- _........•..

-

----

... _ - - _ .

__

......

_ - - - _ ..

__._...

-_.­

OROGRANDE AND SACRAMENTO CITY

137

at least two different facets of life on the Range.
First, the
exploitation of mineral resources increased so drastically that
the mining district around Orogrande was compared favorably to
Cripple Creek (Twitchell 1917, III: 448).
Prospectors had mined
in the Jarilla Mountains as early as the 1870's, but after the
railroad opened the area up, providing easy accessibility and
ready markets for mineral products, the area bustled with
activity.
The increasing mining population, in turn, created an at­
mosphere suitable to land and town developments.
The population
of Orogrande grew from next-to-nothing in 1900 to between 2,000
and 2,500 people in 1907.
Twitchell touted the valley as "one
of the largest and ••• most beautiful plains in New Mexico" (1917,
III; 444); and the editor of The Orogrande Times promised that
if the Sacramento pipeline were extended, the Range would become
a "vast flourishing fruit garden" (February 8, 1906: 2).
Train­
loads of excursionists came through town not only to view the
mines, but to buy lots in Orogrande and in Oliver Lee's newest
promotion, Sacramento City.
Mining near the McGregor Range had an inauspicious and un­
certain beginning.
Tradition has it that Cabeza de Vaca re­
ported Indians mining turquoise in the Jarillas in the sixteenth
century, and at least three individuals were interested in
prospecting there by 1880: S. M. Perkins, W. H. Llewelyn, and
Amos J. DeMueles.
But not until 1883 was the St. Louis United
Copper Company reported to have carried to patent seven claims-­
the Lone Star, Providence, Iron Duke, James Fisk, May Belle,
Shoo Fly, and Garnet--the Lone Star being the oldest patent in
the camp (The Orogrande Times April 26, 1906: 1). Mining in the
Jarillas received a shot in the arm with the building of smel­
ters in El Paso in 1887 and 1888, but activity remained re­
strained at best until completion of the El Paso and Northeastern
in 1899. 38
Sometime before 1905, a prospector named George E. Moffett
from Alamogordo found a gold nugget the size of a man's finger.
That find was all that was needed to trip off a small gold rush
during the years 1905-1906.
Between 1906 and 1914, more than
half-a-dozen different mining companies were incorporated with

37 Continued.

Record 18: 350-351).
One year later Lee sold the
property to' Eddy' t<tT. $.5,009 '(Dona Ana County 1 Deed Re{:ord 19:
210-212).
38
Although scholars have placed Cabeza de Vaca almost everywhere
in the Southwest at one time or another, recent research com­
pletely discounts the idea that he came anywhere near New Mexico
(Krieger 1961: 459-474).
See Ritch for a good early summary of mining in the jarillas
prior to 1885 (1885: 114-115).

138

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

rights to operate in the Jarilla Mountains, and during those
years th~y both operated mines and promoted mining stock in the
South- and Midwest. 39
Orogrande residents immediately felt the impact of the
mining boom, and the town's newspaper editor, F. J. Arkins, ran
weekly articles designed to encourage optimism about the wealth
of the Jarillas.
He boasted at one time that the mountains had
greater mineral wealth than any other place in the Southwest,
indeed, in North America (The Orogrande Times January 18, 1906:
2), and he began the practice of running weekly features on dif­
ferent mining properties, giving histories of the properties, as
well as pertinent information on the value and production of each
mine.
Judging from the promotional work of The Orogrande Times,
mining companies were prospering indeed.
In October of 1906,
Arkins reported that within sight of the top of Lucky Hill, alone,
one could see seven different mining properties at once--the
Lucky, Garnet, Surprise, Lincoln Consolidated, Copper Hill,
Golden Gem, and Turquoise (October 11, 1906: 1).
In November he
wrote that the iron ore exposed on Iron Hill was "one of the
largest bodies ... in North America," and that it was 72% pure
(November 1, 1906: 1); while By-Chance, presumed to be a contin­
uation of the main Lucky vein, was reported to have a vein of
copper ore 37 feet wide (November 8, 1906: 1),'° Something
called wire gold fortuitously was found in the Nannie Baird just
about the time some prospective investors were brought through
town on an excursion train; a feature article proclaimed that
such ore ran $20,000 to the ton, and that "the rock was literally
alive with the yellow stuff" (April 26, 1906: 1).
With such news it was no wonder that miners flocked to the
Jarillas, or that Orogrande boomed.
Orogrande was essentially a
company town, laid out by the South West Smelting and Refining
Company on November 28, 1905.
It began as a station on the El
Paso and Northeastern Railroad named Jarilla Junction, but ex­
perienced a name change on April 1, 1906, at the request of the
39
Gold was not the only mineral found in the Jarilla Mountains.
Prospectors also struck veins of copper and iron, silver and
lead, and it was claimed that in the eight years following 1905,
a million dollars worth of gold, silver, and turquoise was mined
in the area (Jenness 1964: 4).
40
By February of 1907, an additional seven mines were reported in
operation: the Iron Mask, Cuprite, Alice, Flying Eagle, Happy
Jack, Nannie Baird, and the property of the American Copper
Mining Co.
Not reported were the Surprise and Golden Gem (The
Orogrande Times February 21, 1907: 1).

OROGRANDE AND SACRAMENTO CITY

139

city fathers who said the original name was too difficult to
pronounce (The Orogrande Times March 8, 1906; 1).
They nick­
named it the "City of Destiny" and awaited the future with every
expectation that Orogrande would some day be as large as Alamo­
gordo or E1 Paso.
According to the Times, the townspeople would not have long
to wait.
While the town was still named Jarilla Junction it
had a hotel, and the Times editor reported the beginning or com­
pletion of approximately one hundred buildings (January 18,
1906: 1).
By January 25, the town's population was about five
hundred and more people were arriving daily.
Most significantly
of all, the machinery for the South West Smelting and Refining
Company's smelter arrived, making it possible to process ore in
Orogrande itself without sending it to El Paso.
Only one problem stood between Orogrande and unlimited
growth, and that problem was water.
Until December of 1906 the
town had no independent water source.
In an attempt to rectify
the shortage, the South West Smelting and Refining Company pur­
chased Oliver Lee's Sacramento River ditch and water rights on
August 19, 1905. With completion of the property transfer, work
began immediately to enlarge Lee's ditch to the Upper Juniper
Reservoir; build the Lower Juniper, connecting it by ditch to
the Upper Juniper; and construct a pipeline 27 miles long from
Lower Juniper to Orogrande.
The approach of the pipeline was followed with great anti­
cipation in Orogrande, F. J. Arkins making weekly progress re­
ports.
By January of 1906, pipeline headquarters were at
Turquoise, 5 miles north of Orogrande, and pipe was being
brought in on the railroad for distribution at Turquoise and
Escondido.
By April 12, the pipe had been completed to Lower
Juniper, and on May 3, water flowed from the pipe into the town
reservoir.
South West Smelting intended to use the bulk of the water
to run its Orogrande smelter, but plenty of water was available
for the town as well.
From May to December plans moved ahead to
connect the reservoir to city residences by means of water pipes,
a task which was accomplished on December 12, 1906, when water
was turned on at the junction of the South West Company's main
and that of the Orogrande Water Company.
With the easy availability of water heralded by completion
of the pipeline, the last obstacle to Orogrande's grow~h was
set aside.
By the end of 1907, the town had a population of
approximately 2,000, and buildings and organizations to match.
School bonds were voted in March 1906, and a building completed
one year later.
Businesses included the Orogrande Cement Block
Co., which provided block for the schoolhouse; a Smelter and
Merchants Bank; hospital; dairy; and of course, the smelter which
began operation on Wednesday, November 6, 1907.
A Baptist
church, built with Orogrande cement blocks, attempted to

140

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

counteract the evil effects of two saloons, while citizens of a
less rambunctious type attended ice cream and phonograph socials
at Mr. Beazley's Orogrande Pharma2y.
Citizens with more busi­
nesslike interests attended meetings of the Commercial Club,
formed in June of 1906 by Frank W. Beach.
Orogrande also shared in and encouraged the prosperity of a
neighbor to the north--Sacramento City.
Begun as a l~nd promo­
tion scheme which can only be compared to today's Horizon cities,
the Sacramento Valley Irrigation Company was backed by C. A.
Thompson of St. Joseph, Missouri; R. M. Nichols; and Oliver Lee.
Its avowed purpose was to open up the northern part of the
present-day McGregor Range, and encourage immigration and settle­
ment by prospective farmers.
First mention of the enterprise occurred in December 1906,
when The Orogrande Times noted that N. D. Allen, C. A. Thompson,
and R. C. Reid had arrived with the intention of looking over the
country, and investigating the water supply with a view to estab­
lishing a ~.st irrig.tion~enterprise in the~basin (DQcemb~B 13,
1906: 1).
That proposition seemed fine to F. J. Arkins, since
he had been touting the potential of the desert east of Orogrande
as a garden for quite some time; and so he continued to follow
the progress of Sacramento City through the years of its boom and
demise.
One old resident of Orogrande declared that "Missouri suck­
ers" had paid for that town's brief prosperity.
The same might
be said of the Sacramento City enterprise.
Promoters promised
that, with the construction of a second pipeline from the Sacra­
mento River, all the land between Orogrande and the Sacramento
Mountains would become arable.
Their advertisements urged home­
seekers and investors ~o buy a town lot immediately because
prices would double in 90 days (The Orogrande Times July 11,
1907: 1), and trainload after tra load of excursionists were
brought through to view the mines at Orogrande and purchase
property in Sacramento City.
On August 29, 1907, The Orogrande Times announced that the
Alamo Cement and Plaster Company was engaged in putting up a
four kettle mill; and a month later, enough residents had been
attracted to the town to submit a petition for a post office.
However, even this activity was not enough to keep Sacramento
City from reverting to a place inhabited "only by prairie dogs"
(The Orogrande Times September 26, 1907: 1), and despite promises
of tree-lined boulevards, railroad sidings, electric streets, and
multitudinous homes, Sacramento City failed to attract the people
needed for its successful settlement.
The promoters failed to
follow up on their promises of water lines from the Sacramento
River, and the streets that had been laid out so carefully to
attract the Missouri suckers slowly disappeared (Fig. I-19b).
Orogrande followed suit.
Mines began changing ownership
with startling regularity as the minerBls played out, and even

--

HOMESTEADERS

141

the newspaper editor became discouraged, selling the Times to
W. R. Quarles in July or August of 1907.
The $180,000 smelter
was abandoned, and by December 1908 the South West Smelting
and Refining Company was bankrupt.
Although mining in the
Jarilla District continues even today, the boom times were
finished with the end of the company.~l
McGregor Range never again saw a flurry of development
such as had occurred between 1900 and 1908, but something of
the optimism inherent in the growth of Orogrande and Sacra­
mento City remained.
Mine shafts are scattered throughout
the Range area, and in the most unlikely places.
As late as
1920, dozens of mining claims were being bought and sold daily
in the Hueco Mountains (Otero County, Mining Deed Record 77:
1-18).
Even the W. N. Flecks were caught up in the mineral
fever, stepping out only in 1915 when they quitclaimed the
Atlantic Mining Claim in the Jarilla Mountains to Walter B.
Lewis (Otero County, Mining Deed Record No. 33: 109).
In a
brief decade, the Range had experienced more excitement and
activity than it had seen since troops from Companies Hand
L of the 9th Cavalry chased Apaches across the flats east of
Orogrande.

HOMESTEADERS HAVE THEiR TURN
By World War I, events had settled down on McGregor Range.
The flurry of mining activity had peaked and fallen; Lee, Fleck,
and H. L. Newman, Jr .• were secure on their ranches and busy
trying to outlast a bad drought~2; and a few homesteaders were
beginning to take up claims.
Eighteen townships were surveyed
within the present boundaries of the Range between 1915 and
1917, most of them aro~nd the Huecos and east of Turquoise; and
41
The Phelps Dodge Corporation filed claims in theDist~ict as
late as August and December of 1926 (Otero County. Patents and
Patent Maps: T22S, R8E).
Current interest probably has been
encouraged by the rising prices of gold and silver, as well as
a renewed appreciation of turquoise.
42
Henry Newman, Jr., apparently was the only member of his
family to retain an abiding interest in the McGregor Range.
On March 19, 1914, he patented two eighty-acre plots in
T26S, R6E, sections 23 and 26, northeast of Newman, Texas
(Otero County. Patents and Patent Maps: T26S, R6E). as well
as forty acres comprising the old Newman Ranch Headquarters
on November 17, 1922 (Otero County. Patents and Patent Maps:
T25S, R7E), and 160 acres in T26S, R9E and T26S, RlOE, in the
vicinity of Red House Tanks.

.......

- -..

~--~---

..

~---

--~.--.~---

142

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-19.

A~

Langford Ranch and Sacramento City;
Near the Southern Pacific.

Developments

Langford Ranch
Langford Ranch lies just a few miles east of Highway 54
and the railroad.
Originally built on land patented by
Gilbert Langford on May 9, 1927, the house has been torn
down.
Remaining structures include a windmill, tanks,
pumphouse, barn, corrals, and house foundations.
(View
southeast 1975)

B.

Sacramento City
Northwest of Langford Ranch, Sacramento City hit its
peak around 1908.
The bubble of development quickly
burst, but the outlines of the city's streets still bear
mute testimony to the hopes people had for urban and
agricultural growth in the Tularosa Basin.
(View west
1976)

-----~~~~----~~.-

......

~-~.

FIGURE 1-19

A

B

144

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

a few hardy souls attempted to make a go of it on claims rang­
ing from 40 to 640 acres.
F. M. and Mary E. Bradford made five
claims totaling 480 acres along the Sacramento River between
October 1915 and October 1917 (Otero County. Patents and Patent
Maps: T20S, R13E); and a number of families settled on Otero
Mesa, including Jonathan E. Prather, Adrian A. and Agusta A.
Trammell, Sr., John W. K. Williams, Elijah White, James S. Lloyd.
Enoch E. Williams, and Ola Goforth, who was awarded 160 acres on
October 13, 1914, on the east end of the Mesa (Otero County, Pat­
ent Record No. 34: 340).
The Trammells, particularly. made themselves part of the
community that was called "Pumpkin Flats" by their neighbors
(Lewis and Atkins 1975).
They came from Abilene. Texas, in 1906
for Trammell's health, and homesteaded a ranch adjoining that of
John A. Prather.
One of their daughters married Charlie Van
Winkle, who had a claim in the area (Otero County, Miscellan­
eous Record No. 40: 412); another attended school on the Will
Martin Ranch and eventually married Jack Prather, John A. Prather's
nephew; and a son lived at Lulu, a post office and school building
just outside the McGregor Range boundaries (Longwell, rarrant and
Painter 1973; Al,aI11Qf]ar'do Ne.ws February 17,1938: N.p.).
According
to Bessie Voorhees of Orogrande, Lulu was named for the post­
master's wife, "whom nobody liked but he." Pappy Prather was the
mail carrier, and he went from Lulu on Thursdays and back on
Fridays.
His route went through Bugscuffle Pass, and was forty­
four miles long.
Themail went out to Lulu once a week when all
the ranch families would come in to get their letters, visiting
the store there, and taking part in a sort of informal community
(Voorhees N. d.: 2).
Reginning in the late 1920's homesteading activity on the
McGregor Range increased sharply.
The majority of land patented
in the area was claimed between 1926 and 1939, with peak years
occurring in 1936 and 1937.
While patents were filed in almost
half of the townships comprising the McGregor Range, some areas
naturally were more desirable than others.
Land along the lower
Sacramento River and in El Paso Canyon was claimed almost imme­
diately, as was the area east of the Sacramento City site (Fig. 1­
19b).
Other desirable locations for homestead c~a{ms were near
developed water sources such as tanks, pipes, or wells, or in
drainages, where water could be trapped easily.
Most of the individuals who patented their land had lived
on it for several years prior to filing an official claim.
As
a result, specific structures cannot always be dated on the ba­
sis of the date of patent.
Examples of such buildings may be
seen on land patented by Gilbert Langford (brother of Ola Goforth).
who claimed 1,280 acres east of Sacramento City (Fig. I-19a); Tom
Bell, who patented 40 acres around his house in 1939; Ellis Wright,
who built a log cabin, well, tanks. and corrals on his 640 acres

HOMESTEADERS

145

(Fig. I-2la,b)43; the Quicks, who claimed 1,280 acres in 1939
(Fig. I-2lc); and Albert Payne, who located east of Hop Lee
at Mesa Horse Camp, and built a frame house on part of his
640 acres (Fig. I-2ld).
On the southern part of the Range, numerous families
moved in between 1927 and 1939.
Ivan Gray and his brother,
Bob, each patented 640 acres, in 1935 and 1939 respectively.
Eventually, they both controlled approximately ten sections.
They married sisters from the Willie A. Fisher homestead to
the south, and settled down to build homes, tanks, and fences. 44
Ivan Gray constructed an impressive six-room house, made of
large pieces of cut stone which he obtained from outcroppings
nearby (Fig. I-22a,b).
His brother built a wooden structure
at Gray Tank, where his neighbors to the north and west were
the McGregors, and to the south, the Atkins family.
Between the Gray brothers were several more families, all
of them located up and down Castner Draw.
Original settlers
who patented land in T25S, RIOE included Lawrence V. Castner
in 1921, Claude L. Woods in 1927, Daniel A. Holmes in 1931, and
Jack C. Owens in 1932.
Two structures remain which are asso­
ciated with the homesteading period.
The first, settled by
Holmes, is known variously as Childs Place or Hilltop House,
and is comprised of a tank, pens, and a rock house with a frame
addition (Fig. I-22c,d).
The second, Foster Ranch, was homesteaded
by Claude Woods, and purchased later by Henry Foster, the person
most often associated with it.
The ranch, adjoined by Ivan Gray
on the south and the McGregor Ranch on the west, was situated
strategically at the base of numerous drainages.
Three tanks
surrounded an L-shaped frame house, a small rock house, and
pens (Fig. I-23a,b,c).
Natural stone outcroppings provided spill­
ways from one tank to the next; and cattle pens with a loading
shoot were located northwest of the house, next to the road
which headed in to Alvarado. Crossing and Newman.
The frame home at Foster Ranch has perhaps the most amazing
history of any building on the Range.
It was built in Orogrande
at the height of the mining boom, and was owned by the town
madam, a woman named Mrs. Keen, who eventually married Claude
43
Ellis Wright was the son of Pat Wright, who had settled earlier
in the Sacramentos.
His sister married W. M. McCrackin, whose
ranch was located on the east side of the Sacramentos, and who
held a grazing rights lease to Oliver Lee's Old Ditch Camp
(Alamogordo News February 24, 1927: 1; McCraken [sic] N.d.).
44
Fisher sold out to Bryan Bassett.
That part of the Bassett
Ranch which was not taken for the missile range was bought by
Don Lee, Oliver Lee's son, who had been forced to move from
his ranch in the Sacramentos (Atkins 1975).

146

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-20.

A-C.

Homesteading in El Paso Canyon.

Henry Tanner Homestead
Conveniently located near a streambed, Tanner's home­
stead consisted of 2 houses, an outhouse, barn, and
corrals.
Special features. included a cellar on the
north side of the main dwelling and a crude bay window
on the south.
(A, view north 1976; B, view west 1976;
C, view east 1976)

D.

George Moflar's House
Moflar's house was located about a mile up El Paso
Canyon from Tanner's homestead.
The house located at
left foreground appears to date from the late 1940's,
but other remains, such as a log shed, indicate that
the property was in use many years earlier.
(View
north 1976)

o

N

m

c

o

148

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-21.

Homesteading On or Near Otero Mesa.

Homesteading on or near Otero Mesa was a difficult proposi­
tion because of a lack of water. but some people tried it.
A~

B~

Ellis Wright Homestead
Ellis Wright built a small log cabin and patented 640
acres.
A large dry hole dug in bedrock and located
northwest of the cabin attests to the problems of ob­
taining water, as does the cistern adjacent to the
north side of the house.
(A, view north 1975; B, view
south 1976)

e~

Alex and Marcus Quick Cabin
Alex and Marcus Quick were luckier in their search for
water, and built their cabin south of a spring located
in a canyon just visible from the house.
A surveyor
passing through in 1917 noted that Old Culp Spring was
dry, but water flowed in 1975.
(View north 1975)

D~

Albert Payne House
Albert Payne had no well, so numerous cisterns located
around his house had to provide water for drinking.
Three lined the northern face of the house, and one was
situated to the southeast.
The roadbed to Lulu probably lay south of Payne's house
while a large, grass-filled valley to the north would
have provided range for his livestock.
(View south
1975)

,..
N

150

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-22.

Homesteading in the Huecos.

A, B. Ivan Gray House
Ivan Gray's house was built to last.
Loadbearing walls
were constructed of cut stone and cement mortar.
The
finished stone faced outward, while rubble was used
inside and then covered with a smooth cement plaster.
A special feature of the house was a wood frame and
wire mesh cooling c~ntainer which was suspended outside
the kitchen window.
(A, view northeast 1975)
C,

D~

Hilltop House
Hilltop House was on property patented by Daniel Holmes
on October 19, 1931.
Later, it became part of the
McGregor Ranch.
Most of the frame portion has col­
lapsed, but the stone rooms and cistern are standing in
good condition.
(C, view Efa$:t 1~1$~ D, v'iewnG'Eth 1975)

C\I
C\I

w

a:

~

CJ
LL

c

u

152

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-23.

Views of Foster Ranch and Campbell School Flats,

At B •. Foster Ranch

Foster Ranch is the most complete ranching complex
still standing on McGregor Range.
Strategically
located at the base of several large drainages, the
ranch is surrounded by large tanks which provide per­
manent water.
Views to the west are through a gap
and across the Tularosa Basin to the Organ Mountains
far distant, while nearby, to the southeast, are
large, grassy meadows.
(A, view west 1975; .~ view
north 1975)
~.

Foster Ranch
A stone outbuilding is situated between the Foster
ranchhouse and corrals near the dirt road that leads
to Newman and Orogrande.
(View north 1975)

~.

Campbell School Flats
Stone ruins on Campbell School Flats were located on
the Barnhouse property.
(View north 1975)

c

()

154

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Woods.
When Woods patented the Castner Draw property, he dis­
assembled his wife's house and brought it out to the Range site
by wagon.
He dug a root cellar, and reassembled the house, which
still stands in excellent condition.
Around 1938, the Fosters
purchased Woods' 640 patented acres and 9 1/2 sections of grazing
leases, and lived on the ranch until forced to move by the Army
in the 1950's (Foster 1976).
In time, many of the homesteaders found that they were un­
able to make a living from their relatively small claims, and
they sold out to larger operations.
Ivan Gray gave up and moved
to Las Cruces where he became a brand inspector (Atkins 1975);
and several of the families in Castner Draw sold their property
to the McGregors.
Oniy their homes, like those of Ellis Wright
and Albert Payne, and the school at Campbell Flats (Fig. I-23d)
remain to tell a story of individuals who misjudged the Range and
were unable to fulfill their hopes of making a living on it.
As homesteaders like Gray and Foster left, they sold out to
larger concerns.
The Atkins family, for example, came to the
Range in 1939 and eventually acquired 200 sections and a 1,200­
cow permit.
They leased much of what had been the Newman Ranch,
inc.lucling the area around Flat Tank, where they had a cow camp,
broke horses, and stayed in a two-room house.
As recently as the
1940's, ranch life was hard--tanks were dug with fresnos, and sup­
plies were purchased twice a year, a standard item being 1,000­
pound bags of flour.
The Atkins' neighbors were the McGregors, who acquired their
property after W. N. Fleck died and his sons decided to sellout.
The McGregor Ranch, or McGregor Land and Cattle Company, was
formed by J. Douglas McGregor, a pioneer West Texas rancher who
was born in McKinney, Texas~ in 1887, and attended Texas A&M College.
He came to West Texas as a young man, settling first in Culberson
County, and later in El Paso.
Before his retirement in 1953, he
was a bank director, president of the McGregor Land and Cattle
Company, and an active member of the Texas and Southwestern Cattle
Raisers Association and the New Mexico Cattle Growers Association
(Herald~Po8t January 1, 1964; 3A).
While the McGregor Ranch eventually encompassed 193~920 acres,
only 3,320 of those acres were patented, the balance being acquired
under the provisions of the Taylor Grazing Act.
The ranch was di­
vided up into various pastures which ranged in size from 2 1/2 sec­
tions to 176 sections, and included such areas as the Shipping Pas­
ture (2 1/2 sections at Wildy Well), Wi1dy Pasture (14 sections),
Holding Pasture (28 sections between Wildy and Orogrande), Sand
Pasture (47 sections between Orogrande and South Well), Desert
Pasture (22 sections between South Well and Desert), Big Pasture
(176 sections grouped around thirteen tanks), and Campbell Pasture
(14 sections which included Campbell, Castner, Childs, and Owl
tanks).
The basis for the McGregor Ranch was the Fleck holdings, but
J. D. McGregor a 0 added land to the southeast around Castner

THE MILITARY RETURNS

155

Draw, eventually buying out the Holmes and Castner homesteads.
He also altered some of the structures on the ranch.
At South
Well, which was a major camp, his nephew, Malcolm McGregor, added
a barn to a complex which included a frame house, a well, and
corrals.
At Campbell Tank, another major camp, the McGregors
added a breezeway to the older frame structure built by Fleck,
and connected it to a new house which had two rooms and a front
porch.
Little was done to the headquarters ranch, and until
the Army demolished it, the site included Fleck's former home,
saddleshop, barn, and blacksmith shop, complete with hand-forged
tools (McGregor 1975).
For those ranchers who managed to hold out through a severe
drought in the late 1940's and early 1950's, life on the McGregor
Range was a quiet affair.
With the passing and enforcement of
the Taylor Grazing Act in 1934, disputes over range boundaries,
fence lines, and water holes disappeared.
Oliver Lee's Circle
Cross went bankrupt, and the northern part of the Range was
divided among his sons--Hop at Mesa Horse Camp, and Don in the
Sacramentos- and Tom Bell, who purchased the Cox's Well property
east of Paxton Siding and site of a Sacramento River Cattle
Company camp.
The Atkins family used the range south of the
McGregors; and ranchers on Otero Mesa included the Prather family,
the Trammells, and Mary Toy, among others.
THE MILITARY RETURNS, 1954
The quiet of the Tularosa did not last long.
On July 16,
1945, the first explosion of an atomic bomb at White Sands sealed
the fate of the Basin, and within ten years the United States
Army began to look towards the desert flats north of Fort Bliss.
With the launching of the first American-assembled rocket at
White Sands Proving Ground in March of 1946, the military became
convinced of the suitability of the Tularosa to their efforts.
The Basin had a "sparse population, few highways, and year-round
clear weather.
As C. L~ Sonnichsen wrote in 1960, "the isolation
and barrenness which made the place a haven for harried Apaches
in prehistoric times and for discouraged Texans in the eighties
now attracted another kind of pioneer--the scientist laboring to
perfect new weapons for the defense of his country" (Sonnichsen
1960: 276).
In 1954, the Army began negotiations to have a total of
682,000 acres of land withdrawn permanently from public and
private ownership.
Spokesmen said the area was needed for use
as a Nike training si~e.
However, they had not succeeded in ac­
quiring the White Sands Proving Ground without objections from
resident ranchers, and it is possible that they would have
thought twice about the McGregor Range had they known the ten­
year battle that awaited them in the person of one tenacious
rancher on Otero Mesa.

156

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

The man was John Prather and, still vigorous at eighty-two,
he flatly refused to move off his ranch.
Of everyone living
in the Range area, he had perhaps"-the best reasons for refusing
to leave.
He had lived continuously on the Range longer than
anyone else, and had provided leadership for families on Otero
Mesa for almost half a century.
It would have been quite a feat
for the United States Army to have gotten the better of a man
who had bested the Tularosa for so long.
Prather carne to southern New Mexico in 1885.
His father,
John E., was a 38-year-old farmer born in Alabama; and
his mother, Melisa A. Prather, who was five years younger, was
from Mississippi.
The family included John, Samuel, Mattie,
Maggie, and Owen, who eventually settled on a ranch adjoining
John's on Otero Mesa (U~S. Bureau of the Census, l880b).
They
left Grand Saline, Van Zandt County, Texas, where John was born,
and settled in the Sacramento Mountains. q5
It is not clear when the Prathers moved south to Otero Mesa
since they continued to purchase land in T17S, R14E .as late as
1898 (Lincoln County Transcripts, Vol. A Miscellaneous, Otero
County: 79, 118).
However, by 1900, the family had acquired
property in the vicinity .of the current Prather Ranch.
On
November 23, 1916, John E. Prather patented l60~59 acres in
T2lS, R13E (Otero County, Patent Record No. 34: 432).
John
A. Prather's possession of the ranch apparently occurred when
his parents sold the property to him less than a month later
on December 16, 1916, for "$1.00 and other valuable consider­
ations ... " (Otero County, Deed Record 49: 446).
A scant six years later, Prather had established himself
firmly on the Mesa, and had acquired not only leases on state
lands, but interests in other ranches in the vicinity. At the
time of his divorce from Rosa S. Prather, John owned the Dagger
Ranch (north of the Headquarters), Horse Camp Ranch (southeast
of Lulu), Sacatone Ranch, Ches and Rescue ranches (Rescue being
south of Headquarters), and patented land in T22S, R13E and
T22S, R14E.
In addition, he had approximately 600 head of horses
and mules (Otero County, Mortgage Deed Record 80: 215).
Prather was best known among his neighbors on Otero Mesa for
his abilities as a mule and horse breeder.
According to some
45
One reason for settling in the Sacramentos throughout the.late
nineteenth century was the easy availability of ~ater.
The same
water was considerably more difficult to come by on Otero Mesa,
Prather's well being 1,100 feet deep.
After 1905, when Lee and
the South West Smelting and Refining Company diverted water from
the Sacramento River, residents of the Mesa were forced to rely
almost entirely on earthen tanks.
The scarcity of water in the
area might also account for Prather's preference for horse- and
mule-raising, since those animals are able to walk further to
water than are cattle.

THE MILITARY RETURNS

157

accounts, he raised more mules than anyone else in the United
States, and usually sold them to the Mexican government, or to
Hal Bogle at Dexter, near Roswell (Longwell, Tarrant and Painter
1973).
More than one rancher remembers that anyone seriously
occupied in the ranching business made a point of dealing in
horses as well as cattle (Lewis and Atkins 1975), and Prather's
long tenure on the Range was proof of his stock-raising abilities.
Horsebreaking was accomplished in the same neighborly manner as
most activities on the mesa, with Prather's nephews, Jack and
George (sons of Sam Prather
do
much of the work.
-~Suc.h~ coopera
on was a way a
e, an neig ors 0 ten
helped each other with branding, horsebreaking, and housekeep.
46
Two 0 f P
h ' s acqualntances,
.
lng.
rater
Dora Longwell (daughter
of A. A. Trammell) and Lona Tarrant, recall riding many miles on
the range each day.
They arose around 4:00 A.M., fixed break­
fast, rode, branded, mended fence, fed and saddled the horses,
milked the cows, and fixed Prather's supper when they all re­
turned to Headquarters late at night.
John Prath~r had more than 40 years of hard work invested
in his ranch, and it is little wonder that he refused to coop­
erate with the government when it ordered him to remove his
cattle from the Range.
Condemnation proceedings in Albuquerque
in July of 1956 did nothing to change his mind, and an offer of
$209,000 for his property and the privilege of retaining his
house and 15 acres were steadfastly refused (HeraZd;::Post April.
2, 1957: 1).
Eventually, he bowed to court order and removed­
his nine hundred head of livestock, but nothing could forGe him
to vacate the property himself.
The Army's mishandling of the situation drew attention to
what many political figures considered to be a massive land grab,
and prompted legislation which would severely restrict the number
of acres the military could withdraw from the public domain at
anyone time.
In the meantime, Prather's August 1 deadline for
departure from the Range was drawing near, and he had given no
indication that he intended to leave.
On August 6, 1957, District Judge Waldo Rogers of Albuquerque
issued a writ of assistance which made it possible to evict the
old man from his ranch.
However, before the court order could
be executed, more than 20 of Prather's relatives had heard about
it and come from Alamogordo. El Paso. Anthony, and surr.ounding
ranches, prepared to "shoot it out with the Army and their agents
right along with Grandpa Prather" (Herald-Post August 8, 1957: 2).
Convinced of the futility of ever making Prather move out, Judge
46

See Mosley (1973: 21-44) for excellent descriptions of ranch
life in southern New Mexico.

158

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-24.

Material Remains.

A.

Sheep dip near Louis Powell's patent, El Paso Canyon.
(View southeast 1976)

B.

John Prather's grave, Otero Mesa.

C.

Feed bin at Albert Payne's homestead, Otero Mesa •

~~--.--

----

......

.

_--

._---

.......

_----------­

FIGURE 1-24

A

B

c

160

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Rogers and the Army tacked on an amendment to the writ which
excluded Prather, his ranch headquarters, and 15 surrounding
acres from the arder of removal. 'A son-in-law, Hart Gaba, said
that that was "just like giving a man the bedroom and taking
the rest of the -house" (Herald-Post August 9, 1957: 1), and
Prather would be happy with nothing less than retaining his
land, but a compromise of a kind had been struck.
John Prather lived in his ranch house until shortly before
he died on February 12, 1965, and he was buried on the ranch.
His passing marked the end of an era which had begun with the
arrival of the first Texas cattlemen in the Tularosa Basin.
For
over 50 years Prather had fought drought, pestilence, the va­
garies of cattle markets, and the Army, and his dogged resistance
to the new invaders was an appropriate way for the ranching his­
tory of the McGregor Range to end.
His success in defending his
property was a victory for the Tularosa cowman.
His psychology
was a part of the 1880's, and he reacted as his neighbors and
fellow ranchers had always reacted against invasions of their
independence and property (Sonnichsen 1960: 290).
Like Oliver
Lee and William Fleck before him, John Prather had become a
creature of the Tularosa.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Little physical evidence remains today of four hundred
years of historical activity on the McGregor Range.
Because
of the natural obstacles to human habitation, there never were
the number of structures one would expect to find in an area
of 700,000 acres, and recent misuse of what little there was
has resulted in the almost total destruction of a cultural leg­
acy.
Structures and sites throughout the Range have been de~
stroyed.
The Fleck/McGregor Homestead was razed by the Army,
as were John Prather's home; Hop LeeJs home at Mesa Horse Camp;
Tom Bell's, Gilbert Langford's, and Don Lee's homes; and innu­
merable small structures on the southern end of the Range.
In
addition, vandals have significantly weakened the integrity of
still-intact buildings by removing wooden floors at the Foster
Ranch to make campfires, and by attempting to destroy walls at
the Ivan Gray Ranch.
Many of these structure5 were neither·his­
torica1ly nor architecturally significant; others, were they
standing today, could have provided important empirical evidence
for the reconstruction of pioneer adaptations to a dry-land en­
vironment. 47

47
A particularly unfortunate loss occurred with the destruction
of the railroad tie houses at Turquoise, a siding on the E1 Paso

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

161

Fortunately, approximately two dozen bUildings still
stand on McGregor Range, and are sufficiently important either
to be nominated to the National Register of Historic Places,
or to be stabilized and preserved.
A number of historic sites are in good condition and de­
serve consideration for nomination to the National Register
of Historic Places because they are either unique structures
or the best surviving examples of a general and typical type.
Oliver Lee's pipeline, for example, is an outstanding engi­
neering feat, and its construction made possible the opening
up of a large portion of the Basin for ranching, homesteading,
and the development of towns and mining enterprises. 48
The
Fleck Dugout at Campbell Tank (Fig. 1-25) is one of the oldest
remaining structures on McGregor Range, and is an excellent
example of a ranch "chosey," a typical one-room camp house
built of stacked-up Stone.
The Foster Ranch (Fig. I-~7) is
the best-preserved and most complete ranching unit left on
the Range, and with the Fleck Dugout illustrates an almost
complete spectrum of typical structures, building materials,
and architectural styles utilized by ranchers on McGregor.
Finally, Ellis Wright's cabin (Fig. 1- 26 ), located south of
of the Quick Homestead and constructed of logs chinked with
adobe and cement, is the best remaining example of a home­
steader's claim from the post-1920 period.
It, also, is in
excellent condition despite recent disturbance which occurred
when vandals threw a large boulder onto the roof of the house.
A well, hand-dug out of bedrock, lies directly in front of
Wright's home, while corrals are located to the north and
tanks some distance away to the southwest.
Buildings which do not necessarily have state or national
significance, but which deserve to be measured and otherwise
recorded, protected, and maintained, are: the Ivan Gray Home­
stead, Hilltop House, Prather's Ranch, the Payne Homestead,
South Well, Wildy Well, the Sacramento River Cattle Company

47 Continued.

and Northeastern (now Southern Pacific) Railroad.
According to Carlos X. Alvarado of Sweetwater, Texas, whose
grandfather made such houses, the technique may have started in
northern Mexico.
In the United States, similar structures are
found in Sweetwater, Van Horn, Sierra Blanca, and many other com­
munities along railroad lines where Mexican labor was used in the
construction or maintenance of the lines (Alvarado 1975).

48
While it would not be feasible to nominate the entire pipeline
to the National Register, a portion of it, such as that at Mesa
Horse Camp, might logically be considered.
Further information
on similar sites in the Southwest is obtainable from Bill Griggs,
director of the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum, Canyon, Texas.

162

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

FIGURE 1-25.

Fleck's Dugout.

Elevation and floor plan.

FIGURE 1-25

•
I I
I I

II
II
I I

I I
I J

I

I

I I

•
I I
I I

I I
I I
I I

-\9.

I I

..­

I,
I I

I I

I I

I I

----.---~--

-­

5'·. II

//
a\)

164

FIGURE I-26.

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Ellis Wright's Cabin.

Elevation, floor plan, and typical details,

- - - - - - - _.........

__

...

- - - ........

-~--.---

._-­

=(;~

~

.:..

I

,

2.1S 2·5

z~

,.'1.'

c:

::a
m

10-"

en

...

c:

I»

o

:::s

'1_

~

."
(i)

11.,.,0 1
10.85'

o

::r
m

1-­

•<

10-­
~

S_

rLJ

-

j

J

I
I
I
I
I
I

I­

~~~-

~-

'".­
....

~~:

t7

"

,:
~, ,

r:~~"

o

I

1;.:.-""

I
I

I

'1

1

.J

I

&­

I
I

J
10

I

I

-

••

C1- _ _ ...1I

---­

-----­

l

I

2.0'

1

166

FIGURE 1-27.

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Foster Ranch.

Elevations and floor plan.

....

,

N

0,.

..s

..

Or;

!

.

<0

-r:

-a

I

J'L

.-

-",

t

-----1
.Ii

'r
I

I
I

I
I -.

I

I "
I
.... __ .1.

I
I

I

II

-,..

,L"

I

I

"il

t:

It

-t:'.

~

.0

1.._..1

-..,...

,....,

'l
""

.

-~
OJ

"~

~

.,..

"0

,j

o

c:
0

...

..
to

II

UJ
.t:.
0

Z

..

C;

0

..,..
II

W

...

UJ

Go

168

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Camp/Tom Bell's Ranch, the Quick Homestead, Old Ditch Camp,
Grapevine Canyon Horse Camp, the Langford Ranch, and a number
of El Paso Canyon ranching and homestead sites, including those
of Lester B. Powell, Buford Smith, Robert T. West, Clyde W.
Parks, Henry Edward Tanner, George Moflar, and Louis F. Powell
(also the possible earlier location of a Sacramento River Cattle
Company line camp).
All of these sites are representative of
structures built on the Range between 1890 and 1954.
In El Paso
Canyon, the Louis Powell Homestead site consists of an early dug­
out in excellent condition, a bunkhouse, cistern, pens, and sheep
dip (Fig. I-24a).
On Otero Mesa, Albert Payne's Homestead con7
sists of a main house, four cisterns, chicken coops, small sheds,
pens, and tanks.
On the escarpment, coming off of Otero Mesa,
the Quick Homestead, settled by Alex and his son, Marcus, con­
sists of a frame home with an adobe addition, tanks, pens, and
a tunnel blasted out of the escarpment when the two men attempted
to enlarge a spring.
Finally, a small group of sites merits further archival study
either because they form a cluster or district of sites, or be­
cause they are the earliest known ranching settlements on McGregor.
Places included in the first category are largely late nineteenth­
century home~teaders' claims in the Sacramento Mountains, such as
those made by F. M. and Mary Bradford, and members of the Tarrant
family.
Sites comprising the second category are largely ephem­
eral ranches developed between 1880 and 1884 by George F. Johnson
(T22S, R9E, section 28), Henry Wild (T22S, RlOE), an unnamed set­
tler in T22S, RIlE, G. D. White (T23S, R9E), George Way [Hay?]
(T23S, RlOE), George Dell (T23S, RIlE), J. B. Martin (T24S, R8E),
Frank Severson (T24S, R9E), Jack Field (T24S, RlOE), and Wm.
Fisher (T25S, R8E) who appears as co-owner of a ranch with Martin
on a General Land Office map drawn in 1886 (Mayo 1886).
The only
record of these early settlers which still exists seems to be the
surveyors' notebooks now located in the Santa Fe offices of the­
Bureau of Land Management.
None of the men appears to have_staked
an official claim, and it is doubtful that big operators like Oliver
Lee encouraged them to stay.
A careful, on-the-ground search for
four of the ranches in 1976 revealed no obvious remains.
Not all structures still standing on the McGregor Range are
worthy of consideration for preservation.
Other buildings, how­
ever, because of their age, condition, or location, should be
stabilized or otherwise protected until their worth can be as­
sessed further and researched in depth~
Structures such ~s Lee's
pipeline, the Wildy Well windmill, and various wells and tanks
are notable because they graphically illustrate solutions to en­
vironmental problems peculiar to the Tularosa Basin.
Should
these buildings and sites be destroyed, whether through vandalism
or deliberate neglect, a cultural legacy would be lost.
At a
time when New Mexico is re-examining the cultural resources of
a necessarily-neglected part of the state, and when the entire

AFTERWARD

Southwest is grappling
environmental problems
that the few remaining
the McGregor Range not

169

with issues of water management and
in semi-arid areas, it is imperative
evidehces of historical occupation on
be allowed to disappear.
AFTERWARD

The program for researching the history of McGregor Mis­
sile Range was organized into two phases, the first involving
a general survey of available published literature, and the
second an amplification of that material where other research
methods could be used.
When the available literature was surveyed, it was found
that little research had been done on the area included within
the Missile Range, previous investigation having focused on
the area north of Alamogordo.
For obvious reasons, no one had
been able to accomplish a comprehensive, on-the-ground survey
and evaluation of historic sites and few researchers had dealt
with the area as a geographical unit, recording a history of
day-to-day life.
As the work progressed it became apparent that mo~e in­
formation, particularly for the period 1880 to 1954, would have
to be derived from unpublished archival sources and personal
interviews.
Maps, such as those in the New Mexico State Archives
and Record Center, delineated older landmarks, Apache movements,
Spanish and Mexican trails, and in rare instances, early Anglo
ranches.
Surveyors' notebooks at the Santa Fi of
s of th~
Bureau of Land Management covered the period from 1884 to 1934
and provided information about range and water conditions, struc­
tures which had long since disappeared from the Range, and set­
tlers who were not mentioned in other records.
Conversations
with members of the El Paso Archaeological Society revealed the
names and locations of numerous ranching sites, while township
plats in the Mapping Section, Otero County Courthouse, delineated
and identified original patents and established patterns of
settlement.
Following a survey of materials in Santa Fe, work beg~n
with public records available in the Otero and Dona Ana county
courthouses in order to reconstruct patterns of land ownership,
types and numbers of stock raised on the Range, the economics
of ranching, family relationships, dates of structures, and his­
tories of business relationsh~ps, some of which were so complex
that the time allowed was sufficient for only a superficial sur­
vey.
Public and private collections also were used extensively
in an attempt to obtain information.
The most helpful of the
collections were newspapers and files at the Alamogordo and EI
Paso Public Libraries, and the special collections at The Uni­

170

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

versity of Texas at EI Paso.
Finally, numerous interviews were conducted with families
and individuals who had ranched or homesteaded on McGregor.
Such information is not always reliable, but when used in con­
junction with official records is invaluable for assessing the
character of an area or obtaining information not otherwise
recorded.
In addition, collections of similar, earlier inter­
views were surveyed at The University of Texas at EI Paso, the
Alamogordo Public Library, White Sands National Monument, and
the Centennial Museum, El Paso.
After obtaining sufficient information to identify sites,
it was possible to begin recording buildings still extant on the
Range.
Recording was accomplished by written description (fill­
ing out standardized data sheets), photography (using 35 mm.
cameras with color and black/white film), and measured drawings
(usually accomplished by two individuals using steel tapes and
recording on site forms).
Because of strictures of equipment
and personnel, the on-ground recording of sites was unfortunately
inconsistent.
Sufficient information was obtained, however, so
that every site was recorded by one of the above methods, and
the importance of each site relative to all other sites could
be assessed.
A survey of the information gathered on the ground and in
archives clearly points to further work.
All sites should be
recorded consistently, preferably by a single crew comprised of
a photographer and one or two individuals with professional
training in the techniques of historic archeology and the mea­
suring of historic buildings.
Archival sources should be as~
sessed in more depth.
In the State Archives and Record Center,
for example, territorial censuses and special schedules should
be reviewed to obtain data on the amount of stock grazing on
the Range at various times, data which could aid in assessing
the history of botanical changes.
Further research needs to
be done on the history of the various business relationships
among Oliver Lee, J. Fitzgerald Moor, W. W. Cox, W. H. McNew,
Charles Hilton, the Circle Cross Cattle Company, Sacramento
River Cattle Company, and Otero Investment Company.
Obvious
sources have been surveyed to locate historic photographs of
McGregor Range.
But further efforts should be made to locate
early pictures of individuals, structures, and range conditions.
Finally, the southern Tularosa is a unique area in that
many people who settled it are living still, and are available
for taped interviews.
John Atkins, for example, who ranched on
the southern part of the Range and worked on Hearst's ranch,
lives in Orogrande.
Eddy Ardoin, Jr., foreman of Hearst's
Mexican and New Mexican ranches, lives in El Paso.
Ralph Fleck,
son of W. N. Fleck, has been interviewed, but undoubtedly pos­
sesses much more information on the history of his father's
ranch.
Sally Reynolds, granddaughter of H. L. Newman, and Mrs.

171

AFTERWARD

Carl Rohr have information about the N~wman and Lea/Wildy
families; while Tom Prather of El Paso has John Prather's
papers in his possession.
Marcus Quick of La Luz and Les
and Henry Foster of Dell City, New Mexico, and Soper,
Oklahoma, as well as Ellis Wright who lives near Deming,
all have first-hand knowledge of the southern Tularosa Basin.
They should be contacted and their reminiscences recorded.
A preliminary survey of the cultural resources of the
McGregor Range clearly delineates those sites and individuals
worthy of recognition; it also points to the great amount of
work that needs to be done at the sites, in the archives, and
with people who have first-hand knowledge of the Range.

- - - ...... _ - - - -

.----~.----.~----.---~----

......

-.-.~-

...

----~.--

..

-~~~~-.~--

.....-

-

~-------

This page intentionally left blank.

173

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The successful completion of an historical survey of
McGregor Range would have been impossible were it not for
numerous individuals who freely gave their time and advice.
In particular, I would like to thank Mr. Pete Atkins of the
Provost Marshal's Office at· Fort Bliss.
He spent several days
driving me around the Range, pointing out landmarks, and other­
wise sharing information which would have taken many days to
unearth by other methods.
In addition, he introduced me to
Mr. Martin Lewis. also of the Provost Marshal's Office, and Mr.
and Mrs. Don Lee, whese first-hand knowledge of Otero Mesa, the
Sacramento Mountains, and various ranching families made personal
what had heretofore been only abstract court documents.
Finally,
Mr. Atkins and Mr. Lewis put me on the trail of Mr. Ralph Fleck
of El Paso whose reminiscences of ranching on McGregor dated back
to the early twentieth century; and Les Foster of Dell City, who
provided invaluable information on the Foster Ranch and sur­
rounding areas.
In El Paso, Dessamae Lorrain introduced me to Leslie Davis
and John Hedrick, two members of the El Paso Archaeological
Society who freely gave of all the information they had col­
lected over a number of years.
Their maps showing known ranching
sites were helpful in establishing locations of buildings, while
Les Davis' painstaking care in recording sites set a fine example
of scholarship.
At the Centennial Museum, Herbert Morrow shared transcripts
of interviews he had conducted with various individuals on the
history of McGregor Range, while Malcolm McGregor, an El Paso
attorney, reminisced about his uncle's ranch, and provided maps
and photographs which outlined the extent and organization of his
holdings.
In and around Alamogordo, Dave Townsend of New Mexico State
University provided reassurance and advice, and directed me to
the Otero County Courthouse where the staff in the County Clerk's
Office and the Mapping Section provided most of the data on land
ownership without which a history of McGregor Range would have
been impossible.
Dr. Townsend also provided an introduction to
the staff of the Alamogordo Public Library, and their excellent
collection of taped interviews made over a number of years with
individuals in Otero County.
Travelling northward, Marcus Quick of La Luz spoke about
his life on McGregor with his father, Alex; while Molly Madden
at the Lincoln County Museum in Lincoln pulled out her files on
Apache and early ranching activities in Otero and Lincoln
counties.
In Santa Fe and Taos, the staffs of numerous public and
private institutions provided advice and scholarly aid during the

174

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

summer and early fall of 1975.
I began research while Living in
Taos, and the staff of the Harwo04 Library we~e indefatigable in
obtaining mate~ials on inter-library loan from the University of
New Mexico and the State Library.
On numerous trips to Santa F~
I was aided by individuals at the various divisions of the Museum
of New Mexico, including libraries located in the Governors 1
Palace and Laboratory of Anthropology.
In particular, Dr. Myra
Ellen Jenkins and her staff at the New Mexico State Record Center
and Archives were extremely helpful as they filled every request
for maps, census records, and other document collections.
Other institutions in New Mexico and Texas whose staffs pro­
vided information included the Bureau of Land Management in Santa
Fe, with its early surveyors l records; the Archives Division of
the University of Texas at El Paso Library; the Southwestern
Collection of the EI Paso Public Library, with its excellent
biographical files and index to El Paso newspapers; the Texas
State Library in Austin; and the Barker Texas History Center, the
University of Texas at Austin.
Finally, I would like to acknowledge the help provided by
Mr. Albert Schroeder of Santa Fe, and by my husband, Joe Freeman.
Mr. Schroeder provided information on Apache Indians which
lessened my research problems considerably, and generously read
and commented on my completed manuscript.
Joe good-naturedly
bounced over the infamous McGregor roads, and produced measured
drawings and photographs Of sever~l historic sites in the Sa~ia­
mento Mountains, as well as numerous skehches of the Fleck Dugout.

175

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abbott, E. C. ("Teddy Blue") and Helena Huntington Smith
1939
We Pointed Them North.
Farrar & Rinehart, Inc.,
New York.
Adams. Eleanor B. (Editor)
i956
The Missions of New Mexico, 1776; a Description by
Fray Francisco Atanasio Dominguez.
Angelico Chavez
(Translator).
University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque,
Adams, Ramon F.
1952
Come an' Get It.
No-rman.
Allred, B. W.
1947

University of Oklahoma Press,

Southwestern Range Plants.
(July); 24-25.

Sheep & Goat Raiser 27

Alvarado, Carlos X.
1975
Personal communication from Carlos X. Alvarado to
Martha Doty Freeman, October 15, 1975, concerning
the construction of railroad tie houses.
Anderson, George B. (Compiler)
1907
History of New Mexico, Its Resources and People.
2 Vols. Pacific States Publishing Co., Chicago.
Atkins, John
1975

Austin, Mary
1903
Baca, Carmen
N.d.

Interview with John Atkins, October 21, 1975, on
the history of the McGregor Missile Range.
Inter­
view transcript in the possession of the inter­
viewer, Martha Doty Freeman.
5 pp.

The Land of Little Rain.
Boston.

Houghton, Mifflin Co.,

Interview with Mr. Carmen Baca.
Interview trans­
cript in the possession of the interviewer, Herbert
C. Morrow, Centennial Museum, University of Texas
at El Paso.
3 pp.

Bandelier, Ad. F. (Editor)
1922
The Journey of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca.
Fanny
Bandelier (Translator).
Allerton Book Co., New
York.

.176

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Barreiro, Francisco Alvarez

1727

Plano Corographico de el Reyno y Provincia de el
Nuevo Me~ioo una de las de Nueva Espana .... Copy in
the Barker Texas
Texas at Austin.

His~tory

Center, The University of

Beck, Warren A. and Ynez D. Haase

1969

Historioal Atlas of New

Me~ioo.

University of

Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Beverly, Bob
1952

S~ories of Texas Horses.
ber): 159-160.

The Cattleman 39 (Septem­

Boles, Calvin
N.d.
Ballad of John Prather. New Me~ioo: Ballads of the
Southwest. Alamogordo Public Library, tape collec­
tion.
Bowden, J. J.
1971
Spanish and

Me~ican

Aoquisition.

Land Grants in the Chihuahuan

Texas Western Press, El Paso.

Branch, Hettye Wallace

1960

The Story of "80 John."

Greenwich Book Publishers,

Inc., New York.
Brooks, Clinton E. and Frank D. Reeve (Editors) .
1947
James A. Bennett: A Dragoon in New Mexico, 1850-1856.
New Mexioo Historical Review 22 (April): 140-176.
Browder, Virginia

1975
Br

0

Donley County.

Nortex Press, N.p.

wn e , F. B. E.
1851
Map of the Country from Austin to El Paso.
Sketch
& observations taken by ••• Sept. 23 - 1851. Copy
in the Barker Texas History Center, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Buffum, B. C.
Arid Agriculture: A Hand-Book for the Western Farmer
1909
and Stookman. Published by the Author.
Burns, Robert H.
1953
The Newman Ranches: Pioneer Cattle Ranches of the
West. Nebraska History 34 (March): 21-32.

CattZeman" The
1929

Deaths: J. H. Nations.
28.

The Cattleman 15 (January):

BIBLIOGRAPHY

177

Charles, Mrs. Tom

1961

More Tales -of the Tularosa.
Alamogordo.

Bennett Printing Co.,

"

Christiansen, Paige W.
1974
The Story of Mining in New Mexico.
Scenic Trips
to the Geologic Past, No. 12. New Mexico Bureau of
Mines & Mineral Resources, Socorro.
Coan, Charles F.

1925

A History of Nehl Mexico. 3 Vols.
ical Society, Inc., Chicago.

American Histor­

Dale, Edward Everett

1960

The Range Cattle Industry.

University of Oklahoma

Press, Norman.
Davis, Ellis Arthur (Editor)

1945

The Historical Encyclopedia of Nehl Mexico.

2 Vols.
New Mexico Historical Association, Albuquerque.

Davis, Leslie
1973
Coe Lake Ranch Number 1.
A Report to the Centen­
nial Museum of the University of Texas at El Paso,
El Paso, Texas~
An Abandoned Ranch Survey Project~
Report 27, January 1973. Centennial Museum, El
Paso.
Dills, Judge Lucius
N.d.
Autodissertative, Concerning the Life and Times of
the Author.
Earl Vandale Collection, The University
of- Texa& Arch1ves,-Aust~n.
Dobie, J. Frank

1950

Apache Gold & Yaqui Silver.

Little, Brown and Co.,

Boston.
Dona Ana County Records
County Clerks Office, Dona Ana County Courthouse,
Las Cruces.
Deed Records
Mortgage Records
Records of Chattel Mortgages
Renewals of Chattel Mortgages
Duff, Katharyn

1970

Abilene ... on Catclahl Creek.
ing Co., Abilene.

The Reporter Publish­

178

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Dunn, William Edward
1911
Apache Relations in Texas, 1718-1750. The
Quapteply of the Texas State Histopical Association
14 (January): 198-274.
Eff1and, Richard W., Jr,
1971
A Repopt on Two Apchaeological Sites on Fopt Bliss
Militapy Resepvation.
University of Texas at E1
Paso, Centennial Museum, E1 Paso.
Espinosa, J. Manuel (Translator)
1940
Fipst Expedition of Vapgas into New Mexico, 1692.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Flanagan, Sue
1974
Tpailing the Longhopns; A Centupy Latep.
Press, Inc., Austin.
Fleck, Ralph
1975

Madrona

Interview with Ralph Fleck, October 23, 1975, on
the history of the McGregor Missile Range.
Inter­
view tape in the possession of the interviewer,
Martha Doty Freeman.

Fletcher, Robert S.
1932
Organization of the Range Cattle Business in
Eastern Montana.
Bulletin No. 265. Montana State
College Agricultural Experiment Station, Bozeman.
Foreman, Grant
19~9

& the Gold Seekeps.
Press, Norman.

Map~y

University of Oklahoma

Forrestal, Peter P. (Translator) and Cyprian J. Lynch
1954
Benavides' Memopial of 16~O.
Acad~my of American
Franciscan History, Washington.
Foster, Les
1976

Fraser, Tom
1942

Conversation with Les Foster, January 2, 1976, on
the history of the Foster Ranch.
Conversation
transcript in the possession of Martha Doty Freeman.
Interview with Tom Fraser, Alamogordo, December 29,
1942.
C. L. Sonnichsen Collection, The University
of Texas at E~ ~aso Archives.

Gibson, Arre1 Morgan
1965
The Life and Death of Colonel Albept Jennings
Fountain.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

179

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Gilliland, Dick
N.d.
Dick Gilliland.
C. L. Sonnichse~ Collection, The
University of Texas at El Paso Archives.
Gomez Cattle Company
1891
Charter of Gomez Cattle Company.
File Reference #4-F/427.
Texas.
State.

Charter 11646,
Secretary of

Grove, Pearce S., Becky J. Barnett and Sandra J. Hansen (Editors)
1975
New Mexiao Newspapers: A Comprehensive Guide to
Bibliographiaal Entries and Loaations. University
of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Hackett, Charles Wilson (Editor)
1931Piahardo's Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and
1946
Texas.
4 Vols. University of Texas Press, Austin.
1937

Historiaal Doauments Relating to New Mexiao~ Nueva
Vizaaya, and Approaahes Theret9, to 1??3.Vol. III.
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washington.

Hackett, Charles Wilson (Introduction)
1942
Revolt of the Pueblo Indians of New Mexiao and
Oterm~n's

Attempted Reaonquest, 1680-1682.

[Charmion Clair Shelby (Translator)].
Part 2.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Haley, J. Evetts and Hervey Chesley
Mr. Frank Loyd, Tularosa, N.M., June 12, 1939.
1939
Earl Vandale Collection, The University of Texas
Archives, Austin.
Hall, Martin Hardwick
1960
Sibley's New Mexiao Campaign.
Press, Austin.
Hallenbeck, Cleve
1940
Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaaa.
Glendale.

University of Texas

Arthur H. Clark Co.,

Hammond, George P. and Agapito Rey
1928
Obregon's History of 16th Century Explorations in
Western Ameriaa. Wetzel Publishing Co., Inc., Los
Angeles.
1929

Expedition Into New Mexiao, Made by Antonio de
Espejo" 1582--1583 as Revealed in tlie JOlfrnaJ of
. Diego Perez de Luxan, a Member of the Party.
Quivira Society, Los Angeles.

180

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

1953

Don Juan de onate, Colonizer of New Mexico, 1595­
1628.
2 Vo1s. Univ~rsity of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.

Hedrick, John A.
1975
Interview with John A. Hedrick, October 4, 1975,
on the history of the McGregor Missile Range.
Interview notes in the possession of the inter­
viewer, Martha Doty Freeman.
Interview with John A. Hedrick, August 4, 1976, on
the history of the Hot Wells Ranch.
Interview
notes in the possession of the interviewer, Martha
Doty Freeman.

1976

Hening, H.
1958

B.

(Editor)
George Curry, 1861-1947.
Press, Albuquerque.

University of New Mexico

Hodge, Frederick Webb (Editor)
1912
Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 30.
2 Vo1s.
Government Printing Office, Washington.
Hodge, Frederick Webb, George P. Hammond, and Agapito Rey
(Editors)
1945
Fray Alonso de Benavides' Revised Memorial of 1634.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Hollon, W. Eugene
1955
Beyond the Cross Timbers: The Travels of Randolph
B. Marcy, 1812-1887.
University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.
Hughes, John T.
1848
Doniphan's Expedition.
Cincinnati.

J. A. & U. P. James,

Hull, Dorothy
1916
Castano de Sosa's Expedition to New Mexico in 1590.
Old Santa Fe 3 (October): 307-332.
Hunter, J. Marvin (Compiler and Editor)
1925
The Trail Drivers of Texas.
Nashville.

Cokesbury Press,

Jenkins, Myra Ellen
N.d.
Application of Spanish Colonial Institutions to
Administration of New Mexico Pueblo Indians.
Unpublished manuscript in author's possession.

181

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Jenness, Burt Franklin
1964
Orogrande ••• • New Mexico 42 (March): 2..-·4.
,
Jensen, Dorothy Neal
1961
Captive Mountain Waters: A Story of Pipelines and
People.
Texas Western Press, E1 Paso.
Johnson, Frank W.
1914
A History of Texas and Texans.
Historical Society, Chicago.

Vol. IV.

Jones, Fayette Alexander
1904
New Mexico Mines and Minerals.
ing Co., Santa Fe.

New Mexican Print­

Jones, Harriot Howze
1966
The Magoffin Homestead.
61-69.

American

Password 11 (Summer):

Keleher, William A.
1945
The Fabulous Frontier; Twelve New Mexico Items.
Rydal Press, Santa Fe.
Kelley, Harry
1976
History of Miami and Roberts County.

N.p.: N.p.

K1asner, Lily
1972
My Girlhood Among Outlaws.
Eve Ball (Editor).
University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

The

Krieger, Alex D.
1961
The Travels of A1var Nunez Cabeza de Vaca in Texas
and Mexico, 1534-1536. Homenaje a Pablo Marttnez
del Rto.
Instituto Nacional de Antropo1ogia e
Historia, Mexico.
459-474.
Lauderdale, R. J. and John M. Doak
1936
Life on the Range and on the Trail.
Lela Neal
Pirtle (Editor).
The Naylor Company, San Antonio.
Lee, Don
1975

Interview with Don Lee, October 25, 1975, on the
history of the McGregor Missile Range.
Interview
transcript in the possession of the interviewer,
Martha Doty Freeman.
3 pp.

Lewis, Martin and John Atkins
1975
Interview with Martin Lewis and John Atkins,
October 23, 1975, on the history of the McGregor
Mis§i1e Range.
Interview tape in the possession of
the interviewer, Martha Doty Freeman.

182

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Longwell, Dora Trammell Painter~ Lona Tarrant and Gertrude McNatt
Painter
1973
Gertrude McNatt Painter, Dora Trammell Painter
Longwell and Lona Tarrant reminisce about the life
and times of John Prather.
Alamogordo Public
Library, tape collection.
Lovell, Emily Kalled

1963

A Personalized History of otero
Star Publishing Co., Inc"

County~

New Mexiao.

Alamogordo.

McCall, George Archibald

1968

.

New Mexiao in 1850: A Military View.
Frazer (Editor).
Norman.

Robert W.
UniverSity of Oklahoma Press,

McCraken [sia], Mrs. W.
N.d.
Interview with Mrs. W. McCraken [sial.
Interview
transcript in the possession of the interviewer,
Herbert C. Morrow, Centennial Museum, University
of Texas at El Paso.
3 pp.
McGregor, Malcolm
1975
Interview with Malcolm McGregor, October 22, 1975,
on the history of the McGregor Missile Range.
Interview transcript in the possession of the
interviewer, Martha Doty Freeman.
1 p.
McNary, James Graham

1956

This Is My Life.

University of New Mexico Press,

Albuquerque.
Matkin, George C.
1966
Biographical Sketch of Charles Robert Morehead.
Password 11 (Winter): 151-153.
Mayo, Geo. U.

1886

Territory of New Mexico, 1886.
Department of the
Interior, General Land Office,
Copy in the McNitt
Collection, New Mexico State Record Center and
Archives, Santa Fe.

Meadows, John

1936

Interview with J. Evetts Haley, June 13, 1936.
Earl Vandale Collection, The University of Texas
Archives, Austin.

Meinzer, O. F. and R. F. Hare
1915
Geology and Water Resources of Tularosa Basin, New
Mexico.
Department of the Interior, United States
Geological Survey, Water~Supply Paper 343.
Govern­
ment Printing Office, Washington.

- - -...- - - - - .....

-~--

- -...- - ......- - - - - ­

....

183

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Mitchell, S. Augustus, Jr.
1867
County Map of Texas. N.p. Copy in the Library of
the Daughters uf the Republic of Texas at the
Alamo, San Antonio.
Mosley, May Price
1973
"LittZe Texas" Beginnings in Southeastern New
Mexico.
Hall-Poorbaugh Press, Inc., Roswell.
New Mexico Interstate Stream Commission and New Mexico State
Engineer Office
1975
County ProfiZe Otero County~ New Mexico; Water
Resources Assessment for PZanning Purposes.
New Mexico Interstate Stream Commission and New
Mexico State Engineer Office, Santa Fe.
New Mexico, Surveyor General
1862
Sketch of Public Surveys in New Mexico to Accompany
the Annual Report of the Surveyor General for 1862.
N.p.
Copy in the Schroeder Collection, New Mexico
State Record Center and Archives, Santa

Fe.

New Mexico, Territorial Census
1885
Dona Ana County, New Mexico.
Nichols, W. A.
1857
Map of the Department of New Mexico and Adjacent
Territory Compiled and Drawn from the Best Author­
ities, under Order of Colonel B. L. E. Bonneville,
third infantry, Commanding Department of New
Mexico, By Major W. A. Nichols U.S.A., Asst. Adjt.
Genl. of the Department.
Santa Fe: N.p.
Copy in
the McNitt Collection, New Mexico State Record
Center and Archives, Santa Fe.
Opler, Morris Edward and Catherine H.
1950
Mescalero Apache History in the Southwest. New
Mexico HistoricaZ Review 25 (January): 1-36.
Otero County, New Mexico.
Patents and Patent Maps
various Maps of all the townships within the present
dates
boundaries of the McGregor Missile Range, showing
original patents. Mapping Section, Otero County
Courthouse, Alamogordo.
Otero County Records
County Clerks Office, Otero County Courthouse,
Alamogordo.
Bills of Sale Records
Corporation Records

184

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Otero County Records (Continued)
Deed Records
Lincoln County Transcripts
Mining Deed Records'
Miscellaneous Records
Mortgage Deed Records
Mortgage Records
Patent Records
Quit Claim Deed Records
Paddock, B.
1975

History and Biographical Record of North and West
Texas.
Vol. II, pt. 2. Xerox University Micro­
films, Ann Arbor.

Padgitt, James T.
1950
Colonel William H. Day: Texas Ranchman. The South­
western Historical Quarterly 53 (April): 347-366.
1959

Captain Joseph C. Lea, the Father of Roswell.
West
Texas Historical Association Year Book 35 (October):
50-65.

Pearce, T. M. (Editor)
1965
New Mexico PZace Names.
Press, Albuquerque.

University of New Mexico

Port er, Eugene O. (Edi tor)
1959
By Wagon from El Paso to the Bonita Valley in 1894.
Password 4 (July): 113 -122.
Quick, Marcus
1 976
Conversation with Marcus Quick, January 2, 1976,
on the history of the Quick Homestead.
Conversa­
tion transcript in the possession of Martha Doty
Freeman.
Rabe, William T.
1 971
On to White Oaks: The Story of the El Paso and
Northeastern Railroad.
Passwo~d i6 ($pzi~g'~ '8~20;
(Summer): 67-75.
Reed, S. G.
1 941

A History of the Texas Railroads and of Transporta­
tion Conditions under Spain and Mexico and the
RepubZic and the State.
St. Clair Publishing Co.,
Houston.

Rhodes, Eugene Manlove
1946
The Little World Waddies.

Carl Hertzog, E1 Paso.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1963

185

Paso Por Aqut.
Friends of the Alamogordo Public
Library, Alamogordo.
,

Richeson, Hawley
1975
Lee Moor: Shirt Pocket Tycoon.
Co., El Paso.

Guynes Printing

Rickards, Colin
1966
Charles Littlepage Ballard, Southwesterner.
Western College, El Paso.

Texas

Ritch, Mr. and Mrs. William
1974
Interview with Mr. and Mrs. William Ritch on
March 6, 1974, in Tularosa, New Mexico, by George
Morrison and Duane Collier.
Files, White Sands
National Monument.
Ritch, William G.
1885
Aztlan. The History, Resources and Attractions
of New Mexico.
D. Lothrop & Co., Boston.
Sandoz, Mari
1935

Old Jules.

Little, Brown

a~d

Company, Boston.

Schlebecker, John T.
1963
Cattle Raising on the Plains, 1900-1961.
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Schmedding, Joseph
1974
Cowboy and Indian Trader.
Press, Albuquerque.

University of New Mexico

Scholes, France V. and H. P. Mera
1940
Some Aspects of the Jumano Problem. Contributions
to American Anthropology and History, No. 34.
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication
523.
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Washing­
ton, D,C.
Schroeder, Albert H.
Apache Indians I: A Study of the Apache Indians
1974
Parts I, II, and III.
Garland Publishing Inc.,
New York.
Schroeder, Albert H. and Dan S. Matson
A Colony on the Move; Gaspar Castano de Sosa's
1965
Journal, 1590-1591.
School of American Research,
Santa Fe.

186

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

Sheridan, P. H.
1882
Record of Engagements with Hostile Indians within
the Military Division of the Missouri, from 1868
to 1882. Government Printing Office, Washington.
Sherman, James E. and Barbara H.
1975
Ghost Towns and Mining Camps of New Mexico.
University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Siringo, Charles A.
1966
A Texas Cowboy or Fifteen Years on the Hurricane
Deck of a Spanish Pony. University of Nebraska
Press, Lincoln.
Sonnichsen, C. L.
1958
The Mescalero Apaches.
Press, Norman.

University of Oklahoma

1960

Tularosa.

1971

The State National Since 1881.

Devin-Adair Co., New York.
Texas Western Press,

El Paso.
Speer, William S. and John Henry Brown (Editors)
1881
The Encyclopedia of the New West.
The United States
Biographical Publishing Company, Marshall, Texas.
State National Bank of El Paso
1964
Pioneers. N.p.: N.p.
Stoes, K. D.
1957

The Story of San Augustine Ranch.

The New Mexico

Stockman 22 (March): 36, 60-61.
Swanton, John R.
1952
The Indian Tribes of North America.
Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 145. Government
Printing Office, Washington.
Thomas~Alfred

1932

iarnaby

Eorg€Jtten
,.rantie]:>8: A Study of th.e Spani8h J;ndian
~a~iqy 01 Daft J~dn Bautista de Ansa, Governor of
New Mexico~ 1777-1787. University of Oklahoma
P:tess, :Norman.

1940

Pbe E1ai~8 Indians and New Me$i.G~ 1751~1778.
Uaiv6B.icy of lew Mexico BXEBS. AlbQ~ueEque~,

"~-----------

187

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Thomas, Alfred Barnaby (Continued)
1941
Teodoro de Croix and the Northern Frontier of New
Spain/l? 7 6 ...17 ~3.
University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.
Thomas) Cowperthwait & Co.
1850
Map of Texas from the most recent authorities.
Thomas, Cowperthwait & Co., Philadelphia.
Thorp, N. Howard (Jack)
1945
Pardner ()f the Wind.
Caldwell, Idaho.

The Caxton Printers,

Tinsley, Russell
1956
Siege Along the Eyebrow Trail.
(July): 30-31, 45.

New Mexioo 34

Twitchell, Ralph Emerson (Editor)
1917
The Leading Faots of New Mexioan History.
III.
Torch Press, Cedar Rapids.

Vol.

U.S. Army, Corps of Topographical Engineers
(1855]
Report of Exploration of a Route for the Paaifia
Railroads Near the Thirty-S~aond ParalleZ of
Latitude~ from the Red River to the Rio Grande~
by Brevet Captain John Pope, Corps of Topograph­
iaaZ Engineers.
N.p.
Washington, D.C.

u. S • Bureau of the Census
1860
1870
1880a
l880b

Yazoo County, Mississippi.
Burnet County, Texas.
Taylor County, Texas.
Van Zandt County, Texas.

U.S. Congress, Senate
1850
Reports of the Secretary of War, with Recon­
naissances of Routes from San Antonio to EI Paso,
by Brevet Lt. Col. J. E. Johnston; Lieutenant
W. F. Smith; Lieutenant F. T. Bryan; Lieutenant
N. H. Michler; and Captain S. G. French, of
Q'rmaster's Dep't.
Also, the Report of C~pt.
R. B. Marcy's Route from Fort Smith to Santa Fe;
and the Report of Lieut. J. H. Simpson of an
Expedition into the Navajo Country; and the Report
of Lieutenant W. H. C. Whiting's Reconnaissances
of the Western Frontier of Texas.
E~ecutive Docu­
ment No. 64.
Thirty-first Congress, first session.
Printed at the Union Office, Washington.

--~~--~

. - - - -....

-~

.....

188

THE HISTORIC RESOURCE

U.S. Corps of Topographical Engineers
Map No.3.
Boundary between th~ United States &
1857
Mexico Agreed upon By the Joint Commission under
the Treaty of December 30th IS53.
Surveyed in
1855, under the direction of Najor W. H~Emory,
First Cavalry U.S.A. U.S. Commissioner.
Copy in
the Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service
1948
The Jopnada ExpepimentaZ Range.
N.p., Tucson.
U.S. War Department
[1850]
Reconnaissances of Routes from San Antonio de Bexar
to EIPaso del Norte.
P. S. Duval's Lith Steam
Press, Philadelphia.
Utley, R. M.
1962

Longhopns of the Big Bend.
U.S. Department of the
Interior, National Park Service Region Three,
Santa Fe.

Voorhees, Mrs, Bessie
N.d,
Mrs. Bessie Voorhees.
C. L. Sonnichsen Cbllection,
The University of Texas at El Paso Archives.
Warren, Mildred (Compiler)
N.d.
Texas Place Names •.• in Runnels, San Saba, Blanco,
Gillespie, McCulloch, Coleman, Concho, Llano,
Brown, Mason, Collins, and Fannin counties.
Earl
Vandale Collection, The University of Texas Archives,
Austin.
Welch, Joseph
Military Reconnaissance of the Arkansas[,] Rio Del
1847
Norte and Rio Gila by W. H. Emory, Lieut. Top.
Engrs.
Assisted from Fort Leavenworth to Santa Fe
by Lieuts. J. W. Abert and W. G. Peck, and from
Santa Fe to San Diego on the Pacific by Lieut. W.
H. Warner and Mr. Norman Bestor, Made in 1846-7,
with the advance guard of the 'Army of the West.'
Under Command of Brig. Gen. Stephn. W. Kearny,
Constructed under the orders of Col. J. J. Abert,
Ch. Corps Top. Engrs. E. Weber & Co., Baltimore.
White, J. Phelps
Recollections of Ranching Operations in Mexico with
1933
George Littlefield.
Collected in Roswell, New
Mexico, by J. Evetts Haley.
The University of Texas
Archives, Austin.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

189

Wier, W. and Bob Beverly
1937
W. Wier and Bob BeverlYt Monument, New Mexico, to
J, Evetts Ha1ey~ June 22, 1937. Earl Vanda1e
Collection, The University of Texas Archives,
Austin.
Wilson, Neill C. and Frank J. Taylor

1952

Southe:r>n Pacific: The Roa:r>ing Sto:r>y of a Fighting
Rail:r>oad. McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc., New York.

NEWSPAPERS:

Abilene Repo:r>te:r>
Alamogo:r>do News
Daily He:r>ald (E1 Paso)
He:r>aZd (El Paso)
He:r>ald-Post (El Paso)
Lone Sta:r> (El Paso)
The O:r>og:r>ande Times
Rio G:r>ande Republican (Las Cruces)
Times (E1 Paso)

This page intentionally left blank.

THE

CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE: ASSESSMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE
MICHAEL R. BECKES
& DAVID S. DIBBLE

_

..

~~

_________

~.~

__

~

_______

,---_~

___

~

_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _-=r:It-",.'f'____.

This page intentionally left blank.

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE:
ASSESSMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE AND MILITARY IMPACT

Miahael R. Beakes and David S. Dibble

ABSTRACT
This section is aonaepned with a genepal considepation of
the disaoveped pesource base of MaGpegop Range in terms of broad
aategopies of regional peseapah needs.
Twenty-two sites de­
fined op redefined by the peconnaissance ape listed as being
eligible fop considepation fop the National Register of
Historia Places.
These sites ape discussed with refepenae to
the mentioned pegional reseapah needs.
FinalZy~ obsepved
adverse impaats of current and past military aativities on the
identified auZtural resourae ape Zisted and alternative aa ons
for reduction of these impacts are offeped and disaussed.
THE PREHISTORIC CULTURAL RESOURCES IN REGIONAL PERSPECTIVE
INTRODUCTION
This account presents a general assessment of selected
archeological resources of MqGregor Guided Missile Range, Otero
County, New Mexico.
The resources were identified as a result
of a reconnaissance level investigation carried out on the Range
in 1975-76 by the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin, under the terms of a contract with the Fort
Worth District, Corps of Engineers.
The basic aims of the re­
connaissance were;
1) to examine extensive areas of the Range
in order to identify and locate extant archeological pheno~ena,
2) to evaluate, insofar as surficial inspection and limited
subsurface testing would allow, these identified features, and
3) to assess the impact of on-going military use of McGregor
Range on these resources.
The agreement included the instruction
to assess these sites, if possible, in terms of their "signi­
ficance" --in this case their potential for meeting published
criteria for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places.

194

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE

A number of prehistoric and historic sites, considered
by us to meet these criteria, were identified in an interim
report of this investigation pu~lished in the draft environmental
impact study for McGregor Range Land Withdrawal (Dept. of the
the Army 1976).
A total of 22 prehistoric sites (Table 1-2) and
4 historic properties was listed in that preliminary report.
Supporting information to justify the selection of sites was
not printed in the preliminary report; however, it is supplied
here along with specific site-by-site data to describe the basis
for this selection.

TAB LE I - 2

Archeological Sites Considered Eligible for the National Register

Site

Type

Location

..

..
~~

."...~

M85
M100
Ml03
M125
M151
M159
M160
M162
M163
M165
M320
M363
M377
M378
M405
M406
M407
M410
(Escondida Site)
M411
M462
M481
(inc. McGregor S)
M482

Complex Camp (w/rock art)
Complex Camp
Rockshelter (w/rock art)
Complex Camp
Village Complex
Village Complex
Village Complex
Rockshelter
Complex Camp
Rockshelter (w /rock art)
Rockshelter (w /rock art)
Burned Rock
Village Complex
Rockshelter
Lithic Scatter
Rockshelter
Rockshelter (w/rock art)

Hueco Mountains
Otero Mesa
Hueco Mountains
Sacramento Mountains
Otero Mesa Escarpment
Tularosa 8asin
Tularosa Basin
Otero Mesa Escarpment
Otero Mesa
Otero Mesa Escarpment
Sacramento Mountains
Sacramento Mountains
Tularosa Basin
Sacramento Mountains
Sacramento Mountains
Sacramento Mountains
Sacramento Mountains

Village Complex
Village Complex
Complex Camp

Tularosa Basin
Tularosa Basin
Sacramento Mountains

Village Complex
Village Complex

Tularosa Basin
Tularosa Basin

ASSESSMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE

195

The judgement of relative "significance" or "potential sig­
nificance tl is difficult and elusive at best--particularly at the
level of initial reconnaissance. Many factors affected the
evaluation, not the least of which was the fortuitous degree to
which the various archeological sites were physically expressed.
either at the time of surface inspection or as a result of small,
somewhat arbitrarily placed, subsurface probes.
The basis of
evaluation was generally derived from guidelines such as those
proposed recently by the National Park Service.
"Significant
data" is there defined as I I .
• data
that can be used to answer
research questions that may be posed in the future" (U.S. Dept.
of the Interior 1977: 5375).
Also, Fireman (1977: 11), in sum­
marizing a recent Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
report. states that:
significance and/or priorities of archeological sites
must be defined within the context of the relationship
of a particular site to its cultural system and area, in
order to provide a reasonable basis for preservation,
data retrieval, or no action treatment.
Both of these definitions stress the importance of:
1) Demon­
strated or suspected research value and/or 2) Contextual
relationships.
These are the two basic tests which a site must pass when it
is judged for "sIgnificance" and/or priority of the archeological
property.
Further, it is this set of definitions and critieria
which are here assumed to be the foundation on which to consider
sites for National Register nomination.
It must be st~ongly em­
phasized that the suggestion made he~ein that ce~tain sites meet
NationaZ Registe~ c~ite~ia is not to be unde~stood to mean that
othe~ identified cuZtu~al ~esou~ces a~e not of scientific impo~­
tance.
For example, even modest, thin, displaced scatters of
prehistoric cultural debris are of readily conceivable utility
for some, albeit narrow, research purposes.
This is accepted as
obvious.
In addition, the evaluation of properties had to be
made within the investigative limits of our reconnaissance, and
thus the assessment of sites requiring more than surficial
observation and limited testing was clearly beyond the scope of
our study capabilities.
Unavoidable biases toward well exposed
or readily delimited localities were undoubtedly enhanced by
the nature of our inspection.
Those particular sites suggested as holding potentiai for
National Register qualification do share at least two demonstrated
or suspected attributes:
they remain sufficiently intact to ful­
fill basic requirements for critical interpretation and are of
multi-purpose research utility for diachronic and/or synchronic
studies.
This group of sites does include examples of most site
"types" encountered during the reconnaissance although "represen­
tativeness" could not be considered as a selection factor
because of the preliminary nature of the survey.

196

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE

REGIONAL RESEARCH NEEDS AND THE
ARCHEOLOGICAL RESOURCE
Geographically, McGregor Range includes a substantial
portion of the southeastern Tularosa Basin and parts of the
immediately bordering physiographic units, the Sacramento
Mountains, Otero Mesa, and Hueco Mountains.
Except for a
suggested southern addition to include the adjoining Hueco
Bolson and extensions south of the Rio Grande which typify
I!Basin and Rangel! topography, the Tularosa Basin region as
defined by Human Systems Research appears a workable unit
for archeological consideration.
The northern, western,
and eastern limits are defined, respectively, as Chupadero
Mesa, the crests of the Organ and San Andreas mountains,
and the Sacramento Mountains.
Widely applicable research designs for this region await
future development, particularly the achievement of a sounder
data base.
The research potential of resources known to be
present on McGregor Range are thus assessed in their ability
or probable ability to yield information of a basic concern
to a wide variety of anthropological interests rather than
in the context of specific, problem-oriented deSigns.
Work
on McGregor Range and subsequent analyses of the results has
led us to conclude that the following areas of regional arch­
eological knowledge are weak--needlessly so, considering
the identified resource base;
1.

Rigorous Regional Chronologies

The need for incremental refinement of time controls is
universal in archeological studies.
This is particularly true
in contemporary studies emphasizing culture change and to
investigations at the synchronic level (e.g.> prehistoric
settlement patterns).
Archeological efforts in the Tularosa
Basin are seriously hampered by lack of rigorously developed
cultural chronologies.
At the same time, the basic resource
potential for development of sensitive chronologies appears
exceptional.
The extant regional chronology is notably weak in the
vast interval of time between the lightly demonstrated late
Paleoindian occupancy of the ¥~gion and the. local emerg~nce of
sedentary cultures.
The results of regional overviews of
the Tularosa Basin, such as developed by Human Systems Research
Inc. (1973), and contemporary surveys of substantial areas
within this region, (e.g.> Whalen 1977) have been frustrated
in the dating and identification of archeological residues
from this interval.
A carefully reasoned assessment of pre­
ceramic finds and previous definitions of Archaic-age remains
in the area of the Hueco Bolson, for example, characterized

REGIONAL RESEARCH NEEDS

197

the period as "long and poorly defined" and that "Preceramic
occupation patterns in the area remain only vaguely defined"
(Whalen 1977: 15).
The reconnaissance of McGregor Range by
the Texas Archeological Survey fared no better in this respect.
Although a number of surficially exposed localities were
tentatively identified as "Archaic", the certainty of even this
loose, broad age/stage identification remains in question due
to the rarity of regionally applicable, soundly dated, contex
tually "pure" archeological assemblages with which to compare
our observed data.
Obviously, the identification and dating
of such phenomena will remain in question until such time
as rigorously derived chronologies are available.
In the
interim, the long (or, perhaps not so long) post-Paleoindian/
pre-ceramic human utilization of the region must continue to
be couched in such simplistic terms as representing an era of
"patterned mobility" or other rubrics more suitable for
continent-wide, rather than regional characterization.
In any
event, the inter-dependent problems of identification and
chronology must be reasonably controlled prior to the generation
of truly testable, meaningful hypotheses.
The known archeological resource of McGregor Range includes
a number bf localities which demonstrate excellent promise for
contributing to the currently restricted regional data based on
pre-ceramic, Archaic cultures.
The most promising of these
are enclosed sites, rockshelters, where post-depositional
environments are commonly conducive to the stabilization of
stratigraphic relationships.
Open sites observed on the Range
are, on the other hand. generally subject to deflationary
geologic processes which limit the chances of retention of
vertical stratigraphic relationships with materials of different
age and, too, offer less potential for material preservation,
including datable organic residues.
Sites with either demon­
strated (i.e.~ subsurface testing) or suspected potential for
Archaic-age deposits in retained, well-preserved context
include MI03, M162, MI65, M320, M378, M406, and M407.
The
sheltered sites are situated in the northern Hueco Mountains (1),
Otero Mesa escarpment (2), and Sacramento Mountains (4).
Other
open sites, or components of defined sites. should be included
here as of probable value in the isolation and dating of Archaic
deposits.
These include M85 (Hueco Mountains). M363, M405 and
Area A of M462 (Sacramento Mountains).
The degree to which
more definitive dating techniqu~s can be profitably applied to
these well exposed, probably shallow, sites would depend on
the results of suitable subsurface testing.
Observations made
at these localities during the reconnaissance strongly suggest
that potential for meaningful dating of these cultural expressions
is present.
The time scale and culture unit formulation presented in
Lehmer's (1948) classic study, The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon,

198

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE

has been largely applied in all subsequent studies. Most of
the latter were of such limited scope that little was garnered
concerning the complex problems of regional chronology.
Thus,
the presently accepted chrono~ogy of the Ceramic Period cultures
so prominent in the Tularosa Basin is still generally based on
indirect time estimates derived from ceramic cross-dating and
seriation.
A sprinkling of radiocarbon dates, too limited to
allow critical re-assessment, have subsequently been reported.
These dates, aside from their restricted number and time range,
are of no great utility for purposes of critical regional
reassessment.
An evaluation of a complex Ceramic Period village
in the El Paso area, carried out by the University of Texas at
Austin in 1972, for example, provided two well-positioned samples.
Radiocarbon determination of their ages ~ave some basis for
questioning the chronological status quo (see Aten 1972 for
discussion).
Also, radiocarbon assays resulting from limited
subsurface testing completed during this study were at variance
with accepted time estimates - in this case, the age of early
sedentary (Mesilla Phase) occupation of the Basin (see Part II:
Descriptive Report of Test Excavations).
Again, this sort of
dating is useful for certain restrictive purposes but does
little to address the issue of regionally applicable time
scales.
Resources potentially contributive to the establishment of
a sound regional chronology for all presently recognized phases
of the Ceramic Period do exist on McGregor Range.
Present
evaluations of site age were based on traditional ceramic index
type associations (see Part II:
Analysis of Ceramic Materials).
These ceramic associations exist either as components of sites
or in typologically pure contexts.
The following sites on
McGregor Range have notable potential for yielding meaningful
radiometric samples relatable to Ceramic Period occupations:
M8S; MI00; MI03; MI2S; MlS9; M160; M162; M320; M377; M378; M410;
M411; M462; M481; and M482.
Four of these, MI03, M162, M320,
and M378, are rock shelters where retained strat raphic associa­
tions with materials of preceramic age are suspected or were
demonstrated by subsurface testing.
Two large village sites are known to include house struc­
tural remnants with fired clay floor features.
These sites,
M410 and M377, are thus considered to have good potential for
archeomagnetic dating.
The utilization of radiocarbon dating for purposes.of
evaluating cultural developments within a single prehistoric
settlement have recently been applied with considerable success
at the George C. Davis Site in northeast Texas (Story and
Valastro 1977).
This experiment gives an example of the
sensitivity of this dating technique over relatively short
time spans, provided well-selected samples are available in
sufficient numbers.
At least one site on McGregor Range, the
Escondido Site (M410) appears to represent a large, perhaps
continually occupied village - a striking example of a late

REGIONAL RESEARCH NEEDS

199

Mogollon community.
Testing of this site by the Texas Archeo­
logical Survey (Part II: 30-36) and previous excavations by the
El Paso Archeologital Society strongly suggest that structural
and other associated artifact~ remain in good context.
Also,
organic.re~idues are well-preserved and common.
The use-of
massive radiometric dating to assist in the interpretation of
intrasite developments at this locality could conceivable pro­
vide_a_r_eg~o~a1-_l)'~np_aralleled view of late Formative developments.
Of the present variety or- aating-teCliIiTques -avaTTal:) Te-;--- . - - ­
radiocarbon probably is the single most productive and readily
applicable technique to chronological problems in this region.
Previous utilization in Tularosa Basin research has thus far
been light - probably reflective of the sort of investigations
which have dominated past work - and the results remain un­
convincing.
Assuming
14C determinations to be merely
probability statements, it follows that relatively massive
dating is necessary to achieve truly sound time scales.
Although the argument that "radiocarbon dates can be used to
evaluate radiocarbon dates" (Story and Valastro 1977: 81)
appears circular, it has achieved good results in the few
examples where it has been applied.
When all things are
considered, the economy of "dating only a few samples" is
a false economy, particularly in investigations directed
toward regional understanding
In sum, the range and sensitivity of contemporary research
within the Tularosa Basin is severely limited by the lack of
adequate, empirically derived chronologies.
Archeological
resources amenable to the establishment of both absolute and
relative time scales have been identified at a number of sites
on McGregor Range.
Further, this dating is within the capa­
bility of established or promising archeological techniques
(e.g.~ radiocarbon, archeomagnetic dating, and perhaps, thermo­
luminescence).
Dendrochronologic dating in Tularosa Basin sites
may be successfully applied; however, its potential to resources
known on McGregor Range was not demonstrated by our reconnaissance.

21

Synchronic Studies Emphasizing Intrasite Structuring

In again reviewing the results of archeological investi­
gation in the Tularosa Basin, it is clear that the region has
not shared in the productive results achieved elsewhere by
intensive investigations of physically definable prehis~oric
communities.
The anthropological usefulness of such studies
can hardly be questioned, particularly when combined with the
results of intersite variability, catchment surveys, or
approaches which place single settlement investigation into
an areal perspective.
The reconnaissance of McGregor Range has established that
this area does include a number of locations which appear to
be amenable to successful accomplishment of such studies.
Criteria established for evaluating this potential included
a) good preservation and retention of contextually related

----------------------------------------------------------

200

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE

features - sufficient preservation qualities to assume that
variable human behavior is likely reflected and determinable
in the archeological record; anft b) evidence that archeological
features over the site represent the residues of a relatively
short time span or that segments within the defined site area
may be isolable in this regard.
A number of sites selected as
eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places exhibit these qualities to a varying degree.
All of
these settlements date from the Ceramic Period (Mesilla through
El Paso phases).
Two sites, MISI and M41D, hold excellent
overall potential.
Sites M85; MIDD; M159; MI6D; M163; M377;
M4II; M48I; and M182 show at least substantial remnant portions
which could be profitably investigated.
3)

Synchronic Studies Emphasizing Intersite Patterning

McGregor Range, by virtue of its vast size and generally
sharply demarcated and variable natural provinces, was
initially considered well-suited for studies falling under the
label of "settlement pattern".
Our survey of the Range, which
included substantial segments of all major physiographic/
vegetational zones currently defined, added measurably to
confirming this assumption.
Within the limits of a research problem concerned with
settlement patterns the age, frequency and function of analyti­
cal units (i.e.~ "sites"
in this sense) must be viewed in
their totality.
In this perspective, all of the prehistoric
residues present on the Range should be viewed as potentially
contributive to this category of research interests.
4)

Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction

The establishment of any basic understanding of pre­
historic human adaptive systems depends, of course, upon
suitably sensitive estimates of their contemporaneous natural
environments.
The accomplishment of such controls are among the
most difficult to achieve since the existing records of these
past conditions are usually highly subject to natural processes
of deterioration.
As is the Case with the cultural record,
recognizable, diagnostic "documents" of past environments are
differentially preserved.
The need for taking appropriate
advantage of readable segments of this record is thus heightened.
(e.g. Part III:
The Botanical Research: 39-47).
Investigations of past environmental conditions during
the Holocene have not achieved a degree of regional specificity
appropriate to the goals of many archaeological studies which
have been attempted in the Tularosa Basin.
The implied aim of
achieving such adequacy may be idealistic, but strong efforts to
attain a more comfortable balance should be a part of any future
investigative program in this area.

REGIONAL RESEARCH NEEDS

201

The reconnaissance of McGregor Guided Missile Range was not
implemented at a level wherein the potential of the area for
yielding data of use in evaluating past environmental conditions
could be properly assessed.
Ho~ever, in a relatively small
number of instances, it was possible to observe evidence that
such potential does exist on a site-specific basis.
A number
of dry rockshelter deposits examined, for example, were found
to contain organic macrofossils (plant and animal).
These
materials can, of course, be of value at certain levels of envi­
ronmental assessment.
One site, a large rockshelter (MI62) in
the Otero Mesa escarpment, contained a large number of surficially
visible pack rat nests.
These materials have served as valuable
biological resources in that their contents are considered to
reflect certain local environmental conditions (e.g.~ Wells 1966).
Assuming these datable features can be found in proper pre­
historic contexts, their occurrence may serve as a very valuable
environmental indicator.
Other sheltered sites such as MI03;
M165; M320; M378; M406; and M407, because of assumed depositional
environments, are suspected to yield ecofacts and/or macrofossils
of utility in evaluating aspects of prehistoric human subsistence
systems.
In sum, the prehistoric resources of McGregor Range
thus identified hold significant promise for the refinement of
regional chronologies, the study of intra and inter-site patterning
of the necessary extant resources for the reconstruction of
paleoenvironment.
The McGregor Range reconnaissance began with',the strong
assumption that presently measurable environmental parameters
must be considered as merely "base line" data.
The usefulness
of this data, however carefully defined, in interpreting the
natural world of prehistoric cultures in the region must be sub­
ject to the most careful scrutiny.
Efforts were made to probe
certain lines of investigation, botanical and geological, in
order to test their usefulness in understanding the degree to
which environmental change may have occurred (see Part III, The
Botanical Research; and Reconnaissance Geology).
The results further strengthed this initial assumption.
Aside from the obvious relevance of this view in judging the
adaptations of prehistoric populations to their existing natural
milieus, our geological reconnaissance demonstrated that post­
depositional processes must be strongly considered in interpreting
the results of surficial archeological surveys (see Part III,
Reconnaissance Geology: var.) on the Range.
The highly dlverse
topography and other variable physical conditions in this region
make it especially important to address this issue when viewing
the results of areally extensive surfact surveys.
Attention
should be given, for example, to develop procedures to lessen
what Collins (1975) has labeled "discontinuities i l between human
behavior and our record of it.

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE

202

ASSESSMENT OF OBSERVED IMPACTS AND
SUGGESTED ALTERNATIVES FOR MITIGATION
EFFECTS OF MILITARY LAND USE
An assessment of the data gathered during the 1975-76 re­
connaissance survey of McGregor Range demonstrates that a sub­
stantial and significant cultural resource is present and that
current military activities are contributing to the degradation
of this resource.
The sources of the observed adverse impact are
varied but generally take the form of weapons impact and recovery,
surface maneuvering by heavy tracked or wheeled vehicles, and
uninformed relic collecting by unauthorized civilian or military
personnel.
Vandalism and relic collecting by non-military per­
sonnel trespassing on the Range is an additional source of
adverse impact.
The observed effects of specific military acti­
vities upon the discovered archeological and historic resource
are discussed below.
Sources of Adverse Impact
1.

Air Defense Mission
A.

Surface-to-air firing of Nike, Hawk, Redeye, and
Chaparral missiles.
Surface-to-air missile firing
has little observable adverse effect except dis­
turbance of the ground by Nike booster impacts in
the launcher facility areas, and vehicular dis­
turbance of sediments by missile debris recovery
crews.

B.

Surface-to-air firing of Nike Hercules.
Surface
impacts of the Nike Hercules is moderately damaging
to the archeological resource.
Impact zones should
be contingent on prior archeological inspection.

C.

Surface-to-air firing of 20 mm. Vulcan and 40 mm.
Duster anti-aircraft guns.
The major effect of
aerial firing of these small cannons is to. "salt"
large areas with unexploded ordinance, making it
extremely hazardous to conduct archeological survey
or excavations on sites within firing arcs--effec­
tively removing the resource from scientific investi­
gation.

D.

Surface firing of 20 mm. Vulcan and 40 mm. Duster
anti-aircraft guns.
Firing these weapons at surface
targets badly disturbs archeological sites within

EFFECTS f)F MILITARY LAND USE

203

the firing arc, and "salts" the area with unexploded
ordinance.

2.

E.

Air-to-ground firing of 20 mm. shells and 40 mm.
rockets.
This activity badly disturbs archeological
sites within the aerial gunnery range.
The pro­
liferation of unexploded ordinance makes the area
extremely hazardous for future surveyor excavation.

F.

Range maintenance activities.
Various "activities
associated with maintenance of Range missile launch
facilities, access roads, dud pits, etc., have been
shown to have an adverse impact on archeological
resources in the past.

Ground Maneuver/Field Exercise Mission
Activity associated with the use of McGregor Range for
field exercises and desert warfare training has been
isolated as the single most destructive source of ad­
verse military impact on the prehistoric and historic
resource.
Since archeological sites in a fragile arid
environment are particularly susceptible to disturbance
or destruction by heavy tracked or wheeled vehicles,
surface maneuvers are the greatest potential threat to
the cultural resources of McGregor Range.
As far as
can be determined most of this type of military impact
occurred during a single large exercise, "Gallant Shield,"
which took place in the spring of 1975.
Sources of ad­
verse impact associated with surface use of McGregor
Range include:
A.

Periodic, usually limited, field exercises by ele­
ments stationed at Fort Bliss.
Primary impacts
include destabilization and accelerated erosion of
archeological sites due to heavy vehicle disturbance
of sediments and ground cover; the excavation of
emplacements; subsurface disturbance associated with
camping activity and (possibly) uninformed relic
collecting by field personnel.

B.

Large joint training exercises (e.g., Gallant Shield)
in which mobile units from other installations parti­
cipate in maneuvers over large portions of the Range.
Adverse impacts associated with such large exercises
are similar to those cited for smaller maneuvers,
multiplied to correspond with the greater numbers of
heavy vehicles and personnel involved.
The impact of
such exercises is probably increased by the attempt

204

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE

to simulate combat conditions.
Units are widely
dispersed over the central basin area and maneuvers
are often carried out at high speed.
Given the scale
and conditions of this activit~ it probably would not
be possible to avoid damaging archeological and
historic sites even if their location were known.
C.

3.

Periodic use of portions of the Range for survival
training by airborne units, Army Reserve units, and
National Guard personnel.
Adverse impact is limited
to arbitrary off-road use of heavy vehicles and
small scale ground disturbance associated with
camping activities.
Uninformed relic collecting or
vandalism possibly generates associated adverse im­
pact.

Private Collecting - Vandalism
A third major source of adverse impact on archeological
and historic resources is widespread, unauthorized relic
collecting and vandalism resulting from the difficulty of
effectively controlling access to so extensive an area.
Such activity ranges from random surface disturbance of
sites by military personnel using the Range to actual
site specific digging and trenching carried on by un­
authorized civilian or military relic collectors.
The
area of greatest observed disturbance of this kind lies
north of New Mexico Route 506.
In one case screens and
digging equipment were discovered in a badly damaged site
where they had been abandoned by artifact collectors; on
other occasions survey teams frightened off relic col­
lectors in the act of looting sites.
Since much of this
activity is carried out by amateur "pothuntersl~, it tends
to focus on large, easily observed Ceramic Period sites.
The negative effect of periodic, uninformed digging on
archeological sites cannot be over-stressed.
Assuming
that such collecting is carried out on a year-round
basis, it ranks with armored vehicle maneuvers in mag­
nitude of adverse impact.
The minimum response deemed
necessary to reduce this impact is:

..

--~

A.

Place locked gates on Range access roads abutting
U. S. Ro ute 54.

B.

Place sufficient warning signs along the Range
per imeter.

C.

Deploy more military or civilian guards and patrols •

...-

- - - - - ...

-~

..•

~-

...

-~~-

....

-----~

....

-~

..

~

..

-~

..

--~

..

-~

... ..
~

-~

...

SUGGESTIONS FOR MITIGATION

205

D.

Strictly enforce existing trespassing and antiquities
laws.

E.

Inform military personnel of penalties for violation
of the Federal Antiquities Act and of governmental
policies regarding preservation of cultural resource
properties.

SUGGESTIONS FOR MITIGATION OF OBSERVED IMPACTS
The data generated by the reconnaissance survey of McGregor
Range suggest that military activities associated with the basic
air defense training mission can be made compatible with sound
management of the discovered cultural resource base.
The use of
heavy tracked or wheeled vehicles off existing roadways, i.e., as
in field exercise maneuvering, is viewed as inherently incompat­
ible with cultural resource management objectives.
Four alter­
native means of mitigating the demonstrated adverse impact are
outlined below.
These measures are presented in a descending
order, from most desirable and efficient in resource preservation
or management terms, to least desirable and least effective.

AZternative 1: Retain McGregor Range for Air Defense Training.
A.

Define the area north of New Mexico Route 506 as off
limits to heavy vehicle maneuvers or exercises.

B.

Supplement the off-limitS portions of Otero Mesa with
the addition of the Hueco Mountains and coalesced
alluvial fan zone paralleling the Mesa Escarpment.

C.

Restrict artillery firing to existing fans.
Create
new firing fans only on the basis of prior archeolo­
gical investigation.

D.

Restrict arbitrary off-road use of heavy vehicles.

E.

Strictly control relic collecting and vandalism by
military and civilian personnel.

F.

Strictly control unauthorized access to the Range.

G.

Conduct clearance surveys of areas to be affected by
ground disturbing construction, maintenance, changes
on missile impact zones, or the development of new
firing fans.

206

THE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE

H.

Retain a post archeologist to coordinate and develop
an incremental intensive inventory or mitigation
program ultimately designed to provide the degree of
cultural resource management required by Federal
regulations.

I .

Limit the surface use of McGregor Range by armored
vehicles to existing maneuver areas south of McGregor
Range Camp.

J.

Cease joint training exercises requiring the use of
the basin lowlands north of McGregor Range Camp.

Implementation of this alter~ative will result in the
least destruction of the prehistoric and historic cul­
tural resource base.
Alternative 1 is hereby defined
as the preferred action.

AZternative 2: Use of McGregor Range for Air Defense Training
and Surface Maneuvers: Site Avoidance.
A.

Implement all measures called for in Alternative 1
except I. and J., restriction of armored vehicle use.

B.

Define specific archeological and historic sites to
be avoided, on the basis of the existing reconnais­
sance survey data.

C.

Define specific archeological sites to be excavated
or intensively collected in areas not to be avoided,
on the basis of the existing reconnaissance survey
data.

D.

Initially restrict heavy vehicle use to existing
maneuver areas south of McGregor Range Camp.
Grad­
ually expand the available maneuver space northward
as incremental intensive inventories and/or mitiga­
tion programs are completed in portions of the basin
lowlands to be affected.

Implementation of this alternative would resu~t in a
severe adverse impact on the discovered cultural re­
sources for the following reasons: (1) At present in­
sufficient data exists to determine in all cases which
sites require complete avoidance and which require only
intensive collection, etc.; (2) during maneuvers, orient­
ation and navigation in the desert lowlands is very dif­
ficult; (3) unintentional destruction of archeological
and historic sites noted for avoidance would almost

SUGGESTIONS FOR MITIGATION

207

certainly occur; (4) large scale destabilization of sedi­
ments and concomittant maneuver-related erosion of areas
adjacent to significant archeological sites will have
unavoidable adverse effects on sites scheduled for avoid­
ance.

AZtepnative J: Use of McGregor Range for Air Defense Training
and Surface Maneuvers: District Avoidance.
A.

Implement all measures called for in Alternative I
except I. and J. restriction of armored vehicle use.

B.

Define specific archeological or historic areas or
districts to be avoided, on the basis of the existing
reconnaissance survey data.

C.

Supplement the existing reconnaissance survey data
with information gathered during intensive incre­
mental inventory work specified in Alternative l-H
and Alternative 2-D.
Define representive archeolo­
gical or historic areas as districts on the basis of
the subsequent study for complete avoidance by surface
maneuvers.

D.

Retain the defined archeological and historic areas
as districts for future scientific research purposes.

Implementation of this alternative will result in un­
avoidable adverse effects on the discovered archeological
and historic resources for the following reasons: (1) Pre­
sent data do not allow large portions of the desert low­
lands not examined during the reconnaissance survey to be
disregarded as insignificant in defining avoidance dis­
tricts; (2) orientation and navigation problems during
large maneuvers will almost certainly result in uninten­
tional,destruction of cultural sites scheduled for avoid­
ance; (3) the destructive effects of large scale sediment
destabilization and maneuver-related erosion in areas
adjacent to avoidance districts will have unavoidable
adverse effects on sites noted for avoidance.

AZtepnative 4: Use of McGregor Range for Air Defense Training
and Surface Maneuvers: Clearance Salvage.

-------~

.....

A.

Implement all measures called for in Alternative 1
except I. and J., restriction of tracked vehicle use.

B.

Carry out large salvage excavations and intensive
surface collections of all significant archeological

--.~-~

-­

......

208

'1'HE CULTURAL RESOURCE BASE

and historic sites discovered during the preliminary
reconnaissance survey and by subsequent incremental,
intensive inventory in the basin lowlands to be
affected by surface maneuvers.
C.

Permit small and large scale surface maneuvers in
the desert lowlands after the completion of inten­
sive inventory and salvage of significant sites.

D.

Retain the portions of the northern basin areas,
Otero Mesa, Hueco Mountains and alluvial fan zones
of the mesa escarpment now defined as off limits in
an unaltered state as a representative example of
the cultural resources of the region.

Implementation of this alternative will result in the
salvage of considerable scientific information.
Enforced
salvage studies, however, are low in information yield
when compared with independently generated, problem re­
lated investigations which articulate more closely with
contemporary scientific interests.
The retention, if
possible, of the resources untU~s~uch"~time as they can
most profitably be exploited would >be the preferred use.
Given the dynamic nature of the basin landscape, it is
unlikely that even further intensive inventories will
discover all the significant archeological sites located
in the basin lowlands.
Thus, the potential for destruc­
tion of buried, previously undetected sites by large
scale surface maneuvers is probable.
Finally, the
results of the reconnaissance survey indicate that the
areas now designated as off limits to maneuvers are, in
fact, not fully representative of the"range of archeo­
logical resources found on McGregor Range.
The survey
results indicate that the greatest concentration of
archeological sites is located precisely in the area
of most fragile sediments and greatest potential for
adverse military impact, i.e.~ the desert lowlands of
the central Range.
It should be made clear that the recommended AZternative 1
is oriented toward reasonably balanced conservation and further
study of the discovered resource base, rather than toward hurried
data recovery through excavation.
While it is realized that
salvage excavations may be vital and appropriate in specific
cases, it is our judgement that effective preservation and study
of the cultural resources is most suitable. Military use of
McGregor Range for the purpose of air defense training is clearly
most compatible with sound cultural resource management.

--

.....-

- - ......

--.~---

209

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E.
1972
Evaluation of the Cultural Resources of the
Northgate Site, El Paso, Texas.
Texas Archeological
Salvage Project Research Report 5.
The University
of Texas at Austin.
Collins, Michael B.
1975
Sources of Bias in Processual Data: An Appraisal.
In: Sampling in Archaeology (I.W. Mueller, ed.)
The University of Arizona Press.
Department of the Army
1976
Headquarters, Training and Doctrine Command.
Introduction and Environmental Studies.
Environ­

mental Impact Statement Land Use Withdrawal~
McGregor Range~ Fort Bliss, Texas.
Fireman, Bert
Report of the Chairman's Task Force on Archaeology.
1977

American Society for Conservation Archaeology
Newsletter 4(1): 10-12.
Human Systems Research

1973

Survey of the Tularosa Basin.

Technical Manual.

Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Lehmer, D.J.
1948
The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon.
Arizona Bulletin VXIX(2). Tucson.

University of

Story, Dee Ann and S. Valastro
1977
Radiocarbon Dating and the George C. Davis Site.
Journal of Field Archaeology 4(1): 63-89.
U.S. Army Air Defense Center and Fort Bliss, Range Command
1976
Standard Operating Procedures for Weapon Firing
and Maneuver Area Use.
Fort Bliss, Texas.
U.S. Department of the Interior, Nat~onal Park Service
1977
Recovery of Scientific, Prehistoric, Historic,
and Archeological Data: Methods, Standards, and
Reporting Procedures.
Federal Register 42(19):
5374-78.

210

REFERENCES CITED

Wells, Phillip V.
1966
Late Pleistocene Vegetation and Degree of Pluvial
Climatic Change in the Chihuahuan Desert. Saienae
"
153: 970-975.
Whalen, Michael E.
1977
Settlement Patterns of the Eastern Hueco Bolson.
Centennial Museum AnthropoZogiaaZ Paper 4
University of Texas at EI Paso.

211

GENERAL ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many people and organizations contributed in meaningful
ways to the McGregor Range archeological reconnaissance.
Direct contributors to the various special studies contained
in this three part report are listed with the individual
sections.
However, it is appropriate here that an attempt
be made to express our thanks to the many who have aided in
this long, arduous, often frustrating but always exciting
task.
Field crew members who learned first-hand the environ­
mental stresses of the Tularosa Basin and the hazardous
nature of "doing" archeology on an active military missile
range include: Michael R. Beckes, field supervisor;
Dessamae Lorrain, field laboratory supervisor; Martha D.
Freeman, historian; John D. Pigott, geologist; Ray D.
Kenmotsu, botanist; and assistant field supervisor, Alan
R. Delaney, who was also in charge of the final phase of
field work on the Range.
Archeological field assistants included (in alphabetical
order):
Walter A. Adams, Sigrid A. Anderson, Susan L.
Andrews, Julio D. Betancourt, Stephen L. Black, James P.
Dwyer, Augustine J. Frkuska, Patricia A. Georgi, Grant Hall,
Richard A. Hubbard, Stephen M. Kotter, Colleen L. Lamb,
Robert J. Lunn, Michael G. Mallouf, Terry L. Morse, Irwin
Roemer, Jr., Alan R. Rogers, Robert L. Sappington, Robert
F. Scott, Duford W. Skelton, Craig S. Smith, Deborah A.
Steiss, Robert L. Stiba, and Janet A. Stock.
Dr. Victor R. Baker, Associate Professor of Geological
Sciences, The University of Texas at Austin, made a number
of trips to the Range and generally supervised the geological
aspects of the study.
Grant Ferguson, a student of geology,
assisted in the initial geological reconnaissance as a
volunteer.
Thanks are also extended to the staff members of the Texas
Archeological Survey who provided base support in our Austin
headquarters during the field work and aided in the laboratory
analysis of results, report preparation and production.
Deserving of special mention are:
Melinda Giles, administrative
secretary; Harold L. Beall, equipment specialist; Katherine
Yates, laboratory supervisor; and Jane Laurens, Lynn Johnson,
Daniel Brookshire, and H.G. (Woody) Wooldridge who served as
laboratory assistants.
Editorial and production personnel are
listed on page ii of this report.
The cooperation of personnel of the United State Army­
Fort Bliss, and the Fort Worth District, Corps of Engineers,
was excellent throughout the lengthy field and laboratory
study.
Army personnel at Fort Bliss associated with this
work have my sincere thanks for their many actions which

212

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

helped us in a myriad of ways.
Our "mission" and personal
safety were attended to - seemingly in a manner above and
beyond the call of duty.
General C.J. LeVan, Commanding
General, Fort Bliss, and his ~uccessor, General Robert J.
Lynn, each took a personal interest in our work and undoubtedly
aided the project in ways of which we are even now unaware.
Our study, and others associated with the environmental assess­
ment of McGregor Range were coordinated through the Directorate
of Facilities Engineering.
Thanks are specifically directed
to successive directors Colonel William A. Anderson and
Colonel Ray S. Hansen.
The immediate day-to-day coordination
of our efforts were very capably overseen through the Environ­
mental Protection Office.
James W. Conyers, Chief; Kevin Von
Finger, biologist; and Erma Ramirez, secretary, effectively
led us through the administrative maze of a major military
post and aided us in countless other ways.
Justo Gonzales,
Jr., currently a staff member of that office, was an active
duty Captain during our 1975 field work and resolved with
great efficiency a number of our logistical problems.
A number of officers and enlisted men of Range Command
were instrumental in keeping us alive, uninjured and well­
housed at Meyer Range Camp.
My particular appreciation goes
to Colonel Richard F. Dotson and Colonel Hilliard H. Lewis,
Jr., successive commanders during our work, and members of
their staff, Captain James M. Ingraham and Major Richard
Pendleton.
It was a pleasure to work with these members and
employees of the United States Army.
I wish to thank members of the staff of the Environmental
Resources Division, Fort Worth District, Corps of Engineers,
for their help, patience and understanding throughout this
most difficult task.
Mr. L.E. Horsman, Chief, Billy R.
Daniels, Project Leader, and Robert J. Burton and Susan A.
Hazen, archeologists, are especially cited in this regard.
David S. Dibble
Principal Investigator

