MECHANICAL SEARCH FOR UNMARKED GRAVES IN THE LCRA
T219 TRANSMISSION LINE REPLACEMENT PROJECT CORRIDOR
ADJACENT TO OAK HILL CEMETERY (41LM18),
LAMPASAS, TEXAS

by
Douglas K. Boyd

Principal Investigator
Douglas K. Boyd

LETTER REPORT NO. 937

submitted to

Lower Colorado River Authority
Austin, Texas

by

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Cultural Resources Services
Austin, Texas

July 2019

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 8823

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT...............................................................................................................................

v

CURATION...............................................................................................................................

v

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..........................................................................................................

v

INTRODUCTION.....................................................................................................................

1

HISTORY OF THE OAK HILL CEMETERY AND POTENTIAL
FOR UNMARKED GRAVES....................................................................................................

1

THE LCRA T219 TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT AREA.................................................

5

PREFIELD INVESTIGATIONS..............................................................................................

8

GEOLOGICAL SETTING AND SOILS...................................................................................

10

FIELD SURVEY METHODS AND RESULTS........................................................................

10

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS.............................................................................

20

REFERENCES CITED.............................................................................................................

21

iii

LIST OF FIGURES
1.

Project area map showing the T219 transmission line survey area
adjacent to Oak Hill Cemetery.......................................................................................

2

2.

Map of Oak Hill Cemetery showing the locations of the original 10-acre
cemetery plot, the Potter’s Field section, and the African American burial
area in relation to the T219 transmission line corridor................................................

4

Aerial photograph showing the location of the LRCA T219 electrical
transmission line corridor adjacent to Oak Hill Cemetery and the locations
of the nine existing electrical towers and poles.............................................................

6

4.

Aerial photograph showing the seven proposed tower locations..................................

7

5.

1941 aerial photograph of the Oak Hill Cemetery area from the Tobin
Aerial Archives................................................................................................................

9

6.

Map showing locations of backhoe trenches and excavation blocks.............................

13

7.

High-resolution LIDAR topographic map of the Oak Hill Cemetery area
and a north-south surface cross section of the LCRA T219 transmission
line corridor.....................................................................................................................

16

8.

Photographs illustrating selected trench excavations..................................................

17

9.

Photographs illustrating selected trench excavations..................................................

18

10.

Photographs illustrating selected trench excavations..................................................

19

3.

LIST OF TABLES
1.

Summary of backhoe trenches and excavation blocks..................................................

iv

14

ABSTRACT
The Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA) is replacing the T219 electrical transmission
line in Burnet and Lampasas Counties, and the existing metal lattice towers and wooden poles
will be removed and larger tower structures put in place. In April 2019, Prewitt and Associates,
Inc., archeologists conducted an archeological survey of one segment of the transmission line
corridor. The survey area is the LCRA’s 40-ft-wide easement that runs north-south for 2,400 ft
along the west side of the historic Oak Hill Cemetery (41LM18) in Lampasas, Texas. The survey
consisted of excavation of trenches to search for possible unmarked graves at each of the seven
locations proposed for new towers. All of the trenches exposed weathered limestone bedrock or
undulating hard limestone shelves at depths varying from 2.0 to 4.5 ft. Any intrusive excavations
would have been obvious, but no unusual soil anomalies or evidence of possible grave shafts
were observed. Prewitt and Associates recommends that no further archeological investigations
are needed and that the LCRA may proceed with the plans to rebuild the T219 transmission
line section adjacent to the Oak Hill Cemetery.
CURATION
No artifacts were recovered during this investigation. All of the project records, consisting
of original field notes and digital photographs, will be submitted for permanent curation to the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks go to a number of people who were involved in various aspects of this survey
project. For the Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA), archeologist and project manager Andy
Malof worked with Prewitt and Associates, Inc. (PAI), and the Texas Historical Commission
(THC) to develop the scope of work and get the contractual paperwork completed. He also
coordinated our subsequent fieldwork and reviewed the draft report. For the THC, Tiffany
Osburn (regional archeologist and reviewer) and Jennifer McWilliams (Cemetery Programs
Coordinator) reviewed and approved the scope of work, along with subsequent scope of work
modifications as the LCRA’s design plans changed.
The City of Lampasas manages the Oak Hill Cemetery, and their cemetery crew leader,
Duane Griffith, was extremely helpful before, during, and after our field investigation. He
provided help in planning and contacting other interested parties, and he also provided historical
information on the evolution of the cemetery and copies of old cemetery maps.
Prior to conducting the field survey, PAI contacted interested parties to inform them
about the project, including Jane McMillan, Ashley Underwood, and Roy Koon with the Oak Hill
Cemetery Association and Ms. Clydell Wallace with the Lampasas County Historical Commission.
We also contacted Jeff Jackson, a former Lampasas County Historical Commission Member
and local historian who in 1995 published the book Lampasas County Cemeteries, 1865–1995.
Mr. Jackson provided valuable historical insights about the evolution of the Oak Hill Cemetery.
Many people were involved in the field investigation. Brian Beaver, the owner of the land
immediately south of the southwestern portion of the cemetery, allowed us to cross his property
to access the LCRA right of way. PAI archeologists Doug Boyd and John Dockall conducted the
v

field survey using a backhoe provided by Evant Backhoe and Construction, LLC. The backhoe
operator was Aaron Giocobbi, who regularly digs grave shafts within the Oak Hill Cemetery and
other cemeteries in the area. His knowledge of the local geological features and soils proved to
be a valuable asset for this investigation. For PAI, Sandy Hannum created the maps and figures
and laid out the report, and Ross Fields edited it.

vi

INTRODUCTION
The Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA) proposes to rebuild the 40-yearold T219 electrical transmission line in Burnet and Lampasas Counties, Texas. A
portion of this line runs through the northwestern part of the City of Lampasas,
and within the city limits a 2,400-ft-long section of this line extends along the west
side of Oak Hill Cemetery. In this area, the 40-ft-wide transmission line corridor is
cleared of large vegetation and runs from south to north, parallel to and abutting
the western cemetery fence. The existing line runs down the center of this corridor,
with nine existing towers and poles in a straight line approximately 15 to 25 ft west
of the western cemetery fence. Large four-leg steel lattice towers are present at the
north and south ends of this segment, and in between are seven tall wooden pole
towers. These nine towers will be replaced with seven larger towers.
The core area of the Oak Hill Cemetery was a 10-acre tract, and it contains
burials that date back to the 1870s and possibly earlier. The cemetery was expanded
over the years to its current size of approximately 60 acres (City of Lampasas
2019a), and it now encompasses another smaller (1.2 acres) historic cemetery with
some burials dating to the 1860s and 1870s. Consequently, the LCRA and the Texas
Historical Commission (THC) determined that an archeological survey should be
conducted and include the use of mechanical excavations to search for possible
unmarked historic graves that might exist outside the known cemetery boundary.
In January 2019, LCRA contracted with Prewitt and Associates, Inc. (PAI),
to conduct the search for unmarked graves. On April 23, 2019, PAI archeologists
conducted an archeological survey of the 2,400-long section of the T219 line, using
a backhoe to excavate linear trenches or blocks at each of the seven proposed new
tower locations in close proximity to the cemetery. This report describes how this
survey was conducted and documents the findings of the search for unmarked
graves.
As shown in Figure 1, the Oak Hill Cemetery property extends on both sides
of Cemetery Creek in the northwestern part of Lampasas. The LCRA project corridor
is approximately 40 ft wide (12 m) and extends roughly north-south for a distance
of approximately 2,400 ft (731 m). This area encompasses 2.2 acres.
HISTORY OF THE OAK HILL CEMETERY AND
POTENTIAL FOR UNMARKED GRAVES
The City of Lampasas was incorporated in 1873, but its original settlement
and its earliest post office date to the 1850s (Rhoades 2010). The Oak Hill Cemetery
officially began as a 10-acre tract in 1872, as detailed in the brief narrative on the
Oak Hill Cemetery historical marker at the south entrance at 702 North Porter
Street:
Hartwell Fountain sold ten acres of land to the City of Lampasas in
1872 to establish this cemetery. Originally known as City Cemetery,
it was renamed Oak Hill Cemetery in 1908. The Ladies Cemetery
Association, a group of concerned Lampasas women, maintained the
cemetery from 1891 to 1948, when the city assumed responsibility.
1

2

Among those buried here are local pioneers, prominent business
people, veterans of wars including the Texas Revolution and the
Civil War, and their descendants (Texas Historical Commission
1992).

Oak Hill Cemetery

T219 Transmission Line Corridor

³

Huling-Anderson Cemetery or Old Lampasas Cemetery

Lampasas County

0

200

400

T E X A S

800

Meters
0

1,000

2,000

4,000

Feet

Figure 1. Project area map showing the T219 transmission line survey area adjacent to Oak Hill Cemetery. Map
base is USGS 7.5-minute Lampasas quadrangle (United States Geological Survey 2019).

3

Oak Hill Cemetery was expanded several times over the years (Jackson
1995a), and in 1967, the boundary was expanded to the east to its current size of
approximately 60 acres (City of Lampasas 2019a). This eastern expansion took
in a large area along and east of Cemetery Creek, including a 1.2-acre tract that
was originally called the Huling-Anderson Cemetery or Old Lampasas Cemetery
(Texas Historical Commission 2019a, 2019b). This small burial ground contains 38
marked graves, and 9 of them date to the 1860s and 1870s (Jackson 1995b; City
of Lampasas 2019b). The expanded Oak Hill Cemetery is now a perpetual care
cemetery as defined in the Texas Health and Safety Code.
It is common for old historic cemeteries to contain some unmarked graves,
and quite often they contain many unmarked graves in their older sections. The
Oak Hill Cemetery probably is no exception, and it likely contains unmarked graves
in some areas. The potential for unmarked graves is especially high in the HulingAnderson Cemetery. The marked graves there date from 1862 to 1948 (Jackson
1995b; Texas Historical Commission 2019b). Notably absent are graves that date
to the early settlement of Lampasas in the 1850s.
The Huling-Anderson Cemetery is about one-quarter mile east of the LCRA
transmission line, so the potential for unmarked graves within and near it is not
relevant to the current project. However, the potential for unmarked graves is high
in two other sections within the Oak Hill Cemetery that are immediately adjacent
to the LCRA transmission line (Figure 2). One area is the original 10-acre tract
acquired by the city in 1872. The date of the original 10-acre land transaction does
not preclude the possibility that there were already burials on this land when the
City of Lampasas acquired it. This 10-acre tract also encompasses a burial area
depicted on old cemetery maps as “Potters Field” (cemetery map and data provided
by Duane Griffith, personal communication 2019). This rectangular area is in the
northwestern corner of the current cemetery, and it extends about 330 ft to the
south and 110 ft to the east, encompassing ca. 0.8 acres. Typically, the term “Potter’s
Field” refers to a graveyard or cemetery section for burying unknown or indigent
people. Within the Oak Hill Potter’s Field section, there are many well-marked
graves, and some plots and grave markers are more elaborate than typical indigent
graves. However, there are also many graves marked with modest gravestones,
simple hand-carved gravestones, and even fieldstones with no markings at all. The
old Potter’s Field also contains many blank spaces—seemingly empty grave plots—
where unmarked graves may exist despite absence of surface evidence. Historically,
it was not uncommon for indigent burials to have had ephemeral grave markers
that deteriorated over time, temporary grave markers that fell and were removed,
or no formal grave markers at all.
The second area where unmarked graves are likely is in the southwest corner
of the cemetery, which was the African American burial ground. Marked as Section
B on cemetery maps, this area was historically used as a segregated burial ground
(Duane Griffith, personal communication 2019). Examination of this area revealed
several characteristics typical of African American cemeteries and segregated burial
sections, as described by Boyd and Norment (2016), including: probable grave locations
marked only by depressions; out-of-place vegetation anomalies; clusters of non-native

4

African American Section
Original 10-acre Cemetery
Potter's Field Section
Project Area

³

0

0

25

50

Meters
100 200

100

400

Feet

Figure 2. Map of Oak Hill Cemetery showing the locations of the original 10-acre cemetery plot, the Potter’s Field
section, and the African American burial area in relation to the T219 transmission line corridor.

5

plants (such as irises); graves lacking formal headstones but marked with ephemeral
surface evidence such as field stones, shells, and ceramic items; and graves marked
with homemade and vernacular headstones (including cast concrete markers with
free-hand inscriptions). There are relatively few obvious graves given the size of this
area, but many of the seemingly vacant plots could contain burials. Another odd feature
here is a linear cluster of limestone rocks piled adjacent to a tree and along a small
stream channel that follows through the section from northwest to southeast. This
pile may contain many stones that once marked grave locations but were cleaned up
by well-intentioned people who did not recognize them as grave indications.
One historic cemetery listed in the THC’s online Historic Sites Atlas is called
the Huling Slave Cemetery (Texas Historical Commission 2019c). There is no map
plotting for this cemetery, and its precise location is not known. The Atlas simply
says it is “W. of Lampasas.” Jackson (1995c) states that “Morgan Jordan is buried in
the old slave cemetery on the Bean place, a few miles west of Lampasas” and notes
that “The cemetery is located about 1/4 mile south of the Bean-Huling house…” It
is unclear where this old cemetery is located, but it is probably within a few miles
west of the Oak Hill Cemetery. Historically, however, the Huling Slave Cemetery
is a precursor to the African American burial section in Oak Hill Cemetery. While
the original 10-acre tract of the Oak Hill Cemetery was deeded to the City in 1872,
it did not include any burial area for African Americans. It is not clear when the
first burials occurred in the African American section or when the City formally
acquired this tract and added it to the cemetery.
In 1992, the original portion of the Oak Hill Cemetery was recorded as
archeological site 41LM18. As the site is currently recorded, it encompasses the
sections west of Cemetery Creek/Avenue E and comprises an area of approximately
40 acres. This site area excludes the old Huling-Anderson Cemetery and all of the
more-recent burial sections east of Cemetery Creek.
THE LCRA T219 TRANSMISSION LINE PROJECT AREA
The current LCRA easement that runs along the west side of Oak Hill
Cemetery was purchased from private landowners in 1979, and the T219 transmission
line was built in the same year. Figure 3 is an aerial photograph showing the location
of the nine existing electrical power poles in the survey area. Figure 4 is an aerial
photograph showing the locations of the seven proposed new towers. Three of the
proposed structures—22/1, 22/3, and 23/1—are in the same locations as existing
structures, and the other four are offset from the existing structures.
Historical evidence indicates that the western cemetery property boundary
has been established for a long time and that the LCRA T219 transmission line
corridor was never part of the cemetery. However, because the corridor is immediately
adjacent to the cemetery and the original core of the cemetery contains graves
dating back to at least the 1870s, LCRA recognized the possibility that unmarked
graves could be present beyond the cemetery’s western fence. Consequently, LCRA
determined that an archeological survey with subsurface trenching was needed to
confirm that there are no unmarked graves that would impacted by the replacement
of the electrical transmission poles.

6

Figure 3

Figure 3. Aerial photograph showing the location of the LRCA T219 electrical transmission line corridor adjacent to Oak
Hill Cemetery and the locations of the nine existing electrical towers and poles. Image provided by LCRA.

7

23/2

E

23/1

E

22/12

E

22/11

E

22/10

E

22/9
E

Proposed Tower

³

Project Area
0

20 40
Meters

E

80

22/7

E

Figure 4. Aerial photograph showing the seven proposed tower locations. Base image is 2016 aerial photograph
from the National Agriculture Imagery Program, Farm Service Agency, United States Department of Agriculture.

8

PREFIELD INVESTIGATIONS
Before beginning the survey, PAI archeologists conducted background
research in the Texas Historical Commission’s Archeological and Historic Sites
Atlas, reviewed geology and soils data for the project area, and conducted online
search for historical information pertaining to Oak Hill Cemetery. PAI then
prepared an antiquities permit application form and submitted it to the Texas
Historical Commission, along with a written scope of work describing the plan for
trenching at each of the nine proposed tower locations. The scope of work and permit
application were reviewed by the LCRA’s cultural resources supervisor (Andy Malof)
and the Texas Historical Commission’s cemetery programs coordinator (Jennifer
McWilliams) and archeology division reviewer (Tiffany Osburn). On March 12, 2019,
the Texas Historical Commission issued Antiquities Permit No. 8823 to principal
investigator Douglas K. Boyd.
Before fieldwork began, LCRA changed its design plans decreasing the
number of proposed new towers from nine to seven. Three of the seven towers were
to be placed in the same locations as existing towers, and this would require PAI
to offset the excavations slightly from the existing towers. For these locations, PAI
recommended a change to the scope of work that would allow for excavation of a
linear backhoe trench near each existing tower. These trenches had to be at least
10 ft away from each tower base, and the trenches could not be excavated more
than 5 ft deep. These stipulations were set to comply with safety requirements
recommended by LCRA engineers. The scope of work modification was approved
by LCRA and the Texas Historical Commission on April 2, 2019.
In the prefield stage, PAI obtained and examined historic aerial photographs
and maps showing the Oak Hill Cemetery area. These images were examined to
determine if the western boundary of the cemetery appeared to be well established
or if there were any hints that burials may have occurred beyond the boundary.
No improvements are visible within this corridor on the 1977 aerial photograph
in the Lampasas County soil survey (United States Department of Agriculture
2001:Sheet 38), but the map scale is too large to see small features. The 1954
Lampasas 7.5-minute quandrangle map (United States Geological Survey 1954)
shows the cemetery boundary to be the ca. 40-acre rectangular area that is defined
on the current cemetery maps.
Two historic aerial photographs were obtained. A 1941 aerial image from
the Tobin Aerial Archives (1941) shows the area west of the cemetery was cleared
of large vegetation and was presumably used for grazing livestock (Figure 5). No
unusual anomalies are visible along the western boundary of the cemetery. A 1953
aerial photograph (United States Geological Survey 1953) shows essentially the
same thing as the 1941 image. In both aerial photographs, the western boundary
of the cemetery is a straight tree line, indicating the presence of a well-defined
cemetery boundary fence.
About three weeks prior to the survey, PAI began contacting interested
parties regarding the upcoming investigation. The following interested parties were
notified: Jane McMillan, Ashley Underewood, and Roy Koon, Oak Hill Cemetery

9

C

E

e

m

et
e

ry

C

re

ek

E

E

E

E

E

E
E

³

Proposed Tower
0 25 50
Meters
0 100 200

100

400

Feet

Figure 5. 1941 aerial photograph of the Oak Hill Cemetery area from the Tobin Aerial Archives (1941). Drainages
have been added.

10

Association; Duane Griffith, cemetery crew leader, City of Lampasas; and Clydell
Wallace, Lampasas County Historical Commission. Mr. Griffith provided historical
information regarding the cemetery. He also provided critical and timely help with
planning of survey. PAI also contacted Jeff Jackson, a former Lampasas County
Historical Commission member and knowledgeable local historian, and he provided
additional information about the history of the cemetery.
Following Mr. Griffith’s advice, PAI contracted with Evant Backhoe and
Construction for backhoe services and arranged for Aaron Giocobbi to be the backhoe
operator. Mr. Giocobbi has dug many graves in Oak Hill Cemetery, and his knowledge
of the local geology and soils was valuable during the survey. About one week before
the survey was scheduled to start, PAI completed a Texas One Call to begin the
trench safety coordination process. The responses to the One Call ticket revealed
that there were no buried utilities within the T219 transmission line corridor.
GEOLOGICAL SETTING AND SOILS
The Geological Atlas of Texas (Bureau of Economic Geology 1976) shows the
project corridor is situated in an area dominated by Lower Cretaceous limestone
outcrops, with the precise location being at the interface between the Glen Rose
Formation to the west and the Travis Peak Formation to the east. Glen Rose
Formation outcrops are characterized as alternating beds of limestone, claystone,
and sandstone, with softer beds having eroded more quickly to form a classic stairstepped hillslope topography. The Travis Peak Formation contains limestones,
sandstones, and conglomerates, and some of these deposits are rubified due to high
iron content, which contrasts with the typical gray and white colors of Cretaceous
limestones in central Texas. The soil survey for Lampasas County shows that the
entire project corridor is classified as Brackett gravelly clay loam on 3 to 8 percent
slopes (United Stated Department of Agriculture 2001:17, Map Sheet 38). In a
typical profile, this soil unit consists of light brownish gray gravelly clay loam at
0–9 inches, pale brown clay loam at 9–17 inches, and white loam with interbedded
weakly cemented limestone and marly loamy earth at 17–60 inches. Given the
nature of these deposits, it was anticipated that any grave shafts or other intrusive
excavations through these layers would be easy to identify.
FIELD SURVEY METHODS AND RESULTS
The survey was done April 23, 2019. Following the modified scope of work,
fieldwork consisted of pedestrian survey and excavation of a backhoe trench or block
at or near the location of each of the seven proposed tower locations.
While one archeologist monitored the mechanical excavations, another
walked the entire corridor to search for anomalies and surface artifacts. The area
around each existing tower or pole was closely examined to search for artifacts that
might have been brought to the surface when the structures were installed in 1979.
A metal detector was used to scan the areas around some of the existing poles, but
this proved futile because abundant metal items are scattered in many parts of the
project corridor. Fence staples and wire fragments are particularly common and

11

indicate rebuilding of the cemetery boundary fence. At the time of the survey, the
wood and wire fence had just been removed in the southern portion of the project
area, and old cedar fence posts, rolls of mesh wire, and rolls of barbed wire were
observed inside and west of this segment of the survey corridor. Fragments of white
ceramic electrical insulators were found in several places, and whole insulators were
observed attached to fence posts with long nails, indicating that some segments of
the western cemetery boundary fence had once had electrical wires attached.
The pedestrian survey revealed that the transmission line corridor is
hummocky in many areas with numerous scatters of limestone rocks, reflecting
mechanical brush clearing. The corridor would have been mechanically bladed
when the transmission line was built in 1979, and LCRA maintains the easement
with regular brush clearing, most recently in 2003 (Andy Malof, personal
communication 2019). In addition to modern brush clearing, the 1941 and 1953
aerial photographs indicate a long history of clearing for agricultural purposes at
this location. The entire area west of the cemetery was cleared of trees in these
years, and clearing probably has occurred many times over the past century. This
clearing probably was done by various mechanical methods, such as bulldozing,
grubbing, cabling or chaining, roller chopping, and root plowing. Many of these
practices were developed in the 1930s and 1940s, and they cause significant impacts
to the limestone landscape of central Texas, commonly uprooting trees and shrubs
to create depressions and rock piles (Hamilton and Hanselka 2004; Welsh 1991).
Even hand grubbing for removal of tree root balls causes similar disturbances
and local topographic modifications.
Numerous artifact concentrations were observed in several areas of the
corridor, and these appear to represent discarded grave offerings. These materials
were most concentrated in the northern portion of the corridor, adjacent to the
original 10-acre cemetery tract. Historical or modern items observed there include
broken bottle glass (all machine-made bottles postdating 1904) and broken ceramic
sherds. The latter included undecorated whiteware, blue transfer-printed whiteware,
hand-painted whiteware, and coarse earthenwares with a variety of bright-colored
paints. The white vessels represented by these ceramics include plates and bowls,
while the earthenware vessels all appear to be large ornamental pots (i.e., flower
pots) and embossed pieces of decorative figurines. These materials were originally
placed as offerings on individual gravesites, and they subsequently were removed
during cemetery cleaning and thrown over the western fence line. Similar glass
and ceramic vessels were observed at many of the graves near the western fence.
In some cases, the bottles and ceramic vessels and objects were whole, but in other
cases these items were broken in place.
The locations of the seven excavations are shown in Figure 6, and the
excavations are summarized in Table 1. Square or rectangular blocks were excavated
at four locations where the proposed new towers are offset from the existing towers.
All four of these block excavations were centered on the precise new tower spot using
GPS data provided by LCRA. For the three locations where the proposed towers are
at the same locations as existing towers, linear trenches were offset at least 10 ft
from the existing towers. Two of the excavation areas actually consist of two trench

12

excavations each because it was not possible to excavate a single long trench in these
places. Trenches 1-South and 1-North were split apart to avoid an entrance gate in
a property fence, and Trenches 3-South and 3-North were excavated on either side
of an existing wooden power pole.
All excavations were completed using a John Deere 310C backhoe equipped
with a 2-ft-wide, smooth-bladed bucket. PAI archeologists directed and closely
monitored the mechanical excavation at each location. Each excavation proceeded
carefully by scraping no more than four to six inches of sediment with each pass.
Each excavation was documented with photographs and stratigraphic notes.
While historic artifacts and modern items were observed on the surface
in many parts of the project corridor, no historic artifacts or possible grave shaft
anomalies were observed in any of the trenches. As summarized in Table 1, the
trench excavations were terminated as soon as undisturbed layers of weathered
bedrock were observed or hard bedrock layers were encountered. The depths of
the excavated trenches varied from 2.0 to 4.5 ft, with three of the trenches dug to
depths of 4.0 to 4.5 ft.
Figure 7 is a high-resolution topographic map of the Oak Hill Cemetery
area along with a north-south surface cross section of the LCRA project corridor.
The vertical scale is exaggerated, but this cross section shows the trench locations
relative to the hills, slopes, and drainages. Intact alluvial soils were observed only in
Trenches 5 and 7, both of which are in a valley bottom or lower slope near a drainage.
Trench 5 was in a swale of an unnamed tributary, and Trench 7 was on a strath
terrace along Cemetery Creek, which is the largest drainage in the immediate area.
Figures 8–10 illustrate the nature of the shallow bedrock deposits throughout
the project corridor. Figure 8a shows the completed excavation of Trench 1-South,
looking east. The existing lattice tower (Structure 22/7) is to the right, and the wooden
power pole on the left is just outside the southwest corner of the cemetery. This trench
exposed a thin A horizon over white or reddish brown weathered bedrock. Figure 8b
shows the completed excavation of Trench 3-North with the backhoe excavating Trench
3-South in the background. Weathered limestone occurs all across the bottom of the
trench. Figure 9a shows the Trench 4 block excavation, looking west, when it was
approximately one-half complete. The excavation exposed weathered reddish-brown
limestone. Figure 9b shows the completed excavation of Trench 5, looking north. This
block excavation exposed alluvial soils on a strath terrace, with the alluvium coming
from an unnamed tributary located about 170 ft to the south. The white bedrock at
the bottom of the excavation is hard limestone, and its top undulates across the block.
Figure 10a shows the completed block excavation of Trench 6, exposing an undulating
surface of hard limestone bedrock with pockets of rubified weathered bedrock. Figure
10b is a view of Trench 7, looking south. This trench ran north-south between the
large lattice tower on the right and the northwest corner of Oak Hill Cemetery on
the left (tall fence on the property line). Trench 7 exposed up to 3.5 ft of alluvial soils
deposited by Cemetery Creek, which is about 100 ft behind where the photographer
was standing (to the north of the trench). The alluvium sits on top of a strath terrace,
and weathered bedrock was exposed at 4.0–4.5 ft.

13

E T7

T6
E

T5
E

T4
E

T3-North
E T3-South

E
E

Proposed Tower

³

Backhoe Trench or Block Excavation
0

0

100

20 40
Meters
200

T2

80

400

Feet

Figure 6. Map showing locations of backhoe trenches and excavation blocks.

T1-North
T1-South
E

North of
proposed Tower
22/7 (10 ft away
existing 4-leg
lattice tower)

At location of
proposed Tower
22/9

East and south
of proposed
Tower 22/10
(existing wood
pole tower)

East and
north of
proposed Tower
22/10(existing
wood pole
tower)

1-North

2

3-South

3-North

Trench
No.
1-South

Location
Relative to
Proposed Tower
North of
proposed Tower
22/7 (10 ft away
from existing
4-leg lattice
tower)

Trench
Orientation
(degrees)
E-W
(250)

N-S
(340)

N-S
(340)

N-S
(336)

N-S
(328)

Trench Size
(length x
width in ft)
40x2

23x2

30x16

18x2

18x2

2.5

2.5

4.0

2.0

Maximum
Depth (ft)
4.0

Approximate
Surface Elevation
(ft above mean
sea level)
Stratigraphic Description
1104–1105
Upper zone from 0 to 1 ft is an A horizon of dark gray to dark
grayish brown (10YR 4/1 to 4/2) silty clay loam or clay loam
with subangular limestone gravels from pea to pebble size. B
or Bk horizon of variable thickness, increasing gravels in light
brownish gray to weak red (10YR 6/2 to 10R 5/3) clay loam.
Clear boundary between the A and B horizons. C horizon
consists of highly fractured and weathered-in-place limestone
bedrock encountered at varying depths from 3 to 4 ft.
1126–1127
Upper zone from 0 to 1 ft is an A horizon of dark gray to dark
grayish brown (10YR 4/1 to 4/2) silty clay loam or clay loam
with subangular limestone gravels from pea to pebble size. B
or Bk horizon of variable thickness, increasing gravels in light
brownish gray to weak red (10YR 6/2 to 10R 5/3) clay loam.
Clear boundary between A and B horizons. C horizon consists
of highly fractured and weathered-in-place limestone bedrock
encountered between 1.5 and 2.0 ft deep.
1124–1139
Upper zone from 0 to 1 ft is an A horizon of dark gray to dark
grayish brown (10YR 4/1 to 4/2) silty clay loam or clay loam
with subangular limestone gravels from pea to pebble size. B
or Bk horizon of variable thickness, increasing gravels in light
brownish gray to weak red (10YR 6/2 to 10R 5/3) clay loam.
Clear boundary between A and B horizons. C horizon consists
of highly fractured and weathered-in-place limestone bedrock
encountered at a depth of 1.5 ft below the surface.
1157–1158
Upper zone from 0 to 1 ft is an A horizon of dark gray to dark
grayish brown (10YR 4/1 to 4/2) silty clay loam or clay loam
with subangular limestone gravels from pea to pebble size.
B or Bk horizon of variable thickness is present from 1 to 2.5
ft, with increasing gravels in light brownish gray to weak red
(10YR 6/2 to 10R 5/3) clay loam. Clear boundary between A
and B horizons. C horizon consists of highly fractured and
weathered-in-place limestone bedrock.
1157–1160
Upper zone from 0 to 1 ft is an A horizon of dark gray to dark
grayish brown (10YR 4/1 to 4/2) silty clay loam or clay loam
with subangular limestone gravels from pea to pebble size. B
or Bk horizon of variable thickness, with increasing gravels
in light brownish gray to weak red (10YR 6/2 to 10R 5/3) clay
loam. Clear boundary between A and B horizons. C horizon
consists of highly fractured and weathered-in-place limestone
bedrock at 2.0 to 2.5 ft.

Table 1. Summary of backhoe trenches and excavation blocks

20 ft to west
fence

16 ft to west
fence

6 ft to west fence

6 ft to west fence
near southwest
corner

Closest Point
to Cemetery
Boundary Fence
7 ft to south
fence near
southwest corner

14

At location of
proposed Tower
22/12

At location of
proposed Tower
23/1

Southeast of
Tower 23/2
(existing 4-leg
lattice tower)

5

6

7

4

Trench
No.

Location
Relative to
Proposed Tower
At location of
proposed Tower
22/11

Table 1, continued
Trench
Orientation
(degrees)
–

–

–

N-S
(340)

Trench Size
(length x
width in ft)
16x16

15x15

18x18

28x2

4.5

3.5

3.5

Maximum
Depth (ft)
3.0

Approximate
Surface Elevation
(ft above mean
sea level)
Stratigraphic Description
1134–1137
Upper zone is an A horizon of 1 to 1.5 ft of brownish dark gray
to dark grayish brown (10YR 4/1 to 4/2) silty clay loam or clay
loam with pieces of subangular weathered limestone. B or Bk
horizon consists of 1 to 1.5 ft of in situ weathered limestone
and clay loam with a weak red color (10R 5/3). An R horizon
is primarily unweathered limestone, but it is extensively
fractured in the bottom of the excavation block at 3 ft below
the surface.
1125–1126
From 0 to 1.7 ft is a brown (7.5YR 5/2 to 4/2) clay loam to
loam with no inclusions other than roots and rootlets. This
upper zone is an A horizon formed in alluvial sediment from
an unnamed tribuary. It has a diffuse lower boundary and
grades into a B or Bk horizon, a reddish brown (5YR 4/4)
clay that has common calcium carbonate nodules. The R
horizon, consisting of undulating hard limestone bedrock, was
encountered at approximately 3.2 to 3.5 ft
1144–1147
Heavily weathered and fractured limestone present at
surface. Upper 0.5 to 0.8 ft is a thin A horizon of dark grayish
brown (10YR 4/2) very gravelly silty clay loam that is dry
and loosely consolidated. The underlying B or Bk horizon is
reddish brown (5YR 4/4) clay loam, dry and loosely compacted,
with abundant fragments of angular to subangular weathered
limestone (pea size to cobble size). This zone varies in
thickness across the block but is much deeper in the central
portion because of surface fractures in the underlying
limestone bedrock. C horizon is angular to subangular
weathered and fractured limestone, from pea to cobble size,
with dry loose clay loam filling the interstices. The depth of
the undulating C horizon varied from 0.7 ft deep at the south
edge of the excavation block to 3.4 ft deep on the west edge.
1131–1137
Upper zone from 0 to 3.5 ft is a light gray (10YR 7/1) silty
clay loam, loosely compacted with no inclusions. This is an
A horizon formed in alluvial sediment from Cemetery Creek
(located ca. 100 ft to the north). Lower zone from 3.5 to 4.0 ft
is a pale red (10R 7/4) friable silty clay to silty clay loam with
common calcium carbonate nodules. This is a Bk horizon with
rubified sediment and calcium carbonate nodules that formed
in situ. The trench excavation was terminated at 4.0 to 4.5 ft
deep when reddish gray to white (2.5Y 6/1 to 8/1) weathered
bedrock limestone (C or R horizon) was encountered.

11 ft to
northwest corner

9 ft to west fence

7 ft to west fence

Closest Point
to Cemetery
Boundary Fence
16 ft to west
fence

15

16

C

North

em

et
er
y

C

T7

re
ek

T6

T5

T4

T3-North
T3-South

T2

³

0 25 50

T1-North
T1-South

100

Meters
0

100 200

400

South

Feet

1150
1140
1130
1120
1110
1100

Trench

North

T7

T6

T5

T4

T3N T3S

T2

T1N T1

South

Figure 7. High-resolution LIDAR topographic map of the Oak Hill Cemetery area and a north-south surface cross
section of the LCRA T219 transmission line corridor. Topography is shown using 2-ft contour intervals, and the cross
section vertical scale is exaggerated. Data are from the Texas Natural Resources Information System (2014).

Figure 8

a

b
Figure 8. Photographs illustrating selected trench excavations. (a) View east of completed
excavation of Trench 1-South; (b) view north of completed excavation of Trench 3-South with
backhoe excavating Trench 3-North in the background.

17

18

Figure 9

a

b
Figure 9. Photographs illustrating selected trench excavations. (a) View west of Trench 4 with the excavation block onehalf complete; (b) view south of Trench 5 with the block excavation completed.

Figure 10

a

b
Figure 10. Photographs illustrating selected trench excavations. (a) View west of Trench 6 with the block excavation
completed; (b) view south looking upslope at the completed Trench 7 excavation.

19

20

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The Lower Colorado River Authority is rebuilding the T219 electrical
transmission line in Burnet and Lampasas Counties, and a portion of the line runs
along the western edge of the historic Oak Hill Cemetery in Lampasas. Because of
the possibility that unmarked historic graves could be present in the corridor and
could be impacted by construction of new towers, LCRA contracted with Prewitt
and Associates to excavate trenches at or near the locations of the seven proposed
towers located near the western cemetery boundary. PAI archeologists found no
unusual soil anomalies or any other evidence that might hint at the presence of
graves at these locations. The excavations prove that there are no unmarked graves
at the locations of four proposed tower structures (22/9, 22/11, 22/12, and 23/1), and
they indicate that unmarked graves are highly unlikely at the other three (22/7,
22/10, and 23/2). Consequently, PAI recommends that no further archeological
investigations are warranted and that the LCRA T219 transmission line rebuild
project be allowed to proceed as planned.
The results of this survey cannot be taken to mean that there are no
unmarked graves present anywhere within the LCRA’s T219 transmission line
corridor. While the combined archeological and historical evidence suggests that
the western boundary of Oak Hill Cemetery has not changed over time, this does
not preclude the possibility that unauthorized burials could occurred beyond the
established cemetery boundary. It is beyond the scope of this study, but additional
archival research could help reveal a more precise history of how the cemetery
evolved over time and space. In particular, deed research to establish the chain of
title for all the cemetery properties would be helpful in reconstructing the history
of Oak Hill Cemetery.

21

REFERENCES CITED
Boyd, Douglas K., and Aaron R. Norment
2016
African American Graveyards, Pioneer Cemetery, and the African Diaspora. In
Bioarcheological Investigations of Nineteenth-Century African American Burials at the
Pioneer Cemetery (41BO202) in Brazoria, Texas, by Aaron R. Norment, Jeremy W. Pye,
Cory J. Broehm, and Douglas K. Boyd, pp. 141–241. Reports of Investigations No. 180.
Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin. Archeological Studies Program Report No. 174.
Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation, Austin.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1976
Geologic Atlas of Texas, Brownwood Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University
of Texas at Austin.
City of Lampasas
2019a Oak Hill Cemetery. Electronic document, https://www.lampasas.org/121/Cemetery,
accessed May 4, 2019.
2019b

Oak Hill Cemetery Association. Electronic document, https://www.lampasas.org/268/
Oak-Hill-Cemetery-Association, accessed May 4, 2019.

Hamilton, Wayne T., and C. Wayne Hanselka
2004
Mechanical Practices prior to 1975. In Brush Management: Past, Present, and Future,
edited by Wayne T. Hamilton, Allan McGinty, Darrel N. Ueckert, C. Wayne Hanselka,
and Michelle R. Lee, pp. 17–32. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Jackson, Jeff
1995a Oak Hill Cemetery. In Lampasas County Cemeteries 1865–1995. Lampasas County
Historical Commission. Online USGENWEB entry. Electronic document, http://files.
usgwarchives.net/tx/lampasas/cemeteries/oakhill01.txt, accessed May 4, 2019.
1995b

Old Lampasas Cemetery (Huling/Anderson Cemetery). In Lampasas County Cemeteries
1865–1995. Lampasas County Historical Commission. Online USGENWEB entry.
Electronic document, http://files.usgwarchives.net/tx/lampasas/cemeteries/oldlampasas.
txt, accessed May 4, 2019.

1995c

Huling Slave Cemetery. In Lampasas County Cemeteries 1865–1995. Lampasas County
Historical Commission. Online USGENWEB entry. Electronic document, http://files.
usgwarchives.net/tx/lampasas/cemeteries/huling.txt, accessed May 4, 2019.

National Agriculture Imagery Program
2016
Aerial photograph of Lampasas area from the National Agriculture Imagery Program,
Farm Service Agency, United States Department of Agriculture. Available from: https://
www.fsa.usda.gov/programs-and-services/aerial-photography/imagery-programs/
naip-imagery/index.
Rhoades, Alice J.
2010
Lampasas, Tx. In Handbook of Texas Online. Texas State Historical Association.
Electronic document, http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hfl01, accessed
April 25, 2019.
Texas Historical Commission
1992
Oak Hill Cemetery. Texas Historical Marker No. 3646. Texas Historical Commission
online Texas Historic Sites Atlas, Atlas No. 5281003646. Electronic document, https://
atlas.thc.state.tx.us/, accessed May 4, 2019.
2019a

Oak Hill Cemetery. Online Texas Historic Sites Atlas, Cemetery ID No. LM-C006. Texas
Historical Commission. Electronic document, https://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/, accessed May
4, 2019.

22
2019b

Old Huling-Anderson Cemetery. Online Texas Historic Sites Atlas, Cemetery ID No.
LM-C033. Texas Historical Commission. Electronic document, https://atlas.thc.state.
tx.us/, accessed May 4, 2019.

2019c

Huling Slave Cemetery. Online Texas Historic Sites Atlas, Cemetery ID No. LM-C050.
Texas Historical Commission. Electronic document, https://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/,
accessed May 4, 2019.

Texas Natural Resources Information System
2014
Bandera and Lampasas Counties LIDAR, January 25, 2014. Strategic Mapping Program
(StratMap), Texas Natural Resources Information System. Available from: https://tnris.
org/stratmap/.
Tobin Aerial Archive
1941
Lampasas County, aerial photograph taken on August 11, 1941. Licensing available
from P2 Energy Solutions, San Antonio, Texas, at https://www.p2energysolutions.com/
tobin-data/tobin-imagery.
United States Department of Agriculture
2001
Soil Survey of Lampasas County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station.
United States Geological Survey
1953
Lampasas County, aerial photograph taken on August 22, 1953. National Aerial
Photography Program, Earth Resources Observation and Science Center, United States
Geological Survey. Available from USGS Earth Explorer at https://earthexplorer.usgs.
gov/.
1954

Lampasas, TX. 7.5-minute quandrangle map. United States Geological Survey. Digital
version from the Perry Castañeda Library Map Collection, University of Texas at Austin.
Available from: https://legacy.lib.utexas.edu/maps/.

2019

Lampasas, TX. 7.5-minute quadrangle map. National Geospatial Program, United
States Geological Survey. Available from: https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/
national-geospatial-program/national-map.

Welsh, Tommy G.
1991
Brush Management Methods. Publication No. Texas A&M AgriLife Extension Service,
the United States Department of Agriculture, and the County Commissioners Courts
of Texas. Electronic document, http://counties.agrilife.org/gillespie/files/2014/01/BrushManagement-Methods.pdf, accessed May 23, 2019.

