A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT
OF THE PROPOSED GILLESPIE TO MASON
COUNTY LINE TRANSMISSION
CORRIDOR
Gillespie County, Texas

Tec.hrvLc.a.l BuUetin. No. 58

By:

Bruce A. Nightengale

Principal Investigator:

David S. Dibble

A report submitted to Lower Colorado River Authority in partial fulfill­
ment of the terms of Purchase Order #144332, and to the Texas Antiqui­
ties Committee in compliance with Antiquities Permit 252.

June 1982

ABSTRACT
Between Feb4uany 15 and Ap4it 26, 1982, ~he TexahA4eheotogical
SWt1Jey, The UniveJL6dy 06 Texah ~ AMUn, eonduaed a ~ 4uoWtee
~Wl.vey and monito4ed eo~~uetion in~he 14-mi. tong G~upie ~o Mahon
Cou~y Line ~a~~¢ion co~do~ 60~ ~he Lowe4Coto4ado R~ve4
A~howy.
FL6~een p4ew~0~c ~du We4e 4ec.o4ded; two We4e pJr..obabty
muli.i..-Me eamp 4au and ~h-iJt;teen We4e co~ide4ed ~o be W~c. p40­
c.Wteme~ a4eah.
Two a4eah 06 eonc.e~~ed ~de de~dy We4e de6~ned;
bo~h c.an be ~b~ed ~o ~hw pJr..oUmdy ~ pe4manen~ W~e4 40WtC.U.
LCRA eo~~uc.tion ~W4 We4e advi4ed 0 6 ~ae to~o~ and,
wheneve4 6eahibte, 6ottowed ~o~u duigned ~o m~YL1m~ze ~he e66ec.~ 06
heavy equipme~ on ~he c.uUWtat dep04w. Th4ee 4du, whe4e
avoidanee Wa.6 not p0.64ibte, We4e 4y~temmc.atty mapped and a4ti6a.w
eoUee~ed 040111 ~he ~g~-o6-wa.y.
No 6Wtthe4 ~uung Wa.6 c.o~ide4ed
neCU4a4Y beeaLL6e 06 ~he gen~y ~paMe and ~hattow n~e 06 ~he
c.uUWtai ma;t~ a.nd the heavily e40ded eha.4a&eJr.. on ~he .ta.nd4ea.pe.

CO,.!;lr::!!L _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

---

COUNTY

GILLESPIE

COUNTY

Figure 1

- - - LCRA Transmission Line

o

2

3

miles
All site numb<lrs IGL-·) are preced«I bV '41'

4

,
Actapted from Tex4S State Department of Highways
Jnd PubH(; Tr~l1$port..tlon GM1.ral Highway MaP.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

......·....
·
·

Introduction
Environmental Background
Archeological Background
Survey Methods
Biface Categories
Site Descriptions
Summary and Conclusions
References Cited
.

...

.··..

..··
....
··..

1
1

3

....
....

.

6
8
8
18

21

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.
Figure 2.

Project and Site Location Map
Examples of Artifact Types ••••

. . . . . . . iii

. . 19

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1.

Artifact Provenience, 34 Collected Specimens . . . . . .

iv

9

1

INTRODUCTION
Between February 15 and April 26, 1982, The Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, conducted cultural resource
surveying and monitoring along a fourteen-mile, seventy-five-foot wide
transmission line corridor for the Lower Colorado River Authority
(Fig. 1). Segments of the corridor were surveyed as right-of-entry to
the land was acquired. The line runs northwest from a substation 1.5
miles northwest of Fredericksburg to the Mason County line. The com­
plete length of LCRA line is parallel to a WTU transmission line leased
by the LCRA. The field surveying and monitoring were conducted by TAS
staff members Bruce A. Nightengale and D.B. Comstock. Site field
inspection was carried out by Dr. David S. Dibble, Director of the Sur­
vey and Principal Investigator.
The objectives of the survey were
1) to locate and define any cultural resources which may be
adversely affected by construction;
2) to evaluate the significance of these resources;
3) to recommend means of minimizing any adverse effects of con­
struction upon the identified resources;
4) to monitor recommended methods for minimizing impact; and
5) to recommend further work, where necessary, which extends
beyond the scope of the present study.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The fourteen-mile-long LCRA Gillespie to Mason County line trans­
mission corridor is located on the Edwards Plateau along the southern
edge of the Llano uplift. Elevations range from 1680 feet AMSL at the
northwest end to 2000 feet AMSL atop an upland interfluvial divide just
northwest of Highway 2323.
Geology
Surface geology is primarily made up of members of the Edwards
chert-bearing Cretaceous limestone and the Glen Rose Cretaceous lime­
stone formations, except at the far northwestern end of the line where
the underlying geology is comprised of members of the Riley and
~lilberns Cambrian sandstones.
The latter .are on the southern edge of
the Llano uplift. According to Sellards and others (1932), the uplift
is structurally a dome " ••. on which the Pre-Cambrian, which in the
adjacent region is 4,000 or 5,000 feet below sea level, is more. than
1,000 feet above sea level, the total doming being 5,000 or 6,000
feet."Due to erosion of the overlying formations, it appears topo­
graphically as a basin (Sellards 1978: 30).

2

Soils
Soils in the study area are of the Tarrant-Brackett association
(Soil Survey Staff 1975). These are very shallow to shallow, clayey
to loamy, undulating to hilly soils on uplands and formed on limestone
and adobe. Since the limestone layers are more resistant to
weathering than the marl, the landscape has a benched appearance
(op. eit.: 2). Individual soil series within the Tarrant-Brackett
association are described in the Site Descriptions section in refer­
ence to specific archeological sites.
Hydrology
The survey line traverses an upland divide between the Llano
River Basin to the north and the Pedernales River Basin to the south.
Both flow to the east where they eventually drain into the Colorado
River; the study area lies in the Colorado River Basin.
Numerous drainages cross the survey line. Draining into the
Llano River in the northern area are: the intermittent Marshall Creek,
the spring-fed, perennial Cherry Spring Creek, and the spring-fed
(although intermittent where it crosses the corridor) Crabapple Creek,
and two intermittent tributaries of Cherry Spring Creek -- Little
Creek and Rocky Creek. On the southern part of the line, numerous
intermittent tributaries flow southwest to the perennially flowing
Barons Creek. This drainage parallels the line one kilometer to the
west and eventually flows into the Pedernales River. The transmission
line traverses most of the drainages from north to south.
Many springs are located in the vicinity of the survey line. The
majority are to the west; the closest, Cherry Spring, is located 200
meters west of the line and about 7 kilometers southeast of the Mason
County line. Springs are known as settlement areas for both prehistoric
populations and incoming historic settlers (Brune 1975). Since none of
these springs are located within the survey limits, it could not be
ascertained whether or not settlement took place in these areas.
The primary aquifer for the area is the Edwards-Trinity (plateau),
a water-bearing limestone aquifer encompassing most of Gillespie
County (Brune 1975).
Climate
According to the 1980-1981 T~x~ Almanac, the average annual
rainfall for Gillespie County is 27.45 inches. Maximum rainfall occurs
during the month of September, an average of 3.72 inches; the minimum
during December, an average of 1.32 inches. The mean annual.tempera­
ture is 65 degrees, with a low of 36 degrees in January and a high of
95 degrees in July. Temperatures are based on a sixty-seven-year
average and rainfall on a thirty-year average.

3

Flora and Fauna
The study area is situated in the juniper-oak-mesquite savanna
vegetation region (Bureau of Economic Geology 1977). This region is
typically an overstory complex of live oak, shinnery oak, juniper and
mesquite (Gould 1975: 7). The climax grasses are represented by
switchgrass, indiangrass, canebluestem, silver bluestem, little
bluestem, side oats, grama, Canada wild rye, common curley mesquite,
and buffalograss (ibid). The survey team, with the able botanical
observations of staff member D.B. Comstock, noted shinnery oak, live
oak, mesquite, kidneywood, agari ta, prickly pear and twist. leaf yucca.
Gillespie County falls within Blair's (1950: 112-115) Balconian
Biotic Province. Fifty-seven species of mammals are listed for the
province. They include white tail deer, opossum, striped skunk, coyote,
armadillo and gray fox. Also included are some thirty-six species of
snakes and sixteen species of lizards. Diamondback rattlers, water
snakes and racers, along with crevice and tree lizards, are a few in
the area but were not to be seen at this time of year. The predomi­
nant .mammal noted in the study area was the white tail deer, which
has become small in size purportedly from mutation brought about by
overpopulation.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
To date a total of 136 sites have been recorded, in Gillespie
County (Texas Archeological Research Laboratory files). Sites were
recorded on the basis of information supplied from surveys, assess­
ments and testing done by landowners, collectors and various profes­
sional and amateur groups.
The first site recorded in the county is the Lehmann Rockshelter
(41GLl). This stratified site was first excavated in 1936 by A.J.
Woolsey for The University of Texas (TARL files) and later reported by
J. Charles Kelley (1947). Located northeast of Doss, Texas, on Onion
Creek, it contained evidence of prehistoric occupations dating from
the Middle Archaic to the Late Prehistoric, a period of roughly 3000
years. Other archeological investigations include the LBJ Park Project
(Tunnell and Jensen 1968; Ing 1970). Three 1800s historic homesites
and four prehistoric sites were recorded during this survey. Subsur­
face testing took place at the historic sites to expand architectural
knowledge of ,the ,structures. Subsurface testing at 41GL7 revealed two
hearths and a flake concentration. Surficial observations at one of
the prehistoric sites (41GL10) indicated a probable Middle Archaic to
Late Prehistoric occupation. In 1975, during a later survey of land to
be added to the Park, four more prehistoriC sites were found by Ing
for Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) (TARL files). Excava­
tion at one of these sites (41GL21, the Hop Hill Site) was done by a
University of Texas at San Antonio field school in 1978 under the
direction of Joel Gunn (Gunn and Mahu1a 1978). In 1978, a survey of
Enchanted Rock Natural Area (Greer 1979) recorded 248 archeological

4

localities -- 36 in Gillespie County and 212 in Llano County. Most of
the sites were lithic scatters with the exception of two historic sites
in Gillespie County. Occupation at these sites was from the Late
Paleoindian period to Historic times, a span of approximately 8000
years. Re-investigation of the Enchanted Rock State Natural Area (an
area smaller than Greer's 1978 survey) by Assad and Potter (1979),
resulted in the combination of several of Greer's sites and added eight
new sites in Gillespie County and 58 in Llano County. Two sites were
tested in Llano County at this time -- 41LL76 and 41LL254. 41LL76
indicated a Late Prehistoric occupation and 41LL254 had evidence of
Early and Middle Archaic occupation with a possible Late Prehistoric
component.
At the request of TPWD, two sites found during the first and
second surveys of the Enchanted Rock area were tested by Prewitt and
Associates (Kotter and Nance 1980). Both are located in Gillespie
County (41GL57 and 41GL91). 41GL57 contained two occupational periods,
Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric; 41GL91, a multicomponent site
(Historic/Prehistoric) revealed mixed prehistoric deposits also datable
to the Late Archaic and the Late Prehistoric.
The Hill Country Archeological Society has been very active in
Gillespie County, reporting and testing sites. The landowner at one
Site, 41GL40, told the Society that the site had contained a broken
Clov~ and a complete Ptainv~0W point, both Paleoindian artifacts
(TARL files). Four National Register sites and one Historic District
are located within the county. Three are associated with Lyndon B.
Johnson: his birthplace - 41GL18, the first school he attended ­
41GL135, Junction School, and his ranch and home - 41GL136 (TARL files).
The Historic District is in downtown Fredericksburg (National Register .
files) •
In 1973 limited testing by TAS (Gilmore 1973) for the National
Park Service at the Lyndon B. Johnson National Historic Site complex
located formerly extant structures. Results of the testing revealed
evidence of a barn and the possible remains of a smokehouse at the
birthplace site.
The fourth, 4lGL52, is the Historic site of Fort Martin Scott.
This site was assessed in 1979 by J.W. Clark for the Texas Historical
Commission (TARL files) and will be discussed further in the Historic
period section of this report.
As a result of surveys done by the Texas Department of Highways
and Public Transportation in 1981, three lithic and burned rock scatter
sites have been recorded along Highway 87 south of Fredericksburg
(TARL files) and a non-stratified multicomponent (Middle-Late Archaic)
site (41GL17, No-Name Creek Site) was tested along Highway 16 north of·
Fredericksburg (Denton 1976).
.
Archeological work done in the Central Texas area, where time
diagnostic projectile points were identifiable within a datable con­
text, has resulted in a cultural chronology proposed by Prewitt (1981).
All dates are Prewitt's.

5

Paleoindian Period (prior to 10,000 to 8,500 B.P.)
The evidence for this, the earliest known cultural period in
Texas prehistory, is based in Central Texas on surface finds and exca­
vated material. Buried cultural deposits associated with this period
have been unearthed by the Levi Rockshelter on the Pedernales River
(Alexander 1963), the Loeve Site (Eddy 1973; Prewitt n.d.), Tombstone
Bluff on the San Gabriel River (Prewitt 1974a, n.d.b.), and 41BX52 on
the outskirts of San Antonio (Henderson 1980). Stone tool types known
to be assignable to the Paleoindian occupation of the region are Clov~,
Fo~am, Plainv~ew, Scottcbtu66, M~~ve, Ango4Zuha and Galandhina
lanceolate points.
Direct stratigraphic associations for the traditionally accepted
subsistence of Paleoindian groups, that of dependence on now-extinct
Pleistocene megafauna, is lacking in Central Texas. It is assumed
that here their economy depended upon hunting and gathering, a mode of
existence which was retained until the time of contact with the first
Europeans.
Archaic Period {8,500 to 1,250 B.P.}
The Archaic hunters and gatherers of Central Texas were highly
dependent on variable environmental factors -- the availability of
water, game and edible vegetation. Tool kits included contracting and
expanding stem dart points, food processing tools such as manos and
metates, and various auxilIary implements. Based on the changes that
took place within the tool kit and other cultural markers, such as the
increase and decrease of burned rock middens, a cultural construct con­
taining eleven chronological phases for the Central Texas area has been
proposed by Prewitt (1981). This chronology combines and expands on
earlier syntheses (Weir 1976a, 1976b; Prewitt 1974a, 1974b, 1976,
n.d.a., n.d.b.) and earlier stUdies (Kelley 1947; Jelks 1951; Suhm,
Krieger and Jelks 1954; Johnson 1967) and adds new phases to accommo.
date various changes. These eleven phases correspond to previous
chronologies as follows:
Driftwood
Twin Sisters
Uvalde
San Marcos
Round Rock
Marshall Ford
Clear Fork
Oaka11a
Jarrell
San Geronimo
Circleville

1400
1750
2250
2600
3400
4000
4600
5000
6000
7000
8500

-

1250
1400
1750
2250
2600
3400
4000
4600
5000
6000
7000

B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.
B.P.

Late Archaic
Middle Archaic

Late Paleoindianl
Early Archaic

This chronology is considered by Prewitt to be a base for the
expansion of ideas and as new archeological data appear the chronology
is subject to revision.

6

The Late Prehistoric (1250 to 200 B.P.)
This period, referred to by Prewitt (1981) as the Neoarchaic
stage in Central Texas, is one of gradual change." This-became apparent
with the replacement of the atlatl and dart by the bow and arrow.
Pottery made its appearance during the later part of this period and,
in parts of Texas, although not readily documented in Central Texas,
incipient agriculture emerged. Certain time diagnostics are used to
delineate subdivisions within the period, the G~nbUfty and Scailohn
arrow points characterize the Austin Focus (1250 - 650 B.P.) and the
P~diz and Ctinnton arrow pOints, along with the bone-tempered Leon
Ptaln pottery, characterize the Toyah Focus (650 - 200 B.P.). These
are foci of the Central Texas Aspect (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954) and
phases of the Neoarchaic (Prewitt 1981). Prewitt (1981: 68, 74) has
proposed that the appearance of cemeteries during the Neoarchaic
a
chronological delineator for this period in Central Texas.
The Historic Period (European contact to present)
This period has its beginnings with the first European contact -­
the journey of Alvan Nunez Cabeza de Vaca across Texas in about 1535.
At this time the historic Tonkawa were still roaming the area that is
now Gillespie County. European expansion into the county did not
actually begin until the l800s. Gillespie County was established in
1848 from Travis and Bexar Counties and named for capt. Richard A.
Gillespie (Webb 1952: 690). The town of Fredricksburg, the county seat,
was settled in 1846 during a German colonization movement begun in 1844
(Jordan 1966). At this time German immigrants were moving north and
west from Indianola to settle granted land in the Hill Country (ibid).
Fredricksburg, founded by John O. Meusebach, was a way station on the
road to the grant land (OPe cit.: 43-45). At the time of this expan­
Sion, the westernmost by Texas settlers thus far, bands of Comanche
roamed the area. In 1847, Meusebach negotiated the Meusebach-Comanche
Treaty (Webb 1952: 690), however, due to further Comanche hostilities,
Fort Martin Scott was erected by the U.S. Government in 1848 to protect
the settlers. This fort, two miles south of Fredricksburg, was
abandoned in 1866. It is now a National Register site, 4lGL52.
Though the railroad never came through Fredricksburg, it became
a commercial center stemming from its location on the San Antonio to
El Paso Stage route and a supply stop on the El Paso or emmigrant roads
(ibid).
Present-day commercial interests include ranching, farming, and
limestone and fine-grain red granite quarrying.

SURVEY METHODS
Prior to the inception of the survey, appropriate USGS topo­
graphic quadrangle maps and site files at TARL were examined for pre­
viously recorded prehistoric and historic sites
the vicinity of the

7

transmission line. One site, 41GL2, is located on a tributary of
Cherry Spring Creek. This prehistoric site is approximately 900 meters
west of the line and will not be affected by construction. National
Register of Historic Places site files were also checked at the State
Historical Commission for sites that might be endangered by construc­
tion. No nominees to that register are in the vicinity of the proposed
transmission line corridor.
The transmission line corridor if 75 feet wide. Forty feet (20
feet on either side of the center line) will be cleared. The LCRA line
parallels an already existing WTU Lease Line to the east. Since this
lease line is readily visible and lies 100 feet from WTU center line
to LCRA center line, it was used as a bearing. Survey of the corridor
was accomplished by walking serpentire transects with one person on
either side of the center line. All sites were recorded, mapped and
photographed, then plotted on 1:24,000 USGS topographic maps and on a
1:200 plan map provided by the LCRA. The sites were also plotted on
the construction foreman's plan map and flagged with blue flagging
tape in the field to enable the foreman to be constantly aware of the
location of the sites.
Due to the construction timetable set by the LCRA, a combined
cultural resource survey and monitoring procedure was initiated by TAS.
Procedures for this type of survey had been previously established by
Ray D. Kenmotsu (Kenmotsu and Freeman 1980) and TAS and were familiar
to the LCRA construction crews. Briefly, these procedures depend on
infield decisions to minimize impact on sites from center line and
right-of-way clearing.
In cases where sites lay in the middle of the right-of-way, the
bulldozer was directed around the site area so that further assessment
of the site could be accomplished. Shovel probes were used where feasi­
ble since all sites, with the exception of 41GL51, were lying on
eroded cobbly clay, clay gravel, or limestone bedrock surfaces with
pocketed soil deposits. Site 41GL51 was heavily deflated. Twelve
probes at the site showed no sign of subsurface cultural deposits. At
sites where probes were not feasible, animal burrowing backdirt and
cut banks were checked for cultural deposits.
Three different methods were used to either minimize impact to
sites or to extract necessary archeological data from sites in danger
of impact. At sites 41GL145, 146, 149 A and B, all of which lay in
the right-of-way, artifacts and site boundaries were plotted from a
relocatable datum with a Silva Ranger compass and measured from datum.
At 41GL145 and 146 all artifacts collected from the right-of-way were
plotted on an LCRA 1:200 aerial plan map. At 41GL149, which was
cleared at the landowner'S insistence, all artifacts were collected
from the right-of-way_but not plotted on a plan map because the map had
not been received at that time.
At sites 41GL150, 151, 152, 153, 155, 156, 157, 158 and 159 bull­
dozers were routed through areas of the site where artifact density
was minimal or non-existent. At site 41GL153 the landowner allowed the
LCRA to go off the right-of-way enough to minimize impact to the site.
At sites 41GL147, 148 A, B, and C, and 154 no impact was caused
by clearing. 41GL147 and 148 A, B, and C are off the cleared right-of­

8

way and 4lGLl54 is in such a position that it could be bypassed. All
routes were prominently flagged so that later construction and main­
tenance crews would know to avoid these cultural areas.
All sites were given permanent site numbers in the trinomial
numbering system, ~.e.: 41=Texas, GL=Gillespie County, l=number of
site found in the county. Thus, for example, site 4lGL13 is the
thirteenth site found within Gillespie County, Texas. All sites were
photographed. These, and all collected artifacts and artifact sketches,
site descriptions and notes are housed at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, The University of Texas
at Austin.

BIFACE CATEGORIES
The following biface categories are adopted from those used by
Briuer etal. (1981: L-l, L-2). The explanations have been shortened,
with a few word changes. It should be noted here, as did Briuer, that
the Type I and II categories correspond to what Crabtree (1972: 85)
refers to as preforms. These are bifaces in the initial shaping stage
which are the fI • • • unfinished, unused form of the proposed artifact"
(ibid.). Examples are illustrated in Figure 2.
Type I - Roughoat or T~ck Bi6ace
Rudimentary stages of manufacture. Possibly a core. Coarse
flaking by percussion. General thickness in relation to overall
proportion.
Type II - P~e6onm T~ck Bi6ace
Intermediate stages of manufacture. Direct percussion flaking,
often more finely executed than on Type I. Larger than, and with­
out refinement of, the completed tool.
Type
- Fini..6hed or T~nned Bi6ace
Final stages of manufacture. Fine flaking. Usually thin in pro­
portion to length - width size. Implement has specific, recog­
nizable utility or familiar shape.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
(All material

chert unless otherwise stated.)

41GL145
This light lithic scatter is located 1 kilometer southeast of
East Cherry Spring-Road and 4 kilometers northwest of Highway 2323.
The site is atop, and on the northwest slope of, a small knoll over­

! TABLE

1.

- -J

.I
ii

41Gl145

8

./!
~

1;1

4)

.§

iii

£

...

f!

,

Site No.

(all material is chert)

Thirty-four Collected Artifacts

'c:

::7

i
t

~

X
X

9

Use Wear

§

!

Q.

!1

c:

i

8

X
X
X

X
X
X
X

,41G1146

I!!
X

X

~"
it:'

X
X
X
X

'"

!1
i
.8
."

X

5.3
1.2
1.2
2.4
1.4
4.4

4.0
3.9
10
5.7
4.6
3.5
9.5

2.9
3.8
6.8
4.0
3.8
5.5
6.1

0.8
0.7
2.8
0.8
1.1
2.3
2.8

8.3
8.7
15
6.6
10
15
6.3

8.0
7.3
6.8
8.0
7.7
10
3.5

3.0
3.0
3.1
2.0
2.8
3.8
0.8

X

20
12.9
15
15.4
8.9
13
9.7
6.0

12
7.4
6.6
6.1
7.4
6.8
7.2
9.B

4.1
2.5
2.3
2.6
2.5
3.0
2.0
1.7

X

4.8

3.4

0.6

X

X

'x

X

X

X

X

X

x
x

x

X
X
X
X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

X

X

X

41G1155
X

X

X

X
X
X
X
X
X·
X

10.7
4.8
4.9
8.4
6.3
13.5

I!!

a

Comments

X

X
1 chip collected for use wear analysis
1 eccentrically shaped scraper
Distal fragment
Fragment
Bifaca Knife fragment
Fragment
Utilized flake fragment

Secondary flake
Fragment
Fragmel'l't

Distal point missing
X

A Palmillas-like with distal portion and one
shoulder missing.
Lunate shaped fragment

X

X
X

X
X

3.2
4.9

4.1
3.7

1.0
1.2

X

X

X

6.8

2.8

0.9

Secondary flake w/use along 1 lateral edge

X

X

8.7

6.1

2.2

This multi-purpose tool exhibits wear from
scraping, cutting & use as a spoke, shave
like tool.

3.6

2.4

0.6

This unidentified dart point is missing the
distal portion.

X

41GL157

X

X
X

41G1153
X
X
X
X
X

X

X

X

X

!

:If

4.8
3.5
3.7
6.0
4.0
10.5

X

X

X

~

-£
;p

-£

x

X
X

X
X

~

~

~

Q.

X

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

11

X

X

B

I

!1
i

X.

X

X
41 G1149A

~

x

X

IF 16

~

X
X

X

J'

.8

.i

X

X

IF 12

Cortex

SoutCil

X

'x

'~:
"

,.

10

looking the confluence of Little Creek and one of its prime tributaries
approximately 150 meters to the west. Site area is 30 meters east-west
by 50 meters north-south.
Artifacts included two Biface II, one Biface III fragment, three
cores, a uniface side scraper, one possible end scraper, burned rock,
and flakes. Some flakes showed signs of utilization.
Soil series is Doss silty clay (Soil Survey Staff 1975), a
shallow upland soil formed in calcareous marls and weakly cemented
limestone. Soil at this site is heavily eroded with a surface exposure
of limestone fragments and silty clay. Shovel probes were impossible
due to soil conditions. No subsurface cultural material was in evi­
dence in burrow backdirt.
Vegetation consisted of live oak, juniper, agarita, yucca, prickly
pear and short grasses.
Recommendations: Since this site contained no subsurface material
and little in the way of diagnostic material or complete tools, all
collected artifacts were plotted on 1:200 aerial plan maps and measured
to a relocatable datum. Artifacts lying in the right-of-way were col­
lected. Right-of-way clearing was then allowed with caution advised
for the remainder of the site. No further work is recommended.
41GL146
This lithic scatter is located 100 meters southeast of 41GL145 on
a low knoll. The tributary mentioned in 41GL145 separates the two
sites. This tributary flows from the southeast, meanders around 41GL146
to the east, then flows west, then northwest, into Little Creek
approximately 300 meters northwest of 41GL146. Material is scattered
atop and on the eastern slope of the low knoll (Fig. 1) over an area
75 meters east-west by 60 meters north-south.
.
Cultural material at the site included four Biface III fragments,
one Biface I, one Biface II, a biface knife and three cores, and a
small number of flakes, some of which exhibit use wear.
Soils and vegetation are the same as at 41GL145. Slopewash had
redeposited some flakes on the slopes and left the same surface exposure
as at 41GL145. Shovel probes would not penetrate more than 2 centi­
meters. After checking rodent backdirt for signs of cultural material
and making an inventory of the scant surficial remains, the same pro­
cedures and recommendations were used as those for 41GL145. Both
41GL145 and 146 were located in wooded areas in the middle of the
right-of-way. 41GL146 will have a tower constructed in the central por­
tion of the site. Due to the sparse and shallow nature of the sites,
no recommendations for testing were made; therefore an accurate scale
map was necessary for retaining site information with a datum off the
right-of-way and artifacts accurately plotted. This was done both at
41GL145 and 146.
41GL147
This very light lithic scatter, approximately 20 meters by 20
meters, is located 100 meters southeast of 41GL146 atop and at the

11

pediment of a low knoll. Material is exposed in gullies caused by
runoff flowing into a primary tributary of Little Creek that runs east­
west north of the site and separates .41GL146 and 147. This is the same
tributary that winds around 41GL146 and south of 41GL147 (Fig. 1).
Artifacts were four biface cores, two Biface I, one quartzite
cobble with battering and a small number of flakes. The flakes and one
Biface I have been exposed by gullying along the tributary terrace.
Soils at the site are Luchenbach Clay Loam. These are deep up­
land non-calcareous soils. Bedrock, exposed 30 centimeters below sur­
face in the runoff gullies, is also outcropping on the knoll top.
Vegetation at the site consists of live oak, juniper, agarita and
short grasses.
This site is located on the eastern edge of the right-of-way and
will not be affected by clearing or construction. All artifacts have
been plotted to a relocatable datum. No further work
recommended.
41GL148
This site has been divided into three areas: A, B, and C. Those
factors that are common to all three will be described first and fol­
lowed by individual factors.
The three areas are located on the western valley margin slope of
a northwest-southeast flowing tributary of Little Creek. This same
tributary flows by 41GL145, 146, and 147 and has its headwaters
approximately 200 meters south of Area C atop an upland interfluvial
divide (Fig. 1).
These lithic scatters have been exposed by downslope erosional
processes that have formed low benches in the resistant limestone bed­
rock. Cultural material is found lying on these gravelly limestone
benches along the valley margin slopes.
The soil series listed for the site are of the Brackett-Tarrant
Association (Soil Survey Staff 1975). These are hilly, shallow upland
soils. The Brackett series, on the lower parts of the landscapes, are
calcareous soils formed in interbedded cobbly clay with an estimated
45 percent by volume of clay cobbles (Soil Survey Staff 1975). Runoff
for this series is rapid. As stated, all artifacts were found lying
on a deflated surface. It appears that much of this soil has eroded
downward toward the tributary. Therefore, what was seen on the surface
was the extent of cultural material.
Vegetation consisted of live oak, shinnery oak, juniper with
agarita, prickly pear and short grasses.
Artifacts and site areas were:
Area A. Cores with secondary and tertiary flakes, over an area
about 13 meters east-west by 30 meters north-south;
Area B. Cores, four Biface I and one primary and several
secondary flakes, over an area about 30 meters east­
west by 35 meters north-south; and
Area C. Cores, one Biface II, one Biface III, one uniface.side
scraper, and secondary and tertiary flakes, over an area
approximately 20 meters east-west by 60 meters north­
south.

All three areas appear to be lithic procurement areas since most of the
artifacts are in the primary reduction sequence stage.
Recommendations: None of the areas in site 41GL148 are in
danger from right-of-way clearing. An inventory of artifacts has been
taken along with sketches and photographs of the areas. Avoidance is
recommended for any further maintenance and construction crews. The
areas have been adequately flagged with engineers' tape and plotted on
LCRA field maps. No further work is recommended.
41GL149
This lithic scatter has been separated into two areas, A and B,
each of which are approximately 30 meters east-west by 30 meters north­
south, and which are demarcated by a small east-west drainage of Rocky
Creek. Area A is located approximately 75 meters northwest of Rocky
Crrek on a low rise overlooking the creek. Area B is located 150
meters northwest of Rocky Creek and also on a rise above Area A.
41GL149
situated 1 kilometer due east of Highway 2323 (Fig. 1).
Artifacts at Area A include four cores, one Biface I, one Biface
, and flakes, mostly secondary with two exhibiting retouch. At Area
B three Biface I, one Biface II, and one Biface III were found, plus
three cores with secondary and tertiary flakes. This site is an
isolated area within a much larger lithic scatter paralleling the creek.
The ground surface is littered with scattered chert nodules.
Soil at the site is of the Lindy Cobbly clay loam series which is
a moderately deep, non-calcareous upland soil (Soil Survey Staff 1975).
The A horizon is made up of cobbly clay loam with 20 percent limestone·
cobbles and chert gravels (ibid). Shovel probes at the site found a
maximum of 3 centimeters of cobbly clay loam over clay. No subsurface
material was noted either in the tributary cut-bank or in rodent back­
dirt. Groundcover consisted of young post oak, black jack oak, and
short grasses.
Recommendations: Due to the landowner's insistence, the site was
bulldozed. All artifacts within the site bounds were plotted with a
Silva Ranger compass and paced back to a relocatable datum. Artifacts
in the right-of-way were collected. The site was photographed and
plotted on aerial maps. Avoidance of the site peripheral to the right­
of-way is recommended. No further work is recommended.
41GL150
This lithic scatter is located on the valley margin mid-slope of
a southeast-flowing drainage that drains into Barons Creek approximately
2 kilometers south of the site. The site is situated 200 meters east
of Highway 87 (Fig. 1), and covers an area about 30 meters east-west
by 40 meters north-south.
Artifacts at the site are ten cores, two Biface II, one Biface
medial fragment, and secondary and tertiary flakes. Chert nodules
litter the surface.
The soil series is of the Tarrant Rock Outcrop Association (Soil
Survey Staff 1975). This upland cobbly clay soil consists of 75 per­

13

cent Tarrant soil, a cobbly clay with 45 percent limestone cobbles and
stones, and 25 percent rock_outcrop. The soil surface at the site
made shovel probes ineffectual.
Vegetation consisted of scattered live oak, juniper, agarita,
twist leaf yucca and short grasses.
Recommendations: The site is situated in a relatively open area
with few trees that require clearing. The major concentration lies
east of the right-of-way. An avenue through the site area was deter­
mined on the basis of the lack of artifacts along the route. Bull­
dozers were directed through this area of the site, thereby causing
little impact. This avenue was flagged with blue flagging tape so that
later construction crews could follow the same route through the site.
No further work is recommended for this site.
4lGLl51
4lGLl5l is a lithic scatter located on the western bank of
Marshall Creek. Cultural material has been exposed in four gullies
which cut into the bank and run down to the creek. These gullies have
eroded the surface soil deposits down to red clay and the underlying
reddish sandstone bedrock. The site is situated 700 meters southeast
of the Mason County line (Fig. 1), and measures roughly 24 meters
east-west by 73 meters north-south.
This is one of the few sites found with diagnostic artifacts
during the survey. These include one f~nd dart point (distal
portion missing), one Monteti dart point (distal. portion miSSing) and
one Seatto~n arrow point (distal portion missing). Other artifacts
were one Biface III fragment, one unifacial side scraper and a large
quantity of secondary and tertiary flakes. Based on the diagnostic
points it appears the site was occupied during the Late Archaic and the
early part of the Late Prehistoric. No subsurface cultural material
was found on the site. Most of the cultural debris appears to have
been swept into the gullies.
Soil series at the site are of the Cobb Fine Sandy Loam (Soil
Survey Staff 1975). This moderately deep to deep upland soil is com­
posed of fine sandy' loam over sandy clay loam. Erosive processes have
stripped off much of the fine sandy loam A horizon. Shovel probes, to
test for subsurface cultural material and soil depth, showed a decrease
in theA horizon as the probes moved towards the creek. Most of the
cultural materi~l appears to have been washed onto the four exposed
bedrock areas, the only areas where cultural debris is apparent. One
possible reason for this is the lack of grass cover during periods of
minimal rainfall. (This information was gained from a rancher.)
Vegetation consisted of mesquite, juniper, live oak, elm, prickly
pear, agarita, cholla and short grasses. The vegetation is scattered
with most of the trees along the creek bank.
Recommendations: Most of this site extends along the creek bank
off the right-of-way and only a small portion of it extends into the
right-of-way. -There was no evidence of subsurface cultural material in
the right-of-way. There was no evidence of subsurface cultural material

14

in the right-of-way or off and no further work is recommended at this
site. The LCRA was allowed to proceed with clearing.
41GL152
This lithic scatter is located 100 meters south of 41GL148,
Area C. The
is situated on a series of limestone benches ascending
southward to the rim of the interfluve. The ground surface is
littered with chert nodules which extend over the whole interfluve.
Exposed limestone bedrock is also apparent along this series of benches
and atop the interfluve. These lithic scatters, or procurement sites,
are isolated work areas within a larger, intensively used lithic pro­
curement area bounded by the Chert-bearing limestone of the Edwards
formation.
Artifacts observed at the site were five Biface I, and secondary
flakes.
Soil is of
Brackett-Tarrant Association previously explained
for site 4lGL148. At 4lGL152 the "benching" effect associated with
this series is more apparent. Surface soils are minimal.
Vegetation consisted of shinnery oak, juniper, agarita and short
grasses.
Recommendations: Due to the limited quantity of surface cultural
material and the lack of any subsurface material, no further work is
recommended at this site. The LCRA bulldozers were easily routed
around areas of concentration within the site.
41GL153
This dispersed lithic scatter is located on top of an inter­
fluvial divide approximately 700 meters south of 4lGL152. Cultural
material, amid a large concentration of chert nodules and limestone,
lies in an area about 25 meters east-west by 55 meters north-south and
is on the western slope of a southeastward flowing drainage of Cherry
Spring Creek that has its headwaters atop the divide. In some cases,
artifacts appear to be washing downslope, as evidenced by accumula­
tions of flakes and tools
the wash (Fig. 1).
Artifacts included 22 Biface I, three cores and secondary flakes.
This is the largest lithic procurement area found along the line. A
surface collection was made of representative material.
Soils at the site are represented by the Tarrant Soil Series.
These upland, cobbly clay soils are found on the tops of limestone hills
with cobbles and stones covering the surface. Again, shovel probes
were impossible due to soil matrix.
Vegetation is composed of scattered live oak, agarita, prickly
pear, twist leaf yucca and short grasses. The site is in the open
with a few live oak on the periphery and on the site proper.
Recommendations: With the permission of the landowner to leave
the right-of-way, the site was easily circumvented by routing bull­
dozers through an area where few, if any, artifacts were located. The

15

few trees that needed clearing were hand-cut. The sample of artifacts
from the Site, sketches, and photographs will supply later investiga­
tors with necessary information. Avoidance by construction and mainte­
nance personnel is recommended, but no further work is recommended.
41GL154
This small, 10 meter by 10 meter lithic scatter is located on the
limestone bedrock rim ofa southeast flowing drainage of Cherry Spring
Creek. The site is situated approximately 150 meters southeast of the
headwaters for this drainage and 100 meters south-southeast of
41GL153.
Artifacts are three Biface I and ten secondary flakes. Material
has apparently accumulated on the rim from downslope wash.
Soils at the site are of the Tarrant Soil (undulating) Series
which is explained for 41GL153.
Vegetation consists of live oak, juniper, agarita, prickly pear,
twist leaf yucca and short grasses.
Recommendations: Material lies on bedrock. This, combined with
the paucity of artifacts at the site, makes further testing unnecessary.
The LCRA bulldozers were easily routed around the site area. Blue
flagging tape was used to mark this route for later construction crews.
No further work is recommended.
41GL155
This lithic scatter
another site that contained time diagnos­
tic material. It is situated on the northwest limestone rim of Cherry
Spring Creek on an open bench. The site extends perpendicularly to
the LCRA right-of-way. Cherry Spring is 800 meters south of the site
and 41GL154 is 400 meters northwest of the site. Here again material
seems to be washing from upslope (northwest) with most artifacts
located in areas of sheet wash (Fig. 1). The site area is about 70
meters east-west by 40 meters north-south.
Artifacts observed at the site include one dart point fragment
(distal portion missing), p~ or William-6, three Biface III
fragments, two cores, one side scraper, and secondary flakes, some
with use wear. The chert nodule scatter atop the interfluve is visi­
ble on the northern slopes that rise approximately 50 meters distance
from the site center. The one diagnostic, the P~/W~am-6 dart
point, is dated in Central Texas to the later part of the Middle
Archaic.
Soil at the site is of the Tarrant Soil (undulating) Series.
This is the same series as at 41GL153 and 154. Lack of soil deposition
prohibited shovel probes.
Vegetation consists of scattered live oak, prickly pear, agarita
and short grasses.
Recommendations: Though this site contains only a small quantity
of finished tools, it has more than the surrounding procurement areas.

- - - - - -.................

-~

16

Most of the artifacts are located off the right-of-way and the few
found in the right-of-way were collected. Since the site is situated
on an open bench, the bulldozer was directed to stay on the right-of­
way with the blade up to minimize impact. No further work is
recommended for this site due to the lack of subsurface material and
erosional nature of the artifact deposition. Avoidance of areas
peripheral to right-of-way construction and maintenance crews is re­
commended.
41GL156
This very dense concentration of lithic resource material and
artifacts is located on top of an interfluvial divide formed by down­
cutting of the limestone formation on the west and east by unnamed
north flowing drainages of Cherry Spring Creek. The site is situated
250 meters east of Cherry Springs and 600 meters southeast of 41GL155.
A WTU substation lies on the northeast periphery of the site area.
Chert nodules and tabular chert are scattered across the surface of the
Site, an area of about 38 meters east-west by 213 meters north-south,
and there is a large concentration at the southeast and western edges
of the site. Interspersed throughout the southeastern portion are
Biface I tools, cores and flakes. No finished flake tools were found.
The southeastern portion of the concentration lies in an open area
used for cattle feeding, surrounded by live oak. The western portion
extends onto the right-of-way at the northwest end of the survey line
but few artifacts were found in the actual right-of-way_
Soil series are the Tarrant Soils (undulating) which are also
found and described for 41GL153, 154, and 155. Soil in the southeast
concentration was non-existent and soil in the northwest portion was
shallow, cobbly clay.
Vegetation consisted of scattered live oak, shinnery oak,
mesquite, agarita, twist leaf yucca with clumps of short grasses.
Recommendations: No fUrther work is recommended for this site.
Bulldozers were routed around the southeast concentration and allowed
to clear the remaining section of the right-of-way since little if any
impact will be caused by clearing or tower construction.
41GL157
A large, 90 meter by 90 meter lithic scatter, the site is loca­
ted on the top and slopes of a southwest trending ridge between two
southwest flowing, unnamed tributaries of Barons Creek which lies
approximately 700 meters southwest of the site. The transmission line
crosses the pediment of the slope where numerous artifacts have been
washed in from upslope. Due to the lack of any erosion retardant ground
cover, the area has been heavily affected by sheet wa~h. Artifacts are
constantly being redeposited along benches at the crest and pediment of
the slope projection.
Artifacts observed were fragments of Bifaces I, II, and III, one
each, some burned rock, chert nodules strewn over the entire area, one

17

core, and debitage. Artifacts in the right-of-way were less numerous.
The only artifact collected is one secondary flake with use wear along
one lateral edge which was in the right-of-way.
Soils at the site are represented by the Brackett Series (hilly)
(Soil Survey Staff 1975). These are shallow, calcareous loam soils on
uplands which are formed in soft limestone and marly earth. Weathering
has created a stairstep or benching effect on the landscape (~b~d.).
Ground surface at the site was heavily deflated to a composition of .
limestone fragments and loam. Shovel probes were impossible. Cut
banks along the face of the bench exposed along Old Highway 87
(abandoned) revealed no evidence of cultural material.
Vegetation consisted of juniper, live oak, yucca and isolated
clumps of short grasses.
Recommendations: Due to the heavily eroded nature of the Site,
as evidenced by the artifact deposits and the sharp surface rilling, the
LCRA was allowed to clear the right-of-way. No further work is
recommended for this site.
4lGL158
A very light lithic scatter located on the bench and northwest
slope of a southwest flowing tributary of Barons Creek, the site area is
approximately 40 meters by 40 meters. The tributary has been dammed at
Highway 87 (Fig. 1) and the creek lies approximately 500 meters south­
west of the site.
Here again, as at 41GL157, the surface has been heavily deflated
by sheet wash, which has exposed the limestone bedrock in some places
on the slope. The limited number of artifacts are exposed downslope
with no apparent accumulation on the tributary terraces. Material on
the bench is limited and is exposed in rills and areas of sheet wash.
Artifacts observed include two Biface II tools, two utilized flakes,
and a small quantity of scattered flakes and chips. No nodules were
observed at the site.
Soils and vegetation are the same as at 41GL157. It should be
noted here that soil deposition along the tributary terrace at the
slope toe from both coluvial and alluvial processes is deep. No evi­
dence of cultural material was found in the cut banks of the tributary.
Recommendations: Due to the heavily eroded nature of this site
coupled with the evident redepOSition of artifacts on the slopes and
bench, no further work is recommended. LCRA crews were allowed to
clear the right-of-way since site integrity is questionable and arti­
facts are so dispersed that clearing will have minimal impact.
41GL159
This light lithic scatter is located across from 4lGL158 on the
opposite slope of the same southwest flowing tributary. The site is
slightly below mid-slope on a bench and on the slope to the tributary
below the bench. The site is approximately 600 meters northwest of
the Gillespie substation (Fig. 1) and is about 40 meters east-west by
40 meters north-south.
.

18

As with the last two sites -- 41GL157 and 158 -- this site has
been greatly affected by sheet wash erosion. Redeposition of artifacts
is apparent on the slope with few artifacts remaining on the bench.
The major portion of this dispersed lithic scatter is located to the
east of the right-of-way. Artifacts include two Biface III fragments,
One completemano (on the bench) and secondary flakes.
Soils and vegetation are the same as those at 41GL157 and 158.
Recommendations: Due to the highly disturbed surficial nature of
this site, no further work is recommended. The majority of the site
lies east of the right-of-way. As few artifacts lay in the right-of­
way, the LCRA was allowed to clear it.
ISOLATED FINDS
Isolated finds are artifacts found alone without evidence of asso­
ciated cultural material. All isolated finds were plotted on 1:24,000
USGS quadrangle maps, analyzed in the field and not collected. Three
exceptions were IF-I, an unclassified dart point found off the LCRA
right-of-way, and IF-2 and IF-16. The first was sketched, the second
two collected.
A brief description of each follows. All material is chert.
IF-l Unclassified dart point (sketched)
IF-2 Tertiary flake
IF-3 Biface III fragment
IF-4 Flake
IF-5 Scraper
IF-6 Two secondary flakes
IF-7 Core
IF-8 One flake with attrition and one secondary flake
IF-9 Biface II
IF-IO Biface II with attrition
fragment
IF-II Biface
IF-12 Uniface scraper/gouge, a multipurpose tool (collected, Fig. 2f)
IF-13 Core
IF-14 Biface I
IF-15 Biface I
IF-16 Dart point, distal portion missing -- unidentified (collected,
Fig. 2d)
IF-17 Biface III fragment
IF-18 Biface.III fragment
IF-19 Secondary flake

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
As a result of the fourteen-mile survey, fifteen prehistoric
sites and nineteen isolated finds were identified. Lithic scatters were
the predominant site type with one basic subtype -- lithic procurement

19

c

b

a

Y2 ACTUAL SIZE

d

e
f
ACTUAL SIZE

F I GURE 2 . Examp les o f arti f a c t types.
( 4lGL153) , b) biface I ( 4l GL149B ), c) b i face
d) biface I II u ntype d da r t p o i n t (IF -1 6), e)
(4lGL157), f) large mUlti-pu r pose fla ke t ool

a) co r e
II (4lGL149A),
ut i lized flake
(IF-12) .

20

areas. This latter type of site was defined on the basis of lithic
material at the site which in all cases consisted of Biface I and II
tools in various stages of initial reduction: cores, primary and
secondary flakes, and nodular and/or tabular chert outcrops. In some
cases, biface preforms and cores were transported from the procurement
areas to campsites for further reduction when needed. At any stage in
the reduction sequence, from core to tool, the by-products such as
flakes or the biface (core) itself might be used as a tool. Evidence
for transport and use of tools is apparent at some sites close to the
procurement areas. Two good examples are sites 41GL145 and 146. At
each of these Sites, cores, biface preforms and flakes were found
alongside finished bifaces and unifacial tools. Analysis of these
tools -- both biface and uniface -- indicates use wear along edges
attributable to cutting or scraping. These sites were probably multi­
functional campsites where a number of activities were performed.
The areas of site density are apparent: the nine sites in and
around the interfluve, and three sites along the eastern valley margins
of Barons Creek (Fig. 1). In both of these areas, settlement was
within range of what are present-day perennially flowing drainages and
an actively flOwing spring -- Cherry Spring Creek, Barons Creek and
Cherry Spring, respectively. Lithic resources are abundant in both
areas. This, combined with the probability of game being attracted to
water ( these were flowing prehistorically) would make these areas
very attractive for prehistoric settlement. Though no large base camps
were located along the line, the possibility of their existence off the
line is quite high. Further investigation along Cherry Spring Creek
and Barons Creek might prove to be fruitful. The area immediate to
Cherry Spring is another promising area for prehistoric settlement.
Based on the site density of the Cherry Spring Creek and Barons Creek
areas, prehistoric activity in the region was high. Using these
results with further research done in the region could elucidate pre­
historic settlement patterns in Gillespie County and Central Texas.
In conclusion, erosional processes have bad varied effects on
site integrity. Sites along the upland interfluve were found on lime­
stone gravel or bedrock benches with shallow soil catchments. Sites
found along the slopes had been affected by slope wash with extreme
cases apparent at sites 4lGL157, 158, and 159 (Fig. 1) where cultural
material had been redeposited in the LCRA right-of-way. Cultural
material at 4lGL15l (Fig. 1) was lying on deflated surfaces exposed by
gully erosion along the terrace. In all cases, these erosional pro­
cesses have affected site recommendations.
These recommendations also took into account distribution of sur­
ficial and subsurface cultural material, soils, site integrity and site
locality when evaluating impact. No site recorded by this survey
appears to meet the eligibility criteria for the National Register of_
Historic Places. Right-of-way clearing was allowed with caution through
sites where routes of least impact were established. Where sites did
not merit further testing but destruction was immiment t various methods
were used to retain as complete a record of the sites as possible.
Further work by the Lower Colorado River Authority in the vicinity of
these sites has been allowed, but caution is recommended when in the
vicinity of these sites.

21

REFERENCES CITED
Alexander, Herbert L.
1963
The Levi Site:

A Paleo-Indian Campsite in Central Texas.

Amenican Antiquity 28(4): 510-528.

Assad, Christi and Daniel R. Potter
1979
An Intensive Archeological Survey of Enchanted Rock State
Natural Area, Llano and Gillespie Counties, Texas.
Center for Archeological Research, A~cheologicai Sanvey
Repo~ No. 84, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Science 2(1): 93-115.

The Texa¢ Joanna!

on

Briuer, Fred L., George B. Thomas, David S. Dibble and Jack M. Jackson
1981
Fort Hood Archeological Resource Management Program.
Standard Operating Procedures, FY 81 Project. Unpub­
lished manuscript on file at Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Brune, Gunnar
1975
Major and Historical Springs of Texas.
Water Development Board.

Repo~

189.

Texas

Bureau of Economic Geology
1977

Land Re6oance6 06 Texa¢.

1981

Geologic A:tia¢ 06 Texa¢, Auotin Shed.

The University of

Texas at Austin.
Clark, J.W.
n.d.

TARL files.

Crabtree, Don E.
1972
An Introduction to Flintworking.

Occa¢wna! PapeJt.6 06
the Idaho S:ta.te UniVeJt.6Uy Muoeurn No. 28, Pocatello,

Idaho.
Crawford, Daymond
n.d.
Texas Highway Department.
Dallas Morning News
1980- Te~ Almanac.
81

TARL files.

Belo Corporation, Dallas, Texas.

22

Denton, Joe T.
1976
No-Name Creek Site, A Terrace Site of the Middle and Late
Archaic Period in Gillespie County, Texas. R~ponx 7.
State Department of Highways and Public Transportation
Publications in Archeology, Highway Design Division.
Eddy, Frank W.
1973
Sa1vag~

AJtch~oiogy

in

-th~ Lan~ponx Ru~voiJt

V'£'(:'-tUd,

Report submitted to the National Park
Service by the Texas Archeological Survey, The University
of Texas at Austin.
C~~ T~x~.

Gilmore, Kathleen K.
1973
Archeological Investigations at the Lyndon B. Johnson
Birthplace National Historic Site, Gillespie County,
Texas. ReA MItch R~ponx 2. Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Gould, Frank W.

1975

Th~ G~~e6

06

T~x~.

Texas A&M University Press.

College

Station, Texas.
Greer, John
1979

w.

Enchanted Rock, A NatUral Area. SUltvey 14: 117-166. An
Archeological Reconnaissance of the Enchanted Rock Area
of Llano and Gillespie Counties, Central Texas. Lyndon
B. Johnson School of Public Affairs, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Gunn, Joel and Royce Mahula
1977
Hop Hill: Culture and Climatic Change in Central Texas.
Center for Archeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Speciai Reponx 5.
Henderson, Jerry
1980
Preliminary Report of the Texas Highway Department Exca­
vations at 4IBX52 - The Paleo Component. Te~ Altcheo­
iogy, Newsletter of the Texas Archeological SOCiety 24
(2): 14-15.
lng, J. David

1970

Archeological Investigations, Lyndon B. Johnson State
Park. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Interpretive
Planning Section.

1975

TARL files.

Jelks, Edward B.
1951
Relationships Between Foci of the Edwards Plateau Aspect:
A Distributional Analysis of Diagnostic Projectile Point
Types from Archeological Sites in the Marshall Ford Dam
Reservoir, Tra:vis County, Texas. Master's .Thesis on
file at the Library, The University of Texas at Austin.

23

Johnson, Leroy Jr~
1967
Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic Cultures of
Central and Southwestern Texas. Texas Memorial Museum,
Bulletin 12, Austin.
Jordan, Terry G.
1966
Genman Seed ~n Texa4 Soil, Imm~g~ant Fanm~ ~n N~ne­
teenih CentWty TextU. The University of Texas Press,
Austin, Texas.
Kelley, J. Charles
The Lehmann Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of Toyah,
1947
Uvalde and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin Ob .:the Texa4
A~eheolog~cal and Palean.talog~cal So~e.ty, Vol. 18.
Kenmotsu, Ray D. and Martha Doty Freeman
Cultural Resource Survey and Monitoring in the Fayette
1980
to Lytton Springs Transmission Corridor, Bastrop,
Caldwell and Fayette Counties, Texas. Texas Archeologi­
cal Survey, Reoe~ch Repo~ 76, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Kotter, Steven M. and Linda A. Nance
1980
Archeological Assessments at 41GL57 and 41GL91.
Enchanted Rock State. Natural Area, Gillespie County,
Texas. Repo~ 06 Inveo~gation& la, Prewitt and Asso­
ciates, Inc., Consulting Archeologists, Austin, Texas.
August 1980.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974a Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Reo~eh Repa~ 49, The University of Texas at Austin.
1974b

Upper Navasota Reservoir: An Archeological Assessment.
Texas Archeological Survey, Reo~eh Repo~ 47, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1976

Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site: The San
Marcos and Twin Sisters Phases. In: The Texa4 Afl..eha-tc:
A Sympo~ium, T.R. Hester (ed.). The University of Texas
at San Antonio.
.

1981

Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
cal Society, Bulletin 4: 65-89.

n.d.

The Rogers Spring Site: 1974 Investigations. Texas
Archeological Survey, unpublished Research Report on file
at The University of Texas at Austin.

Texas Archeologi­

24

Prewitt, Elton R.
n.d.
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox, Loeve and
Tombstone Bluff Sites in the Granger Lake District of
Central Texas. Manuscript in review with the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.
Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins and F.B. Plummer
1932
The Geology of Texas, Vol. 1: Stratigraphy.
sity of Texas, Buttetin 3232, Austin, Texas.

The Univer­

Soil Conservation Service
1975
Soil Survey of Gillespie County, Texas.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
06 the Tex~ Ancheoiogical Society No. 25.

Buttetin

Tunnell, Curtis D. and Harold P. Jensen, Jr.
1969
Archeological Excavations in Lyndon B. Johnson State Park,
Summer 1968. State Building Commission, Ancheoiogical
Pnognam Repont 17.
Webb, Walter Prescott
1952
The Handboo~ 06 Tex~, Vol. 1.
Association, Austin, Texas.

Texas State Historical

Weir, Frank A.
1976a The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Doctoral disserta­
tion. Washington State University, Pullman, Washington.
1976b

The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered. In: The Tex~
AnchMc: A SympO.6,tum, T.R. Hester (ed.). Center for
Archeological Research, Spe.cial Repont 2, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

Woolsey, A.J.
n.d.
Report on Lehmann Rock Shelter 1936, on file at Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.

