An Assessment of the Archeological and Historical Resources
to be Affected by the
BRAZOS ISLAND HARBOR WATERWAY PROJECT, TEXAS

Grant D. Hall
and
Kerry A. Grombacher

Research Report No. 30
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
March, 1974

ABSTRACT

Results of field work and archival research aimed at
assessing the archeological and historical resources
involved in the modification of Brazos Island Harbor Waterway, a project proposed by the Galveston District, U.S.
Army Co-rps of Engineers, are reported.
The study was
conducted for the Corps during June and July, 1973, by the
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
It has been determined that the proposed Brazos Island
Harbor Waterway Project directly endangers two sites on
Lorna Ochoa and Brazos Santiago Depot, a 19th century historic site listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
In addition, a high probabality for the existence of shipwrecks in the area is indicated.
Included are recommendations for the protection of these and other threatened sites
located within the project area.

i

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Part I:

Archeological Assessment

Abstract ...................................................... - . i
1
Introduction . . . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
The Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . • . . . . .
Survey Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . • . . . . . • . . . . . . . . • • 13
References Cited . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . . 24
Part II:
Part III:

Historical Resources ..•••••.....•....••• 26
Summary and Conclusions ....•..•.• _•..... 42

LIST OF FIGURES
Fig. No.
1

2
3
4

Project Area Map........................
2
General Views of Brazos Santiago Depot .. 15
Brazos Island Maps-Past and Present ..... 19
Loma Ochoa Sites . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . • . . . . . . . . 21

----,----------------

PART I: THE ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT
by

Grant D. Hall

INTRODUCTION
The Brownsville Ship Channel stretches for approximately 17 miles from its harbor 5 miles north of Brownsville to its entrance at Brazos Santiago Pass on the Gulf
of Mexico. As it now exists, the channel varies in width
from 200 to 500 feet and in depth from 36 to 40 feet.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is considering an
extension of the jetties at Brazos Santiago Pass and a
general widening and deepening of the Brownsville Ship
Channel from the pass to the turning basin at Port Brownsville. By resolution of the Committee on Public Works,
U.S. House of Representatives, a navigation survey investigation was authorized and adopted May 5, 1966.
The archeological and historical study requirements
premising this report include the location and assessment
of archeological and historical resources falling within
the project area, surficial observation and preliminary
testing aimed at the evaluation of these resources, and
analysis of the impact of proposed modification.

Biota

Cameron County is placed within the Tamaulipan
Biotic Province with the most frequent vegetation type
being described as thorny brush. A further distinction
is drawn between vegetation found on sand and clay surfaces.
Clay soils are generally capable of sustaining all of the
plant types known for the province while mesquite and various grasses grow in sandy soils. The coastal marshes in
the area are dominated by sacahuiste grass. Vertebrate
fauna in the province include Neotropical and grassland
species (Blair 1950: 103).

Geology
The land area involved in this study, which is of

1

r
N

--,

~_J

L

>

A

G

U

N

FIGURE

L'.__.~' 1 "

;OKLA.i::D

I

M

I

T

x

E

A

s

\;

BRAZOS

)J'
G)

\

"' ,.

\..._

.. .J

-·~

-I'
I

c

'

c:r--

,,

~

BRAZOS

SANTIAGO
DEPOT O
CF4

,,

0

s:
"'x

"
0

""c

~

..
del Divisadero
<QS.?O'Loma

§---..../

SITE

LOCATIONS

.,,

0

SH IP

BRAZOS

ISLAND

WATERWAY
s

c

A

l

0

E
I

m i

I e s

2

HARBOR

PROJECT

fishing

E -:: ROWNS~'
0

..

~\.u.s~~~~T~~Ao~~~~~Es
RA~i~_,;~~~::,~~
li.
.-.--'-'·'~-{)~- ~- ,_,,,r;,·i-,~,-.,_-,. _ ~

0...

·•"'R...

MLF/73

s

~

~
A

s:

"'"
"0

Recent geological age, is located in the Gulf Coastal
Plain specifically within the Rio Grande Delta. These
deposits consist of unconsolidated sand, silt, and clay
and are less than 10,000 years old. They are found in
the form of channel, point bar, natural levee, and backswamp depositional sequences. Also included are coastal
marsh, mud flat and clay dunes (U.S.D.A. 1968: 2).
Specifically relevant to the archeology of the Brownsville area are the clay dune formations locally known as
lomas. Several of these features lie adjacent to the
Brownsville Channel. Many of the archeological sites involved in this survey are located on the flanks and prominences of these hills. Price (1961: 245) has determined
that a clay dune forms as clay particles are picked up
from dry lagoon and bay bottoms by prevailing southeast
winds and then deposited in a given area to accumulate and
compact into 5 to 25 foot hills. Although exact measurements are not yet possible, Price has theorized that clay
dunes accrete at the rate of approximately 1 foot per
hundred years (Price 1961: 248).
The basic soil types in the study area are classified
as Lomalta and Lomalta-loamy variant. These soils consist
of poorly-drained saline clay and loam having a high water
table (U.S.D.A. 1968: 34).

Previous Archeological Research

Archeological investigation in the Brownsville area
has been limited to surface collection and recording. No
large scale, controlled excavations have as yet been conducted, so knowledge of the area is vague.
The greatest amount of work done in the area was accomplished over a 30-year period by A.E. Anderson, a civil engineer from Brownsville. Between 1908 and 1940, Anderson
made extensive surface collections on 196 sites in the
Brownsville-Matamoros area and maintained concise notes
concerning the location and condition of each of the sites
he found (Anderson n.d.).
In 1932, he published a short

3

------------

--

paper which was essentially an artifact list for the Brownsville area (Anderson 1932). Richard S. MacNeish (1947: 1-15)
used Anderson's collection for defining the "Brownsville"
and "Barril" complexes for the Rio Grande Delta.
In 1970, Elton R. Prewitt conducted an archeological
survey of the eastern portions of Cameron County for the
Texas State Historical Survey Committee. During this survey, Prewitt relocated many of Anderson's sites and also
found and recorded 38 new sites (Prewitt 1971: 2). General
conclusions drawn from this survey suggest an aboriginal
population largely dependent on shellfish and fish for
a food base with hunting and gathering as subsidiary activities. Noted as a distinguishing characteristic for the
area are numerous shell artifacts indication an advanced
shell-working industry (Prewitt 1971: 14).

THE SURVEY

Methods and Procedures
Thorough observations were made by boat of all pertinent areas bordering the channel. As land vehicle travel
was greatly hindered by the extensive tidal bays in the
area, the boat was used to gain as close access as possible
to the areas surveyed via the channel itself. It was anchored at a given area and the surveyor proceeded on foot
to make a careful examination of the areas known to contain,
or suspected of containing, cultural remains.
Maps used during the survey pinpointed the locations
of sites previously found by both Anderson and Prewitt.
Although the locations and properties of these sites were
already known, they were revisited for the specific purpose
of evaluation in terms of potential threat created by the
proposed modifications on the channel. As a result of these
previous investigations, it was known that some eight sites
were located within the study area. During the current survey, four new sites were added.

4

Each of the new sites found during this survey was
briefly described and its location plotted on U.S.G.S. topographic maps. Black and white photographs were taken of
pertinent site areas and of specific features within the
individual sites. Test pits at various sites were done
within 5-foot squares and excavated in 6-inch vertical
levels.
The notes, survey forms, negatives, and artifacts
and other culturally-associated material collected during
the survey will be permanently housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Sites Under Consideration

The prehistoric sites involved in this survey represent
the remains of an aboriginal culture totally dependent on
shellfishing. hunting, and gathering as a means of subsistence. As a result of the nomadic tendencies of these people, their campsites were probably not permanent. Therefore. large deposits of cultural debris would not be expected in any of these areas. Prewitt (1971: 13) has stated
that he qualified the sites reported during his 1970 survey
on the presence of at least one specimen each of bone, shell,
lithic material or burned clay nodules.
The cultural material inventories in the sites described below may seem
meager but are in fact all that can be expected from the_
type of sites encountered during this study.
Of the 12 recorded sites falling within the survey
area, five were originally reported by A.E. Anderson (n.d. ),
and two by Elton R. Prewitt (1971). The current survey
has resulted in the location of four new sites. Brazos
Island Depot was officially reported by Tunnell and Corbin
(1967).
The trinomial designation before each site discussion
represents the standard recording system used by The University of Texas at Austin,
The number 41 designates the
State of Texas. The letters "CF" and final numerals
distinguish Cameron County and the specific site within the

5

county. The sites are listed according to their numerical
order as recorded within the county. Locations of these
sites relative to the Brownsville Ship Channel and the proposed areas of modification are shown in Figure 1.

Brazos Santiago Depot (41 CF 4) is found on the extreme northern end of Brazos Island at Brazos Santiago Pass
(Figs. 1 & 2). The site was recorded on the National
Register of Historic Places on July 14, 1971. The boundaries of the site as recorded on this listing are shown in
Figure 1.
As early as 1523, the natural harbor at Brazos Santiago
was used as a stop-over by Spaniards during the exploration
and colonization of northeastern Mexico and Texas. In 1820,
Spain established Brazos Santiago as a port, and trade between New Orleans and Matamoros increased rapidly. During
the Mexican War, the Civil War, and the era of Indian campaigns in Texas, Brazos Santiago Depot was an important supply point and encampment. Following the Civil War, the depot remained as an important supply station for the transportation of military stores destined for the west. It was
abandoned, however, in the 1880's with the coming of the
railroad to Texas.*
Following partial exposure of the site by Hurricane
Beulah in 1967, numerous civilian and military artifacts of
the period between 1845 and 1870 were collected. Also,
many of the remaining exposed structural features were mapped (Tunnell and Corbin 1967). Although excavation in the
area has proved to be very difficult, future investigation
is certainly warranted by the long period of occupation, by
the structural remnants known buried below surface, and by
the excellent preservation of materials recovered.
* A more complete historical review of the site is given in
the Historic Resources section of this report.

6

The Garcia Pasture Site, 41 CF 8, consists of several
occupation areas on and around Loma del Mesquite. This loma
lies approximately 1 1/2 miles southwest of the Port Isabel
Turning Basin and 3/4 of a mile east of State Highway 48.
The site was listed on the National Register of Historic
Places on February 23, 1972, and the limits of the designated site. area are shown in Figure 1.
This site is reported as a contact or historic Indian
camp by Tunnell and Corbin (1967) on the basis of glass and
brass arrow points collected in the area. Burials have also
been found in the vicinity. Materials collected during past
investigations include bone, shell, lithic debris, shell
artifacts (including beads and tools) and very small triangular arrow points.
The site is valuable in that the possibility for establishing a prehistoric to historic chronological sequence
presents itself. Surficial manifestations are extensive.

This historic site is located on the northeast and
north central flanks of Loma Ochoa, a clay dune situated.1/4
of a mile south of the Brownsville Ship Channel and approximately 3 miles southwest of the Port Isabel Turning Basin.
Historic material is eroding out of the contact between
the tidal bay and the clay dune. The hill itself is densely
covered in brush. Surface collections include military buttons, bottle fragments, brick fragments, badly corroded metal
items, gun parts, and expended cartridge casings. These
artifacts advance the possibility that 41 CF 18 might be a
military encampment peripherally associated with site 41 CF 4,
Brazos Santiago Depot.
A test pit was excavated on site 41 CF 18 to determine
the depth and nature of the cultural deposits in the area.

7

The excavation revealed a 6-inch layer of cultural debris
lying just beneath the surface on the loma (Fig. 4D). Further shovel testing at random points on the hill revealed
that the site is extensive, perhaps covering the entire
northern exposure.

Lying immediately southeast of 41 CF 18 on Loma Ochoa,
41 CF 19 constitutes an aboriginal site of unknown age.
As with 41 CF 18, the materials observed were found eroding
out of the contact zone between bay and dune. Material collected includes bone, shell, and a small, triangular arrow
point. The site is extensive, there is a considerable amount
of material exposed, and deposits appear to be relatively
deep.

41 CF 48 is located immediately south of a large, natural depression on the southwestern end of Loma del Portrero
Cercado.
The major feature found at this site is a buried layer
of fish bones and other detritus suggesting that occupation
here may not have been as ephemeral as at some of the other
sites in the area. Materials collected include shell, oyster
shell, and small, triangular arrow points.

This site is located about 1/4 of a mile west of Loma
del Portrero Cercado.
The small rise upon which the site
lies appears to be the southernmost expression of Puerta de
Trancas (a clay dune), the major portion of which lies
north of the Brownsville Ship Channel. 41 CF 49 was separated from the main hill when the channel was constructed.

8

Although A.E. Anderson (n.d.) located a site here, and
Elton Prewitt (1971) officially recorded the site, current
investigations revealed the existence of spoil-associated
detritus only. From surface indications, the original site
appears to have been completely covered in spoil.

Cultural debris was found eroding out of a bare, steep
face on the southwest point of a small hill just southwest
of Loma del Portrero Cercado and northwest of Loma del
Divisadero. The hill is covered with dense brush and cactus. Material collected consists of shell fragments and
fish bone.
The site does not appear to be extensive enough
to warrant further study.

This site is located on the northwest prominence of
Loma del Islote, a clay dune lying approximately 3/4 of a
mile southwest of the Port Isabel Turning Basin.
It consists of a hearth area made up of a concentration
of burned clay nodules and shell fragments (oyster and _
conch) eroding out of the hillside. The general site area
is highly eroded and sparsely covered with vegetation. The
erosion appears to be the result of the construction of a
spoil levee cutting northeast to southwest through the hill.
Surface observations indicate that the site is small,
the hearth area being the only visible evidence of activity
on the hill.

This site is located on the southeast prominence of
Loma de los Lobos, a hill lying 3/4 of a mile east of the

9

Brownsville Fishing Harbor.
Significant portions of the southern flank of this loma
have already been covered with channel spoil. Cultural indications were found in a highly eroded area near the highest
elevations on the hill. Diagnostic objects found included
oyster shell, bone fragments, and burned red clay.
A test was made here to determine the depth of the cultural remains. No definitive conclusions could be drawn as
a result of this test. Much of the burned clay in the area
may be attributable to natural rather than cultural phenomena.

Shell fragments (conch, cockle, and oyster) and a piece
of chipped stone were found along the east side of an eroded
ridge on a hill on the northeast ridge of Loma de la Draga.
It is approximately 1 1/2 miles southwest of the Port Isabel
Turning Basin. Heavy vegetation covers the uneroded portions
of this loma. The site does not appear to be extensive
enough to warrant further investigation.

Located on Loma Ochoa 1/4 of a mile south of the
Brownsville Ship Channel and approximately 3 miles southwest
of the Port Isabel Turning Basin, this site lies about 8
feet below the northwest prominence of the hill.
Shell, bone, and a li thic drill tip were found below a
burned clay lens exposed in an erosional scarp. A smooth
face was cut into the scarp wall to give a profile view of
the burned clay lens.
In cutting the profile, a second lens
was encountered approximately 1 1/2 feet below the first.
These superimposed hearth lenses indicate that 41 CF
100 is a stratified site and thus potentially of great

10

importance (Fig. 4C).

This site is found on the south-central side of Loma del
Portrero Cercado, a clay dune lying just northwest of the
county Fishing Road which runs from the Boca Chica Highway to the Boca Chica Passing Basin on the Brownsville Ship
Channel.
Lithic materials including a dart point and core pebbles,
pumice pipe fragments, and an oliva shell bead were found
in a highly eroded area low on the flank of the hill. Features seen eroding out of the hillside indicate a deeply
stratified site.

Summary Significance of Archeological
Remains in the Project Area
The recent rapid economic development of
the Texas coast and the attendent increase in
population have seriously affected archeological
prospects in that area. Sites are constantly
being destroyed as cities and towns expand.their
limits, as industrial plants are constructed, as
canals and ship channels are dug ... When all this
is considered, along with normal erosion and the
effects of hurricanes on the coast line, it is
clear that the destruction of archeological
sites is proceeding at a very fast pace. It is
just a matter of time until the limited archeological resources of the area will be destroyed
except in protected areas. (Campbell 1958: 150)

Site destruction, as described in the excerpt above,
coupled with the fact that very little archeological research has taken place on the Rio Grande Delta are two of
the most important factors to be considered in determining
the significance of the remaining archeological resources

11

in the Brownsville area. As construction and natural
processes take their yearly toll, the raw number of sites
available for study is reduced.
With the emphasis now on the consideration of archeological resources in a regional context, that is, realizing that each individual site comprises an integral part
in the understanding of a whole cultural system, it quickly becomes apparent how grim the situation is in the South
Texas area. Sites are being destroyed and there is no
organized attempt being made at the retrieval of any of
the information being lost. To compound this loss, there
has been absolutely no controlled excavation at sites on
the delta to preserve even a representative sample of the
available archeological data.
With this situation in mind, it perhaps goes without
saying that any site which can be preserved in this area
should be.
The aboriginal sites found along the Brownsville Ship Channel exhibit no outstanding artifact assemblages, are small, and were apparently occupied only on
a short term basis.
This is, however, the case with all
of the aboriginal sites on the Rio Grande Delta.
These
small, seemingly insignificant sites represent the sum
total of the evidence to be retrieved and analyzed in
attempting to learn more about the peoples who once inhabited the area. As such, they should be protected.
The historic localities, 41 CF 4 and 41 CF 18, are
representative of very pertinent eras in the history of
the nation. Brazos Santiago Depot (41 CF 4) has been
placed on the National Register of Historic Places. The
site is qualified as significant under the following
National Register criteria:
1)

it is associated with events that have made
a significant coutribution to the broad patterns of our history;

2)

it is associated with the lives of persons
significant in our past; and

12

'1
3)

it may be likely to yield information important in history.
(Federal Register 1974:3369)

41 CF 18 on Loma Ochoa is apparently a small Civil War
period encampment and is important due to its close association with Brazos Santiago Depot.
The Garcia Pasture Site, 41 CF 8, on Loma del Mesquite
has also been placed on the National Register. Although
this area will not be affected by current proposals, it
should be recognized that the site is on the Register and
is in close proximity to the Brownsville Ship Channel.

Survey Results

The Brownsville Office of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers was contacted concerning the physical impact of engineering techniques planned for modifying the channel. Indicated as the three operations potentially destructive to archeological resources were:
1)

the actual dredging of the channel,

2)

the dumping of spoil generated during the
dredging process, and

3)

the movement of heavy equipment alongside
the channel.

A fourth consideration pointed out was that a certain amount
of bank slumpage due to ship-generated wave action could
be expected following completion of the project. The
impact, that is, the actual threat to archeological resources, on the 12 sites falling within the project area
were considered on the basis of these four factors.
Dredging of the Channel
As far as can be determined, the actual dredging

13

of the channel will not damage any of the prehistoric
or historic sites located on the various lomas flanking
the channel. All of these sites are far enough removed
as to be unaffected by this operation.
It has been determined, however, that there is a
high probability for the existence of sunken ships in
the vicinity of Brazos Santiago Pass. Archival research
has definitely established that two ships, the Nassau and
the Luzon, were sunk off Brazos Santiago. Given the oncetreacherous nature of the unmodified pass and the volume
of shipping which took place due to the good harbor and
convenient location at Brazos Santiago, it is entirely
possible that many more unreported shipwrecks are located
in the area.
The possibility of encountering shipwrecks within
the pass, the old harbor, anq offshore should therefore
be taken into serious consideration. Dredging operations
could have a detrimental affect on any of these historically significant wrecks.

Dumping of Spoil
The dumping of spoil in areas now bounded by lowlying spoil levees will definitely result in damage to
site 41 CF 18 on Loma Ochoa. The site is endangered be-·
cause Loma Ochoa has been incorporated as a southern portion of a spoil holding pool into which spoil generated
during the dredging process will be dumped (Fig. 4A).
Although the hill itself rises some 25 feet and
the spoil levees only 3 to 4 feet, portions of 41 CF 18,
are situated low on the flanks of the hill and could
conceivably be covered when spoil is pumped into the pond.
This possibility is well illustrated at Loma del Cenizal
farther to the west where spoil has encroached on the hill,
killing vegetation and covering significant amounts of
original ground (Fig. 4B).

14

Figure 2: General Views of Brazos Santiago Depot

A.

General view of Brazos Island as it now
appears. Brownsville Ship Channel is in
background.

B.

Civil War period wagon tracks impressed in
the clay layer on Brazos Island. Photo
taken by Tunnell and Corbin following Hurricane Beulah in 1967.

c.

Foundation pilings exposed on Brazos Is.land
by Hurricane Beulah in 1967. Photo by Tunnell:
and Corbin.

D.

Test pit excavated on Brazos Island. At
25 inches the pit filled with water and
excavation walls began to collapse. Artifactbearing clay layer was not reached.

FIGURE 2

tiago Depot

it now
1 is in

'ressed in
Photo
wing Hur-

zos Is.land
to by Tunnel

A

B

nd. At
.er and
e. Artifac

d.

c

D

At Brazos Island, an existing spoil reservoir is
bisected by the western National Register boundary of
41 CF 4, the Brazos Santiago Depot site. Apparently,
some spoil has already been placed in this particular
pool. It would appear that the maximum possible amount
of damage that could result from the construction of
these levees and subsequent dumping of spoil has already
occurred. On the basis of observations made during this
survey, it appears that further deposition of spoil in
this Particular reservoir would not appreciably increase
the amount of disturbance that this part of 41 CF 4 has
undergone. However, any dumping of spoil in areas
outside of this existing reservoir and within the National
Register boundary could be highly detrimental to the
Brazos Santiago Depot site.
Based on an opinion solicited from the Office of
the Texas State Liason Officer, The National Register
of Historic Places, it is apparent that enlargement or
further use of spoil dump areas within the presently
established confines of the Brazos Santiago Depot Historic
District would require consultation with that office and
a review by the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation.
Beneath the sand layer on Brazos Island lies a clay
surface upon which are impressed the remnants of the
occupational activities which have taken place in the area.
Today these traces are covered by wind and water-borne
sand (Fig. 2A). However, following the hurricanes of 1933
and 1967, this sand cap was removed by wave action and
the clay surface exposed (Fig. 2B). During these period's
of exposure, numerous relics of Mexican and Civil War
vintage were found. Building foundations, general camp
outlines, wagon ruts, tent outlines, latrines and cistern
holes were all visible (Fig. 2C).
Although much of the area was recorded and mapped
by Tunnell and Corbin of the Texas Historical Commission
following the 1967 hurricane, neither time nor funds were
available to complete the job. Sand again began to
accumulate in the area and all vestiges of historic occupation disappeared once more.
It was not possible at that

17

time to determine the precise lateral extent of historic
remains at the site as the hurricane exposed only certain
portions of the total area believed to have been occupied.
It should be noted that subsurface archeological
investigations on Brazos Island during the current survey
were greatly hindered by a very high water table on the
island. In a test pit excavated in an area believed to
be the scene of greatest 19th century activity, water was
encountered at a depth of 25 inches and the clay layer still
lay at some indeterminate depth beneath this point (Fig. 2D).
This situation distinctly limits the possibilities
for further archeological investigation of the historic
remains buried on Brazos Island. The presence of the
high water table makes further attempts at delineating
the historic features on the island an impossibility in
many places within the National Register boundary. Local
collectors indicate that excavation is possible only in
limited areas back away from the ship channel.
It is felt that this situation has come about in
part as a result of the natural subsidence of deltaic
deposits underlying the site (Swanson and Thurlow 1973).
Conditions are further aggravated by the impermeable clay
layer upon which rain and tide water collects. Should
these processes continue to operate in the area, the Brazos
Santiago Depot site will soon be rendered useless for
further archeological research.

Movement of Heavy Equipment Along the Channel

The remaining ten sites located within the study area
should not be affected by either dredging or spoil disposal. The operation of heavy land machinery associated
with the channel modification could, however, result in
damage to nine of these sites (41 CF: 8, 19, 48, 50, 97,
98, 99, 100, and 102). Because the specifics of heavy
equipment movement cannot be determined at this time, precise
evaluation of the possible damage related to this activity
cannot be made. Although most machinery operation will

18

FIGURE

N

Laguna

a

de/ Madre

p•

,s

-

l.l
:>.(

,o s

s''
CIRCA 1865

ADAPTED FROM
0 FF I C E 0 F C HI E F ENG.
DEPT. OF GULF

r1'

.,,

-·-r- o

F

"-

B
R
A

"'
.-

,..
z
0

.,,

J ET T Y

,//
/

/

/

/
/

//_,....,,,....,,,..,.

BRAZOS

,,,,,----------------

s

L

A
N
D

MLF/73

SANTIAGO

PASS

-------------------

/

.,,

.,,
y
-~

z
0
s
I

(/I

;--

H

"-

:::i

Laguna Madre

T

a

-.J

(/I

c

R

0

y
. ,.....
'•

0

"' I E
~ N
D

3

G)

0

~

..,.,

(/I

:>.(

CIRCA 1970
ADAPTED FROM
U.S.G.S. OU AD RAN GL E

C)

a

------------

---

.......

~--·---

-----~-~--

probably be limited to low-lying spoil dump areas, crossing
several of the lomas adjacent to the channel or removing
fill material from them would create a threat to the
preservation of known sites.
As far as can be determined, no damage to archeological resources will result from post-dredging slump of the
channel banks.

20

Figure 4: Loma Ochoa Sites

A.

Spoil levee intersecting Loma Ochoa on
its east side. Loma Ochoa forms part
of the south levee of this particular
spoil dump area.

B.

View of Loma del Cenizal where past spoil
dumping has killed vegetation and covered
significant amounts of original ground.

c.

Profile view of burned clay lenses at
41 CF 100 on Loma Ochoa.

D.

Test pit excavated at 41 CF 18. Excavation
revealed a 6-inch layer of historic cultural
debris.

FIGURE 4

choa on
s part
icular

past spoil
nd covered
ground.

ses at

A

B

c

D

Excavation
oric cultural

GLOSSARY OF SELECTED ARCHEOLOGICAL TERMS

Arrow Point- A small, thin, and light point hafted to the
end of an arrow shaft.
In general, the weight
of such points is only a fraction of that
of dart points although in dimensions there is
considerable overlap.*
contact Period Site- A site containing evidence of
aboriginal contact with European artifacts.
Cultural Comolex("Brownsville" and "Barril" )- A local
or regional division of peoples on the basis
of a unique set of characteristics distinguishing them from other cultures or civilizations existing during the same time period.
Cultural Remains or Materials- Materials in any way
indicative of the past activities of man.
Dart Point-

11
11
A point attached to the shaft of a dart
These points
used with the spear thrower.
are considerably heavier than those for
arrows.*

Ephemeral Site- A site occupied at irregular or shortterm intervals.
Lithic Material- Artifacts and waste material resulting
from the working of stone.
Profile-

An excavated face to reveal vertical stratigraphic relationships.

* From: An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25
by Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks.

23

REFERENCES CITED

Anderson, A.E.
n.d.
Notes on file. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1932

Artifacts of the Rio Grande Del ta Region.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and
Paleontological Society, Vol. 4: 29-31.

Blair, Frank W.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1: 93-116.
Campbell, T.N. and Jack Q. Frizzell
1949
Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande
Valley, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 20:
63-72.
1958

Archeology of the Central and Southern Sections
of the Texas Coast. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 29: 145-170.

1974

Federal Register, Vol. 39, No. 18, Part II:
3366-3370.

Hester, T.R. and R.W. Rodgers
1970
Additional Data on the Burial Practices of
the Brownsville Complex, Southern Texas.
Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 22, No. 4.
MacNeish, Richard S.
1947
A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas,
Mexico. American Antiquity, Vol. XIII, No. 1:
1-15.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1971
Preliminary Archeological Investigations in
t,he Rio Grande Delta Area of Texas. Ms. on
file at the Texas Archeological Survey. The
University of Texas at Austin.
24

Price, W. Armstrong and Louis S.
Marine and Lagoonal
1961
Gulf Coast, Texas.
Petrology, Vol. 31,

Kornicker
Deposits in Clay Dunes,
Journal of Sedimentary
No. 2: 245-255.

Swanson, R. L. and C. I. Thurlow
1973
Recent Subsidence Rates along the Texas and
Louisiana Coasts as Determined from Tide
Measurements. Journal of Geophysical
Research, Vol. 78, No. 15: 2665-2671.
Tunnell, Curtis and James E. Corbin
1967
Cameron County File, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory. The University of
Texas at Austin.
U.S.D.A.
1968

Comprehensive Study and Plan of Development
of the Lower Rio Grande Basin, Texas-Soils.
A final review draft produced by the United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.

25

PART II: THE HISTORIC RESOURCES
by
Kerry A. Grombacher

INTRODUCTION

The Cameron County littoral has a long and interesting history, blessed by a wealth of primary and secondary sources. The earliest and latest periods of that
history have received less attention than the period between 1820 and 1900. Then, the great influx of people-soldiers of the two wars, settlers, and travelers--drew
others to record the recent history and geography of the
Brownsville area. The period of Spanish exploration,
1520-1700, is poorly reported although the archives of
Spain and Mexico must contain countless journals and
reports of the exploration. A great deal of speculation
will abound until these materials are studied thoroughly
for the details of the earliest journeys. The period of
Spanish land grants of course has left us the grants
themselves, often containing valuable biographical data
about the settlers as well as the physical boundaries
of settlement.
It is the time after Mexican Independence,
after the port of Brazos de Santiago was opened, that is
so heavily reported, although there often are disagreements
among the historians. Custom records, reports of Mexican
officials and citizen's descriptions may be located.
Later in the century, reports of the United States Army,
reports prepared for the United States Congress, and reports prepared by local historians and "boosters" were
circulated. Several economic histories of the lower Rio
Grande Valley have been completed, focusing largely on the
19th century. The area's history in the 20th century must
be gleaned from newspapers and cursory references in
contemporary surveys.
I would like to thank A.A. Champion of Brownsville,
Dan Scurlock of the Texas Historical Commission, and
Richard Austin of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
for their aid in the preparation of this paper. All
three have provided extremely useful specialized information that contributed greatly to the direction of the
report.

26

Early

Explor~tion

"
,,,
Alonso Alvarez
de Pineda
was the first European to
view the area of the Texas Gulf Coast near the mouth of
'
,
the Rio Grande.
In 1518, or early 1519, Alvarez was
nearing the end of an initial exploration of the Gulf
of Mexico ordered by Francisco de Garay, the Governor of
Jamaica, when he put in at a river he named Rio do las
Palmas after the palm forest he found there. These palms,
reduced now to fewer than 60 acres, were the far northern
fringe of Mexico's coastal jungle (McKenna 1950: 5).
,
Alvarez continued on to Vera Cruz where he re-supplied his
ships for the voyage back to Jamaica. Late in 1519, en
route to Jamaica, Alvarez stopped again at the Rio de las
Palmas. He stayed at the river's mouth for 40 days, and
noted 40 Indian settlements encountered on small expeditions into the countryside (Clark 1955: 109).
Francisco de Garay realized the importance of securing
the newly discovered land against the threat of foreign
encroachment. He was also apparently engaged in some
competition with Hernan Cortes to win the greatest lands
and treasures for the Crown.
In 1520 Garay sent an expedition to the Rio de las Palmas to establish a fort
there. Diego de Camargo led a command of three ships and
150 men, supplied with artillery, artisans and materials
to build a fort.
They constructed a garrison, probably
on the north bank of the river, but abandoned it in the
face of "determined resistance of the natives" (Clark
1955' 110).
In 1523 Garay himself led an expedition back to the
area and more extensively explored the surrounding bays.
He entered and named the bay Brazos de San Iago (Arms of
Saint James) on July 25, 1523, St. James' Day. By 1526
a small colony of Spanish gold hunters was established
near present Point Isabel.
It is doubtful if they found
much gold for they were soon gone. (Cameron County Files).
Alonso de Lebn crossed through the lower Rio Grande

27

country between 1686 and 1690, leading a series of expeditions north from Mexico in search of La Salle's fort and
evidence of other French encroachment on New Spain
(Cameron County Files). At the same time the Count of Monclova,
directing the search for French forts in New Spain, sent
two long boats propelled by oars and sail up the coast
of the Gulf of Mexico. These boats were of very small
draft and could easily enter any inlet on the low-lying
coast (Dunn 1916). The earliest report detailing the
topography, wildlife and Indian inhabitants of the littoral
between the Guadalupe River and the Rio Grande was made
by Captain Joaqu{n de Orobio y Bas terr a, commander of the
garrison at La Bahia (Goliad) as part of the expedition
organized by Jos~ de Escand6n in 1747 (Castaneda 1938:
III,145-147). Escand6n was the first explorer to visit
and describe the mouth of the Rio Grande (Castaneda 1938:
III, 146).
I

I

In 1746 Jose de Escandon was made governor of Sena
Mexicano. He immediately organized the exploration and
conquest of the region he named Nuevo Santander. In
1747 he led a seven part expedition that converged on
the lower Rio Grande Valley after exploring the southern
and western frontiers of Nuevo Santander. Escandbn judged
the lowest end of the river to be unhealthy and unfit for
settlement, so his colony, established about 1749, settled
on the Rio Grande way above present Matamoros at Carmargo
(Castaneda 1938: III, 162). In the 1750's Escand6n's
colonies reportedly rafted hides down the Rio Grande to
ships waiting to ship them to Mexico or Spain (PipKin 1940:
35-38).
Shipping Established

Escairl:5'n's colony probably did not ship too many hides.
The mouth of the Rio Grande is subject to winds from all
sides, and is very shallow with a shifting bar, and so a
poor anchorage.
In addition, the Spanish government restricted trade to the port of Vera Cruz (Graf 1942: 16,
22). Attempting to curtail a lucrative smuggling operation,
Spain opened the port of Brazos de Santiago in 1820.

28

Foreign trade was allowed, theoretically, but it was not
until after 1823 when Agust{n Iturbide, Emperor of Mexico, declared the port open, that a non-Mexican ship
served Brazos de Santiago. Then trade with New Orleans
predominated. Dry goods were imported, and specie was
shipped out, the principle export, in addition to hides,
skins, and wool (Graf 1942: 23-27).
/

/

Martin de Leon was among the first entrepreneurs to
ship goods from New Orleans to Brazos de Santiago, and
then transport them overland by mule and ox-cart to
Matamoros. From J.823 Brazos de Santiago was the chief
port for the trade of south Texas and northern Mexico
(Lea 1957: 46-48).
Smuggling persisted after the port was opened, made
profitable by high tariffs and outright prohibitions on
importing such goods as tobacco, raw cotton, grains,
sugar and coffee. Mexico's leaders wanted to develop
domestic production of a full range of items so they banned
or heavily taxed their importation. The prohibitions
seem unreasonable for Mexico simply did not have the
capacity to meet all the citizens' needs (Graf 1942: 5253). Goods smuggled into Texas and northern Mexico
successfully competed with goods introduced through the
ports of Vera Cruz and Tampico, even when these ports
were nearer the final markets than Matamoros.
This situation continued late into the century when
the high Mexican tariff rates contrasted sharply with the
U.S. charges. A trader reserved a high profit margin
when he sold his goods, upon which no Mexican duty had
been paid, at the prevailing rates of the interior.
Mexico attempted to reduce smuggling in 1870 when
some duties were reduced to parity with the United States'
schedule.
In addition a Free Zone was established wherein only a small percentage of the regular duties were
collected until the goods were moved farther into the country (Carrol 1943: 175). Throughout a considerable part
of the 19th century, smuggling, tremendously profitable,
was also socially acceptable and indeed a social responsibility.
29

The settlement on Brazos de Santiago Island consisted
of a few jacales (thatched huts) for the custom employees,
fishermen and soldiers who lived there.
There were no
warehouses as goods offloaded at Brazos de Santiago were
soon transported to Matamoros. Freight was taken down
the island on muleback or in ox-carts, lightered across
to the mainland at Boca Chica, then carted on either side
of the Rio Grande to Matamoros. The carts were of wooden
frame and wheels, with sides of hide, and usually pulled
by two oxen (Graf 1942: 40-42).
The harbor of Brazos de Santiago was safe except
during the most severe storms. Then boats might break
anchor and be cast upon the shore. The Rudd gave "Loma
de la Draga," just inside the present Brownsville Ship
Channel, its name when that ship was blown up on the hills'
southeast flank and a dredge (draga) was used to cut a
channel so the ship could be towed out to deeper water
(A. A. Champion, personal communication). The most
dangerous aspect of the harbor was crossing the bar and
negotiating Brazos de Santiago Pass. There was a 550
yard stretch of water between Padre and Brazos islands
but the channel was a mere 55 yards wide. Numerous ships
ran aground entering the harbor (Graf 1942: 40).
An advantage of sailing from New Orleans over sailing
from Europe or New York was that having only to ply the
waters of the Gulf of Mexico the New Orleans vessels could
be of light draft, and thereby easily cross the bar at
Brazos de Santiago. Most of the European vessels that
shipped to the Rio Grande were obliged to anchor outside
the bar and discharge their cargos into lighters, an
inconvenient and dangerous task (Graf 1942: 37).

The Turbulent 30's
Colonel Jos~ Antonio Mejia of the Mexican Army led
a force that landed on Brazos Island in June 1832. His
troops, in agreement with Santa Anna's opposition to the
regime of Bustamante, advanced to Matamoros and took the

30

city without opposition (Turnerl903: 4-5).
In 1835 Brazos harbor again witnessed a display of
military power. On April 3, the American sloop-of-war
Invincible arrived at the port of Brazos de Santiago to
investigate alleged insults to the United States Consul
at Matamoros.
The Mexican sloop-of-war General Bravo
and the schooner Correo de Mexico were at anchor inside
the bar. The Invincible entered the harbor and anchored.
W.H. Livine, an officer of the Invincible, was sent to the
Bravo to explain the Americans' presence on the coast.
Livine was taken prisoner by the Mexicans. The Invincible's
commander opened fire on the Bravo. The Mexicans responded
with ship and shore artillery as the Invincible quit the
harbor. Livine was tried as a pirate and executed on April
6, 1835 (Pierce 1917: 22).
Two years later, on April 9, 1937, the United States
man-of-war Natchez put in a Brazos Island to investigate
the detention of the U.S. schooners Champion and Luisiana
by the Mexican bark Urrea.
The Chamoion was anchored inside the harbor while the Luisiana stood outside the bar
near the Urrea.
The Natchez simply towed the Luisiana
away.
Three days later the Natchez returned and its
commander requested permission of the Urrea's to speak
with the Champion's commanding officer. When permission
was refused the Natchez' decks were cleared and Urrea
advised that should the Natchez' yawls be molested as
they sailed to shore the Urrea would be destroyed. As the
Champion was being brought out of the harbor the Urrea
opened fire.
The Natchez responded with its big guns,
silencing the Urrea, and then towed the Champion out to
sea (Pierce 1917: 22-23).
In the meantime President Burnett of the newly-declared
Republic of Texas had proclaimed a blockade of the port of
Matamoros, including both the mouth of the Rio Grande and
the harbor of Brazos de Santiago. Shipping was reduced
drastically during the blockade, from July 1836 until
early 1837, and limited largely to provisions (Graf 1942:
126) .
In 1838 the French closed the harbor from April until

31

August with a blockade by the brig-of-war Dunois. This
blockade stopped Baron Johan von Raknitz from establishing
a colony in northern Tamualipas on the Nueces River.
Rakni tz was an ex-German Army officer who found favor with
the Mexican government and was granted the privilege of
settling a group of German immigrants in northern Mexico,
perhaps to offset the large number of United States citizens
who were finding their ways into Texas and northern Mexico.
Raknitz' plan was foiled when his first ship was turned
away from Brazos harbor by the French blockade. The ship
went to New Orleans where most of the erstwhile colonists
stayed (Graf 1942: 438-439).
The years of 1830-1845 saw the commerce of Matamoros
violently disrupted.
Increased taxes, war and revolutionary
activity (and the consequent blockades), epidemics of
cholera, yellow fever and malaria (and the consequent quarantines) and severe storms that destroyed cargoes and port
facilities made this a period of economic stagnation, if
not retrogression (Graf 1942: 145-150).

The Mexican War

The custom house was moved from Brazos Island to Point
Isabel after a storm in 1837 destroyed all vestiges of
human habitation on the island. Point Isabel was a small
village of grass-thatch cottages with 50 of 60 inhabitants
when General Zachary Taylor moved his troops from Corpus
Christi to the vicinity of Brazos harbor in March, 1846.
The army built sheds and dwellings, establishing a garrison
at Point Isabel (Thorpe 1846: 45).
Taylor constructed a supply depot on Brazos Island as
well, consisting of a custom house, a lighthouse and
storage buildings in addition to the fort.
This description
of Brazos Island given in Justin Smith's The War With Mexico
is drawn from a soldier's letters home:
... the primary camp lay ... at the north end
of Brazos Island, which consisted of low hills
on the side turned toward the mainland, a

32

swamp in the center, a wreck strewn beach
on the outer side, and in general three
blades of grass to fifty square feet of
sand, as Lieutenant George B. McClellan
wrote home. Here too, the air was excellent;
but the brackish water caused many complaints.
And the sand blew into everything--hair, nose,
eyes, and food. Marching the entire length
of the island the soldiers found themselves,
at its southern end, about eighty yards from
the mainland •.. (Smith 1919: 205).

There at the southern end of the island Taylor constructed a floating bridge of cypress logs to facilitate
the transport of military supplies off Brazos Island,
across Boca Chica, and onto the mainland (Cameron County
Files Texas Historical Commission). Later General Taylor
began using steamboats to transport men and supplies from
Brazos Island up the Rio Grande as far as Camargo and Mier.
Although steamboats had been seen on the Rio Grande
as early as 1829 they were not significant in the area's
economy until after the war, in the 1850's. The carreteros
and arrieros (cart drivers and muleteers) opposed steam
competition until they had no choice in the matter (Graf
1942: 62-66).

No naval action around Brazos de Santiago harbor
was recorded. Lower Cameron County's Mexican War battlefields are mostly on a line between Port Isabel and
Matamoros where a series of battles and skirmishes took
place (Thorpe 1846).
The introduction of steam transport on the Rio
Grande was a boon to the economy. 'rhe cost of carting
goods from Brazos Island to Matamoros was often equal
to the cost of shipping them from New Orleans to Brazos
harbor. Riverboats reduced freight rates substantially
(McKenna 1956: 7).
In 1850 Richard King, Miflin Kenedy and Charles
Stillman formed a partnership to engage in shipping on

33

the Rio Grande. King brought to the company the experience of having been pilot and captain of one of Taylor's
boats during the war, as well as a systematic program
for designing steamboats to meet the needs of Rio Grande
shippers.
For steamboats to travel the Rio Grande they required
some modifications of the Mississippi riverboat, the
flat bottom design was not good on the Rio Grande for
the boat could not maintain its head when crossing a short
bend. The current would push against the side of the
boat and force it onto the bank. Power was insufficient;
both firebed and boilers were regarded as too small.
Mesquite, the only wood to be had, burned slowly with
little flame making it a difficult task to keep up steam
(Lea 195 7: 35, 36) .
King designed boats to overcome those problems. His
plan was to use a heavy boat to transport freight from
the wharf on Brazos Island down Laguna Madre and out
through Boca Chica to the mouth of the Rio Grande, and
upriver four miles to White Ranch.
There freight would
be transferred to a lighter boat that could travel far
upriver, having only a 24 inch draft fully-loaded.
So
successful were King's ideas that by 1852 Kenedy & Co.
controlled all shipping from the Gulf to Brownsville arJd
Matamoros (Lea 1957: 57-59).
The California Gold Rush brought a boost to the
local economy, as well. Matamoros had long supplied the
equipment for the mines of northern Mexico, and was in
a good position to supply California as well. Equipment
and men flowed through Brazos de Santiago harbor and
Brownsville-Matamoros bound for the gold fields of
California.
The depot on Brazos Island was manned by United
States troops continuously until the early 1860's. Two
inspection tours found the garrison in good shape. W.G.
Freeman described the depot in 1853:
Lit7 is approached by the channel around
the north end of the island, which at full

34

tides had a depth of eight feet.
Vessels
drawing 7 1/2 feet can cross the bar at
certain stages of water, but none of more
than 6 1/2 feet draft should be freighted
by the government. The mail is received
semi-monthly by steamer from New Orleans.
Fort Brown and Ringgold Barracks are the
only posts that receive supplies through
the Brazos. The stores are transported
by contract--a steamer running from the
depot to Fort Brown, in connection with
one from port to Ringgold Barracks. This
contract was entered into by Bvt. Major
Chapman, Assistant Quartermaster, with M.
Kenedy & Co., for two years from Feb. 10,
1852. The rates paid ... seem to me high,
but they were doubtless the most advantageous
that could be obtained at the time.· (Crimmins
1948 : 101)
Freeman also noted that the government did not own the land
on which the depot stood, but had occupied land that by
precedent was public land used as a dock while it was legally
patented land. No one seemed concerned about this fact for
the depot was maintained and no attempt was made by the
government to acquire the land.
In 1854 the city of Brownsville requested that the
custom house and other port offices be moved from Point
Isabel to Brownsville. The Committee of Commerce of the
United States Senate advised that Point Isabel remain the
official port of entry. Boosterism would not supercede the
expedience of keeping the port off ices at the wharves where
goods actually entered the country, rather than thirty
miles away (Report of the Committee of Commerce 1854).

Civil War

Residents of Cameron County stood with the Confederacy
in the 1860's, not out of philosophical and political
agreement but from sectional loyalty. There were few if

35

any slaves on the lower Rio Grande. Owing to the case of
escape into Mexico where people of color abound and slavery
was illegal, the nature of the economy, and the availability of cheap labor, it was unprofitable to keep slaves
(Thompson 1965: 88).
The depot on Brazos Island was occupied by Confederate
troops in Spring of 1861 when all Federal troops were withdrawn from Texas. The post was indefensible in case of
naval bombardment so the Confederates removed all military
stores from the island and left only a few men to watch the
coast. Kenedy & Co. steamers were used to haul the abandoned
supplies up to Fort Brown, in Brownsville (Lea 1957: 178).
By late 1861 the Union navy was blockading the port of
the mouth of the Rio Grande. Brazos de Santiago harbor was
closed and the custom house moved to Brownsville. Bagdad,
on the Mexican side of the Rio Grande's mouth, became a
thriving port of entry, as only ships bound for Texas could
be stopped by the Union navy. Cargo, including guns and
ammunition, could be landed at Bagdad and taken upriver to
Matamoro·s where it was transferred across the border to
Brownsville (Cameron County Files).
Union troops invaded south Texas in late 1863 and
pushed as far upriver as Laredo. Some 7,000 soldiers landed
at Brazos Island on November 3, 1863 under command of Major
General N.J.T. Dana. Confederate General Bee was routed from
Brownsville by rumors of a massive Union force, leaving the
city burning while the federal troops were still on the beach
(Lea 1957: 205).
In 1864 Union General N.P. Banks ordered a narrow
guage railway be built from the Fort at Brazos de Santiago
to the White Ranch four miles up the Rio Grande from the
Gulf, where cargo could be loaded onto riverboats for the
haul upriver. Palmetto pilings were used to construct a
railroad bridge across Boca Chica, and are reportedly still
visible near the remains of Zachary Taylor's cypress bridge.
This railroad was the first competition offered the riverboat since the freight line between Point Isabel and Matamoros had been forced out of business after the Mexican War
(Lea 1957: 248; Cameron County Files).

36

I

i

The Federal troops were forced from the main.land by
Confederate forces in July 1864. They remained for the rest
of the war on Brazos Is.land, victims of a stalemate with
the local opposition. In fact, the Union army lost the
last battle of the Civil War in the coast area, over one
week after Lee surrendered to Grant (Thompson 1965: 87-88) .
Late in 1865 General P. H. Sheridan ordered the rail
line repaired.
It had been destroyed when the Confederate
troops forced the Union army onto Brazos Island. The little
railroad's rolling stock included one 15-ton Patterson
locomotive and 8 platform cars. The right-of-way had never
been secured, track having been laid as a matter of military
expediency during the war. Kenedy & Co. still owned the
facilities at White Ranc:h (A. A.. Champion, personal communication) .
Railroads

Competitors of Kenedy & Co. purchased the line from the
the War Department in 1866, but found they had an inoperable
railroad for they were refused access to the terminals and
docks at White Ranch. A hurricane in 1867 destroyed the
track, putting the competition out of business. Unfortunately for Kenedy & Co. the same hurricane levelled the depot
on Brazos Island and destroyed the buildings at White Ranch
as well as four l::oats (Thompson 1965: 108,109; Lea 1957: 249).
For a short time the overland routes from the harbor
to Brownsville-Matamoros became important again. Two roads
were reopened to freight:
the road down Brazos Island,
across Boca Chica, and upriver to the cities, and a road
that took off directly west from Point Isabel, then went
southwest into Brownsville. This had been the route of
a stage line established in 1840
William Neale, an emigrant
from England. The line operated throughout the Mexican War
but was forced out of business by the steamboats. In the
late 1860's once again this route saw heavy traffic (Thompson
1965: 59; Pipkin 1940: 80).
In 1866 King and Kenedy received a charter from the
State of Texas authorizing them to build a railroad line

37

I
II

from Brazos de Santiago or Point Isabel to Brownsville.
They had no intention to construct the line, desiring
only to forestall competition to their steamboat company.
It was not until 1872 that a rail line was established between Brownsville and Point Isabel and the riverboat traffic
was cut into (Lea 1957: 249; Pierce 1917: 125-127).
The Rio Grande Railroad Company ran its narrow guage
tracks on a straight line from Brownsville to Point Isabel.
While one large trestle was constructed the track generally
ran through swales and other low spots rather than stay on
high ground. Heavy storms in 1873, 1875, and 1888 caused
thousands of dollars' damage to low-lying tracks. Bankruptcy came in the early 20th century, followed by two
quick sales. In 1925 the track was widened to regular
gauge to facilitate connections with other railroads. By
1933 the Rio Grande Railway had been abandoned, a victim of
highways and the deep water port established at Brownsville (Cameron County files).

Shipping through Brazos de Santiago and Brownsville
suffered when a rail line from Corpus Christi to Laredo,
with connections through Monterrey for Mexico City, was
built in the 1880's. Brownsville was cut off from the
lucrative markets of northern Mexico, and the port's volume
declined. Not until 1904 when the St. Louis, Brownsville, &
Mexico Railroad reached Brownsville, and 1905 when the Mexican
National extended its track from Monterrey to Matamoros,
did Brownsville resume its place of importance in the
trade of south Texas (Pierce 1917: 126-127).
In the meantime dredging operations inside the Brazos
bar ceased, and the steamer Luzon was allowed to sink just
off Brazos wharf in such a position to form a nucleus for
a bar that could close the pass, rendering the harbor of
Brazos de Santiago useless.
The sinking is alleged to have
been an act of sabotage perpetrated by railroad interests
to galvanize support of their cause, to destroy both the
capacity and the credibility of shippers (Pierce 1917:
126-127; Pipkin 1940: 30).
The pass and harbor of Brazos de Santiago was not

38

thoroughly cleared until 1935 when the Brownsville Navigation District authorized dredging a channel from Brazos de
Santiago Pass to Brownsville. A $3 million bond issue
financed dredging the canal and the building of deep water
port facilities, including a wharf, warehouses, railroad
spur lines, and a turning basin. Brownsville is Texas' only
deep water port south of Corpus Christi and handles a large
volume of agricultural and industrial products from the
lower Rio Grande Valley (Pipkin 1940: 22).

\,
111

I~

'
11

!
I

REFERENCES CITED
Carrol, H.B.
1943
Texas Collection. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly, Vol. LVII, No.2 :175.
n.d.

I

I

l
II
M

Clark, Joseph L. and Elton S. Scott
1955 The Texas Gulf Coast, Vol. 1. Lewis Historical
Publications Co., Inc. New York.
Crimmins, L. L. (editor)
1938 Colonel J.K.F. Mansfield's Report of the Inspection of the Department of Texas in 1856. Sou thwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. XLII, No.2: 215-256.
1948

l

I
il

i*

I
1

I

!

Cameron County Files, Texas Historical Commission.
Austin.

W.G. Freeman's Report on the Eighth Military
Department. Southwestern Historical Quarterly,
Vol. LII, No. 1: 100-108.

Dunn, William Edward
1916 The Spanish Search for La Salle's Colony on the
Bay of Espiritu Santo, 1685-1689. Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Vol. XIX, No. 3: 323-369.
Graf, LeRoy
1942 Economic Historv of the Lower Rio Grande Valley.
Ph.D. dissertation. Harvard University.
1947

Lea, Tom
1957

Colonizing Projects in Texas South of the Nueces,
1820-1845. Southwestern Historical Quarterly,
Vol. L, No. 4: 431-448.
The King Ranch.

Little, Brown and Company. Boston.

McKenna, Verna Jackson
1956 Old Point Isab~l Lighthouse. Beacon of Brazos
Santiago. Texas State Park Board.

40

Pierce, Frank C.
1917 A Brief History of the Lower Rio Grande Valley.
George Banta Publishing Company. Menasha.
Pipkin, Maurice S.
1940 An Early History of Cameron County. M.A. thesis.
Texas College of Arts and Industries. Kingsville.

1854

Report of the Committee of Commerce, U.S. Senate.
Photocopy at the Texas State Archives.

Smith, Justin H.
1919 The War With Mexico, Vol. 1. The MacMillan Company.
New York.
Thompson, James Heaven
1965 A Nineteenth Centurv Historv of Cameron County,
Texas. M.A. thesis. The University of Texas.
Austin.
Thorpe, T.B.
1846 Our Army on the Rio Grande.
lishers. Philadelphia.

Carey and Hart Pub-

Turner, F.H.
1903 The Mejia Expedition. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly, Vol. VII, No. 1: 1-28.

41

PART III:

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

by
Grant D. Hall

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

During the archeological survey and corresponding
archival research involved in assessing the archeological
and historical resources found along the Brownsville Ship
Channel, 12 sites were considered on the basis of their
scientific importance and the manner and degree to which
they might be damaged by proposed modification. Evidenced
are the possibilities for damage to sites due to spoil
disposal and the movement of heavy equipment alongside the
channel. As a result of historical research, a high probability for the existence of sunken ships in certain sections
of the project area is noted.
Summarily, recommendations for the protection of archeological resources found within the area encompassing the
proposed Brazos Island Harbor Waterway Project are as
follows:
First, in the vicinity of Brazos Santiago Pass, further investigation, perhaps including a magnetometer survey,
to determine the presence or absence of significant shipwrecks
is suggested. An investigation of this type could be conducted by the Office of the Underwater Archeologist, the
Texas Historical Commission. This agency has the facilities
necessary to conduct magnetometer surveys and personnel
qualified in the assessment of any sunken ships discovered.
The areas specifically suggested for further study include
all offshore areas where dredging will take place, Brazos
Santiago Pass, and the old natural harbor immediately northwest of the jetties (indicated by 6 to 15 foot water depths
on the U.S.G.S. Port Isabel Quadrangle).
Second, adoption of an alternate plan for the placement
of levees on Loma Ochoa so designed as to avoid the deposition
of spoil materials on the site located there should be considered. 41 CF 18 on Loma Ochoa, an apparent military outpost to Brazos Santiago Depot during the Civil War, offers
an opportunity to draw interesting conclusions on military

42

I

life in a well-defined area. Spoil deposits on top of the
site would be serious drawback should archeological excavation become feasible at any time in the future.
Third, spoil dumping in the vicinity of Brazos Santiago
Depot (41 CF 4) should be restricted pending consultation
with the appropriate autnorities (Texas State Liason Officer,
The National Register of Historic Places). Further construction
of spoil dump areas within the boundary of this National
Register site could result in damage to the historical
features located in this vicinity.
Finally, restrictions on the activities of heavy land
machinery for the project areas with known archeological
resources should be imposed. Sites 41 CF 8 (Garcia Pasture
Site-National Register) on Loma del,Mesquite; 41 CF 19 and
41 CF 100 on Loma Ochoa; 41 CF 48, 41 CF 50, and 41 CF 102
on Loma del Portrero Cercado; 41 CF 97 on Loma del Islote;
41 CF 98 on Loma de los Lobos; and 41 CF 99 on Loma de la
Draga might conceivably be damaged by the movement of heavy
machinery alongside the channel. Land machinery operation
does not, however, automatically entail the destruction of
any of the above sites. By responsibly avoiding the higher
elevations on the lomas listed as containing sites, there
should be no damage to, or destruction of, any of the above
archeological resources.

43

Submitted to the U.S. Army, Corps
of Engineers, Galveston District
by the Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin,
in accordance with the terms of
Contract DACW 64-73-C-0085.

