TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE OF A PROPOSED
PIPELINE AT GIBBONS CREEK
Grimes County, Texas

Terry Seelinger

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGlCAL SURVEY

Technical Bulletin No. 35
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

1980

ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE OF A
PROPOSED PIPELINE AT GIBBONS CREEK
Grimes County, Texas

On February 4 and 5, 1980, at the request of Dames and
Moore, staff members of the Texas Archeological Survey, James
R. Pliska and Terry Seelinger, conducted an archeological
reconnaissance of a 4 mile long, 135 foot wide corridor from
Hog Creek west to the Navasota River along which the Texas
Municipal Power Agency proposes to build a water pipeline
and power transmission line.

In addition, a wider corridor

of 400 feet was surveyed from the Navasota River to a point
2,640 feet east which will encompass the intake channel and
pumping station.

The entire corridor was examined twice

using zig-zag transects spaced approximately 20 meters apart.
The elevation ranges from 200 feet on the Navasota
River floodplain and 250 feet along Hog Creek to 290 feet
in the upland areas.

The line passes through three basic

environmental settings from the flat floodplain to the low,
slightly rolling terrain of the uplands with relief accent足
uated by tributaries of the Navasota River: floodplain,
upland terraces, and uplands.

The vegetation is primarily

dense bermuda grass in the cleared pasture areas; isolated
wooded stretches are densely overgrown along the drainages.
The soils are sandy with an underlying dense clayey horizon
in the uplands and clay loams and sandy loams in the flood足

--

-----------------

Gibbons Creek Pipeline Corridor

plain.

-2 足

Gravels consisting of small cobbles and petrified wood

are visible in the sheet and slopewash erosion in the upland
terraces above the floodplain.

These potential lithic resources

are too small to be readily exploited by aboriginal occupants
of the area.
A search of the archives of the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, the University of Texas at Austin,
revealed no sites had been previously recorded in this corridor
and none were located during the course of this survey.

No

sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places are
within the boundaries of the project area.

Texas A & M

Anthropology Laboratory field crews have recorded some sites
in the area as part of their survey preceding the construction
of the TMPA Power Plant (Ippolito 1979).

These sites are

on the upland terraces near Hog and Gibbons creeks; special
emphasis was placed on similar locations during this survey
but no sites were found.
Visibility was greatly hindered by the dense ground
cover; shovel testing in areas of high site probability, such
as sandy knolls or upland terraces, were negative, no cultural
materials were uncovered.

However, given the narrow width

of this corridor, areas of high archeological sensitivity
could be traversed without encountering prehistoric materials.
One .. small historic site (UTM 773350E 3394150N, USGS 7.5 1
Reliance Quad) was located 200 feet south of the corridor.
This probable farm house or related structure was evidenced

Gibbons Creek Pipeline Corridor

-3足

by a few bricks and some broken glass and ceramics.
impact is expected on this small site.

No

A historic scatter

consisting of three snuff bottles, one clear glass screwtop
bottle and a galvanized coffee.;pot was found within the
corridor (UTM 774050E 3394250N, USGS 7.5

1

Reliance Quad).

These items are post-1940 production and can be considered
to have little historic significance.
In our opinion, the construction of the pipeline will
not adversely affect any cultural resources.

Although our

field investigation of the corridor did include shovel
probes, the possibility of buried archeological material
being extant in the construction area does exist.

This is

especially the case in areas where the corridor crosses the
Navasota River terraee

system~-

It is theref6re

st~ongly

recommended that any cultural material exposed during
excavation and construction be reported to the offices of
the Texas Historical Commission.

Terry Seelinger, Staff Archeologist

REFERENCE CITED

Ippolito, John E.
1979 The Gibbons Creek Steam Electric Station Project:
An Archeological Test and Survey Supplement.
Anthropology Laboratory Report No. 47, Texas
A & M University, College Station.

From: Reliance, Tex., 7.5' (1962)
Keith, Tex., 7.5'
(1959)
TMPA, Gibbons Creek S.E.S. Makeup
Water System Pipeline
(in yellow)

