TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF PORTIONS OF
THE BURNET TO LAMPASAS TRANSMISSION CORRIDOR

Lampasas County, Texas

J. Peter Thurmond

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Technical Bulletin No. 33
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

1979

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF PORTIONS OF THE
BURNET TO LAMPASAS TRANSMISSION CORRIDOR

Lampasas

County~

Texas·

An archeological survey of the Burnet to Lampasas
transmission corridor, T.L. #12, was conducted by J. Peter
Thurmond of the Texas Archeological Survey for the Lower
Colorado River Authority on November 6, 1979. The surface
of that portion of the T.L. #12 right-of-way within 2700
feet to the south of its intersection with T.L. #55 was
inspected for the presence of archeological or historical
remains.
No such remains within a reliable context were found.
Some aboriginal lithic debitage and recent glass fragments
were found along the fencerow on the western side of 8ak
Hill Cemetary. The lithic debitage appears to be of recent
introduction. All specimens had been stream-rolled after
aboriginal modification. The material was probably removed
from a streamside gravel bar in recent times and used to
pave a cemetery access road which closely parallels the
transmission corridor. The debitage could easily have
been knocked over into the easement by subsequent foot
traffic. The glass fragments all relate to modern use of
the cemetery. Most appear to be the remains of small vases
which are often placed next to grave markers to contain
flowers. The fragments were probably cleaned up after
breakage and discarded along the cemetery margin.
If any archeological or historical sites ever existed
along this easement, they have undoubtedly been masked or
destroyed by modern land use. Most of the landowners on the
western side own horses. The combined trampling and grazing
by these animals have led to considerable sheet erosion of
the slope which rises beyond this side of the easement,
burying the western half of the right-of-way beneath 10-40
cm. of recent colluvium. Any cultural remains would thus

Lampasas Transmission Corridor

-2­

have been obscured. The eastern portion of the easement
lying within the cemetery has been severely disturbed by
burial excavation and access road construction. Any sites
which may have existed along this side of the easement have
undoubtedly been destroyed.
In conclusion, no archeological or historical remains
requiring further study were detected within the subject
easement. However, it should be noted that there are a
number of modern burials located immediately adjacent to
the fencerow which demarcates the western edge of the
cemetery. Any easement modifications contemplated which
might extend to the east of this fencerow should take the
presence of these burials into account.

November 7, 1979

J. Peter Thurmond
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin

