Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of New Braunfels Utilities Proposed
E. C. Mornhinweg Substation Project
Comal County, Texas

By Andrew F. Malof and Daniel J. Prikryl

Andrew F. Malof
Principal Investigator

TAC Permit # 6166
Cultural Resources Report No. 17
Real Estate Services
Lower Colorado River Authority
February 2012

INTRODUCTION AND MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
New Braunfels Utilities (NBU) proposes to construct a new substation that will be known as the E. C.
Mornhinweg (ECM) Substation in southern Comal County between the communities of New Braunfels
and Schertz. Because NBU is a division of the City of New Braunfels, and therefore a governmental
agency, a cultural resources assessment is required under the Antiquities Code of Texas. There is no
federal permitting or funding for this project. At the request of NBU, LCRA’s Cultural Resources
department obtained Antiquities Permit # 6166 issued by the Texas Historical Commission (THC) to
LCRA archaeologist Andrew F. Malof as Principal Investigator, in order to conduct a cultural resources
survey of the proposed substation location. A cultural resources investigation that meets minimum survey
standards as adopted and recommended by THC was conducted by LCRA and contracted archaeologists
on February 8, 2012. No cultural resource sites were encountered during the investigation. The
substation parcel is considered to be fully investigated and it is recommended that the project be allowed
to proceed. No artifacts were collected and no curation will be necessary.

PROJECT DESCRIPTION
The ECM project will be an approximate 2.5-acre facility placed within an approximate 4-acre parcel of
land located at the intersection of FM 482 and a short county road that accesses a few structures, and now
leads to a massive quarry operation (Figure 1). A railroad line (known as the Kansas and Texas on the
1916 New Braunfels quad) roughly parallels FM 482 and borders the southeastern edge of the parcel.
The site is within a previously plowed field which is at closest 350 m from Dry Comal Creek.
Geologically this is within a non-aggrading landform, but is also within the 100 year floodplain. The
substation will therefore be placed upon a pad of fill that will be 1.2 m (4 ft) thick. The majority of
ground disturbance will take place within this pad.

PROJECT AREA BACKGROUND

Environmental Background
The project area is located about 5.2 miles southwest of the City of New Braunfels in southern Comal
County, Texas. Dry Comal Creek, a tributary of the Comal River, is situated 200 to 400 meters northwest
of the survey tract. The survey area is situated on a terrace that was formerly cultivated but has been
fallow in recent years.
The project area is located within the Blackland Prairie just 800 meters southeast of this geographic
province’s boundary with the Edwards Plateau (Arbingast et al. 1979:12). This boundary occurs along
the Balcones Escarpment, which has a sharp 120 ft rise in elevation from about 700 ft msl to 820 ft msl.
Elevations within the project area itself range from approximately 668 to 678 ft msl.

1

Figure 1. Project area on New Braunfels West USGS quad.

2

Surface geology within the project area mainly consists of the Pleistocene-aged Leona Formation with the
far south edge possibly being underlain by the Pecan Gap Chalk of the Cretaceous era (Barnes 1983).
The Leona Formation is described as consisting of fine calcareous silt grading down into coarse gravel.
Soils in the project area consist of the Branyon clay, the Krum clay and the Bolar clay loam (Batte
1984:Map Plate 99). Typically, the Branyon clay has a dark gray clay upper layer with an average
thickness of 122 cm that overlies 86 cm of grayish brown clay. The Krum clay topsoil is dark brown clay
with an average thickness of 48 cm. Deeper, the subsoil is typically 76 cm of brown clay. The surface
layer of the Bolar clay loam is dark grayish brown clay loam of 35 cm average thickness. The next soil
zone is the subsoil which is dark brown clay loam also having a 35 cm average thickness.
Based on data in McMahan et al. (1984), the project area was traditionally utilized as cropland from the
late nineteenth through mid twentieth centuries. Most of the agricultural fields in the general area now
appear to have been fallow for many years, and due to suburban expansion along the nearby Interstate 35
corridor, the landscape in the project area vicinity currently contains a mix of industrial parks, gravel
mining operations, residential settings, county roads, and railroad ROW.

Historic Background
The first European settlement in Comal County occurred in 1756 when the Mission Nuestra Senora de
Guadalupe was founded at or near the Comal Springs (Greene 2012). The mission was soon abandoned
in 1758 due to the cost of defending it from expected Comanche raids. A Mexican land grant was given
to Juan M. Veramendi in 1825, but it was not until 1845, when Prince Carl of Solms-Braunfels of
Germany acquired rights to over 1,000 acres surrounding Comal Springs, that permanent settlement
began in Comal County. By 1856 Comal County was formed by the Texas legislature, with boundaries
finalized in 1858. Despite a large German population, Comal County voted for secession during the Civil
War, even though the agrarian economy was largely based on household labor. New Braunfels also soon
became a hub of industry, as a variety of skilled workers and tradesmen arrived and set up support
mechanisms for the surrounding farms and ranches. By 1920, New Braunfels was taking full advantage
of the railroad and had become a manufacturing and shipping center. Throughout these times, the
population retained a German flavor. The Depression did not seem to impact the New Braunfels area
severely, and manufacturing and related industry continued to increase in abundance as tourism, fueled in
great part by the Guadalupe River and Canyon Lake, has become increasingly important to the economy.
The project area is located about midway between two small rural communities, Comal and Solms (Haas
2012a and b). They are both situated along Farm-to-Market Road 482, which appears to follow the path
of the Old San Antonio Road. Solms is located about four miles southwest of New Braunfels and was
originally known as Four Mile Creek for its location on that stream. It was established in the late 1840s
as German immigrant farmers spread southwestward out of nearby New Braunfels. The settlement soon
had a store and by 1857 the community had one of the first cotton gins in the county. In the 1880s the
name of the town changed to Solms in honor of Prince Carl of Solms-Braunfels. A post office operated
briefly in Solms from 1894 to 1903. Several rural schools in the area merged in the area in 1902 to form
the Solms School. Farming centered on corn and cotton crops while ranching included cattle, goat, and
3

sheep production. The population of the community was generally less than 100 individuals from the
1940s through 1980. By the late 1980s, the New Braunfels had grown so large that its boundary abutted
Solms.
Comal, Texas is located about four miles southwest of Solms. It was established in 1846 and became a
railroad section station on the Missouri, Kansas and Texas Railroad around 1900. Like Solms, it had a
population of about 40 in 1980 with most members of the community involved in farming, ranching or
working at a nearby stone quarry.

Prehistoric Background
The project area is located within southern edge of the Central Texas archeological region (Prewitt 1981;
Ellis et al. 1995). The Central Texas archeological record has typically been divided into four main
subdivisions. These periods, in chronological order from most ancient to most recent are: the
Paleoindian, the Archaic, the Late Prehistoric, and the Historic periods. These periods are differentiated
mostly by broadly defined subsistence patterns. The prehistoric part of this chronology has been
subdivided further into phases based largely on changes in material culture, especially projectile point
styles. Combined, this information begins to describe the 12,000 or more year history of human
occupation in Central Texas.
Prehistoric site types in Central Texas consist of camps, caches, isolated artifacts, interments, cemeteries,
kill/butcher locales, quarry/workshops, lithic scatters, and rock art sites (Collins 1995:363). Central
Texas is perhaps best known for the many burned rock midden sites that occur on the Edwards Plateau.
Numerous excavations of major campsites have been conducted along the larger streams and rivers (cf.
Prewitt 1982). Such excavations have demonstrated that Central Texas was occupied as early as the
Paleoindian Period. These also show that throughout these millennia, prehistoric peoples were nomadic
hunter-gatherers who moved across the landscape exploiting seasonally available plant and animal
resources.

Previous Investigations
According to digital Archeological Sites Atlas there are over 320 archaeological sites presently recorded
in Comal County. The nearest site is 41CM113, located on the north side of Dry Comal Creek about 500
m north of the project area. It is described as a lithic scatter with tools including scrapers, spoke shaves
and projectile points. About 350 m further north is 41CM115, a lithic scatter with tools resting right at
the base of the escarpment where an unmade tributary flows southward to its junction with Dry Comal
Creek. At least 15 sites have been recorded for a distance of 2 kilometers northwards along this same
drainage, many in conjunction with a flood control project (Carpenter and Skoglund, 2005), which is now
well underway.. They are mapped on both the upland edges of the canyon and along the stream and
consist of primarily lithic scatters and lithic procurement sites along with an open camp, a Late Archaic
burned rock midden complex, a historic trash scatter and a historic cement plant.

4

Within the vicinity of the present project area in similar settings cultural resource surveys have been much
less productive. A large EPA survey to the east resulted in the recording of 41CM107, described as a
lithic scatter with Late Archaic affiliations. No other sites were recorded, despite the project area fronting
on Dry Comal Creek at two separate locations. A fairly large block survey with associated linear
components conducted in 1999 by the U. S. Army Corps of engineers and the Fish and Wildlife Service
resulted in no recorded archaeological sites, nor did the LCRA Northcliff/Solms substation project in
2001 (Ralph 2003).
Other sites recorded in the same general setting as the present project include 41CM301, a minor lithic
scatter, 41CM302, a house that dates to 1845 (Feit and Stotts, 2007), 41GU38, a sparse lithic scatter,
lithic scatter 41GU22 and lithic scatter/open camp 41GU82 (Malof 2008).
In summary, this brief examination of locally recorded sites demonstrates that prehistoric lithic scatters
are common, with procurement sites clustered to some extent along the escarpment. This is not surprising
given that chert would be expected to outcrop here. Prehistoric camp sites, some of which are fairly
extensive, can be expected along water courses, while historic sites can be expected in almost any setting,
although detailed maps from the early twentieth century provide a excellent source for determining where
structures were located.

RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS
The investigation was designed to identify, assess, and make recommendations on any cultural resource
sites that might be present. Prior to field investigations, appropriate maps, including modern and
historical USGS quads, soils and geology and aerial imagery, were reviewed. The project area parcel
location was determined to be in an area of moderate to high probability for prehistoric resources. The
1916 New Braunfels topographic map was georeferenced over the project area. This map is very detailed
and includes names of house occupants and businesses. No structures or other suggestions of historic
occupation were shown.
Field investigations consisted of pedestrian survey coupled with shovel testing. Visibility was excellent
within the old agricultural field. Eight shovel tests were excavated, which meets THC survey standards of
two per acre for a project of this size. The tests were placed primarily within the area that the substation
would be placed, but also towards the portion of the tract nearest Dry Comal Creek (Figure 2). Tests
were excavated to obvious subsoils in almost all instances. Shovel test locations were recorded on a GPS
receiver with typical 3-4 m accuracy. Records were kept on standardized forms.
This report follows standards for negative finding reports as adopted by the THC. Figures were drafted
on a GIS that incorporates GPS waypoints.

5

Figure 2. 2004 aerial (NAIP) imagery of project area with parcel in green, substation in orange, and shovel tests
numbered in yellow. Note recently harvested hayfield.

6

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS
The project area was seen to be within a recently mowed, fallow agricultural field (Figure 3). Visibility
was excellent, and the soil was found to be a clay loam largely consistent with the surface description of
the mapped Branyon-Krum series soils. Subsurface coloration more closely matched Krum than Branyon
soils. Numerous (but not dense) cobbles, almost all of chert, were seen across the ground surface. Many
of these exhibited breakage indicative of plow damage. A single apparent core was seen at about the tract
center. It had been formed on a thin cobble of chert with alternate flake removal along one edge.

Figure 3. Project area looking generally northwest from the vicinity of FM 482 towards Dry Comal Creek, shovel
testing in progress.

Eight shovel tests were excavated. Recent rains had resulted in soils being thoroughly moist and the clay
content was such that screening was impossible. Soil was therefore carefully hand sorted as it was
removed from each test. The soil profiles were relatively similar except that they were yellower to the
south and browner to the north, once the A horizon had been passed. (Table 1 describes soils profiles for
the eight shovel tests.) All shovel tests encountered a few chert cobbles. These did not appear to
correspond with soil horizons and were recovered more or less consistently through the column.

7

One possible polyhedral core was recovered from Shovel Test 4. It was formed on one half of a battered
cobble of coarse grained chert. At least three broad flake scars are present and reflect sequential
longitudinal removal from the parent material. The platform angles, however, are obtuse, and in its
present state such flake removals would be impossible (see Whittaker 1994:92). Despite this, the distal
end of the core, if such it is, has a rolling surface that may emanate from an incipient cone of percussion
seen on the dorsal surface. If so, it represents an attempt at core rejuvenation, which for the piece in
question was only partially successful, as only one additional flake removal appears to be possible.
In summary, intensive pedestrian survey and shovel testing failed to locate anything other than two
possible cores within a four acre-sized piece of land. These finds are not considered to represent an
archaeological site.

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
New Braunfels Utilities engaged LCRA’s Cultural Resources department to conduct a cultural resources
survey for the new 2.5 acre E. C. Mornhinweg substation to be constructed within an approximate 4 acre
sized tract of land located in southern Comal County. The cultural resources survey was conducted
following minimum survey standards as adopted by the Texas Historical Commission and in accordance
with the terms of Texas Antiquities Permit #6166, which was issued for the project. No federal funding
or permitting is involved.
No archaeological sites or other cultural resources were identified as a result of the investigations. It is
therefore recommended that the NBU E. C. Mornhinweg substation be allowed to proceed to construction
and that any and all project related activities be allowed to take place within the 4 acre tract. However, if
unexpected cultural materials are encountered during construction, than it is understood that ground
disturbance shall cease in the area of the discovery until a qualified archaeologists, in consultation with
the THC, can assess the find.

8

Table 1. Shovel test profiles.

ST 1
0-29 – gray clay loam
29-50 – yellowish brown blocky clay loam,
mottled at 50 cm

ST 5
0-12 – grayish brown clay loam
12-50 – grayish brown friable clay loam
50-60 – light grayish brown clay loam

ST 2
0-23 – gray clay loam
23-45 – yellowish gray friable clay loam
45-50 – yellowish brown mottled clay loam

ST 6
0-16 – grayish brown clay loam with lots of
charcoal
16-30 – brownish clay loam
30-45 – yellowish brown clay loam
45-50 – yellowish brown clay

ST 3
0-13 – gray clay loam
13-45 – yellowish gray clay loam
45-50 – yellowish gray mottled clay loam

ST 7
0-11 – dense gray clay loam
11-36 – gray loamy clay
36-50 – mottled gray and brown clay loam

ST 4
0-12 – gray heavy clay loam
12-50 – yellowish gray clay loam

ST 8
0-12 – gray clay loam
12-44 – gray friable clay loam with brown
mottles
44-50 – pale gray mottled clay loam

9

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, S. A., L. G. Kennamer, R. H. Ryan, A. Lo, D. L. Karney, C. P. Zlatovich, M. E. Bonine, and
R. G. Steele
1976 Atlas of Texas. Bureau of Business Research, The University of Texas at Austin.
Batte, C. D.
1984

Barnes, V. E.
1983

Soil Survey of Comal and Hays Counties, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D. C.

Geologic Atlas of Texas:San Antinio Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Carpenter, Steve, and Thanet Skoglund
2005 Cultural Resources Significance Testing and Survey in Flood Control Project Area 11,
Comal County, Texas. SWCA Cultural Resources Report No. 04-22 , SWCA
Environmental Consultants, Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:361-400.
Ellis, L.W., G.L. Ellis, and C.D. Frederick
1995 Implications of Environmental Diversity in the Central Texas Archeological Region.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:401-426.
Feit, Rachel, and Michael C. Stotts
2007 Archeological Survey of FM 1014 Improvements from IH 35 to Weil Road in Comal and
Guadalupe Counties, Texas. Archeology Services No. 168. Hicks and Company, Austin.
Greene, D. P.
2012

Comal County. In The Handbook of Texas Online. Accessed Feb. 9, 2012. Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.

Haas, O.
2012a Comal, Texas. In The Handbook of Texas Online. Accessed Feb. 9, 2012. Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.
2012b Solms, Texas. In The Handbook of Texas Online. Accessed Feb. 9, 2012. Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.

10

Malof, Andrew F
2008 Post Construction Monitoring of the Weiderstien Substation Ditch Project, Site 41GU82.
in LCRA Annual Report of Investigations for 2007, by Andrew F. Malof and Daniel J.
Prikryl, compilers. Annual Report No. 17. Parks and Conservation Services, Lower
Colorado River Authority, Austin.
McMahan, C. A., R. G. Frye, and K. L. Brown
1984

The Vegetation Types of Texas Including Cropland. Texas Parks and Wildlife, Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-89.
1982 Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox, Loeve, and Tombstone Bluff Sites
in the Granger Lake District of Central Texas. In Archeological Investigations of
the San Gabriel Reservoir Districts, Central Texas, Vol. 4, edited by T. R. Hays.
Institute of Applied Sciences, North Texas State University, Denton.
Ralph, Ron
2003

Cultural Resource Survey of the Lower Colorado River Authority’s Proposed
Northcliff/Solms Electrical Substation Project, Comal County, Texas. In LCRA Annual
Report of Cultural Resource Investigations for 2001, by Andrew F, Malof, Daniel J.
Prikryl, Ron Ralph and Glenn T. Goode. Parks and Conservation Services, Lower
Colorado River Authority.

Whittaker, John C.
1994 Flintknapping: Making and Understanding Stone Tools. University of Texas Press,
Austin.

11

