Archaeological Survey of the Proposed
City of La Joya Multipurpose Facility,
Hidalgo County, Texas
SUBMITTED TO

Hollis Rutledge & Associates, Inc.
By
Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester

ABASOLO ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS

San Antonio, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5376
Report No. 85
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
2009

Archaeological Survey of the Proposed
City of La Joya Multipurpose Facility,
Hidalgo County, Texas
SUBMITTED TO

Hollis Rutledge & Associates, Inc.
By

Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester

ABASOLO ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS

San Antonio, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5376

Report No. 85
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
2009

2

Abstract

Abasolo Archaeological Consultants conducted a Phase I archaeological survey of the
12-acre site proposed for a new multipurpose facility to be built by the City of La Joya,
Hidalgo County, Texas under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5376. Work performed
included a 100% pedestrian survey of the 12 acres tract, followed by backhoe testing.
The 12-acre site had been used extensively as a gravel quarry in the past and is at least
80% disturbed. Traces of cultural material in the form of a light scatter of fire-cracked
rock, chert flakes, and snail shell (Rabdotus sp.) were observed in a graded area at the
northern portion o the property. Three backhoe trenches confirmed the presence of a
light cultural deposit buried in the alluvial soils; this site has been given the designation
41HG234. No further work is recommended for the site because the site area has been
much disturbed and the deposits do not appear to have stratigraphic integrity.
.

3

Introduction and Background

Abasolo Archaeological Consultants (AAC), conducted a Phase I archaeological survey
of the 12-acre site proposed for a new multipurpose center to be built by the City of La
Joya, Hidalgo County, Texas (Figs. 1 and 2).

Work performed included a 100%

pedestrian survey of the 12 acres tract, followed by backhoe testing. The field work was
conducted by the authors on September 9, 2009. The work was carried out in accordance
with the “Archeological Survey Standards for Texas” to insure that no archaeological or
historical resources eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places are
damaged or destroyed due to the planned construction.

Prior to fieldwork, Texas

Antiquities Permit 5376 was obtained.

The Setting

The City of La Joya is situated in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of southern Texas. It has
developed along Highway 83, and lies just north of the Rio Grande, in the upper section
of the vast delta formed by Quaternary alluvium (Bernard and LeBlanc 1965). The
present town was not founded until 1926, and was named “the jewel,” after a small
natural lake just to the west. However, its origin goes back to the Escandon settlements
in 1749. Apparently, La Joya is on the site of Los Ejidos de Reynosa Viejo, and near a
later community, Tabasco, organized in the early 1800s. The 12 acres surveyed in the
present project lies south of Highway 83 at the western end of La Joya, and is bordered
on the east by Palm Shores drive.

Geology

The dominate geological strata in this area is a thick deposit of cemented gravels. These
have been linked, by Weeks (1937), to the Pleistocene Lissie gravels and are so identified
on the geological map shown in Figure 3. These are mostly fist-sized siliceous cobbles

4

(chert, chalcedony, quartzite), though there are larger nodules that occur..

Most of the

southern half (or more) of the project area is a large quarry pit resulting from the mining
of these gravels. Indeed, the face of the quarry has eroded to a bluff-like appearance,
(Figs. 4 and 5). On close inspection of the face of this “outcrop” reveals traces of drilling
to break up the deposits as they were quarried (Fig. 4).

Other geologists would

characterize the quarry matrix as part of the Reynosa Formation (not to be confused with
the Reynosa soil noted above), with sands and gravel conglomerate (Trowbridge 1923;
Weeks 1937). The Goliad Formation, part of the Reynosa, is often quarried for gravels in
the region. Based on recent geological mapping, the quarried outcrop of cemented chert
and siliceous gravels at the La Joya project area may well be Uvalde Gravel (Pleistocene
or Pliocene), with “… well-rounded chert clasts. About 6 m [meters] thick.” (Page et al.
2005:7).

Beginning largely with the efforts of Mallouf et al. (1977), archaeologists working in the
Valley have attempted to use geological and geomorphological criteria to predict the
presence and types of sites within defined environmental zones. The work by Mallouf et
al. (1977) focused mainly on the eolian deposits of Willacy County and has little
relevance to the La Joya project. Hall et al. (1987:Figure 3) later defined and mapped
nine environmental zones. The La Joya survey area lies within their Zone IX, “[with]
major landforms features such as abandoned channels, levees and terraces along the Rio
Grande” (ibid.:14).

Soils

The soils in the project area were described in the late 1920s by Beck and Devereux, for
the United States Bureau of Chemistry and Soils (Beck and Devereux 1929). However,
their definitions are highly generalized. It is fortunate, therefore, that Jacobs (1981) has
authored a soil survey for the locality. In the multipurpose facility project one major soil
type is dominant. This is the Runn silty clay, saline (Jacobs 1981:54-55). It is described
as a deep soil found in flat areas (.5 to 1% slopes) of ancient terraces. That is clearly the
situation in the project area, which sits on the edge of an old Rio Grande terrace. Some

5

Reynosa silty clay, as well Grulla clay, impinge on the southeast corner of the project
area. The terrace surface has been modified by grading, and currently has a somewhat
steeper slope.

Archaeological Background
Regional Overview

The La Joya survey area lies within the Lower Rio Grande Valley, a distinctive
topographic area of southern Texas.

The region is flat and somewhat featureless,

dissected mainly by the Rio Grande and its earlier channels (resacas) and smaller
drainages. The northern portion the Valley is marked by the Arroyo Colorado, thought
by some to have been an early channel of the Rio Grande (Mallouf et al. 1977). Most of
the sediments in the Valley have been deposited by the Rio Grande in the last 10,000
years. In many areas, this accumulation has been very rapid, burying archeological sites
with little trace until they are exposed by erosion or development (Hester 1977).

The Valley also underwent large-scale agricultural modification beginning early in the
20th century (see Hall et al. 1987: Table 1).

The native vegetation (Foscue 1939)

characterized by thorn-brush forests and a strip of sub-tropical palm forests was largely
eliminated. Land-leveling for farming was particularly destructive of archeological sites,
especially those located on low knolls. Rapid urban expansion has changed the face of
the Valley, especially along Highway 83 from Rio Grande City to Brownsville, and such
rapid growth has also impacted the prehistoric and early historic cultural resources.
Residential developments, utilities construction, new highways and a variety of
infrastructure installations and improvements have dramatically changed the areas atop
the high terrace of the Rio Grande, as in the City of La Joya area.

Although still poorly understood from an archeological standpoint, the Valley has seen
extensive research in some areas. The initial investigations were by A. E. Anderson, a
civil engineer in Brownsville, who collected from many sites in the Valley and adjacent

6

Tamaulipas from, 1908-1940 (Anderson 1932).

Much of what has been written,

surmised, or interpreted (and misinterpreted) about Valley prehistory has been based on
Anderson’s collection. For example, it was extensively utilized by Richard S. MacNeish
during his surveys of coastal Tamaulipas, and he made distinctions, using the Anderson
materials, between cultural patterns on the Mexican and Texas sides of the Rio Grande
(e.g., the Barril Complex; MacNeish 1958). Prewitt (1974) re-checked, or attempted to
find, some of Anderson’s original sites.

Mallouf et al. (1977) provide a detailed history of the archeology of the Valley and
adjacent parts of south Texas, and updates are found in Ricklis (1995) and Hester (1995).
In the 1950s through the early 1970s, much of the literature deals with prehistoric burials
and cemeteries found through farming and urban expansion. During the 1970s through
the early 1990s, the construction of the extensive Hidalgo-Willacy Drainage Project was
preceded by archeological surveys and excavations by Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
(Austin, Texas). These contributed abundant new insights into the characteristics of
occupation or camp sites in the Valley (e.g., Day et al. 1981; Hall et al., 1986; Bousman
et al., 1990; Kibler 1994).

These studies were made even more valuable because they

represented a sustained archeological presence in the Valley over more than two decades.
Moreover, this project has provided data on site types in the general area of the present
project. Most are characterized by “very sparse cultural remains...only small quantities of
faunal and macrobotanical remains...and lack well-stratified contexts.” (Bousman et al.
1990:143). The age of these sites, and most others found in the Valley are largely within
the last 3000-4000 years. Most common are sites of the Late Prehistoric era (after A.D.
1200), though Late to Middle Archaic artifacts have been found in some areas (ca. 1000
B.C.-A.D. 1200; see Mallouf et al. 1977). The Late Prehistoric has long been assigned to
the Brownsville Complex, noted for manufacture of great numbers of shell ornaments,
and use of dunes for camp sites and for cemeteries (Hester 1995). However, recent work
by Terneny (2005) has indicated that the “Brownsville Complex” is badly in need of
revision. For example, new radiocarbon dates from prehistoric cemetery sites (often
lumped into the Brownsville Complex; see Collins et al. 1959) actually date, at least in
part, to the Late Archaic.

This suggests that some of the distinctive traits of the

7

Brownsville Complex (shell working, for example) have earlier origins than once
thought.

Nearby Sites

Only a handful of archaeological sites have been recorded in the La Joya area (Texas
Archeological Site Atlas, Texas Historical Commission). To the east-southwest, both
41HG149 and 41HG150 are surface lithic scatters, with no diagnostics. Site 41HG210, in
this vicinity, is on the Rio Grande terrace, similar to the project area. However, this is a
historic site, with artifacts related to an early to middle 20th century house

To the southwest of La Joya is 41HG143, a depression with lithics and, apparently,
Archaic diagnostics. Known to avocational archaeologists since the 1960s, the site is
now thought to have been destroyed. South of La Joya, toward the Rio Grande, is two
sites in the route of the “border fence.” Both 41HG209 and 41HG210 are lithic scatters
with no diagnostics. Located on the alluvial floodplain, these sites were not tested but
Might have some buried deposits. 41HG120 is a particularly large lithic scatter, in
comparison to the other lithic scatters noted above.

Research Design
The research design consisted of employing the field methods needed to fully inspect for
any evidence of historic or prehistoric archaeological sites, and to determine the presence
or absence of intact cultural deposits for any site documented. The tasks proposed to
accomplish these objectives are enumerated below:

Task 1: Request a TAC permit. Abasolo Archaeological Consultants obtained a Texas
Antiquities Commission permit (No. 5376) that was required for this project. Once the
permit number was received from the Texas Historical Commission (THC), field work
could proceed.

8

Task 2: Field Work. To fully inspect the area, a 100% pedestrian survey was conducted
across the entire 12 acres. Backhoe trenches were determined to be more effective than
shovel testing, in accordance to Texas Council of Archaeologists survey standards.
Survey finds were record using hand-held GPS units and plotted on the project map.
Diagnostic artifacts encountered during the course of the survey or testing will be
digitally photographed for recording. A no collection policy was followed, as no unusual
finds were encountered.

Task 3. Following the field work, the information recovered form the pedestrian survey
and shovel testing will be compiled and evaluated. The formal report presented here was
prepared following the Council of Texas Archeologists report guidelines. Those include
project description, summary of the geology and soils in the project area, archaeological
background, and archaeological sites in the vicinity, survey findings, summary and
recommendations.

Task 4. This formal report will be submitted as a review draft to the Texas Historical
Commission. Once the report has been accepted, a notice to proceed will be issued by the
THC at which time construction can begin.

Task 5: We have prepared 25 copies of the final report... Twenty copies will be
submitted to the Texas Historical Commission in fulfillment of the Texas Antiquities
Permit needed to perform the work; three copies will be provided to Hollis Rutledge &
Associates, and one copy to the City of La Joya.

Survey Results
The property was exposed with virtually no ground cover. Most of the property consisted
of an abandoned gravel quarry that had severely modified the landscape. One small area
of the terrace remained in the northeast quadrant and an additional area along the
northern portion of the property had been graded with a 5-8% slope to the west (Figs. 69). In other words, over 85% of the property had been disturbed to the extent that no
intact geological deposits existed. Even the surface of the remaining portion not quarried

9

showed extensive surface modification as if the soils were churned a bulldozer and an
admixture of construction debris was seen among the surface material (Figs. 6-9).

The survey team did note an unusual amount of snail shell (Rabdotus sp) along the north
eastern fence line; this species of snail is known to have been a food source for
prehistoric populations. Two man-made flakes were also observed in this area. An
inspection of the graded slope yielded a trace of a disturbed hearth area (Fig. 10), a biface
(Fig. 11), two chipped basalt pebbles (Fig. 11), and several more flakes, and an
abundance of snails.

Backhoe testing was employed instead of shovel testing (Figs. 12, 13). About the time we
were documenting the hearth area, backhoe operator Eli De La Rosa arrived with a City
of La Joya machine. Mike Alaniz, the City Manager, had volunteered the backhoe for
use if we needed it. A further inspection of the graded slope revealed several more flakes
and fire-cracked rock fragments. The decision was made to excavate a series of backhoe
trenches to see if the cultural deposits were intact and to determine how deep they were
beneath the graded surface.

Three backhoe trenches, all oriented east-west, were

excavated (Fig. 13). Descriptions of these trenches are provided below.

BHT-1 UTM 14R 0552568E/2902821N

This trench was six meters long and reached a depth of 1.1 meters. Profile views are
shown in Figures 14 and 15).

0-70 cm: Compact pale brown (10YR6/3) Runn silty clay with some small gravels
mixed in. Adult Rabdotus sp., some flakes, and an occasional fire-cracked rock
fragment were observed. One core of silicified wood was observed (Fig. 11).
.7-1.10 meters: Mottled deposit of light yellowish brown and light gray matrix; the
light gray consists of caliche nodules. No cultural material was present.

1.10+ cm: Gravel.

10

BHT-2 UTM 0552592E/2902812N

This trench was 23 meters east of BHT 1. It was two meters in length and reached a
depth of 1.3 meters. The trench was excavated to determine the depth of the overlying
sandy deposit containing the cultural material. Excavation ceased when the caliche
deposit was reached. The profile is shown in Figure 16, and is described below.

0-1.0 meters: Pale brown (10YR6/3) compact Runn silty clay with some gravel.
Rabdotus, a few flakes, and fire-cracked rock were observed, but the density is
much less that was observed in BHT 1.
1.0-1.2 meters: Compact sandy loam with a heavy admixture of caliche nodules.
No cultural material was observed in this deposit.

1.2 m+ The backhoe struck compact gravel at this level.

BHT 3 UTM 0552617E2902808N

This three-meter trench was placed 24 meters east of and upslope from BHT 2. This
trench also was excavated to determine the depth of the sandy deposit which contained
traces of cultural material. Like BHT#2, the trench was terminated when the caliche and
gravel was encountered (Fig. 17).

0-70 cm: The same pale brown Runn silty clay was encountered (10YR6/3) but with
much more gravel.

Fire-cracked rock, snails, and flakes were much less

frequent. At 70 cm caliche mixed with gravel was encountered. No cultural
material was found below 70 cm.

Site 41HG234

11

The survey did discover one archaeological site, designated as 41HG234. The site area,
located at the northern portion of the property, and is shown in Figure 12. It is exposed in
on the surface of a graded slope that extends across much of the north portion of the
property. How much of the surface had been removed above the exposed cultural
material is unknown. The traces of cultural material consists of a very thin scatter of
fire-cracked rock fragments, a few chipped stone flakes, two worked basalt pebbles, a
small biface, snail shells, and at least one core. Representative artifacts are shown in
Figure. 11. The cultural deposits are confined to the upper portion of the Runn silty clay
deposits that overlies the formation of consolidated gravels. The lower part of the soil
profile consists of a dense concentration of caliche nodules intermixed with some gravels
and silty clay soil. No cultural material was found in the caliche soils which overlay the
gravels. The site area, which was probably much larger prior to the gravel operation and
more recent grading, extends about 100-120 meters east-west and about 75 meters northsouth. Cultural material is thinly scattered throughout the area tested and because if its
location north of the gravel pit, the authors suspect that this is probably the northern
remnant a site that was more extensively originally. We do not recommend any further
work at the site because of the extent of the previous disturbances and were unable to
determine if the deposits have stratigraphic integrity.

Summary and Recommendations
The pedestrian inspection of the 12-acre tract proposed for the City of La Joya’s
multipurpose facility revealed that all but a small portion of the area had been severely
disturbed by gravel quarrying. Despite the extensive disturbances, traces of a prehistoric
site (41HG234) were exposed along the graded slope at the northern end of the property.
A light deposit of flakes, cores, fire-cracked rock, Rabdotus snails, an occasional artifact,
and a scattered hearth area was observed on the surface.

12

Backhoe testing provided some insight to the surface geology and stratigraphy. The
cultural material, which was never concentrated, was contained within Runn silty clay
deposit that reached a maximum depth of .7 -1.0 meter immediately overlying the gravel
formation. These cultural-bearing deposits overlay a zone of dense caliche nodules, some
gravel, and silty clay that was sterile of cultural material. Beneath the caliche are dense
gravels. No evidence of geological stratification was observed in the deposits containing
cultural material, and no diagnostic artifacts were observed that would give any
indication of the sites chronological age.

Based on the results of the surface survey and backhoe testing, it is apparent that the
traces of the site recorded represents the northern extent of a much larger site that has
been mostly destroyed by the quarrying activity. Given the fact that the cultural deposits
were exposed on a graded surface, it is unknown how deep the site was originally and
how much has been removed.

The authors think the identifying the site was important because its location in the
landscape (an old terrace of the Rio Grande) could alert researchers in the future that
buried deposits do occur in this kind of setting. Even though the site does contain intact
deposits, the deposits do not appear to have stratigraphic integrity. More extensive
testing might yield diagnostic artifacts, but we do not feel the effort would be worthwhile
due to the extensive modification of the survey locale, sever alteration of the site’s
context. Therefore, we do not recommend further work at the site.

References Cited
Anderson, A. E.
1932 Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 4:29-31.
Beck, M.W. and R. E. Devereux
1929 Soil Survey of Hidalgo County, Texas. United States Bureau of Chemistry
and Soils. Washington, D.C.
Bernard, H. A. and R. J. LeBlanc
1965 Resume of the Quaternary Geology of the Northwestern Gulf of Mexico
13

Province. In, The Quaternary of the United States, ed. by H. E. Wright, Jr.
and D. G. Frey, pp.137- 185. Princeton University press, Princeton, N.J.
Bousman, C. B., S. A. Tomka, and G. L. Bailey
1990 Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in Hidalgo and Willacy
Counties, South Texas: Results of the Phase I Test Excavations. Report
of Investigations 76. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.
Brown, L. F., J. L. Brewton, T. J. Evans, J. H. McGowan, W. A. White, C. G. Groat, and
W. L. Fisher
1980 Environmental Geologic Atlas of the Texas Coastal Zone—
Brownsville Harlingen Area. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Collins, M. B., T. R. Hester, and F. A. Weir
1969 The Floyd Morris Site (4lCF2). A Prehistoric Cemetery Site in Cameron
County, Texas. Part 1. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:
119-146.
Day, D. W., J. Laurens-Day, and E. R. Prewitt
1981 Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo and
Willacy Counties, Texas. Reports of Investigations 15. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Foscue, E. J.
1939 Historical Geography of the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas.
The Texas Geographic Magazine 3(1):1-15.
Hall, G. D., M. B. Collins and E. R. Prewitt
1987 Cultural Resources Investigations Along Drainage Improvements,
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas: 1986 Investigations. Report
of Investigations 59. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.
Hester, T. R.
1977 The Archeology of the Lower Rio Grande Valley of Texas. In, An
Exploration of a Common Legacy, The Proceedings, ed. by M. E. Heck,
pp. 66-73. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1995

Jacobs, J. L.
1981

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:427-460.

Soil Survey of Hidalgo County, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.

Kibler, K. W.

14

1994

Archeological and Geomorphological Investigations at Prehistoric
Sites 41WY50 and 41WY60, Willacy County, Texas. Report of
Investigations 95. Prewitt and Associates, Inc. Austin.

MacNeish, R. S.
1958 Preliminary Archaeological Investigations in the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 48(6).
Philadelphia.
Mallouf, R. J., B. J. Baskin, and K. L. Killen
1977 A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in Hidalgo and
Willacy Counties, Texas. Archeological Survey Report 23. Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
Page, W. R.,. D. P. Vansistine, and K. J. Turner
2005 Preliminary Geological Map of Southernmost Texas, United States,
And Parts of Tamaulipas and Nuevo Leon, Mexico. U.S. Geological
Survey Open-File Report 2005-1409. Denver.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Rio Grande
Delta of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 45: 55-65.
Ricklis, R. A.
1995 Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A
Regional Overview. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:265-300.
Terney, T. T.
2005 A Re-Evaluation of Late Prehistoric and Archaic Chronology in the Rio
Grande Delta of South Texas. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Trowbridge, A. C.
1923 A Geologic Reconnaissance in the Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas, near the
Rio Grande. In Shorter Contributions to General Geology, Professional
Paper 131, pp. 85-107. United States Geological Survey, Washington,
D. C.
Weeks, A. W.
1937 Miocene, Pliocene, and Pleistocene Formations in the Rio Grande Region,
Starr and Hidalgo County, Texas. Bulletin of the American Association of
Petroleum Geologists, Vol. 21: 491-499.

15

Figures

Figure 1. Aerial perspective of the project area within La Joya;
Highway 83 is to the north (top) of the image.

16

Figure 2. Topographic map of the La Joya project area.

17

Figure 3. Geological Map of the La Joya area showing the
consolidated gravel formation as the dominant unit in the project area.

Figure 4. Wall of old gravel quarry looking southeast at the La Joya
project site showing exposed consolidated gravels.

18

Figure 5. View looking northwest across old gravel quarry.

Figure 6. View of 41HG234 looking north toward the northeast
boundary; not the graded slope near the back of the property.

19

Figure 7. View of site 41HG234 looking west from near the eastern
boundary of the property.

Figure 8. Looking upslope on the graded are at 41HG234. Golf ball
in the center marks the traces of the hearth area.
20

Figure 9. View looking south-southwest from the eastern section of
the La Joya project property.

of

Figure 10. View showing traces of a hearth area marked by fragments
burned rock.

21

Figure 11. Artifacts observe at 41HG134. Left, small biface, center
two artifacts are chipped basalt pebbles; right artifact is a tested
silicified wood core.

Figure 12. Excavation of BHT#1 in progress monitored by Thomas Hester.

22

1

2

3

41HG234

Figure 13. Aerial perspective of site 41GU234 and location of BHT
1-3.

23

Figure 14. Profile view of BHT#1.

Graded Surface

Cultural zone

Caliche, no
cultural material

Figure 15. Details of BHT#1 profile showing the aeolian sand
capping a calihe layer above gravel deposit.

24

Figure 16 . Profile view of BHT#2. The scale rests on the calichegravel deposit at the bottom of the trench.

Figure 17. Profile view of BHT#3 showing the upper sandy deposit.
25

26

