Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract,
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens and Kathryn St. Clair

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8402
H222-180075

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

NRP Holdings, LLC
San Antonio, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

June 2018

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract,
San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens and Kathryn St. Clair

Prepared for:

NRP Holdings, LLC
200 Concord Plaza Drive, Suite 900
San Antonio, Texas 78216

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
H222-180075

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8402

June 2018

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by NRP Holdings, LLC
(NRP) on behalf of the San Antonio Housing Trust (SAHT) Public Facility Corporation (PFC) to
conduct an archeological survey and assessment for the proposed development of an
approximately 1.3-hectare (3.3-acre) tract located at the western corner of the intersection of W.
Jones Avenue and Broadway Street in downtown San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. The tract,
designated herein as the “Broadway Jones tract,” consists of a small city block on the northeastern
side of downtown San Antonio bounded on the northeast by W. Jones Avenue, on the southeast
by Broadway Street, on the southwest by 10th Street, and on the northwest by Avenue B. For
purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is considered to consist of the entire
1.3-hectare (3.3-acre) tract.
While the subject property is currently privately owned, the proposed undertaking would
be sponsored by the SAHT PFC, which would become the future landowner of the tract. As the
SAHT PFC is a political subdivision of the state of Texas, the project would fall under the
jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). In
addition, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the City of San Antonio’s (CoSA) Historic
Preservation and Design Section of the Unified Development Code (Article 6, Sections 35-630,
Designated Archaeological Sites, to 35-634, Cemeteries). At this time, no federal agency permits,
licenses, or funding have been identified in connection with the project. As the proposed project
represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project sponsor is required to provide the Texas
Historical Commission (THC), which serves as the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for
the state of Texas, and the CoSA’s Office of Historic Preservation (OHP) with an opportunity to
review and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties considered
eligible for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) under the Antiquities Code of Texas.
The tract is currently a developed urban lot, and several standing buildings are present on
the tract. A large, abandoned, 1.5-story brick warehouse with two attached single-story office
buildings are present within the northern portion of the tract; a small, single-story commercial
building sits in the middle of the southeastern portion of the tract that is currently in use as part of
a mayoral election campaign; a covered carport runs along the back side of the southeastern half
of the tract behind the small commercial building; and a central alley bisects the tract from
northeast to southwest. The majority of the tract is composed of asphalt-paved parking lots,
though the various buildings are constructed on concrete slabs.

H222-180075

v

Management Summary

Prior to initiating the field survey, Horizon conducted preliminary consultation with Matt
Elverson, Assistant City Archaeologist, with the CoSA’s OHP to discuss the specific scope of work
for the archeological investigations. As the entirety of the block is paved, standard archeological
survey techniques, such as surface inspection and shovel testing, would not be appropriate.
Instead, Mr. Elverson suggested that approximately four backhoe trenches should be excavated.
One trench would be excavated in the eastern corner of the tract, near the intersection of
Broadway Street and W. Jones Avenue, to target a branch of a historic-age acequia shown on an
1852 historical map as crossing that portion of the tract. A second trench would be excavated
perpendicular to the San Antonio River in the western corner of the tract, near the intersection of
10th Street and Avenue B, to target alluvial deposits underneath the asphalt pavement and
disturbed construction fills. The third, fourth, and any additional trenches that may be necessary
would be excavated in the central area of the southeastern portion of the tract fronting onto
Broadway Street where a row of late 19th- to early 20th-century dwellings and associated
outbuildings were formerly located, as depicted on historical Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps.
From May 1 to 3, 2018, Horizon archeologists Briana Smith, Jeffrey D. Owens, Eric
Schroeder, and Jared Wiersema conducted a cultural resources survey within the project area to
locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Jeffrey D. Owens served as Principal Investigator, and Kathryn St. Clair provided supplemental
historical research. The cultural resources survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit
no. 8402.
Horizon excavated a total of six backhoe trenches during the survey. Overall, the
stratigraphy of the sediments on the block consists of multiple deposits of artificial fills of varying
depths overlying gravelly Pleistocene-age terrace deposits. Possible Holocene-age terrace
deposits were encountered in two of the six backhoe trenches. No prehistoric cultural resources
were observed in any of the trenches.
Examination of historical maps and aerial photographs suggests that there were roughly
three major phases of development within the project area—late 19th century to early
20th century, early to mid-20th century, and mid- to late 20th century. Based on the earliest map
evidence available from 1852, one or two small branches of a historic-age acequia (irrigation
ditch) may have crossed the project area, which suggests that this part of San Antonio was
probably largely agricultural until urban development spread this far north in the late 19th century.
Residential and commercial development is evident within the project area by 1886 (the date of
the earliest map available), and the earliest buildings on the block appear to have stood well into
the early 20th century. Most of the lots along Broadway Street (then named Avenue C) supported
dwellings at this time, as did many of the lots on the Avenue B side of the block. A bakery may
also have been present fronting onto W. Jones Street (then named Grand Avenue) in the early
20th century, though this building appears to have been a later addition to the block if in fact it
was ever built.
There is a gap in historical map coverage in the early to mid-20th century between 1912
and 1955, though city directories help to fill in the gap. Most of the original buildings on the block
were demolished during this timeframe. By 1955, the date of the earliest aerial photograph

vi

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

examined, all of the original buildings had been removed and replaced largely with open lots and
commercial structures related to automotive businesses.
The current configuration of the block evolved over the course of the mid- to late
20th century. The large 1.5-story brick warehouse and its attached offices in the northern portion
of the block were constructed between 1955 and 1963. By 1986, all of the earlier buildings except
for the large warehouse and its attached offices had been removed, and the entire block was in
use as a parking lot. Given the density of vehicles packed into the parking areas visible on aerial
photographs, it would appear that the block was associated with an automotive dealership and/or
repair shop run from the warehouse and offices (the word “Automotive” is still faintly visible painted
on the side of the warehouse). A small structure was built at the eastern corner of the block at
the intersection of W. Jones Avenue and Broadway Street between 1973 and 1986 that may have
served as a filling station used by the business (several underground storage tanks were removed
from this area the week before Horizon’s cultural resources survey was conducted), though this
structure was removed by 1986. A smaller, single-story commercial building was constructed on
the Broadway Street side of the block between 1986 and 1995, probably as part of the automotive
business. As such, the current configuration of buildings currently standing on the property had
been achieved by 1995. However, the automotive business appears to have shut down by then,
as subsequent images show mostly abandoned, unused parking lots on the block. Currently, the
smaller commercial building is in temporary use in connection with a mayoral campaign, and
much of the parking is leased out to nearby businesses. The warehouse and offices are boarded
up and abandoned.
No evidence of the historic-age acequia depicted on an 1852 historical map was observed
within the project area. Construction debris—mainly bricks, brick fragments, concrete chunks,
and rebar—was relatively abundant in some of the lenses of artificial fill deposits observed in
backhoe trenches. While at least some of the structural debris may have derived from the earlier
structures on the block, the rubble deposits on the site appear to date from the most recent phase
of construction on the block dating to the mid- to late 20th century. A few window glass shards
were observed in some of the trenches, but non-structural cultural materials were otherwise
largely absent from the fill deposits within the project area.
No clear evidence of the late 19th- to early 20th-century phase of development was
observed during the cultural resources survey, though one or two objects or features were
encountered that may be associated with this timeframe. These features, which include a
rectangular concrete footing and two superimposed debris pits, were recorded as archeological
site 41BX2244.
The concrete footing, which consists of a rectangular concrete slab or block with two
pieces of rebar projecting from its top, was encountered in a trench (BHT-4) excavated along W.
Jones Avenue along the northeastern edge of the block at a depth of 110.0 centimeters
(43.3 inches) below the modern ground surface. The function of this concrete footing is not
certain, though it may represent the remains of a railroad trestle support. An early Sanborn Fire
Insurance Map from 1904 shows an elevated railroad trestle on the original iron Grand Avenue
Bridge crossing the San Antonio River, located a half-block northwest of the project area along
W. Jones Avenue (formerly Grand Avenue). This railroad likely transported freight from

H222-180075

vii

Management Summary

businesses on the northwest side of the river, such as the Lone Star Brewery, to railroad depots
located three blocks southeast of the project area. This railroad trestle is depicted along the
southwestern side of the bridge, which would place it on the same side of W. Jones Avenue
(formerly Grand Avenue) as the concrete footing observed in BHT-4. The current Grand Avenue
Bridge (which does not appear to have included a railroad trestle) was constructed in 1928, which
places the abandonment of the local street railway system between 1904 and 1928 (notably, the
1912 Sanborn Fire Insurance Map depicts the original iron Grand Avenue Bridge, though it does
not specifically mention the railroad trestle, so it is possible the railroad was already out of use at
this time).
Two superimposed rubble pits were detected in one backhoe trench (BHT-6) excavated
in the approximate center of the southeastern portion of the block facing onto Broadway Street.
This trench and a neighboring trench (BHT-5) were excavated within the mapped location of an
adobe house depicted on the 1896, 1904, and 1912 Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps in an attempt
to discern whether or not any structural remnants associated with the original phase of
development may be present below the layers of construction fill. The lower of the two
superimposed rubble pits was observed at depths of 90.0 to 250.0 centimeters (35.4 to
98.4 inches) below surface and measured 4.5 meters (14.8 feet) in length in profile. This lower
pit is superimposed by a later rubble-filled pit that cuts into the top of the earlier pit, extending
from depths of 45.0 to 150.0 centimeters (17.7 to 59.1 inches) below surface. While no
architectural remnants or artifacts temporally diagnostic of the late 19th or early 20th centuries
were encountered, the lower pit contained a fairly large concentration of powderized calcium
carbonate. The high concentration of powdery calcium carbonate suggests that the lower pit may
represent the remains of a lime slaking pit. Prior to the introduction of Portland cement in the US
in the 1870s to 1880s, mortar was produced by the calcination of limestone at high temperatures
in lime kilns and the addition of sand to the resulting quicklime to produce mortar or cement.
Calcined lime would be removed from the kiln after several days of heating, sent to pits, and
dissolved (“slaked”) by pouring water over it. The burnt rock would heat the water beyond the
boiling point and turn into a white, yogurt-like paste that would be covered by a layer of water and
stored until ready for use. The processed limestone (pit lime) was used as mortar for masonry
work. While this inference about the function of the lower pit is far from conclusive, it is possible
that such a feature could have been used during the earliest phase of development within the
project area to produce mortar for buildings. Some residential and commercial development is
evident within the project area as early as 1886 (earlier images were not available), and the
earliest buildings on the block appear to have stood well into the early 20th century. Production
of mortar from calcined lime would have been much more labor-intensive than purchasing
Portland cement, though local production of calcined lime may have been the more expedient
option if imported cement was not readily available at the time. A dwelling was present on this lot
at the location of the possible lime pit by 1886; as such, this pit may have been associated with
the earliest phase of development in the late 19th century. Of course, the presence of a slaking
pit would suggest a lime kiln would have been located nearby, and no archeological or historical
map evidence of such a structure was noted, so it is also possible that the lower pit is simply an
early pit filled with a high concentration of calcium carbonate and some construction debris (the
gravelly Pleistocene-age terrace into which this pit was excavated also contains a high

viii

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

concentration of calcium carbonate). The secondary rubble pit that cuts into the lower pit contains
construction debris indicative of the last phase of construction within the project area during the
mid- to late 20th century.
The majority of the cultural resources observed during Horizon’s survey of the Broadway
Jones tract are associated with the most recent phase of demolition and construction within the
project area dating to the mid- to late 20th century, which produced the current configuration of
the block. While one archeological site, 41BX2244, was recorded—consisting of two cultural
objects or features, including a concrete structural footing possibly associated with an early 20thcentury railway and a large pit filled with powderized calcium carbonate that may represent the
remains of a lime slaking pit associated with the original phase of construction and development
on the block in the late 19th century—the objects/features that compose this site do not retain
sufficient integrity to reflect the character of late 19th- to early 20th-century residential and
commercial development on the block. Artificial fill layers observed across the project area
contain varying quantities of construction debris (mainly bricks, brick fragments, concrete chunks,
and rebar), appear to be associated mainly with the mid- to late 20th-century phase of
development on the block, and are heavily disturbed. No intact structural remains, architectural
remnants, or archeological deposits were observed, and site 41BX2244 is recommended as being
ineligible for designation as an SAL.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the project area documented in
this report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed
undertaking. In accordance with 36 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.4, Horizon has made
a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify historic properties within the project area. No cultural
resources were identified that meet the criteria for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks
(SAL) according to 13 TAC 26, and no further archeological investigations are recommended in
connection with the proposed undertaking. However, it should be noted that human burials are
protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the unlikely event that any human remains
or burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately at the location of the inadvertent discovery until a qualified archeologist can assess
the find, and the THC should be notified of the discovery.

H222-180075

ix

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 6
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 6
2.4
Biota.............................................................................................................. 9

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8,500 years B.P.) ....................................11
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8,500 to 1,200 years B.P.) .............................................12
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1,200 to 350 years B.P.) ...................................12
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 years B.P. to Present) ............................................12

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................23

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................37

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................49

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................59
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................59
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................60
7.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................61
7.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................63

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................65
APPENDIX A: Backhoe Trenching Data

H222-180075

xi

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1-1.
Figure 1-2.
Figure 2-1.
Figure 4-1.
Figure 4-2.
Figure 4-3.
Figure 4-4.
Figure 4-5.
Figure 4-6.
Figure 5-1.
Figure 5-2.
Figure 5-3.
Figure 5-4.
Figure 5-5.
Figure 5-6.
Figure 5-7.
Figure 5-8.
Figure 5-9.
Figure 5-10.
Figure 5-11.
Figure 5-12.
Figure 5-13.
Figure 6-1.
Figure 6-2.
Figure 6-3.
Figure 6-4.
Figure 6-5.
Figure 6-6.
Figure 6-7.

xii

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map ......................................... 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph .................................................... 3
Distribution of Soil Types Mapped within Project Area ........................................ 7
Locations of Known Cultural Resources within 0.5 Mile of Project Area .............24
Possible Historic-age Acequias within Project Area Based on 1852 Map ...........27
Location of Project Area on Bird’s Eye Drawing of San Antonio (1886) ..............29
Location of Project Area on Sanborn Fire Insurance Map (1896) .......................31
Location of Project Area on Sanborn Fire Insurance Map (1904) .......................32
Location of Project Area on Sanborn Fire Insurance Map (1912) .......................34
Project Area from Broadway Street/10th Street Intersection (Facing North) .......38
Project Area from Broadway Street/W. Jones Avenue Intersection (Facing
West) .................................................................................................................38
Parking Lot in Western Portion of Block (Abandoned Warehouse in
Background) (Facing Northwest)........................................................................39
Abandoned Warehouse and Attached Offices from W. Jones Avenue/
Avenue B Intersection (Facing South) ................................................................39
Abandoned Warehouse and Attached Equipment Storage (Facing West) .........40
Offices Attached to Abandoned Warehouse (Facing Southwest) .......................40
Commercial Building Fronting on Broadway Street (Facing West) .....................41
Covered Carport along Rear of Broadway Street Side of Block Abutting
Central Alley (Facing Southwest) .......................................................................41
Subsurface Gas and Electrical Utility Lines under Covered Carport at Rear of
Broadway Street Side of Block (Facing Northwest) ............................................42
View of Central Alley from W. Jones Avenue (Facing Northwest) ......................42
Parking Lot Fronting on Broadway Street (Facing Southwest) ...........................43
Eastern Corner of Parking Lot from W. Jones Avenue/Broadway Street
Intersection (Facing West) .................................................................................43
Locations of Backhoe Trenches within Project Area...........................................45
Location of Site 41BX2244 on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .........................50
Location of Site 41BX2244 on Aerial Photograph ..............................................51
Stratigraphic Profile Sketch of BHT-4 (Southwest Wall) .....................................52
Overview of BHT-4 Profile (Facing Southeast) ...................................................52
View of Concrete Footing in BHT-4 (Facing Northwest) .....................................53
Grand Avenue Bridge (One Block Northwest of Project Area) (Facing West) .....54
Similar Concrete Railroad Abutment Observed at The Luxury Sandwich Shop
near Grand Avenue Bridge (Facing West) .........................................................54

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 6-8.
Figure 6-9.

Stratigraphic Profile Sketch of BHT-6 (Southwest Wall) .....................................55
Detail of BHT-6 Profile (Facing Southwest) ........................................................55

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 2-1.
Table 4-1.
Table 7-1.

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area.................................................... 8
Previously Documented Cultural Resources within 0.5 Mile of Project Area .......25
Summary of Cultural Resources Recorded During Survey .................................62

H222-180075

xiii

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by NRP Holdings, LLC
(NRP) on behalf of the San Antonio Housing Trust (SAHT) Public Facility Corporation (PFC) to
conduct an archeological survey and assessment for the proposed development of an
approximately 1.3-hectare (3.3-acre) tract located at the western corner of the intersection of W.
Jones Avenue and Broadway Street in downtown San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas (Figures 11 to 1-2). The tract, designated herein as the “Broadway Jones tract,” consists of a small city
block in northern San Antonio bounded on the northeast by W. Jones Avenue, on the southeast
by Broadway Street, on the southwest by 10th Street, and on the northwest by Avenue B. For
purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is considered to consist of the entire
1.3-hectare (3.3-acre) tract.
While the subject property is currently privately owned, the proposed undertaking would
be sponsored by the SAHT PFC, which would become the future landowner of the tract. As the
SAHT PFC is a political subdivision of the state of Texas, the project would fall under the
jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). In
addition, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the City of San Antonio’s (CoSA) Historic
Preservation and Design Section of the Unified Development Code (Article 6, Sections 35-630,
Designated Archaeological Sites, to 35-634, Cemeteries). At this time, no federal agency permits,
licenses, or funding have been identified in connection with the project. As the proposed project
represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the project sponsor is required to provide the Texas
Historical Commission (THC), which serves as the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for
the state of Texas, and the CoSA’s Office of Historic Preservation (OHP) with an opportunity to
review and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties considered
eligible for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) under the Antiquities Code of Texas.
The tract is currently a developed urban lot, and several standing buildings are present on
the tract. A large, abandoned, 1.5-story brick warehouse with two attached single-story offices is
present within the northern portion of the tract; a small, single-story commercial building sits in
the middle of the southeastern portion of the tract that is currently in use as part of a mayoral
election campaign; a covered carport runs along the back side of the southeastern half of the tract
behind the small commercial building; and a central alley bisects the tract from northeast to
southwest. The majority of the tract is composed of asphalt-paved parking lots, though the various
buildings are constructed on concrete slabs.

H222-180075

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1-1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Map

2

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 1-2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

H222-180075

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Prior to initiating the field survey, Horizon conducted preliminary consultation with Matt
Elverson, Assistant City Archaeologist, with the CoSA’s OHP to discuss the specific scope of work
for the archeological investigations. As the entirety of the block is paved, standard archeological
survey techniques, such as surface inspection and shovel testing, would not be appropriate.
Instead, Mr. Elverson suggested that approximately four backhoe trenches should be excavated.
One trench would be excavated in the eastern corner of the tract, near the intersection of
Broadway Street and W. Jones Avenue, to target a branch of a historic-age acequia shown on an
1852 historical map as crossing that portion of the tract. A second trench would be excavated
perpendicular to the San Antonio River in the western corner of the tract, near the intersection of
10th Street and Avenue B, to target alluvial deposits underneath the asphalt pavement and
disturbed construction fills. The third, fourth, and any additional trenches that may be necessary
would be excavated in the central area of the southeastern portion of the tract fronting onto
Broadway Street where a row of late 19th- to early 20th-century dwellings and associated
outbuildings were formerly located, as depicted on historical Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps.
From May 1 to 3, 2018, Horizon archeologists Briana Smith, Jeffrey D. Owens, Eric
Schroeder, and Jared Wiersema performed a cultural resources survey of the project area to
locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Jeffrey D. Owens served as Principal Investigator, and Kathryn St. Clair provided supplemental
historical research. The survey consisted of background archival research, mechanical backhoe
trenching within the project area, and production of a technical report suitable for review by the
State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical Commission’s
(THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas
Archeologists’ (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resource Management Reports. The cultural
resources survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit no. 8402.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses archeological survey methods.
Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the archeological survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents
archeological management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the references
cited in the report. Appendix A summarizes backhoe trenching data.

4

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in northeastern San Antonio in Bexar County in south-central
Texas near the common junction of three significant physiographic provinces—the Edwards
Plateau, the Balcones Canyonlands, and the Gulf Coastal Plain. The Edwards Plateau and
Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across Texas to form a
distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock and lower plains
composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an abrupt scarp (the
Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the entire length of this
transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock, hydrology, soil, vegetation,
and animal life.
The Gulf Coastal Plain, which extends as far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern
Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists of seaward-dipping bodies of
sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin, that reflect the gradual infilling
of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The fluviodeltaic sedimentary rocks are arranged in
an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine facies making
up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities between these
formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods
of low sea level. The oldest rocks in this sequence are of Late Cretaceous age.
Hydrologically, the project area is situated within the San Antonio River basin. The project
area is situated on the southeastern terraces of the San Antonio River, which meanders generally
southward a half-block northwest of the project area. From the southern margin of San Antonio,
the San Antonio River flows generally southeastward across the Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately
discharging into the Gulf of Mexico southeast of Victoria, Texas. The project area consists of an
urban block that has been heavily modified by cycles of urban development and demolition for
more than a century. The elevation of the project area is approximately 198.2 meters (650.0 feet)
above mean sea level (amsl).

H222-180075

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

In general, the bedrock throughout central Texas is composed of Late Cretaceous
formations that dip slightly to the east and are predominantly composed of calcareous clay, shale,
limestone, and marl, with a small portion of sandstone (Barnes 1983). These geologic units are
overlain in some areas by unconsolidated Quaternary alluvial floodplain and fluviatile terrace
deposits. On the surface, these formations weather into a rounded, gently rolling topography with
a few bluff faces exposed in stream valleys where more resistant strata are present.
Specifically, the project area is situated on fluviatile terrace deposits (Qt), which consist of
gravel, sand, silt, and clay extending southeastwards from the Edwards Plateau (Barnes 1983).
Stream valleys below the Balcones Escarpment tend to be entrenched and lack active floodplains,
and terrace structures are typically located above flood level along entrenched streams, resulting
in preservation of fluviatile morphology in point bars, oxbows, and abandoned channel segments.
The nearby Edwards Formation is composed of hard, micritic limestone beds, some of which are
chert-bearing. Other beds are extensively burrowed and weathered into “honeycombed” porous
rock. Caverns and sinkholes are known to occur throughout central and southwestern Texas in
the Edwards Formation and Austin Chalk limestones, but they are not especially common. The
nearby Edwards Limestone constitutes one of the largest chert resources on the Great Plains
(Frederick and Ringstaff 1994; Frederick et al. 1994), and expansive outcrops of Edwards Group
chert are often accompanied by extensive aboriginal lithic scatters created during raw material
procurement (or “quarrying”) activities. In the absence of aggrading depositional environments,
such lithic procurement sites are typically restricted to the deflated modern ground surface, on
which the native limestone bedrock is typically exposed over large areas.
Soils in Bexar County, Texas, formed from the underlying sedimentary formations,
including limestone, chalky limestone, chalk, shaly clay, marly clay, sandy clay, calcareous clay,
sand, and sandstone (Taylor et al. 1991). Alluvial deposits of recent or ancient age occur along
the principal rivers and streams of the county, but soil thickness in upland environments is typically
minimal, and extensive bedrock outcrops are commonly exposed on the modern ground surface.
The project area traverses a mosaic of soil units characteristic of alluvial terrace and
paleoterrace settings in the region (Figure 2-1; Table 2-1) (NRCS 2018). These soils are
composed of a mix of vertisols, soils with a high content of shrinking and swelling clay sediments,
and mollisols, base-rich mineral soils that typically have molllic epipedons. The southeastern half
of the project area is characterized by a soil unit associated with Pleistocene-age alluvial terraces
(Branyon), whereas the northwestern half of the project area closer to the river is typified by
Holocene-age alluvium (Tinn and Frio). A small sliver of the Lewisville soil unit is present in the
northeastern portion of the project area.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). Bryant
and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas from

6

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 2-1. Distribution of Soil Types Mapped within Project Area

H222-180075

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Table 2-1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Typical Profile
(inches)

Parent Material

HtB

Branyon clay,
1 to 3% slopes

Calcareous clayey alluvium derived from
mudstone of Pleistocene age on stream
terraces

0-12: Clay (Ap)
12-72: Clay (Bkss)
72-80: Clay (BCkss)

LvB

Lewisville silty clay,
1 to 3% slopes

Calcareous clayey alluvium derived from
mudstone on stream terraces

0-15: Clay (Ap)
15-38: Clay (Bk1)
38-69: Clay (Bk2)

Tf

Tinn and Frio soils,
0 to 1% slopes,
frequently flooded

Clayey alluvium of Holocene age derived
from mixed sources on floodplains

0-8: Clay
8-65: Clay
65-80: Clay

Source: NRCS 2018
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 years Before Present [B.P.]) through the Late
Glacial period (14,000 to 10,000 years B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 years B.P. to
present). Evidence from the Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in eastcentral Texas was considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that
the region was more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant
and Holloway 1985). The Late Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration
and a slow warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous
woodlands were gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway
1985). During the Post-Glacial period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been
more stable than during the Late Glacial. The deciduous forests had long since been replaced
by prairies and post oak savannas. The drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late
Glacial period continued into the mid-Holocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief
amelioration to more mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 years B.P. Recent
studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental conditions in eastcentral Texas were probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.
Bexar County is now located within the South-Central Climatic Division. The modern
climate is typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate
is influenced primarily by tropical Maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified
by polar air masses. Tropical Maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature manifest regional
clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining fairly regularly from east to west and mean
annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast (Larkin and Bomar
1983:18, 50). Regional temperature ranges from 4 to 36 degrees Celsius (°C) (39 to 96 degrees
Fahrenheit (°F), with an average annual temperature of 18°C (64 F).

8

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Average annual precipitation in the region is approximately 78.7 centimeters
(31.0 inches). Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf storm
trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall (Baker
1975). Two extreme examples are the excess of 91.4 centimeters (36.0 inches) of rain that fell
within an 18-hour period in the vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 55.9centimeter (22.0-inch) deluge that fell in less than three hours near O’Harris, Texas in May 1935
(Baker 1975). Lower rainfall amounts are characteristic of winter and late summer. In winter,
frontal storms pass so frequently that there is little time for moisture to increase, and prevailing
upper-level winds from west to east often dominate over meridional flow, meaning that much of
the available moisture is derived from the Pacific rather than from the Gulf of Mexico. In summer,
cool fronts rarely penetrate into the region, and rainfall occurs primarily as localized, thermal
convective storms.

2.4

BIOTA

The project area is located in the Balconian Biotic Province on the southern fringes of the
Edwards Plateau (Blair 1950). The Edwards Plateau and associated Balcones Escarpment is
characterized by a mixture of species from the Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, and
Kansan, Balconian provinces. While three vegetational regions are recognized by Tharp (1939)
within the limits of the Balconian Province, the project area is situated in the oak-cedar region that
corresponds to the dissected southern and eastern part of the Edwards Plateau.
Fifty-seven species of mammals are known from the Balconian Province, though none of
these species are restricted to this province. Common mammalian species include white-tailed
deer, opossum, eastern cottontail rabbit, raccoon, striped skunk, hispid cotton rat, white-footed
mouse, nine-banded armadillo, and fox squirrel. Common bird species include northern bobwhite,
eastern meadowlark, mourning dove, killdeer, field sparrow, red-tailed hawk, turkey vulture, belted
kingfisher, and mockingbird. Reptile and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include
six-lined racerunner, rat snake, eastern hognose snake, Gulf Coast toad, Texas spiny lizard,
rough green snake, copperhead, western diamondback rattlesnake, green tree frog, Blanchard’s
cricket frog, diamondback water snake, Houston toad, and green anole. Although small herds of
bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early historic periods, these
species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

H222-180075

9

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located near the southern boundary of Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central
Texas Archeological Region. The indigenous human inhabitants of central Texas practiced a
generally nomadic hunting and gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to
much of the rest of North America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have
changed markedly through time in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8,500 YEARS B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists have historically discounted claims of much earlier human
occupation during the Pleistocene glacial period. However, recent investigations of the Buttermilk
Creek Complex in Bell County, Texas, have raised the possibility that a pre-Clovis culture may
have been present in North America as early as 15,500 years ago (Waters et al. 2011).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented by
the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian
bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and
settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Central
Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There
is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is
divided into two periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point styles. These

H222-180075

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile points
(i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period, which
is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview, Scottsbluff, Meserve, and
Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8,500 TO 1,200 YEARS B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these
3 subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most markedly,
burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the Late
Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In addition,
the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute evidence
of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially accounts for the
lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1,200 TO 350 YEARS B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas, unifacial
arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The Late
Prehistoric period is generally divided into two phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 YEARS B.P. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de Vaca crossed

12

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

south Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay. However,
European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The first half of
the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as the first
effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native cultures and social systems.
This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site on Galveston Island in Galveston
County, Texas, where burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994),
as well as increased participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade.
By the time that heavy settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the
indigenous Indian population was greatly diminished.
Spanish expeditions explored the area that would become San Antonio in 1691 and 1709.1
In 1691, the expedition of Domingo Terán de los Ríos traveled through the region en route to East
Texas and named the San Antonio River on June 13, the Feast Day of Portuguese Franciscan
friar Saint Anthony of Padua. The expedition also encountered an Indian area of settlement,
which the Spaniards interpreted to have the name Yanaguana. The year 1691 has also been
recognized as the beginning of a route, or more accurately a network of trails (caminos reales),
that came to be known as the San Antonio-Nacogdoches Road, or the Old San Antonio Road.
With stretches most likely developed from existing Indian trails, the road developed into a main
artery for commerce and immigration. The Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre expedition in 1709
explored the future site of San Antonio and named the San Pedro Springs. Fray Isidro Félix de
Espinosa reported on the abundance of water that “could supply not only a village but a city which
could easily be founded here….” Indeed, a “city” later grew out of the San Antonio mission and
presidio (1718) and San Fernando de Béxar villa (1731).
On May 1, 1718, Franciscan Antonio de San Buenaventura y Olivares established San
Antonio de Valero, one of five Spanish missions to be located along the San Antonio River. On
May 5, 1718, Martín de Alarcón, governor of the province of Texas, founded San Antonio de
Béxar Presidio. Initially founded north of the present-day downtown area, in 1722 the presidio
was relocated to the area surrounding San Antonio’s city hall, which sits on the site of Military
Plaza. The fledgling community consisted of both military and civilian citizens—soldiers, Mexican
frontiersmen, resident families, and the mission Indians. The land containing San Pedro Springs,
considered as a vital water source for settlement, was declared by the Spanish crown in 1729 to
be public land—a designation which makes San Pedro Springs Park one of the oldest municipal
parks in the US. The presidial captain’s house or Comandancia (later the Spanish Governor’s
Palace) was completed on Military Plaza in 1749. In 1731, Canary Islanders formed the villa of
San Fernando de Béxar and established the first regularly organized civil government in Texas.
They expanded an acequia from the San Pedro Springs that had been started by the military
settlers to serve a large area of farmland between the river and San Pedro Creek to the south.
They laid out town lots and drew up plans for what became Main Plaza and the site of the San
Fernando de Béxar Church. Construction for the church, which was later designated San
Fernando Cathedral in 1874, was completed by the late 1750s. Over time, the Canary Islanders,

1

The following discussion of San Antonio history is excerpted from TSHA (2018).

H222-180075

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

whose arrival initially disrupted the existing presidio community, forged economic and family
bonds within the greater community.
In 1773, San Antonio de Béxar became the capital of Spanish Texas. A census of Béxar
in 1777 listed a total population of 2,060; that number included 1,351 military and civilian residents
and 709 mission residents (mostly mission Indians). Its circumstances were described as
“miserable” by visitors. Primarily agricultural, the population was poor and heterogeneous, made
up of Europeans, mestizos, Indians, and castas (racial/ethnic groupings). Persons of mixed race,
mostly identified as mulatto, included individuals of Indian/mestizo and Indian/black descent.
Afro-Mexicans—people of African descent who were part of the Hispanic population of New
Spain, included both free blacks and a small number of slaves. Though stone houses near the
town’s center comprised some structures, most of the dwellings were jacales—mud and stick huts
with thatched roofs. In 1790, population numbers decreased to 1,878 (1,383 military and civilian
residents and 495 mission residents). The San Antonio population also included 15 black
families. Secularization of the missions began in 1793 with San Antonio de Valero Mission (later
known as the Alamo), which in the early 1800s became a military barracks.
In the early 19th century, San Antonio found itself at a crossroads of conflict. Growing
sentiment against Spanish rule and in favor of Mexican independence had simmered since Miguel
Hidalgo y Costilla’s call for independence in Mexico in 1810 and the subsequent Casas Revolt in
San Antonio in 1811. In 1813, republican forces of the Gutiérrez-Magee expedition defeated
Spanish royalists at the battle of Rosillo 14.5 kilometers (9.0 miles) southeast of the city. The
army known as the Republican Army of the North, which consisted of Anglos, Tejanos, Indians,
Spanish army deserters, and former royalists, captured San Antonio on April 1, 1813, and
declared independence as a republic under their “Green Flag” banner on April 6, 1813. In August,
the republican force of about 1,400, in the effort to spare the city, marched south to face Joaquín
de Arredondo and his army, which included the young officer Antonio López de Santa Anna. The
resulting battle of Medina in present-day Atascosa County on August 18 crushed the rebellion in
the bloodiest battle ever fought in Texas. Arredondo enforced martial law in San Antonio.
Suspected collaborators and republican sympathizers were killed or severely punished, and the
city suffered the burden of an occupation army.
During the Mexican period, San Antonio lost its status as a provincial capital when Texas
was joined to neighboring Coahuila and the seat of government moved to far off Saltillo. San
Antonio instead served as the seat of government for the Department of Texas until the early
1830s, when the state legislature created the departments of Texas and Brazos in response to
population growth in Texas. In the immediate aftermath of Mexican independence, San Antonio
served as the political center of the province, and its citizens actively lobbied for American
immigration to support regional economic growth and Indian defense. Leading citizens of San
Antonio participated in the drafting of both the Federal Constitution of 1824 and the Constitution
of Coahuila and Texas of 1827. Most of the city’s leading men sided with the states’ rights factions
in state and national politics and in support of continued Anglo-American immigration. When
Texas finally rebelled against Santa Anna and the Centralist government in Mexico City, city
leaders sided with the rebels. The only two Tejano representatives to the convention at

14

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Washington-on-the-Brazos to sign the Texas Declaration of Independence were both San
Antonio-born, as was the leading Tejano military figure on the Texan side.
San Antonio once more became the site of critical campaigns during the Texas Revolution,
including the siege of Bexar from October to December 1835, during which Texan forces
ultimately wrested control of the city from Mexican defenses. On February 23, 1836, Texas
soldiers garrisoned in the Alamo began their fateful stand against the larger Mexican army under
the command of Gen. Antonio López de Santa Anna, who ordered the siege and ultimately the
final assault that took place on March 6, 1836. The battle of the Alamo, which Alamo historian
Stephen Hardin has characterized as the “most celebrated military engagement in Texas history,”
immortalized San Antonio’s converted first Franciscan mission and its Texan defenders as
symbols of sacrifice, and generations would recognize the rallying cry of “Remember the Alamo.”
Following the battle of San Jacinto and the evacuation of Mexican forces, Bexar County
was organized by the Republic of Texas in December 1836, and San Antonio was chartered in
January 1837 as its seat. The 1840 Census of the Republic of Texas recorded a total of
339 individuals listed on the county tax rolls (which included white males over the age of 21,
taxable property owners and/or their agents, executors, guardians, and administrators) and a total
of 30 slaves. In 1840, a failed attempt to negotiate the release of captives held by Comanche
Indians resulted in the Council House Fight—yet another battle in the streets of the town. San
Antonio was seized twice during the Mexican invasions of 1842. The city’s history of conflict
made it one of the most fought-over cities in North America.
After Texas entered the Union, growth was rapid as the city became a servicing and
distribution center for the western movement of the US. Beginning with the Mexican War in 1846,
the US military established a presence in San Antonio that would forge a lasting connection with
the city. The headquarters of the Eighth Military Department moved to San Antonio in 1848. The
Quartermaster Depot occupied the Alamo in 1849 until the early 1850s, when land south of the
city was purchased in 1859 and the US Army established the San Antonio Arsenal to serve as
storage for ordnance and arms to supply army troops. In 1861, local militia forced the surrender
of the federal arsenal at San Antonio even before the state seceded on March 2. Subsequently,
San Antonio served as a Confederate depot. Several units, such as John S. Ford’s Cavalry of
the West, were formed there, though the city was removed from the fighting during the Civil War.
After the war, San Antonio prospered as a cattle, distribution, mercantile, and military
center serving the border region and the Southwest. The city had experienced steady growth
from a population of 3,488 in 1850 to 8,235 in 1860, when San Antonio had become for the time
the largest town in Texas (ahead of Galveston). Germans made up a large part of this growth;
German speakers outnumbered both Tejanos and Anglos until after 1877. The city was the
southern hub and supplier of the cattle trail drives, and an important wool market developed with
the importation of merino sheep to the adjacent Hill Country. Railroads in Texas had a profound
effect on cities, and, with the coming of the Galveston, Harrisburg and San Antonio Railway in
1877, San Antonio, formerly without a transportation system, entered a new era of economic
growth. In 1881, a second railroad, the International-Great Northern, reached the city from the
northeast, and five railroads had built into the city by 1900.

H222-180075

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

The population reached 20,550 in 1880 and increased to approximately 45,000 for the city
in 1887 (with a total population for Bexar County at 47,210). The new immigration was
overwhelmingly native-born Anglos, mostly from Southern states, but a breakdown of nationalities
in the 1887 agricultural census for the county reflected a remarkable diversity in ethnicities. The
First Annual Report of the Agricultural Bureau of the Department of Agriculture, Insurance,
Statistics, and History listed the following breakdown of population groups in the county—
“Americans 26,061, colored [African Americans] 3,395, English 606, Germans 6,146, French 564,
Danes 26, Hebrews 90, Irish 1,022, Italians 171, Mexicans 7,688, Spanish 101, Swedes 30,
Norwegians 12, Poles 447, Russians 64, Chinese 19, of all other nations 745.” In 1887, the city
of San Antonio had a scholastic population of 10,037, but the number of students who were
actually enrolled in school was 3,594. The city had 10 schools and 65 teachers.
Modernization was explosive in the 1880s, comparable to growth patterns across the US.
Civic government, utilities, street paving and maintenance, water supply, telephones, hospitals,
and a power plant were all established or planned. By the late 1880s, the city’s two periodicals
(which would be longtime competitors for more than a century), the Express and the Light, were
publishing daily editions. Bexar County had 315 merchants, 100 lawyers, 32 physicians, and nine
banks. Notable industry in San Antonio in the late 19th century included Pioneer Flour Mills,
Alamo Iron Works, Lone Star Brewery, San Antonio Brewing Association, Alamo Cement
Company, and merchandise stores such as Joske’s. In 1891, the first Battle of Flowers Parade
was held in the city “as a patriotic celebration to…commemorate the victory at the Battle of San
Jacinto.” Through the years, the popular event evolved into the city’s annual Fiesta. Longestablished in downtown were the nightly open-air chili stands where “Chili Queens” served their
Mexican fare of chili con carne, tamales, enchiladas, and other cuisine at Alamo Plaza, Market
Square, and other locations. The colorful, festive atmosphere drew commentary from writers
Stephen Crane and O. Henry. In the late 1890s, German immigrant William Gebhardt had opened
a factory on West Commerce Street in the city to manufacture his own chili powder and would go
on to market his product on a national scale.
Construction of a permanent army post on more than 37.2 hectares (92.0 acres) located
4.0 kilometers (2.5 miles) northeast of the Alamo included a headquarters, a hospital, and some
60 other structures. In 1890, the post was designated Fort Sam Houston. During the SpanishAmerican War, the First United States Volunteer Cavalry mobilized in San Antonio and was
supplied by Fort Sam Houston. Better known as the “Rough Riders,” the famed cavalry unit
formed and trained in San Antonio under the direction of the unit’s celebrated recruiter and leader
Lt. Col. Theodore Roosevelt.
San Antonio was once again the largest city in the state in 1900, with a population of
53,321. That figure ballooned to 96,614 in 1910. After 1910, Mexican immigration greatly
increased due to the Mexican Revolution and the development of local service industries. The
Spanish-language newspaper La Prensa was founded in 1913 and went daily in 1914. The
periodical kept readers abreast of events in Mexico, covered Mexican politics, and provided
announcements for area Mexican and Mexican American organizations. The confluence of
Hispanic, German, and Southern Anglo-American cultures in San Antonio made it into one of
America’s “four unique cities” (along with Boston, New Orleans, and San Francisco). Frederick

16

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Law Olmsted had remarked on the city’s “jumble of races, costumes, languages and buildings”
as early as the 1850s. Each successive group of immigrants put its stamp upon the city, its
culture, and architecture; all mingled, none quite submerging the others. Each period of growth
produced characteristic and often distinguished architecture. Peculiarly, San Antonio succeeded
in merging its past into the new in each generation. Old Spanish walls remain beside modern
glass towers, with rows of Victorian mansions a block away, a combination that contributed to the
city’s charm and attracted millions of visitors. Perhaps no preservation effort would be as
significant and defining for the city (and millions of tourists) as the work to save the Alamo. The
state of Texas purchased the Alamo from the Catholic Church in 1883—an action that marked
the first time that a structure was purchased for the sake of historic preservation in the US west
of the Mississippi. Two decades later, in the early 1900s, members of the Daughters of the
Republic of Texas worked to expand the Alamo property and eventually assumed stewardship of
the complex. The site would remain San Antonio’s most recognizable landmark.
The Germans in particular brought cultural traditions in the form of music, the arts, and
architecture to San Antonio. A German men’s chorus that had begun as early as the 1840s
developed into the Beethoven Männerchor. German musicians formed an orchestra for the state
Saengerfest held in San Antonio in 1874 and were instrumental in the formation of symphony
orchestras in the city in the early 1900s, though the San Antonio Symphony Orchestra was not
formally established until 1939. During the late 19th century and into the early 20th century, many
of the prominent German families built residences in the King William Historic District, which
became known for its fine Victorian homes.
In the 1910s, San Antonio began its long historical association with the advancement of
aviation. In 1910, the US Army’s only airplane arrived at Fort Sam Houston with Lt. Benjamin
Foulois. On March 2, 1910, his first solo flight there marked the “birth of military aviation.” In
1915, aviatrix Katherine Stinson and her family opened the Stinson School of Flying on land just
south of town. Young Stinson, who was the fourth American woman to earn her pilot’s license,
awed crowds across the nation with her aerial stunts and was the first woman to master the loopthe-loop, authorized to deliver US airmail, and fly at night. Her sister Marjorie, also an instructor
at the school, was the first pilot to deliver mail by air in Texas. Stinson Field became the Alamo
City’s first airport and 100 years later still operated as the second-oldest general aviation airport
in continual operation in the nation and the oldest west of the Mississippi. In 1916, Capt. Benjamin
Foulois selected the site of Kelly Field to expand upon the new Aviation Section of the US Army
Signal Corps at Fort Sam Houston. The base, named for Lt. George E. Kelly, who was killed in
a crash at Fort Sam in 1911 and was the first US military aviator to perish in a military aircraft,
rapidly increased in its importance with America’s entry into World War I, and more World War I
aviators earned their wings there than any other field in the US. One San Antonio native and
World War I ace, Edgar Tobin, went on to establish a pioneering aerial surveying firm in the city.
An instructor training facility that soon became known as Brooks Field opened in 1917. A balloon
and airship school followed at the facility. As a result of the war, the army expanded its military
footprint in San Antonio as the site of Camp Travis (originally named Camp Wilson) for the training
of the Ninetieth Division. The army also leased additional land adjacent to the already-established
Leon Springs Military Reservation to establish Camp Bullis and Camp Stanley in 1917.

H222-180075

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

San Antonio’s army and air fields provided attractive settings for the growing motion
picture industry of the early 1900s, when a number of production companies (both locally
established and from outside of the state) operated in the city. The military facilities served as
backdrops for several films, including The Big Parade (1925), The Rough Riders (1927), and
Wings (1927), which won Best Picture at the inaugural Academy Awards ceremony.
In 1920, San Antonio, still the largest city in Texas, had a population of 161,379. On
September 9 and 10, 1921, San Antonio suffered one of its greatest disasters in history—a
devastating flood that inundated downtown with up to 3.7 meters (12.0 feet) of water in some
areas. A massive wall of water swept through the streets and tore through structures, including
city hall, police headquarters, and hospitals. At least 51 people died and others were missing.
The 1921 catastrophe remains the worst flood on record in terms of loss of life and property and
prompted city officials to pursue flood-control measures. In 1926, Olmos Dam on Olmos Creek
was completed for flood control, especially for the downtown region (though the poorer West Side
neighborhoods would still wait decades for effective flood-control measures). Flood waters were
also diverted from the Great Bend of the San Antonio River, with floodgates installed at each end
of the bend. The bypass channel was finished in 1930. A major ultimate consequence of the
great 1921 flood and ensuing flood-control measures was the safe development of the downtown
river bend into an area of shops, restaurants, and pedestrian walkways and bridges originally
envisioned by architect Robert Hugman in 1929. The San Antonio River Walk was completed in
1941.
The city’s first radio station, WOAI, went on the air in 1922 and was touted as one of the
“first super powered stations in Texas.” WOAI entertained listeners with a variety of musical and
informative programming. Popular western swing groups, Mexican songs, and soap operas filled
the airwaves. The station’s focus on news coverage eventually led, in the late 1930s, to the hiring
of Henry Guerra, a young news reporter who became the first Mexican American to broadcast
news over a major radio station. The studio at WOAI also served as a recording facility for a
number of labels that traveled to the Alamo City in search of talent. In the 1920s and 1930s, San
Antonio was a major Texas destination for such record labels as Victor, Bluebird, OKeh,
Columbia, American Record Corporation, Decca, and others who sought out artists for field
recordings. Tejana singers such as Lydia Mendoza and her family were recorded numerous
times. Conjunto pioneers Santiago Jiménez, Sr., Narciso Martínez, and others showcased their
developing genre. San Antonio offered country and western swing musicians such as the Tune
Wranglers; the polka and western swing blend of Adolph Hofner; the jazz of Troy Floyd, whose
orchestra included such notables as saxophonist Herschel Evans and trumpeter Don Albert; and
many others. Record labels also conducted field recordings at such locales as banquet halls,
churches, office buildings, and hotel rooms. A pivotal event in the history of the recording industry
in San Antonio, for example, took place at the Gunter Hotel with Vocalion’s first recording sessions
of blues legend Robert Johnson in 1936.
In addition to the city’s evolving musical expressions of the 1920s and 1930s was the
growing awareness of the visual arts and architecture of the city. The San Antonio Conservation
Society organized in 1924 and began its mission to protect many of the city’s historic buildings,
including the missions, and the society’s focus extended to photographs and other archival

18

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

materials, art, street names, natural scenery—all elements of “cultural conservation.” The San
Antonio Museum Association chartered in 1925 and helped open the Witte Memorial Museum in
1926. The San Antonio Art League also partnered with the Witte, and from that alliance eventually
emerged the San Antonio Museum of Art. In 1926, the city’s Municipal Auditorium, designed by
famed architect Atlee Ayres in the Spanish Colonial Revival Style, was built. Ayres and his son
Robert also designed the villa of Jessie Marion Koogler McNay, the residence that in later
decades housed the McNay Art Museum beginning in 1927. Two architectural and artistic design
jewels—the Aztec Theatre and Majestic Theatre—opened in the city in 1926 and 1929,
respectively, for movies, musical performances, vaudeville acts, and other entertainment. At its
opening, the Majestic touted its status as the largest movie house in the South and first fully airconditioned theater in the state.
San Antonio already promoted itself as a tourist destination and convenient headquarters
for exploring motorists. The San Antonio Express boasted in 1929 that Bexar County had the
“largest mileage of improved roads of any County in the United States” and “more than 150 motor
buses” operated daily from the city to other regions. The San Antonio-Austin Post Road (first
completed in 1916 and known as Highway No. 2, an early forerunner to Interstate 35) served as
a main artery for motorists. San Antonio’s many attractions in 1929 included its new zoo, built at
a former rock quarry adjacent to Brackenridge Park (one of the city’s popular scenic parks opened
in 1899). Nearby, visitors could enjoy the Japanese Tea Garden.
During the Great Depression, however, San Antonio experienced a period of slower
growth as compared to some other major Texas cities. Its population of 231,542 fell behind
Houston and Dallas, and the city remained the third largest city in Texas through the 2000 census.
Several key events during the 1930s shed light on the hardships of the Mexican workforce in the
city. Most notably, the Pecan Shellers’ Strike against the Southern Pecan Shelling Company in
1938 drew national attention to the poor working conditions associated with one of the city’s
largest industries—the processing of pecans. Led by native San Antonian and labor and civil
rights activist Emma Tenayuca, who had also participated in a strike against the H.W. Finck Cigar
Company in 1933, more than 10,000 workers (mostly women) went on a three-month strike
against Southern Pecan Shelling Company. Though both sides later arbitrated a settlement and
a federal minimum wage established a higher rate of pay, the company soon mechanized its
operations, thereby displacing the workforce.
During the 1930s, poor living conditions on San Antonio’s predominantly Mexican
American West Side came to the attention of Fr. Carmelo Tranchese, pastor of Our Lady of
Guadalupe Church. Tranchese championed programs to improve health and housing on the
West Side, especially in his capacity as one of the members of the new San Antonio Housing
Authority in 1937. By the early 1940s, the city had its first housing projects, including the AlazanApache Courts.
San Antonio did not expand beyond its original Spanish charter land until 1940. The area
was large enough to allow a number of incorporated suburbs within the metropolitan area, but the
city soon grew beyond these. Like most 20th-century American cities in the automobile age, its
expansion was mainly horizontal, with sprawling neighborhoods but little vertical building.
Although the first Texas skyscraper and several tall buildings were built in San Antonio in the early

H222-180075

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

20th century, vertical construction did not continue, and the city’s center of population steadily
moved northward. In 1941, the city purchased 485.6 hectares (1,200.0 acres) north of the city
limits to develop an airport, and what initially opened as a military training facility later became
San Antonio International Airport. That same year, oilman and philanthropist Thomas Slick, Jr.,
founded the Foundation of Applied Research on a ranch west of town, and he established
Southwest Research Institute there six years later.
San Antonio’s population boomed during the wartime and post-war years from 253,854 in
1940 to 408,442 in 1950 and to 587,718 in 1960. The city’s transportation system was boosted
by the completion of much of Interstate Highway 35 by the late 1950s. WOAI-TV signed on in
1949 as the city’s first television station. KEYL-TV (present-day KENS) followed suit in 1950, and
KONO-TV (present-day KSAT-TV) began in 1957. Raoul Cortez, owner of the city’s first Spanishlanguage radio station with KCOR in 1946, launched the nation’s first Spanish-language television
station with KCOR-TV in 1955.
Until 1955, the city government followed the classic mayor-alderman pattern, in which
appeared a number of colorful mayors, lively elections, and no little corruption. In 1955, San
Antonio opted for the council-manager form. Native son Henry B. González was the first Mexican
American elected to the city council (in 1953). He championed civil rights and spoke out against
segregation while on the council. González was later elected to the state senate and eventually
was the first Tejano elected to the US House of Representatives. As was the case for other Texas
cities, the fight for civil rights transformed San Antonio into a broader-based electorate.
During the struggle for desegregation, San Antonio did not experience the violence that
characterized the fight for civil rights in some other cities, especially in the Deep South. Scholars
have identified several mitigating factors that diffused some of the turmoil. Though segregation
was a long-standing norm for citizens in San Antonio, the city’s public accommodations had been
“open to Mexican Americans since the 1940s.” The African American community largely resided
on the city’s East Side and constituted a small percentage of the population. In 1960, while
Mexican Americans made up approximately 40% of San Antonio’s population, African Americans
constituted just 7%. Certain major segments of the city had already enacted desegregation. The
US military had begun the process of integration by the late 1940s. The Catholic Church
condemned prejudice and integrated all parochial schools and its two colleges in the city in 1954
(just prior to the US Supreme Court’s historic decision in Brown v. Board of Education). Many
city officials, clergy, and traditional black leaders moved along a course of voluntary
desegregation in stages, though pending litigation by the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) prompted the city to desegregate such facilities as
municipal parks and golf courses in 1954 and swimming pools, buses, and train stations in 1956.
In addition to the Catholic Church, support came from other members of the clergy. San Antonio’s
black newspaper, the San Antonio Register, owned by Valmo Charles Bellinger, kept readers
informed regarding civil rights issues. His father, Charles Bellinger, had been an African American
political leader in San Antonio going back to the late 1910s. Until his death in 1937, Charles
Bellinger had delivered black votes to the city’s political machine in exchange for municipal
projects and other improvements on the East Side. However, a new generation of African
American activists began to reject this paternalistic tradition.

20

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

On March 16, 1960, San Antonio became the first major city in the South to integrate its
lunch counters. Soon after, the San Antonio Interracial Committee formed and sent delegations
to various public establishments in the attempt to convince them to voluntarily integrate. City
leaders approached the enactment of increased civil rights from an economic perspective and the
effort to avoid conflict, generally with the cooperation and input of traditional black leadership.
This “policy of gradualism and control undercut black activists who sought to accelerate the pace
of desegregation.” One exception to this gradualism came with the protest sit-ins waged against
the Joske’s department store when the business opened its basement café but did not open its
two exclusive restaurants to African Americans. The resulting months of protests as well as
meetings with the Interracial Committee eventually succeeded in the store’s change in policy.
Finally, after the years of voluntary desegregation in the city, the city council unanimously
approved desegregation of all public accommodations on November 11, 1965. That same year
Rev. Samuel H. James became the first African American to win a council seat in San Antonio;
he was the first black to do so in a major Texas city.

H222-180075

21

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon performed background archival research on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) for information on previously recorded cultural
resources sites and historic properties in and near the project area as well as previous cultural
resources investigations conducted in the vicinity of the project area. Based on this archival
research, 11 known archeological sites, two individual historic properties listed on the National
Register of Historic Places (NRHP), and one NRHP-listed historic district are located within a 1.6kilometer (1.0-mile) radius of the project area (Figure 4-1; Table 4-1) (THC 2018). No
archeological sites, cemeteries, or historic properties listed on the NRHP or designated as State
Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) are located within or adjacent to the project area. However, the Old
Lone Star Brewery, a historic district listed on the NRHP, is located a short distance northwest of
the project area that may be of some historical relevance to the project area, as discussed in more
detail below.
The project area falls within a large area covered during a prior cultural resources survey
conducted by The University of San Antonio’s (UTSA) Center for Archaeological Research (CAR)
in 1979 (Fox 1979). This prior survey covered most of the central, northeastern, and northwestern
portions of downtown San Antonio and was oriented toward compiling as much information as
possible on archeological, historical, and architectural sites as possible given the project
resources. The level of survey intensity within any given city block is unknown, though it is unlikely
that this prior survey systematically prospected for subsurface archeological resources within
developed city blocks.
Examination of historical aerial photographs (NETR 2018), Sanborn Fire Insurance maps
(PCL 1896, 1904, 1912), and San Antonio city directories (Texas State Library and Archives
Commission 1885-86, 1910, 1921, 1936, 1946) provide a somewhat more robust historic context
for the project area.
The project area occupies an urban block northeast of the central downtown San Antonio
area. The culturally diverse and dynamic history of the city is reflected in this urban block, which
was once primarily residential. The area is considered to fall within the River North section of the
city, which is loosely defined by the San Antonio River to the west, the central commercial and
business district of downtown San Antonio to the south, US Highway (US) 281 to the east, and
Interstate Highway (IH) 35 to the north.

H222-180075

23

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 4-1. Locations of Known Cultural Resources within 0.5 Mile of Project Area

24

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Table 4-1. Previously Documented Cultural Resources within 0.5 Mile of Project Area
Site
No./Name

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility
Status1

Distance/Direction
from Project Area

Potential to
be Impacted
by Project?

Archeological Sites
41BX1817

Historic-age cut limestone
dam (built ca. 1872)

Undetermined

245.0 feet northwest

No

41BX1818

Historic-age dam
(early to mid-20th century)
(built 1939-1941)

Undetermined

0.5 mile southwest

No

41BX1913

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(Archaic)

Undetermined

0.1 mile west

No

41BX2072

Historic-age mill race
(Alamo Flour Mill Dam)
(late 19th century)

Recommended
eligible

0.1 mile southwest

No

41BX2108

No information on file
(undetermined historic)

Unknown

0.5 mile east

No

41BX2129

Historic-age rail bed
(late 19th century)

Recommended
ineligible

0.1 mile southeast

No

41BX2130

Historic-age homestead
(built ca. 1880s-1890s)

Recommended
ineligible

0.4 mile east

No

41BX2133

Historic-age landscape
(structural foundations and
artifact scatter)
(late 19th to 20th centuries)

Recommended
ineligible

0.3 mile southwest

No

41BX2134

Historic-age irrigation ditch
(segment of Navarro
Acequia) (19th century)

Undetermined

0.3 mile southwest

No

41BX2161

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric);
Historic-age foundation and
artifact scatter
(mid-20th century)

Recommended
ineligible

0.2 mile northwest

No

41BX2169

Historic-age artifact
palimpsest
(20th century);
aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible

0.3 mile southwest

No

Listed NRHP Historic Properties
Gustav Uhl
House and
Store

Historic house and store
(house built 1857; store
built 1870)

Historic property
listed on NRHP

0.2 mile south

No

Old Lone Star
Brewery

Historic brewery
(built 1895-1903)

Historic district
listed on NRHP

220.0 feet northwest

No

Hays Street
Bridge

Historic bridge
(built 1910)

Historic property
listed on NRHP

0.4 mile southeast

No

H222-180075

25

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

1

Determined eligible/ineligible = Site determined eligible/ineligible by SHPO
Recommended eligible/ineligible = Site recommended as eligible/ineligible by site recorder and/or sponsoring
agency but eligibility has not been determined by SHPO
Undetermined = Eligibility not assessed or no information available
NRHP National Register of Historic Places
SAL State Antiquities Landmark
SHPO State Historic Preservation Office

The earliest map evidence available consists of a digital screen capture of historic-age
acequias (irrigation ditches) provided by Matt Elverson, Assistant City Archaeologist with the
CoSA’s OHP, based on an 1852 map in the possession of the OHP. This image suggests that
one or two small acequia branches may have historically crossed the project area (Figure 4-2).
One branch may have crossed the project area from east to west in the northern quadrant of the
block under the current brick warehouse and its attached offices, and a smaller branch may have
crossed the eastern corner of the project area near the intersection of W. Jones Avenue and
Broadway Street (known as Grand Avenue and Avenue C, respectively, at the time). The map
source and resolution of the digitized acequia alignments provided by the CoSA’s OHP is not
known, and it is difficult to discern how accurate the acequia alignments may be. However, the
former presence of the acequias in this area suggests that this part of San Antonio was probably
largely agricultural until urban development spread this far north in the late 19th century.
The city experienced two substantial periods of growth relevant to the current project—
during the late 1800s following the establishment of the railroad and during the first two decades
of the 20th century. As the city center expanded in the late 19th century with new industries and
supporting businesses, the surrounding farms and ranches, which were kept irrigated by
acequias, became more densely populated by small family-run businesses, single and multifamily dwellings, and domestic businesses (such as boarding houses and grocery stores).
Bottling plants and breweries found locations along the banks of the San Antonio River and
access to the railroad lines leading to shipping ports to be ideal for commerce. Worker housing
sprouted up around these industrial sites, and people of many nationalities supported the
operations. Folk Victorian, shotgun, adobe cottages, and variations on the National Folk styles
were commonly constructed during the late 1880s boom near these industrial sites, while more
formal architectural styles were favored near the city center and along prominent thoroughfares.
Prior to the 1880s, there is limited documentation on the architecture or occupation of the
project area specifically. This area of the city was primarily at the outskirts of the city center and
likely hosted modest dwellings. Augustus Koch’s 1873 Bird’s Eye rendering of San Antonio
covers the emerging downtown area but did not extend as far north as the project area. The 1873
map terminates about three blocks south of the project area at 7th Street. Most of the city blocks
in this part of the city contained a scattering of domiciles surrounded by parkland or farmland at
that time, and it seems reasonable to extrapolate this pattern a few blocks north to the current
project area. Approximately two blocks to the south and southwest of the project area (bounded
on the north by 9th Street and on the west by the San Antonio River) was a historic neighborhood
known as Irish Flats, named for the small, one-story dwellings constructed between the 1840s
and 1890s with a dense population of Irish immigrants. The buildings were of stone or adobe
construction, modest in size, and featured landscaped gardens and vegetation. The 1873 Bird’s

26

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 4-2. Possible Historic-age Acequias within Project Area Based on 1852 Map

H222-180075

27

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Eye map depicts hand-drawn images of such dwellings in the Irish Flats area; however, as noted,
the 1873 rendering does not extend far enough north to include the current project area.
By 1877, San Antonio experienced a large period of industrial growth once the railroad
lines finally reached the community, linking the city from the ports of Galveston, Port Aransas,
and Port Lavaca to areas across the US. Once bypassed in favor of lines through Austin, the
railroad now facilitated travel and commerce through San Antonio. By 1880, the San Antonio and
Aransas Pass Railroad established the Sunset Depot three blocks east of the project area. The
Great Northern Railroad (1881) and Galveston, Houston and San Antonio Railroad (1885) also
constructed lines through the city, securing San Antonio’s role in domestic and international
commerce.
Augustus Koch’s 1886 Bird’s Eye rendering of San Antonio visually demonstrates how
substantially the city grew in the decade or so between 1873 and 1886 (Figure 4-3).
Neighborhoods were more densely settled, and gardens, orchards, and farmland near the city
center gave way to the infill of housing, commercial buildings, civic buildings, and larger industrial
operations. Bakeries, ice factories, lumber mills, and breweries provided many jobs to the influx
of immigrants. Avenue C (now Broadway Street) (the southeastern boundary of the project area)
historically (and currently) served as a primary business district artery running north to south
through the city and roughly paralleled the San Antonio River. The San Antonio Street Railway
Company began service in 1878. A horse-drawn street car line provided transportation from
downtown up to 10th Street (the southwestern boundary of the project area) and terminated at
10th Street near the railroad depots to the east of the project area. Hotels, boarding houses,
entertainment venues, houses, and businesses lined both sides of Avenue C (Broadway Street)
up to Grand Avenue (now Jones Avenue). A notable difference in the size and scale of dwellings
north of 10th Street (where the project area is located) and south of 10th Street along Avenue C
(Broadway Street) suggests that the new streetcar line may have been directly related to property
values. The architecture south of 10th Street was grander in scale, with Queen Anne, Spanish
Colonial Revival, and Romanesque styles predominating. Renowned architect Alfred Giles
(among others) was commissioned to provide the city with distinctive architectural icons. During
this time period, the area north of 10th Street, including the project area, retained modest
dwellings and smaller homes, presumably to support workers at the nearby factories.
A distinctive feature of the city in the 1870s and 1880s was the numerous public parks
and city blocks designated as open public spaces or plazas. Maverick Park, once named Milam
Park, was established on the block immediately southeast of the project area across Avenue C
(Broadway Street) in 1884, and this park remains today.
The proliferation of breweries and bottling operations during this industrial boom can be
attributed in large part to the swelling German immigrant population during the mid- to late
19th century. This particular industry was important to the history of the project area as at least
two large breweries and bottling plants were within walking distance. By 1884, the Lone Star
Brewery and the City Brewery opened facilities across Grand (Jones) Avenue just northwest of
the river. The Lone Star Brewery’s operation proved prolific enough to warrant a freight rail line
that ran parallel to Grand (Jones) Avenue southeastward toward the railroad depot three blocks
away. The project area supported several dwellings during the 1880s, primarily along the Avenue
28

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 4-3. Location of Project Area on Bird’s Eye Drawing of San Antonio (1886)

H222-180075

29

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

C (Broadway Street) side of the block on the southeast, though a few similar structures were
present along Avenue B and 10th Street (see Figure 4-3). By 1886, the project area had at least
three one-story houses of adobe and wood construction facing Avenue C (Broadway Street), a
two-story house facing the foundry on Avenue B, and two one-story houses facing 10th Street.
By 1891, at least three shotgun-style houses facing Grand (Jones) Avenue were constructed
within the northern quadrant of the block, which coincides with the surrounding industrial
environment. Shotgun houses were commonly used as worker or tenant housing as several
would fit within a small amount of acreage. The 1896 Sanborn Fire Insurance Map shows the
northern quadrant of the block as vacant (i.e., the shotgun houses were no longer present), though
six dwellings in single-story, Folk Victorian forms were standing along Avenue C (Broadway
Street), two similar single-story structures faced Avenue B, and two small, single-story homes
faced 10th Street (Figure 4-4). The 1885 city directory does not list any businesses operating
within the project area during this time, suggesting that the block was occupied by dwellings until
after 1910.
A soda water bottling plant owned by the Rishche family was located directly across Grand
(Jones) Avenue from the project area. The 1885 city directory indicates that Ed Rishche and sons
operated the Soda and Mineral Water Factory at this location. A foundry operated out of a large
brick building across Avenue B from the project area. The same city directory indicates that this
foundry was owned by R.G. Nixon, though the 1896 Sanborn Fire Insurance map indicates that
the foundry was not running (see Figure 4-4).
By 1904, the foundry was a dilapidated machine shop, as indicated on the Sanborn Fire
Insurance Map of that year (Figure 4-5). Adjacent to the foundry building, on the corner of Grand
(Jones) Avenue and Avenue B, were “Negro Tenements” with a stable in the back yard. The
Rische family’s bottling works across Grand (Jones) Avenue from the project area is labeled as
an iron-clad warehouse on the map. Within the project area, seven dwellings faced Avenue C
(Broadway Street), three faced Avenue B, and two faced 10th Street. The northern quadrant and
northeastern edge of the block facing Grand (Jones) Avenue remained vacant. It is possible that
the reason the northeastern side of the project area remained undeveloped through the early
20th century had to do with a railroad line that may have extended along the southwestern side
of Grand (Jones) Avenue connecting the Lone Star Brewery across the river one block to the
northwest with the railroad depots three blocks to the southeast. The 1904 Sanborn Fire
Insurance Map depicts an elevated freight railroad trestle adjacent to the iron bridge that spanned
the San Antonio River along Grand (Jones) Avenue at the time. The railroad tracks are not
depicted as extending past the bridge, though they almost certainly would have continued to the
southeast along the southwestern side of Grand (Jones) Avenue.
The 1910 city directory indicates that seven houses faced Avenue C (Broadway Street) at
this time. Of these occupants, five owned their homes and the others were renters. Eight houses
faced Avenue B (including the houses across the street from the project area), six of which were
rented. Many of these occupants worked in the service industry, the local breweries, or other
industries. Two houses (rentals) were occupied facing 10th Street. The surnames of the
occupants provide insight into the diverse group of nationalities represented in the city—German,
English, Spanish, and Irish names are listed.

30

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 4-4. Location of Project Area on Sanborn Fire Insurance Map (1896)

H222-180075

31

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 4-5. Location of Project Area on Sanborn Fire Insurance Map (1904)

32

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

The 1912 Sanborn Fire Insurance Map indicates “plans” for a large bakery within the
northern quadrant of the project area facing Grand (Jones) Avenue, though it is not clear if this
bakery was ever built (Figure 4-6). Two shotgun houses were constructed in place of the prior
two-story dwelling facing Avenue B across from the former foundry, and additional shotgun
houses replaced the lot on which the foundry once was located. An additional one-story house
was constructed on the 10th Street side of the block, though the remainder of the block remained
largely the same as it had been in 1904. The 1921 city directory lists primarily dwellings within
the project area at this time, with most of the houses along Avenue B serving as rentals. The
property at 1025 Avenue C (Broadway Street), at the corner of Grand (Jones) Avenue, lists R.G.
and Anna Barbeck living there and owning the Magnolia Petrol Company Gas Station, though it
is not certain the gas station was located on the lot.
There is a gap in historical map coverage in the early to mid-20th century between 1912,
the date of the last available Sanborn Fire Insurance Map, and 1955, the date of the first available
aerial photograph, but most of the original buildings on the block were demolished during this
timeframe. San Antonio continued to expand through the beginning of the 20th century. With the
breweries and bottling plants supporting part of the economy, Prohibition presented a challenge
for these operations to stay afloat and continue providing employment to locals. Some facilities
switched to bottling soda water or non-alcoholic beer. During this period, the automobile industry
and related support businesses became part of the economic landscape. During the Great
Depression in the 1930s, the Works Progress Administration (WPA) organized and funded
numerous construction and community improvement projects, including the San Antonio River
Walk. This endeavor transformed the river banks and the parcels that lined the river banks into
a linear park and tourist destination. Historic-age buildings along the river’s channel, which has
been substantially altered and engineered over the years, were rehabilitated for numerous uses
supporting arts, tourism, business, and new industries.
By 1936, the city directory indicates that Gus Gimbel, the occupant of a house within the
project area in 1910 on a lot facing Avenue C (Broadway Street), owned and operated the Gimbel
Manufacturing Company within the project area behind his house at 1021 Avenue C (Broadway
Street). The company manufactured potato chips, waffles, and peanuts. The same city directory
lists Benji Bruno living next to his automotive repair shop, Bruno’s Garage, on two separate lots
facing Avenue B. The Ned Miller Motor Company, located on the same property at
1001 Avenue C (Broadway Street), sold used cars. The Al Huffington Motor Company was
located adjacent to C.P. Howard’s Filling Station on the block.
By 1946, the Gimbel Manufacturing Company no longer operated within the project area.
By this time, many of the dwellings were replaced with automotive-related businesses, including
Green Ellis Motor Company, where used cars were sold. Aerial photography from 1955 onward
shows only industrial and commercial buildings within the project area.
The current configuration of the block evolved over the course of the mid- to late
20th century. The large 1.5-story brick warehouse and its attached offices in the northern portion
of the block were constructed between 1955 and 1963. By 1986, all of the earlier buildings except
for the large warehouse and its attached offices had been removed, and the entire block was in
use as a parking lot. Given the density of vehicles packed into the parking areas visible on aerial

H222-180075

33

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 4-6. Location of Project Area on Sanborn Fire Insurance Map (1912)
34

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

photographs, it would appear that the block was associated with an automotive dealership and/or
repair shop run from the warehouse and offices (the word “Automotive” is still faintly visible painted
on the side of the warehouse). A small structure was built at the eastern corner of the block at
the intersection of W. Jones Avenue and Broadway Street between 1973 and 1986 that may have
served as a filling station used by the business (several underground storage tanks were removed
from this area the week before Horizon’s cultural resources survey was conducted), though this
structure was removed by 1986. A smaller, single-story commercial building was constructed on
the Broadway Street side of the block between 1986 and 1995, probably as part of the automotive
business. As such, the current configuration of buildings currently standing on the property had
been achieved by 1995. However, the automotive business appears to have shut down by then,
as subsequent images show mostly abandoned, unused parking lots on the block. Currently, the
smaller commercial building is in temporary use in connection with a mayoral campaign, and
much of the parking is leased out to nearby businesses. The warehouse and offices are boarded
up and abandoned.

H222-180075

35

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

From May 1 to 3, 2018, Horizon archeologists Briana Smith, Jeffrey D. Owens, Eric
Schroeder, and Jared Wiersema performed a cultural resources survey of the project area to
locate any cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Jeffrey D. Owens served as Principal Investigator, and Kathryn St. Clair provided supplemental
historical research.
The project area consists of a small city block on the northeastern side of downtown San
Antonio bounded on the northeast by W. Jones Avenue, on the southeast by Broadway Street,
on the southwest by 10th Street, and on the northwest by Avenue B (Figures 5-1 to 5-2). The
tract is currently a developed urban lot, and several standing buildings are present on the tract.
A large, abandoned, 1.5-story brick warehouse with an attached equipment storage area and two
single-story office buildings are present within the northern portion of the tract (Figures 5-3 to 56). A small, single-story commercial building sits in the middle of the southeastern portion of the
tract that is currently in use as part of a mayoral election campaign (Figure 5-7). A covered carport
runs along the back side of the southeastern half of the tract behind the small commercial building
(Figures 5-8 to 5-9). A central alley bisects the tract from northeast to southwest (Figure 5-10).
The majority of the tract is composed of asphalt-paved parking lots, though the various buildings
are constructed on concrete slabs (Figures 5-11 to 5-12).
As discussed in the previous chapter, the current configuration of the block evolved over
the course of the mid- to late 20th century. The large 1.5-story brick warehouse and its attached
offices in the northern portion of the block were constructed between 1955 and 1963. By 1986,
only the large warehouse and offices were standing, and the rest of the block was in use as a
parking lot associated with an automotive dealership and/or repair shop (the word “Automotive”
is still faintly visible painted on the side of the warehouse). A small structure was built at the
eastern corner of the block at the intersection of W. Jones Avenue and Broadway Street between
1973 and 1986 that may have served as a filling station used by the business (several
underground storage tanks were removed from this area the week before Horizon’s cultural
resources survey was conducted), though this structure was removed by 1986. A smaller, singlestory commercial building was constructed on the Broadway Street side of the block between
1986 and 1995, probably as part of the automotive business. However, the automotive business
appears to have closed its doors around that time, as subsequent aerial photographs show mostly
abandoned, unused parking lots on the block. Currently, the smaller commercial building is in

H222-180075

37

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5-1. Project Area from Broadway Street/10th Street Intersection (Facing North)

Figure 5-2. Project Area from Broadway Street/W. Jones Avenue Intersection
(Facing West)

38

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 5-3. Parking Lot in Western Portion of Block (Abandoned Warehouse in
Background) (Facing Northwest)

Figure 5-4. Abandoned Warehouse and Attached Offices from W. Jones
Avenue/Avenue B Intersection (Facing South)

H222-180075

39

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5-5. Abandoned Warehouse and Attached Equipment Storage (Facing West)

Figure 5-6. Offices Attached to Abandoned Warehouse (Facing Southwest)

40

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 5-7. Commercial Building Fronting on Broadway Street (Facing West)

Figure 5-8. Covered Carport along Rear of Broadway Street Side of Block Abutting
Central Alley (Facing Southwest)

H222-180075

41

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5-9. Subsurface Gas and Electrical Utility Lines under Covered Carport at Rear of
Broadway Street Side of Block (Facing Northwest)

Figure 5-10. View of Central Alley from W. Jones Avenue (Facing Northwest)

42

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 5-11. Parking Lot Fronting on Broadway Street (Facing Southwest)

Figure 5-12. Eastern Corner of Parking Lot from W. Jones Avenue/Broadway Street
Intersection (Facing West)

H222-180075

43

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

temporary use in connection with a mayoral campaign, and much of the parking is leased out to
nearby businesses. The warehouse and offices are boarded up and abandoned.
Prior to initiating the field survey, Horizon conducted preliminary consultation with Matt
Elverson, Assistant City Archaeologist, with the CoSA’s OHP to discuss the specific scope of work
for the archeological investigations. As the entirety of the block is paved, standard archeological
survey techniques, such as surface inspection and shovel testing, would not be appropriate.
Instead, Mr. Elverson suggested that approximately four backhoe trenches should be excavated.
One trench would be excavated in the eastern corner of the tract, near the intersection of
Broadway Street and W. Jones Avenue, to target a branch of a historic-age acequia shown on an
1852 historical map as crossing that portion of the tract. A second trench would be excavated
perpendicular to the San Antonio River in the western corner of the tract, near the intersection of
10th Street and Avenue B, to target alluvial deposits underneath the asphalt pavement and
disturbed construction fills. The third, fourth, and any additional trenches that may be necessary
would be excavated in the central area of the southeastern portion of the tract fronting onto
Broadway Street where a row of late 19th- to early 20th-century dwellings and associated
outbuildings were formerly located, as depicted on historical Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps.
Horizon excavated a total of six backhoe trenches during the survey (Figure 5-13).
Backhoe trenches were excavated using a 0.6-meter- (2.0-foot-) wide bucket with a flat edge, and
trenches ranged in length from 6.3 to 19.0 meters (20.7 to 62.3 feet) in length. Excavation of
backhoe trenches was monitored by Horizon archeologists. Trench walls, floors, and spoil piles
were inspected during and after excavation for evidence of archeological materials, distinctive
stratigraphic anomalies, and/or soil discolorations that may be indicative of past cultural activities.
Horizon personnel recorded notes on the stratigraphic character of soil deposits observed in
trench walls, though at no time did any personnel enter a backhoe trench that was more than
1.2 meters (4.0 feet) deep per current Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
guidelines. The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all backhoe trenches were
determined using hand-held Garmin ForeTrex global positioning system (GPS) devices based on
the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Specific backhoe trench data are presented in
Appendix A.
The first two trenches, BHT-1 and BHT-2, was excavated in the western corner of the
block in an asphalt parking lot near the intersection of Avenue B and 10th Street. Historical map
research indicates that there were some domestic structures standing on this corner of the block
in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Furthermore, this area was suggested by Mr. Elverson
of the OHP as a promising location to investigate the natural stratigraphy of the San Antonio River
terrace. BHT-1 revealed 50.0 to 90.0 centimeters (19.7 to 35.4 inches) of artificial fills
interspersed with sparse pieces of construction debris such as bricks, brick fragments, and
concrete chunks, overlying gravelly, calcareous silty clay interpreted as the natural Pleistoceneage river terrace deposits. The parking lot had evidently been brought to grade via deposition of
the artificial fills as the natural slope of the surrounding land is downward toward the San Antonio
River to the northwest. As such, BHT-2 was excavated in the center of the western parking lot
farther “uphill” from BHT-1 to determine if the fill deposits were shallower here and/or if any
Holocene-age terrace remnants may be present. However, BHT-2 revealed a similar stratigraphic

44

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 5-13. Locations of Backhoe Trenches within Project Area

H222-180075

45

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

structure to BHT-1, consisting of approximately 70.0 centimeters (27.6 inches) of artificial fills
overlying gravelly, calcareous, Pleistocene-age terrace deposits.
The next two trenches, BHT-3 and BHT-4, were excavated in the eastern corner of the
block in an asphalt parking lot near the intersection of Broadway Street and W. Jones Avenue.
Several underground storage tanks had been removed from this part of the project area the week
prior to Horizon’s cultural resources survey, and the excavation voids had been filled with clean
fill sand. As noted in the prior chapter, it appears that this corner of the block was once the site
of a filling station, probably associated with the automotive businesses that characterized the
block since the early to mid-20th century. As such, BHT-3 and BHT-4 were excavated along the
narrow margins of the parking lot between the excavation voids from the underground storage
tanks and the fence marking the parking lot boundary. BHT-3, excavated along the southeastern
margin of the lot, consisted exclusively of artificial fill to a depth of 130.0 centimeters (51.2 inches)
below surface and had to be abandoned due to the large number of utility pipes left in place
following the tank removals. BHT-4, excavated along the northeastern margin of the lot, also
revealed deep layers of artificial fills interspersed with construction debris (bricks, brick fragments,
concrete chunks, and rebar). A small, rectangular concrete slab, tentatively interpreted as a
railroad trestle support, was observed in this trench at a depth of 110.0 centimeters (43.3 inches),
and a concrete-capped rubble berm was observed at a depth of 100.0 centimeters (39.4 inches)
below surface. Natural, calcareous, gravelly, Pleistocene-age terrace deposits were observed at
depths of 75.0 to 125.0 centimeters (29.5 to 49.2 centimeters) below surface in different portions
of the trench.
The final two trenches, BHT-5 and BHT-6, were excavated roughly in the middle of the
parking lot facing Broadway Street off the eastern corner of the small, T-shaped commercial
building currently in use as a mayoral campaign office. These trenches revealed comparatively
shallow, surficial layers of artificial fills ranging from 25.0 to 30.0 centimeters (9.8 to 11.8 inches)
in depth overlying stratified A, B, and K horizons. The A and B horizons may represent natural
Holocene-age sediments, and the K horizon was consistent with other Pleistocene-age terrace
deposits observed elsewhere within the project area. Remnants of two debris pits were observed
in BHT-6. The lower of the two rubble pits was observed at depths of 90.0 to 250.0 centimeters
(35.4 to 98.4 inches) below surface and measured 4.5 meters (14.8 feet) in length in profile. This
lower pit is superimposed by a later rubble-filled pit that cuts into the top of the earlier pit,
extending from depths of 45.0 to 150.0 centimeters (17.7 to 59.1 inches) below surface. While
the upper pit contained general construction debris indicative of the most recent phase of
development within the project area in the mid- to late 20th century. The lower pit contained
sparse construction debris but a high concentration of powderized calcium carbonate and possibly
represents the remains of a limestone slaking pit associated with the earliest phase of
construction on the block in the late 19th century.
Initial plans to excavate additional trenches along the back sides of some of the former
residential lots on the side of the project area facing Broadway Street to prospect for outbuildings
shown on the historical Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps had to be abandoned due to the large
number of underground utilities criss-crossing this area underneath the covered parking kiosk.

46

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

One newly recorded archeological site, 41BX2244, was documented during the survey.
This site trinomial was obtained to represent the possible concrete railroad footing observed in
BHT-4 and the superimposed rubble pits observed in BHT-6. While the function of the small
concrete slab interpreted as a possible railroad footing is somewhat provisional and the rubble
pits may simply be excavation voids filled with rubble, the site trinomial was obtained so as to
provide information for future researchers who may be working on surrounding blocks about the
possible historic-age objects and features observed during the current project. The site number
was obtained by completing a Texas Archeological Data Site Form using the most current version
of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory’s (TARL) TexSite archeological data collection
software, and the form was submitted to TARL.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic log
was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources. Diagnostic
artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to be
described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed, the collection policy did not
come into play.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the APE as defined in 36 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3.

H222-180075

47

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

No evidence of the historic-age acequia depicted on an 1852 historical map was observed
within the project area. Construction debris—mainly bricks, brick fragments, concrete chunks,
and rebar—was relatively abundant in some of the lenses of artificial fill deposits observed in
backhoe trenches. While at least some of the structural debris may have derived from the earlier
structures on the block, the rubble deposits on the site appear to date from the most recent phase
of construction on the block dating to the mid- to late 20th century. A few window glass shards
were observed in some of the trenches, but non-structural cultural materials were otherwise
largely absent from the fill deposits within the project area.
No clear evidence of the late 19th- to early 20th-century phase of development was
observed during the cultural resources survey, though one or two objects or features were
encountered that may be associated with this timeframe. These features, which include a
rectangular concrete footing and two superimposed debris pits, were recorded as archeological
site 41BX2244 (Figures 6-1 to 6-2). This site trinomial was obtained to represent the possible
concrete railroad footing observed in BHT-4 and the superimposed rubble pits observed in BHT6. While the function of the small concrete slab interpreted as a possible railroad footing is
somewhat tentative and the rubble pits may simply be excavation voids filled with rubble, the site
trinomial was obtained so as to provide information for future researchers who may be working
on surrounding blocks about the possible historic-age objects and features observed during the
current project.
The concrete footing, which consists of a rectangular concrete slab or block with two
pieces of rebar projecting from its top, was encountered in a trench (BHT-4) excavated along W.
Jones Avenue along the northeastern edge of the block at a depth of 110.0 centimeters
(43.3 inches) below the modern ground surface (Figures 6-3 to 6-5; also see Appendix A). The
function of this concrete footing is not certain, though it may represent the remains of a railroad
trestle support. An early Sanborn Fire Insurance Map from 1904 shows an elevated railroad
trestle on the original iron Grand Avenue Bridge crossing the San Antonio River, located a halfblock northwest of the project area along W. Jones Avenue (formerly Grand Avenue) (see
Figure 4-5). This railroad likely transported freight from businesses on the northwest side of the
river, such as the Lone Star Brewery, to railroad depots located several blocks southeast of the
project area. This railroad trestle is depicted along the southwestern side of the bridge, which
would place it on the same side of W. Jones Avenue (formerly Grand Avenue) as the concrete
footing observed in BHT-4. The current Grand Avenue Bridge (which does not appear to have

H222-180075

49

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 6-1. Location of Site 41BX2244 on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

50

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 6-2. Location of Site 41BX2244 on Aerial Photograph

H222-180075

51

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 6-3. Stratigraphic Profile Sketch of BHT-4 (Southwest Wall)

Concrete
Footing

Figure 6-4. Overview of BHT-4 Profile (Facing Southeast)

52

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 6-5. View of Concrete Footing in BHT-4 (Facing Northwest)

included a railroad trestle) was constructed in 1928 (Figure 6-6), which places the abandonment
of the local street railway system between 1904 and 1928 (notably, the 1912 Sanborn Fire
Insurance Map depicts the original iron Grand Avenue Bridge, though it does not specifically
mention the railroad trestle [see Figure 4-6], so it is possible the railroad was already out of use
at this time). A broadly similar concrete object was observed during a lunchtime excursion to The
Luxury sandwich shop during the field effort, which is located a half-block northwest of the project
area on the southeastern bank of the San Antonio River adjacent to the current Grand Avenue
Bridge (Figure 6-7). The concrete block observed at the sandwich shop is not shaped exactly the
same way as the block observed in BHT-4, having an L-shaped cross-section rather than the
square cross-section, though the blocks appear to be of relatively similar dimensions. The
concrete block observed at the sandwich shop adjacent to the bridge is on the other side of the
street from the block observed within the project area, though it is unknown whether or not the
block at the sandwich shop is in its original location.
Two superimposed rubble pits were detected in one backhoe trench (BHT-6) excavated
in the approximate center of the southeastern portion of the block facing onto Broadway Street
(Figures 6-8 to 6-9). This trench and a neighboring trench (BHT-5) were excavated within the
mapped location of an adobe house depicted on the 1896, 1904, and 1912 Sanborn Fire
Insurance Maps in an attempt to discern whether or not any structural remnants associated with
the original phase of development may be present below the layers of construction fill. The lower
of the two superimposed rubble pits was observed at depths of 90.0 to 250.0 centimeters (35.4 to
98.4 inches) below surface and measured 4.5 meters (14.8 feet) in length in profile. This lower

H222-180075

53

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

Figure 6-6. Grand Avenue Bridge (One Block Northwest of Project Area) (Facing West)

Figure 6-7. Similar Concrete Railroad Abutment Observed at The Luxury Sandwich Shop
near Grand Avenue Bridge (Facing West)

54

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure 6-8. Stratigraphic Profile Sketch of BHT-6 (Southwest Wall)

Intrusive
Rubble Pit

Lower
“Lime” Pit

Figure 6-9. Detail of BHT-6 Profile (Facing Southwest)

H222-180075

55

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

pit is superimposed by a later rubble-filled pit that cuts into the top of the earlier pit, extending
from depths of 45.0 to 150.0 centimeters (17.7 to 59.1 inches) below surface. While no
architectural remnants or artifacts temporally diagnostic of the late 19th or early 20th centuries
were encountered, the lower pit contained a fairly large concentration of powderized calcium
carbonate. The high concentration of powdery calcium carbonate suggests that the lower pit may
represent the remains of a lime slaking pit. Prior to the introduction of Portland cement in the US
in the 1870s to 1880s, mortar was produced by the calcination of limestone at high temperatures
in lime kilns and the addition of sand to the resulting quicklime to produce mortar or cement.
Calcined lime would be removed from the kiln after several days of heating, sent to pits, and
dissolved (“slaked”) by pouring water over it. The burnt rock would heat the water beyond the
boiling point and turn into a white, yogurt-like paste that would be covered by a layer of water and
stored until ready for use. The processed limestone (pit lime) was used as mortar for masonry
work. While this inference about the function of the lower pit is far from conclusive, it is possible
that such a feature could have been used during the earliest phase of development within the
project area to produce mortar for buildings. Some residential and commercial development is
evident within the project area as early as 1886 (earlier images were not available), and the
earliest buildings on the block appear to have stood well into the early 20th century. Production
of mortar from calcined lime would have been much more labor-intensive than purchasing
Portland cement, though local production of calcined lime may have been the more expedient
option if imported cement was not readily available at the time. A dwelling was present on this lot
at the location of the possible lime pit by 1886; as such, this pit may have been associated with
the earliest phase of development in the late 19th century. Of course, the presence of a slaking
pit would suggest a lime kiln would have been located nearby, and no archeological or historical
map evidence of such a structure was noted, so it is also possible that the lower pit is simply an
early pit filled with a high concentration of calcium carbonate and some construction debris (the
gravelly Pleistocene-age terrace into which this pit was excavated also contains a high
concentration of calcium carbonate). The secondary rubble pit that cuts into the lower pit contains
construction debris indicative of the last phase of construction within the project area during the
mid- to late 20th century.
The majority of the cultural resources observed during Horizon’s survey of the Broadway
Jones tract are associated with the most recent phase of demolition and construction within the
project area dating to the mid- to late 20th century, which produced the current configuration of
the block. While one archeological site, 41BX2244, was recorded—consisting of two cultural
objects or features, including a concrete structural footing possibly associated with an early 20thcentury railway and a large pit filled with powderized calcium carbonate that may represent the
remains of a lime slaking pit associated with the original phase of construction and development
on the block in the late 19th century—the objects/features that compose this site do not retain
sufficient integrity to reflect the character of late 19th- to early 20th-century residential and
commercial development on the block. Artificial fill layers observed across the project area
contain varying quantities of construction debris (mainly bricks, brick fragments, concrete chunks,
and rebar), appear to be associated mainly with the mid- to late 20th-century phase of
development on the block, and are heavily disturbed. No intact structural remains, architectural

56

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

remnants, or archeological deposits were observed, and site 41BX2244 is recommended as being
ineligible for designation as an SAL.
Overall, the stratigraphy of the sediments on the block consists of multiple deposits of
artificial fills of varying depths overlying gravelly Pleistocene-age terrace deposits. Possible
Holocene-age terrace deposits were encountered in two of the six backhoe trenches (BHT-5 and
BHT-6). No prehistoric cultural resources were observed in any of the backhoe trenches.

H222-180075

57

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:



Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.



Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for designation
as SALs.



Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the project area and to make preliminary determinations of whether or
not the resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important
historic events and/or personages. Under the Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources
are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological
resources for designation as SALs.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

H222-180075

59

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least on one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

60

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

No evidence of the historic-age acequia depicted on an 1852 historical map was observed
within the project area. Construction debris—mainly bricks, brick fragments, concrete chunks,
and rebar—was relatively abundant in some of the lenses of artificial fill deposits observed in
backhoe trenches. While at least some of the structural debris may have derived from the earlier
structures on the block, the rubble deposits on the site appear to date from the most recent phase
of construction on the block dating to the mid- to late 20th century. A few window glass shards
were observed in some of the trenches, but non-structural cultural materials were otherwise
largely absent from the fill deposits within the project area.
No clear evidence of the late 19th- to early 20th-century phase of development was
observed during the cultural resources survey, though one or two objects or features were
encountered that may be associated with this timeframe. These features, which include a
rectangular concrete footing and two superimposed debris pits, were recorded as archeological
site 41BX2244 (Table 7-1).
The concrete footing, which consists of a rectangular concrete slab or block with two
pieces of rebar projecting from its top, was encountered in a trench (BHT-4) excavated along W.
Jones Avenue along the northeastern edge of the block at a depth of 110.0 centimeters
(43.3 inches) below the modern ground surface. The function of this concrete footing is not
certain, though it may represent the remains of a railroad trestle support. An early Sanborn Fire
Insurance Map from 1904 shows an elevated railroad trestle on the original iron Grand Avenue
Bridge crossing the San Antonio River, located a half-block northwest of the project area along
W. Jones Avenue (formerly Grand Avenue). This railroad likely transported freight from
businesses on the northwest side of the river, such as the Lone Star Brewery, to railroad depots
located three blocks southeast of the project area. This railroad trestle is depicted along the
southwestern side of the bridge, which would place it on the same side of W. Jones Avenue
(formerly Grand Avenue) as the concrete footing observed in BHT-4. The current Grand Avenue

H222-180075

61

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

Table 7-1. Summary of Cultural Resources Recorded During Survey
Permanent
Trinomial

Temp.
Site No.

41BX2244

BJ-1

Cultural Affiliation

Site Type

Historic-age railroad
footing (early 20thcentury) and debris
pit (late 19th-century)

Historic-age
engineered object
(possible early 20thcentury railroad footing)
and debris pit (possible
late 19th-century “lime
slaking pit”)

Recommended
SAL Eligibility
Ineligible

Recommendations
No further
investigations

1

Eligibility recommendations apply only to the portions of sites and features within the project area. Site and feature
areas outside the project area were not evaluated.
SAL
State Antiquities Landmark

Bridge (which does not appear to have included a railroad trestle) was constructed in 1928, which
places the abandonment of the local street railway system between 1904 and 1928 (notably, the
1912 Sanborn Fire Insurance Map depicts the original iron Grand Avenue Bridge, though it does
not specifically mention the railroad trestle, so it is possible the railroad was already out of use at
this time).
Two superimposed rubble pits were detected in one backhoe trench (BHT-6) excavated
in the approximate center of the southeastern portion of the block facing onto Broadway Street.
This trench and a neighboring trench (BHT-5) were excavated within the mapped location of an
adobe house depicted on the 1896, 1904, and 1912 Sanborn Fire Insurance Maps in an attempt
to discern whether or not any structural remnants associated with the original phase of
development may be present below the layers of construction fill. The lower of the two
superimposed rubble pits was observed at depths of 90.0 to 250.0 centimeters (35.4 to
98.4 inches) below surface and measured 4.5 meters (14.8 feet) in length in profile. This lower
pit is superimposed by a later rubble-filled pit that cuts into the top of the earlier pit, extending
from depths of 45.0 to 150.0 centimeters (17.7 to 59.1 inches) below surface. While no
architectural remnants or artifacts temporally diagnostic of the late 19th or early 20th centuries
were encountered, the lower pit contained a fairly large concentration of powderized calcium
carbonate. The high concentration of powdery calcium carbonate suggests that the lower pit may
represent the remains of a lime slaking pit. Prior to the introduction of Portland cement in the US
in the 1870s to 1880s, mortar was produced by the calcination of limestone at high temperatures
in lime kilns and the addition of sand to the resulting quicklime to produce mortar or cement.
Calcined lime would be removed from the kiln after several days of heating, sent to pits, and
dissolved (“slaked”) by pouring water over it. The burnt rock would heat the water beyond the
boiling point and turn into a white, yogurt-like paste that would be covered by a layer of water and
stored until ready for use. The processed limestone (pit lime) was used as mortar for masonry
work. While this inference about the function of the lower pit is far from conclusive, it is possible
that such a feature could have been used during the earliest phase of development within the
project area to produce mortar for buildings. Some residential and commercial development is
evident within the project area as early as 1886 (earlier images were not available), and the
earliest buildings on the block appear to have stood well into the early 20th century. Production
of mortar from calcined lime would have been much more labor-intensive than purchasing

62

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Portland cement, though local production of calcined lime may have been the more expedient
option if imported cement was not readily available at the time. A dwelling was present on this lot
at the location of the possible lime pit by 1886; as such, this pit may have been associated with
the earliest phase of development in the late 19th century. Of course, the presence of a slaking
pit would suggest a lime kiln would have been located nearby, and no archeological or historical
map evidence of such a structure was noted, so it is also possible that the lower pit is simply an
early pit filled with a high concentration of calcium carbonate and some construction debris (the
gravelly Pleistocene-age terrace into which this pit was excavated also contains a high
concentration of calcium carbonate). The secondary rubble pit that cuts into the lower pit contains
construction debris indicative of the last phase of construction within the project area during the
mid- to late 20th century.
The majority of the cultural resources observed during Horizon’s survey of the Broadway
Jones tract are associated with the most recent phase of demolition and construction within the
project area dating to the mid- to late 20th century, which produced the current configuration of
the block. While one archeological site, 41BX2244, was recorded—consisting of two cultural
objects or features, including a concrete structural footing possibly associated with an early 20thcentury railway and a large pit filled with powderized calcium carbonate that may represent the
remains of a lime slaking pit associated with the original phase of construction and development
on the block in the late 19th century—the objects/features that compose this site do not retain
sufficient integrity to reflect the character of late 19th- to early 20th-century residential and
commercial development on the block. Artificial fill layers observed across the project area
contain varying quantities of construction debris (mainly bricks, brick fragments, concrete chunks,
and rebar), appear to be associated mainly with the mid- to late 20th-century phase of
development on the block, and are heavily disturbed. No intact structural remains, architectural
remnants, or archeological deposits were observed, and site 41BX2244 is recommended as being
ineligible for designation as an SAL.

7.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations of the project area documented in
this report, no potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed
undertaking. In accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith
effort to identify historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified
that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26, and no further
archeological investigations are recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, it should be noted that human burials are protected under the Texas Health and Safety
Code. In the unlikely event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately at the location of the inadvertent
discovery until a qualified archeologist can assess the find, and the THC should be notified of the
discovery.

H222-180075

63

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Baker, V.R.
1975
Flood Hazards Along the Balcones Escarpment in Central Texas—Alternative
Approaches to the Recognition, Mapping, and Management. Geological Circular
No. 75-5. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Barnes, V.E.
1983
Geologic Atlas of Texas—San Antonio Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water Development Board, Report No. 53,
Austin.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

H222-180075

65

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Fox, A.A.
1979
A Survey of Archaeological, Architectural and Historical Sites on the San Antonio River
from Olmos Dam to South Alamo Street and on San Pedro Creek from San Pedro Park
to Guadalupe Street.
Archaeological Survey Report No. 1979, Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Frederick, C.D, and C. Ringstaff
1994
Lithic Resources at Fort Hood: Further Investigations. In Archeological Investigations
on 571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas, edited by W.N.
Trierweiler. United States Army Fort Hood, Archeological Resource Management
Series, No. 31, pp. 125-181.
Frederick, C.D., M.D. Glascock, H. Neff, and C.M. Stevenson
1994
Evaluation of Chert Patination as a Dating Technique: A Cast Study from Fort Hood,
Texas. US Army Fort Hood, Archeological Resource Management Series, No. 32.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J.T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas. US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.

66

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
National Environmental Title Research (NETR)
2018
Historic Aerials by NETR Online. <http://www.historicaerials.com>. Accessed May 18,
2018.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2018
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed April 25, 2018. US Department of Agriculture.
Office of Historic Preservation (OHP)
2018
Screen Capture of Historic-age Acequia Data Layer. Office of Historic Preservation,
City of San Antonio. Provided March 29, 2018.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Perry-Castañeda Library (PCL)
1886
Augustus Koch’s Bird’s Eye Map of San Antonio.
Collection. The University of Texas at Austin.

Perry-Castañeda Library Map

1896

Sanborn Fire Insurance Map. Perry-Castañeda Library Map Collection. The University
of Texas at Austin.

1904

Sanborn Fire Insurance Map. Perry-Castañeda Library Map Collection. The University
of Texas at Austin.

1912

Sanborn Fire Insurance Map. Perry-Castañeda Library Map Collection. The University
of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in
the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B. Collins,
pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

H222-180075

67

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Taylor, F.B., R.B. Hailey, and D.L. Richmond
1991
Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, in cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station. Washington, D.C.
Texas State Library and Archives Commission
1895-96 San Antonio City Directory. Texas Family Heritage Research Center, Texas State
Library and Archives Commission, Austin, Texas.
1910

San Antonio City Directory. Texas Family Heritage Research Center, Texas State
Library and Archives Commission, Austin, Texas.

1921

San Antonio City Directory. Texas Family Heritage Research Center, Texas State
Library and Archives Commission, Austin, Texas.

1936

San Antonio City Directory. Texas Family Heritage Research Center, Texas State
Library and Archives Commission, Austin, Texas.

1946

San Antonio City Directory. Texas Family Heritage Research Center, Texas State
Library and Archives Commission, Austin, Texas.

Tharp, B.C.
1939
The Vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy of Science, Publications in Natural History,
Series 1:i-xvi, 1-74.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2018
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Restricted Database. <https://www.thc.atlas.state.
tx.us/>. Accessed April 25, 2018.
Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2018
San Antonio.
The Handbook of Texas Online <http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/
handbook/online/articles/BB/hds02.html>. Accessed April 25, 2018.
US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2016
Digital orthophoto, Bexar County, Texas. National Agriculture Imagery Program, Farm
Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1992
7.5-minute series topographic map, San Antonio East, Texas, quadrangle.
Waters, M.R., S.L. Forman, T.A. Jennings, L.C. Nordt, S.G. Driese, J.M. Feinberg, J.L. Keene, J.
Halligan, A. Lindquist, J. Pierson, C.T. Hallmark, M.B. Collins, and J.E. Wiederhold
2011
The Buttermilk Creek Complex and the Origins of Clovis at the Debra L. Friedkin Site,
Texas. Science 331:1599-1603.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

68

180075_arch_survey_report

APPENDIX A:
Backhoe Trenching Data

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure A-1. Locations of Backhoe Trenches Excavated within Project Area

H222-180075

A-1

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Table A-1. Backhoe Trench 1 (BHT-1)
Trench No.:
UTM Coordinates1:
Comment:

Zone

Depth
(cmbs)

I

BHT-1
550305 E, 3256300 N
BHT-1 was oriented northwest to southeast and measured 8.0 meters in length. It
was excavated in the western corner of an asphalt-paved parking lot in the western
corner of the block near the intersection of Avenue B and 10th Street.

Description

Cultural Materials

0-45

Light yellowish-brown, poorly sorted, gravelly clay;
angular crushed limestone fragments; loose and friable;
abrupt lower boundary (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

II

45-90

Very dark gray massive clay; occasional limestone
fragments; architectural brick recovered along upper
contact; occasional burned limestone; clear, wavy
lower boundary (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

III

50-150

Dark grayish-brown silty clay; common limestone
fragments and stream-rolled limestone gravels; loose
and friable; moderately abundant calcium carbonate
films and occasional nodules (1.0 to 3.0 mm) (Ab
horizon)

None

IV

60-300

Very pale brown gravelly silt; 50% calcium carbonate;
friable; isopachous rinds present; gravels are chert
mixed with limestone and poorly sorted but well
rounded (K horizon)

None

cmbs = centimeters below surface
mm = millimeters

Figure A-2. Stratigraphic Profile Sketch of BHT-1 (Southwest Wall)

A-2

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure A-3. Location of BHT-1 Prior to Excavation (Facing Southwest)

Figure A-4. Excavation of BHT-1 in Progress (Facing Southeast)

H222-180075

A-3

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure A-5. Overview of BHT-1 Profile (Facing Southeast)

Figure A-6. Detail of BHT-1 Profile (Facing Southwest)

A-4

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Table A-2. Backhoe Trench 2 (BHT-2)
Trench No.:
UTM Coordinates1:
Comment:

Zone

Depth
(cmbs)

I

2
550344 E, 3256298 N
BHT-2 was oriented northwest to southeast and measured 6.3 meters in length. It
was excavated in the approximate center of an asphalt-paved parking lot in the
western corner of the block near the intersection of Avenue B and 10th Street.

Description

Cultural Materials

0-20

Light yellowish-brown, poorly sorted, gravelly clay;
angular crushed limestone fragments; loose and friable;
abrupt lower boundary (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

II

20-70

Very dark gray massive clay; occasional limestone
fragments; occasional burned limestone; clear, wavy
lower boundary (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

IV

70-270

Very pale brown gravelly silt; 50% calcium carbonate;
friable; isopachous rinds present; gravels are chert
mixed with limestone and poorly sorted but well
rounded (K horizon)

None

cmbs = centimeters below surface

Figure A-7. Stratigraphic Profile Sketch of BHT-2 (Northeast Wall)

H222-180075

A-5

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure A-8. Location of BHT-2 Prior to Excavation (Facing Southeast)

Figure A-9. Overview of BHT-2 (Foreground) and BHT-1 (Background) (Facing West)

A-6

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure A-10. Overview of BHT-2 Profile (Facing Northwest)

Figure A-11. Detail of BHT-2 Profile (Facing Southeast)

H222-180075

A-7

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Table A-3. Backhoe Trench 3 (BHT-3)
Trench No.:
UTM Coordinates1:
Comment:

Zone

Depth
(cmbs)

I

3
550447 E, 3256322 N
BHT-3 was oriented northeast to southwest and measured 7.0 meters in length. It
was excavated in the eastern corner of an asphalt-paved parking lot in the eastern
corner of the block near the intersection of W. Jones Avenue and Broadway Street.
Three or four underground storage tanks (UST) had been recently excavated and
removed from this area, and the excavation voids were filled with clean fill.
Excavation of this trench was abandoned due to the high density of abandoned
utility pipes left in the ground following removal of the USTs.

Description

Cultural Materials

0-20

Light yellowish-brown, poorly sorted, gravelly clay;
angular crushed limestone fragments; loose and friable;
abrupt lower boundary (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

II

20-40

Very dark gray massive clay; occasional limestone
fragments; occasional burned limestone; clear, wavy
lower boundary (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

V

40-145

Brown, granular fine sand; iron staining; clay fragments
present; manganese staining (artificial fill sand deposit)

None

VI

50-130

Lens of dark gray sandy clay with common streamrolled gravels and rock fragments; moderately friable;
brick fragments present throughout; light brown
mottling present; buried pipes may be from nearby
underground storage tank closure (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

cmbs = centimeters below surface

Figure A-12. Stratigraphic Profile Sketch of BHT-3 (Northwest Wall)

A-8

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure A-13. Location of BHT-3 Prior to Excavation (Facing East)

Figure A-14. Excavation of BHT-1 in Progress (Facing Southwest)

H222-180075

A-9

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure A-15. Overview of BHT-3 Profile (Facing Southwest)

Figure A-16. Detail of BHT-3 Profile (Note Abandoned Utility Pipes) (Facing Down)

A-10

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Table A-4. Backhoe Trench 4 (BHT-4)
Trench No.:
UTM Coordinates1:
Comment:

Zone

Depth
(cmbs)

Ia

4
550446 E, 3256324 N
BHT-4 was oriented northwest to southeast and measured 19.0 meters in length.
It was excavated in the eastern corner of an asphalt-paved parking lot in the
eastern corner of the block near the intersection of W. Jones Avenue and
Broadway Street. Three or four USTs had been recently excavated and removed
from this area, and the excavation voids were filled with clean fill.

Description

Cultural Materials

0-25

Light yellowish-brown, poorly sorted, gravelly clay;
angular crushed limestone fragments; loose and friable;
abrupt lower boundary (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

Ib

25-50

Light brown gravelly clay (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

IIa

50-60

Very dark gray massive clay; occasional limestone
fragments; occasional burned limestone; clear, wavy
lower boundary (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

IIb

60-75

Yellowish-brown loose sand (artificial fill deposit)

None

III

75-150

Dark grayish-brown silty clay; common limestone
fragments and stream-rolled limestone gravels; loose
and friable; moderately abundant calcium carbonate
films and occasional nodules (1.0 to 3.0 mm) (Ab
horizon)

None

IV

125-250

Very pale brown gravelly silt; 50% calcium carbonate;
friable; isopachous rinds present; gravels are chert
mixed with limestone and poorly sorted but well
rounded (K horizon)

None

cmbs = centimeters below surface

H222-180075

A-11

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure A-17. Stratigraphic Profile Sketch of BHT-4 (Southwest Wall)

Figure A-18. Location of BHT-4 Prior to Excavation (Facing Northwest)

A-12

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure A-19. Excavation of BHT-4 in Progress (Facing Northwest)

Figure A-20. View of Concrete-Capped Rubble Pile in BHT-4 (Facing Southeast)

H222-180075

A-13

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure A-21. View of Concrete Footing in BHT-4 (Facing Northwest)

Figure A-22. Overview of BHT-4 Profile (Facing Southeast)

A-14

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Table A-5. Backhoe Trench 5 (BHT-5)
Trench No.:
UTM Coordinates1:
Comment:

Zone

Depth
(cmbs)

I

5
550398 E, 3256300 N
BHT-5 was oriented northwest to southeast and measured 8.6 meters in length. It
was excavated next to BHT-6 in an asphalt-paved parking on the northeastern side
of a small building formerly used as a car dealership office on the southeastern
side of the block facing Broadway Street.

Description

Cultural Materials

0-30

Light yellowish-brown, poorly sorted, gravelly clay;
angular crushed limestone fragments; loose and friable;
abrupt lower boundary (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

A

30-70

Very dark grayish-brown silty clay; common light brown
mottles; occasional calcium carbonate flecks; fine
subangular blocky structure; clear wavy boundary (A
horizon)

Sparse construction
debris at upper
interface

B

70-95

Dark yellowish-brown silty clay; occasional streamrolled gravels; common clay films present; calcium
carbonate filaments; clear wavy lower boundary (B
horizon)

None

K

95-145

Light yellowish-brown silty clay; 50% calcium
carbonate; stage II calcium carbonate morphology (K
horizon)

None

cmbs = centimeters below surface

Figure A-23. Stratigraphic Profile Sketch of BHT-5 (Southwestern Wall)

H222-180075

A-15

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure A-24. Location of BHT-5 Prior to Excavation (Facing Southeast)

Figure A-25. Excavation of BHT-4 in Progress (Facing Southeast)

A-16

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure A-26. Overview of BHT-5 Profile (Facing South)

Figure A-27. Detail of BHT-5 Profile (Facing Southwest)

H222-180075

A-17

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Table A-6. Backhoe Trench 6 (BHT-6)
Trench No.:
UTM Coordinates1:
Comment:

Zone

Depth
(cmbs)

I

6
550396 E, 3256297 N
BHT-6 was oriented northwest to southeast and measured 9.0 meters in length. It
was excavated next to BHT-5 in an asphalt-paved parking on the northeastern side
of a small building formerly used as a car dealership office on the southeastern
side of the block facing Broadway Street.

Description

Cultural Materials

0-25

Light yellowish-brown, poorly sorted, gravelly clay;
angular crushed limestone fragments; loose and friable;
abrupt lower boundary (artificial fill deposit)

Sparse construction
debris

A

25-60

Very dark grayish-brown silty clay; common light brown
mottles; occasional calcium carbonate flecks; fine
subangular blocky structure; clear wavy boundary (A
horizon)

None

B

60-75

Dark yellowish-brown silty clay; occasional streamrolled gravels; common clay films present; calcium
carbonate filaments; clear wavy lower boundary (B
horizon)

None

K

75-220

Light yellowish-brown silty clay; 50% calcium
carbonate; stage II calcium carbonate morphology (K
horizon)

None

cmbs = centimeters below surface

Figure A-28. Stratigraphic Profile Sketch of BHT-6 (Southwest Wall)

A-18

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure A-29. Location of BHT-5 Prior to Excavation (Facing East)

Figure A-30. Excavation of BHT-6 in Progress (Facing South)

H222-180075

A-19

Appendix A: Backhoe Trench Data

Figure A-31. Overview of BHT-5 (Left) and BHT-6 (Right) (Facing Southeast)

Figure A-32. Overview of BHT-6 Profile (Facing West)

A-20

180075_arch_survey_report

Archeological Investigations on the
3.3-acre Broadway Jones Tract, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas

Figure A-33. Detail of BHT-6 Profile (Facing Southwest)

H222-180075

A-21

