TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

....,

, .

LETTER TO MR. B. W. BRUNS
UPPEI1 GUADALUPE RIVER AUTHORITY

...

Grant D. Hall

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas At Austin
Technical Bulletin No. 17

197]

..

-'
. , ....

,

·,
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

Texas Archeological' Survey
BALCONES RESEARCH CENTER
10.100 aUftNET ROAD,

AUSTIN.

TEXAS

787118

May

Mr. B. W. Bruns, General Manager
Upper Guadalupe River Authority
P.O. Box 1278
Kerrville, Texas 78028

10, 1977

- -,
"
, ­

.

Dear Mr. Bruns:

The Texas Archeological Survey has now completed field reconnaissance in the area
to be affected by the Upper Guadalupe River Authority's proposed ponding dam and
reservoir in Kerrville, Texas. r.iO sites--the remains of an historic mill and a
prehistoric aboriginal e'ncampment--were located, during the course of the survey.
It has been concluded that these sites shouldnp.t·;* with the precautionary measures
suggested below, be adversely affected by the planned modifications. :
On-foot inspection of the ground surface over the entire project area took place
on April 20 and April 22, 1977. Particularly careful attention was given to the
terraces along either side of the river. These features were considered to have
the greatest potential for the occurrence of relatively undisturbed historic an~
prehistoric remains., The floodplain or "bottom" of the Guadalupe River occurring
between the foot of the terrace and the present river channel was given only a
cursory examination. Here, the effects of past scouring and reworking of deposits
by strong flood waters have been so intense as to preclude, for all practical pur­
poses, the occurrence of significant cultural remains. The two sites located
during the survey were both situated on the terraces overlooking the Guadalupe.
One prehistoric aboriginal site (41 KR 131) was found along the south (right)
bank on a gradual sandy slope roughly 1300 feet southeast along the terrace top
from the Knapp Road low-water crossing. The site was evidenced by a chert bi­
face, two chert flakes) and several fire-altered limestone cobbles resting on
ground surface in an area severely altered by recent sand mining operations. A
relatively extensive deposit of sandy clay up to two meters in thickness apparently
once existed at the location, but was excavated and hauled away at some time in
the recent past. Vestiges of the deposit are preserved as pedestals around oak
trees too large to have been removed as the mining took place. These remnants of
intact deposit are too small and too root-filled to provide any substantial idea
of what the original deposit and its cultural contents were like.
Due to its highly disturbed condition, it is ~elt that Site 41 KR 131 retains
little or no scientific potential. Though proposed construction and/or attendant
effects may have an additional impact on the site, it is already in such bad
condition that further damage would not constitute a significant loss of archeo­
logical data. No further investigation iSJecommended •

..

Mr. B. W. Bruns
May

page 2

10, 1977
·t

On the north (left) bank of the river, the remains of what is purported to be an
old mill (designated 41 KR 130) were found at the terrace edge directly behind
the Overstreet Fruit Market fronting on Highway 27. The structure evidencing
the site consists, as far as can be observed, of two dressed limestone block
walls recessed an estimated 15 feet into the ground at the terrace edge such
that the wall footings are down on the floodplain of the river. The tops of
the walls are flush with the upper edge of the terrace. Cutting in perpendicular
to the terrace edge, the walls parallel one another about 15 feet apart. At 15
feet back from the opening to the river, the walls cut off in opposite directions
at 90 degrees to form a T-shaped opening in the ground. The opening between the
walls has been almost completely filled with trash making it impossible to ade­
quately assess the condition and extent of the feature.
At present, little is ~~own of the history of Site 41 KR 130. The present land­
owner, Lester Overstreet, knew only that an "old milln had once'stood at the
location. Long time Kerrville residents, Mr. and Mrs. Arlie James, confirmed the
existence of a mill but were unable to provide additional details. Deed records
at the Kerr County Courthouse in Kerrville revealed that the land upon which the
mill is located was originally granted to James Monroe Starkey, one of the first
settlers in the region. Probate and tax records at the courthouse were consulted
but yielded no further information. The chairman of the Kerr County Historical
Commission, Mrs. R. C. McBryde, knew nothing ab~ut the mill and stated that the
county historical records contain no information on the site. A history entitled
Kerr County, Texas 1856-1956, by Bob Bennett, made no mention of a mill on
Starkey property by the Guadalupe River. In summary, little evidence has been
found to indicate that this mill (41 KR 130) played an outstanding role in the
history of Kerr County.
The mill site is located in an area of the proposed reservoir where planned
modifications will involve no construction, only removal of trees and underbrush
from the floodplain and terrace face. It is recommended that clearance activities
in the area immediately adjacent to the mill be conducted in a manner designed to
avoid damaging the structural features evidencing the s~te. Beyond this single
precautionary measure, no further investigation of the site is deemed necessary
relative to the river authority project now under consideration.
Neither of the sites located in the area to be affected by the proposed dam and
reservoir are considered worthy of nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places.
Sincerely,

Grant D. Hall
Staff Archeologist
GDH:mg

Copy to Dr. Neil Bishop, Turner, Collie and Braden
Mr. Arthur D. Denys, Chie~ Engineering Division,
Fort Worth District Corps of Engineers

-"

..
.;~~ ,

. \'",

.

.

