CULTURAL RESOURCES INVESTIGATION REPORT OF THE
PROPOSED BEAR CREEK SUD WATER SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS
PROJECT IN LAVON, COLLIN COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 8745

Prepared for:
Bear Creek Special Utility District (SUD)
P.O. Box 188
Lavon, Texas 75166
972/843-2101

Prepared by:
Sphere 3 Environmental, Inc.
1501 Bill Owens Parkway
Longview, TX 75604
903/297-4673

Authored by:
James S. Belew, RPA and Michael Ryan

March 2019

ABSTRACT
Sphere 3 Environmental, Inc. (Sphere 3) conducted an intensive pedestrian cultural resources
survey of approximately 5.1 hectares (12.7 acres) of land designated as the Area of Potential
Effects (APE) on January 31 through February 1, 2019, in response to water system
improvements proposed by Bear Creek Special Utility District (SUD). The project area is located
on the east side of Lake Road, the north side of Moore Lane, and both sides of Texas State
Highway 78. The facilities tracts and waterline are owned by Bear Creek SUD. The waterline
will be owned by Bear Creek SUD. The cultural resources survey was conducted under Texas
Antiquities Permit #8745 to identify properties eligible for inclusion in the National Register of
Historic Places (NRHP) or listing as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL). A total of 64 shovel
tests were excavated across the project area. Two archaeological localities were identified, Site
41COL316 and Isolated Find #1. Site 41COL316 was identified as a multi-component
indeterminate prehistoric and indeterminate historic low-density artifact scatter in a highly
disturbed cultivated upland flat terrace. Prehistoric artifacts recovered from the site consisted of
five lithic fragments exhibiting minimal cultural modification. Historic artifacts, likely scattered
from domestic activities at a nearby residence, consist of two chronologically diagnostic amethyst
bottle glass shards. Additional cultural objects collected included: a clam shell fragment, several
amber, aqua, and colorless bottle glass fragments evaluated as likely greater than 50 years old,
and several iron objects. Recent cultural objects (less than 50 years old) within this scatter
include amber bottle fragments with paper beer labels attached thereunto, contemporary store
label affixed to lighter, and amber glass shards exhibiting no patina, wear, of other signs of aging
and are attributed as discarded materials from the occupants of vehicles traversing the road
forming the site’s east boundary. The site’s integrity has been destroyed by many years of use for
cultivating row crops since prior to the 1960s. Isolated Find #1 consists of a buried single
translucent colorless bottle glass shard, for which site delineation revealed no additional historic
cultural association. Project records and artifacts were curated at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas. The site and Isolated Find #1 have been
evaluated as not eligible for inclusion in the NRHP or for listing as a SAL. Sphere 3 therefore
recommends that construction of water system improvements proceed as planned without further
cultural resource investigations.

i

Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................. 1
DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA...................................................................................... 2
RESEARCH DESIGN ........................................................................................................ 3
RESULTS ........................................................................................................................... 4
Previous Investigations ................................................................................................... 4
Imagery and Topographic Analysis ................................................................................ 5
Intensive Pedestrian Survey Supported by Shovel Testing ............................................ 6
Large Facilities Tract .................................................................................................. 6
Small Fenced Facilities Tract...................................................................................... 6
Southwest Waterline ROW Segment .......................................................................... 7
Northeast Waterline ROW Segment ........................................................................... 9
Relevant Culture History (1845 to Present) .................................................................. 13
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS................................................................... 17
REFERENCES ................................................................................................................. 18
APPENDICES
Appendix A: Figures
Figure 1.

Figure 2.

Figures 3a to 3c.

Vicinity Map of the Proposed Bear Creek SUD Water System
Improvements Project in Collin County, TX
Topographic Features of the Proposed Bear Creek SUD Water System
Improvements Project in Collin County, TX
Shovel Test Locations of the Proposed Bear Creek SUD Water System
Improvements Project in Collin County, TX

Figure 4.

Previously Conducted CRM Surveys and Previously Recorded
Archaeological Sites Within One Mile of the Project Area

Figure 5.

Aerial Photograph (2016) of the Project Area

Figure 6.

Historic Topographic Map of Project Area – Published 1930

Figure 7.

Historic Topographic Map of Project Area – Published 1963 and
Photorevised 1968

Figure 8.

Site Map of 41COL316

Appendix B: Tables
Table 1.
Large Facilities Tract of Bear Creek SUD Water System Improvements Project
Shovel Test Log

ii

Table 2.

Small Fenced Facilities Tract of Bear Creek SUD Water System Improvements
Project Shovel Test Log

Table 3.

Southwest Waterline ROW Segment of Bear Creek SUD Water System
Improvements Project Shovel Test Log

Table 4.

Northeast Waterline ROW Segment of Bear Creek SUD Water System
Improvements Project Shovel Test Log

Table 5.

Site 41COL316 Field Specimen Catalogue

Table 6.

Isolated Find #1 Field Specimen Catalogue

Table 7.

Recent Anomalies Field Specimen Catalogue

Appendix C: Photograph Log

iii

INTRODUCTION
Bear Creek Special Utility District (SUD) plans to develop an approximately 5.1-hectare (ha)
(12.7-acre [ac]) area of land for water system improvements in the City of Lavon, Texas
(Appendix A: Figures 1 and 2). Proposed development includes a pump station facilities area
consisting of two adjoining rectangular tracts totaling approximately 3.2 ha (7.8 ac) and two
discontiguous linear waterline segments of right-of-way (ROW) cumulatively comprising
approximately 2.0 ha (4.9 ac) (Appendix A: Figures 3a, 3b, 3c). The cultural resources survey
was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit #8745 on behalf of the Bear Creek SUD as project
sponsor and owner.
Sphere 3 Environmental, Inc. (Sphere 3) was retained by Bear Creek SUD to determine whether
any cultural resources determined to be adversely impacted by proposed construction activities
are eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or worthy of being
listed as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL). Fieldwork was conducted on January 31 through
February 1, 2019 by James S, Belew, RPA (Principal Investigator) with the assistance of Michael
Ryan and Adam Bennett.
A total of 64 shovel tests were excavated across the project area. One multi-component artifact
scatter (Site 41COL316) and one historic isolated find (Isolated Find #1) were identified during
the survey. Several shovel test units were found to be “positive” for cultural objects but are not
reflective of conventional site formation. The ground surface supporting these positive units are
demonstrated to have been highly disturbed and/or recently brought in as fill.
Site 41COL316 consists of a low-density surface and buried scatter of indeterminate prehistoric
cultural objects and indeterminate historic-era cultural objects. The prehistoric component
comprises five lithic fragments exhibiting minimal cultural modification. The historic component
contains two historic-era diagnostic artifacts pointing to certain chronological benchmarks (two
amethyst bottle fragments). The remaining historic artifacts consist of non-diagnostic cultural
objects, including ceramic semi-porcelain and whiteware, bottle glass, iron objects, and a clam
shell fragment, all evaluated as likely greater than 50 years old. The southern extension of Lake
Road in connecting with State Highway 78 forms the western limits of Site 41COL316.
Interpretation of United States Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps and historic aerial
photographs reveals that this road segment was built during the 1960s. Thus, occupants of
vehicles traversing this road began littering adjacent fields with beverage bottles and other
unwelcomed garbage only during the past 50 years. Cultural objects assessed as likely less than
50 years old are regarded as not contributing to the understanding of the historic component and
thus are excluded from permanent curation. Several such objects as found in the project area
include amber bottle fragments with paper beer labels still preserved as adhering to these external
surfaces, a lighter with “Corner Store” identification on its exterior, and amber glass fragments
exhibiting near-perfect transparent clarity. Little of the site’s integrity remains after several
decades of cultivation of agricultural crops. This site has been determined to be ineligible for
inclusion in the NRHP or for listing as a SAL.
Isolated Find #1 consists of a single translucent colorless bottle glass fragment discovered 0 to
10.0 centimeters below ground surface (cmbs) (0 to 3.9 inches below surface [inbs]). A potential
site was delineated along the axis of the linear ROW by excavating shovel tests in 10-m intervals.
This resulted in two units negative for historic-era cultural objects on either side of positive

1

Shovel Test A15. This cultural resource is ineligible for inclusion in the NRHP or for listing as a
SAL.

DEFINITION OF STUDY AREA
The Bear Creek SUD Water System Improvements project area and APE consists of the ROW
easement within which a new or replacement waterline shall be installed to 1.52 meters (m) (5
feet [ft]). The project area is located in gently sloping uplands in the town of Lavon, Collin
County, TX (Appendix A: Figures 1 and 2). The project area consists of two discontinuous linear
sections referred to as the Southwest Waterline Segment and the Northeast Waterline Segment
and a pump station facilities area consisting of an adjoined pair of rectangular tracts (Appendix
A: Figure 2). The western rectangle is an existing pump station facility and the eastern is a large
tract for a planned eastward expansion. The facilities area totals an approximately 3.2 ha (7.8 ac)
located approximately 457.2 m (1,500.0 ft) south of Highway 78 and just north of Farm-toMarket (FM) 484. The two segments of waterline total approximately 2,667 m (8,750 ft) long
with ROWs approximately 3.0 to 13.7 m (0 to 45 ft) wide (Appendix A: Figures 3a, 3b, and 3c).
Maximum depth of impacts for pipeline installation is approximately six feet. In the facilities
grounds, the ground storage tank will be buried approximately 7.62 m (25 ft). The yard piping
will be deep where it ties in to the ground storage tank and will have 1.52 meters (5 feet) of cover
everywhere else.
The existing pump station measures approximately 0.9 ha (2.1 ac). The ground surface of the
existing facility has been artificially raised above the surrounding area and planted with grass.
The proposed expansion area consists of an overgrown field and measures approximately 2.3 ha
(5.7 ac).
The southwest waterline segment begins at the existing pump facility and extends approximately
422.1 m (1,385.0 ft) generally northward through a fallow agricultural field. The waterline
travels 48.5 m (158 ft) crossing under Highway 78 and enters a manicured residential subdivision
entryway. On the north side of Highway 78 the waterline tees into the next section of the pipeline
segment. A small section of waterline extends approximately 8.2 m (27.0 ft) southwest of this
point while the rest of the section extends approximately 387.4 m (1,271.0 ft) to the east at which
point it terminates.
The northeast waterline segment begins on the northwest side of Highway 78 and extends
northward along the east side of Lake Road for approximately 244.7 m (803.0 ft) through an
agricultural field. At this point the waterline crosses under Moore Lane and turns northeast along
the north side of the road. The waterline extends approximately 321.3 m (1,054.0 ft) through a
road ditch alongside a large artificial berm. The line then makes five sharp turns in a generally
northeastward fashion for approximately 119.8 m (393.0 ft). The waterline then straightens out
and extends approximately 1,001.2 m (3,285.0 ft) northeastward between agricultural fields and
road ditches/berms associated with Highway 78 and buried utilities. The agricultural fields give
way to manicured residential lawns as the waterline nears Bois D Arc Creek, an ephemeral
headwater of Bear Creek. Once the waterline reaches Bois D Arc Creek it turns southeastward
and extends approximately 48.5 m (159 ft), crossing under Highway 78, before it reaches the
terminus.
The project area is located in the Texan biotic province, one of seven recognized by Blair (1950)
and Dice (1943) for the state of Texas based on ecological associations of a relatively stable

2

assemblage of plants and animals. This ecotone describes a region characterized by tall grass
prairies supported by clay soils or sandy soils and oak hickory forests; the dominating species
being post and blackjack oaks, and hickory. Vegetation observed around the project area
consisted of winged elm, eastern redcedar, oak, and various grasses.
The NRCS Web Soil Survey illustrates the proposed waterline as extending through two discrete
soil units of the Houston Black Clay series; 0 to 1 percent slopes (HoA) and 1 to 3 percent slopes
(HoB). Houston black soils are moderately well drained soils formed from clayey residuum
weathered from calcareous mudstone of upper cretaceous age (NRCS Web Soil Survey 2017).
The upper 25 cm (10 in) of Houston Black soils contain 10 to 30 percent kind-quartzite and chert
gravels (USDA 2019). These soils are described as clay down to 203.2 cm (80.0 in). The
proposed pump station extends through HoA and HoB soils as well as Lewisville Silty Clay, 3 to
5 percent slopes, eroded (LeC2). The Lewisville Silty Clay series consist of well drained silty
clay down to 162.3 cm (64.0 in). These soils are formed from calcareous clayey alluvium derived
from mudstone (NRCS Web Soil Survey 2017).

RESEARCH DESIGN
Sphere 3 performed all necessary cultural resources investigations in connection with the Bear
Creek SUD Water Systems Improvements Project. These investigations were conducted to locate
prehistoric and historic cultural resources sites within the property, delineate the vertical and
horizontal extent of each site, and make preliminary evaluations of each site's integrity and
potential for SAL designation and/or NRHP eligibility.
Prior to initiating the fieldwork, Sphere 3 acquired a Texas Antiquities Permit. Sphere 3
conducted a records search for State Archeological Landmarks, Historic Markers, properties
listed on or eligible to the NRHP, previously recorded sites documented at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), previous survey reports housed at the Texas
Historical Commission (THC), and available online through the Texas Archeological Site Atlas.
Topographic maps, aerial images, and Google Earth imagery for the past eighty-nine years was
analyzed for modern and historic impacts to the property.
The pedestrian cultural resources survey relied on both visual examination and shovel testing.
The visual examination focused on areas with exposed soil surfaces (e.g., cut banks, animal
disturbances, etc.) as well as the location of buildings illustrated on topographic maps, and aerial
images. Shovel testing was conducted in accordance with the THC guidelines with tests spaced
at 100.0 m (328.1 ft) intervals along the proposed waterline. Shovel testing was tightened to 30.0
m (98.4 ft) intervals in areas deemed to have a high chance for containing cultural resources by
the field crew (based on field conditions, streams, and structures mapped less than 30.0 m (98.4
ft) from the project area on topographic maps). As per the THC’s standards, project areas
between 1.2 – 4.0 ha (3.0 – 10.0 ac) require a minimum of two shovel tests per acre. The
facilities area measures 3.2 ha (7.8 ac); however, it was determined that more than 80 percent of
the 2.1-ac existing pump station has been covered with a thick clay cap, causing disturbed matrix
to exist for more than 100 cm below ground surface (cmbs). Fifteen shovel tests were excavated
within the approximately 2.5 ha (6.2 ac) of less-disturbed pump station facilities area (existing
facility and proposed expansion area combined). All shovel tests were excavated in 10 cm (3.9
in) levels down to the clay substrate or to 100+ cm (39.4+ in) below the ground surface. The
excavated matrix was screened through a 0.635-cm (0.25-in) wire mesh screen. Shovel test

3

locations were recorded with a GPS capable of one-meter (3 ft) accuracy. Notes were made of
soil color, texture, and the depth of the shovel test.
Upon finding an artifact, shovel tests were excavated solely within the project area boundaries at
approximately 20.0 m (65.6 ft) intervals or less until the site limits could be determined using
surface features/artifacts or two consecutive negative shovel tests. Surface features were mapped
with a GPS. Photos were taken of the site area. A soil profile was described from a positive
shovel test on the site, and a State of Texas Archeological Site Data Form was completed for each
new site discovered. Sub-surface artifacts were collected by shovel test number and 10 cm (3.9
in) level. Surface artifacts were collected by contiguous 10 m by 10 m (32.8 ft by 32.8 ft) surface
collection areas placed with the site boundary.
After the survey was complete, the artifacts were washed, cataloged and analyzed to determine
cultural affiliation. Site forms, artifacts, maps and photos along with other data were curated at
TARL in Austin, Texas. Any collected cultural objects assessed as likely less than 50 years old
are regarded as not contributing to the understanding of the historic period archaeological sites
and were excluded from permanent curation.

RESULTS
This cultural resource investigation was conducted in compliance with State of Texas antiquities
permitting regulations and of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA)
1966, as amended. One prehistoric and historic, surface and buried scatter, site, 41COL316, and
one historic buried isolate, Isolated Find #1 were documented during the survey.

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Based on a site file search of the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) database at
http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/index.html and literature search and records review, the proposed
project area will not impact any previously recorded archaeological sites or other recorded
cultural resources. There are three archaeological sites (41COL7, 41COL229, and 41COL258)
and five previously conducted cultural resources surveys within an approximate one-mile radius
of the project area (Appendix A: Figure 4). There are no historic properties listed on the NRHP
recorded within a one-mile radius of the project.
•

Site 41COL7 – Archaic open camp site, 137.2 m by 91.4 m (150 yards by 100 yards),
located on a toeslope off high terrace on east side of Pilot Creek, containing a midden
feature, broken dart points, knives, flakes. Determined to be “ineligible” for the NRHP.

•

Site 41COL229 – Indeterminate historic site. The site was evaluated as not eligible for
inclusion on the NRHP. The site is comprised of four small site areas. One of these
areas, measuring 11.6 m by 0.8 m (38.0 ft by 2.5 ft), is located north of Moore Lane;
approximately 9.1 m (30.0 ft) north of the Northeast Waterline ROW Segment of the
project area. Two of the other areas are mapped over 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile) west of the
Southwest Waterline ROW Segment. The fourth location is mapped approximately 1.3­
kilometer (0.8-mile) east of the Northeast Waterline ROW Segment on Bear Creek. No
additional data was available in the TASA database.

4

•

Site 41COL258 “Lavon Cache” – Late Archaic to general Late Prehistoric small cache
measuring 8 cm by 8 cm (3.1 in by 3.1 in) with no associated additional artifacts or
features, located on east side of Lake Lavon, on gentle terrace 50 m (164 ft) south of
perennial Price Creek, which empties into East Fork of Trinity River, consisting of 1
zoomorphic artifact, 4 bifaces, 1 circular scraper. NRHP eligibility was not evaluated.
The recorder’s responses to “Research Value” is “None” and to “Basis for Determining
Components” is “no associated site” with the cache.

Five previously conducted archaeological surveys are mapped within one mile of the project area.
No information was found for four of the surveys except the survey sponsor and date. Of these
four surveys, three were sponsored by the Army Corps of Engineers Fort Worth District (1983,
1994, and 1998), and the fourth survey was sponsored by the National Park Service in 1963.
The remaining survey (THC Permit 6146) was conducted by AR Consultants Inc. in 2012. The
survey report was authored by Cody S. Davis, Nick Coleman, S. Alan Skinner, and Deborah
Anglin. The survey was conducted in support of a 52-mile long pipeline to be constructed within
a 120-ft wide ROW in Collin, Fannin, and Grayson Counties, Texas. The survey identified
eighteen archaeological sites; sixteen of which were recommended as ineligible for inclusion on
the NRHP. Recommendations as to the NRHP eligibility of the remaining two sites, Lovell
Cemetery (41COL219) and the Redwine House (41COL228) were not made (Davis et al 2012).

IMAGERY AND TOPOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS
Aerial imagery and topographic maps from 1930 to 2016 (Appendix A: Figures 5-7) illustrate the
modern use of the project area. The area of southeastern Collin County encompassing the Lavon
waterline project is drained by the Elm (or East) Fork of the Trinity River. Predominant trees
growing along these streams include bois d’arc, oak, elm, ash, and pecan.
In general, the project area appears to extend primarily through rural agricultural fields or
pastures from 1930 to the present. Google Earth aerial imagery revealed several residential
housing areas constructed near the project area in recent times. Housing was constructed on the
west side of Lake Road between 1996 and 2001. A residential subdivision was constructed north
of the Southwestern Section of the waterline as it extends along the north side of Highway 78
between 2005 and 2008. Another subdivision was constructed on the west bank of Bois D Arc
Creek alongside a portion of the Northeastern Section of the waterline between 1996 and 2005.
Appendix A: Figure 5 presents a 2016 aerial image to help illustrate the current uses of the
project area.
The 1930 USGS topographic map (Appendix A: Figure 6) illustrates two structures in close
proximity to the project area on the Northeast Section of the proposed waterline ROW and one
structure approximately 150 feet east of the Southwest Section of the project area. The USGS
topographic map published in 1963 and photorevised in 1968 (Appendix A: Figure 7) revealed a
cluster of three structures approximately 100 feet outside the project area near the Southwest
Section (one of which appears on the 1930 map as well), one structure west of Lake Road, and a
cluster of structures in the same location as one structure mapped on the 1930 map in close
proximity to the Northeastern Section of the project area.

5

INTENSIVE PEDESTRIAN SURVEY SUPPORTED BY SHOVEL TESTING
Visual inspection was supported by shovel testing at set intervals, in accordance with guidelines
issued by the THC, as originally offered by the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA). The
project area, as viewed in general from southwest to northeast, is discussed in this section as four
distinct areas: (1) Large Facilities Tract (area of proposed pump station expansion), (2) Small
Fenced Facilities Tract (existing pump station), (3) Southwest Waterline ROW segment, and (4)
Northeast Waterline ROW segment. The majority of the project area is sufficiently removed
from perennial waters and associated landforms typically preferred for habitation or food
exploitation by indigenous people mostly in the prehistoric era or by Euro-American settlers,
farmers, and town dwellers of the historic era. These lands are of “low probability” for finding
archaeological sites or noteworthy architectural buildings and structures. Within the two facility
tracts, shovel testing was conducted at two tests per acre of minimally disturbed ground surface.
Within the two linear ROW segments, shovel testing was executed every 100.0 m (328.0 ft) in
low probability areas. Portions of the project area approaching a perennial or intermittent stream
or the remnants of a structure built more than 50 years ago (standing, demolished, or moved) as
demonstrated by topographic and aerial imagery background research were assessed as “high
probability.” For a high probability area, the interval between standard program units is 30 m
(98.4 ft) (Appendix A: Figures 3a, 3b, and 3c).

Large Facilities Tract
This approximately 2.3 ha (5.7 ac) rectangular area (Appendix C: Photograph # 1) lies on a flat
upland terrace. The west side has more slope than the east side. Twelve shovel tests were
excavated within this tract. These units, as depicted in Appendix A: Figure 3a, occurred along
four north-south (N-S) transects of three units each. The distance east-west between transects and
thus between shovel tests is approximately 45.0 m (147.6 ft), with the N-S interval approximately
50.0 m (164.0 ft).
For most of the 12 shovel test units, thick Blackland Prairie dark gray clays predominated in this
tract. Visibility of the ground surface ranged from less than 5 percent to 30 percent in a few
isolated locations. Ultra-compact clays difficult to penetrate with a hand shovel below 20 cmbs
(7.9 inbs) were encountered in most units (as depicted in profile of shovel test M1, Appendix C:
Photograph # 2). No cultural objects were found in any of these shovel tests, nor were any
objects likely older than 50 years found on the ground surface. Further details are found in
Appendix B: Table 1.

Small Fenced Facilities Tract
This approximately 0.9 ha (2.1 ac) rectangular area (Appendix C: Photograph # 3) is situated on
top of a swale, which forms into an ephemeral drainage flowing to the west-southwest. The
USGS topographic map shows a slope toward the southwest corner. However, the vast majority
of this entire tract is covered by a clearly artificial earthen pad constructed of fill material
(Appendix C: Photograph # 4). A Bear Creek SUD engineer stated that several years ago a water
storage tank was installed. This tank, associated machinery, and other supporting equipment are
protected from trespassers and vandals by a chain-link fence. The ground surface is covered in

6

dense lawn turf. Visibility of ground surface ranges from 0 percent to less than 5 percent, except
in a very few isolated locations along the fenced perimeter where it is 20 percent.
As depicted in Appendix A: Figure 3a and tabulated in Appendix B: Table 2, the first unit
excavated was shovel test A7 in the tract’s northeast corner, near the point from which the
proposed new water pipeline is proposed to begin and extend northward. Thick manicured lawn
grass was found to be rooted in a distinctively compact clay horizon that differed from than the
Blackland Prairie clays found to the east and north of this tract by being brown, with less gray,
and much more mottled. In excavating with a hand shovel and then a post hole digger, progress
was slow in each of the four clay horizons (as depicted in profile of shovel test A7, Appendix C:
Photograph # 5). Extra time was spent in extracting from the quarter-inch screen more than 30
tiny fragments of brick and slag. Only one brick fragment was found in the gray Soil Layer 2 at
14.0 to 25.0 cmbs (5.5 to 9.8 inbs), thus demonstrating that these cultural objects were restricted
to the uppermost soil horizon. The two further underlying gray clay layers were sterile and
became increasingly similar to terminal soil horizon layers encountered in shovel tests in the
adjacent Large Facilities Tract and Southwest Waterline ROW Segment. No brick or slag was
found in any shovel tests or on the ground surface beyond unit A7. The highly mottled brown
clay containing numerous tiny cultural objects was interpreted as being associated with imported
fill material used to cover the water storage tank and associated pipes and instrumentation.
Accordingly, no effort was made to delineate this cultural resource. The numerous tiny brick and
slag fragments were not collected and thus not catalogued in the Recent Anomalies Field
Specimen Catalogue (Appendix B: Table 7).
Furthermore, the middle of this recently constructed facility area was not shovel tested. The two
additional shovel tests within the fenced tract were excavated along the south edge and in the
northwestern corner (Appendix A: Figure 3a; Appendix B: Table 2). Both had a highly mottled
brown clay horizon at the top and succeeding soil horizons indicating intentional modification of
the landscape. All such soils are interpreted as associated with the recent facility construction.
The construction of this underground water storage facility occurred less than 50 years ago.
Consequently, this cultural resource was not recorded as an archaeological site or as a historic
structure.

Southwest Waterline ROW Segment
This approximately 865.9 m (2,841.0 ft) segment is situated on a large flat upland terrace. The
area south of Highway 78 is an actively cultivated field with no vegetation except dead remnants
of last year’s soybean crop. Visibility of the ground surface thus approached 100 percent. The
only cultural resources observed on this highly exposed surface were occasional occurrences of
concrete fragments. Most were observed within 20.0 m (65.6 ft) either side of a recently
constructed water spigot in this open cultivated field. These were not collected, as they were
interpreted to be associated with construction activities having taken place less than 50 years ago.
Immediately south of the highway is an area not in cultivation. The vegetation in this area
consists of hackberry and other trees growing amid short grasses. Visibility of the ground surface
ranged from less than 5 percent to 20 percent. The 1963 topographic map (Photorevised 1968)
(Appendix A: Figure 7) shows a cluster of three structures (one of which appears on the 1930
topographic map as well [Appendix A: Figure 6]) approximately 30 m (100 ft) east of the project
area. The project area was intensely inspected for any surficial remains or indications of these

7

structures however the shovel testing interval was not reduced to 30.0 m (98.4 ft). No cultural
resources were observed on the surface within the ROW.
The entirety of this Southwest Waterline segment north of Highway 78 extends along the north
edge of the highway, just beyond the Atmos Energy utility line. This open land, not having been
plowed for agricultural purposes for many years, is associated with the large subdivision of tract
homes located more than a hundred meters to the north. Manicured lawn in varying degrees of
thickness characterizes the surface vegetation within the APE. Visibility of ground surface
ranges from less than 5 percent to 20 percent.
As depicted in Appendix A: Figure 3a and tabulated in Appendix B: Table 3, shovel testing
comprised 14 units within the Southwest Waterline ROW segment. For most of the units,
Blackland Prairie gray clays predominated in this tract. Grays are generally lighter shade than
those encountered in the Large Facilities Tract. Soils become more loamy in the cultivated field
south of Highway 78. In most units were encountered ultra-compact clays difficult to penetrate
with a hand shovel between 18 and 22 cmbs (7.1 and 8.7 inbs), with several shallower units in the
south end of that cultivated field. Except for A15 containing Isolated Find #1, no cultural objects
were found in any of these shovel tests, nor were any objects likely older than 50 years found on
the ground surface.
Isolated Find #1
Isolated Find #1 consists of a single colorless, translucent bottle glass shard, exhibiting an
aquamarine tinge, located in shovel test A15, from 0 to 9 cmbs (0 to 3.4 inbs) (Appendix C:
Photograph # 27). It is located along the north side of Highway 78, midway along the southwest
waterline ROW segment. It is found on a flat upland terrace. This area is currently an open field
situated just east of the main entrance into a large subdivision of recently constructed tract homes
(Appendix C: Photograph # 6). This field likely had been extensively plowed and cultivated for
agricultural purposes but has not been adversely impacted in this manner for many years. This
positive shovel test was delineated only within the APE within the southwest segment of ROW
easement. (Appendix A: Figure 3a).
Four additional shovel tests were excavated in successive 10 m (32.8 ft) intervals to delineate the
isolated find from shovel test A15. From one of these units was collected a thin wire, which
broke into two fragments. This cultural object was interpreted as being pin flagging, a popular
method of marking sub-surface utilities found within the APE. Since no additional cultural
objects were observed in any of the delineation shovel tests on respective sides of A15, this
historic-era bottle glass fragment was identified as an “isolated find.”
No cultural objects were visually observed on the ground surface, as intensively inspected on
either side of A15. Thick lawn grass rendered visibility as less than 5 percent throughout this
40.0 m (131.2 ft) long interval of the ROW. Soils throughout these five shovel tests consisted of
clay loam to thick clay underlying layer. The upper soil horizon passed through the ¼-inch mesh
screen more completely than did most of the soils encountered in the project. The especially
compact underlying horizon was especially difficult to pass through the screen.

8

Northeast Waterline ROW Segment
This approximately 1,735.5 m (5,694 ft) segment traverses several landforms (Appendix A:
Figures 3b and 3c). From southwest to northeast, it begins on a large flat upland terrace. The
first 244.8 m (803.0 ft) section is in a cultivated field and is where Site 41COL316 was
discovered and partially delineated (Appendix C: Photograph # 7). Limited vegetation has
recently grown in the field since it was last plowed several months ago, rendering surface
visibility between 70 and 95 percent. Archaeological results for the entirety of this 244.8 m
(803.0 ft) section of ROW are provided under “Site 41COL316.”
The line crosses under Moore Lane and extends more than 321.3 m (1054.0 ft) through a road
ditch alongside a large artificial berm along Moore Lane’s north side. No cultivation occurred
within the APE. Ground surface visibility in this area was under 5 percent. The first three shovel
tests (M13, M14, and M15) located across Moore Lane from Site 41COL316 were excavated
along the edge of the berm in an effort to avoid a buried utility pipe installed in the road ditch
(Appendix A: Figure 3b; Appendix C: Photograph # 9). These units contained pulverized brick
fragments from 0 to 10.0 cmbs (0 to 3.9 inbs), as illustrated in the profile of positive shovel test
M15, Appendix C: Photograph 12. According to USGS topographic maps and aerial imagery,
Moore Lane has been an established public thoroughfare for more than 80 years. Thus, these
positives are not likely associated with either previously recorded site 41COL229 located 9.3 m
(30.0 ft) to the north (Appendix A: Figure 4) or newly recorded 41COL316 (Appendix A: Figure
8). As charted in Appendix B: Table 4, two of the three positive shovel tests contain
predominantly 10YR6/3 (i.e. “pale brown”) clay with 10YR5/6 (higher “chroma, yellowish
brown”) mottles. This matrix contrasts with 10YR4/1 (“dark gray”) to 10YR3/1 (“very dark
gray”) “Blackland Prairie” clays that characterize virtually all other soils in the Bear Creek SUD
project, including that found to the north and within the ROW in the central and eastern parts of
this 321.3 m (1,054,0 ft) section of waterline (Appendix B: Table 4; Appendix C: Photograph #
11). No brick was found in such “natural” clays in any other shovel tests in this section. A
neighbor passing Sphere 3’s survey activities told Crew Chief Michael Ryan that the berm
containing those bricks was used as cover for burying a utility pipeline several years ago.
Furthermore, older topographic maps and aerial imagery reveals that a railroad line was mapped
along this north side of Moore Lane. This unusual-looking matrix thus is interpreted as material
imported for originally forming the rail track berm and subsequently for covering the utility pipe
within the past 50 years. The assumption further asserts that these brick fragments are contained
within this matrix having been transported from a distant location. Therefore, these cultural
objects were manufactured, utilized, and discarded at another location and unintentionally
included in forming this recent cultural anomaly. Therefore, this location is not recorded as an
archaeological site.
The line turns northeastward along the northwest side of Highway 78 for approximately 1,121.1
m (3,678.0 ft). The line transitions off the western edge of the large terrace onto a gradual downslope. The first 304.8 m (1,000.0) ft consists of overgrown fallow field (Appendix C: Photograph
# 13). Ground surface visibility ranges between 10 and 95 percent. Within shovel tests, most of
the soils comprising the middle and underlying horizons are 10YR3/1 (“very dark gray”) clay, as
illustrated in the profile of negative shovel test M27, Appendix C: Photograph # 14. There is
greater soil diversity in this section than is found in other sections, as a few horizons are sandy
clay loam with divergent colors, such as 10YR3/1 (“very dark gray”) and 10YR4/2 (“dark grayish
brown”) (Appendix B: Table 4).

9

One-third of the way to the northwest a complex of structures is depicted on several USGS
topographic maps. This likely historic farmstead today has a number of trees and underbrush
located more than 30.0 m (98.4 ft) from the ROW (Appendix A: Figure 3c; Appendix C:
Photograph # 15). From that point to a recently built subdivision is a cultivated field with surface
visibility between 80 and 95 percent. Shovel testing was conducted at 30-m intervals in this highprobability area. No cultural resources were found in these five shovel tests. However, in the
cultivated field just to the northwest of the APE (Appendix C: Photograph # 16) were observed
three contemporary terracotta undecorated orange earthenware potsherds in a small drainage
channel running alongside a buried utility berm. Two shovel tests (M29 and M30) were
excavated on both sides of the drainage. Both shovel tests were devoid of cultural materials.
These terracotta fragments likely represent discarded flower pots from a passing motorist on
Highway 78. This assemblage of flower pot fragments, likely less than 50 years of age, was
interpreted as being a recent cultural anomaly and not worthy of designation as a recorded
archaeological site. The shovel tests excavated to the northeast of this farmstead revealed sandy
clay loam topsoil overlying the typical gray clays of the area.
In the subdivision (Appendix C: Photograph # 17), the ROW passes through uncultivated open
land with occasional planted shrubbery. Thick manicured lawn grass covers these several
hundred feet of ROW, rendering surface visibility from less than 5 percent to 20 percent. The
two shovel test units excavated at a 100.0 m (328.1 ft) interval reveal 10YR3/1 (“very dark gray”)
clays with some mottling, possibly indicating disturbance in recent years from nearby
construction activities.
This section then passes across the north bank of Bois D Arc Creek, an ephemeral headwater of
Bear Creek (Appendix C: Photographs # 18 and # 19). This shoulder landform has incrementally
less-dense manicured turf, with up to 50 percent ground visibility in places. A patch of bulb
ornamental plants was observed along the bank’s edge to the northwest of the project area
(Appendix C: Photograph # 21). Ornamental flowers grown for fulfilling aesthetic cultural needs
often are indicators of a nearby historic-era residence. In an isolated bare patch of soil situated
approximately 5 m northwest of the project area were observed two sherds of historic whiteware.
Also observed on the ground surface in association with the bulbs were a pile of Terra Cotta
potsherds (Appendix C: Photograph # 23) and a sprinkler manufactured by Gilmour (established
in 1949 and continues to operate today) (Appendix C: Photograph # 22). This appearance
suggests the existence of a historic archaeological site located to the northwest of the project area.
Shovel test A21, excavated in as close proximity as possible to these above-ground historic-era
cultural resources, is a highly disturbed series of four soil horizons to 40.0 cmbs (15.7 inbs)
(Appendix C: Photograph # 20). The uppermost layer contained several fragments of concrete.
Layer 3 (20.0-30.0 cmbs [7.9-11.8 inbs]) contained a red plastic fragment, likely less than 50
years old. A colorless bottle glass shard, potentially representing the extended surface expression
of the nearby archaeological site (Appendix C: Photographs # 28), was located less than a meter
from the unit. However, no additional surface cultural objects were observed within or for
several meters beyond the northwest boundary of the APE. Because of this very low density and
the absence of any historic-era artifacts in shovel test A21, the interpretation is that the southeast
limits of the observed potential historic site lie beyond the project area and thus is not being
recorded in this project. Materials collected from shovel test A21 can be found in the Recent
Anomalies Field Specimen Catalogue (Appendix B: Table 7)
The waterline crosses underneath this drainage into the floodplain forming the north bank. It is
considerably lower elevation than is the opposite bank of Bois D Arc Creek. The line turns under
Highway 78, terminating in the lower north bank floodplain on the southeast side of the four-lane

10

boulevard. In both areas, tall grass and various species often associated with wetlands are found
growing from these often-inundated soils.

Site 41COL316
Site 41COL316 is a low-density historic and prehistoric scatter within a recently plowed and
cultivated agricultural field. The site is delineated strictly within the APE within the northeast
segment of ROW. The site’s area, as restricted to the project area, measures approximately 182.0
m (597.1 ft) N-S and 9.0 m (29.5 ft) E-W. Investigation of the site was restricted to the project
right-of-way and exiting utility easements between the project area and Lake Road (Appendix A:
Figure 8).
This field and nearby lands to the east of Lake Road comprise an expansive, relatively flat upland
terrace, with a slight increase in downward slope as the landform approaches the intermittent
streams more than 200 m (656.1 ft) to the southwest and west, respectively. Vegetation found
within the surveyed portion of Site 41COL316 consisted of remnant crops with weeds growing
along the perimeter of the field and bar ditches of Lake Road and Moore Lane (Appendix C:
Photograph # 24). Soils throughout the site consisted of clay loam to thick clay underlying layer
(as depicted in profile of the original unit positive for prehistoric cultural objects, shovel test
M12, Appendix C: Photograph # 8). The latter was especially difficult to pass through the
quarter-inch mesh screen.
Since most of Site 41COL316 remains outside the APE, most of the actual limits remain
unknown. Since the project area is bounded on the west by Lake Road (built sometime after
1968), one surmises that the actual western boundary exists under this recently-constructed
roadbed or into the fields and manicured yards of recently built suburban tract homes lying just
west of this road. The location of the actual western boundary of the site thus remains
undetermined. The site boundary is bordered on the north by Moore Lane. The area north of
Moore Lane did not exhibit any surface artifacts and was heavily disturbed by a bar ditch, buried
pipelines, and a large artificial berm. The south edge of Moore Lane therefore most likely
represents the actual north limits of Site 41COL316.
The surface scatter was observed to extend eastward toward an unnamed ephemeral drainage
located approximately 47.0 m (154.1 ft) east of the project area (Appendix A: Figure 8). With
permission of the property owner, the east limits of the site’s surface expression likely should be
able to be delineated by extending the method of surface collection areas of field specimens
toward the ephemeral stream and linear grove of hardwood trees that collectively form the east
boundary of the cultivated field in which this site was discovered.
The only limits of Site 41COL316 to have been delineated using field archaeological methods in
this project were those falling within the 3.0 m (10.0 ft) ROW along its south margins. Regarding
the sub-surface element of this site, its actual southern boundary was established by negative
shovel testing in successive 10.0 m (32.8 ft) intervals. Regarding these limits, the surface
expression and subsurface manifestation were delineated as depicted in Appendix A: Figure 8.
The vast majority of artifacts were recovered from the surface. Site delineation shovel tests were
conducted at 10 m (32.8 ft) intervals from the initial positive (M12). Nine shovel tests were
excavated within the site; including four positive shovel tests (M12, A24, A25, and M39).
Artifacts recovered from shovel testing ranged from between 10.0 and 30.0 cm (3.9 and 11.8 in)
deep. All artifacts were recovered from highly disturbed context.

11

In total, 196 field specimens were recovered from the site (Appendix B: Table 5). Prehistoric
artifacts include: tertiary flake, tertiary flake fragment, and three prehistoric shatter. Historic-era
artifacts likely exceeding 50 years old include: one iron nail (indeterminate type), crushed brick
(numerous impurities), plain whiteware fragments, plain semi-porcelain fragment, vessel/bottle
glass shards (solarized, colorless, aqua, amber, and lime green), milk glass, iron nut (Appendix C:
Photograph # 25), ocean clam shell fragment, several likely cultural objects of unidentified
function, and concentration of likely naturally occurring chalk (found in unusual concentration, as
possibly associated with cultural activity, in one shovel test). Cultural objects likely less than 50
years old and probably associated with garbage deposited as litter from passing motorists on the
segment of Lake Road constructed in c. 1968 include: plastic fragment, plastic and metal
“Country Store” lighter, a piece of a car muffler (manufactured by Super Trapp), amber bottle
glass shards with paper Bud Light and other beer labels attached by glue (Appendix C:
Photograph # 26), and amber glass shards exhibiting no signs of patina or impact wear through
frequent plowing.
Historic artifacts recovered suggest a late 19th to mid-20th century occupation. Solarized glass, as
well as aqua glass and milk glass shards, support this interpretation, however only the solarized
glass was considered diagnostic. The brick fragments recovered exhibit many impurities and
rough construction unlike more modern uniform brick. The high level of rust makes
identification of the iron objects, including the nail, problematic.
Regarding the prehistoric component, the presence of one tertiary flake (shovel test M39, 20.0 to
30.0 cmbs [7.9 to 11.8 inbs]), one tertiary flake fragment (shovel test M12, 0 to 10.0 cmbs [0 to
3.9 inbs]), and three chert shatter fragments (multiple surface collection areas) indicate an
unknown temporal prehistoric affiliation/component. The tertiary chert flake fragment appears to
have been broken from larger flake.
Topographic analysis of the overall area, as encompassing the actual extent of, and extending
well beyond Site 41COL316, identified the location of two structures over 50 years old nearby
the site. The historic component of the site may be associated with either or both of these likely
residential locations. One structure is mapped on a 1930 USGS topographic map approximately
22.0 m (72.2 ft) west of the site boundary (Appendix A: Figure 6). The other structure is mapped
on a USGS topographic map, published 1963 and photorevised 1968, approximately 66.0 m
(216.5 ft) to the west (Appendix A: Figure 7). Neither structure is still standing. The structure
mapped in 1930s is not present on the 1963 topographic map. The general area around the
mapped structures was built into residential housing after 1996, which likely obliterated all intact
elements of the historic structures.
In summary, topographic and artifact analysis strongly indicate Site 41COL316 to be a late 19th to
mid-20th century rural occupation. Site delineation was conducted solely within the defined APE
and existing utility easements between the project area and Lake Road. The surface scatter
expression extends beyond the project area to the east and possibly to the west as well. The
subsurface element likely also extends to the east and west. Modern disturbances including
plowing, road construction, buried pipelines/utilities, and trash dumping have destroyed the sites
integrity within the investigated area and very likely in all areas of the site beyond to the east and
west. Based upon low artifact density, absence of prehistoric diagnostic materials, absence of
features or other indications of intact soils directly associated with cultural behavior, and recent
disturbance, this site is recommended as not eligible for inclusion in the NRHP or for listing as a
SAL.

12

RELEVANT CULTURE HISTORY (1845 TO PRESENT)
The United States granted statehood to Texas on April 21, 1845, causing Mexico to sever
diplomatic relations and declare war. By 1847, the Americans had won the Mexican-American
war. Mexico signed the terms of peace with the United States in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo
in 1848. With Comanches and their allies raiding settlers and otherwise ignoring concessions
made in recent treaties, the 1850s continued to be a violent period. The United States Army
installed several forts in the Southern Plains (Hoig 1993:171). The Second Regiment, under
Colonel Robert E. Lee and several other future Civil War generals, launched several punitive
strikes against the Comanches, providing them invaluable training (Ibid:184).
Texas Indians, starting in the late 1840s, gathered in growing numbers in the area west of Collin
County to escape persecution and extermination in their original homelands. In 1854, the Brazos
Indian Reservation was established by U. S. Army General Randolph B. Marcy as a refuge for
groups of a variety of tribes that had been removed from their homelands in Texas, many of
whom had been encamped in this area since before 1850. U. S. Army Colonel Samuel Cooper in
that year determined that number to be more than one thousand Indians. They were refugees
from two areas of Texas whose newly arrived Anglo settlers no longer tolerated them in their
former Indian homelands. From Central Texas came the Waco and Tawakoni. From eastern
Texas arrived the Caddo, Anadarko, Keechi, and Ioni, which were encamped in eastern part of
the County, just southwest of the future Mineral Wells. Keechi chief Acaquash guided U.S.
Army personnel on the southwest-northeast-running Comanche Trail (Schmidt 2008:11-12).
The Brazos Reserve consisted of 18,576 acres (slightly more than 4 Leagues), forming a squarishshaped territory. The reservation began 12 miles south of Fort Belknap and extended
downstream along the Brazos River, encompassing three large loops of the Brazos. The southeast
corner of the reservation extended just inside the limits of Palo Pinto County. The federal
government controlled the reservation and a ten-mile perimeter surrounding it to prevent the
selling of liquor to the residents. The Indian agency main building was located three miles east of
Graham, where traces are found today. Major Robert F. Neighbors, the general supervisor of
Indians in Texas, coordinated the residence of about 2,000 Indians (Crouch 2012), including:
Wichitas, Shawnees, Delawares (Leffler 2012), Caddos, Anadarko, Wacos, and Tonkawas, the
latter four who had organized into separate villages. Contracts with local ranchers called for
about 34 cattle to be delivered each week (Crouch 2012).
In 1858, the U.S. Army’s Second Regiment and the Texas Rangers began attacking the villages of
the Comanche, killing and deporting to reservations in Indian Territory numerous women,
children, and the aged of these Comanche communities. Warriors in residence in the Texas
Reservations assisted in these campaigns deep into Indian Territory. Tribes involved in alliance
with U.S. forces included: Caddo, Tonkawa Waco, Delaware, and Shawnee (Walsh 1998:74-75).
Hoig (1993:184) assessed, “The attacks of 1858 and 1859 severely punished the Comanches, but
by no means…[were] the tribe’s fighting forces destroyed.” With raids throughout north-central
Texas still occurring regularly, travelers along the Santa Fe trail running from Missouri through
southern Kansas to Bent’s Fort, Colorado, and then southwest to Santa Fe, remained unsafe
(Walsh 1998:75-76). Most of the Comanche and Kiowa bands continued living in Oklahoma’s
southeast corner and Texas’ Panhandle of Rolling Plains and Llano Estacado raiding frontier
homesteads in western north-central Texas and robbing wagon trains along the Santa Fe Trail.

13

A regiment of Texas Rangers in 1860 killed Peta and captured Cynthia Ann and daughter
Topasannah but son Quanah escaped to join the Quahadi band. This raid and similar
depredations against Anglo settlers led to the “Comanche-Texas War” (Hoig 2009:68). Through
numerous triumphs against U.S. troops on the Llano Estacado, Quanah emerged as an
accomplished horseman and became the chief of the Quahadi (Byers 2003:4). Following the end
of the wars, Quanah Parker was the last chief to voluntarily depart Texas as a free Comanche.
The Harrell site, Young County, is the largest and best documented historic-era Native American
archaeological site in north-central Texas for which block excavations (i.e. a Phase III
investigation) have been carried out. One blue glass trade bead was recovered, possibly
associated with a Kickapoo village site known to have existed here in ca. 1850. This remnant of
the Kickapoo chose to settle at this confluence in 1850 just upstream from the Brazos Indian
Reservation, in Palo Pinto County, where the Caddo, Tonkawa, Kichai, and Waco tribes resided
from 1854 to 1859 (Dial and Black 2002a:2).
Fertile soils, the Peters Colony’s readily available land grants, and relatively peaceful relations
with indigenous populations combined to have attracted about 150 Euro-American settlers
concentrated in this portion of Fannin County. On April 3, 1846, they organized Collin County,
with Buckner as the county seat. Two years later, courthouse and government functions were
relocated to McKinney, located within three miles of the county’s geographic center (Minor
2019) and 27 km (16.7 mi) to the northwest of the project area. Both the county and the
permanent seat were named for area settler Collin McKinney, a signer of the Texas Declaration of
Independence.
With Caddos having relocated westward in joining with Wichita-speaking tribes and other Texas
indigenous peoples in eventually occupying Brazos Reserve, settlers to Collin County by the
1850s were experiencing “no extended period of conflict.” The area’s first Euro-American
settlers established farmsteads “near streams, where water and wood were easily obtained.”
These family-owned farms “produced mostly wheat and corn.” With an absence of mechanized
farm equipment, farmers largely avoided the thick clays of the Blackland Prairie. Thus, most of
the county’s rural land remained out of production throughout the 1840s through 1860s.
The nearest market town with regional transportation into the rest of the United States was
Jefferson, Texas, located more than 150 miles east of Collin County. This was the closest
location served by freight steamboats which would sail to major American manufacturing and
redistribution centers. Neither the Trinity River, its perennial branches, nor the Red River,
forming the border between Texas and Indian Territory to the north of the project area, were
navigable. The nearest points at which steamboats could serve were far removed from northcentral Texas. Consequently, the shipping of cash crops such as cotton, representing the
agricultural and slave-based economy that characterized most of the American South, was not
feasible from such a remote area. Thus, farming families with relatively little experience in
slaveholding and cotton production were attracted to settle this frontier area of north-central
Texas. Many of these people migrated from the Upper South, where most farmers had little
experience with the cotton plantation economy, as dependent upon the labor of enslaved African
Americans (Minor 2019).
The census of 1860 recorded 9,264 inhabitants, of which 1,047 were African-American. This
relatively low percentage of black population combined with especially low cotton harvests to
reveal how insignificant the cotton-slave economy in Collin County was. The area’s State
Senator, James W. Throckmorton, advocated that Texas remain in the Union. With such low
presence of the cotton plantation industry, Collin County citizens in 1861 voted against secession,

14

948 to 405. The pro-secession position, however, prevailed statewide, leading Texas to join the
Confederacy. Senator Throckmorton and more than 1,500 Collin County men enlisted in the
Confederate Army. Throckmorton eventually rose to rank of brigadier general. With no battles
or skirmishes having occurred anywhere in north-central Texas, the only warlike activities in the
region were “isolated incidents of violence…between Union sympathizers and Confederates.”
Some Collin County residents participated in actions leading to the “Great Hanging at
Gainesville,” Cooke County, some 60 miles northwest of the project area. Resulting from the
Lee-Peacock feud was death of Collin County participants and victims in Farmersville, 5 miles
north of the project area. During Reconstruction, a few Republicans were appointed by the
occupying Federal Army to public offices. Otherwise, the county remained staunchly Democratic
throughout these years into the late 19th century (Minor 2019).
The arrival of the railroad at last brought to Collin County economic transportation connecting
with the rest of Texas and the United States. In 1872, the Houston and Texas Central Railroad
established depots in McKinney and Plano, permitting rapid delivery of product southward to
major population centers, most important of which was Houston. The Missouri, Kansas and
Texas (MK&T, or Katy) railroad established services in 1875. A decade later the Gulf, Colorado
and Santa Fe (eventually shortened to Santa Fe Railroad) became the county’s third railway.
Three additional rail lines had been built through the county by the 1890s (Minor 2019).
With such diverse markets suddenly made available and by economic delivery of modern
mechanical equipment, farmers began cultivating the challenging but extremely fertile Blackland
clays. Census records document dramatic increases of population, from 9,264 in 1860 to 49,609
in 1920. Agricultural data documented by the Census points to notable increases in production
between 1870 and 1920. The number of farms skyrocketed from 903 to 6,001. Cumulative value
of the county’s farms, evaluated in 1870 to just over $3 million, exploded to over $84 million in
1920. Corn increased from 42,827 to 956,412 bushels, and cotton grew from 4,371 to 49,311
bales. With the two diagnostic artifacts of Site 41COL316 dating to the turn of the 20th century,
one might infer that this surface and buried scatter is directly associated with a farmstead
operating between 1870 and 1920 (Minor 2019).
Impacts of the Great Depression led to population decline and reduction in agricultural
production in Collin County. Following World War II, agricultural production rebounded,
causing the county to be a noteworthy center of agricultural activity by the 1960s. The proximity
to the rapidly growing urban centers of Dallas and Fort Worth especially attracted young adults to
seek permanent employment outside the county. Unlike those living in more remote rural
counties in Texas, persons taking jobs in Dallas and Fort Worth were sufficiently close to
regularly return to provide constant support for family members still residing on the county and to
retain vitality in these family land holdings (Minor 2019).
From 1920 to 1940, and then to 1960, population dropped from 49,609 to 47,190, then to 41,247.
With the cumulative value of crops harvested in 1920 at more than $10 million, this value
plummeted to $6.5 million in 1940. As the effects of the Great Depression lingered,
unemployment stood at 19 percent that year. The number of farms fluctuated over these decades.
It increased from 6,001 in 1920 to an all-time high in 1930 of 6,069. Farms dropped to 4.771 in
1940, then to 3,166 in 1950 and to 2001 in 1960. The proportion of farmers who did not own
their land, i.e. “tenant farmers,” spiked at 74 percent in 1925. This percentage had fallen to 38
percent by 1960. The vast majority of those tenant farmers no longer being recorded as farmers
had sought employment outside the county or had joined the military during World War II and
subsequently became employed elsewhere (Minor 2019).

15

Overall prosperity involving agricultural production and those who remained in farming
rebounded after the War, especially in Collin County. By 1960, 62 percent of farmers owned
their cultivated fields and were able to retain substantially greater percentages of their earnings.
Wheat, which had remained the largest cash crop from prior to the Civil War, increased from
352,229 bushels in 1949 to 1,224,664 bushels in 1959 (Minor 2019).
Quality of life for farm families increased as a result of federal programs instituted to end the
Great Depression. During the late 1930s, the Rural Electrification Administration established
three co-operatives that brought electricity to virtually all of the more isolated rural communities
of the county. The Collin County Soil Conservation District was formed in 1946. One of its
purposes was to reduce destruction of crops by unwanted floodwaters having previously covered
thousands of rich bottomlands in southeastern Collin County. In the immediate environs of the
Lavon waterline project area, the dam and associated infrastructure comprising Lake Lavon
helped control flooding on farmlands in the area of Lavon, Texas. In 1954 the Texas Research
Foundation, established in Renner, Collin County, introduced cutting-edge scientific practices for
improving farming practices. By residing and farming in close proximity to this research center,
nearby farmers derived enhanced benefit, involving wheat production and likely other crops.
This information contributed ultimately to enhanced income for Collin County farming families.
Finally, paved roads serving rural areas of Collin County, as funded by a variety of federal and
state programs, skyrocketed from 138 miles in 1946 to 2,333 miles in the early 1970s. These
enhanced quality roads aided in the efficient economic transporting of harvested crops to rail
depots, cotton gins, or grain elevators and in providing considerably quicker and smoother
transportation of family members to school and nearby city and town services. By the late 1960s,
most farm families enjoyed most of the services that their urban neighbors had enjoyed for many
past generations (Minor 2019).
Starting in the 1970s, the rapid and sustained growth of the Dallas metropolitan area brought a
diverse array of light industry and other commercial activities to the cities and towns of Collin
County. From 1980 to 2010 and more recently, Collin County’s cities and towns have been
transformed into bedroom suburbs and exurbs in support of the massive Dallas/Fort Worth
Metroplex. County population, 41,247 in 1960, following a 40-year decline, skyrocketed to
144,576 (1980), 264,036 (1990), and most recently 885,241 (2014).
Agriculture has drastically declined in importance, as tens of thousands of acres have been
removed from production of crops in support of commercial businesses and subdivisions of
homes. These domestic and workplace locations are now served by recently built transportation
infrastructure consisting of freeways, toll roads, DART Light Rail, and numerous neighborhood
streets. Recent upgrading of State Highway 78 has resulted in an almost constant presence of
concrete fragments within the project area scattered across the ground surface and up to 30 cm
below surface (cmbs). These fragments are presumed to be less than 50 years old and thus are
not regarded as being archaeological artifacts with historic importance.
In 1960, the town of Plano, 18 miles north of downtown Dallas and 15 miles west of the project
area, had 3,695, nowhere as large as the county seat of McKinney. In the past three decades,
however, Plano has exploded into one of the largest cities in Texas, from 128,673 in 1990 to
278,495 in 2014 (Minor 2019). Hundreds of recently built residences of families with adults
employed in Dallas, Plano, or other locations in the Metroplex form several subdivisions on either
side of Texas State Highway 78, along which was conducted this archaeological survey for Bear
Creek SUD.

16

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
In summary, approximately 5.1 ha (12.7 ac) was surveyed to assess for existing cultural resources
in the pump station facilities area and two segments of waterline ROW for water improvements
proposed by the Bear Creek SUD in Lavon, Texas. Texas Antiquities Permit #8745 was obtained
and all stipulations of the permit were completed. The goal of the survey was to identify cultural
resources and to make a preliminary evaluation of the documented cultural resources as to their
eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP and for being listed as a SAL.
The investigations conducted by Sphere 3 included an examination of previous archaeological
and other cultural resources investigations within one mile of the project area, an historical sketch
of each prehistoric, protohistoric, and historic period of Collin County and the north-central
Texas region, an analysis of aerial imagery and topographic maps over the past eighty years, and
an intensive pedestrian archaeological survey supported by systematic shovel testing of the
project area. A total of 64 shovel tests were excavated.
Shovel testing discovered the indeterminate prehistoric component of Site 41COL316. The
historic component of this site was first identified by inspection of the highly visible plowed
ground surface. Two artifacts, both solarized or amethyst bottle glass fragments, chronologically
diagnostic for late 19th-century through 1914, were found and collected. This site was assessed as
having no historic integrity. No features were identified. Regular plowing and other cultivation
activities occurred for many decades in the field containing Site 41COL316, causing high
disturbance to approximately 30.0 cmbs (11.8 inbs). Site 41COL316 therefore is evaluated as not
eligible for inclusion on the NRHP and not worthy for listing as a SAL. The same evaluation
applies to Isolated Find #1 and the presence of cultural objects in four additional areas, each of
which has been interpreted as a recent cultural anomaly. Sphere 3 requests the Texas Historical
Commission, as the State Historic Preservation Office for Texas, to concur with these evaluations
of non-eligibility and thus to concur with the determination of “no effect” to historic properties
listed on or eligible for inclusion in the NRHP and those listed in or worthy of being included as a
SAL.

17

REFERENCES
Blair, W. Frank
1950 “The Biotic Provinces of Texas.” The Texas Journal of Science 11(1):93-117.
Byers, Johnny A.
2003 Hutcheson Ranch Archeological Investigations, 41PR101, 41PR102, 41PR103.
In conjunction with Texas Archeological Society, Tarrant County Archeological
Society. Prepared on August 15, 2003 for Texas Archeological Society. Fort
Worth.
Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA)
1995 Guidelines (Performance, Curation, and Reports). Volume, and summary sheet
entitled, “Archeological Survey Standards for Texas.” Council of Texas
Archeologists and Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division, Austin.
Crouch, Carrie J.
2012 Brazos
Indian
Reservation.
The
Handbook
of
Texas
Online.
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/bpb03
accessed by James Belew July 9, 2012. Published by the Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.
Davis, Cody S., Nick Coleman, S. Alan Skinner, and Deborah Anglin
2012 Archaeological Survey of the Proposed Lake Texoma Outfall to Wylie Water
Treatment Plant Raw Water Line A Survey of Upland Divides and Lower Order
Drainages of the Upper East Fork Watershed in Grayson, Fannin, and Collin
Counties, Texas. Prepared by AR Consultants, Inc. Texas Antiquities Permit
6146.
Dial, Susan, and Steve Black
2002a “The Harrell Site: Peace and Violence on the Upper Brazos River.” An online
article, largely editing original contributions by Alex D. Krieger and Jack T.
Hughes, with contributions by Christopher Lintz, Doug Boyd, Dan Prikryl, and
Darrell Creel. Part of the Harrell Site exhibit in Texas Beyond History web site:
http://www.texasbeyondhistory.net/harrell/index.html, edited by the Texas
Before History (TBH) Web Team on August 8, 2002, accessed by James S.
Belew on June 22, 2012. College of Liberal Arts, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Dice, L. R.
1943

Hoig, Stan
1993

The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press, Ann
Arbor.

Tribal Wars of the Southern Plains. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

18

Horn, Jonathon C.
2005 Historic Artifact Handbook. Alpine Archaeological Consultants, Inc., Montrose,
CO.
Leffler, John
2012 Palo
Pinto
County.
The
Handbook
of
Texas
Online.
(http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hcp01) accessed by James
Belew July 9, 2012. Published by the Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Lindsey, Bill
2017

Bottles/Glass Colors. U.S. Department of the Interior Bureau of Land
Management.
Society for Historical Archaeology.
Accessed online
https://sha.org/bottle/colors.htm, February 10, 2019.

Minor, David
2019 Collin
County,
Texas.
The
Handbook
of
Texas
Online.
(https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hcc16), accessed February 7,
2019. Published by the Texas State Historical Association, Austin. References
used but not footnoted with corresponding specific informational elements
include: Hall, Roy Franklin, and Helen Gibbard Hall 1975: Collin County:
Pioneering in North Texas, Nortex, Quanah, Texas; Stambaugh, J. Lee, and
Lillian J. Stambaugh 1958: A History of Collin County, Texas State Historical
Association, Austin; Walker, Ellen Jeanene 1969: Agricultural Land Utilization
in Collin County, M.A. thesis, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
Natural Resource Conservation Service
2017 Soil conservation Service.
Web soil survey.
Data downloaded from
http://www.ftw.nrcs.usda.gov/ssur_data.html, accessed February 10, 2019.
Potter, Dan, Roland Pantermuehl and Anne Fox
2006 A Steward’s Illustrated Key to Historic Ceramics. Revised Edition, 2006. Texas
Archaeological Stewardship Network. Texas Historical Commission. Accessed
online http://www.txhas.org/PDF/THC%20Reference/CERAMICSfinal2.pdf, on
February 10, 2018.
Stelle, Lenville J.
1989 An Archaeological Guide to Historic Artifacts of the Upper Sangamon Basin,
Central Illinois, U.S.A.
Center for Social Research, Parkland College,
Champaign, IL.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2001 “Archeological Survey Standards for Texas.” Summary of minimum survey
standards developed in consultation with the Council of Texas Archeologists.
Second Draft revised August 10, 2001. Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division, Austin, Texas.
n.d.

Texas Archeological Site Atlas.
“Texsite,” site file search at website
https://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/ Maintained by Archeology Division, Copyright 1995­
2008 Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

19

United States Department of Agriculture
2017 Houston
Black
Series.
Accessed
online
https://soilseries.sc.egov.usda.gov/OSD_Docs/H/HOUSTON_BLACK.html,
February 5, 2019

at

Walsh, William Edward
1998 A Contextual Analysis of Nineteenth-Century Indian Burial Artifacts of the
Southern Plains. Unpublished thesis submitted to the Office of Graduate Studies
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts,
December 1998, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas.

20

APPENDIX A:
FIGURES

APPENDIX B
TABLES

Project: Bear Creek SUD Water System Improvements Project
APPENDIX B: Table 1: Large Facilities Tract of Bear Creek SUD Water Improvement Project Shovel Test Log

Shovel
Test
Number

Project
Feature

Landform

M1
M2
M3

station
station
station

terrace
terrace
terrace

M4

station

terrace

M5
M6

station
station

terrace
terrace

A1

station

terrace

A2

station

terrace

A3

station

terrace

A4

station

terrace

A5

station

terrace

A6

station

terrace

Depth of Soil
Horizon (cm
Horizon Soil Type
below
surface)
0-13
0-18
0-15
0-6
6-14
0-12
0-12
0-10
10-16
0-8
8-11
0-8
8-15
0-10
10-20
20-24
0-8
8-19
0-7
7-12

clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
loamy clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
loamy clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay

Munsell Color

10YR4/1
dark gray
dark gray
10YR4/1
10YR3/1
10YR4/1
dark gray
10YR4/1
10YR3/1 with 10YR4/2 mottles
2.5Y3/1
2.5Y3/1
gray
gray
gray
gray
gray
gray
gray
gray
gray

Presence of
Cultural Resources
("positive"-one or
more artifacts)
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative

Project: Bear Creek SUD Water Systems Improvements Project
APPENDIX B: Table 2: Small Fenced Facilities Tract of Bear Creek SUD Water Improvement Project Shovel Test Log

Shovel
Test
Number

Project
Feature

Landform

M7

station

raised terrace

M8

station

raised terrace

A7

station

raised terrace

Depth of Soil
Horizon (cm
Horizon Soil Type
below
surface)
0-15
15-40
0-7
7-12
12-30
0-14
14-25
25-30
30-40

sandy clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay

Munsell Color

10YR4/2 with 10YR5/4 and 10YR3/1 mottles
10YR2/1 with 10YR5/4 and 10YR8/1 mottles
10YR4/2
10YR5/8 with 10YR5/4 and 10YR8/1 mottles
10YR3/1
10YR3/2 with gray mottles
10YR3/1 with 10YR5/1 mottles
10YR4/1 with 10YR5/3 mottles
2.5Y4/1 with 2.5Y5/2 mottles

Presence of
Cultural Resources
("positive"-one or
more artifacts)
negative
negative

positive

Project: Bear Creek SUD Water System Improvements Project
APPENDIX B: Table 3: Southwest Waterline ROW Segment of Bear Creek SUD Water Improvement Project Shovel Test Log

Shovel
Test
Number

Project
Feature

Landform

A8

water line

terrace

A9

water line

plowed field

A10

water line

plowed field

A11

water line

plowed field

A12

water line

terrace

A13

water line

terrace

A14

water line

terrace

A15

water line

terrace

A16

delineation

terrace

A17

water line

terrace

A18

delineation

terrace

Depth of Soil
Horizon (cm
Horizon Soil Type
below
surface)
0-10
10-20
20-28
0-9
9-15
0-8
8-13
0-10
10-18
0-16
16-20
0-9
9-17
0-8
8-15
0-9
9-18
0-10
10-15
0-9
9-20
20-22
0-8
8-15
15-20

clay
clay
clay
clay loam
clay
loamy clay
clay
loamy clay
clay
clay
clay
humus
clay
humus
clay
humus
clay
humus
clay
humus
clay
clay
humus
clay
clay

Munsell Color

gray
gray
gray
10YR3/1
10YR4/1
gray
gray
gray
gray
gray
gray
10YR3/1
10YR3/1
gray
gray
10YR3/1
10YR3/1
gray
gray
gray
gray
gray
10YR3/1
10YR2/1 with 10YR3/1 mottles
10YR7/1 with 10YR5/6 and 10YR2/1 mottles

Presence of
Cultural Resources
("positive"-one or
more artifacts)
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
positive
negative
negative

negative

APPENDIX B: Table 3: Southwest Waterline ROW Segment of Bear Creek SUD Water Improvement Project Shovel Test Log

Shovel
Test
Number

Project
Feature

Landform

A22

water line

terrace

A23

delineation

terrace

M35

delineation

terrace

Depth of Soil
Horizon (cm
Horizon Soil Type
below
surface)
0-10
10-20
0-10
10-20
20-30
0-20

clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay

Munsell Color

gray brown
gray brown
10YR3/1
10YR3/1
10YR2/1
10YR3/1

Presence of
Cultural Resources
("positive"-one or
more artifacts)
negative
negative
negative

Project: Bear Creek SUD Water Systems Improvements Project
APPENDIX B: Table 4: Northeast Waterline ROW Segment of Bear Creek SUD Water Improvement Project Shovel Test Log

Shovel
Test
Number

Project
Feature

Landform

M9

water line

terrace

M10

water line

plowed field

M11

water line

plowed field

M12

water line

plowed field

M13

water line

road ditch

M14

water line

Berm

M15

water line

Berm

M16

water line

road ditch

M17
M18

water line
water line

road ditch
Berm

M19

water line

road ditch

M20

water line

plowed field

M21

water line

road berm

M22

water line

plowed field

Depth of Soil
Horizon (cm
Horizon Soil Type
below
surface)
0-20
0-5
5-20
0-4
4-20
0-6
6-16
0-14
0-10
10-14
14-27
0-10
10-20
0-4
4-17
0-10
0-20
0-10
10-20
0-7
7-20
0-10
10-20
0-11
11-20

clay
sandy clay loam
clay
sandy clay loam
clay
sandy clay loam
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
sandy clay loam
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay

Munsell Color

10YR4/1
10YR3/1 with 10YR3/2 mottles
10YR3/1
very dark gray with very dark gray brown mottles
very dark gray
very dark gray with very dark gray brown mottles
very dark gray
10YR3/1
10YR3/1
10YR6/3 with 10YR5/6 mottles
10YR3/1
10YR3/1
10YR6/3 with 10YR5/6 mottles
10YR3/1 with 10YR3/2 mottles
10YR3/1
10YR3/1
very dark gray
10YR3/2
10YR4/1
10YR4/2
10YR4/1
10YR4/2
10YR4/2 with 10YR5/3 mottles
10YR3/1
10YR4/1

Presence of
Cultural Resources
("positive"-one or
more artifacts)
negative
negative
negative
positive
positive
positive
positive
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative

APPENDIX B: Table 4: Northeast Waterline ROW Segment of Bear Creek SUD Water Improvement Project Shovel Test Log

Shovel
Test
Number

Project
Feature

Landform

M23

water line

plowed field

M24

water line

plowed field

M25

water line

terrace

M26

water line

terrace

M27

water line

plowed field

M28

water line

plowed field

M29

water line

road berm

M30

water line

plowed field

M31

water line

plowed field

M32

water line

plowed field

M33

water line

lawn

M34

water line

lawn

M36

delineation

plowed field

M37

delineation

plowed field

Depth of Soil
Horizon (cm
Horizon Soil Type
below
surface)
0-9
9-19
0-8
8-20
0-8
8-18
0-5
5-9
9-20
0-8
8-19
0-6
6-20
0-50
0-7
7-23
0-5
5-20
0-4
4-18
0-30
0-9
9-20
0-8
8-20
0-7
7-21

clay
clay
sandy clay loam
clay
sandy clay
clay
clay
sandy clay
clay
clay loam
clay
sandy clay loam
clay
clay
clay
clay
sandy clay loam
clay
sandy clay loam
clay
clay
sandy clay
clay
sandy clay loam
clay
sandy clay loam
clay

Munsell Color

very dark gray
dark gray
10YR4/2
10YR2/1
10YR3/1 with 10YR4/2 mottles
10YR3/1
10YR3/1
10YR5/4 with 10YR5/6 mottles
10YR3/1 with 10YR3/2 mottles
10YR3/1 with 10YR3/2 mottles
10YR3/1
very dark gray with very dark gray brown mottles
very dark gray
10YR3/1
10YR3/1 with 10YR3/2 mottles
10YR3/1
10YR3/1 with 10YR3/2 mottles
10YR2/1
very dark gray with very dark gray brown mottles
black
10YR3/1 with 10YR5/1 and 10YR5/6 mottles
10YR3/1
10YR3/1
10YR3/1 with 10YR4/2 mottles
10YR3/1
very dark gray with dark gray brown mottles
very dark gray

Presence of
Cultural Resources
("positive"-one or
more artifacts)
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative
negative

APPENDIX B: Table 4: Northeast Waterline ROW Segment of Bear Creek SUD Water Improvement Project Shovel Test Log

Shovel
Test
Number

Project
Feature

Landform

M38

delineation

plowed field

M39

delineation

plowed field

A19

water line

dist. terrace

A20

water line

shoulder

A21

water line

dist. shoulder

A24

delineation

plowed field

A25

delineation

plowed field

Depth of Soil
Horizon (cm
Horizon Soil Type
below
surface)
0-8
8-21
0-5
5-40
0-10
10-20
0-8
8-15
0-10
10-20
20-30
30-40
0-10
10-20
20-22
0-10
10-20
20-23

sandy clay loam
clay
sandy clay loam
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay
clay

Munsell Color

very dark gray with dark gray brown mottles
very dark gray
10YR5/2
10YR3/1
10YR3/1 with white mottles
10YR3/1 with 10YR6/1 mottles
gray brown with red mottles
gray brown
10YR3/1
103/1 with gray and red mottles
10YR3/1 with 10YR5/1 and 10YR8/1 mottles
10YR3/1 with 10YR4/2 mottles
10YR3/1
10YR2/1 with 10YR4/2 mottles
10YR3/1 with light gray mottles
gray brown
gray brown
gray brown

Presence of
Cultural Resources
("positive"-one or
more artifacts)
negative
positive
negative
negative

positive

positive

positive

Project Name: Bear Creek SUD Water System Improvements Project

Collection Date: 1/31/19 - 2/1/19

APPPENDIX B - Table 5: Site 41COL316 Field Specimen Catalogue
Provenience

Surf. Collection
Area 1

Surf. Collection
Area 2

Surf. Collection
Area 3

Surf. Collection
Area 4

Count
1
1
1
3
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
5
1
2
1
1
5
1
5
1
1
1

Description
solarized amethyst glass vessel shard
colorless vessel shard
aqua glass vessel shard
crushed brick fragments
colorless glass vessel neck shard
colorless glass vessel shard - blue gey hue
ferrous rock
unidentified iron fragment
amber glass vessel shard
colorless glass vessel shard
milk glass shard
crushed brick fragments
amber glass bottle base frag
amber glass shard
crushed tin fragment
colorless glass vessel base shard
colorless glass vessel rim shard
colorless glass vessel shards
gravel piece
amber glass vessel shards
unidentified pastic fragment
aqua glass vessel shard
colorless glass vessel shards
amber glass bottle base frag
amber glass vessel shards
colorless glass vessel shard - raised texture
iron nut
ferrous rock

Curated
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
no

Comments
1885-1920

Reference
Lindsey 2017; Horn 2005

non-diagnostic

early 19th century - 1920s
many impurites - locally made/obtained clay
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
1860s to present
non-diagnostic
Commonly used as drug bottles - 1870s - 1930s
many impurites - locally made/obtained clay
modern manufacture
modern manufacture
modern manufacture
mid 19th century - present
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture
modern manufacture
early 19th century - 1920s
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture
modern manufacture
modern manufacture
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic

Lindsey 2017; Horn 2005
Stelle 1989

Horn 2005:1
Lindsey 2017
Stelle 1989
Lindsey 2017; Horn 2005

Horn 2005

Lindsey 2017; Horn 2005

APPPENDIX B - Table 5: Site 41COL316 Field Specimen Catalogue
Provenience

Surf. Collection
Area 5

Surf. Collection
Area 6

Surf. Collection
Area 7

Surf. Collection
Area 8

Count
1
1
1
1
1
9
1
1
1
1
5
1
1
1
1
5
1
4
1
5
7
1
11
1
1
1
3
1
1
1

Description
iron wedge
aqua glass vessel rim shard
undecorated whiteware body fragment
amber glass vessel shard
aqua glass vessel shard
colorless glass vessel shards
plastic fragment
"corner store" plastic lighter
iron hook
tertiary chert shatter fragment
colorless glass vessel shards
aqua glass vessel shards
crushed brick fragment
undecorated whiteware body fragment
iron nail
amber glass vessel shards
car muffler part
aqua glass vessel shards
colorless glass vessel rim shard
crushed brick fragments
colorless glass vessel shards
colorless glass vessel neck shard
amber glass vessel shards
iron washer
milk glass shard - "REG"
colorless glass vessel rim shard
colorless glass vessel shards
clam shell fragment
crushed brick fragment
undecorated semi-porcelain base frament

Curated
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Comments
non-diagnostic
early 19th century - 1920s
non-diagnostic
1860s to present
early 19th century - 1920s
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture
modern manufacture
modern manufacture
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
early 19th century - 1920s
many impurites - locally made/obtained clay
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic - rusted beyond identification
modern manufacture - beer bottle
modern manufacture - "Super Trapp"
early 19th century - 1920s
non-diagnostic
many impurites - locally made/obtained clay
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture - beer bottle
modern manufacture
Commonly used as drug bottles - 1870s - 1930s
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
many impurites - locally made/obtained clay
1840s - present

Reference
Lindsey 2017; Horn 2005
Horn 2005
Lindsey 2017; Horn 2005

Lindsey 2017; Horn 2005
Stelle 1989

Lindsey 2017; Horn 2005
Stelle 1989

Lindsey 2017

Stelle 1989
Potter et al 2006; Stelle 1989

APPPENDIX B - Table 5: Site 41COL316 Field Specimen Catalogue
Provenience
Surf. Collection
Area 9

Surf. Collection
Area 10

Surf. Collection
Area 11
Surf. Collection
Area 12
Surf. Collection
Area 13
Surf. Collection
Area 14
Surf. Collection
Area 15

Surf. Collection
Area 16

Count
1
4
1
2
1
2
2
1
1
1
2
3
1
1
3
3
2
5
1
6
1
1
4
1
1
1
1
1
1

Description
solarized amethyst glass vessel neck shard
colorless glass vessel shards
aqua glass vessel shard
amber glass vessel shards
aqua glass vessel neck shard
aqua glass vessel shards
colorless glass vessel shard
tertiary chert shatter fragment
primary chert shatter fragment
undecorated whiteware body fragment
amber glass vessel shards
colorless glass vessel shards
colorless glass vessel shard - raised texture
pull tap from can
colorless vessel shards with light green hue
colorless vessel shards
colorless vessel shards with light green hue
colorless glass vessel shards
lime green bottle base shard
colorless vessel shards
amber glass vessel shard
colorless glass bottle base shard
colorless glass vessel shards
brass unidentified object
concrete fragment
colorless glass vessel shard
crushed brick fragment
slag fragment
concrete fragment

Curated
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
no

Comments
1885 - 1920
non-diagnostic
early 19th century - 1920s
modern manufacture
early 19th century -1920s
early 19th century -1920s
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture
non-diagnostic
many impurites - locally made/obtained clay
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture

Reference
Lindsey 2017; Horn 2005
Lindsey 2017
Linsey 2017
Linsey 2017

Stelle 1989

APPPENDIX B - Table 5: Site 41COL316 Field Specimen Catalogue
Provenience

Count
1
Surf. Collection
1
Area 17
1
1
ST A24; 0-10cm
3
ST M12; 0-10cm
1
8
ST M39; 10-20cm
1
5
ST M39; 20-30cm
1
1
ST A25; 0-10cm
1
Total Artifact Count: 196

Description
colorless glass bottle base shard
aqua glass vessel shard
crushed brick fragment
lime green bottle rim shard
crushed brick fragments
tertiary chert flake (part of larger flake)
chalk fragments
slag fragment
chalk fragments
tertiary chert prehistoric flake
crushed brick fragment
amber glass vessel shard

Curated
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
no
yes
no
yes
yes
no

Comments
non-diagnostic
early 19th century - 1920s
many impurites - locally made/obtained clay
modern manufacture
many impurites - locally made/obtained clay
non-diagnostic
naturally occuring - unusual concentration
non-diagnostic
naturally occuring - unusual concentration
non-diagnostic
many impurites - locally made/obtained clay
modern manufacture

Reference
Linsey 2017
Stelle 1989
Stelle 1989

Stelle 1989

Project Name: Bear Creek SUD Water System Improvements Project

Collection Date: 1/31/19 - 2/1/19

APPENDIX B: Table 6: Isolated Find #1 Field Specimen Catalogue
Provenience
ST A15; 0-10cm
ST A23; 10-20cm

Count
1
2

Description
colorless glass vessel shard - aqua hue
pin flag fragments

Curated
yes
no

Comments
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture

Project Name: Bear Creek SUD Water System Improvements Project

Collection Date: 2/1/19

APPENDIX B: Table 7: Recent Anomalies Field Specimen Catalogue
Provenience
ST A21; Surface
ST A21; 0-10cm
ST A21; 10-20cm
ST A21; 20-30cm

Count
1
2
1
1

Description
colorless glass vessel shard
concrete fragments
sandstone-quartz rock - concrete attached
plastic fragment

Curated
yes
no
no
no

Comments
non-diagnostic
modern manufacture
naturally occuring
modern manufacture

APPENDIX C
PHOTOGRAPH LOG

Project: Bear Creek SUD Water Systems Improvements Project
APPENDIX C: Photograph Log
Photograph # 1
Date: 1-31-2019
Large Facilities
Tract
Subject: General
environmental
photograph of
proposed pump
station expansion
area. Facing south
from ST M2 near
northern project
boundary.

Photograph # 2
Date: 1-31-2019
Large Facilities
Tract
Subject: ST M1 soil
profile.
Representative of
Large Facilities
Tract soils.

Photograph # 3
Date: 1-31-2019
Pump Station
Subject: Existing
pump station
facility. Facing west
from entrance.

Photograph # 4
Date: 1-31-2019
SW Segment of
waterline
Subject: Photo of
existing pump
station illustrating
the raised ground
surface from the
surrounding area.
Facing west toward
ST A7 and point at
which waterline ties
into the existing
pump station.

Photograph # 5
Date: 1-31-2019
SW Segment of
waterline
Subject: ST A7
profile. Slag and
flecks of brick
rubble visible in top
layer of profile.

Photograph # 6
Date: 2-1-2019
SW Segment of
waterline
Subject: General
environmental
photograph of SW
Segment of
waterline north of
Hwy. 78. Facing
west

Photograph # 7
Date: 1-31-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: General
environmental
photograph of NE
Segment of
waterline east of
Lake Road and
north of Hwy. 78.
Facing north from
ST M10.

Photograph # 8
Date: 1-31-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: ST M12
profile. Original
positive shovel test
excavated at
41COL316.
Representative of
soils between Hwy.
78 and Moore Lane.

Photograph # 9
Date: 1-31-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Photograph
of NE Section of
waterline north of
Moore Lane. Large
artificial berm is
visible on the left
side of the image.
Facing northeast
from corner of Lake
Road and Moore
Lane.

Photograph # 10
Date: 1-31-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Drainage
extending from
man-made reservoir
north of Moore
Lane. Modern brick
and stone scatter
and cement erosion
control feature
visible. Facing north
from north edge of
project area.

Photograph # 11
Date: 1-31-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Photograph
taken from top of
artificial berm north
of Moore Lane.
Project area extends
through bar ditch
along Moore Lane
on the right of
image. Facing
northeast from ST
M15.

Photograph # 12
Date: 1-31-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Soil profile
of ST M15.
Representative of
disturbance from
large artificial berm.
Small pieces of
brick visible in
profile.

Photograph # 13
Date: 1-31-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Project area
after it turns
northeastward to
follow Hwy. 78
north of Moore
Lane. Facing
northeast from ST
M21.

Photograph # 14
Date: 2-1-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: ST M27
soil profile.
Representative of
soils within fallow
field on the west
side of Hwy. 78.

Photograph # 15
Date: 1-31-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Wooded
area north of Hwy.
78 on the NE
Segment of the
waterline. Cement
turn-off from Hwy.
78 visible in image.
Facing north from
ST M25.

Photograph # 16
Date: 2-1-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Drainage
along Hwy. 78 in
which modern
artifact scatter was
observed. Project
area extends along
the road berm to the
right of the
drainage. Facing
northeast.

Photograph # 17
Date: 2-1-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Project area
as it enters
manicured lawns
just south of Bois D
Arc Creek. Facing
northeast.

Photograph # 18
Date: 2-1-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Bois D Arc
Creek. Facing
northeast from
project area.

Photograph # 19
Date: 2-1-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Bois D Arc
Creek as it passes
under Hwy. 78.
Facing east from ST
A21.

Photograph # 20
Date: 2-1-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: ST A21
soil profile.

Photograph # 21
Date: 2-1-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Bulbs north
of project area on
the bank of Bois D
Arc Creek. Plastic
lawn ornament is
also visible in
image. Facing north.

Photograph # 22
Date: 2-1-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Sprinkler in
Bois D Arc Creek
near bulbs. Made
by Gilmour (1949 –
present). Facing
west.

Photograph # 23
Date: 2-1-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Terra Cotta
sherds found near
bulbs on Bois D Arc
Creek. Facing west.

Photograph # 24
Date: 2-1-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: 41COL316
environmental
photo. Facing south
from northern
boundary of site.

Photograph # 25
Date: 2-7-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: 41COL316
representative
artifacts.

Photograph # 26
Date: 2-8-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: 41COL316
representative
modern objects
recovered from site.

Photograph # 27
Date: 2-8-2019
SW Segment of
waterline
Subject: Isolated
Find 1.

Photograph # 28
Date: 2-8-2019
NE Segment of
waterline
Subject: Colorless
bottle glass shard
found on surface
near ST A21.

