An Archaeological Survey for the NuStar
San Antonio Refinery Pipeline Project,
Southern Bexar County, Texas
SUBMITTED TO

ERM Southwest
Austin, Texas
By

Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester

Texas Antiquities Permit #6068

Report No. 101
ABASOLO ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS
San Antonio, Texas
November, 2011

1

Abstract
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants, subcontracting with ERM Southwest, conducted a
Phase I pedestrian archaeological survey along the NuStar San Antonio Refinery Pipeline
route. The route begins at the NuStar San Antonio Refinery on South Presa and runs
south-southeast to the NuStar Refinery terminal on Lamm Road south of Loop 1604 in
southern Bexar County. Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6068 was issued for the project
which crosses both public and private properties. The purpose of the survey was to
examine “high probability areas” along the route. Eleven archaeological sites and one
historic architectural feature were recorded. Three of the sites, NS-1 (41BX1903), NS-2
(41BX1904), and NS-3 (41BX1905) were recorded along a previous pipeline route and
are no longer in the path of construction. Sites NS-5 (41BX690), NS-6 (41BX1907), NS7 (41BX1908), NS-8 (41BX1909), NS-9 (41BX1910), and NS-10 (41BX1911) are
surface lithic scatters that require no further archaeological investigations. Site NS-4
(41BX1906) may have a buried component and is located just north of the San Antonio
River where a drill box is planned. A trace of prehistoric activity was noted on the south
side of the San Antonio River where another drill box is planned in the deep alluvial
terrace. The drill boxes on both sides of the San Antonio River at Site NS-4 (41BX1906)
location should be monitored when drill box excavations are carried out due to the high
probability location for buried archaeological sites. The Texas Historical Commission
stipulates that trenching adjacent to the Southton Cemetery (41BX1912) be monitored to
insure that no unmarked graves are encountered. The stone pillars at Southton Road and
Nancy Carole Way require no further work. No other archaeological investigations are
recommended other than the monitoring mentioned above.

2

Introduction
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants has subcontracted with ERM Southwest to conduct
a Phase I pedestrian archaeological survey along the NuStar San Antonio Refinery
Pipeline route. Texas Antiquities Permit No. 6068 was issued for the project which
crosses both public and private properties. The pipeline begins at the NuStar San Antonio
Refinery on South. Presa in south San Antonio to the NuStar Refinery facility on Lamm
Road south of Loop 1604 in southern Bexar County (Fig.1). The purpose of the survey
was to examine “high probability areas” along the route. We were to identify any cultural
resources, within such areas along the pipeline right-of-way and to make
recommendations regarding avoidance or mitigation of those resources.

One segment of the pipeline on private property was previously surveyed as a separate
project (Shafer and Hester 2011). This segment extended from Southton Road down
Center Road, across Salado Creek to the west side of Blue Wing Road. One
archaeological site, NS-1, was recorded along the Center Road segment; two additional
sites (NS-2 and NS-3) were recorded on the east side of Salado Creek. The pipeline was
rerouted to avoid the Center Road segment and the sites NS-1, NS-2, and NS-3 will not
be impacted by the new route.

The Setting
The project area lies in the Gulf Coastal Plain near the confluence of Salado Creek and
San Antonio River. Several unnamed northern tributaries of the San Antonio River are
crossed by the pipeline. The generally flat prairie landscape is now covered with invader
species such as mesquite, and the area of the survey can be described as a mesquite
savannah with dense stands of other thorny brush and underbrush along the stream
corridors (Fig. 2). Yucca and prickly pear cactus are intermixed among the mesquite. In
some areas, a number of large live oaks are seen, including some trees of remarkable size
and age, mainly on the tributaries.

Geology and Soils

3

The proposed pipeline route lies almost entirely within geologic units dating from Eocene
(30-65 million years ago) and Paleocene (65-55 million years ago) times. Dominant is the
Wilcox Group of the Eocene, 1,000 feet thick, comprised of sands, sandstone, clay and
lignite. It also provides a “moderate” amount of water for wells drilled on farms and
ranches (Arno 1959:18). Adjacent to the north and west are alternating belts of Willis
Point Formation of the Midway group, Paleocene in age. Its distinctive characteristics
include sandy clay (greenish-gray weathering to yellow brown), and numerous sandy and
limy concretions, the size of which can reach several tons (Arno 1959:17).

Soil types on or near the surface are described for each of the archaeological sites
described in a later section (Fig. 2) The Venus-Frio-Trinity soils dominate both the
drainages of the San Antonio River and Salado Creek. Soils are deep and calcareous, on
the terraces and the bottomlands of these streams. In the area between the two drainages
is a broad expanse of Lewisville-Houston Black soils. These are deep clay soils, with the
soils characterized by dark color, large cracks in dry times, and subject to erosion when
wet. At the confluence of the San Antonio River and Salado Creek is the San AntonioCrockett association, which is deep clay loam and sandy loam soils (Taylor et al. 1991:
General Soil Map). And, along the CPS transmission line west of IH37, the HockleyWebb-Crockett occur, with "inter-bedded sandstone" in sandy and loamy sands. More
specifically, the survey area along Blue Wing Road cuts through five soils, Venus,
Karnes, Webb, and Hilly Gravely Land, while Frio soils are found along the creek in the
southeastern part of the survey area (Taylor et al., 1991; see Fig. 2). The Venus soils, a
loamy, lighter colored loam is mainly in the northern part of the project locale and along
the unnamed creek in the southeast part of the survey tract. Karnes soils occur on 3 to 5
percent slopes along the terraces in the southern part of the tract. Webb fine sandy loam
(3 to 5 percent slope) occurs on the crest between Salado Creek to the west and the
unnamed creek to the east. Deep Frio soils are adjacent to the present unnamed creek
channels (Fig. 2).

Archaeological Background
Regional Summary

4

The pipeline route lies in the southernmost park of Bexar County, on the northern edge of
the South Texas Plains. An overview of the archaeology of south Texas has been
published by Hester (2004) and we have provided a brief summary below. Diagnostic
artifact styles mentioned are described by Turner et al. (2011).

The general cultural chronology in the survey region spans more than 11,000 years.
Paleoindian sites (8800-11,500 years ago) yield distinctive point types such as Clovis
and Folsom, along with unfluted lanceolate forms-- St. Mary’s Hall, Golondrina,
Angostura-- from the Late Paleoindian era. These sites are extremely rare. The Archaic
period follows, lasting from around 8800 to 2500 years ago, and represents widespread
human occupation, focused on a hunting and gathering lifeway. The diagnostic dart
points are easily distinguished from earlier forms, including triangular dart points
(Tortugas) and several types that are stemmed and barbed (including Langtry, Pedernales,
Frio, Ensor). In addition to occupation sites of the Archaic, other traces on the landscape
include “lithic scatters” (widely dispersed chert artifacts, fire-cracked rock), “quarries,”
better described as lithic procurement zones where Uvalde Gravels were tested and
selected by Archaic flintknappers, and “short term occupations” such as the burned rock
and mussel shell scatter at 41BX1475, described below. The Late Prehistoric period
commences around 1300 years ago and continues up to Historic contact. Sites are
quickly identified by the presence of small arrow points, such as Edwards and Scallorn.
Later, after A.D. 1300, the Toyah culture is represented by Perdiz points, end scrapers,
and other tool forms, along with plain, bone tempered pottery. The Historic impact in the
region is seen in the establishment of the Spanish Colonial mission system, followed by
structures and sites (farmsteads; ranching complexes) linked to early German and other
Anglo-European settlers. The native peoples are incorporated into the missions, where
many died of introduced diseases. Additionally, these groups and the early Spanish and
later Anglo settlers suffered from raiding by Comanche (1750s) and Lipan Apache
groups (1720s) that began in the mid-18th century, continuing as late as the 1870s.

Nearby Sites

5

While archaeological research in Bexar County has been fairly intensive, with more than
2150 sites recorded (Texas Archeological Site Atlas, Texas Historical Commission);
surveys on the south side of the county have been more limited.

Or, in the case of

extensive survey areas on the east side of Salado Creek, above its confluence with the
San Antonio River, sites were rarely reported (Fox et al. 1978). A large area surveyed in
1977 under EPA sponsorship along Blue Wing Road, and west along Salado Creek
recorded no sites. To the southwest, 41BX775 is plotted, but no information is available
on it. A bit further south is 41BX1475, recorded in a 2002 survey for SAWS. It is on a
terrace of the San Antonio River, characterized by Venus soils. At a depth of 6 feet below
the surface, four backhoe trenches revealed a human occupation area, in the form of
scattered burned rock (both chert and limestone) and mussel shells. It is estimated that
the debris comprised a 490 square meter area.

Site 41BX690 (see our site N-6) was

initially found in 1980 during a survey of the CPS transmission line corridor. Another
survey along the same corridor, in 2011, provided more data on the site.

Research Design
The research design called for a pedestrian survey of the high probability areas along the
NuStar San Antonio Refinery pipeline right-of-way. Shovel tests were to be excavated
where deemed appropriate when a site was encountered or a high probability area was
crossed with poor ground visibility. A no-collection policy was followed. A draft reports
was to be submitted to the Texas Historical Commission and ERM Southwest for review.
A final report will be issued upon completion of the review process as required by the
Texas Antiquity Permit specifications.

Survey Findings
Field work was carried out by the authors from September 22 to October 17, 2011.
While the research design called for attention to high probability areas for prehistoric
archaeological sites, the survey party ended up inspecting all of the pipeline right-of-way
by walking most of the route and visually inspecting some lower probability areas. The
initial survey efforts concentrated on partials TX-BX0065-TXBX0072 but the pipeline

6

was rerouted to exclude these partials (Shafer and Hester 2011). The pipeline right-ofway had been mostly staked out at the time of our survey; in those tracts where staking
had not been done maps were provided by ERM clearly indicated the planned pipeline
route which could be ground verified.

The pedestrian survey began at the Texas A&M University System property adjacent to
Brooks City Base and proceeded southwestward along Southton Road, across Salado
Creek, and along the east side of Blue Wing road to the point where the route abruptly
turns southeastward across the San Antonio Water System’s Wastewater Treatment Plant
tract (hereafter SAWS WWTP). The line continued southeastward cross Flatten Road and
Heinze roads where it make a turn southwestward before turning southeastward again to
IH37. The route parallels IH37 and crosses the San Antonio River where it continues
along IH37 and crosses under it before turning southward to the NuStar San Antonio
Refinery facility at Lamm Road. The route south of Loop 1604 to Lamm Road was not
part of our project nor was Brooks City Base.

Survey conditions varied from excellent to very poor. In areas where the route crossed
cultivated or fallow fields, the visibility was generally excellent. Upland wooded areas
also provided generally good ground visibility, but this was not the case when upland
drainages were crossed. Near the end of the SAWS WWTP tract for example, the brush
became extremely thick and hard to navigate, especially when the creek was
characterized by numerous deep ravines, or more appropriately, chasms. Wild hogs had
been very active in the area feeding on mesquite beans. They had been extensive rooting
in the field along Blue Wing Road where the pipeline makes the turn southeastward. This
rooting provided a perspective of what was beneath the surface much as plowing would
do. The Texas A&M System tract is a good example of a old fallow field that while now
covered with thorny acacias (such as huisache and mesquite) had quite good ground
visibility as did the tracts west of an along IH37. Good to excellent visibility was also
afforded where the pipeline route paralleled the CPS transmission corridor.

Very informative information came from the geomorphic observations. At least two

7

ancient channels of Salado Creek were indicated by aerial imagery in the northern part of
the survey area. The terraces adjacent to these old channels were points of interest by the
survey party and particular attention was paid to them.

Soils were another good

indication of archaeological site conditions. Duval soils, for example, are upland rocky
soils that have little appreciable depth and any archeological site found in this type of
environment will unlikely have contextual integrity. Venus clay loam soils, however, are
characteristically deep, occur along old stream terraces, and may contain deeply buried
cultural deposits. The Webb soil area along Blue Wing Road was another high
probability location.

Abasolo Archaeological Consultants (AAC) had recorded an

archaeological site along a now-abandoned pipeline route across the road in this soil
context.

Archaeological Sites
Eleven archaeological sites were recorded along the entire pipeline route; 10 are
prehistoric and one is historic. The sites were given temporary numbers beginning with
the designation of NS-1; permanent trinomial numbers were assigned by the Texas
Archaeological Research Laboratory at UT-Austin. Since only the pipeline corridor
defined the property to be surveyed, the full extent of the archaeological sites was not
recorded and remains unknown. The location and character of each site, however, is
briefly described below.

Site NS-1 (41X1903): This site is located about 2,700 feet south from Southton Road
along Center Road where the old Salado Creek channel is approached (Fig. 3). This area
had a high probability of a prehistoric site and on the north side of this old channel a trace
of a possible prehistoric site was found (Fig. 4) The trace of archaeology consisted of two
chipped stone flakes found in the dark soils Venus clay loam (VcB) along a lateral road
cut. How concentrated the site is, its size, or what ages the occupation are unknown
factors. No temporally diagnostic artifacts were noted, but one of the flakes was a biface
thinning flake indicative of the manufacture of projectile points, and the kind of flake
most often found in campsites. The project will have no affect on this site since it was
avoided through rerouting the pipeline.

8

Site NS-2 (41BX1904): This site was found while walking a now abandoned pipeline
route on the west side of Blue Wing Road between the road and the Salado Creek-San
Antonio confluence (Fig. 3). The site is on a high terrace point overlooking the
floodplain. A thin scatter of chipped stone artifacts (flakes, flake fragments) and a few
fire-cracked rocks were noted eroded from the Webb fine sandy loam (WcB) (this soil
extends about 200 meters along the route.) Two shovel tests were excavated to a depth of
30-40 cm and screened through ¼ hardware mesh; the results were negative (Fig. 5).
One private road cut was also examined and the artifact-bearing soils appeared to be
relatively shallow, no more that 30 cm in depth. The pipeline has been rerouted to go
along the east side of Blue Wing Road. The area east of the road was inspected and the
surface was much disturbed by feral hogs. No cultural material was noted along the
rerouted section east of the road. Since the pipeline has been rerouted to avoid the site,
no further archaeological investigations are warranted.

Site NS-3 (41BX1905): The now-abandoned pipeline route from Center Road to Blue
Wing road crossed this site just east of Salado Creek (Figs. 3 and 6). It is located on a
low terrace between the current channel and an old abandoned channel. The site was
recently cleared of all brush and the conditions were ideal for surface inspection. A
scatter of prehistoric occupational debris was observed in the Venus clay loam (VcB)
soils; the evidence consisted of chipped stone artifacts such as flakes and core, firecracked rock, and an occasional mussel shell. No features were observed and a single
fire-cracked rock fragment was found in one of the two shovel tests (Fig. 7). The site area
does not extend to Salado Creek; vertical banks along the creek were inspected and no
evidence of buried archaeological resources was in evidence. The area of the site exposed
along the pipeline extended for some 150 meters at least. Since the pipeline was rerouted
to avoid this site, no further archaeological investigations are warranted.

Site NS-4 (41BX1906): A trace of prehistoric cultural material in the form of flakes and
cores was noted in Duval sandy loam soils (DmC) on the Drew Tract north of the San
Antonio River adjacent to IH37 (Figs. 8 and 9). The presence of buried mussel shell and

9

snail shell in the bank of a deep gully in the Gullied Land (Gu) soils immediately north of
the river was also indicative of a light cultural deposit (Fig. 10). Also seen on the slopes
leading to the gully were large sandstone boulders (Fig. 11). On the surface were several
flakes and cores scattered among some ancient gravels. Scattered flakes were also found
some distance from the river (ca. 100+) meters in a fallow field but no temporally
diagnostic artifacts were found. Two shovel tests excavated in the Duval soils were
negative further indicating a lack of concentrated cultural material (Fig. 12). However,
deep soils occur in the valley north of the river and concentrated buried cultural material
may occur as suggested by the mussel shells observed in the gully bank. Because a drill
box is planned within the recorded site area, it is recommended that any excavation here
be monitored.

Site NS-5 (41BX1690). Site NS-5 is located on the Pooley Tract beneath a high voltage
power line and was previously recorded as 41BX690 by archaeological surveys in 1980
and 2011 (Fig. 13). This site extends into the pipeline right-of-way and consists of a light
lithic scatter on the nose of a ridge that overlooks an unnamed creek. The ridge has been
in cultivation but was much eroded at the time of our visit (Fig. 14). The site lies within
the Webb Soils (3-5% slopes, eroded; Taylor et al. 1991:34). This is basically a sandy
loam soil, but is usually reddish in color due to cultivation (surface mixed with subsoil)
(Fig. 14). There is a thin scatter of Uvalde gravels, found at all other sites on this leg of
the route, which had been used as a lithic source sometime in prehistory. The observed
flakes were mostly from primary reduction of cores and the few cores observed were
extensively reduced. One very thick biface was observed among the surface material
(Fig. 15 left). The deposits are confined to the surface and have no integrity. No further
archaeological investigations are recommended.

Site NS-6 (41BX1907). This site is located about 270 meters southeast of Site NS-5
(41BX690) also on the Pooley Tract (Fig. 13). It consists of a light scatter of chert flakes
among a light outcrop of Uvalde Gravels. The flakes were the results of primary
reduction of testing and early stage reduction of chert cobbles. Soil linked to this site is
the Orelia clay loam (0-1% slopes: Taylor et al. 1991:26). The deposits are confined to

10

the surface as indicated by erosion and the shallow distribution of the gravels in the soils.
No temporally diagnostic artifacts were recovered to indicate when in prehistory the chert
resources were used. No further archaeological investigations are recommended for NS6 (41BX1907).

Site NS-7 (41BX1908). This site is very similar to Site NS-6 (41BX1907) but is larger.
Also in the Orelia clay loam soils, it is located less 300 meters southwest of Site NS-6
(41BX1907) on the Pooley Tract (Fig. 13). It, too, consists of a shallow outcrop of
Uvalde Gravels that were quarried sometime in prehistory (Fig. 15 right). Primary and a
few secondary flakes were observed scattered across the nose of the ridge overlooking
the unnamed creek bottom (Fig. 16, 16). Erosion gullies provided vertical profiles up to
about 40 cm deep, and like NS-6 the Uvalde Gravels were concentrated on an near the
surface, indicating that the lithic scatter has no contextual integrity. No temporally
diagnostic artifacts were observed along the pipeline route. No further archaeological
investigations are recommended due to the surface nature of the cultural material.

Site NS-8 (41BX1909). A section of the pipeline extends along the south side of a CPS
power line easement west of IH37 (Fig. 17). The lessee, Adolph Lambrecht, greatly
facilitated our survey. The pipeline crosses several shallow drainages and chert nodules
and sandstone outcrops occur on the eroded slopes leading to these drainages. The chert
was exploited some time in prehistory and there is evidence of other activities as well.
Site NS-8 is located on the Voith Tract east of and overlooking the unnamed northern
tributary of the San Antonio River. The scatter of cultural material was observed along
the eroded slope consisting Duval sandy loam (DmC) soils and outcrops of sandstone
boulders of the high terrace. Erosion gully indicated the cultural material was confined to
the surface as the soils were very shallow and situated on top of the sandstone bedrock.
One feature observed at the site was a bedrock metate near the edge of a flat sandstone
ledge or boulder north of the pipeline right-of-way in the utility line easement (Fig. 18).
This feature is not in the pipeline right-of-way and is in no danger or being disturbed. It
is characterized by a shallow basin, 40 cm long and 20 cm in maximum width. The basin
surface shows pecking related to manufacture and use. It was apparent that the chipped

11

stone artifacts were confined to the surface and that the deposit have no contextual
integrity. No further archaeological investigations are recommended.

Site NS-9 (41BX1910): A large surface scatter of Uvalde Gravels was observed in a
fallow field east of Site NS-8 (41BX1909) (Fig. 17). The Uvalde Gravels consist mostly
of chert nodules along with an occasional quartzite cobble. The soils in the field and site
area consist of Duval sandy loam (DmC) and supported a large stand of sunflowers at the
time of the survey. Chert flakes created by testing and initial reduction of cobbles were
observed along with one oval biface (Figs. 19, 20). No temporally diagnostic artifacts
were found to indicate at what time or times in prehistory the resources were exploited.
Erosion on the eastern slope of the field indicate the Uvalde gravels were confined to the
upper 30 cm, and extended down the slope eastward almost to the dry creek, or for an
overall distance of about 300 meters along the pipeline. One possible hearth feature was
observed in the Gullied Land (Gu) soils just west of the drainage (Fig. 21), but this
feature was not in the pipeline right-of-way. No further archaeological investigations are
recommended.

Site NS-10 (41BX1911): Another surface lithic scatter was observed on the upland
slopes east of site NS-9 (41BX1910) (Fig. 17). Here again, a few primary flakes were
observed among surface outcrops of Uvalde Gravels in eroded Duval soils extending
along the right-of-way for about 50 meters (Figs 22, 23). No temporally diagnostic
artifacts were observed and no further archaeological investigations are recommended.

Site NS-11 (41BX1912): This site is a historic cemetery located immediately south of
the pipeline right-of-way north of Southton Road and west of Salado Creek just off of the
SARA tract property (near 11978 Southton Road) (Fig. 24). It is situated within the San
Antonio clay loam (1-3% slope) and usually is found on the highest elevation in the area
around it (Taylor et al. 1991:28). The name of the cemetery is recorded as “Southton
Cemetery” (findagrave.com) and is in Vol. 3, page 82 of Cemeteries of Bexar County.
Numerous graves were observed (Figs 25, 26), some with dates as early as the 1920s and
as recent as March 2011. Marked graves include names such as Torres, Trenz, Ramirez,

12

and Cervantes (Fig. 27). The survey party noted numerous unmarked graves especially
on the east end that overlooks the Salado creek bank, but others were also noted on the
west end.

It appears the east end contains burials of infants and small children.

However, there are old, barely marked or unmarked graves also in this area. This
cemetery will be given a formal site number. The pipeline will not directly affect the
cemetery per se but it is located immediately across the fence for the southern boundary
of the pipeline right-of-way, and is recorded here to alert the construction crew regarding
its presence.

The cemetery will not be directly affected by the pipeline construction as it is
immediately adjacent to and outside of the pipeline right-of-way. Due the proximity of
the cemetery and unmarked graves, however, we recommend that care be taken not to
disturb the adjacent cemetery property during construction.

Architectural Feature along Southton Road
In addition to the recorded archaeological sites, one architectural feature that was of
concern consists of two stone pillars located at Southton Road and Nancy Carole Way
(Fig. 27). These weathered structures have iron attachments indicating they were once
part of a rather elaborate entrance to a residence that has long been demolished. A
previous archaeological survey of the property leading past the pillars was conducted by
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants for Frost GeoSciences in 2007 (Shafer and Hester
2007). Five backhoe trenches were excavated on the 80 acres which the pillars led into.
No remains or ruins of a residence were observed in that survey. Similar pillars were
observed, however, leading to a historic house on Blue Wing Road just south of the San
Antonio River (Fig. 28). It is our assessment that the pillars at Nancy Carole Way and
Southton went to a home that is now demolished, and that was built probably about 1900.
The pillars are historic in that sense, but since their contextual integrity has been
destroyed (that is the house), they would not be of concern to the city in our opinion. If a
house was present like the situation on Blue Wing Road, or the pillars associated with a
standing structure, they would be considered a "contributing structure" but that is not the
case here. No further work is recommended for these features. The pillars are

13

immediately adjacent to the pipeline right-of-way and will not be affected by
construction.

Recommendations
The pedestrian archaeological survey of the NuStar San Antonio Refinery Pipeline
recorded 11 archaeological sites. Three of the sites (NS-1 [41BX1903], NS-2
[41BX1904], and NS-3 [41BX1905]) were recorded along a previous pipeline route and
are no longer in the path of construction. Sites NS-4 [41BX1906] is located just north of
the San Antonio River where a drill box is planned. While cultural material observed here
was only a light scatter, we recommend that any excavation associated with the drill box
be monitored to record any buried archaeological resources. Furthermore, a trace of
prehistoric activity was noted on the south side of the San Antonio River where another
drill box is planned in the deep alluvial terrace; this should be monitored as well as this
area is regarded as a high probability location for buried archaeological sites.

Sites NS-5 (41BX690), 41NS-6 (41BX1907), NS-7 (41BX1908), NS-8 (41BX1909), NS9 (41BX1910), and NS-10 (41BX1911) are all lithic procurement sites consisting of
surface scatters of primary flaking debris and tested cobbles and cores. None have any
contextual integrity and none yielded temporally diagnostic artifacts. It should be noted
that the upland slopes all along the northern tributaries of the San Antonio River are
littered with Uvalde Gravels, an easily accessible source for chert needed for chipped
stone tools by the American Indians who once inhabited the region. Any transect across
the landscape is going to encounter these lithic procurement areas, some of which extend
for thousands of meters along the slopes. Documenting their presence is important for
archaeologists seeking understanding of prehistoric landscape use, but beyond that they
have little research value or potential. None of these sites re recommended for further
work.

Site NS-11 (41BX1912), however, is a very significant historic Hispanic cemetery and
although it is adjacent to the pipeline right-of-way, its boundary should be protected

14

during the course of construction. Texas Historical Commission’s review of the final
report draft stipulates that monitoring be done during the course of trenching along the
boundary adjacent to the cemetery (see Attached Review Letter).

References Cited
Arnow, T.
1959

Ground-Water Geology of Bexar County, Texas. Bulletin 5911,
Texas Water Board of Engineers. Austin.

Fox, A. A., A. J. McGraw and F. Valdez, Jr.
1978

Archaeological Survey and Testing of Pipelines and Confluence
Site, San Antonio 201 Wastewater Treatment Project.
Archaeological Survey Report 66. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hester, T. R.
2004

The Prehistory of South Texas. In: The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T.
K. Perttula, pp 127-154. Texas A&M University Press, College Station:

Shafer, H. J. and T. R. Hester
2007

An Archaeological Survey of Southton Park, Bexar County, Texas.
Report 54, Abasolo Archaeological Consultants. San Antonio, Texas.

Taylor, F. B., R. B. Hailey, and D. L. Richmond
1991

Soil Survey of Bexar County. Series 1962, No. 12. Reissued June 1991.
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Washington, D.C.

Thoms A. V. and P. A. Clabaugh
2011

The Archaic Period at the Richard Beene Site: Six Thousand Years of
Hunter-Gatherer Family Cookery in South-Central North America.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 82: 77-116.

Turner, E. S., T. R. Hester, and R. McRenolds
2011

The Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. 3rd edition.
Taylor Trade Publishing, Rowman and Littlefield, Lanham, Maryland.

15

Figures

Figure 1. Google Earth map showing the route of the NuStar San Antonio Refinery
pipeline.

16

Figure 2. General soils map of the project area. The keys to the soils are: 5,
Lewisville-Houston Black; 6, Venus-Frio-Trinity association; 7, San
Antonio-Crockett association; 8, Hockley-Webb-Crockett inter-bedded
sandstone, sandy and loamy sands.

17

Figure Removed

Figure 3. Locations for sites NS-1 (41BX1903), NS-2 (41BX1904), and
NS-3 (41BX1905) along previous pipeline route.

Figure 4. View of archaeological site NS-1 (41BX1903) looking west from
Center Road identified by the presence of two chipped stone flakes
indicative of prehistoric cultural activity.

18

Figure 5. View of exposed NS-2 (41BX1904) along the dirt road and shovel
testing in progress.

Figure. 6. Site NS-3 (41BX1905) looking west toward Salado Creek (in woods).

19

Figure. 7. Dr. Hester working on shovel test at Site NS-3 (41BX1905).

Figure 8 Removed

Figure 8. Topographic map showing the location of Site NS-4
(41BX1906) on the north bank of the San Antonio River.

20

Figure 9: Site NS-4 (41BX1906) on the north side of San Antonio River west
of IH37.

Figure 10. Steep gully bank with exposed mussel shell at Site NS-4
(41BX1966) north of the San Antonio River and west of
I-37.

21

Figure 11. View of boulder outcrop at Site NS-4 (41BX1906) on the north
side of the San Antonio River.

Figure 12. Excavating shovel test at Site NS-4 (41BX1906).

22

Figure 13 Removed

Figure 13. Topographic map showing the locations of sites NS-5 (41BX690),
NS-6 (41BX1907), and NS-7 (41BX1908).

Figure 14. View of Site NS-5, 41BX690, looking southwest.

23

Figure 15. Left: Early stage biface from Site NS-5 (41BX690); Right: Example of
Uvalde Gravels on site NS-7 (41BX1908).

24

Figure 16. Examples of primary flakes struck from tested cobbles and cores
observed at site NS-7 (41BX1908).

25

Figure 17 Removed

Figure 17. Topographic map showing the locations of site NS-8 (41BX1909), NS-9
(41BX1910), and NS-10 (41BX1911).

Figure 18. Bedrock metate at site NS-8 (41BX1909).

26

Figure 19. Site NS-9 (41BX1910) showing the scatter of Uvalde gravels which
were a source of chert raw material for stone tools prehistorically.

Figure 20. Early stage bifaces observed in the sunflower field at Site NS-9
(41BX1910) that were discarded prehistorically due to material
flaws or premature breakage.

27

Figure 21. Top: East side of Site NS-9 (41BX1910) showing the location of the
hearth outside the pipeline right of way (defined by the yellow stake in
the right of the photo. Bottom: hearth area showing fire-cracked rock.

28

Figure 22. Site NS-10 (41BX1911) seen from the east; note large sandstone
boulder and yellow stake in the background that defines the
pipeline.

Figure 23. Overshot flake fragment observed at Site NS-10 (41BX1910).

29

Southton Cemetery

Southton Cemetery

Figure 24. Aerial and topographic maps showing the location of the
Southton Cemetery, Site NS-11 (41BX1912) relative to the
approximate location of the NuStar pipeline.

30

Figure 25. Views of the NS-11 (41BX1912), Southton Cemetery.

31

Figure 26. Preserved headstones in Site NS-11 (41BX1912), the Southton Cemetery.

Figure 27. Stone pillars at Southton Road and Nancy Carole Way marked
the entrance of a residence that has long since been removed.

32

Figure 28. Stone gate pillars in front of historic home along Blue Wing Road south
of the San Antonio River.

33

34

35

