AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
ROCKING M RANCH PIPELINE PROJECT
IN BELL COUNTY, TEXAS
Antiquities Permit 6206

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 261

2012

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE ROCKING M RANCH PIPELINE
PROJECT IN CENTRAL BELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Project Number 12-03

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
Central Texas Water Supply Corporation
Post Office Box 2393
Harker Heights, Texas 76548

by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey along a proposed water trans mission line (24,935 feet)
and a proposed pump station site (80 f eet by 100 feet) in Bell County, Texas was
performed by Brazos Valley Re search Associates (BVRA) for the Central Tex as Water
Supply Corporation (WSC) in April of 2012 under Antiquities Permit 6206. The Princ ipal
Investigator for this project was William E . Moore, and Jesse Todd was the Project
Archaeologist who was assisted by Br
ett Lang. The water line passes through
previously recorded site 41BL1 056 (Childe rs-Shanklin Grist Mill) and part of it may
intersect 41BL1057 (a military road). The areas of these sites that are wit hin the Are a
of Potential Effect are not eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or
for designation as a State Archeological La ndmark. Other sites in the area are 41BL2
(Spicewood Springs Camp and midden), 41BL1 058 (a historic site referred to on the
site form as Habitat “A”), 41BL1077, a st age station and corral, and 41BL1091 (no
information for this site). The APE was inve stigated using the pedestrian survey method
supported by shovel t ests and m achine-aided subsurface tests (backhoe tr enches). In
all, the project area consists of 11.63 acres
. No previously unr ecorded sites wer e
recorded, and not one of the
previously recorded s ites in the project area will be
affected by the proposed construction.
It is recommended that the water transmiss ion line project be allowed to proceed
as planned without further consultation wit h the Texas Historical Commission (THC),
Archeology Division. Copies of the final report are on avai lable at the THC, the Texas
Archeological Research Labor atory (TARL) , the Texas Water
Development Board
(TWDB), the Texas State Libr ary, Central Texas W SC, and BVRA. Field notes, forms,
and photographs are curated at TARL.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to those who helpe d ensure the success of this project.
Lee Kelley is the General Manag er of the Central Texas WS C. He provided a backh oe
and operator and was always av ailable to an swer our questions regarding access and
past use of the area. S. D. Ka llman of Roundrock, Texas is the engineering firm for this
project, and he and his staff provided maps and logis tical support. Steve D . Kelley o f
Kelley Env ironmental Consulting in Geor getown, Texas conduct ed the env ironmental
study. He also provided m aps and helped coordinate the fi eldwork with the client and
the field crew. The field survey was c onducted by Jesse Todd who was assisted by
Brett Lang. Bryan Ric hards (Facilities Ma nager) and J ory Martindale (Camp Manager)
of Camp Tahuaya ac companied the field crew and biologist to the project area to mak e
sure that their concer ns regarding tree pr otection and other envir onmental issues wer e
addressed. Jean Hughes, Rec ords Cons ervator at TARL, checked the s ite files for
previously recorded sites in the project area and copied reports documenting previous
projects. William A. Dicke ns examined samples of chert from the project area a nd
shared his knowledge of sites in the area. Charles D. F rederick is a geo-archaeologist,
and he dis cussed the probability of buried sites in the terra ces and floodplains in the
path of the proposed water line. Lili G. Ly ddon of LL Technical Services prepared the
figures, and she also edited the report. St eve Kelley and J esse Todd pr ovided the
photographs that appear in this report. Courtney Siegert helped prepare the records for
curation at TARL.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 4
CULTURE SEQUENCE .................................................................................................. 7
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS..................................................................................... 13
METHODS .................................................................................................................... 16
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 28
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 30
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 31
Appendix I: Photographs of 41BL105
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log
Appendix III: Backhoe Trench Log
Appendix IV: Backhoe Trench Photographs
FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location ......................................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles............................................................. 3
Figure 3. Lampasas River in the Project Area......................................................................... 6
Figure 4. North Central Cultural-Geographical Region of Texas.......................................... 8
Figure 5. Limestone Bluff in Area A......................................................................................... 17
Figure 6. Abandoned Terrace in Area A................................................................................. 18
Figure 7. Cave at Base of Limestone Bluff in Area A ........................................................... 19
Figure 8. Approximate Location of Shovel Tests .................................................................. 21
Figure 9. Shovel Test 8 in Area A............................................................................................ 22
Figure 10. View of Ground Surface on Ridge in Area A .............................................................. 24
Figure 11. Rock Wall in Area B................................................................................................ 25
Figure 12. Location of Backhoe Trenches ............................................................................. 27

iv

INTRODUCTION
The Central Texas WSC proposes to install approximately 24,935 linear
feet of 20-inch water transmission line in rural Bell County (Figure 1) and a pump
station on a site that is 80 feet by
100 feet in size (0.18 acres). These
improvements will become part of the Ce ntral Texas WSC water distribution
system. Funding will be provided by a TWDB Rural Assistance Water Loan Fund
and the T WDB General Fund ( Project Nu mber 21716) with Chris Cara n as the
TWDB representative. The APE is within the floodpla in of the Lampasas Rive r
which falls under the purvey of the Fort Worth District of the Unit ed States Army
Corps of Engineers (USACE). Relevant l egislation included Waters of the United
States, the National Histor ic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended (PL-96-515),
the National Envir onmental Policy
Act of 1969 (PL-90-190), and the
Archeological and His torical Preservation Act of 1974, as am ended (PL-93-291).
The USACE was informed of this project on April 19, 2012, and they have not
advised that a special permit will be required for this project. Since the method of
horizontal directional bori ng will be used to cross t
he river, there will be no
adverse affect to the landscape. Also, the Lampasas River is not on their list of
navigable rivers.
The proposed water transmission line will connect with an existing 14”
water line and pump station at the north end of the Area of Potential Effect (APE)
and an existing pipeline at the south end. The trench will be 36 inches wide and
have 4 fee t of cover. The working eas ement will be 2 0 feet. The only stream
crossing is at the Lampasas Ri ver. At this point, the water line will pass beneath
the river through horiz ontal directional boring at a depth at least six to eight feet,
and the entry and exit points will be at leas t fifty feet fr om the bank of the river.
Most of the water line will be install
ed in existing road rights-of-way, and
approximately 4500-5 000 feet will be cross -country. On the so uth side of the
river, the water line will par allel the west side of Amity School Road and Tahuaya
Road. On the north side of t he river, the water line will parallel the south sid e of
Shanklin Road and the west side of Shanklin Lane.
A segment of the water line will pass through Camp T ahuaya, a 147 acre
Boy Scout summer camp. The project area is depicted on three USGS
topographic quadrangles. They are Be lton (3197-122), No lanville (3197- 211),
and Salado (3097-344) (Figure 2).
An archaeological survey for this project was required by the THC, and
BVRA was selected t o perform this service. Since the Central Texas WSC is a
public entity, an antiquities per mit from was requir ed, and permit 6206 was
issued to BVRA.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangles

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Introduction
Bell Count y is located with in the Balconian Biotic Province as defined by
Blair (1950:112-116) and includes the Gulf Coastal Plain from the Atlantic Ocean
to eastern Texas. The size and location of this province is descr ibed belo w by
Blair (1950:112):
According to Sellards et al. (1933:figures 3-4), the Balconian province
includes m ost of the Ed wards Plateau, the Lampasas Cut Plain and Comanche
Plateau of Raisz (1939 [cited as 1946 in Blair]), and the Central Mineral or Llano
Uplift Region. That part of the Edwards Plat eau ly ing west of the Pecos , and
often referred to as the Stockton Plateau, is not included, but is referred to as the
Chihuahuan province.
Climate
The Balconian c limate is characterized by a decrease in rainfall from east
to west. B ell County is located in the eas tern half of the provinc e that has been
classified by Thornwaite (1948) as
dry subhumid, mesothermal with average
annual pot ential evapot ranspiration of between 39.27 and 44.88 inches. The
annual rainfall for Bell County is 34 inches, the January minimum t emperature is
37 degrees Fahrenheit, the July maximum temperature is 96 degrees Fahrenheit,
and the growing season is 258 days (Kingston and Harris 1983).
Flora and Fauna
According to Blair (1950:113), the most characteristic plant association of
this province is a scrub forest of Mexican cedar (Juniperus mexicana), Texas oak
(Quercus texana), stunted live oak (
Quercus virginiana), and various less
numerous species. Gould (1962) places the project area within the Prairies
Vegetation Region and the Edwards Pl ateau Vegetation Region. Species of
vegetation characteristic of t he region include Plateau liv
e oak ( Quercus
fusiformus), Texas oak ( Quercus texana), ashe juniper (Juniperus ashei), honey
mesquite ( Prosopis glandulosa), cedar elm ( Ulmus crassifolia), cottonwood
(Populus deltoides), pecan (Carya illinoinensis), elm (Ulmus spp.), sumacs (Rhus
spp.), Texas persimmon ( Diospyros texana), agarita ( Berberis trifoliolata), Texas
stillingia ( Stillingia texana), yucca ( Yucca spp.), Texas prick ly pear ( Opuntia
Lindheimeri), yaupon ( Ilex vomitoria), and American beautyberry ( Callicarpa
americana). Grasslands include seep mulhy (
Muhlenbergia reverchnoii),
Canadian wildrye ( Elymus canadensis), dichanthelium ( Dichanthelium s pp.),
Texas grama (Bouteloua rigidiseta), and red grama (Bouteloua hirsuta).

4

The Balconian Biotic Province is
characteristically represented by a
general mixture of fauna from nearby surrounding provinces (Blair 1950). Typical
species found within the projec t area include whit e-tailed deer ( Odocoileus
virginianus), cotton-tailed rabbit ( Sylvilagus floridanus), nine-banded armadillo
(Dasypus novemcinctus), black-tailed jack rabbit ( Lepus californicus), racoon
(Prycon lotor), hispid cotton rat ( Sigmodon hispidus), wild tu rkey ( Melagris
gallopavo), mourning dove (
Zenaida macroura), scissor-tailed flycatcher
(Tyrannus forficatus), northern bobwhite (
Colinus virginianus), western
coachwhip ( Masticophis flagellum testaceus), and the bulls nake ( Pituophis
melanoleucus sayi).
Soils
The water pipeline passes through six soil t ypes. They are defined in the
soil survey for Bell County (Huckabee et al. 1977) as Bosque clay loam (Be),
Bosque clay loam, frequently flooded (Bf), Crawford clay , 1 to 3 percent slopes
(CrB), Purves silty clay, 1 to 4 percent
slopes (PrB), Real As sociation, hilly
(REF), and Speck Association, undulating (SpD).
Water Resources
There are two sources of natural water within the project area. They are
Spicewood Springs and the Lampasas River that bisects the northern portion of
the project area. Spicewood Springs is one of the numerous springs that was
formed within the Balcones Esc arpment. Water from the spri ngs reaches the
surface from limestone caves beneath the surf ace of the earth. Originally, water
from these springs emerged at three loc ations, but t wo have been sealed off.
The third spring remains active, but it is enclosed within a pum p house. The free
flow of water from Spicewood Springs has been estimated to be 250,000 gallons
per day. Lake Boyd Callan was constructed, and the water needed to maintain it
comes from Spicewood Springs and spri ngs located on land west of the Boy
Scout camp. Excess water from the springs enters the river.
The Lampasas River is one of the many spring-fed rivers in Central Texas.
It originates near the city of Hamilton and meanders seventy-file miles through
Central Te xas in a s outheastern direction where it fl ows into Stillho use Hollo w
Reservoir. It continues for a short distanc e from the reservoir where it enters the
Leon River and together they form the Little River near the town of Belton.

5

Figure 3. Lampasas River in the Project Area

6

CULTURE SEQUENCE
Bell Co unty is loc ated in the North Central Texa s c ultural-geographical
region as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:76) (Figure 3). This area is referred to
as Central Texas by most archaeologists, and it is rich in archaeological sites.
Summaries relevant to the prehistor y of Bell County and vicin ity have been
prepared by various archaeologis ts, primarily as a result of work at Fort Hood in
Bell and Coryell counties (Guderjan et al. 1980; Sk inner et al. 1981, 1984;
Thomas 1978; Roemer et al. 1985; Carlson et al. 1986), Belton Reservoir (Shafer
et al. 1964), the Youngsport site (Shaf er 1963), and St illhouse Hollow Reservoir
(Sorrow et al. 1967). Summari es of the region hav e been published by Suhm
(1960), Weir (1976), and Prewitt (1981,
1985). Most recently, two thorough
articles concerning Central Texas were published in Volume 66 of the Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society. These works, entitled “Forty Years of
Archeology in Central Texas, ” by Michael B. Collins ( 1995) and “Implications of
Environmental Diversity in the Central Texas Archeological Region” by Linda
Wootan Ellis, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D. Frederick (1995), represent a major
synthesis of the vast amount of collect ed data for the region. The following
discussion is taken primarily from the works cited above.
Paleo-Indian Period
Although problems exist with the term
“Paleo-Indian,” it is so widely
accepted that it is used in this discussion. Paleo-Indian typically refers to those
cultures that were oriented toward big game hunting with food c ollecting not a
major pursuit (Willey and Phillip s 1958:80). Eileen Jo hnson (1977:65-77) states
that it has been erroneously st ereotyped as a migratory syste matic big game
procurement adaptation. Co llins (1995:381) argues that subsistence in Clovis
times, for example, Pale o-Indian exploited a dive rse fauna base that not only
included large herbivores su ch as mammoth, bison, a nd horse but also included
smaller animals such as water turtles, land tortoises, alligator, mice, badger, and
raccoon. At Kincaid Rock Shelt er, a pav ed floor suggests that the inhabitants of
this site returned to the same s ite as part of a regular hunting and gathering
strategy in contrast with nomadic hunt ers who only pursued big game. I t is,
therefore, assumed t hat an array of plants presumabl y also constituted part of
Clovis subsistence (Collins 1990; Collins et al. 1989).

7

Figure 4. North Central Cultural-Geographical Region of Texas

8

According to Skinner et al. (1981:13), the Paleo-Indian period is one of the
least understood time periods in Central Te xas prehistory, primarily because few
sites have been excavated. Evidence of t his period often occurs in the form of
surface collected materials found over much of Central Texas. At Fort Hood, this
period is represented by di stinctive projectile points f ound in multi-component
surface sites and as isolated finds on t he surface (Carlson et al. 1986:15).
Generally, it is believed t hat this period last ed from about 10,000 B.C. until 6000
B.C. Diagnostic artifacts of the period include dart point types Angostura, Clovis,
Folsom, Golondrina, and Plainview as defined by Suhm and Jelks (1962) and
Turner and Hester (1985).
These early sites are often found on ol d terraces of major river drainages
and may be more distant from major
streams than some more recent
occupations (Bryan 1931). Som e rock shelters, such as Lev i (41TV49) in Tr avis
County, were intensiv ely occupied even though they are loca ted a considerable
distance from major ri vers. The only exam ple of a rock shelter in Central T exas
immediately adjacent to a major dr
ainage known to contain Paleo-Indian
occupation is the Horn Shelter (41BQ46) in Bosque County (Redder 1985). Two
major sites dating to Paleo-Indian time s in Bell County are Buttermilk Creek
(41BL1239) and Gault (41BL323). Thes
e sites contain ev idence of Clov is
peoples, and a poss ible pre-Clovis occupation was found at the Gault site
(Collins and Bradley 2008). Collins ( 2002), Collins and Brown (2000), and
Dickens (2005) have reported on work at Gault. Work at Buttermilk Creek is
ongoing by archaeologists from Texas A&M University.
Archaic Period
The Archaic represents a broad cult
ural time period that last ed from
approximately 8500 B.P. to 1250 B.P. in Central Texas. According to Prewitt
(1981:71), "The Archaic Stage dominates all other remain s in Central Texas."
Prewitt (1981) has s ubdivided the Archai c into elev en phases. LeRoy Johnson
(1987) has questioned the va lidity of the phase concept as us ed by Prewitt,
especially the phases occurring before t he Middle Archaic. These have been
grouped into Early, Middle, Late, and
Terminal periods by Carlson et al.
(1986:15). According to Prewitt (1981:77-78), during the Early Archaic there was
a "strong orientation t oward the gathering aspect rather than the hunting, and a
mobile population was of low density." This occurred during the Circleville, San
Geronimo, and Jarrell phases (8500 B.P. - 5000 B.P.). In the Middle Arc haic,
food gathering had become ver y specia lized as evidenced by t he presenc e of
numerous burned rock middens/mounds (P rewitt 1981:78-80). The Middle
Archaic is seen by Prewitt to have tak en place during the Oakalla, Clear Fork,
Marshall F ord, and Round Rock phases (5000 B.P. - 2600 B.P.). An overall
decrease in burned rock middens took place during the Late Archaic. Bison were
important as a food resource , but did not dominate subsis tence activities (Prewitt
1981:80-81). The Late Arc haic occurred during the San Marcos and Uv
alde
phases (2600 B.P. - 1750 B.P.).

9

The Terminal Archaic, according to t he classification by Carlson et al.
(1986), includes the T win Sisters and Driftwood phase s (1750 B.P. - 1250 B.P.).
An increase in the im portance of gather ing and an apparent peak in site density
seem to have occurred during Prewitt's (1981:82) Driftwood phase.
According to the statistical overview (Biesaart et al. 1985) published by the
Office of the State Archeologist in 1985,
the prehist oric site inventory for Bel l
County was heavily s kewed towards the Arc haic. Of the 197 recorded s ites, 2
were class ified as Paleo-Indian, 10 Ea rly Archaic, 37 Middle Archaic, 32 Late
Archaic, 52 General Archai c, and 29 Late Prehistoric. These statistics suggest
that Bell County was occupied mainly du ring the Archaic period which, according
to Prewitt (1981:Figur e 3), lasted from 8500 years B.P. to 1250 B.P. This is
supported by the statement by Collin
s (1995:383) that "two-thirds of the
prehistory of Central Texas is “Archaic' in character."
Late Prehistoric Period
This period has been referred to by some as the Neo-American Stage
(Suhm et al. 1954), Neo-archaic (Pre witt 1981), and Post-Archaic (Johnson and
Goode 1994). Technological changes suc h as the bow and arrow and possibly
horticulture are the primary distinguishing characterist ics of this stage. The
Austin (1250 B.P. - 650 B.P.) and Toyah (650 B.P. - 200 B.P.) phases belong to
this stage of prehistory.
According to Collins ( 1995:385), there is now ev idence that only the bo w
and arrow appeared initially in Central
Texas; pottery was added later, and
agriculture developed last and was of
minor im portance. Becaus e Late
Prehistoric groups continued to practice hunting and gathering, a divis ion or two
sub-periods seem to have taken place. These are referred to as early and late
by Collins (1995:385) with the break between the long -standing Archaic period
and the Late Prehistoric period oc curring at circa 800 B.P. when Toyah replaced
Austin as the prevailing archeological manifestation.
The most obvious change that em erged at the beginning of the Lat
e
Prehistoric period is the introduction of the bow and arrow and de creased use of
the atlatl or spear thrower. Otherwise,
subsistence lifeway s in the Late
Prehistoric were probably little different from those in the earlier Archaic period
(Prewitt 1981:74; Weir 1976). A chronolog ical model by Dillehay (1974) of bison
presence and absenc e periods on the sout hern plains suggests that bison were
present during the Toyah phase but not during the preceding Austin phase.

10

Historic Period
Collins (1995:386) div ides the Histori c period of Central Texas into three
sub-periods: early, middle, and late. Du
ring the f irst two, vestiges of both
indigenous and European peoples and cultures were present; however, in the
third the indigenous peoples had virtually disappeared. The early Historic s ubperiod in Central Texas began in the late 17t h century with the first documented
arrival of Europeans. Bell County is situated within the historic range of the
Tonkawa Indians who inhabited the area in the 16th Century (Newcomb 1986).
By the 19th Century, they had broken ti es with the Comanche and Wichita and
were associated with the Lipan Apac
he ( Aten 1983:32). They have been
described as typical southern Plains Indians who were hunters and gathe rers
and who lived along the stream s and river s of Central Texas. Remains of this
group have not been found in an historic context in Bell County.
During this period, Texas was occ upied by numerous aborigin al groups
including the Caddo, Jumano, Tonk
awa, Comanche, and Lipan Apa
che
(Newcomb 1986). Trade is known to have existed between the Jumanos and the
Caddos. The Lipan Apaches and subs equently the Comanc hes entered the
region from the Plains while following key animal resources as they migrated into
Texas. Contact period occupations are
often identified by the occurrence of
glass beads, gun parts, gunflints, meta
l projectile poi nts, and European
manufactured ceramics. The archival sear ch did not locate any Historic Indian
sites in Bell County; however, Texas Ar cheological Soc iety (TAS) member B ob
Burleson (1995:6) reports finding a metal arrow point cut from a barrel strap in
fresh gravels placed on the road to his fa rm. In adjacent Cory ell County, a blue
glass bead was found with one of the burials at 41CV1 , a group burial along the
Leon River (Jackson 1931), and a steel arrow point has been r eported as an
isolated find on Hors e Creek in the ex treme eastern corner of Coryell County
(Campbell 1952).
Historically, Bell County was fi rst settled in 1834 and 1835 by colonists
who settled along Little River. The area was abandoned during the "Runaway
Scrape" of 1836, reoccupied, and deserted again after the fall of Fort Parker in
June 1836. The early settlements were c onstantly har assed by hostile Indians
and, although sever al forts were estab lished, by 1838 all settlers had lef t the
county. On May 26, 1839, the Indians s uffered a decisiv e defeat at what is
referred to as the " Famous Bird Cr eek Fight" about one and a half miles
northwest of the pres ent site of Temple , Texas. However, settlement did not
return to the Bell County area until after 1843.

11

Bell County was created on January 22, 1850 and was named for Peter H.
Bell. Nolan Springs was chosen as the county seat and named Nolanville, but on
December 16, 1851 t he name was changed to Belton. Early settlement was
along the c reeks and rivers. One of the early communities was Salado, a town
established on Sa lado Creek. Archib ald Willingham was the first permanent
Anglo-American settler having ar rived in 18 50. In 1852, the first post office was
established when a stage line with terminals at Waco and Austin began a weekly
run more than a doz en years before the to wn was laid out. Th e town of Salado
was founded directly as a res ult of the es tablishment of Salado College. This
town prospered as an educational, industrial, and agricultural center. A series of
eight flour and grist mills we re built o n Sa lado Creek dur ing the early d ays. In
1990, the population of the town was 1216. This is the closest community to the
current project area. The abov e information was taken from the Handbook of
Texas Online. Early histories of Bell County refe r frequently to the Shallowf ord
Crossing on the Leon River as an important transportation route for wagon traffic.
The exact location of this crossing has not been identified, but it substantiates the
importance of this part of Be ll County during its early s ettlement. By 1860, most
of the land had been taken. The last seri ous Indian raid occurred in 185 9. With
the Indian problem apparent ly resolved, settlement increased and the c ounty
grew from 4799 in 1860, to 9771 in 1870, and to 20,518 in 1880. The number of
farms in the county increased from 640 in 1869, to 2231 in 1871, and to 424 9 in
1889. Bell County is chiefly an agric
ultural region with cotton and corn the
leading crops. The construction of Fort Hood led to a population increase in the
county from 44,863 in 1940 to 74,145 in 1950.
Information concerning the early history of the project area can be found in
a well-researched report by Par khill et al. (2004). Parkhill and others worked
several years conducting archival research and fieldwork at Camp Tahuaya, and
their report represents the only professional work for this specific area.

12

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
General
According
to Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical
Overview (Biesaart et al. 1985:111), there we re 197 sites recorded at TARL in
1985 when this study was published by the Office of the State Archeologist. At
this time, Bell Count y was third in the North Central Texas region, and the 197
sites represented 7.35% of the region and . 97% of the state. The archaeological
significance of this area is further indica ted by the fact that 61 of the 197 sites
recorded in 1985 were regist ered as State Ar cheological Landmarks. This figure
represents 30.96% of all sites in Bell County at that time.
Since 1985, however, the number of recorded sites has greatly increased,
and 1359 sites are on file at TA RL as of April 4, 2012. Although sites have been
recorded by private contract archaeology firms, local archaeological soc ieties,
and interes ted individuals, this increase in the number of site s in the county is
mainly due to large-scale feder al projec ts such as Lake Belton (Shafer et al.
1964), Stillhouse Hollow Reserv oir (Sorrow et al. 1967), and For t Hood (Sk inner
et al. 1981, 1984; Roemer et al. 1985, and Carlson et al. 1986, and others). At
the time of this survey, five previously recorded sites were known to exist in or
near the current project area.
The largest area survey nearest
the project area was t
he Texas
Archeological Soc iety Annual F ield Sc hool at the Tenroc Ranc h conducted in
2002 along Salado Creek (Kib ler and Schroeder 2004) . Eleven sites (41BL1159
– 41BL1169) were recorded. The prehi storic sites are described on the site
forms as an open camp, a burned rock midden, a buried terrace site, an open
terrace site, a rock shelter, lithic scatters, and lithic pr ocurement sites. Since this
survey was limited to a s urface survey with no shovel testing, the infor mation
collected was limited. The majority
of the prehistoric sites contained no
diagnostic artifacts and are descr ibed as s imply “unknown prehis toric.” One site
is a buried terrace site and is described as Ea rly Archaic. The single historic sit e
is a home site with outbuildings that probably dates to the 20 th century. No
statements regarding the e ligibility of the se sites for listing in the National
Register of Historic Places is present on the site forms.
The efforts of members of the Cent ral Texas Archaeol ogical Society and
Bell Count y Archeological Society hav e made notable contributions. These
include articles in the form of bulle
tins, newsletters, s pecial reports, and
unpublished manuscripts on file at TARL or with societ y members. Bell County
has been the subject of intensive investigations by members of the Central Texas
Archeological Soc iety. As a res ult of the above-mentioned inves tigations, " Bell
County is one of the better known Cent
ral Texas c ounties and has provided
significant information toward the underst anding of prehistoric chronologies in
this part of Texas" (Young 1987:9).

13

Investigations in the Project Area
The only professional survey to be conducted in t he project area was
conducted over a period of six y ears from 1996 – 20 01 under the supervision of
David T. Parkhill with help from se
veral professional archaeologists and
volunteers from the Travis County Archaeological Society and Austin Community
College. His efforts resulted in the ident ification of one prehistoric site (41BL2)
and four historic sites (41BL1056, 41BL1057, 41BL1058, and 41BL1077. They
also located and documented evidence of prehistoric and historic activity in areas
that did not receive site numbers such as a shell lens, isolated finds of prehistoric
and historic artifacts, hist oric features, and a stone dam. These finds and others
are plotted on a map in their report (Par khill et al. 2004:42). This was a very
systematic study with the camp being divid ed into 50 meter squares that were
investigated individually. A brief description of the re corded sites follows, but the
interested reader is referred to the report for a detailed description of the survey,
history of Bell County and the camp, and the results of their investigation.
41BL2
This site is described as a camp, chi pping station, shelter, and source of
fresh water that came from a large natur al spring. The area is k nown today as
Spicewood Springs, and the water flows from beneath a large stone outcrop. In
prehistoric times, this area was occupied as a camp. The area was visited at one
time by A. T. Jackson of The University of Texas at Austin who documented the
presence of indentations on the f ace of the rock outcrop that some believe were
used as handholds and footholds for the Indians to climb up and down the rock
face to the water. At the time of Parkhill’s visit, the midden had been cover ed
with soil that had been removed during co nstruction of a swim ming pool in the
streambed at the base of the rock outcrop. It is not within the APE.
41BL1056
This is the site of the Childers-Shanklin grist mill that was constructed by
Robert Childers and Tom Walden in 1838. At that time, it consisted of a tub with
a makeshift dam for w ater, water race, and two grinding stones (Tyler 1985). At
the time of the visit by Parkhill, the only remaining features included two partial
interior stone walls, a sizable p ortion of the mill race, and an 18- inch stand pipe
that was 14 feet tall. During their in vestigation they disco vered a trench lined
with stones that was one meter deep and less than one meter wide, and it had no
stone bottom. Artifacts recovered at the site included metal portions of the water
wheel, round steel structur al rods and beam s, and a large amount of nails (cut
and machine made). The stone wall in th e northeast corner was collaps ing due
to erosion, and a volunteer stone mason from Austin repaired it.

14

According to Parkhill et al. (2004:45), this mill was th e “mainstay of the
first community in Bell County. Childers built a log cabin on the south bank of the
river near the mill, but Parkhill does not menti on this structure as part of the site.
The bound aries of the mill were determined to be eight meters north-south and
10 meters east-west. Appendix I consists of a collection of photographs taken at
the site during the current survey. The proposed wa
ter line passes near the
feature that is described as a millrace or water chute at a distanc e of 25 feet or
more (Appendix I: figures 4-6).
41BL1057
This site is named Military road becaus e it was used by the army an d
civilians to travel to forts in the area. On the north side of the river it passed near
two military forts (Camp Chambers and Little River F ort) and a Waco Indian
village. O n the sout h side, it passed near Kenney’s Fo rt (occupied by civ ilians)
and ended in Austin. On the s outh side of the river there are ruts in the limestone
that were caused by wagons, but they are not in the APE. It is not clear from the
site boundaries on the Texas Ar cheological Sites Atlas if the proposed water line
merges with this road.
41BL1058
This site is described in the report as a home site (Habitat A) that yielded
ceramics that date from the 1700s through the 1900s. On the site form, it is
referred to as “Singing School” that wa s part of the Childers Mill Community. The
age and s ize of this site is not mentioned in the report. This site is not in the
APE.
41BL1059
This site is described in the report as a home site with a large fire pit and a
cut stone that had burn marks. Artifact s consisted of ceramics, metal objects,
animal bone, a spoon, buttons, a zipper, and five musk et balls. This site is not in
the APE.
41BL1077
This site is described in the report as a stage station and corral. Very little
information can be found in the report or on the site form. This site is not in the
APE.

15

METHODS
Pre-Field Methods
Prior to ent ering the field, the Texas Archeological Site Atlas and the files
at TARL were checked for previously re corded sites and previo us surveys in the
area and vicinity. Sev eral documents were reviewed during the planning stages
of this project. These are a planning
document by the Texas His
torical
Commission (Biesaart et al. 1985), an arc heological bibliography for the Central
Region of Texas (Simons and Moore 1997), all volumes of the Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology published by the THC, and re ports documenting prev ious
projects in the project area and vicinity (Suhm 1960; Shafer 1963; Weir 1976,
Young 1987; Schroeder and Jones 1998; and Schroeder 2005). The interested
reader is referred to these sources fo
r additional information regarding the
prehistory of this area. The USDA on line soil survey for Bell County (Huckabee
et al. 1977) was reviewed in order to ident ify the soils present in the APE. The
area south of the river was designated as Area A, and the area no rth of the river
is Area B.
Field Methods
The field survey began on April 5, 2012. We visited the location of the
proposed pump station on a high hill an d saw no evid ence of a site. Since that
time, the site has been moved to a prev iously distur bed area at a much lower
elevation. Then we m et the field crew at the southern end of the APE, an a rea
that traverses cross-country and has been greatly d isturbed by construction of
buildings and roads associat ed with industrial sites. A ditch in one of the roads
showed that the B Horizon was less than 50 centimeters (cm) below the s urface.
This is a very low probabili ty area for a prehistoric site bec ause there is no
source of water in the vicinity. No shovel tests were dug.
We drove to the
Boy Scout camp along Tahuaya Road a nd Amity Road, and saw no reas on to
refer to any of these segments as
a high probability ar ea. There is no
dependable source of water along this segm ent, and it is viewed as a very low
probability area for a prehistoric site. No shovel tests were dug.
At the entrance to the camp we we re met by Bryan Richards (Facilities
Manager) and Jory Martindale (Camp Manage r). Together, we descended the
escarpment (Figure 5) and exami ned what appears to be an abandoned river
terrace at the base of a limestone bluff that is about thirty feet above the river
(Figure 6). There are two natural features along the face of the cliff that may have
been used in the past by prehistoric and historic peoples. These are a shallow
cave (Figure 7) and a slig ht ov erhang. T he cave ex tends into the ridge for a
distance of twenty feet. It could have provid ed an excellent s ource of shelter or it
could have been used as a place for stor age. Embedded in the walls of the cave
and along the face of the cliff are c
hert nodules t hat could have provided a
source of raw material for the manufacture of stone tools.

16

Figure 5. Limestone Bluff in Area A

17

Figure 6. Abandoned Terrace in Area A

18

Figure 7. Cave at Base of Limestone Bluff in Area A

19

The second natural feature is a slight overhang at the base of the cliff that
could have also afforded protection from the elements. A brief surface inspection
of the small talus slope beneat h the ov erhang was conducted, and no cultural
materials were observed. Because of the deposits of soil as the result of flooding
episodes, cultural materials may be pr esent on an older landform beneath thes e
alluvial deposits. Subsur face testing (possibly with a backhoe) will have t o be
excavated before it can be conc luded that this area was occupied in prehist oric
times. The cave and overhang are not within the path of the proposed water line.
It is on this terrace that the gristmill is located. Since this historic site is
very close to the proposed route of t
he water line, it was decided that the
footprint of the water line s hould be s hovel tested and the s urface vis ually
inspected for historic artifacts and featur es. Six shov el tests were excavat ed in
this area. The first test was exc avated in the narrow space between the twotrack road and the wa ter chute (mill race) at the gristmill. It was dug to 10 cm
through clayey loam and termi nated when a lens of impenetrable gravel was
encountered. The remaining fiv e tests we re dug in a northeast direction to the
northern end of the gristmill. Shovel tests 1-5 were dug at intervals of 10 meters
except for Shovel Test 6 that was spaced 15 meters from Shovel Test 5 and
about 8 meters from the water chute at the point where it ends. Historic trash
(mainly pull-top cans) and charc oal was found at 35 cm below the surface in
Shovel Test 7 that is loca ted approximately 50 meters north of Shovel T est 6.
This featur e was interpreted as an ar ea where trash ma y have been burned or
the site of a campfire. The pres ence of the pull-top cans dates it to sometime in
the 1970s or later. This test was termi nated at 55 cm. Excava ted dirt from the
tests was screened using quarter-inch hardware cloth, and relevant data such as
depth of the tests and type of soil enc ountered were entered ont o a s hovel test
log. Shovel Test 8 was dug 45 m eters north of Shovel Test 7 on t he edge of the
terrace (Figure 9). The purpose of this test was to determine the depth of the B
Horizon. Fine sand was present at
eighty centimeters, and the tes t was
terminated at 104 cm because it was too diffi cult to continue digging by hand.
Backhoe trenching will be needed to determi ne if this test was dug into the
subsoil. The approximate location of the shovel tests is depicted in Figure 8.
A terrace was encountered adjacent to the river. It is approximately twenty
feet below the upper terrace and ten feet above the river. It was decided that this
area should be invest igated with a back hoe, and the area where the trench was
to be dug was marked with flagging tape.
A path to the area of the proposed
backhoe trench was also marked with flagging tape to assist the backhoe
operator should he need to arrive before the field crew.

20

Figure 8. Approximate Location of Shovel Tests

21

Figure 9. Shovel Test 8 in Area A

22

The last area to be examined was the top of the bluff above the river. This
area was walked from the edge of the bluff to the entrance o f the Boy Scout
camp and visually ins pected for cultural materials. This area is r ocky, surfa ce
visibility was excellent (Figure 10), and the A Horizo n consists of clay loam over
bedrock. Small fragments of weathered lim estone wer e observed, but no chert
cobbles or broken chert was present. No evidence of a prehistoric or historic site
was observed, and shovel tests were not warranted in this upland setting. The
historic military road ( 41BL1057) crosses the river and continues on this side,
and the only evidence of this site observed is the series of ruts in the limestone
caused by wagons. These ruts are not in the APE.
On April 6, 2012, the crew examined that part of the APE on the north side
of the river (Area B). St eve Kelley joined them, and they walked from Shanklin
Road cross-country to the river. This segment of the APE is in the uplands. From
the road to a point about 100 meters from the river, t he area is in unimproved
pasture that contains scattered trees and a thicket or clump of woods. Elm and
Juniper are the major types, and surface vi sibility was estimated at 50%. The A
Horizon is very shallow and c onsists of clay over lying bedr ock at a depth
estimated to be between 15 and 30 cm bas ed on two shov el tests excavated in
this area. In some places, lim estone outcrops were observed. This area was
examined by a surface inspection and two shovel tests. Shovel Test 9 was dug in
unimproved pasture about 15 meters sout hwest of Shank lin Ro ad (Figure 8).
The soil is very dark brown clay with small limestone gravels. Shovel Test 10 was
dug on a small ridge near a residence where the proposed route turns to the east
(Figure 8). The soil is sandy clay over a lens of impenetrable gravel at fifteen
centimeters. Both tests we re negative. About 100 mete rs north of the limestone
bluff is a juniper forest. The surface
in this area was littered with weathered
limestone f ragments and a few scattered cher t nodules that did not exhibit any
evidence of having be en utilized or tested. The groun d surface visib ility was at
least 50%. No cultural materials (prehist oric or historic) we re observed. Shovel
testing was not deemed necess ary in this area due to the shallow nature of the
soils.
At the base of the slope to the river is a floodplain. Between the bank of
the river a nd the base of the limestone cliff, a ridge was observed that is about
five feet above the surrounding floodplain. This ridge passes through the footprint
of the proposed water line and is fifteen meters wide. Visibility on the floodplain
was estimated at less than 10% due to the presence of Johnson grass and other
plants. A rock wall is in this area (Fi gure 11). It is 1 meter high, 0.5 meter wide
and consists of uncut limestone boulders. The function of this wall is not known,
but its construction could have been the resu lt of clearing a fi eld of rock s to
facilitate cultivation. It extends to the east at least one-fourth mile and to the
west for an unknown distance as it parallels the limestone ledge.

23

Figure 10. View of Ground Surface on Ridge in Area A

24

Figure 11. Rock Wall in Area B

25

It was determined in the field that
three backhoe trenches should be
excavated. The first would be placed abou t ten meters north of the river, the
second on the ridge, and the third approximately fifty meters from the bottom of
the limestone cliff. No shovel tests were dug. The field survey was documented
with a shovel test log (Appendix II), backhoe trench log (Appendix III), field notes,
and digital photography. The starting and ending points and key points were
documented with a hand-held Global Positioning System (GPS).
The crew r eturned to the project area on April 13, 2012, and excavated
two backhoe trenches in Area A and three ba ckhoe trenches in Area B. The first
(Backhoe Trench 1) was exc avated on the upper terrace in Area A. Its
dimensions are 5 meters long, 1.5 mete rs wide, and 147 cm deep. The soil in
this area was found to consist of clayey loam and loamy c lay over ver y fine
sandy clay with almost no structure. Backhoe Trenc h 2 was excavated on the
lower terrace adjacent to the river. It wa s 5 meters long, 1.5 meters wide, and
210 cm deep. The s oil consists of loamy clay throughou t. No cultural materials
were encountered in either trench. The various soil horizons observed in the two
trenches were described in the field notes, and each trench is discussed in detail
in Appendix III. The distance between th e two trenches is approx imately 50
meters.
Three backhoe trenches were excavat ed in the floodplain and a ridge on
the north side of the river. Backhoe Trench 3 was excavated 10 meters northeast
of the river. It was 5 meters long, 1. 5 meters wide, and 162 cm deep. The soil
consisted of loamy clay over sandy
clay, and no cultural materials were
encountered. Backhoe Trench 4 was ex
cavated 55 meters southwes t of
Backhoe T rench 5. It was 5 meters long, 1.5 meters wide, and 217 cm deep.
The soil consisted of clayey loam from 0-25 cm; fine sandy clay from 25-202 cm;
and sandy, loamy clay from 202 to 217 cm. Backhoe Trench 5 was excav ated
35 meters northeast of Backhoe Trench 4 and 22 meters from the rock wall. It
was 5 meters long, 1.5 meters wide, and 175 cm deep. The soil consisted of
black clay from 0-83 cm over sandy,
loamy clay from 83-175 cm. Decayed
limestone was present at the bottom of th is trench. Not one of these trenches
contained cultural material s. The various s oil horizons observed were descr ibed
in the field notes, and each trench is
discussed in detail in Appendix III. The
location of the trenches and other landmarks such as the ridge, rock wall, and
river is depicted in F igure 11. Photogr aphs of eac h trench c an be found in
Appendix IV.
The last task that day was a visit
to the new location of the proposed
pump station by the Project Archaeologist and Steve Kelley. The new site is in a
previously disturbed area appr oximately 150 feet east of the north end of the
project area and intersection of the propos ed pipeline and the existing water line.
This site is viewed as a very low probabi lity area for a prehistoric site, and no
evidence of a historic site was observed.

26

Figure 12. Location of Backhoe Trenches

27

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The records check revealed that six s ites (41BL2, 41BL105 6, 41BL1057,
41BL1058, 41BL1077, and 41BL1091) are in or very close to the APE. When the
route of the water line on the s outh side of the river was finaliz ed, the only sites
within the APE are the grist mill (41BL1056) and possibly a portion of the mil itary
road (41BL1057). The waterline passes ap proximately 25 meters to a millra ce
associated with the g rist mill, and a sm all s egment may merge with the military
road. The remaining four sites ar
e 41BL2 (Spicewood Springs Camp and
midden), 41BL1058 (historic site referred to as “Habitat A”), 41 BL1077 (stage
station and corral), and 41BL1091 (no info rmation on the Atlas regarding this
site).
The methods employed on the south side of the river (Area A) consisted of
a surface examination, eight shovel tests, and two backhoe trenches. At 35 cm in
Shovel Test 7, charcoal and m odern cans were encount ered. This feat ure is
recent and not significant. No evidenc e of the two previously r ecorded historic
sites was found as a result of shovel test ing, and no cultural materials that would
indicate an unrecorded site were found. T he two bac khoe trenc hes in Area A
were negative in terms of containing cultur al materials. The only evidenc e of the
military road observed is the series of ru ts in the limestone cause d by wago ns,
but they are not within the APE.
Two natural features were observed in Area A. They are a small cave and
a rock overhang in t he limestone bluff above the abandoned terrace. These
features will not be af fected by the proposed construction, and no shovel tests
were excavated in these areas.
The survey methods employed on the north side of the river (Area B) were
the same as those on the south side ex
cept the number of shovel tests and
backhoe trenches were different. Two s hovel tests and three backhoe trenches
were excavated. These efforts did not i dentify an archaeological site (prehistoric
or historic). Three backhoe trenches we re dug in the floodplain, and they were
negative in terms of containing cultural materials.
A rock wall consisting of limestone boulders was observed in this area. Its
function is not known, but it is possible that it was constructed from rocks on the
surface of the floodplain in
an effort to clear a field
for possible c ultivation.
Similar walls have been observed by the Principal Investigator during a survey of
Fort Hood (Carlson et al. 1986). The water line will pass beneath this feature.

28

The soils in the uplands on both sides of the river have shallow A horizons
over limestone bedroc k that is exposed on t he surface in some ar eas. No c hert
cobbles were observ ed on the surface on the south side of the river, and very
few chert cobbles were seen on the north side of the river. Although any chert
cobble can be modified to create a functi onal tool, the ones observed in the APE
were too small to be considered for the manufacture of stone tools.
On the south side of t he river, ch ert nodules were obs erved embedded in
the vertical face of th e limestone c liff. On e chert nodule found on the surface
was examined by William A. Dic kens who was not able to determine if it had
been removed from the cliff by prehistoric groups wh o were using this resource
as a quarry. It is his opinion that it eroded nat urally from its original context . He
was able, however, to identify flake scars that suggested it had been tested. This
particular item contains numerous incl
usions and impurities, and it is not
considered to be good quality chert. It is
not known if the re st of the chert
nodules in the cliff face are of similar quality.
The site of the pump station was mov ed from a high hill to a previous ly
disturbed location approximately 150 feet east of the north end of the project
area and the intersection of the proposed water line and an existing water line.
This site was determined to be a very lo w probability area for a prehistoric site,
and no evidence of a historic site was observed.
The portion of the two sites within the APE (41BL1056 and 41BL1057) are
not eligible for listing in the National Regist er of Historic Places or for designat ion
as a State Archeological Landmark because no c ultural materials were found on
the surface or subsurface. The remainder of the project area consists of two
segments along roads and a sm all segment that traverses cross-country. These
are very low probabilit y areas for a prehistor ic site, and no evidence of a historic
site was observed.
This s urvey was conducted acc ording to the Minimum Survey Standards
as outlined by the THC.

29

RECOMMENDATIONS
The proposed water line will not affect any of the arc haeological sites in
the APE, and no previous ly u nrecorded site s were found. Therefore, it is
recommended that construction be allowed to proceed as planned with no further
consultation with the THC. Should ev
idence of an archaeol ogical site be
encountered during constructi on in an area not discuss ed in this r eport, all work
in the area of the find must cease until the THC can eval uate the situation. Also,
if the route of the water transmission lin e is changed, the THC must be notif ied
as additional survey by a professional archaeologist may be warranted.

30

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The
Bryan, F.
1931
Burleson, Bob
1995

Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science
11(1):93-116.
Notes on the Archeology of Central Texas. American
Anthropologist 33(1):16-31.
Letter from Bob Burleson to Roming-Parker Associates, L.L.P.
Consulting Engineers and Beach Engineering dated November
7, 1995. In Improvements and Extension to Pepper Creek
Trunk Sewer: Preliminary Engineering Report, prepared by
Roming-Parker Associates, L.L.P. and Beach Engineering,
November 1995.

Campbell, Thomas Nolan
1952
Note written by T. N. Campbell dated October 24, 1952. On file
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin,
Texas.
Carlson, David L., Shawn B. Carlson, Frederick L. Briuer, Erwin Roemer, Jr., and
William E. Moore
1986
Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas Fiscal Year 1983,
The Eastern Training Area. United States Army Fort Hood,
Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
11.
Collins, Michael B.
1990
The Archaeological Sequence at Kincaid Rockshelter, Uvalde
County, Texas. In Transactions of the 25th Regional
Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and
Western Texas, pp. 25-33. Midland Archeological Society,
Midland.

31

Collins, Michael B. (continued)
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:361-400.
2002 The Gault Site, Texas and Clovis Research. Athna Review:
Quarterly Journal of Archaeology, History, and Exploration 3(2):3142, 100-101.
Collins, Michael B., G. L. Evans, Thomas Nolan Campbell, M. C. Winans, and C.
E. Mear
1989 Clovis Occupation at Kincaid Shelter, Texas. Current Research in
the Pleistocene 6:3-4.
Collins, Michael B., and Kenneth M. Brown
2000
The Gault Gisement: Some Preliminary Observations. Current
Archeology in Texas 2(1):163-166.
Collins, Michael B., and Bruce A. Bradley
2008 Evidence for Pre-Clovis Occupation at the Gault Site (41BL323),
Central Texas. In Current Research in the Pleistocene 25:70-72.
Dickens, William A.
2005 Biface Manufacture and Blade Production at the Gault Site
(41BL323): A Clovis Occupation in Bell County, Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Texas A&M University, College
Station.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern
Plains. Plains Anthropologist 19(65):180-196.
Ellis, Linda Wootan, G. Lain Ellis, and Charles D. Frederick
1995
Implications of Environmental Diversity in the Central Texas
Archeological Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:401-426.
Gould, F. W.
1962

Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, Bulletin MP-585. College
Station.

Guderjan, Thomas H., George B. Thomas, and Howard R. Cramer
1980
Existing Data Inventory of Cultural Resource and
Paleontological Information, Fort Hood, Texas. Soil Systems,
Inc. Marietta, Georgia.

32

Huckabee, J. W., Thompson, D. R., Wyrick, J. C., and Pavlat, E. G.
1977
Soil Survey of Bell County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture-Soil Conservation Service. United States
Government Printing Press, Washington, D.C.
Jackson, A. T.
1931

Excavation of a Burial Site on Fred Acree Farm, Coryell County,
Texas, January 29 to February 3, 1931. Unpublished
manuscript on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

Johnson, Eileen
1977
Animal Food Resources of Paleoindians. The Museum Journal
17:65-77. Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1987
A Plague of Phases: Recent Sociocultural Taxonomy in Texas
Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 57:1-26.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., and Glenn T. Goode
1994
A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene Climates, as
well as Archeological Periods, on the Eastern Edwards Plateau.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65:1-51.
Kibler, Karl W., and Eric A. Schroeder
2004
Archeological Survey at the Tenroc Ranch, Bell County, Texas:
2002 Texas Archeological Society Field School. Report
prepared for the Texas Archeological Society.
Kingston, Michael T., and Ruth Harris (editors)
1983
The Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide: 1984-1985. The
Dallas Morning News.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1986
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press. (Seventh Paperback Printing)
Parkhill, David T., Karen Bell, David Mikulencak, and Carol Macaulay
2004
An Archaeological Survey and Assessment of Spicewood
Springs/Camp Tahuaya, BSA, Bell County, Texas. Report on
file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.

33

Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural
Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1985
From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas
Chronology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
54:201-238. (for 1983)
Raisz, Erwin
1946

Map of the Landforms of the United States. Harvard University.
Cambridge.

Redder, Albert J.
1985
Horn Shelter Number 2: The South End a Preliminary Report.
Central Texas Archeologist 10:37-65.
Roemer, Erwin, Jr., Shawn Bonath Carlson, David L. Carlson, and Frederick L.
Briuer
1985
Archaeological Surveys at Fort Hood, Texas, The Fiscal Year
1982 Range Construction Projects. United States Army, Fort
Hood Archaeological Resource Management Series, Research
Report Number 10.
Schroeder, Eric A.
2005
Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed Water Treatment
Plant Site and Distribution System, Bell County, Texas. Paul
Price and Associates, Cultural Resources Report 335.
Schroeder, Eric A., and James T. Jones
1998
Archeological Survey of the Williamson County Raw Water
Pipeline, Williamson and Bell Counties, Texas. Paul Price and
Associates, Cultural Resources Report 220.
Sellards, E. H. Adkins, W. S. and F. B. Plummer
1933
The Geology of Texas: Volume I, Stratigraphy. The University of
Texas Bulletin 3232. Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1963
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace
Site in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 34:57-81.
Shafer, Harry J., Dee Ann Suhm, and J. D. Scurlock
1964
An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources
of Belton Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962.
Texas Archaeological Salvage Project, Miscellaneous Papers,
Number 1. The University of Texas at Austin.

34

Simons, Helen, and William E. Moore
1997
Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 36. Texas
Historical Commission.
Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, George B. Thomas, Ivan Show, and Eli
Mishuck
1981
Initial Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year
1978. United States Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report Number 1.
Skinner, S. Alan, Frederick L. Briuer, W. A. Meiszner, Ivan Show, and Eli
Mishuck
1984
Archaeological Survey, at Fort Hood, Texas, Fiscal Year 1979.
United States Army, Fort Hood Archaeological Resource
Management Series, Research Report Number 2.
Sorrow, William M., Harry J. Shafer, and Richard E. Ross
1967
Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, Number 11. Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960
A Review of Central Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 29:63-107.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Archeological Society, Special Publication Number 1 and Texas
Memorial Museum, Bulletin Number 4.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 25. (entire volume).
Texas Historical Commission
1991
Endangered Historic Properties of Texas: Second Edition.
Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Thomas, George B.
1978
A Survey and Assessment of the Archeological Resources of
Fort Hood, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
49:195-240.
Thornwaite, C. W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
Geography Review 38:55-94.

35

Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas
Monthly Press.
Tyler, George W.
1985
History of Bell County. The Village Press, Inc., Salado.
Weir, Frank A.
1976

The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation,
Washington State University. Pullman. On file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

Willey, Gordon R., and Philip Phillips
1958
Method and Theory in American Archaeology. The University of
Chicago Press, Chicago.
Young, Wayne C.
1987
Archaeological Testing of Site 41BL260 Bell County, Texas.
Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division.

36

APPENDIX I
PHOTOGRAPHS AT SITE 41BL1056

Figure 1. Historical Marker at the grist mill

Figure 2. Standpipe below water chute (looking north)

Figure 3. Standpipe and collapsed walls

Figure 4. Side view of millrace

Figure 5. Intact portion of millrace (looking northeast)

Figure 6. Collapsed section of millrace (looking northeast)

APPENDIX II: SHOVEL TEST LOG
Shovel Tests 1-8 were dug on April 5, 2012 in Area A
Shovel Tests 9-10 were dug on April 6, 2012 in Area B
Shovel
Test
1
2
3
4
5
6

7

8
9
10

Depth

Comments

very dark brown sandy, slightly
10 cm clayey loam (10YR 2/2)
impenetrable gravel at 10 cm
very dark brown sandy, slightly
15 cm clayey loam
impenetrable gravel at 15 cm
very dark brown sandy, slightly
21 cm clayey loam
impenetrable gravel at 21 cm
very dark brown sandy, slightly
30 cm clayey loam
impenetrable gravel at 30 cm
very dark brown sandy, slightly
41 cm clayey loam
impenetrable gravel at 41 cm
very dark brown sandy, slightly
38 cm clayey loam
impenetrable gravel at 38 cm
very dark grayish-brown sandy,
clayey loam (19YR 3/2)
55 cm
charcoal and metal soda water
cans with pull top tabs
very dark grayish-brown sandy,
clayey loam
104 cm
fine brown sand (10YR 4/3)
with mottles and laminae at 80 cm
very dark brown clay containing
30 cm
pea-sized limestone gravel
dark yellowish-brown sandy clay
15 cm (10YR 3/4)
impenetrable gravel at 15 cm

Results

GPS
Coordinates
Zone 14

Negative

E 6 42 590
N 34 31 850

Negative

E 6 42 597
N 34 31 843

Negative

E 6 42 595
N 3 431 847

Negative

E 6 42 604
N 34 31 854

Negative

E 64 2611
N 34 3 1878

Negative

E 6 42 647
N 34 31 880

Negative *

E 6 42 683
N 34 31 892

Negative

E 6 42 704
N 34 31 892

Negative

E 64 43 134
N 34 32 501

Negative

E 6 43 134
N 34 32 501

* Shovel test is considered negative because no prehistoric site or historic site
older than fifty years was encountered. The historic artifacts represent a modern
occurrence.

APPENDIX III: BACKHOE TRENCH LOG
Backhoe trench 1
Location: at Shovel Test 8 on the upper terrace in Area A
Coordinates: 14S Easting 6 42 731; Northing 34 31 876
Orientation: 165º South and 350º North
Dimensions: 5 meters long and 0.05 meters wide
Depth: 147 centimeters
Recorder: Jesse Todd
Results: negative in terms of cultural materials
Comments:
0-53 cm: brown clayey loam (7.5YR 4/2) with light yellowish-brown (10YR 6/4)
sand inclusions, laminae, limestone gravel, whole and partial shells of
Planorbella trivolvis and Mesodon thyroidus, and few small to medium size roots.
53-89 cm: brown clayey loam (7.5YR 4/2) containing limestone, gravel
(maximum size 1.25 cm), sand; and sand laminae
89-131 cm: dark grayish-brown sandy, loamy clay (10YR 4/2) with small gravels,
and a few clay films on ped faces
131-147 cm: light brownish-gray very fine sandy clay

Backhoe trench 2
Location: 14 meters south of the Lampasas River on the lower terrace in Area A
Coordinates: 14S Easting 6 42 737; Northing 34 31 938
Orientation: 210º South and 320º North
Dimensions: 5 meters long and 1.5 meters wide
Depth: 210 centimeters
Recorder: Jesse Todd
Results: negative in terms of cultural materials
Comments:
0-210 cm (center of trench): dark gray sandy, loamy clay (10YR 4/1) with light
yellowish-brown mottled sand (10YR 6/4), laminae; and numerous small roots.
Calcium carbonate filaments were prevalent from the surface to 163 cm where
they became less numerous.
0-117 cm (3 meters from the north end of trench): dark gray sandy, loamy clay
(10YR 4/1) with light yellowish-brown mottled sand (10YR 6/4), laminae, and
small to medium size roots. Calcium carbonate filaments were prevalent from the
surface to 163 cm where they became less numerous.
117-210 cm: dark gray loamy clay with pockets of light yellowish-brown sand, few
calcium carbonate filaments; and small to medium size roots
The presence of clay below the sand indicates that there was a stable landform
upon which flood deposits consisting of sand have been deposited.

Backhoe trench 3
Location: 10 meters north of the Lampasas River in the floodplain in Area B
Coordinates: 14S Easting 6 42 775; Northing 34 32 030
Orientation: due east-west
Dimensions: 5 meters long and 1.5 meters wide
Depth: 162 centimeters
Recorder: Jesse Todd
Results: negative in terms of cultural materials
Comments:
0-40 cm: dark gray loamy clay (10YR 4/1) with a few small pebbles, and small to
medium size roots
40-154 cm: brown fine sandy, loamy clay (7.5YR 4/2), a few small to large roots.
The presence of Mesodon thyroidus and Rabdotus shells indicate a former
savannah environment.
154-162 cm: brown sandy clay (10YR 5/3) with a few small roots present

Backhoe trench 4
Location: 55 meters southwest of Backhoe Trench 3 in the floodplain in Area B
Coordinates: 14S Easting 6 42 800; Northing 34 32 034
Orientation: due north-south
Dimensions: 5 meters long and 1.5 meters wide
Depth: 217 centimeters
Recorder: Jesse Todd
Results: negative in terms of cultural materials
Comments:
0-25 cm: grayish-brown fine s andy, clay loam (10YR 5/2) wit h a few s mall to
medium size roots present.
25-202 cm: grayish-brown fine sandy clay (10YR 5/2) with a few clay films on
ped faces, abundant calcium carbonate filaments; and a few small to moderate
size roots. Fragments of snail shells were also present, but they could not be
identified.
202-217 cm: brown sandy, loamy clay (10YR 5/3) with moderate clay films on
ped faces, some pores, and a few calcium carbonate filaments

Backhoe trench 5
Location: 35 meters southwest of Backhoe Trench 4 in the floodplain in Area B
Coordinates: 14S Easting 6 42 825; Northing 34 32 061
Orientation: due east-west
Dimensions: 5 meters long and 1.5 meters wide
Depth: 175 centimeters
Recorder: Jesse Todd
Results: negative in terms of cultural materials
Comments:
0-83 cm: black clay (10YR 2/1 with many small roots
83-175 cm: grayish-brown sandy, loamy clay (10YR 5/2) with a few clay films on
ped faces, small to moderate size roots, and decayed limestone at the bottom of
the trench

APPENDIX IV
BACKHOE TRENCH PHOTOGRAPHS

Backhoe Trench 1 (facing Northwest)

Backhoe Trench 2 (facing South)

Backhoe Trench 3 (facing East)

Backhoe Trench 4 (facing South)

Soil Profile at Backhoe Trench 5 (facing North)

