ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF A SECTION OF THE PROPOSED
BRAZOS RIVERWALK TRAIL AT THE TEXAS RANGER HALL OF FAME
AND MUSEUM IN WACO, McLENNAN COUNTY, TEXAS

by

Timothy B. Griffith

and

Douglas K. Boyd

Principal Investigator: Douglas K. Boyd

LETTER REPORT NO. 796

submitted to
Engineering Department
City of Waco
Waco, Texas

by
Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Cultural Resources Services
Austin, Texas
PAI No. 208007

September 2008

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 4875

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ........................................................................................................................
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................................
INTRODUCTION ..............................................................................................................
LEGAL MANDATE FOR CEMETERY PROTECTION .................................................
PROJECT LOCATION AND GEOLOGIC SETTING .....................................................
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS AND HISTORY OF THE PROJECT AREA .............
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY METHODS AND RESULTS ..........................................
ANALYSIS OF HISTORIC MAPS AND AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHS .............................
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ......................................................................
REFERENCES CITED .....................................................................................................

ii

iv
v
1
1
4
5
6
10
12
15

LIST OF FIGURES
1.

Project location map ..................................................................................................

2

2.

Modern aerial photograph showing location of the proposed Brazos
Riverwalk survey area in relation to historic and modern features .......................

3

Modern aerial photograph showing locations of trackhoe trenches and
schematic showing stratigraphic profiles of trackhoe trenches ..............................

8

3.
4.

Photographs of trench profiles .................................................................................. 11

5.

Comparison of 1929 and 1938 aerial photographs showing the proposed
Brazos Riverwalk Trail in relation to historic features........................................... 13

iii

ABSTRACT
Personnel from Prewitt and Associates, Inc., conducted an intensive archeological
survey along a 660-ft-long segment of the proposed Brazos Riverwalk in Waco, Texas.
Because the trail is just north of Waco’s historic First Street Cemetery, the survey focused
on searching for unmarked graves. Work included visual assessment of the entire segment
and excavation of seven trackhoe trenches. The project area is completely within the old
Waco city dump, 41ML238, and deposits of historic trash up to 5 m thick were exposed in all
of the trenches. Trenching revealed that the proposed route of the Brazos Riverwalk, which
appears to be on an upper terrace of the Brazos River, is actually located on an entirely
artificial landform composed of trash deposits. No unmarked graves were encountered during
the survey, and, there is little or no potential for intact deposits or historic graves along the
proposed trail. No further archeological work is recommended.
CURATION
No artifacts were collected during this archeological investigation.

iv

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Joe Mayfield from the City of Waco Engineering Department coordinated all the
details of the project and provided numerous maps that facilitated our work. Byron A.
Johnson and the staff at the Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum provided valuable
information about the property and numerous historic maps of the area. Thanks also go to
Dr. James Bruseth of the Texas Historical Commission, who took time out of his hectic
schedule to conduct a field visit to the project area on our first day of survey. His input and
understanding of the cemetery site helped us to develop a manageable field methodology
for subsurface survey once it was clear that we were dealing with as much as four meters of
historic trash deposits.
For Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Timothy B. Griffith (project archeologist) and Karl
W. Kibler (project geoarcheologist) conducted the archeological survey, and Douglas K. Boyd
was principal investigator. Sandra Hannum produced the maps and figures.

v

INTRODUCTION
Prewitt and Associates, Inc. (PAI), conducted an intensive archeological survey of a
660-ft (201-m) section of the proposed Brazos Riverwalk Trail in Waco, Texas (Figure 1).
The work was performed for the City of Waco. The project area is one section of the final
phase of Brazos Riverwalk project, which is funded in part through the Texas Department
of Transportation’s Statewide Enhancement Program. Several phases of the riverwalk
project have already been completed, and completion of the current phase will extend the
riverwalk through the Baylor campus, connecting the university with downtown Waco (Texas
Department of Transportation 2004). Since the city owns the land, the project falls under
the jurisdiction of the Texas Antiquities Code. The archeological survey was conducted as
specified in Texas Antiquities Permit No. 4875 and in accordance with cemetery laws in
the Texas Health and Safety Code.
The project area is near the northern end of Waco’s historic First Street Cemetery,
where unmarked historic graves are known to exist (Figure 2). Consequently, the two
primary goals of the subsurface testing were: (1) to determine if the alluvial deposits were
sufficiently intact that historic graves might be present along the proposed trail route; and
(2) if intact deposits were present, to locate any unmarked graves along the route with
extensive trenching.
When the project was initiated, old maps and recent archeological investigations
revealed that historic graves were very close to the proposed riverwalk. A 1968 handdrawn site map (provided to PAI by the Texas Ranger Hall of Fame) shows locations of
unmarked graves that were excavated and moved that year in conjunction with the
development of Fort Fisher and the Texas Ranger Hall of Fame. The excavation and
relocation of graves from the First Street Cemetery and Masonic Cemetery was authorized
by Waco City Ordinance No. 2507 (Bradle et al. 2006:Appendix III). The locations of some
of the graves that were to be moved are within 100 to 150 ft of the proposed trail. In
addition, the recent expansion of the Texas Ranger Hall of Fame, with the newly constructed
building located only 100 to 300 ft south of the proposed trail route, has encountered many
unmarked graves and triggered a major archeological project to exhume and relocate the
burials (Smith 2007, 2008).
LEGAL MANDATE FOR CEMETERY PROTECTION
The proposed Brazos Riverwalk project has the potential to impact historic graves
associated with Waco’s First Street Cemetery, which dates to the middle of the nineteenth
century (Waco Convention & Visitors Bureau n.d.). For that reason, and because the project
involved the use of federal funds and is on property owned by the City of Waco, the proposed
trail project is subject to the provisions of cultural resources laws, both federal (Section
106 of the National Historic Preservation Act) and state (Texas Antiquities Code and the
related “Rules of Practice and Procedure”).
In addition to cultural resources laws, human graves and cemeteries are protected
under other state laws. Cemeteries in Texas are subject to regulation under several
provisions of the Texas Health and Safety Code (THSC). Chapter 711 of the code, “General
Provisions Relating to Cemeteries,” includes sections on removal of remains, unknown or
1

Project Area

35

0

0.5

1

2

3

Miles

McLennan County

TEXAS

PAI/07/slh

Figure 1. Project location map.
2

4

abandoned cemeteries, and desecration of a cemetery. Chapter 715, “Certain Historic
Cemeteries,” contains regulations on operating and maintaining historic cemeteries. While
these laws imply a general policy of not disinterring remains in cemeteries, the need arises
often enough that the THSC established formal procedures that must be followed in cases
in which graves need to be exhumed and relocated.
The northern portion of Waco’s First Street Cemetery is a large area that contains
no marked graves but many unmarked graves. Although the marked historic graves in
this area were to be moved during the 1968 grave relocation effort (as described in the
Waco City Ordinance No. 2507; see Bradle et al. 2006:Appendix III), there apparently was
no attempt to search for and exhume unmarked graves. The existence of large numbers of
unmarked graves in this area was essentially “discovered” in late 2007 when human remains
were disturbed by construction activities (Smith 2007). Unmarked graves were encountered
well beyond the northern fence of the First Street Cemetery, but no information was available
regarding how far north of the cemetery boundary unmarked graves might be located. For
this project, then, the only safe view was to assume that unmarked graves might extend
all the way to the Brazos River. For all practical purposes, the northern portion of the First
Street Cemetery—the area between the northern cemetery fence and the Brazos River,

Texas Ranger Hall of Fame
Location of Texas Ranger Hall of Fame Addition

5

Proposed Trail
I3

Baylor Law School
Br a
zo s

Ri v

er

Location of
Incinerator #3

First Street Cemetery

S Un

0

PAI/08/slh

50

100

ive r

s ity

P ark

s Dr

200

Meters

Figure 2. Modern aerial photograph showing location of the proposed Brazos Riverwalk project
area in relation to historic and modern features. Base image is February 2007 aerial photograph
provided by the City of Waco. Location of Incinerator #3 is from a 1926–1950 Sanborn map.
3

which includes the area where unmarked graves have been found around the newly
constructed Texas Ranger Hall of Fame building—can be considered an “unknown” or
“abandoned” cemetery under state law. The requirements of Section 711.010, Unknown or
Abandoned Cemetery, of the THSC state:
(a) The owner of property on which an unknown cemetery is discovered or on
which an abandoned cemetery is located may not construct improvements
on the property in a manner that would further disturb the cemetery until
the human remains interred in the cemetery are removed under a written
order issued by the state registrar or the state registrar’s designee.…
(b) On petition of the owner of the property, a district court of the county in
which an unknown cemetery is discovered or an abandoned cemetery is
located shall order the removal of any dedication for cemetery purposes that
affects the property. If all human remains on the property have not previously
been removed, the court shall order the removal of the human remains from
the cemetery to a perpetual care cemetery.…
Thus, no improvements can be built over graves, and moving of graves must be
authorized by a court order and follow a very specific process.
Given what was known about the historic First Street Cemetery and the
unambiguous nature of state cemetery laws, THC adopted the position that this new section
of the Brazos Riverwalk could not be built over any graves. It insisted that the city initiate
an extensive archeological search to determine the nature of the subsurface deposits and
to locate and avoid any unmarked graves that might exist along the trail route.
PROJECT LOCATION AND GEOLOGIC SETTING
This section of the proposed Brazos Riverwalk Trail is on the south side of the
Brazos River, immediately east of Interstate Highway 35 near downtown Waco, Texas. The
project area is a linear stretch of land approximately 10 ft wide and 660 ft long that runs
east-west along the south edge of the Brazos River. The project area begins just east of the
existing Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and extends eastward until it reaches the Baylor
University property boundary near the law school.
The Geologic Atlas of Texas, Waco Sheet, maps the project area as Holocene alluvium
(Bureau of Economic Geology 1970). The McLennan County Soil Survey maps the soils in
the project area as Yahola-Gaddy complex (Miller and Greenwade 2001). These soils are
flooded occasionally and consist of very fine to fine sandy loams. At the time of this survey,
this area was completely open and covered with well-manicured grass and a few scattered
trees. Landscaping has altered much of the modern ground surface, but the landform where
the proposed trail is located appeared to be a Holocene-age terrace of the Brazos River
situated about 3–4 m above the water level in the river channel. Just north of the trail and
immediately adjacent to the river is a lower terrace that is only 1–2 m above the river
level. This lower terrace may have been part of the active floodplain before the dams on
this stretch of the Brazos River were constructed.
Although the geological and geomorphic evidence suggested that the project area
was on the alluvial terrace of the Brazos River, the subsurface trenching revealed that it
actually rests on a completely artificial terrace—a thick, manmade accumulation of historic
4

trash deposits. From the ground surface, the area appears very level, and this artificial
terrace is visually indistinguishable from the intact Brazos River terrace deposits
immediately to the south. Notably, the exact location of the interface between the intact
Brazos River alluvial terrace and the artificial terrace is not known, but it is probably
within 20–80 m south of the trail corridor.
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS AND HISTORY OF THE PROJECT AREA
The project area is entirely within site 41ML238, a historic city dump site used in
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Albert J. Redder recorded the location
as an archeological site in 1995. Although no site map was included, Redder (1995) noted
that “The river bank has been used as a dump for Waco since its founding, till after World
War II. Dump area extends several miles up and down the river bank.” It also was reported
that this south bank of the Brazos River was used for dumping much of the debris associated
with the 1953 Waco tornado. The site form states that the Central Texas Archeological
Society, along with Baylor University, was planning to conduct limited test excavations at
the old city dump. However, it is not known if this activity ever occurred.
In March 2006, TRC Mariah Associates, Inc., conducted an archeological survey of
the proposed Brazos Riverwalk, and their trail corridor included the entire section that
comprises the current project area (Matchen 2006). This survey was conducted for the
Archeological Studies Program, Environmental Affairs Division, at the Texas Department
of Transportation, to assist the City of Waco with the proposed Brazos Riverwalk extension.
Eleven backhoe trenches were excavated during this survey, and historic debris associated
with 41ML238 was encountered in six of the eleven trenches (Trenches 1–6). These six
trenches were dug up to 1.5 m deep, and they exposed only historic trash fill and never
reached any intact alluvial deposits. Trench 1 was dug close to the east end of the current
project area, and the other trenches were spread out for about 1600–1800 ft to the east
along the proposed trail route. The investigators noted that the historic debris included
materials from the cleanup of the 1953 Waco tornado, as well as earlier trash fill, much of
it intensively burned, associated with the old Waco city dump. Based on the testing results
and observations along the river cutbank, they Machen (2006) concluded that the city
dump, site 41ML238, extended for more than 1,500 ft along the edge of the river and
encompassed the historic trash fill observed in Trenches 1–6.
Following the TRC Mariah survey, the current project was implemented by the City
of Waco at the request of TxDOT and THC. The PAI work reported here was planned as an
intensive survey specifically aimed at addressing the potential for unmarked graves along
the trail route. The First Street Cemetery, Waco’s oldest public cemetery, is located just
south of the current project area. It was established in 1852 and continued to expand over
the next 50 years. This large cemetery, which actually subsumes three separate cemetery
tracts (i.e., a Masonic lodge cemetery, the Waco public cemetery, and an Independent Order
of the Odd Fellows cemetery), was closed in 1897 except for public burials. The Hebrew
Rest Cemetery, located adjacent to the First Street Cemetery, was established in 1869 and
is still used by the Jewish community (Waco Convention & Visitors Bureau n.d.).
In 2006, American Archaeology Group (AAG) conducted a survey and construction
monitoring for the Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum expansion project for the City

5

of Waco. The researchers noted that a hand-drawn site map (provided to PAI by the Texas
Ranger Hall of Fame and referenced in Bradle et al. 2006:30) showed the locations of known
graves that were excavated and moved in 1968. However, the map only showed graves
marked with headstones, and it appears that no scraping was done to search for unmarked
graves during the 1968 burial relocation authorized by Waco City Ordinance No. 2507 (see
Bradle et al. 2006:Appendix III). Because of the potential for unmarked graves, the AAG
investigators used a gradall to do “systematic stripping in 10 centimeter levels” over a
large area where the new building was to be constructed specifically to search for unmarked
graves (Bradle et al. 2006:26). They also dug four backhoe trenches to depths varying from
1.1 to 2.4 m (Bradle et al. 2006:Appendix II), and the trench profiles clearly depict thick
deposits of artificial fill. They found two “crypt” features and concluded based on historical
and archeological evidence that these were empty graves where remains of three people
had been disinterred and moved. The researchers determined that that the building site
was located on the “late nineteenth-early twentieth century dump site” (41ML238), but
they did not identify any historic graves in the project area. They recommended that “the
City of Waco be allowed to proceed with the current proposed project and archaeological
monitoring is not necessary” (Bradle et al. 2006:32).
It is now clear that the AAG gradall scraping did not go deep enough to encounter
intact alluvial terrace deposits over most of the search area. Subsequent construction
activities went much deeper, and scattered human bones were found by local citizens and
reported in the Waco Tribune (Culp 2007a, 2007b). Subsequent work revealed that numerous
historic graves were disturbed by the construction of the new Texas Ranger Hall of Fame
building. Remains associated with more than 160 unmarked graves have been found in
subsequent archeological excavations around the building (Smith 2008).
The finding and archeological recovery of many unmarked graves on the Texas
Ranger Hall of Fame property is documented in numerous articles published in the Waco
Tribune between July 2007 and May 2008. The City of Waco initially hired AAG to conduct
recovery efforts to excavate and relocate the unmarked historic graves at the construction
site. Subsequently, the City hired archeologists with PBS&J to continue this effort (Smith
2008). Notably, the new building where all of the unmarked graves have been found sits
about 100–300 ft south of the proposed Brazos Riverwalk Trail. While the PAI survey of
the proposed riverwalk trail was underway, PBS&J archeologists were continuing the effort
to excavate historic graves found around the new building and search for additional
unmarked graves. These excavations had exposed between 1.0 and 1.5 m of artificial fill on
top of the intact sandy alluvial terrace deposits that contain the unmarked graves.
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY METHODS AND RESULTS
Before field investigations began, a search for previously recorded archeological
sites was conducted using the THC’s online Archeological Sites Atlas. This search revealed
that the project area is located within the boundaries of 41ML238, and the 1985 site form
was reviewed. Reports on previous archeological investigations near the project area (i.e.,
Machen 2006; Bradle et al. 2006) were also reviewed. The 1968 hand-drawn map of relocated
graves at the First Street Cemetery was studied to determine how close known graves had
been to the current project area. The online Sanborn maps from the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries and aerial photographs from 1929 and 1955 were also examined

6

to look for evidence of historic cemetery boundaries and the old Waco city dump.
The archeological survey consisted of a pedestrian examination of the entire project
area followed by the excavation of seven trackhoe trenches. Three of the trenches were dug
along the precise route of the proposed riverwalk trail, and four trenches were dug downslope
and slightly north of the trail route (Figure 3). The pedestrian survey included visual
inspection of the ground surface, landforms, and cutbank exposures along the Brazos River.
The inspection did not identify any surface evidence that would indicate the presence of a
cemetery, such as grave-size mounds or depressions, fragments of grave markers, or unusual
vegetation such as irises or lilies. Ground surface visibility along and near the proposed
trail was poor in most areas due to grass cover. The cutbanks along the Brazos River revealed
historic trash deposits at the water level and extending 50 to 100 cm above the water level,
which would be about 3 m below the surface of the upper terrace, where the trail route is
located.
Several factors influenced the method of subsurface testing used to conduct this
survey. Since the possibility of finding unmarked graves existed, the initial survey plan
was to use a trackhoe to dig 100 percent of the proposed trail route. The trackhoe would
remove the upper historic trash deposits, generally estimated to be 3 to 5 ft thick, to reach
intact alluvial deposits. Next, the intact terrace deposits would be scraped in 6-inch
increments, and each scrape would be inspected for evidence of unmarked graves. As directed
by THC, this would continue to a depth of at least 5 or 6 ft into the intact alluvial deposits,
which could be as much as 10 to 11 ft below surface. The problems that arose with this plan
were related to trench safety and logistics of where to pile the backdirt. Before someone
could enter a trench deeper than 5 ft, the trench would have to be widened for safety. If the
trench were 10 ft deep, the entire length would have to be stepped back, with benches dug
to 5 ft on both sides, and this would more than double the amount of fill being removed.
This created the logistical problem of where to put huge amounts of excavated fill while
the trenching was in progress. This was further complicated by the fact that if unmarked
graves were found, the trenching might need to be widened further to locate areas where
there were no unmarked graves.
Due to constraints associated with the initial plan, THC and PAI agreed that it was
more reasonable to begin the survey by digging short test trenches along and near the
proposed trail corridor to investigate the depth and nature of the deposits. Seven trenches
were excavated to various depths ranging from about 2.8 to 5.0 m (see Figure 3). For safety
reasons, PAI archeologists never entered the deep trenches, so trench profiles and fill were
examined only from the surface.
As discussed below, all seven trackhoe trenches revealed thick layers of artificial
fill composed of massive amount of historic trash. The trench excavations continued as
deep as possible in an attempt to reach intact alluvial deposits, but the artificial fill was
much thicker than predicted. Six of the trenches contained only artificial fill, which was 3
to 5 m thick. Only Trench 4, located north of the trail, encountered a thick deposit of finegrained sediment representing intact alluvium.
All of the trenches encountered water—either the actual water table or a zone of
saturation—at various depths. The water level was within a meter or so of the water level
7

Proposed Riverwalk
Trackhoe Trench
0
TT1
TT7

10

20

40

Meters
TT6

TT2

TT5

TT4

TT3

Figure 3. Modern aerial photograph showing locations of trackhoe trenches and schematic show­
ing stratigraphic profiles of trackhoe trenches. Base image is a February 2007 aerial photograph
provided by the City of Waco.
8

in the Brazos River. The excavation of each trench was continued until the water made it
impractical to go any further. Occasional thin drapes of fine-grained sediments were
interspersed within the trash deposits. These layers denote brief flood episodes that occurred
between accumulations of trash.
Trenches 1–4 were placed along the upper terrace surface ca. 3–4 m above the current
Brazos River channel. Since no intact terrace deposits were encountered, survey moved
north to investigate the depositional environment of the lower terrace. Trenches 5–7 were
placed closer to the river and next to an existing sidewalk. These trenches were all on the
lower terrace, which is only 1–2 m above the Brazos River level.
Trench 1 was placed in the center of the proposed trail near the western end of the
survey area. It measured 6.5 m long, 4.2 m wide, and 5.1 m deep. The stratigraphic profile
revealed continuous historic rubble fill from the surface to the bottom at or near the water
level. Trench 2 was placed east of Trench 1, and it also was in the center of the proposed
trail. It measured 5.3 m long, 1.6 m wide, and 4.8 m deep, and the profile revealed historic
rubble fill down to near the bottom, but it appears that an alluvial deposit was encountered
near the bottom and at the water level. Trench 3 was placed in the center of the proposed
trail near the eastern end of the survey area. It measured 5.7 m long, 1.6 m wide, and
5.2 m deep. The trash deposit in this trench extended to a depth of 4.8 m, where the water
level was encountered. Continued excavation revealed that fine-grained alluvial sediments
were present from 4.8 to 5.2 m, below the water level. These three trenches indicate that
the entire trail route is on an artificial surface and rests on top of approximately 5 m of
trash fill. Trench 4 was placed on the upper terrace but nearer to the edge of the Brazos
River bank and north of the east end of the proposed trail. It measured 5.5 m long, 1.6 m
wide, and 4.1 m deep, and ended at the water level. The trash deposit in this trench was ca.
2.6 m thick, and fine-grained alluvial deposits were present from 2.6 to 4.1 m.
Trenches 5–7 were all placed on the lower terrace north of the proposed trail and
next to an existing concrete sidewalk near the river. Water filled each of these trenches
between 2.2 and 2.9 m below the ground surface. Excavation of each trench continued
below the water table. The stratigraphic profiles of these trenches revealed the same thick
historic trash deposit that was observed on the upper terrace. Several layers of alluvial
flood deposits were observed within the trash fill in these trenches. Trench 5 was placed
downslope and north of the central portion of the proposed trail. It measured 5.5 m long,
1.6 m wide, and 2.8 m deep. This trench hit the water level at 2.2 m, and no intact alluvial
surface was encountered. Trench 6 was placed west of Trench 5. It measured 4.8 m long,
1.6 m wide, and 3.5 m deep. This trench hit the water table at 2.9 m deep, and no intact
alluvial surface was encountered. Trench 7 was placed west of Trench 6, and it measured
4.5 m long, 1.6 m wide, and 3.0 m deep. This trench struck the water level at 2.4 m below
ground surface. A prominent flood deposit was sandwiched between the trash fill, but no
intact alluvial deposits were encountered.
The profiles of the seven trenches reveal the nature of the landform on which the
proposed Brazos Riverwalk is located, and thick deposits of historic trash dominate the
exposures (Figure 4). Historic materials observed in the trench walls and in the excavated
fill included glass bottles, concrete rubble, rebar, bricks, historic ceramics, melted glass,
and metal debris. The upper 1.0–1.5 m of artificial fill contained larger concrete rubble,
9

bricks, and cinderblocks in addition to metal debris and rebar. Below this were trash deposits
consisting of historic bottles, ceramics, and metal debris, and most of the trash was
intensively burned. All of these more deeply buried materials appear to date to the early to
mid-1900s.
Many glass bottles and bottle fragments were observed coming out of the trash fill
in the backhoe trenches, and some of the specimens were temporally diagnostic. The vast
majority of specimens exhibited attributes indicating they were manufactured on an
automatic bottle machine; the attributes included Owens suction scar and mold seams
over the neck and lip. These specimens would postdate the 1903–1904 invention of the
Owens Fully Automatic Bottle Machine (Fike 1987:4). One of the complete specimens made
on a fully automatic bottle machine was a small soda pop bottle with embossed letters:
“WELCHS GRAPE JUICE.”
Only three specimens, all complete bottles, had hand-finished lips. These bottles all
had mold seams around the base and up the sides, but the absence of mold seams on the
neck and lip indicate that they were not manufactured on automatic bottle machines (Fike
1987:4, Figures 2 and 3). While the fully automatic bottle machine was patented in 1903–
1904, Fike (1987:4–5) notes that this type of bottle manufacturing did not become common
until several years later. There was a period of overlap in which bottles were made on
semi-automatic and fully automatic bottle machines, and the fully automatic machines
could not even make small medicine bottles until 1909. Thus, the three bottles with handfinished lips could date from the last quarter of the nineteenth century through the first
decades of the twentieth century. Two of these bottles had diagnostic markings. One was a
round bottle of light green glass with “WORCESTERSHIRE SAUCE” embossed horizontally
on its shoulder and “LEA & PERRINS” embossed vertically on its body. The other specimen
was a clear glass, rectangular panel bottle with embossed lettering on one panel. It had
“ONLY THE BEST” inside a wreath, followed by “THE OLD CORNER DRUG STORE” and
“WACO, TEX.” Morrison’s “Old Corner Drug Store” in Waco is famous as the place where
Dr Pepper was invented in 1885 (Dr Pepper Museum 2007).
ANALYSIS OF HISTORIC MAPS AND AERIAL PHOTOGRAPHS
All of the historic Sanborn maps for Waco were examined in an attempt to define
the sequence of historic development for the project area (Digital Sanborn Maps, various
years). These maps provide a historic overview for the area, but the story they tell is far
from complete. The 1885 and 1889 Sanborn maps do not provide sufficient details for this
area, since it was east of the main city. The 1893 Sanborn map indicates that the project
area was on “Railroad Property.” Although no cemetery is shown, the First Street Cemetery
definitely existed by this time. The 1899 Sanborn map shows a large block labeled
“cemeteries” on the main sheet, but the northern boundary is not clearly identified. On the
detailed map of the area (Sheet 6), the “Odd Fellows Cemetery” and “Hebrew Cemetery”
are shown immediately north of 1st Street, but the northern area is cut off by an inset.
Notably, the adjacent map (Sheet 5) shows buildings labeled “PUBLIC SCHOOL
(COLORED)” and “NEGRO TENEM’TS” north of 1st Street and not far west of the two
cemeteries. This area had become an industrial area adjacent to the railroad tracks along
1st Street. Two large tracts were railroad yards labeled: “SAN ANTONIO & ARKANSAS
PASS R. R. PROPERTY.”

10

a

b
Figure 4. Photographs of trench profiles. (a) Profile of Trench 3 showing laminated layers of arti­
ficial fill down to the water level at nearly 5 m; (b) profile of Trench 5 showing the dense trash
deposit and water table.
11

The 1926 Sanborn map shows a “CEMETERY” block along 1st Street, but it is
much smaller than the actual cemeteries in this area. The area immediately north of the
cemetery block is blank all the way to the southern edge of the Brazos River, a distance of
about 1,000 ft. About 1,500 ft to the east, a large area on both sides of Waco Creek is also
blank. These blank areas along the river were probably not being developed because they
were being used as the city dump. The next Sanborn map dates to 1926–1950. It is essentially
the 1926 map with portions updated in the 1940s and 1950. The same square “CEMETERY”
block is shown, but what is most notable on this map is that the “City of Waco Incinerator
No. 3” appears in the undeveloped area near the river and about 1,800 ft east of the current
project area. Between the incinerator and the cemetery are several industrial tracts with
names like: “MILLER MEAT CO. SLAUGHTER HO;” the “CENTRAL HIDE &
RENDERING CO;” and “PRESTON PROVISION SERVICE MEAT PACKING.” This map
also indicates that between 1926 and 1950, two long blocks of single dwelling homes south
of 1st Street in this general area were replaced with apartment-style row housing labeled
“CAIN HOMES (COLORED) U.S.H.A. PROJECT.”
The exact boundaries of the First Street Cemetery are unknown, but it is clear that
extensive alterations to the landscape occurred in the twentieth century. The most extensive
changes were along the Brazos River and associated with the Waco city dump. In the late
nineteenth or early twentieth century, the city dump extended for a considerable distance
along the river, although no detailed historical maps show its boundaries. The results of
the subsurface testing indicate that city trash was dumped right up to the edge of the old
First Street Cemetery. It is likely that the trash found in the project area was simply
dumped along the natural edge of the river and into the active Brazos River floodplain.
Alternatively, the alluvial deposits along the terrace edge might have been removed by
quarrying (i.e., for clay, sand, or gravel), and the large pits were subsequently backfilled
with trash. If the latter is the case, then it is possible that some portions of the old cemetery
were actually destroyed by late-nineteenth- or early-twentieth-century quarrying activities.
Historic aerial photographs provide further evidence of early-twentieth-century
disturbances in the project area. A look at the 1929 and 1938 aerial photographs of the
project area is revealing (Figure 5). The 1929 aerial photo shows extensive disturbances
all along the stretch of the Brazos where the riverwalk trail is proposed. In contrast, the
cemetery area to the south is covered with vegetation, and there is a sharp boundary line
between the two areas. The 1938 photo shows similar conditions. The cemetery area was
wooded, and there was still a sharp boundary that marked the northern edge of the cemetery.
The long tract of land along the Brazos River where the proposed trail is now located was
still extensively disturbed. Both of these historic aerial photos suggest that the project
area was disturbed and probably used for trash disposal before 1929. Notably, the location
of the Waco City Incinerator No. 3 was heavily wooded in 1929, and it appears likely that
the incinerator had not been constructed at that time. This area had changed significantly
by 1938, however, and it is likely that the incinerator was in operation by this time.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Trenching revealed that the proposed route of the Brazos Riverwalk, which appears
to be on an upper terrace of the Brazos River, is actually located on an entirely artificial
landform composed of trash deposits. The bulk of the materials, based on observations of a

12

1929
Proposed
Riverwalk

I3

5

Br a
zo s

S

Un

iv
er

si
ty

Pa
rk

s

Ri v

Location of
Incinerator #3

er

Dr

1938
Proposed
Riverwalk
Location of
Incinerator #3

I 35

Bra
zos

S

Un

iv

er
si

ty

Pa
rk

s

D

Riv

er

r

0

50

100

200

Meters

PAI/08/slh

Figure 5. Comparison of 1929 and 1938 aerial photographs showing the proposed Brazos
Riverwalk Trail in relation to historic features. The 1929 aerial photograph (top) was pro­
vided by the Texas Ranger Hall of Fame. The 1938 aerial photograph is from Tobin Inter­
national. It is an ortho-rectified image of the Waco East Quad, 13N24E, flown in May 1938.
13

few temporally diagnostic artifacts, appear to date from the early to mid-twentieth century.
This location, designated as 41ML238, is the old Waco city dump. For the project area in
general, the upper 1–2 m of fill consists of large concrete rubble, bricks, cinderblocks, and
metal fragments, and these materials are probably associated with cleanup of debris from
the 1953 tornado that devastated much of the downtown area. The fill below 1 or 2 m is
early-twentieth-century trash associated with the dump. The exact boundaries of the site
are unknown, but it is common knowledge that the dump extended for almost a mile east
of Interstate Highway 35. Many of the Baylor University facilities along the river, from the
law school east to the baseball fields, are built on the old landfill (Tom Decker, Waste
Management, Inc., personal communication 2008). Furthermore, the 1926–1950 Sanborn
maps show that the “City of Waco Incinerator No. 3” was located near the river in the
center of this dump area, and it was only about 1,000 ft east of the project area (see Figure
2). Most of the lower trash deposits contained dense layers of burned trash that probably
came from this city incinerator, which was probably built in the late 1920s or 1930s (and
was certainly there by 1950). This incinerator site appears to be fairly close to where TRC
archeologists excavated Trench 4 in 2006 (Matchen 2006).
All historical and archeological evidence indicates that the project area is situated
on the old Waco city dump. With deposits of trash fill up to 5 m thick all along the trail and
exposed at the water level along the Brazos River, it is safe to conclude that the entire area
is an artificial landform. It is likely that the area where the proposed trail is situated was
originally part of the active Brazos River floodplain, and this area was probably filled in
with historic trash in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Therefore, the
project area has little or no potential to contain unmarked graves associated with the First
Street Cemetery. No further search for unmarked graves is warranted for this area, and it
is recommended that the City of Waco be allowed to proceed with construction of this
phase of the Brazos Riverwalk. Furthermore, it is recommended that 41ML238, the latenineteenth- and early-twentieth-century Waco city dump, is not eligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places or for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.

14

REFERENCES CITED
Bradle, Michael R., Gilbert T. Bernhardt, and Ron Ralph
2006
Archeological Survey and Monitoring of the Texas Ranger Hall of Fame and Museum
Expansion Project for the City of Waco, McLennan County, Texas. Reports of Investigations
No. 125. American Archaeology Group, Inc., Lampasas, Texas.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1970
The Geologic Atlas of Texas, Waco Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Culp, Cindy V.
2007a
Missing Bones Cause Big Beef for City, Museum Officials. Waco Tribune, July 20, 2007.
2007b

State Officials Scrutinizing Loose Human Bones, Ambitious Museum Plans.Waco Tribune,
July 24, 2007.

Digital Sanborn Maps
Various Waco, Texas. Digital Sanborn Maps, 1867 1979. Proquest, LLC. Available at http://
sanborn.umi.com [accessed May 1, 2008]. Maps examined: 1885; 1889; 1893; 1899; 1926;
1926–1951; and 1926–1952.
Dr Pepper Museum
2007
History of Dr Pepper. Available online at http://www.drpeppermuseum.com/About-Us/
History-Of-Dr—Pepper.aspx [accessed June 2, 2008].
Fike, Richard E.
1987
The Bottle Book: A Comprehensive Guide to Historic, Embossed Medicine Bottles. Peregrine
Smith Books, Salt Lake City, Utah.
Matchen, Paul
2006
Survey Along the Brazos River for the Proposed River Walk Extension in Waco, Texas.
Interim Report submitted to the Archeological Studies Program, Environmental Affairs
Division, Texas Department of Transportation.
Smith, J. B.
2007
Grave Concerns Bedevil Texas Ranger Hall of Fame Project. Waco Tribune, November 13,
2007.
2008

Descendants of First Street Cemetery Dead Plea for Peace at Long Last.Waco Tribune,
April 27, 2008.

Texas Department of Transportation
2004
Texas Department of Transportation Commission Meeting Minutes, Waco Convention
Center, Bosque Theater, 100 Washington Ave., Waco, Texas, April 29, 2004. Available at
http://www.dot.state.tx.us/transcom/transcripts/0404.htm [accessed June 5, 2008].
U.S. Department of Agriculture
2001
Soil Survey of McLennan County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Extension Service.

15

Waco Convention & Visitors Bureau
n.d.
Waco Cemetery Tour. Popular brochure created by the Waco Convention & Visitors Bureau,
City of Waco, Texas. Available at http://www.wacocvb.com/forms/
CemeteryTour.pdf [accessed May 1, 2008].

16

