GREENBUSCH/WESTHEIMER PARKWAY
RIGHT-OF-WAY EXPANSION,
TxDOT CSJ: 0912-34-109

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 3926

By
Douglas G. Mangum
Project Archeologist
and
Roger G. Moore
Principal Investigator

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Report of Investigations Number 452
April 2008

ii

ABSTRACT
On October 14th and 17th of 2005, Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. (MAC)
conducted a surface survey of the proposed right-of-way widening for FM 1774, in Fort
Bend, Texas. The overall corridor length is approximately 4.7 kilometers (km)(2.9 miles
[mi.]) long and consists of expanding the existing Pin Oak Road, Greenbusch Road and
Westheimer Parkway into a single road. The expansion will be from two lanes to four
lanes. The typical section within the existing roadway consists an 18-meter (m) (60 ft)
ROW that will be expanded to 30.5 m (100 ft) ROW.
The investigation was performed for HNTB Corporation under Antiquities Permit
Number 3926. The results will be subject to review by Fort Bend County, the Texas
Department of Transportation (TxDOT), the Texas Historical Commission (THC), and
HNTB. A total of 13 shovel tests were excavated during the survey. No cultural resources
were found.
The investigation was limited to examination of the portions of the Project Corridor
which fell within PALM mandated survey areas and for which right-of-entry (ROE) had
been obtained. This is due to the fact that virtually all of the proposed corridor expansion
falls within privately owned land. The PALM recommended survey of 3.8 km of the
ROW and ROE was obtained for approximately 440 m of ROW (that segment already
owned by the county). The remainder was visually examined from outside the ROW to
determine if there was visible disturbance sufficient to negate the need for additional
survey. Based on this examination all but .75 km was removed from consideration.
An examination of the existing ROW along the proposed Project Corridor was conducted
during the investigation, as per TxDOT requirements. This examination found that the
construction of ditches, roads, driveways and the placement of infrastructure elements
such as gas and phone lines have impacted the existing ROW along the entire corridor.
It is the recommendation of Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. that construction of
the proposed FM1488 ROW expansion be permitted to proceed on the entire project. The
combination of shovel testing, visual examination and areas excluded by the PALM
model resulted in the removal of all but 750 m of the corridor. It is felt that the remaining
segments are too far from water and other resources to suggest the potential for cultural
resources.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTINGS
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
METHODS
RESULTS
RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES CITED
APPENDIX A: Photographs
APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log

ii
iii
1
6
10
12
13
16
18
19
21
22

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Project Corridor in Fort Bend County
Figure 2. Project Corridor on the Katy (299510) and
Richmond NE (299518) USGS Quadrangles
Figure 3. Project Corridor Detail
Figure 4. Project Corridor shown over aerial photograph
Figure 5. PALM Units on Project Corridor
Figure 6. Shovel Test locations
Figure 7. Areas of proposed ROW not cleared

2
3
4
5
9
15
17

1

INTRODUCTION
On October 14th and 17th of 2005, Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc. (MAC) of
Houston, Texas conducted an archeological survey of the proposed right-of-way (ROW)
widening along Greenbusch/Westheimer Parkway between Interstate 10 (IH10) and State
Highway 99 (SH99) in Fort Bend County, Texas (Figures 1-4). The project is found on
the Katy (299510) and Richmond Northeast (299518) USGS quadrangle maps. The
investigations were conducted under Texas Antiquities Code (TAC) Permit Number 3926
for HNTB Corporation. The results will be subject to review by Fort Bend County, the
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT), the Texas Historical Commission (THC).
The proposed project is approximately 4.7 kilometers (km) (2.9 miles [mi.]) in length and
consists primarily of expanding the existing Pin Oak Road, Greenbusch Road and
Westheimer Parkway into a single road. The expansion will be from two lanes to four
lanes. One segment approximately 240 meters (m) (800 feet [ft]) in length is entirely new
and cuts across land recently purchased by the county. Similarly a 200-m (656-ft) feeder
road that will attach the new segment to Katy Flewellen Road has been purchased by the
county. The typical section within the existing roadway consists an 18-m (60 ft) ROW
that will be expanded to 30.5 m (100 ft) ROW. The maximum depth of impacts is
expected to be no more than 2 m (6 ft). The overall area of potential effect is 152 m (500
ft) but this study will focus on the ROW expansion only.
This project deals only with the portions of the proposed corridor that fall within sections
recommended for survey by the PALM model (Abbott 2001). The actual shovel testing
survey was limited to those segments that have already been purchased by the county
(approximately 440-m [.25 mi.]) and within the existing ROW. This is as per
communication with HNTB regarding the lack of ROE to privately owned tracts of land
within the proposed ROW expansion. Tracts without ROE were examined from the ROW
edge and, where possible, determinations were made as to the integrity and need for
survey. Additionally the existing ROW was examined to determine if there are
potentially intact segments that might require survey (See METHODS).
The objective of the investigation is to determine the presence or absence of cultural
materials within the location proposed for the widening of the ROW. It will also assess, if
possible, any potentially impacted archeological sites and provide recommendations
regarding mitigation measures, if any are necessary. Finally it will provide a report of the
results of the survey to Fort Bend County, TxDOT, and the THC.
The PALM model does not identify any segment of the proposed project corridor as
requiring deep reconnaissance (in the form of backhoe trenching). Therefore, this
investigation does not include backhoe trenching.
The crew excavated 13, 30 x 30-centimeter (cm) (roughly 12 x 12-inch [in.]) shovel tests
during the initial survey at preset intervals as described in the METHODS section of this
report. These excavations produced no cultural resources.

2

Project Archeologist Douglas G. Mangum and Field Project Archeologist Randy
Ferguson with Crewmember Steven Hall, conducted this investigation under the
supervision of the Principal Investigator, Roger G. Moore, Ph.D.

Figure 1: Project Corridor in Fort Bend County.

3

Figure 2: Project Corridor on the Katy (299510) and
Richmond NE (299518) USGS Quadrangles.

4

Figure 3: Project Corridor detail.

5

Figure 4: Project Corridor shown over aerial photograph.

6

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Modern Climate
The modern climate of Fort Bend County is humid and subtropical. The mean annual
temperature of the region is approximately 20.5° Celsius (C) (69° Fahrenheit [F]). Fort
Bend County receives an average of 109.8-cm (43.23 in.) of rainfall annually (Mowery et
al. 1960).
Modern Flora and Fauna
Southeast Texas is within the Austroriparian biotic province, near its western boundary
with the Texan province (Blair 1950:98-101). Pine-hardwood forests on the eastern Gulf
coastal plain mark this boundary, which is set by available moisture levels. The project
area is situated within the pine-oak forest subdivision of the Austroriparian province and
includes portions of the coastal prairie within its western limits (Tharp 1939).
Grasses within the coastal prairies and marsh vegetation area are described from a rangemanagement perspective in Hoffman et al. (nd: 45). This 10,000,000-acre (ac) area
consists of 9,500,000 ac of gulf prairies and 500,000 ac of gulf marshes. The regional
vegetation of the coastal prairies is characterized as follows:
The principal grasses of the prairies are tall bunchgrass, including big
bluestem (Andropon gerardi), little bluestem, seacoast bluestem
(Schizachyrium scoparium, var. littorus), Indiangrass, eastern gamagrass
Tripascum dactyloides), switchgrass, and gulf cordgrass. Seashore
saltgrass is common on moist saline sites. Grazing pressures have
changed the composition of the range vegetation so that the grasses now
existing are broomsedge bluestem, smutgrass, threeawns, tumblegrass
(species) and many other inferior grasses. The other plants that have
invaded the productive grasslands are oak underbrush, mcartney rose,
huisache, mesquite, pricklypear, ragweed, bitter sneezeweed, broomweed,
and many other unpalatable annual weeds [Hoffman et al. nd: 45].
The dominant floral species of the pine-oak forest subdivision of the Austroriparian biotic
province include loblolly pine (Pinus taeda), yellow pine (Pinus echinata), red oak
(Quercus rubra), post oak (Quercus stellata), and blackjack oak (Quercus marilandica).
Hardwood forests are found on lowlands within the Austroriparian and are characterized
by such trees as sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua), magnolia (Magnolia grandiflora),
tupelo (Nyssa sylvatica), water oak (Quercus nigra) and other species of oaks, elms, and
ashes, as well as the highly diagnostic Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneiodes) and palmetto
(Sabal glabra). Swamps are common in the region.
Blair (1950) and Gadus and Howard (1990:12-15) define the following mammals as
common within the Austroriparian province: white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus),
muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), coyote (Canis latrans), opossum

7

(Didelphis virginiana), eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus}, eastern pipistrelle
(Pipistrellus subflavus), Eastern red bat (Lasiurus borealis), Fox squirrel (Sciurus niger),
eastern gray squirrel (Sciurus carolinensis), Southern flying squirrel (Glaucomys volans),
Baird's pocket gopher (Geomys breviceps), Salt marsh harvest mouse (Reithrodonomys
fulvescens), white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), Marsh rice rat (Oryzomys
palustris), cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus,), packrat (Neotoma floridana), eastern
cottontail (Sylvilagus floridanus), and swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquaticus). Bison
(Bison bison) may have been present on nearby grasslands at various times in the past
(Gadus and Howard 1990:15).
Common land turtles include eastern box turtle (Terrapene carolina) and (common
name) Terrapene ornata, while snapping turtle (Chelydra serpentinia), mud turtle
(Kinosteron spp.), river cooter (Chrysemys concinna), and diamondback terrapin
(Malaclemys terrapin) comprise common water turtles. Common lizards include Green
anole (Anolis carolinensis), Fence lizard (Sceloporus undulatus), Common ground skink
(Leiolopisma laterale), Broadhead Skink (Eumeces laticeps), Six-lined Racerunner
(Cnemidophorus sexlineatus), and the Glass snake (Ophiosaurus ventralis). Snakes and
amphibians are also present in considerable numbers and diversity.
The resources provided by river-influenced estuarine and marsh environments were
undoubtedly of great importance to the littoral residents of southeast Texas. These
resources are summarized by Gadus and Howard (1990:12-15). Estuarine fish resources
cited by Gadus and Howard include sand trout (Cynoscion arenarius), spotted sea trout
(Cynoscion nebulosus), Atlantic croaker (Micropogon undulatus), striped mullet (Mugil
cephalus), southern flounder (Paralichthysis lethostigma), shortnose gar (Lepisosteus
platostomus), channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus), freshwater drum (Aplodinotus
grunniens), red drum (Sciaenops ocellata), and bluegill (Lepomis macrochirus) and other
sunfishes. Common shellfish include Rangia (Rangia cuneata), Macoma spp., dwarf surf
clam (Mulinia lateralis), oyster (Crassostrea virginica), Vioscalba louisianae, and olive
nerite (Neritina [Vitta] reclivata). Arthropods, such as shrimp and crab, are also
numerous and highly productive.
Area marshes replete with plants such as cordgrasses (Spartina spp.), reeds (Phragmites
spp.), giant millet (Setaria magna), and bullrushes (Scirpus spp.) would have formed a
highly attractive and bountiful magnet for waterfowl (Gadus and Howard 1990).
Soils and Geology
Geologic formations of the Upper Texas Coastal region are Pleistocene in age. The Gulf
Coastal Plain is the result of a series of sediment wedges, both marine and continental,
created over the last 65 million years (Spearing 1991). Their presence is the result of the
rise and fall of sea level and the fluvial and deltaic deposits of Texas rivers.
Combinations of these activities have contributed to the advancement of the Gulf Coast
shoreline and the Gulf of Mexico. The geological activity that created the Texas coastal
floodplain over the last 65 million years has added 402 km (250 mi.) of land to the United

8

States (Spearing 1991).
The surface geology of the Gulf Coastal Plain is referred to as the Lissie Formation of the
Houston Group. The Lissie Formation is a series of Pleistocene-age deposits located
stratigraphically above Pliocene-age sands and gravels. Extending from the Sabine River
to the Rio Grande, the Formation fans out into a 32-km (20-mi) wide belt north of the
Beaumont Plain (Fields et al. 1983). It retains deltaic and fluvial characteristics from its
composition of river materials and of materials deposited from continental deterioration
carried by streams across the coastal plain (Wheeler 1976).
According to the PALM model developed by Abbott for the TxDOT Houston District,
approximately 3860 m (2.4 mi.) of the overall 4700 m (2.9 mi.) project corridor is Unit 2
or 2a. Unit 2 requires surface survey (shovel testing) while 2a requires testing of pimple
mounds only (Figure 5). The remaining 840-m (2755-ft) segment is Unit 4, which
requires no survey. This is straight-line measurement without consideration for locations
where the alignment is actively on both sides of the highway.
The proposed project area is depicted on sheets 2 and 6 of the Soil Survey of Fort Bend
County, Texas (Mowery et al, 1960). The dominant soils in the project corridor are Edna
fine sandy loam (2770 m), Bernard-Edna complex soils 840 m, and Katy Fine sandy
loam. There is also a small segment of Katy-Waller complex soils (1770 m for the
combined Katy and Katy-Waller soils). All of the soils within the project are of low
geoarcheological potential (Abbott 2001). The Edna soils are very slowly drained, the
Bernard and Katy soils are slowly drained, and the Waller soils are poorly drained
(Mowery et al, 1960).
During fieldwork, the crew found the project area to be level coastal plain with
significant amounts of urbanization. Soils in the few shovel tests varied between sandy
clay loams to shallow clay soils. Some areas that were visually examined had deep
deposits of fill soils.
Hydrology
The project corridor has no stream crossings (Figure 3). The nearest significant stream is
Buffalo Bayou that roughly parallels the project corridor to the south. This stream
averages approximately 600 meters distance from the project corridor. An unnamed
tributary to Buffalo Bayou curls around the southern end of the corridor before draining
into the bayou, but never gets closer than within 450 meters of the ROW expansion.

9

Figure 5: PALM Units on Project Corridor

10

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The project area is within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, which has been
recently summarized by Patterson (1995). Other recent prehistoric summaries equally
pertinent to the prehistory of the Brazoria-Fort Bend County area include Ensor (1991),
and Moore and Moore (1991). The reader is referred to these works for detailed data on
the prehistory of this region.
Previous investigations in Southeast Texas have demonstrated that prehistoric people
occupied this area as early as 12,000 years ago. All through prehistory, the inhabitants
were nomadic hunter-gatherers. Ensor (1990) has proposed a prehistoric cultural
sequence of periods for Southeast Texas which are as follows: Paleo-Indian (10,0008,000 BC), Early Archaic (8,000-5,000 BC), Middle Archaic (5,000-1,000 BC), Late
Archaic (1,000 BC – AD 400), Early Ceramic (AD 400-AD 800), and Late Ceramic (AD
800-AD 1750).
Evidence for prehistoric occupation of Southeast Texas is scarce in the Paleo-Indian
period, and indeed, is rather ambiguous through the Middle Archaic period (Patterson
1983; Aten 1983:156-157). However, although most previously recorded sites date to the
Late Archaic and Ceramic periods, it is probable that earlier dating sites have been lost to
erosion, channel cutting, and, particularly in the case of very early sites, to rising sea
level. In cases where early-dating artifacts have been found, such as Wheat’s (1953) finds
of projectile points dating from the Paleo-Indian through Middle Archaic periods at
Addicks Reservoir in western Harris County, the materials occur in deposits with poor
contextual integrity.
Sites dating from the Late Archaic through the Ceramic periods are more commonly
found in the project vicinity. During the late Archaic period, modern climatic conditions
evolved, sea level rose and stabilized, and coastal woodlands expanded. Aten (1983)
hypothesizes that an increase in population and the establishment of seasonal rounds,
including regular movement from littoral to inland areas occurred during the Late
Archaic period. Particularly relevant to the prehistory of the project area are Hall’s (1981)
data from the Allens Creek project in nearby Austin County, Texas. Excavations of a
large cemetery there suggest a Late Archaic trade system that linked Southeast Texas to
Central Texas and areas eastward into Arkansas. The excavation of other, smaller
cemeteries in this section of the Brazos River drainage, including some in Fort Bend
County, have yielded similar evidence.
Aten (1983) has proposed that ceramics were introduced in the aboriginal artifact
assemblage on the Upper Texas Coast at AD 100. Ensor places the beginnings of the
Early Ceramic period at AD 400, which may be more applicable for areas inland from the
coastline. The Early Ceramic period is characterized by a continued growth in population
levels. Ensor (1991) places the beginning of the Late Ceramic at AD 800, which
coincides with the introduction of the bow and arrow. A plain sand-tempered pottery
dominates throughout both parts of the Ceramic era. Story et al. (1990) has defined the
Mossy Grove Cultural Tradition for Late Prehistoric cultures in Southeast Texas with

11

sandy paste pottery being the principle diagnostic artifact type.
European settlement did not begin to seriously disrupt aboriginal habitation in the areas
inland from the Upper Texas Coast until after AD 1700 (Patterson 1995; 249). European
diseases, probably introduced by explorers and early traders, did begin to have impacts as
early as AD 1528. At least 7 epidemics were recorded among the tribes of the study area
between that date and AD 1890 (Ewers 1974).
The project area appears to have been in the area shown as a “Buffer Zone” by Aten (Fig
3.1, pg. 31, 1983). This buffer fell between the territories (as of the early 18th century) of
the Akokisa, the Coco and Tonkawa. During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries,
epidemic diseases, the mission system, and the fur trade acted to severely reduce, and in
some cases exterminate, these indigenous populations (Ewers 1974).

12

PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
A review of the Texas Historical Commission’s Texas Archeological Sites Atlas
indicated that there are two previously recorded sites within 1 km (0.6 mi.) of the project
corridor. These are 41FB101 (roughly 600 meters from the corridor) and 41FB102
(roughly 400 meters). Both are prehistoric sites along Buffalo Bayou and contained
numerous lithic and ceramic artifacts including intact dart points. Another 2 sites are
found within 2 kilometers northwest of the project area.
There have been no previous archeological investigations that directly impacted the
current Project Area. The nearest previous survey is more than half a kilometer to the
west. No specific record of this particular survey could be found but it may relate to the
Bruce Duke’s examination of Buffalo Bayou that discovered the four prehistoric sites
mentioned above.

13

METHODS
Shovel Testing
Shovel testing was conducted in an attempt to identify buried cultural resources within
the project corridor. A single transect was established within the proposed ROW
expansion on each side of the existing road. In locations where the ROW was all new a
pair of transects were run along the corridor (Figure 6). Shovel tests were excavated
along these transects at an interval of approximately every 100 m (328 ft). In the areas
designated as PALM Unit 2a, only pimple mounds were tested. Alterations were made to
transects and shovel test intervals when necessary to avoid dense thickets and landscape
variations such as streambeds. Alterations were also made to allow testing of better
landforms such as mounds and stream banks. All visible surfaces were examined for
historic or prehistoric archeological materials. Surface visibility varied throughout the
project area, from 0-50% due to various ground cover.
The crew excavated all shovel tests in 10-cm (4-in.) arbitrary levels and screened the
soils through 0.25-in hardware cloth. Soils that were too compact or clayey to sieve
through hardware cloth were broken up by hand. All materials were carefully examined
for cultural artifacts. Location, size, depth, and all other data for each shovel test were
recorded on standardized MAC shovel test forms. Shovel tests were immediately
backfilled. The UTM locations of all shovel tests were recorded utilizing recreation-grade
GPS units (Magellan GPS 315). As previously mentioned, it was determined that deep
reconnaissance, in the form of backhoe trenching, would not be a part of this
investigation.
Any locality producing either prehistoric or historic cultural remains was recorded on
State of Texas archeological site forms for submission to TxDOT. In addition to form
information, sites and features were documented by photographs, plan and stratigraphic
sketches and measured drawings, and crewmembers’ daily field notes. Investigations at
any identified site or feature sought to determine site boundaries, depth, nature of the
archeological deposits, and the site’s state of preservation. Historic buildings (if any) and
all other archeological sites and cultural features were photographed, mapped in plan
view, and plotted with accuracy on USGS quadrangle maps and project maps (if
available). Recommendation for State Archeological Landmark (SAL) and National
Register of Historic Places (NRHP) eligibility were left blank, as per TxDOT procedure.
For buried or obscure sites, boundaries were delineated through a combination of soil
surface examination and shovel test excavation. Where necessary shovel tests were dug at
5-10 m (16-32 ft) intervals radially in the cardinal directions from the presumed center of
each site until no further artifacts were encountered in two successive units (or until the
boundary of the project area was reached). The site boundary on each radius was
presumed to lie between the last artifact-producing test and the first sterile unit.
Information on the depth and nature of the deposits was derived from shovel test results,
as well as available surface observations. Any prehistoric or potentially pre-1870 historic
materials recovered from the shovel tests or other subsurface investigations, and any

14

diagnostic cultural materials from the above periods found on the surface, would be
collected and retained.
Photographs were taken of stream crossings, the existing ROW, and general landforms
within the project area. Photographs were also taken of any obvious features (i.e. pimple
mounds, structure remnants, etc…) and of any sites found. Photograph direction, subject,
photographer name, and dates were recorded on a standard MAC photo log.
Because the tracts along the proposed expansion are primarily the property of multiple
private landowners, it was necessary to mail forms requesting right of entry (ROE)
permission to conduct investigations of the land. However, the initial ROE requests were
valid for a limited period of time and had expired by the time MAC was given notice to
proceed. As a result only the limited area (approximately 440-m) already purchased by
the county and the existing ROW would be available for direct investigation. At the
request of HNTB, MAC pursued the investigation without further delay for additional
ROE requests.
Non-ROE Properties and Existing ROW
The following methodologies were developed as a result of consultation with TxDOT
ENV archaeologists regarding the visual examination of properties for which ROE could
not be obtained and the survey of the existing ROW.
Examination of the proposed ROW where ROE was not available (approximately 3 km.)
required significant pre-field work utilizing Global Information Systems (GIS). Maps
were developed showing individual tracts and whether the owner had authorized ROE (in
this case no ROE was available). This was then compared to the PALM model. From this
data, new maps were developed showing those areas requiring survey and the availability
of ROE. Utilizing these maps, a combination driving and walking survey of the project
corridor was conducted. Any areas that were clearly undisturbed were recorded as
requiring survey after TxDOT acquires the land. Such properties could include forested
land and tracts with visible landscapes that appear unaltered. Tracts with indeterminate
integrity would also be recorded as requiring survey after TxDOT has acquired the land.
These properties could include those with no visibility from the existing ROW edge and
those with visibility but no clear evidence of disturbance. Finally, tracts that were clearly
disturbed were recorded as such and recommendations were made that no further survey
was required. Examples of such properties could include parking lots, graded tracts,
businesses and tightly packed urban housing. In locations defined by the PALM model as
requiring deep reconnaissance (i.e. backhoe trenching), the level of disturbance necessary
to make a determination of no survey required was based on the professional opinion of
the archeologist in the field. Thus, if the archeologist felt that grading on a property had
not penetrated deep enough to impact deep deposits, he or she might leave the property as
indeterminate.
Examination of the existing ROW consisted of a driving survey. Wherever there was a
question of the level of disturbance within the existing ROW, the investigator stopped
and walked the area. For the purposes of this investigation, it was assumed that the

15

existing ROW ends wherever fence-lines begin. Wherever this is not the case, it is
assumed that the land ownership is disputed and MAC archeologists will not enter the
property.

Figure 6: Shovel Test locations

16

RESULTS
Shovel Testing Survey
On October 14th and 17th of 2005, MAC performed a pedestrian archeological survey of
the proposed Greenbusch/Westheimer Parkway ROW expansion in Fort Bend County,
Texas. As mentioned in the METHODS section, this survey was performed utilizing
shovel testing along transects and visual survey of all visible surfaces. It also included
visual examination of all non-ROE properties. This sampling methodology resulted in the
excavation of 13 shovel tests during the survey in the limited area already purchased by
the count (Figure 6) and the examination of roughly 3 kilometers of non-ROE property
All 13 shovel tests excavated within the project corridor during the investigation were
sterile. All were dug in areas of new ROW and crossed open fields. All shovel tests
reached the basal clay subsoil. All shovel tests reached the basal soils at depths ranging
between 20-55 cmbs (see Appendix B). All 13 were sterile.
Non-ROE Properties and Existing ROW
The visual examination of the non-ROE properties suggested that revealed that
approximately 1100 m (.7 mi.) of proposed ROW corridor within PALM Unit 2a could
be removed from consideration (see Figures 4a-e). This was based on the lack of any
mound features.
The remaining areas of PALM Unit 2 for which MAC had no ROE were visually
examined for survey potential. This amounted to 1900 meters of ROW. Of these tracts
approximately 1150 meters were determined to be too disturbed to merit further
examination. The predominant sources of the disturbances were urban and business
development.
There remained approximately 750 meters of PALM Unit 2 with no ROE that could not
be excluded due to previous disturbance. This was in two tracts of land on the south side
of the existing road (Figure 7). One had approximately 500 meters of ROW and the other
approximately 250 meters.
An examination was made of the existing Greenbusch/Westheimer Parkway within the
project corridor. This examination found that virtually the entire existing ROW had been
significantly disturbed. Most of this disturbance took the form of ditches dug as part of
the drainage control system alongside the road. These ditches fill virtually the whole
space between the edge of the road shoulder and the fence line representing private
property. Typically an area less than a meter in width may be left behind. It was observed
that even this narrow band was commonly impacted by the emplacement of buried
infrastructure elements such as phone lines, gas pipelines, etc. Field archaeologists
determined that there were no segments large enough and intact enough to merit shovel
testing.

17

Figure 7: Areas of proposed ROW not cleared.

18

RECOMMENDATIONS
It is the recommendation of MAC that no further archeological investigation is necessary
prior to construction of the proposed ROW expansion. Based on the limited shovel
testing and visual examination it was possible to exclude all but 750 meters of the Project
Corridor. It is felt that the remaining segments of the Project Corridor, amounting to
approximately 2.2 acres, should also be excluded. This relatively small area falls on
poorly drained soils of low geoarcheological potential (Abbott 2003). Furthermore both
tracts are more than 600 meters from the nearest natural water sources and are well
outside of forested areas. These factors, combined with the rapid urbanization of the
corridor, suggest that there is little potential for cultural sites or that potential cultural
sites could remain intact within the narrow band of proposed ROW expansion.

Should archeological deposits or features be encountered during construction, it is
advised that construction cease in the immediate area of the finds and the Archeology
Division of the THC should be contacted for further consultation.

19

REFERENCES
Abbott, James T.
2001 Houston Area Geoarcheology; A Framework for Archeological
Investigation, Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the
Houston Highway District. Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Division, Archeological Studies Program, Report
27.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. National Parks Service, United States
Department of the Interior. Washington, D.C.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science 2 (1):
93-117.
Ensor, H. Blaine
1991 Comments on Prehistoric Chronology Building in Southeast Texas.
Houston Archeological Society Journal, 98:1-11.
Ewers, John C.
1974 The Influence of Epidemics on the Indian Populations and Cultures of
Texas. Plains Anthropologist, Volume 8: 104-115. Lincoln, Nebraska.
Fields, R., M. D. Freeman and S. M. Kotter
1983 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at Addicks Reservoir,
Harris County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports of
Investigations 22. Austin.
Gadus, Eloise F., and Margaret Ann Howard
1990 Hunter-Fisher-Gatherers on the Upper Texas Coast: Archeological
Investigations at the Peggy Lake Disposal Area, Harris County, Texas
(Volume 1). Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations Number
74. Austin.
Hall, Grant D.
1981 Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos
River Valley, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 61.
Austin.
Hoffman, G. O., B. J. Ragsdale and J. Daniel Rogers
N.d. Know Your Grasses. Texas Agricultural Extension Service. The Texas
A & M University System. College Station, Texas.

20

Moore, Roger G.
1995 An Empirical Analysis of Elements of Prehistoric Site Location and
Formation In Harris County, Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting, Report of
Investigations, Number 149.
Moore, Roger G., and William E. Moore
1991 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed 750 Acre Joseph S. and
Lucie H. Cullinan Park, Fort Bend County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations, Number 50.
Mowery, Irvin C., Gordon S. McKee, Francisco Matanzo, and Everett Francis
1960 Soil Survey of Fort Bend County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and Forest Service, and Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.
Patterson, Leland W.
1983 Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in Southeastern Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Volume 54: 253-270.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, 66: 239-264.

Sjoberg, Andree F.
1951 The Bidai Indians of Southeastern Texas. Unpublished Master’s Thesis,
University of Texas at Austin.
Spearing, Darwin
1991 Roadside Geology of Texas. Mountain Press Publishing. Colorado.;
Story, D. A., Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha D. Freeman, Jerome C. Rose, D.
Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard
1990 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volume 1.
Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series. No. 38.
Tharp, B. C.
1939

The Vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy of Sciences, Non-Technical
Series 1 (I-vi): 1-74.

Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin, Southeast Texas.
Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 154: 143-252. Washington, D.C.

21

APPENDIX A: PHOTOGRAPH LOG

Photograph 1: Typical ROW section on south end of project corridor

Photograph 2: Typical ROW section on north end of project corridor

Photograph 3: New area of ROW purchased by county and shovel tested during investigation

22
APPENDIX B: Shovel Test Log
S.T No.

Depth
(CMBS)

1

0-48
48-59

2

0-12
12-26

26-45
45-56
3

0-7
7-27

27-40
40-48
4

0-7
7-13

5

mixed & mottled dk gray,
red, yellowish brown clay
w/chunks of concrete
10yr3/3 dk brown clay
w/few orange mottles
Dk grayish brown SL -fill
Grayish white clay fill
w/reddish orange,
yellowish brown & dk
gray mottles
Dk gray clay fill w/reddish
orange and yellowish
brown mottles
10yr3/1 very dk gray clay
w/reddish mottles
Dk grayish brown SL -fill
Lt grayish white clay fill
w/reddish orange &
yellowish brown mottles
Dk gray clay fill w/reddish
orange and grayish white
mottles
10yr3/1 very dk gray clay
w/reddish orange mottles
10yr5/3 brown SL
Whitish gray, orangish
red, pale brown & dk
gray clay

Comments
extremely
compact
dry, extremely
compact
humic zone

subsoil
humic zone

subsoil

13-27

10yr3/1 very dk gray clay
w/some reddish orange
mottles

extremely hard

27-40

10yr3/2 very dk grayish
brown clay w/reddish
orange mottles & CaCo3
concrs.

subsoil

0-9
9-28
28-36

6

Description

0-47

10yr3/2 very dk grayish
brown clay
10yr4/2 Dk grayish
brown CL w/few
yellowish orange mottles
10yr4/1 Dk gray clay
w/heavy yellow mottles
Grayish brown SCL fill
w/chunks of very dk gray
clay & pale brown &
reddish orange mottles

subsoil

23

7

47-50

10yr4/1 Dk gray clay
w/reddish orange mottles
& CaCo3 concrs.

subsoil

0-40

Dk grayish, Dk gray,
grayish brown mixed clay
fill

concrete on
top, charcoal
throughout

40-61
8

0-30
30-55

55-65
9

0-16
16-39
39-46

10

0-30
30-40

40-55
11

0-16
16-37
37-53

12

0-27
27-39
39-47

13

0-20
20-42

10yr3/2 very dk grayish
brown clay w/few orange
mottles & CaCo3 flecks
10yr5/1 gray SL
10yr4/2 Dk grayish
brown SCL w/pale brown
mottles
10yr3/1 very dk gray clay
w/reddish orange mottles
& CaCo3 concrs.
10yr4/2 dk grayish brown
SCL
10yr4/2 dk grayish brown
CL w/few orange mottles
10yr5/3 brown Clay
w/orange mottles
10yr5/1 gray SL
10yr4/2 Dk grayish
brown SCL w/pale brown
mottles
10yr3/1 very Dk gray
clayw/reddish orange
mottles
10yr4/2 Dk grayish
brown SCL
10yr4/2 dk grayish brown
CL w/few orange mottles
10yr5/3 brown clay
w/orange mottles & dk
grayish brown inclusions
10yr5/1 gray SL
10yr4/2 Dk grayish
brown SCL w/reddish
orange mottles
10yr3/1 very dk gray clay
w/reddish orange mottles
10yr4/2 dk grayish brown
clay
10yr4/2 dk grayish brown
clay w/few orange
mottles

disturbed
very compact,
intact
subsoil

subsoil
disturbed

subsoil
plow zone

subsoil
disturbed - plow
zone

subsoil

subsoil

