Archaeological Investigations at
The Grove at San Antonio Tract, San Antonio, Texas
By
Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester
SUBMITTED TO

Regional Development Partner
Campus Crest Development, LLC
P.O. Box 1600
Abilene, Texas 79604
By

ABASOLO ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS
San Antonio, Texas

Report No. 88
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
2009

1

Archaeological Investigations at
The Grove at San Antonio Tract, San Antonio, Texas

By
Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester

SUBMITTED TO

Alex B. Eyssen
Regional Development Partner
Campus Crest Development, LLC
P.O. Box 1600
Abilene, Texas 79604
By

ABASOLO ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONSULTANTS
San Antonio, Texas

Report No. 88
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
2009

2

Abstract
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants conducted Phase I archaeological investigations at
The Grove tract in San Antonio, Texas for the Regional Development Partners, Campus
Crest Development, LLC, and Abilene, Texas. Fieldwork included a 100% pedestrian
survey of the tract and four backhoe tests. These investigations recorded two
archaeological sites, one, designated as site TG-1, was a cluster of prehistoric artifacts on
the surface near a grove of large live oak trees on the property. The cluster included a
grinding stone (mano), several burned limestone hearthstones, chipped stone flakes, and a
biface tool. Backhoe testing showed the cultural material to be confined to the surface.
Site TG-2 was discovered in a backhoe trench at the western end of the tract where a
hearth feature and other cultural material was encountered buried in Leon Creek terrace
deposits.

3

Introduction and Background
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants (AAC) conducted Phase I archaeological
investigations at The Grove tract in San Antonio, Texas for the Regional Development
Partners, Campus Crest Development, LLC, and Abilene, Texas. Fieldwork included a
100% pedestrian survey of the tract. These investigations recorded a cluster of prehistoric
artifacts near a grove of large live oak trees on the property (Figure 1). The artifact
cluster (site TG-1) included a grinding stone (mano), several burned limestone
hearthstones, chipped stone flakes, and a biface tool. Surface inspection and shovel
testing was not sufficient to fully investigate and assess this potential archaeological site.
Therefore, additional investigations consisting of backhoe testing was recommended.
This request was approved following the initiation of a supplemental proposal to include
one additional day of field work. The backhoe testing was carried on December 21 by the
authors. This report documents the results of the field work.

Setting
The Grove tract is along the west and south sides of UTSA Boulevard (southeast of its
intersection with UTEX Boulevard) and north of Hausman Road (Fig. 1). Underlying
this locale, geologically, is a number of faulted Cretaceous limestone formations along
the edge of Balcones Escarpment (Fig. 2). Del Rio clay is the dominant underlying
geological formation in the project area (Arnow 1959).

The tract is to the east of the Leon Creek drainage, and is characterized by Lewisville
series soils, LvB (1-3 % slopes), that serve to separate the terraces on the west from the
uplands to the east (Fig. 3). It is a dark grayish brown soil that can be cultivated for crops
(Taylor et al. 1991). Patrick soils occur at the western end of the project area along a
terrace of Leon Creek bordering an old channel Old fields within the tract today are
covered by mesquites, juniper, and white brush.

4

Archaeological Background
Chronological Overview
The tract known as The Grove lies within an area of northern Bexar County where a series of
major prehistoric sites have been excavated and published. These sites span most of the
13,000-year chronology of the region’s human presence (Turner and Hester 1993). Just less
than a mile to the north, one the south side of FM 1604, is the Pavo Real site (41BX52;
Collins et al. 2003). This site yielded abundant chipped stone remains linked to the
Paleoindian period. Occupation of that site began around 13,000 years ago during the end of
the Pleistocene (Ice Age), continuing intermittently for the next 1000-2000 years. The
Paleoindian period ended in a time of improving climate, around 8800 years ago. A good
example of the later Paleoindian cultures has been found less than a mile from the survey
area, at site 41BX47 on the terrace of Leon Creek (Tennis 1996). This site also provides an
excellent example of Archaic occupations. Lasting about 7000 years, the Archaic peoples
were hunters and gatherers who exploited the resources of an essentially modern Central
Texas environment. Plant resources, such as the bulbs of sotol and other plants, were often
processed in burned rock middens, earth ovens of the sort also seen at 41BX47. Another of
the major resources was chert (flint) that weathered out of limestone of the Edwards
formation in northern Bexar County. Archaic sites are marked by large numbers of projectile
points (used on spears thrown with the atlatl or spear thrower; Tennis 1996) and other tools,
along with much flake debris resulting from their manufacture. Around 1300 years ago,
changes began to appear in the long Archaic lifeway. Most recognizable is the introduction of
the bow and arrow, with the tiny points notably distinct from the larger spear points of
Archaic times. This era, lasting until the arrival of the Spanish in the 17th century, is known
as the Late Prehistoric. The Historic archaeological record in the area is best represented by a
series of ranch and farm structures documented at Camp Bullis, north of The Grove. These
include several houses built in the mid- to late-19th century, some constructed by early
German immigrants (Gerstle et al., 1978).

5

Sites Near The Grove Tract

The Leon Creek Valley has a long history of prehistoric occupation and numerous
archaeological sites. Archaeology in the Leon Creek watershed is known largely from an
early 1970s survey by Willam Fawcett and Paul McGuff (Texas Archeological Site Atlas,
Texas Historical Commission).

Several of their sites are to the west-northwest, on both

sides on Leon Creek. The most important of these sites is 41BX47 where work by The
University of Texas at San Antonio led to the discovery of major cultural deposits.
(Tennis 1996). With occupations that range from at least 7000 B.C. to 1000 B. C., it is an
example of the kind of significant site sometimes found in the terraces of Leon Creek.

Nearby sites recorded in the Texas Archeological Site Atlas (Texas Historical
Commission) include 41BX597, north-northeast of UTSA Boulevard [a single hearth
recorded by G. Goode in 1983], 41BX72, 41BX127, and 41BX53, all to the west along
Leon Creek. These latter three sites were in, 1970, on the property of George Delavin
and recorded by Fawcett and McGuff. Collections from 41BX72, in the landowner’s
possession, included Archaic and Late Prehistoric points, and some possible Paleoindian
specimens. It was a campsite marked by burned rock and flakes.

41BX127 is a

campsite then located in a field. Archaic artifacts had been found there. 41BX53 is a
campsite buried in terrace deposits; tho0ugh no diagnostics were found, the recorders felt
it was Archaic in age.

Backhoe Testing Results
On December 21, 2009, four backhoe trenches were excavated. Two were designed to
sample the area of the surface scatter of artifacts observed at site TG-1. It was important
to learn whether or not buried cultural deposits were present at that site. Backhoe
trenches BHT-1 and BH-2 were excavated (Figs. 5, 8-10). Neither trench yielded any
evidence of buried cultural deposits. BHT-1 reached a depth of 55 cm, at which point
exfoliated limestone bedrock was reached. BHT-2 was excavated to a depth of 70 cm

6

was encountered Lewisville soil, and no cultural material was observed in the trench or
back dirt (Fig. 10).

Two trenches, BHT-3 and BHT-4 were placed at the northwestern and southwestern
corners of the western extent of the property. BHT-3 encountered a buried hearth,
consisting of over a dozen fire-cracked rocks at a depth of 40-55 cm below the surface
(Figs. 11-13). Associated with this hearth layer were numerous Rabdotus sp. snail shells
and two chert flakes—together with the fire-cracked rock these are indisputable evidence
of a prehistoric campsite. This cultural deposit has been given the temporary designation
of TG-2. The full extent of the site is unknown but it occurs in Patrick soils which
parallel an old channel of Leon Creek and appears to be confined to the southwest corner
and extended beyond the boundaries of the project area (Fig. 5). Formal TexSite records
will be filled out for this site, as well as for site TG-1.

BHT-4 was excavated to see if the thin cultural deposit seen in BHT-3 continued across
the western end of the property. No cultural material was seen in BHT-4, but a thin
scatter of Rabdotus sp. shells was observed at about 50-60 cm, possibly an indication of
the occupation surface in BHT-3, and perhaps indicating that we had exceeded the
southern margin of site TG-2 with the placement of this trench. Figure 5 shows the
location of BHT-4, TG-2 and its proximate boundaries.

Summary
The archaeological survey, consisting of a 100% pedestrian surface and backhoe testing,
recorded two archaeological sites on The Grove tract.

The backhoe testing, while

showing negative results in the area of site TG-1, did locate a buried cultural deposit in
the western portion of the project area closest to Leon Creek. The trenches were dug to
test this high probability area paralleling Leon Creek. Site TG-2 does contain an intact,
buried prehistoric living surface. No diagnostic artifacts were found to indicate just how
old the site may be. However, research at nearby site 41BX47 located a half-mile west of
TG-2 and on the same Leon Creek terrace, uncovered numerous hearths and burned rock
7

features similar to that found in BHT-3. The hearth features at 41BX47 date as early as
7,900 years ago.

Based on these archeological findings, we do not recommend any

further archaeological work to be conducted at TG-1. We do, however, recommend that
the area at the southwest corner of the property—site TG-2--be avoided if possible in
order to preserve the intact prehistoric cultural deposits that exists in this area.

References Cited
Arnow, T.
1959 Ground-Water Geology of Bexar County, Texas. Bulletin 5911.
Texas Board of Water Engineers, Austin.
Collins, M. B., D. B. Hudler, and S.L. Black
2003 Pavo Real (41BX52): A Paleoindian and Archaic Camp and Workshop
on the Balcones Escarpment, South-Central Texas. Studies in Archeology 41.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Taylor, F. B., R. B. Hailey, and D. L. Richmond
1991 Soil Survey of Bexar County. Series 1962, No. 12. Reissued June 1991. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Tennis, C. L.
1996 Archaic Land Use of Upper Leon Creek Terraces: Archaeological Testing
in Northern Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report 234.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993 Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. 2nd ed. Rowman
and Littlefield, Lanham, MD.

8

Figures

Figure 1. Aerial perspective showing the location of The Grove tract.

9

Figure 2. Topographic map showing the location of the The Grove tract
in northern San Antonio. The project is on a terrace of Leon Creek.

10

Figure 3. Geology map of northern San Antonio showing the location of
the project area relative to the geology; the dominate geological
formation in the project area is Cretaceous era Del Rio Clay.

11

Figure 4. Soils map showing the soils Lewisville (LvB) soils being the
major soils in the project area; Patrick (PaB) soils, which occur along
the old terrace of Leon Creek, were encountered in BHT-3e.

12

BHT-3

TG-2
BHT-1

BHT-4

BHT-2

TG-1

Figure 5. Map of the project area showing the location of backhoe
trenches 1-4 and archeological sites TG1 and TG2.

Figure 6. Location of an artifact scatter designated as TG-1 in the live
oak grove.

13

Figure 7. Chipped stone artifact found on the surface of site TG-1.

Figure 8. Backhoe testing in progress at site TG-1.

14

Figure 9. Profile of BHT-1 showing exfoliated bedrock (Del Rio Clay).
No cultural materials were found in this test.

Figure 10. Backhoe profile of BHT-2 at site TG-1 showing Lewisville
soils. No cultural material was found in this test.

15

Figure. 11. BHT-3 profile showing Patrick series soils; a buried
cultural deposit designated as site TG-2 was encountered 40-65 cm
below the surface.

Figure 12. Burned limestone rock encountered in BHT-3 at site TG-1.
The fire-cracked limestone is an indicator of a prehistoric hearth
feature.

16

Surface
0
10YR4/2 dark gray brown
25
S

s

s

s

s

s

s

10YR4/3 brown

50
10YR5/4 yellowish brown
75
10YR5/6 yellowish brown
100 cm

Unexcavated

Figure 13. Profile sketch of BHT-3 showing soil hues and buried
cultural deposit.

Figure 14. Soil profile of BHT-4 showing Lewisville soils; no cultural
material was encountered in this test.

17

