ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE CITY OF ABILENE’S
WEST CENTRAL TEXAS MUNICIPAL WATER DISTRICT (WCTMWD)
PIPELINE ASSOCIATED WITH THE CITY OF ABILENE’S
POSSUM KINGDOM RAW WATER ROUGHING FACILITY
BRECKENRIDGE, STEPHENS COUNTY, TEXAS
Texas Antiquities Permit Number 7096

by
Michael R. Bradle
and
Herbert G. Uecker
American Archaeology Group, LLC
Report of Investigations Number 196
2015

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE CITY OF ABILENE’S
WEST CENTRAL TEXAS MUNICIPAL WATER DISTRICT (WCTMWD)
PIPELINE ASSOCIATED WITH THE CITY OF ABILENE’S
POSSUM KINGDOM RAW WATER ROUGHING FACILITY
BRECKENRIDGE, STEPHENS COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 7096

by
Michael R. Bradle
and
Herbert G. Uecker
Principal Investigator: Herbert G. Uecker
Prepared for
City of Abilene
P.O. Box 60
Abilene, Texas 79604

Prepared by
American Archaeology Group LLC
P.O. Box 534
Lampasas, Texas 76550

ii

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of approximately 7.38 mile (44.73 acres) for the City of
Abilene’s proposed West Central Texas Municipal Water District (WCTMWD) Pipeline
associated with the City of Abilene’s Possum Kingdom Raw Water Roughing Facility,
located west of Gunsolus (Gonzales) Creek transecting northwest across Hubbard Creek
Reservoir in Breckenridge, Stephens County, Texas was conducted by American
Archaeology Group LLC in December 2014. The project was conducted under the auspices
of Texas Antiquities Permit Number 7096 and Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act (potential Corps of Engineers permitting).
The proposed pipeline begins just south of the existing Water Treatment Plant on
the south side of Breckenridge then extends west across Hubbard Creek Reservoir (which
currently is extremely low) to the west side where a pump station will be built. Surface
inspections were conducted along the exposed sections within the reservoir limits and it
contained deep silt/mud deposits, rock, and marshy areas. The proposed depth of impacts
are 10 feet below the ground surface, and the existing right-of-way is 50 feet. AAG focused
its efforts on the existing right-of-way but also conducted a pedestrian survey of an
additional 30 feet of ground surface on the west/south of the right-of-way in an effort to
identify any noticeable cultural resources that might be affected by light vehicular traffic
during access for the project, although construction and traffic are limited to the right-ofway.
Roughly 70% of the project area had been heavily disturbed by prior earth moving
activities. The survey included a systematic inspection of the ground surface of the project
area supported by backhoe trenching and shovel testing to test for subsurface deposits.
Most of the soils have been severely impacted and are fairly shallow on top of bedrock or
eroded. Those areas that had any appreciable depth were subjected to backhoe trenching to
provide a more comprehensive subsurface testing in those areas to attempt to locate any
potentially buried cultural resources in those areas. Eight archaeological sites were
identified during the course of this survey, both in and adjacent to the existing WCTMWD
pipeline right-of-way. None of the archaeological sites contained any sub-surface cultural
deposits, no significant features, artifact assemblages, or architecturally significant
remains, and none of the sites are known to be related to any significant person or event in
history or prehistory.
Site 41SE322 was recorded as a possible historic house site located just south of
Highway 180, west of Breckenridge, and predominantly north of the pipeline right-of-way.
The site has been totally bulldozed. A possible cistern may be present with an 18 inch neck
having been clipped off by a bulldozer. Artifacts observed were concrete, brick fragments,
round nails, clear glass, shaped sandstone (possible pier stones), and white ware ceramics
The site is located at 1,220 feet above mean sea level (amsl) and just east of Dry Branch,
an intermittent tributary to Big Sandy Creek. The site appears to be approximately 30x30
meter in size, with only a few artifacts and stones located inside the existing right-of-way.
The site appears to date to the early-mid 20th century. Subsurface tests did not reveal any
sub-surface cultural deposits. No significant artifact assemblages were identified, no
ii

architecturally significant features were located, and it appears that this site has been
destroyed and not considered eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) nor worth considered eligible for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places (NRHP) nor worthy of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL).
Site 41SE323 was recorded as a prehistoric occupation site of unknown age. The
site was identified during accessing the pipeline right-of-way. Three sandstone manos were
observed on the surface and left in-situ since they are located outside of the project rightof-way. Burned sandstone and 4 tertiary flakes were also observed, all outside of the project
area. The site is located at 1,297 feet (amsl) and adjacent to a tributary of Dry Branch that
flows eventually into Big Sandy Creek. Previous pipeline construction and right-of-way
clearing has destroyed that portion of the site that was previously located inside the project
area. Based on visual inspection and two-track dirt road cut bank, it appears that this site
may have approximately 30 centimeters of subsurface cultural deposits remaining in the
areas outside of the project area, southwest of the existing pipeline corridor. It appears to
be approximately 50x50 meters in size. If any future expansions of the existing pipeline
right of way to the south, should conduct subsurface testing to assess the significance of
these deposits located outside of the pipeline corridor. The current project will not impact
any remaining cultural deposits located adjacent to the project area. No cultural deposits,
no significant artifact assemblages, nor any features were located within the existing
pipeline right-of-way, therefore, this site will not be impacted by the proposed project. The
site appears to continue being impacted by erosion and two-track vehicle traffic.
Site 41SE324 was recorded as a historic trash scatter dating from the late 19th to
early 20th century and also containing a very minimal prehistoric component of unknown
age approximately 30 x 40 meters in size. The site is located on a narrowing toe slope
located at 1,237 feet (amsl) above an intermittent tributary to Dry Branch that eventually
flows into Big Sandy Creek. The historic component was defined based on the presence of
lavender glass, clear glass, and brown glass. Most likely, there is a historic habitation site
further to the north, upslope from the pipeline right-of-way. The site may very well extend
to the north and south outside of the pipeline corridor. The prehistoric components of
unknown age was defined based on the surficial presence of 1 secondary and 5 tertiary
chert flakes. This site has been heavily impacted by previous pipeline construction, erosion,
two track vehicular traffic, and right of way clearance and maintenance. Subsurface tests
did not reveal any subsurface cultural deposits, features, significant artifact assemblages,
and does not appear to be associated with any significant event of historical or prehistoric
significance, therefore, this portion of the site contained within the project area is not
considered eligible for inclusion on the NRHP nor worthy of SAL designation.
Site 41SE325 was recorded as a remnant ranching site related to a livestock water
trough. This site was identified adjacent to the pipeline right of way. It has been bulldozed
and piled up. It appears that other ranch features may have been present but have been
razed. The site is located northeast of the pipeline right-of-way, adjacent to Highway 180,
west of Breckenridge. The site is located at 1,202 feet (amsl) above an intermittent tributary
to Dry Branch that eventually flows into Big Sandy Creek. The water trough measured 182
x 182 centimeters and the concrete was 13 centimeters thick, and 51 centimeters in height.
iii

A possible filled in cistern was located nearby based on a circular depression. This site is
located on the Sayre Ranch and appears to be mid-20th century. Even though this site is
located outside of the existing pipeline right-of-way, AAG personnel were able to review
the entire site while accessing the pipeline corridor. There does not appear to be any intact
subsurface cultural deposits, nor any significant artifact assemblages, features, or
architecturally significant features, therefore, this site is not considered eligible for
inclusion on the NRHP nor worthy of designation as a SAL.
Site 41SE326 was recorded as a historic ranch complex based on the presence of a
pile of sandstone rocks and a brick fragment (with “CO” on it, probably Coleman) was
located next to the pipeline corridor fence. This rock concentration appears to be a house
mound of pier stones. A historic wood barn was located approximately 150 meters east of
the pipeline right of way and appears to be an extension of a ranching complex. The site
is located on a flat upland area located at 1,223 feet (amsl) above an intermittent tributary
to Dry Branch that eventually flows into Big Sandy Creek. The site appears to be minimally
150 x 60 meters in size, with only a few artifacts (round nail, clear glass) and stones located
inside the existing right-of-way and scattered (approximately 5 x 5 meters). The site
appears to date to the early-mid 20th century. Subsurface tests did not reveal any subsurface cultural deposits. No significant artifact assemblages were identified, no
architecturally significant features were located, and it appears that this site has been
destroyed and not considered eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) nor worth considered eligible for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places (NRHP) nor worthy of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL).
Site 41SE327 was recorded as a mid-late 19th century historic habitation site based
on sandstone chimney fall with several square cut nails present. This site is located outside
of the existing pipeline right of way. This site is located on a flat upland area located at
1,212 feet (amsl) above an intermittent tributary to Dry Branch that eventually flows into
Big Sandy Creek. Approximately 30 meters further northeast, a bulldozed pile of plank
boards where another historic homestead had been located. Within the debris pile was one
hand hewn log that had been cut, probably salvaged from the older house locality and
recycled. This second house site appears to date to early 20th century. Even though this
site was located adjacent to the project area, if any future expansions of the pipeline right
of way will impact this site, sub-surface testing should be implemented to assess any
cultural deposits and conduct historic archival research to determine which early settler
residence this site represents. The site appears to be minimally 50 x 50 meters in size, with
only a few artifacts (square cut nails and round nails, clear glass) and stones located
northeast of the project area approximately 20 meters.
Site 41SE328 was recorded as a possible historic house site located west of
Highway 183, southwest of Breckenridge, and predominantly located within the pipeline
right-of-way. The site has been totally bulldozed as a result of pipeline construction and
routine right-of-way maintenance. Artifacts observed were milk glass, ceramics, clear
glass, brown glass, lavender glass, amber glass, and a metal bucket. The site is located at
1,231 feet (amsl) and just northwest of an intermittent tributary to Gunsolus (Gonzales)
Creek. The site appears to be approximately 30 x 30 meters in size. The site appears to date
iv

to the late 19th-mid 20th century. Subsurface tests did not reveal any sub-surface cultural
deposits. No significant artifact assemblages were identified, no architecturally significant
features were located, and it appears that this site has been destroyed and not considered
eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) nor worth
considered eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) nor
worthy of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL).
Site 41SE329 was recorded as a possible historic house site based on the presence
of concrete steps, tin roofing, and clear glass, located west of Highway 183, south of
Breckenridge, and located outside of the pipeline right-of-way. The site has been
bulldozed. Artifacts observed were milk glass, ceramics, clear glass, brown glass, lavender
glass, amber glass, and a metal bucket. The site is located at 1,190 feet (amsl) and just
northwest of an intermittent tributary to Gunsolus (Gonzales) Creek. The site appears to be
approximately 30 x 40 meters in size. The site appears to date to the late 19th-mid 20th
century. No subsurface tests were conducted due to the site location outside of the pipeline
corridor. Any future impacts that will occur in the vicinity of this site should search for any
intact foundation areas and determine if there are any intact subsurface cultural deposits in
order to adequately assess this site.
American Archaeology Group LLC (AAG) recommends that construction within
the project area be allowed to proceed as planned. Monitoring during construction by a
professional archaeologist is not considered necessary. No artifacts were collected,
therefore, no artifacts were curated and project records were curated at AAG.

v

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
American Archaeology Group LLC is grateful to those whose cooperation made
the completion of this project possible. Ms. Luci English, P.E., Project Manager at
Enprotec/Hibbs & Todd Inc. in Abilene, Texas served as our primary contact and provided
the survey crew with all of the appropriate maps. She is also thanked for her avid interest
in protecting and preserving local cultural resources. Mr. Rodney Taylor, Assistant
Director of Water Utilities for the City of Abilene, is thanked for his support and assistance
during this project. Mr. Joe Herring from the West Central Texas Municipal Water District
are thanked for providing guidance and assistance with accessing various segments of their
pipeline right-of-way. Mr. Herbert G. Uecker served as the Principal Investigator for the
project, and Mr. Michael R. Bradle served as the Project Archaeologist, assisted by Mr.
Fred Mims, Mr. David C. Scott, Mr. David D. Bradle, Mr. Roger Wardlow, and Mr. Terry
Bennie. Ms. Tiffany Osburn of the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical
Commission served as our reviewer.

vi

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................................ ii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ............................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING .........................................................................................7
ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL BACKGROUND .......................................10
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ......................................................................................14
PROJECT METHODOLOGY...........................................................................................15
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS ...................................................................................16
RECOMMENDATIONS ...................................................................................................30
REFERENCES CITED ......................................................................................................31
APPENDIX I: RESEARCH DESIGN AND SCOPE OF WORK ....................................34
APPENDIX II: BACKHOE TRENCH LOG ....................................................................36
APPENDIX III: SHOVEL TEST LOG .............................................................................38
APPENDIX IV: ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE LOCATIONS ..........................................44

FIGURES
FIGURE 1: MAP SHOWING GENERAL LOCATION OF PROJECT AREA ................2
FIGURE 2a: MAP OF PROJECT AREA............................................................................3
FIGURE 2b: MAP OF PROJECT AREA ...........................................................................4
FIGURE 2c: MAP OF PROJECT AREA............................................................................5
FIGURE 2d: MAP OF PROJECT AREA ...........................................................................6
vii

FIGURE 3: MAP OF TEXAS SHOWING ECOLOGICAL AREAS .................................7
FIGURE 4: PETROGLYPHS IN STEPHENS COUNTY ................................................12
FIGURE 5: HARRELL ARROW POINTS FROM THE HARREL SITE IN YOUNG
COUNTY ...............................................................................................................13
FIGURE 6: VIEW OF THE WEST SIDE OF HUBBARD RESERVOIR. NOTE MAP
OF PROJECT AREA........................................................................................................17
FIGURE 7: VIEW OF BHT-1 PROFILE ..........................................................................17
FIGURE 8: VIEW OF BHT-13 WITH LIMESTONE AT THE BOTTOM OF THE
TRENCH............................................................................................................................18
FIGURE 9: VIEW OF BULLDOZED PILE OF RUBBLE FROM 41SE322. NOTE
POSSIBLE CONCRETE CISTERN TOP .........................................................................19
FIGURE 10: VIEW LOOKING WEST AT SITE 41SE323, LOCATED ADJACENT
TO THE PIPELINE RIGHT-OF-WAY.............................................................................20
FIGURE 11: VIEW OF THREE SANDSTONE MANO FRAGMENTS FOUND
0N-SITE AT 41SE323, ADJACENT TO THE EXISTING PIPELINE
RIGHT-OF-WAY ..............................................................................................................20
FIGURE 12: SOUTHEAST VIEW OF SITE 41SE324 WITHIN THE EXISTING
RIGHT-OF-WAY ..............................................................................................................21
FIGURE 13: VIEW OF THE GROUND SURFACE AT 41SE324 SHOWING
HISTORIC GLASS AND CERAMIC SCATTER ............................................................22
FIGURE 14: NORTHEASTERN VIEW OF WATER TROUGH AT SITE 41SE325 ....23
FIGURE 15: NORTHEASTERN VIEW AT BULLDOZED PILE AT SITE 41SE325...23
FIGURE 16: VIEW OF POSSIBLE FILLED-IN CISTERN, WELL OR CELLAR
AT 41SE325.......................................................................................................................24
FIGURE 17: VIEW OF PROBABLE HISTORIC MOUND AT 41SE326 ......................24
FIGURE 18: NORTHEASTERN VIEW OF HISTORIC BARN IN BACKGROUND
AT SITE 41SE326 .............................................................................................................25

viii

FIGURE 19: VIEW OF SANDSTONE CHIMNEY FALL AT SITE 41SE327,
OUTSIDE OF THE PIPELINE RIGHT-OF-WAY...........................................................26
FIGURE 20: NORTHEASTERN VIEW OF SECOND HISTORIC HOUSE
MOUND AT SITE 41SE327 AND BULLDOZED PILE OF WOOD PLANKS .............27
FIGURE 21: VIEW OF BULLDOZED PILE OF HISTORIC DEBRIS AND
ARTIFACTS AT SITE 41SE328 ......................................................................................28
FIGURE 22: VIEW OF BULLDOZED HISTORIC SITE 41SE329 LOCATED
OUTSIDE OF THE PIPELINE RIGHT-OF-WAY...........................................................29

ix

INTRODUCTION
American Archaeology Group LLC (AAG) is assisting the City of Abilene with the
permitting process required to proceed with construction of a new pipeline to distribute
roughed water from the Possum Kingdom (PK) Raw Water Roughing Facility (RWRF) to the
existing pump station at Hubbard Creek Reservoir. Due to ongoing drought conditions an
additional source of raw water for the City of Abilene is needed. The planned project will
consist of improvements to implement Possum Kingdom Lake as a raw water supply under
the City of Abilene’s Second Stage Short-term Drought Strategy. This portion of the project
is called the West Central Texas Municipal Water District (WCTMWD) Pipeline due to its
location parallel to an existing WCTMWD line. The designation is for location purposes and
does not indicate ownership. In December 2014, AAG conducted an archaeological survey
and testing in the project area, which covers approximately 7.38 miles of proposed pipeline
construction (Figure 2). This report describes the implementation and results of the
investigation. Funding for the project was provided by the City of Abilene.
The investigation was designed to detect prehistoric and/or historic cultural
resources that could potentially be impacted by the proposed WCTMWD Pipeline
Construction adjacent to an existing line but inside the same pipeline right-of-way. The
proposed depth of impacts are 10 feet below the ground surface, and the existing right-ofway is 50 feet. AAG focused its efforts on the existing right-of-way but also conducted a
pedestrian survey of an additional 30 feet of ground surface on the west/south of the rightof-way in an effort to identify any noticeable cultural resources that might be affected by
light vehicular traffic during access for the project, although construction and traffic are
limited to the right-of-way.
Fieldwork was authorized by the Texas Historical Commission (Texas Antiquities
Permit No. 7096) and comprised systematic surface survey at 5 meter intervals and
subsurface testing was completed through backhoe trenching and shovel testing. At the
time fieldwork was undertaken, approximately 70% of the project area had been subjected
to various impacts in the past including pipeline construction, right-of-way maintenance,
livestock grazing, reservoir construction and impoundment and erosion. There were several
major utility lines and other gas and water lines that traversed through the project area.
These impacts are extensive as noted by the presence of backfill rock and trash in the
western portion of the project area. Some areas were not tested due to extensive subsurface
impacts, or shallow soils disturbed, and on top of bedrock and caliche present.
The project area is depicted on the 7.5’ U.S.G.S. topographic quadrangles
Breckenridge and Edwards Branch (Figure 2). The U.T.M. coordinates for the approximate
center of the tract are Zone 14 Northing 3623102 and Easting 506063. Appendix I contains
the Research Design and Scope of Work. The nearest water sources are Gunsolus
(Gonzales) Creek immediately east of the project area and Hubbard Creek Reservoir on the
west side. The topographic position of the project area is 1182 feet in elevation above mean
sea level (amsl).

1

Previous archaeological surveys in Stephens County have identified significant
prehistoric and historic sites. Enprotec/Hibbs & Todd Inc. contracted with American
Archaeology Group LLC (A.A.G.) to perform an archaeological survey under the auspices
of the Texas Antiquities Code pursuant to Antiquities Permit Number 7096, and Section
106 of the National Historic Preservation Act.

Figure 1: Map showing general location of project area.

2

Figure 2a: Map of project area (adapted from USGS 1958).

3

Figure 2b: Map of project area (adapted from USGS 1958).

4

Figure 2c: Map of project area (adapted from USGS 1958).

5

Figure 2d: Map of project area (adapted from USGS 1958).

6

ENVIROMENTAL SETTING
Natural Setting
This section was previously prepared by AAG (Griggs et al. 2007:4). The project
area is located in the Cross Timbers and Prairies ecological region of Texas (Gould 1975).
This region covers 67,340 square kilometers (26,000 square miles) in the north central
portion of the state (Figure 3). Potential vegetation is alternating bands of wooded habitat
scattered throughout prairie dominated by one-three foot tall grasses (TPWD 2007a).
Historic anthropogenic disturbances have significantly altered native plant communities.
Common trees present today, particularly in the vicinity of Stephens County, include
pecan, mesquite, hackberry and elm. Grasses include broom weed, wild rye and milkweed.
The topography is broken with hilly plateaus. Average annual rainfall levels in the Cross
Timbers region grade higher from east to west. In Stephens County the average annual
rainfall is 67.1 centimeters (26.4 inches). Average temperatures range from a low of 31° F
in January to a high of 98° F in July (Leffler 2007).

Figure 3: Map of Texas showing ecological areas (adapted from TPWD 2007b).

7

Soils
A total of 10 different soil types were identified along this project right-of-way.
Bluegrove loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (BgB) soil is a clay loam/clay that was formed in
uplands. The parent material from which this soils formed from is sandstone deposits. The
typical profile for this soils is reddish brown loam 0 to 5 inches; reddish brown clay
loam/clay 5 to 27 inches; reddish brown and yellowish brown sandstone bedrock (Cyprian
1994:17).
Bonti-Exray complex, gently undulating (BrC) soil is a sandy and stony loam that was
formed on ridgetops in uplands. The parent material from which this soils formed from is
sandstone deposits. The typical profile for this soils is brown stony sandy loam 0 to 4
inches; light yellowish brown stony fine sandy loam 4 to 8 inches; red clay 8 to 18 inches;
reddish/brown clay 18 to 24 inches; yellow and brownish yellow cemented sandstone
(Cyprian 1994: 18).
Gageby clay loam, occasionally flooded (Ga) soil is a clay loam that was formed in
floodplains along streams. The parent material from which this soils formed from is alluvial
deposits. The typical profile for this soils is dark brown clay loam 0 to 22 inches; yellowish
brown clay loam 22 to 42 inches; calcareous light brown sandy clay loam 42 to 52 inches;
yellowish brown clay loam 52 to 60 inches (Cyprian 1994:24-25).
Leeray clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (LeA) soil is a clay that was formed in uplands. The
parent material from which this soils formed from is shale deposits. The typical profile for
this soils is dark grayish brown clay 0 to 52 inches; grayish brown clay with calcium
carbonates concretions 52 to 62 inches; brownish yellow clay 62 to 68 inches; limestone
bedrock (Cyprian 1994:26-27).
Lindy silt loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes (LnB) soil is a loamy clay that was formed in gently
sloping areas on ridgetops. The parent material from which this soils formed from is
limestone deposits. The typical profile for this soils is brown or reddish brown silt loam 0
to 5 inches; reddish brown clay 5 to 25 inches; limestone bedrock (Cyprian 1994: 27-28).
Lincoln sandy loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes, occasionally flooded (LnA) soil is a sandy
loam that was formed in river valleys and formed on levees. The parent material from
which this soils formed from is sandy alluvium. The typical profile for this soils is 0-6
inches sandy loam (Cyprian 2009:57-58).
Owens-Harpersville complex, hilly (OxE) soil is clayey and calcareous sandstone and
limestone deposits that was formed on sloping to steep hillsides. The parent material from
which this soils formed from is from clay, sandstone and limestone. The typical profile for
this soils is grayish brown clay 0 to 5 inches; light brownish gray clay 5 to 16 inches; pale
olive clay 16 to 23 inches; light gray clay grading into shale 23 to 60 inches (Cyprian
1994:30).

8

Palopinto very flaggy loam, undulating (PaD) soil is a clay loam that was formed in
uplands. The parent material from which this soils formed from is limestone deposits. The
typical profile for this soils is dark brown very flaggy loam/clay loam 0 to 11 inches; hard
platy limestone bedrock (Cyprian 1994:30-31).
Thurber clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (TrB) soil is a clay loam that was formed in
uplands. The parent material from which this soils formed from is interbedded sandstone
and shale. The typical profile for this soils is a surface layer consisting of grayish brown
clay loam from 0 to 4 inches thick; dark grayish brown clay 4 to 18 inches; dark brown
clay 18 to 38 inches; brown clay 38 to 62 inches (Cyprian 1994:34-35).
Truce fine sandy loam, 1to 3 percent slopes (TuB) soil is a sandy loam that was formed
in uplands. The parent material from which this soils formed from is weathered clayey
shale. The typical profile for this soils is the surface layer consists of yellowish brown fine
sandy loam 0 to 10 inches; reddish brown clay 10 to 22 inches; strong brown clay 22 to 38
inches; reddish brown clay 38 to 44 inches; underlying material 44 to 60 inches reddish
brown, weathered, clayey shale (Cyprian 1994:35).
Truce fine sandy loam, 1 to 5 percent slopes eroded (TuC2) soil is a sandy loam that
was formed in uplands. The parent material from which this soils formed from is weathered
caleyey shale. The typical profile for this soils is a surface layer of fine sandy loam 0 to 4
inches; reddish brown clay 4 to 20 inches; strong brown clay 20 to 34 inches; strong brown
clay 34 to 42 inches; reddish brown, weathered clayey shale 42 to 60 inches (Cyprian
1994:35-36).

9

ARCHAEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Cultural Sequence
This section was previously prepared by AAG (Griggs et al. 2007:8-11). The land
that is now Texas has been occupied by human populations for more than 11,000 years. A
chronological framework developed by archaeologists for the interpretation of Texas
history comprises five general temporal periods whose boundaries correspond to
significant cultural and social developments (Nunley 1989:37-46). These periods and their
approximate dates are as follows: 1) Paleoindian (11,500- 8500 before present [hereafter
B.P.]); 2) Archaic (8500-1200 B.P.); 3) Late Prehistoric (A.D. 800-1450); 4) Protohistoric
(A.D. 1450-1650); and 5) Historic (A.D. 1650-1940s).
The Paleoindian period begins during the last Glacial and continues into the early
Holocene. The earliest confirmed Paleoindian populations in Texas were small, highly
mobile bands of hunters armed with distinctive fluted “Clovis” projectile points who
pursued large, late Pleistocene mammals, most notably mammoths (Surovell 2000; Turner
and Hester 1985; Waguespack and Surovell 2003). Later Paleoindian populations
developed new forms of projectile points and refined their hunting strategies in response
to environmental factors such as the extinction of the mammoth and other megamammals;
yet despite these adaptations, they maintained life ways more like those of their
predecessors than those of later Archaic populations.
The complete demise of the Pleistocene big-game animals and climate change
accompanying the onset of the Holocene are linked to shifts in stone tool technology,
subsistence pursuits and settlement patterns that define the Archaic period. The
Paleoindian-Archaic transition, like those between succeeding periods, occurred gradually.
As the Pleistocene megamammals began to vanish, indigenous populations focused on
smaller game and increased their reliance on local plant foods. With changes in subsistence
came new and more diverse stone toolkits and an increase in tools made of wood and other
organic materials. Additionally, settlements became more stable, and there is evidence for
progressively sophisticated cultural practices, such as systematic burial of the dead
(Bousman et al. 2002). Although the Archaic hunting and gathering lifeway remained
relatively stable for thousands of years, archaeologists are able to define four sub periods
(or eras) – Early, Middle, Late and Transitional – based on a dated sequence of diagnostic
projectile points (Turner and Hester 1985:47-49).
The Late Prehistoric period is marked in some areas of Texas, including the north
central region, by the introduction of domesticated plant foods such as corn and beans.
Technological innovations such as pottery and the bow and arrow were widely adopted
(Nunley 1989:44; Turner and Hester 1985:82).
The Protohistoric period is associated with an incipient European presence in the
region. Protohistoric indigenous populations were the first described in early ethnohistoric
accounts. Often, these accounts reflected only indirect contact. Items of European

10

manufacture are occasionally found in Protohistoric sites, though in most cases these items
were not acquired directly but through so called down-the-line trading (Nunley 1989:45).
The Historic period is characterized by a firm historical record and increasing direct
contact between indigenous and European explorers and settlers. Horses introduced by the
Spanish and European material culture led to profound changes in indigenous cultures.
Eventually, Old World diseases, resettlement and warfare claimed up to 95% of Texas
Indians (Klos 2007). The latter part of the Historic period encompasses the AngloEuropean settlement of Texas.
Local Archaeological and Historical Context
In Stephens County 320 archaeological sites are registered with Texas Historical
Commission. The vast majority of these are located in the north central and northeastern
part of the county along the Clear Fork of the Brazos River and on Hubbard Creek
downstream from the Hubbard Creek Reservoir (RCRI 2014). The distribution of these
sites reflects both a predilection on the part of prehistoric populations for riparian
settlements, which provided access to fresh water and game animals, and a recent surge in
archaeological surveys along river ways targeted for reservoir projects.
Sites dating to all periods of the cultural chronology outlined in the section above,
with the exception of the Protohistoric, are represented in site records for Stephens County
(RCRI 2014). It is possible that some of the registered Late Prehistoric sites were occupied
in the Protohistoric period, but this is difficult to demonstrate since most material remains
from the Protohistoric are indistinguishable from those of the Late Prehistoric. Paleoindian
sites are truly rare in the county; only one has been registered (site 41SE78). Most
prehistoric sites have been assigned to the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods on the basis
of temporally diagnostic artifacts, primarily arrow points. Two sites from these periods
(41SE2 and 41SE3) contain rock art, which is uncommon in north central Texas (Figure 4;
Jackson 1938: 292-295). Around 15% of sites in the county contain historic components
that range from simple surface scatters of historic debris, such as glass and metal, to oilfield
camps and buildings. The County Courthouse, located in Breckenridge, has been
designated as a State Archaeological Landmark (RCRI 2014).

11

Figure 4: Petroglyphs in Stephens County; a-b. 41SE2, c. 41SE3 (adapted from Jackson
1938:plates CCXIV, CCXV).
The best documented period of prehistory in north central Texas is the Late
Prehistoric. During this period a large block of north central Texas, including much of
Stephens County, was occupied by interrelated populations whose shared cultural traits,
(e.g., artifact types and adaptive strategies) are referred to by archaeologists as the
Henrietta Focus. The Harrell site, located only a few miles north of Stephens County at
the confluence of the Brazos River and Clear Fork, is the “type site,” or ideal example, of
the Henrietta Focus (Krieger 1946:137). Current estimates place the chronological range
of the focus between A.D. 1200-1600 (Lynott 2007). Inhabitants of the Harrell site and
other Henrietta Focus sites were maize agriculturalists and hunters. Bison was the
preferred game, but deer, antelope and other small mammals, as well as turtles, turkey,
ducks and fish also contributed to the subsistence base. The material culture of the
Henrietta Focus is uniquely represented by a shell tempered pottery, Nocona Plain. Other
artifacts associated with the focus, though not exclusive to it, are small, triangular Harrell
and Washita arrow points (Figure 5), diamond-shaped and leaf-shaped bifaces, manos,
metates, bison scapula hoes, deer ulna flakers and disc beads made of perforated mussel or
Olivella shell (Krieger 1946:137-141; Lynott 2007). These artifacts, as well as a farming
and hunting subsistence base, link the Henrietta Focus to a broader cultural tradition, the
Plains Villager Horizon, which extends across the river valleys of the Southern Plains.
Trade relations with groups to the west are indicated at Henrietta Focus sites by the

12

occurrence of stone tools made of agatized dolomite from the Alibates Flint Quarry in the
Texas Panhandle and Puebloan pottery from the New Mexico area (Krieger 1946:111-112,
119).

Figure 5: Harrell arrow points from the Harrell site in Young County; size ½ (after
Krieger 1946:fig. 7, e-h).
During the late seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, north central Texas witnessed
the arrival of the Comanche, Kiowa and Tonkawa Indians. These groups are believed to
have migrated from the Great Basin and High Plains regions after acquiring Spanish horses.
All three were nomadic and depended on the buffalo for their subsistence (Mayhall 2007;
Lipscomb 2007; Carlisle 2007).
In the late 1850s, Anglo settlers began moving into north central Texas, and in 1858
the Texas legislature established what is now known as Stephens County (the original name
of Buchanan County was changed to Stephens in 1861 in honor of the vice president of the
Confederate States of America). Though early settlers were constantly harassed by raiding
parties of Comanche and Kiowa Indians until the early 1870s, the population of the county
grew steadily, reaching 4,725 by 1880 (Leffler 2007).
The first waves of Anglo settlers in Stephens County were primarily cattle ranchers.
By the late nineteenth century, however, cotton and corn farming provided a significant
contribution to the local economy. Cotton production fell precipitously following a boll
weevil infestation in the first decade of the twentieth century, but that bad fortune was
eventually eclipsed by an oil boom that began in 1916 with a strike at a well near Caddo.
Additional fields were soon discovered, and by 1922 Stephens County accounted for 15
percent of all the oil produced in the United States. The boom lured thousands of new
residents to the county, as well as eighty-nine oil companies and two railroads. Although
production slowed by the mid-1920s, oil remains a significant industry in the county. Other
key industries in Stephens County today are recreation, livestock agriculture and
manufacturing. Manufactured products include mobile homes, furniture, aircraft parts,
petrochemical and oilfield equipment (Leffler 2007; Hunt 2007).
The eastern end of the current project area is located adjacent to Gunsolus
(Gonzales) Creek, named in honor of Dr. Peter Gunsolus (1801-1886) who came to the
Breckenridge area in the 1850s (Open Plaque 2014). Dr. Gunsolus lived and practiced
medicine in Shackleford, Parker and Stephens Counties, Texas, eventually settling on Duck
Creek, which was later renamed in his honor as Gunsolus Creek, yet the United States
Geological Survey has erroneously labelled the creek as “Gonzales Creek” (Open Paque
2014).

13

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Shelton (2009) conducted an archaeological survey for the Stephens Regional
Special Utility District (RSUD) Waterline Improvements immediately north and south of
the current project area next to Gunsolus (Gonzales) Creek. One prehistoric lithic
procurement site was recorded (41SE307). The site was determined to be ineligible for
inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places.
Griggs et al. (2007) surveyed approximately 2.98 acres for proposed improvements
at the Anniversary Park, located on the west side of Lake Hubbard Creek in Stephens
County, Texas in March 2007. The planned project consisted of improvements at a boat
ramp location within Anniversary Park, south of Highway 180. Approximately 90% of the
project area has been subjected to various impacts in the past including cutting and filling,
parking lot construction, and boat ramp construction. No archaeological sites were
encountered

14

PROJECT METHODOLOGY
The project was divided into three phases – archival research, field survey, and
report preparation. The archival research consisted of a check for records of registered
sites in the online “Texas Archeological Sites Atlas,” which is maintained by the Texas
Historical Commission, as well as a review of other literature for publications concerning
previous work in the county.
The field investigation was conducted in December 2014. The field
investigation involved a pedestrian surface survey supported with backhoe trenching and
shovel testing (Figure 2; Appendix I-II). The survey was conducted systematically across
the entire 7.38 miles of pipeline right-of-way, with members of the survey team inspecting
the ground surface along linear transects spaced at 5 meter intervals. The proposed depth
of impacts are 10 feet below the ground surface, and the existing right-of-way is 50 feet.
AAG focused its efforts on the existing right-of-way but also conducted a pedestrian survey
of an additional 30 feet of ground surface on the west/south of the right-of-way in an effort
to identify any noticeable cultural resources that might be affected by light vehicular traffic
during access for the project, although construction and traffic are limited to the right-ofway.
Approximately 70% of the ground surface of the project area had been disturbed
by prior earth moving activities. Other surface disturbances included pipeline construction,
right-of-way maintenance, livestock grazing, reservoir construction and impoundment and
erosion. Visibility of the ground surface was obscured by patches of short grasses, but
overall, visibility was more than 60% due to erosion. There were 17 backhoe trenches
(BHTs) excavated to test for subsurface deposits of cultural remains and they ranged from
the shallowest at 14 centimeters to the deepest at 2.1 meters in depth with the average test
depth of 94.85 centimeters. Additionally, 98 shovel tests were placed along the project
alignment to provide additional near surface testing. They ranged from the shallowest at
10 centimeters to the deepest at 60 centimeters and the average depth was 34.44
centimeters. Samples of soil from each BHT were screened through ¼” hardware cloth.

15

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Archival Research
A review of the archaeological literature for Stephens County revealed no
previously recorded sites within the project area. There were three sites worth referencing
which include 41SE5, 41SE301 and 41SE32. The first is an exposed bedrock mortar
(prehistoric) with five “eye-shaped” mortar holes. This site is located on a peninsula
extending into Hubbard Creek Reservoir northeast of the project area. Site 41SE301 lies
to the west of the project area, just north of Hwy 180. It is the ruin of an historic homestead.
Several sherds of glass and historic earthenware were recovered during a surface collection
at the site, and a cistern was documented. Site 41SE32, located west of 41SE301, is
described as a prehistoric campsite with a Late Prehistoric component. Several chipped
stone tools and a Scallorn arrow point were recovered during a surface survey. No
additional field research was recommended at any of the three sites by the archaeologists
who documented them.
Field Survey
The field investigation conducted for this project covered approximately 7.38 miles
of proposed WCTMWD Pipeline right-of-way parallel and adjacent to existing WCTMWD
pipeline in Breckenridge, Stephens County. The proposed pipeline begins just south of the
existing Wastewater Treatment Plan on the south side of Breckenridge then extends west
across Hubbard Creek Reservoir (which currently is extremely low) to the west side where
a pump station will be built. Figure 6 provides a good view of the current status of the
reservoir. Surface inspections were conducted along the exposed sections within the
reservoir limits and it contained deep silt deposits, rock, and marshy areas.
Roughly 70% of the project area had been heavily disturbed by prior earth moving
activities. The survey included a systematic inspection of the ground surface of the project
area supported by backhoe trenching and shovel testing to test for subsurface deposits.
Typical soils profiles encountered along this route are BHT-1 (Figure 7) and BHT-13
(Figure 8). Most of the soils have been severely impacted and are fairly shallow on top of
bedrock or eroded. Those areas that had any appreciable depth were subjected to backhoe
trenching to provide a more comprehensive subsurface testing in those areas to attempt to
locate any potentially buried cultural resources in those areas. Eight archaeological sites
were identified during the course of this survey, both in and adjacent to the existing
WCTMWD pipeline right-of-way. None of the archaeological sites contained any
subsurface cultural deposits, no significant features, artifact assemblages, or architecturally
significant remains, and none of the sites are known to be related to any significant person
or event in history or prehistory.

16

Figure 6. View from the west side of Hubbard Reservoir. Note the existing pipeline rightof-way across the reservoir on the east side.

Figure 7. View of BHT-1 profile.
17

Figure 8. View of BHT-13 with limestone at the bottom of the trench.
Eight archaeological sites were recorded along the proposed project alignment. The
first was site 41SE322 was recorded as a possible historic house site located just south of
Highway 180, west of Breckenridge, and predominantly north of the pipeline right-of-way.
The site has been totally bulldozed. A possible cistern may be present with an 18 inch neck
having been clipped off by a bulldozer. Artifacts observed were concrete, brick fragments,
round nails, clear glass, shaped sandstone (possible pier stones), and white ware ceramics
(Figure 9). The site is located at 1,220 feet (amsl) and just east of Dry Branch, an
intermittent tributary to Big Sandy Creek.
The site appears to be approximately 30x30 meter in size, with only a few artifacts
and stones located inside the existing right-of-way. The site appears to date to the earlymid 20th century. Subsurface tests did not reveal any sub-surface cultural deposits. No
significant artifact assemblages were identified, no architecturally significant features were
located, and it appears that this site has been destroyed and not considered eligible for
inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) nor worth considered eligible
for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) nor worthy of designation
as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL).

18

Figure 9. View of the bulldozed pile of rubble from 41SE322. Note possible concrete
cistern top.
Site 41SE323 was recorded as a prehistoric occupation site of unknown age. The
site was identified during accessing the pipeline right-of-way (Figure 10). Three sandstone
manos (Figure 11) were observed on the surface and left in-situ since they are located
outside of the project right-of-way. Burned sandstone and 4 tertiary flakes were also
observed, all outside of the project area. The site is located at 1,297 feet (amsl) and adjacent
to a tributary of Dry Branch that flows eventually into Big Sandy Creek. Previous pipeline
construction and right-of-way clearing has destroyed that portion of the site that was
previously located inside the project area.
Based on visual inspection and two-track dirt road cut bank, it appears that this site
may have approximately 30 centimeters of subsurface cultural deposits remaining in the
areas outside of the project area, southwest of the existing pipeline corridor. It appears to
be approximately 50x50 meters in size. If any future expansions of the existing pipeline
right of way to the south, should conduct subsurface testing to assess the significance of
these deposits located outside of the pipeline corridor. The current project will not impact
any remaining cultural deposits located adjacent to the project area. No cultural deposits,
no significant artifact assemblages, nor any features were located within the existing
pipeline right-of-way, therefore, this site will not be impacted by the proposed project. The
site appears to continue being impacted by erosion and two-track vehicle traffic.
19

Figure 10. View looking west at site 41SE323, located adjacent to the pipeline right-ofway.

Figure 11. View of three sandstone mano fragments found on-site at 41SE323, adjacent to
the existing pipeline right-of-way.
20

Site 41SE324 was recorded as a historic trash scatter dating from the late 19th to
early 20th century and also containing a very minimal prehistoric component of unknown
age approximately 30 x 40 meters in size (Figure 12). The site is located on a narrowing
toe slope located at 1,237 feet (amsl) above an intermittent tributary to Dry Branch that
eventually flows into Big Sandy Creek. The historic component was defined based on the
presence of lavender glass, clear glass, and brown glass (Figure 13). Most likely, there is a
historic habitation site further to the north, upslope from the pipeline right-of-way. The site
may very well extend to the north and south outside of the pipeline corridor.
The prehistoric components of unknown age was defined based on the surficial
presence of 1 secondary and 5 tertiary chert flakes. This site has been heavily impacted by
previous pipeline construction, erosion, two track vehicular traffic, and right of way
clearance and maintenance. Subsurface tests did not reveal any subsurface cultural
deposits, features, significant artifact assemblages, and does not appear to be associated
with any significant event of historical or prehistoric significance, therefore, this portion of
the site contained within the project area is not considered eligible for inclusion on the
NRHP nor worthy of SAL designation.

Figure 12. Southeast view of site 41SE324 within the existing pipeline right-of-way.

21

Figure 13. View of ground surface at 41SE324 showing historic glass and ceramic scatter.
Site 41SE325 was recorded as a remnant ranching site related to a livestock water
trough (Figure 14). This site was identified adjacent to the pipeline right of way. It has been
bulldozed and piled up (Figure 15). It appears that other ranch features may have been
present but have been razed. The site is located northeast of the pipeline right-of-way,
adjacent to Highway 180, west of Breckenridge. The site is located at 1,202 feet (amsl)
above an intermittent tributary to Dry Branch that eventually flows into Big Sandy Creek.
The water trough (Figure 14) measured 182 x 182 centimeters and the concrete was
13 centimeters thick, and 51 centimeters in height. A possible filled in cistern was located
nearby based on a circular depression (Figure 16). This site is located on the Sayre Ranch
and appears to be mid-20th century. Even though this site is located outside of the existing
pipeline right-of-way, AAG personnel were able to review the entire site while accessing
the pipeline corridor. There does not appear to be any intact subsurface cultural deposits,
nor any significant artifact assemblages, features, or architecturally significant features,
therefore, this site is not considered eligible for inclusion on the NRHP nor worthy of
designation as a SAL.

22

Figure 14. Northeastern view of water trough at site 41SE325.

Figure 15. Northeastern view of bulldozed pile at site 41SE325.

23

Figure 16. View of possible filled-in cistern, well, or cellar, outside of the pipeline rightof-way AT 41SE325.
Site 41SE326 was recorded as a historic ranch complex based on the presence of a
pile of sandstone rocks and a brick fragment (with “CO” on it, probably Coleman) was
located next to the pipeline corridor fence (Figure 17). This rock concentration appears to
be a house mound of pier stones. A historic wood barn (Figure 17) was located
approximately 150 meters east of the pipeline right of way and appears to be an extension
of a ranching complex. The site is located on a flat upland area located at 1,223 feet (amsl)
above an intermittent tributary to Dry Branch that eventually flows into Big Sandy Creek.
The site appears to be minimally 150 x 60 meters in size, with only a few artifacts
(round nail, clear glass) and stones located inside the existing right-of-way and scattered
(approximately 5 x 5 meters). The site appears to date to the early-mid 20th century.
Subsurface tests did not reveal any sub-surface cultural deposits. No significant artifact
assemblages were identified, no architecturally significant features were located, and it
appears that this site has been destroyed and not considered eligible for inclusion on the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) nor worth considered eligible for inclusion
on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) nor worthy of designation as a State
Antiquities Landmark (SAL).

24

Figure 17. View of probable historic house mound at 41SE326.

Figure 18. Northeastern view of historic barn in background at site 41SE326
25

Site 41SE327 was recorded as a mid-late 19th century historic habitation site based
on sandstone chimney fall with several square cut nails present (Figure 19). This site is
located outside of the existing pipeline right of way. This site is located on a flat upland
area located at 1,212 feet (amsl) above an intermittent tributary to Dry Branch that
eventually flows into Big Sandy Creek. Approximately 30 meters further northeast, a
bulldozed pile of plank boards (Figure 20) where another historic homestead had been
located. Within the debris pile was one hand hewn log that had been cut, probably salvaged
from the older house locality (Figure 19) and recycled. This second house site appears to
date to early 20th century. Even though this site was located adjacent to the project area, if
any future expansions of the pipeline right of way will impact this site, sub-surface testing
should be implemented to assess any cultural deposits and conduct historic archival
research to determine which early settler residence this site represents. The site appears to
be minimally 50 x 50 meters in size, with only a few artifacts (square cut nails and round
nails, clear glass) and stones located northeast of the project area approximately 20 meters.

Figure 19. View of sandstone chimney fall at site 41SE327, outside of the pipeline rightof-way.

26

Figure 20. Northeastern view of second historic house mound at site 41SE327 and
bulldozed pile of wood planks.
Site 41SE328 was recorded as a possible historic house site located west of
Highway 183, southwest of Breckenridge, and predominantly located within the pipeline
right-of-way. The site has been totally bulldozed as a result of pipeline construction and
routine right-of-way maintenance. Artifacts observed were milk glass, ceramics, clear
glass, brown glass, lavender glass, amber glass, and a metal bucket (Figure 21). The site is
located at 1,231 feet (amsl) and just northwest of an intermittent tributary to Gunsolus
(Gonzales) Creek.
The site appears to be approximately 30 x 30 meters in size. The site appears to
date to the late 19th-mid 20th century. Subsurface tests did not reveal any sub-surface
cultural deposits. No significant artifact assemblages were identified, no architecturally
significant features were located, and it appears that this site has been destroyed and not
considered eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) nor
worth considered eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
nor worthy of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL).

27

Figure 21. View of bulldozed pile of historic debris and artifacts at site 41SE328.
Site 41SE329 was recorded as a possible historic house site based on the presence
of concrete steps, tin roofing, and clear glass, located west of Highway 183, south of
Breckenridge, and located outside of the pipeline right-of-way. The site has been
bulldozed. Artifacts observed were milk glass, ceramics, clear glass, brown glass, lavender
glass, amber glass, and a metal bucket (Figure 22). The site is located at 1,190 feet (amsl)
and just northwest of an intermittent tributary to Gunsolus (Gonzales) Creek.
The site appears to be approximately 30 x 40 meters in size. The site appears to
date to the late 19th-mid 20th century. No subsurface tests were conducted due to the site
location outside of the pipeline corridor. Any future impacts that will occur in the vicinity
of this site should search for any intact foundation areas and determine if there are any
intact subsurface cultural deposits in order to adequately assess this site.

28

Figure 22. View of bulldozed historic site 41SE329 located outside of the pipeline rightof-way.

29

RECOMMENDATIONS
American Archaeology Group LLC recommends that construction within the
project area be allowed to proceed as planned. No artifacts were collected, therefore, no
curation was necessary. Monitoring during construction by a professional archaeologist is
not considered necessary. However, should any cultural materials be exposed in any area
not discussed in this report, all work in the immediate area must cease until the situation
can be evaluated by American Archaeology Group LLC in consultation with the
Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission and Enprotec/Hibbs & Todd, Inc.

30

REFERENCES CITED
Barnes, Virgil E.
1970 Geologic Atlas of Texas: Abilene Sheet; in 15-minute Digital Gat Quads,
NE; Texas Commission on Environmental Quality; Austin, Texas.
Bousman, Britt C., Michael B. Collins, Paul Goldberg, Thomas Stafford, Jan Guy, Barry
W. Baker, D. Gentry Steele, Marvin Kay, Anne Kerr, Glen Fredlund, Phil Dering, Vance
Holliday, Diane Wilson, Wulf Gose, Susan Dial, Paul Takac, Robin Balinsky, Marilyn
Masson and Joseph Powell
2002 The Palaeoindian-Archaic transition in North America: New evidence
from Texas. Antiquity 76:980-990.
Carlisle, Jeffrey
2007 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Tonkawa Indians”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/TT/bmt68.html
(accessed March 16, 2007).
Cyprian, Thomas E.
1994 Soil Survey of Stephens County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station; 142 pgs, 48 maps.
Gould, F. W.
1975 Texas Plants-A Checklist and Ecological Summary. Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station, Publication 585; College Station.
Griggs, John C., Gilbert T. Bernhardt, and Michael R. Bradle
2007 Archaeological Survey for the Anniversary Park Project, Stephens County,
Texas. American Archaeology Group LLC. Report of Investigations
Number 134. Lampasas, Texas.
Hunt, William R.
2007 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Breckenridge, Texas”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/BB/hfb5.html
(accessed March 16, 2007).
Klos, George
2007 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Indians”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/II/bzi4.html
(accessed March 21, 2007).
Krieger, Alex
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas; with Extension of
Puebloan Datings to the Mississippi Valley. University of Texas
Publication No. 4640, Austin.

31

Leffler, John
2007 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Stephens County”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/SS/hcs14.html
(accessed March 16, 2007).
Lipscomb, Carol
2007 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Comanche Indians”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/CC/bmc72.html
(accessed February 7, 2007).
Lynott, Mark J.
2007 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “M.D. Harrell Site”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/MM/bbm9.html
(accessed March 18, 2007).
Mayhall, Mildred
2007 Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Kiowa Indians”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/KK/bmk10.html
(accessed March 16, 2007).
Nunley, Parker
1989 A Field Guide to Archeological Sites of Texas. Texas Monthly Press,
Austin.
Open Plaques
2014 Breckenridge, Texas.
http://openplaques.org/places/us/areas/breckenridge_tx (accessed
December 17, 2014).
RCRI
2014

Texas Historical Commission Restricted Cultural Resource Information
and Texas Archaeological Sites Atlas. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/
(accessed December 12, 2014).

Shelton, Rebecca
2009 Archaeological Survey of the Stephens RSUD Waterline Improvements,
Stephens County, Texas. AR Consultants, Inc. Cultural Resources Report
2009-50. Dallas, Texas.
Surovell, Todd
2000 Early Paleoindian women, children, mobility and fertility. American
Antiquity 65(3):493-508.

32

Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD)
2007a Plant Guidance by Ecoregions: Ecoregion 5 – The Cross Timbers and
Prairies. http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/huntwild/wild/wildscapes/guidance/
plants/ecoregions/ecoregion_5.phtml
2007b GIS Lab Data Downloads, gould24k.shp.
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/landwater/land/maps/gis/data_downloads/
Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
Houston.
United States Geological Survey (USGS)
1958 Edwards Branch 7.5 minute Quadrangle (Revised 1981); in Abilene /
Sweetwater CD Rom; MAPTECH; Amesbury, Ma.
Waguespack, Nicole and Todd Surovell
2003 Clovis hunting strategies, or how to make out on plentiful resources.
American Antiquity, 68(2):338-352.

33

APPENDIX I: RESEARCH DESIGN AND SCOPE OF WORK
Records Check
Prior to entering the field, American Archaeology Group LLC (A.A.G.) will contact
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas, the state
repository for site records on Texas, to determine if previously recorded sites are present
in the project area. This task may be conducted by a personal visit to TARL or by telephone.
The library at A.A.G. is very extensive, especially regarding reports for the project
area region, and much of the archival work can be accomplished in-house. Since A.A.G.
has conducted work in the area, much of the background work has already been
accomplished.
Permit Application
No fieldwork will commence until a permit from the Archeology Division (AD) of
the Texas Historical Commission has been issued. An application for an antiquities permit
will be submitted to AD-THC as soon as A.A.G. receives Notice To Proceed. Normally,
A.A.G. discusses the project with AD personnel before beginning any fieldwork. This is
done to ensure that both parties are in agreement as to the level of work required for this
project.
Survey Methods
The entire project area will be 100% intensively surveyed utilizing the pedestrian
survey method supported by shovel testing and/or augering and examination of eroded and
disturbed areas where cultural materials may be visible on the surface. Herbert G. Uecker
will act as the Principal Investigator. Shovel testing, augering, and backhoe trenching will
meet and exceed the Minimum Survey Standards For Texas established by the THC.
In areas of poor visibility, and environmental settings that have potential for buried
cultural materials, shovel testing will be required and tests will be concentrated in areas of
high site probability and randomly across the project area. All excavated fill from shovel
tests will be screened through 1/4-inch hardware cloth. Shovel tests will be manually
excavated to sterile clay or bedrock when possible.
The survey crew will be equipped with shovel test forms, notebooks, camera,
compass, and a project area map for accurate plotting of shovel tests, backhoe trenches,
and archaeological sites. In addition to shovel testing as a means of identifying buried sites,
select areas in alluvial settings or areas with some appreciable soil depth will be subjected
to backhoe trenching. All sites identified in the project area will be mapped in the field and
plotted on a topographic map. Site locations will also be determined through the use of a
Global Positioning System (GPS). Each site will be recorded using the official State of

34

Texas Archeological Site Form. In no case will the survey crew work outside of the project
area as depicted on the project area map provided by the client.
Only diagnostic artifacts will be collected from the surface. All artifacts recovered
through shovel testing will be collected. These specimens will be bagged and recorded on
a field sack log. They will be analyzed and prepared for eventual curation at TARL, unless
a petition to discard is prepared and accepted.
The draft report will be submitted to AD-THC for review. Once the report has been
approved by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), copies will be delivered to
AD-THC and the client. A.A.G. will maintain copies of the notes, photographs, site forms,
and any other records produced from the project deemed to be a work product.
Scope of Work
I.

Conduct background check for previously recorded archaeological sites in the
project area and the vicinity. Review the relevant literature.

II.

Discuss the project with the AD-THC reviewer assigned to this project before
entering the field.

III.

Obtain an antiquities permit from AD-THC.

IV.

Consult with the representative of the sponsor before beginning the field survey.

V.

Perform a 100% pedestrian survey of the project area to include shovel testing, and
examination of all exposed areas such as creek banks for buried or displaced
artifacts.

VI.

Check for deeply buried sites through the use of backhoe trenching in areas with
deep soils.

VII.

Analyze all artifacts recovered and prepare them for curation at TARL.

VIII.

Prepare a draft report and submit copies to the AD-THC and the sponsor for review.

IX.

Make all required changes, correct any mistakes, and submit the final report and
turn in the artifacts for curation.

35

APPENDIX II: BACKHOE TRENCH LOG

BHT
1

2

3
4
5
6

7
8

9
10
11

12

Depth (cm)
0‐23cm
23‐68cm
68‐100cm
0‐30cm
30‐90cm
90cm
0‐110cm
100cm
0‐63cm
63cm
0‐80cm
80cm
0‐100cm
100‐120cm
120cm
0‐70cm
70cm
0‐90cm
90‐100cm
100cm
0‐105cm
105cm
0‐110cm
100cm
0‐112cm
112‐190cm
190cm
0‐50cm
50cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
mixed clay
red clay, some slab rock
clay
mixed clay
red clay
caliche
mixed clay
caliche
mixed clay
caliche
mixed clay
caliche
mixed clay
brown clay
caliche
mixed clay
caliche
mixed clay
clay
caliche
mixed clay
caliche
mixed clay
Very hard
mixed clay
clay loam, some carbonite flakes
clay
mixed clay
caliche

36

BHT
13

14
15
16
17

Depth (cm)
0‐61cm
61‐86cm
86cm
0‐42cm
42cm
0‐14cm
14cm
0‐90
90cm
0‐15cm
15‐61cm
61‐75cm
75‐210cm
210cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
mixed clay
3/3 clay
limestone
mixed clay
caliche
mixed clay loam
caliche
mixed clay
caliche
7YR4/4, mixed clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
lighter color clay
darker color clay
caliche

37

APPENDIX III: SHOVEL TEST LOG

ST
1

2

3

4
5
6

7

8

9

10
11

12

Depth (cm)
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
35cm
0‐10cm
10‐25cm
25cm
0‐10cm
10‐25cm
25cm
0‐10cm
10‐15cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐15cm
15‐35cm
35cm
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
35cm
0‐10cm
10‐25cm
25cm
0‐15cm
15‐30cm
30cm
0‐15cm
15‐35cm
0‐20cm
20‐45cm
45cm
0‐12cm
12‐40cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
7YR 4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay
caliche
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3
slab rock
7RY4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay/rock
rock
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, rocks
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, pebbles, caliche
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, pebbles
caliche
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, rocks
caliche
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, pebbles
caliche
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, pebbles
caliche
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, pebbles
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay
caliche
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, rocks

38

ST
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29

Depth (cm)
0‐20cm
20‐50cm
0‐10cm
10‐25cm
0‐15cm
15‐35cm
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
0‐15cm
15‐30cm
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
0‐12cm
12‐25cm
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
30‐40cm
0‐20cm
20‐40cm
0‐25cm
25‐45cm
0‐20cm
20‐40cm
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
0‐10cm
10‐20cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐12cm
12‐40cm
0‐12cm
12‐45cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, rocks
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, rocks
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, rocks
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, rocks
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, rocks, iron oxide stain
7YR4/4, clay/sand
7YR3/3, clay, caliche
7YR4/4, clay/loam
7YR3/3, clay, caliche
7YR4/4, mixed clay
7YR3/4, clay/silt
mixed from disturbance, fill dirt
10YR5/4, sandy/silt
10YR4/6, clay/silt
10YR5/4, clay/sand
10YR4/6, clay
10YR4/4, clay loam
10YR4/2, silt/loam
10YR4/4, clay/silt
10YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4, clay/silt
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR4/2, clay

39

ST
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48

Depth (cm)
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
0‐10cm
10‐40cm
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐10cm
10‐25cm
0‐40cm
0‐12cm
12‐25cm
0‐15cm
15‐40cm
0‐50cm
0‐50cm
50‐60cm
0‐12cm
12‐40cm
0‐10cm
10‐40cm
0‐15cm
15‐40cm
0‐25cm
25‐35cm
0‐12cm
12‐50cm
0‐15cm
15‐30cm
0‐60cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/4. clay loam
7YR4/2, clay
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
plow zone, mixed soils
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR3/3
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR3/3, clay

40

ST
49
50

51
52
53
54
55
56

57
58
59
60
61
62

63
64

Depth (cm)
0‐15cm
15‐50cm
0‐5cm
5‐30cm
30cm
0‐10cm
10‐40cm
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐5cm
5‐40cm
0‐5cm
5‐40cm
0‐10cm
10‐20cm
20cm
0‐12cm
12‐30cm
0‐12cm
12‐30cm
0‐8cm
8‐40cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐5cm
5‐15cm
15cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐12cm
12‐30cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
7YR4/3, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/6, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
caliche
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
caliche
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
caliche
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay

41

ST
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84

Depth (cm)
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐10cm
10‐25cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐15cm
15‐40cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐10cm
10‐40cm
0‐30cm
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
0‐35cm
0‐10cm
10‐40cm
0‐35cm
0‐5cm
5‐30cm
0‐12cm
12‐60cm
0‐15cm
15‐40cm
0‐10cm
10‐35cm
0‐40cm
0‐12cm
12‐35cm
0‐35cm
0‐12cm
12‐35cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR5/6, sandy/clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/3, clay
7YR4/4, clay, sand
7YR3/3, clay, sand
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
mixed clay, iron ‐ disturbed
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, mixed clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay

42

ST
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
98

Depth (cm)
0‐5cm
5‐30cm
0‐5cm
5‐30cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐15cm
15‐35cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐5cm
5‐35cm
0‐10cm
10‐40cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐25cm
0‐10cm
0‐10cm
10‐30cm
0‐8cm
8‐40cm
0‐30cm
0‐5cm
5‐30cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay loam
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
disturbed mixed soils
disturbed mixed soils
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay
7YR3/4, clay
7YR4/4, clay loam
7YR3/4, clay

43

APPENDIX IV: ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE LOCATIONS

44

