I - ?; ) <;...
P.12-T'l

I
_.

Final Report
Cultural Resources Survey of
Portions of Bergstrom Air Force Base,
Travis County, Texas

January 1991
Prepared for

United States Air Force
AFRCE-BMS
· · · Force Base, California
AR-TX
lilo. F04607-90-C0010)
TARL 03 .017

11\12L

I'/
L

"?....0 17

CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY OF PORTIONS OF
BERGSTROM AIR FORCE BASE,
TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS

by
Leland C. Bement

Technical Series

l 1-

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin

Prepared for the U.S. Air Force
AFRCE-BMS/DEPV
Norton Air Force Base, California

Under subcontract to
Tetra Tech, Inc.
San Bernardino, California
(Prime Contract No. F04607-90-COOIO)

January 1991

11111111
....,..

ABSTRACT
The intensive pedestrian survey of five areas totaling 380 acres of Bergstrom Air Force Base
by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) for Tetra Tech, Inc., produced no new site
locations. Four prehistoric open campsites previously recorded along Onion and Cottonmouth creeks
were reassessed. Sites 41TV434, 41TV435, and 41TV436 are recommended for testing to determine
their eligibility for listing on the National Register of Historic Places. Site 41TV437, previously

-

recommended for collection and testing respectively, was found to be in worsened condition and it
no longer merits further study. All areas surveyed, except along Onion Creek, have undergone
extensive modifications associated with golf course construction, landfill activities, drainage
rechannelization, and runway upgrading and contouring.

--

-

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many people contributed to the successful completion of this project. Dr. Dave Carmichael
and Ms. Susan Bupp of Tetra Tech, Inc., coordinated the effort. Mr. Tim Knapp of the 67th Civil
Engineering Squadron provided the interface between the military concerns and the goals of the
study, resulting in a safe and productive field survey. Dr. Solveig Turpin oversaw all aspects of the
project, and Ms. Kelly Scott typed and edited the manuscript.

,_

Ill

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION ........................................................... 1

-

ENVIRONMENT AL BACKGROUND ........................................... 1
Soils and Geology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Climate ............................................................. 1
Flora and Fauna ....................................................... 3
CULTURAL BACKGROUND ................................................. 3
Historic Background .................................................... 3
Prehistoric Background ................................................. 4
Previous Investigations .................................................. 7
FIELD TECHNIQUES .....................................· ................... 8
RESULTS ................................................................. 9
Area A .............................................................. 9
Area B .............................................................. 9

,,._

Area C ............................................................. 10
Area D - Golf Course . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Area E - Landfill Site ................................................. 12
Summary and Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
REFERENCES CITED . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

LIST OF FIGURES

Cultural Resources Survey Areas. Bergstrom AFB. Texas ........................ 2
2

-

Central Texas Chronology (After Prewitt 1981) ............................... 5

iv

INTRODUCTION

During May 1990, the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (T ARL) conducted an
intensive pedestrian survey of five areas within Bergstrom Air Force Base (AFB) as part of the Base
Closure Environmental Impact Statement to be prepared by Tetra Tech, Inc. (Figure l ). The five
areas, totaling 380 acres, were selected for their potential to contain cultural resources. The survey
was conducted by Yorke Rowan and Leland Bement of TARL between May 16 and May 22, 1990.
Four previously recorded prehistoric sites, 41TV434, 41TV435, 41TV436, and 41TV437, were
reassessed in view of the proposed base closure. No new cultural resources were identified.
The survey was conducted in partial fulfillment of the Air Force's obligations under Air Force
Regulation 126-7, the National Historic Preservation Act 'of 1966 as amended in 1980 (PL89-665),
the Archeological Resources Protection Acts of 1979 (PL93-291 and PL96-95), and the American
Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978 (PL95-341).
ENVIRONMENT AL BACKGROUND

Soils and Geology

-

Bergstrom AFB extends from the banks of Onion Creek to the Colorado River. Soils in this
area are the dark brown silty clays of the Lewisville-Patrick association. This association includes
the clayey loamy soils of the Lewisville, Patrick, Houston Black, and Trinity series along the valley
margins and uplands, and Altoga and Frio series in the alluvium of the floodplain (Werchan, Lowther,
and Ramsey 1974).

These soils are primarily of fluvial origin, deposited by the ancient

Colorado River. The southern area, below Onion Creek, is underlain by gravels of the Navarro Group
of upper Cretaceous age (Barnes 1974).
Climate
Travis County has a humid, subtropical climate with an average annual rainfall of 32 inches
(Carr 1967). Periods of maximum precipitation occur during early spring and autumn. A mean
annual temperature of 78.6°F is bounded by a maximum low temperature of 59.4° Fin January and
a high of 95° F in August (Bomar 1983:215). Winds generally blow from the south with major
directional changes associated with cold air masses entering the region from the north during the
winter months.

-

\ ______

•-t-{4..

. ~~

/_

+,
'~

I
!

-

'··

'.·..

-

---~

-=1

L.·

---

.

.

-

~

, , '~~------ --

A I-It --F (JR C E - B A $ E
-

--~~

- r--=-·=1,------------.
-.r-c .I

----_____.;

~I

!

'

--.• ~"
';.___ ,

-----=

:__ -

:.,_

.::i;::=-,/

.,,:..-

---

---

:/

/

/'

•ii

Figure 1 Cultural Resources Survey Areas, Bergstrom AFB, Texas
2

.-.

-::-----=-==--------:----=--.
-~-

c

-

~----:::-::;-=.--;:

Flora and Fauna
The project area lies on the eastern edge of the Balcones Escarpment, a fault zone which
marks the boundary between the Edwards Plateau and Blackland Prairie vegetational areas of Texas
(Gould 1975). Typical vegetation on the Edwards Plateau is an overstory of juniper, live oak,
shinnery oak, and mesquite, with an understory of grasses. In contrast, the Blackland Prairies support
grasses with few trees except in riparian zones.
Faunal communities inhabiting these vegetational zones are similarly divided along the
Balcones Escarpment (Blair 1950). To the west, including the fault zone, are fauna of the Balconian
biotic province. Immediately east of this area is the Texan province. Both provinces share many of
the same species, and, particularly in the project area, the fauna consists of species common to both

-

provinces.

CULTURAL BACKGROUND
Travis County holds over 1,500 recorded sites (TARL records). Most of these sites were
recorded as a result of cultural resource assessments in preparation for ground-disturbing activities
associated with housing, utility, parks, and road development projects (e.g., Bryant, Jackson, and
Prewitt 1985; Lynn and Fuszek 1981; Moncure 1983; Kotter 1985; Espey, Huston and Associates 1986;
Whitsett and Fox 1979; Davis 1984; Thurmond 1982).
Historic Background
Sites have been assigned to one of two broad time periods - Historic and Prehistoric. The
historic period began with the Spanish advance into the area during the sixteenth century and
continues to the present. The Mexican government divided the land along Onion Creek for settlement
in the 1830s. Among the earliest grantees was Don Santiago del Valle, the namesake of the town of

-

Del Valle (Webb 1952:149). Present Travis County was still considered part of the unsettled frontier
in the 1830s, and early transactions reflected short-term speculative considerations rather than
concerted homesteading efforts.

Also of historic note, this area was crossed by the famed

Chisholm Trail. Bergstrom AFB was built in 1942 and named after Captain J.A. Earl Bergstrom, the
first Austin military man killed during World War II (Webb 1952:149). Bergstrom AFB was designed
and used to train combat-ready troops which were sent directly into action.

-

3

Prehistoric Background
Chronology
Prehistoric sites range in age from the end of the Pleistocene (ca. 12,000 years Before Present
[BP]) to Spanish contact in the sixteenth century. This broad time period has been subdivided into
time periods delineated by changes in tool forms, technology, or major cultural events.
Beginning with the oldest, these subdivisions are: Paleoindian (12,000-8000 BP), Archaic
(8000-1500 BP), and Late Prehistoric (1500-500 BP). Each of these has also been divided into
sections reflecting stylistic and technological variations within specific geographical regions.
Travis County is within the Central Texas cultural zone where the Archaic has been subdivided into

-

11 phases and the Late Prehistoric into 2 (see Prewitt 1981, 1985) (Figure 2). In Prewitt's chronology,
the earliest Archaic period is the Circleville phase (8500- 7000 years BP) which is identified by
the recovery of Angostura, Golondrina, Meserve, and Scottsbluff projectile points. Plant gathering
was the dominant subsistence practice although deer and other small game were hunted.

The

San Geronimo phase (7000-6000 years BP) is represented by artifacts including Gower, Hoxie, and
Wells projectile points along with Clear Fork and Guadalupe gouges. Few sites with extensive
deposits are known for this time period, thus precluding any assessment of subsistence strategies
beyond generalized hunting and gathering. The Jarrell phase (6000-5000 years BP) continues the use
of stemmed and notched points although the forms change, defining the Andice, Bell, Martindale,
and Uvalde types. Like the Circleville Phase, gathering dominates the subsistence mode. The
Oakalla Phase (5000-4600 years BP) is typified by the triangular Baird and Taylor projectile points.
This phase marks the first evidence of burned rock middens as a distinct site type. At such sites,
burned limestone or sandstone cobbles accumulated by the disposal of rocks from numerous hearths
in midden-like fashion, or by the intentional mounding of limestone cobbles to form earthen ovens.
Hypotheses regarding the possible function of this site type range from acorn processing through rock
boiling techniques to deer/bison cooking pits. The larger middens cover acres and are several meters
deep.
The Clear Fork phase (4600-4000 years BP) is marked by Nolan and Travis projectile points.
Burned rock midden sites of this period are located in upland and terrace settings. With this period,
the subsistence mode of intense exploitation along waterways is set for the next 2,000 years.

4

SUMMARY OF KEY INDEX MARKERS STAGE

Toyah
NeoAustin

Driftwood

~

~

"

Twin Sisters

~

Uvalde

-

Items

Son Morcos

of

INDEX

European

MARKERS

Manufacture

u-(JQ
~ ,;.--0 .,_, ,.......
_,, , , ., ,~. ~ -ti ,;: : .,
!)

Scr~s

u

B1foces CM"amics

-n
·~ "' "_
troo.,,. .,;.Ll .,. . V~{j
. ij/J-rs~·m·
'Ll0..,U·-U(}"""""
o~o . .
-(J'''
ts" ~··~ rt-o~=·.
0-0 n~o.. ,
~•P--0 -o ~~~o~ "'·'· i'- o~-··
~c6rn

Archaic

-

KEY

PHASE

-

Historic

CENTRAL TEXAS CHRONOLOGY

Granbury

Biface

~~-" ~

Fnday
Bdoce

a.,...A

Cemeteries

O~,.,~~::..-:·
~·

Pr!dt1rno/es

Round Rock
~

~

Archaic~

-

~

Marshall Ford

Clear Fork

- Oakalla

-

Jarrell
~

@
Son Geronimo

Circleville

PaleoIndian

-

Burned Rock

Middens

Burned Rock

Middens

Burned Rock
Middens

ts-~

Burned Rock

~

...-~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~__J~

Figure 2 Central Texas Chronology (After Prewitt 1981)
5

The Marshall Ford phase (4000-3400 years BP) and the subsequent Round Rock phase
(3400-2600 years BP) appear to be times of relative coalescence of site and artifact forms. Bulverde
and Pedernales projectile point types are key index lithics of these periods, respectively.

The

San Marcos (2600-2250 years BP), Uvalde (2250-1750 years BP), Twin Sisters (1750-1400 years BP),
and Driftwood (1400-1250 years BP) phases see the end of burned rock midden accumulation
although habitation on midden sites continues. A proliferation of projectile point styles suggests a
discontinuity between these populations and the dominant social spheres of Marshall Ford and
Round Rock times.
The Austin phase (1250-650 years BP) of the Late Prehistoric period marks the first
widespread use of the bow and arrow and Scallorn and Granbury arrow points emerge as time
markers. During the Toyah phase (650-200 years BP) ceramics and limited horticultural pursuits are

-

adopted. The first contact with Europeans occurs during this period.
Site Types

-

-

The Central Texas cultural region consists of the Edwards Plateau west of the Balcones
Escarpment and the Blackland Prairies to the east. Both physiographical subdivisions contain distinct
site types and features directly attributable to the lithic resources of each subarea.
Sites along the Balcones Escarpment and on the Edwards Plateau often contain large cooking
or heating features (called burned rock middens) composed of limestone cobbles. These features have
received the bulk of archeological investigations in the limestone areas. To the east, the limestone
bedrock is replaced by thick clays and sandy clay bedrock often capped by deposits of Uvalde gravels.
In this subarea, cooking and heating features were constructed of chert, quartzite, and sandstone
cobbles. The change in heating/cooking feature morphology between the two areas may relate to
subsistence resource changes or simply the availability of different materials for hearth construction.

-

Sites recorded in the Central Texas area can be attributed to a particular time period based
on a diagnostic tool type - usually a projectile point style. Multiple occupations are indicated by two
or more diagnostic point types. The development of chronologies and artifact typologies has thus
progressed hand-in-hand.

Although certain site features and locations may vary between the

Edwards Plateau and the Blackland Prairies, the chronologies and tool types are the same. Hence, the
two geophysical zones are contained in the same archeological area known as Central Texas.

6

PreYious Innstigations

Prior to the initiation of fieldwork, the records at T ARL were searched to determine if
cultural resource assessments had been conducted or if prehistoric or historic sites had been recorded
in the vicinity of the proposed five study units.
Sites along the Colorado River and Onion Creek were recorded as early as the 1930s by
avocational archeologists. Those sites within the Onion Creek drainage are of more interest here since
all prehistoric sites assessed by this project are within this drainage.
Site types identified in the Onion Creek drainage include rockshelters (Suhm 1955, 1957),
open campsites (Whitsett and Fox 1979; Davis 1984; Brown 1981), quarries/lithic procurement sites,

.,..,

and burned rock middens (Whitsett and Fox 1979). The vast majority of sites are open campsites and
quarries/lithic procurement sites or combinations of both.
These sites have been grouped according to 11 attributes including site type, surface area,
depth, visible features, chronology, condition, physiography, geology, soils, water source, and
proximity to other sites. Four clusters have been identified which reflect settlement patterns and site

-

-

use {Whitsett and Fox 1979). Sites in the present study area fall into two of the four identified
clusters: Navarro cluster and Bergstrom cluster. The Navarro cluster consists of shallow lithic
procurement sites on the exposed gravels of the upland valley margins where the Navarro formation
is exposed at the surface.

Bergstrom cluster sites are open campsites along the terraces of

Onion Creek and associated tributaries. These often active terraces allowed for quick and often deep
burial of cultural deposits by overbank flooding. Here, then, are deeply buried, possibly intact
cultural lenses.
The third site cluster, termed the Confluence cluster, includes those sites found on the terraces
in the vicinity of the confluence of Onion Creek and the Colorado River. These sites are located on

-

the elevated terraces of the river and contain buried, possibly stratified deposits similar to those in
the Bergstrom cluster. The fourth cluster is the Canyon cluster located along the upper stretches of
Onion Creek along the Balcones Escarpment. There, sites include small open sites, large lithic
procurement sites, burned rock middens, and rockshelters (Whitsett and Fox 1979).
Among the sites recorded by Whitsett and Fox (1979), two have received additional

-

investigation in the form of test excavations. Site 41TV461, an open campsite on an Onion Creek
7

terrace overlapping a Colorado River terrace, was tested prior to the construction of the Onion Creek
Wastewater Treatment Plant {Thurmond 1982}. This testing revealed a shallow, mixed cultural zone
on the upper Colorado River terrace and buried, stratified cultural zones of late Holocene age in the

-

Onion Creek terrace.
Site 41TV285, originally exposed in the walls of a gravel quarry, was tested prior to the
construction of a wastewater interceptor line {Davis 1984). This investigation into stratified gravel
levels failed to produce cultural materials such as those exposed farther downstream in the gravel
quarry.
Four sites recorded by Whitsett and Fox {1979) are within the current project area: 41TV434,
41TV435, 41TV436, and 41TV437. All are open campsites marked by lithic debris, tools, and
concentrations of burned rock. Surface collection of 41TV434, and limited testing of 41TV435,
41TV436, and 41TV437, were recommended but not implemented.

-

In 1986, selected portions of Bergstrom AFB were visited during a brief reconnaissance for
cultural resources (Hoffman 1987}. Four of the five survey blocks of the present study area were
included in the earlier assessment. No new sites were recorded during the 1986 reconnaissance, but
the Air Force and the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) staff agreed that the minimal surface

-

-

disturbance reported for some portions of the reconnaissance area was not sufficient to eliminate them
from the present study. Archival research identified a disturbed site just south of the base that is still
considered significant because of the presence of buried deposits. The potential for buried materials
suggested the need to examine minimally disturbed areas in some detail despite their inclusion in the
earlier reconnaissance. In conjunction with the 1986 assessment, all historic structures 45 years old
or older on Bergstrom AFB were recorded and evaluated for eligibility for listing on the National
Register of Historic Places. A total of 30 structures was included in the evaluation; however, none
were found to be significant according to criteria for listing on the National Register of Historic
Places (McDaniel 1986; Herrington 1987).

-

FIELD TECHNIQUES
The pedestrian survey of Bergstrom AFB was conducted by two archeologists performing
zigzag transects at 15-meter intervals across the proposed study areas. A daily journal was kept to
record the progress of the survey. All materials and notes are curated at the Texas Archeological

-

Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

8

RESULTS

Five areas, A-E, totaling approximately 380 acres were intensively surveyed. No new sites
were recorded; four previously recorded sites were relocated and assessed under the conditions of the
present project. The previous site forms were found to contain ample information on the sites;
therefore, new forms were not filled out.
Area A

Area A is a relatively flat parcel of land located at the north end of the main runway and east
of the Greenwood Cemetery. All that remains of once extensive paved roads and buildings are
chunks of asphalt and concrete. This area was heavily disturbed during the demolition of houses,
roads, and apartments on this and the adjoining parcel when the runway was constructed, and again
in 1981. No evidence of significant cultural materials was found. Ground visibility was excellent and
enhanced by rodent burrowing in the northeast quadrant. The National Park Service assessment of
this tract described the area as superficially disturbed (Hoffman 1987). These prior disturbances and
the distance from water sources explain the absence of cultural deposits in Area A.
Area B

Area B is a wedge of land between the main runway and Highway 183 to the west. A
prominent feature in this tract is a channelized drainage ditch 15-20 meters wide and 4-5 meters deep
which runs the length of the parcel. An intersecting drainage has also been channelized. Spoil from

-

the channelization has been spread across the tract, in addition to landfill dumps of concrete, asphalt,
and gravel. The broader portion of the wedge to the south also contains a live ordnance range where
live ammunitions have been detonated.
Surface visibility was good along and within the channelized ditches, f encerows, and ordnance
range. Large holes, including apparent coyote dens, indicate that the substrata contains a mixture of
gravels, concrete, and wire. No intact cultural deposits were identified; the extensive land-disturbing
activities would certainly have exposed any buried cultural material.

9

Area C
Area C consists of a north and south parcel. The north parcel lies between Burleson Road and
the south end of the main airstrip. The south tract extends southward from Burleson Road, and across
Onion and Cottonmouth creeks. Between Burleson Road and the airstrip, the land has undergone
extensive landscaping for the runway and jet taxi lanes, and is planted in low grasses. No cultural
materials were found.
South of Burleson Road and along the banks of Onion and Cottonmouth creeks are four
previously recorded prehistoric sites: 41TV434, 41TV435, 41TV436, and 41TV437 (Whitsett and
Fox 1979). These sites encompass the majority of this portion of Area C, with the exception of a
segment of the left (north) bank of Onion Creek. No new sites were identified. Reassessment of
these sites was the major objective of survey in Area C.
41TV434
41TV434 is an open campsite located on the gravel-capped hilltop south of Onion Creek and
east of Cottonmouth Creek. The majority of the site occurs outside the base, but numerous cores,
flakes, and pieces of burned rock are found in a gravelly projection of the site extending north into
the study area. Examination of an old road cut and numerous animal burrows demonstrates that the
portion of the site occurring on the base is restricted to the surface exposure of gravels except along

-

a small gully where a narrow strip of burned rock, flakes, and shell were seen eroding out at a depth
of 25 centimeters. No temporally diagnostic artifacts were found, but several thin biface tips noted
along the southern fencerow suggest that formal tools are present on the main portion of the site
outside the base.
The materials exposed by the gully may correspond to the northern edge of an occupation
level that is more deeply buried upslope on the main portion of the site. That level, buried to a depth
of 45 centimeters, has yielded burned rock, bone, mussel shell, and a large amount of lithic debitage
(Whitsett and Fox 1979). Subsurface testing would be necessary to verify the extent of the cultural
deposit and its possible relationship to the materials on the base. While the northern portion of the
site within Bergstrom AFB may have less research potential than the rest of the site, the site as a
whole should be considered potentially eligible for the National Register of Historic Places.
Additional research on the offbase portion of the site would be needed to identify and evaluate areas

wire:;:ed~nm<~~~+-<- ~

41TV435

This site sits between the right (south) bank of Onion Creek and a horseshoe meander (oxbow)
of Cottonmouth Creek, in an Onion Creek terrace remnant. Cottonmouth Creek is eroding into the
site from the back, exposing two flat hearths at a depth of 40 centimeters in the resulting cutbank.
Flakes, cores, burned rock, and thick bifaces are also exposed on the site surface which extends for
30 meters east-west by 40 meters north-south. The cultural material is contained in a brown silty
zone, 40 centimeters thick, overlying gravel beds with yellow silts to a minimum depth of 3.5 meters.
No temporally diagnostic artifacts were found on the surface or exposed in the cutbank which
surrounds three sides of the site. The hearths, visible on the west and south edge of the terrace
remnant, indicate that intact cultural deposits are contained in the site. Whitsett and Fox's (1979)
recommendation for testing remains valid.
41TV436

Site 41TV436 is a prehistoric open campsite located on the right (south) bank of Onion Creek
and bordered on the east by a meander of Cottonmouth Creek. This site extends westward outside
the project area for several hundred meters. Within the base, it covers an area of 40 meters east-west
by 30 meters north-south. Again, Cottonmouth Creek has cut into the Onion Creek terrace containing
the site. That portion of the meander nearest Onion Creek exposed two hearths, debitage, and a
burned rock scatter to a depth of 1 meter beneath the surface. The meander cut exposed a profile of
silt and gravel over 3 meters high. Whitsett and Fox (1979) reported cultural material to a depth of
2.4 meters but that observation could not be verified during the present study. That portion of the
cutbank below l meter has been covered by soil which has slumped from higher in the profile.
The cultural material is contained in the upper meter of the terrace in a matrix of brown silt.
Burned rock, cores, and debitage are also exposed on the surface of the terrace and in the backdirt
piles of rodent burrows. No temporally diagnostic artifacts were found and neither exposed hearth
contained visible charcoal.

Due to the extensive size of this site and the presence of buried,

apparently intact, cultural features, Whitsett and Fox's ( 1979) recommendation for testing of 41TV436
is reiterated.

11

41TV437
Site 41TV437 is an open campsite located along the left bank of the channelized drainage
which enters Onion Creek directly across from 41TV436. This extremely small site consists solely of
four pieces of burned rock and three flakes found along the bank of the drainage ditch at a depth
of 30 centimeters below the surface. There was no additional material in the ditch wall, bottom, or
adjacent surface, leading to the conclusion that whatever buried feature may once have been here has
been washed out. Close scrutiny of both sides of the ditch, adjacent surfaces, ruts along a dirt road,
and the spoil from two large rodent burrows failed to recover additional cultural material. Recent
garbage, including a large pile of tires and other trash, has been dumped in the area.

Other

disturbances include construction of Burleson Road and apparent trenching along the roadway.
Surface visibility was good along the dirt road, ditch banks, and track to the runway centerline lights.
No additional cultural materials were found.
This site was recommended by Whitsett and Fox (1979) for subsurface testing based solely on
the presence of a scatter of burned rock in the drainage ditch. This recommendation is no longer
appropriate in light of the more extensive survey of the area and the present site condition. No
further work is recommended at this site.
Area D - Golf Course
Area D consists of a short tributary to the Colorado River in the northeast corner of
Bergstrom AFB. This corner of the base has been sculptured into a golf course. In the process, large
amounts of landfill have been dumped along the drainage course and its sides covered by concrete
slabs, asphalt, garbage, and various-colored soils brought in as topsoil or playing base for the golf
course. An old retention dam in the bottom of the tributary has been breached, indicating the
magnitude with which runoff enters this drainage from the paved and improved areas bordering this
section of the golf course. No cultural resources were identified in Area D.
Area E - Landfill Site
This area consists of the headers of a short left-bank tributary to Onion Creek. Soils are
mapped as Lewisville silty clay. The area is used as the base landfill dump and as such has undergone
extensive modification. Caliche road base and gravel have been spread over high-use areas and the

12

drainage banks are covered with garbage, concrete rubble dumps, and tree trimmings. No cultural
material other than recent garbage was found.
Summary and Recommendations
The pedestrian survey of five parcels at Bergstrom AFB, totaling 380 acres, resulted in the
reassessment of four prehistoric sites located along Onion and Cottonmouth creeks. All are open
camps with burned rock features on creeksides, following the pattern suggested by earlier work along
Onion Creek (TARL records). No new sites were found. The potential for intact buried deposits at
sites 41TV434, 41TV435, and 41TV436 should be further explored to determine their National
Register of Historic Places eligibility. These sites have the potential to add to our understanding of
subsistence practices through the analysis of intact cooking features and the delineation of intra-site
patterning, particularly food processing and tool production/maintenance activity areas. If this
potential is realized, criteria for listing on the National Register of Historic Places would be met.
Site 41TV437 probably fits the site type of dispersed hearths along the creek terraces, but due
to channelization and other disturbances, it no longer contains the integrity necessary to provide
additional information. The sparsity of cultural materials and the extent of recent disturbances
suggest that prior recommendations for additional investigation of site 41 TV437 are no longer
appropriate and that this site would not meet eligibility requirements for listing on the National
Register of Historic Places.

13

REFERENCES CITED
Barnes, Virgil
1974 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Austin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W.F.
1950

Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.

Bomar, George W.
1983 Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Brown, David 0.
1981 Archeological Testing along the Proposed Route of Wastewater Pipeline for the
Planned Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment Plan, Travis County, Texas. Technical
Bulletin 50. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, William A., Jack M. Jackson, and Elton R. Prewitt
1985 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at the Village at Western Oaks
Municipal Utility District, Travis County, Texas. Reports of Investigation 44. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Carr, John T.
1967 The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Report 53. Texas Water Development
Board, Austin.
Davis, Michael
1984 Archeological Investigations at 41TV285: A Site to be Affected by Construction of
the Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment Interceptor Line, Travis County, Texas.
Technical Bulletin 78. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc.
1986 Environmental Assessment of the City of Austin's Proposed CKT 3125 345KV
Transmission Line Project. Austin.
Gould, F.W.
1975

The Grasses of Texas. Texas A & M University Press, College Station.

Herrington, Laverne
1987 Deputy State Historical Preservation Officer, Texas Historical Commission. Letter to
Mr. Tim Knapp. April 22, 1987.
Hoffman, J.J.
1987 Appraisal of Archeological Resources at Bergstrom Air Force Base, Austin, Texas.
U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service.

14

Kotter, Steven M.
1985 Cherry Tree Shelter, A Stratified Late and Neoarchaic Rockshelter at the Headwaters
of Bull Creek, Travis County, Texas. Research Report 92, Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Lynn, Warren M. and John R. Fuszek
1981 Walnut Creek District Park, Archeo/ogical Testing at the Wells Site 41TV368, City of
Austin, Travis County, Texas. Parks and Recreation Planning Associates, Inc. Austin.
McDaniel, Harry R.
1986 Bergstrom Air Force Base Civil Engineer. Letter to Dr. Laverne Herrington. June 13,
1986.

-

Moncure, Henry B.
1983 Archeological and Historical Investigations at the Fulkes Homestead, Travis County,
Texas. Technical Bulletin 66, Texas Archeological Survey, The UnivMft'ly of Texas
at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-89.
1985
Suhm, D.A.
1955
1957

-

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 54:201-238.
Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas.
Archeological Society 26:7-54.

Bulletin of the Texas

Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County, Texas.
Science 9:26-58.

Texas Journal of

Thurmond, Peter
1982 Archeological Testing and Assessment of 41TV461 and the Onion Creek Wastewater
Plant Site, Travis County, Texas. Technical Bulletin 49. Texas Archeological Survey,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Webb, Walter P.
1952 The Handbook of Texas, Vol. I. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Werchan, L.E., A.C. Lowther, and R.N. Ramsey
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service and the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Whitsett, Hayden and Daniel E. Fox
1979 Cultural Resources of Lower Onion Creek. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Construction Grants and Water Quality Planning Division. Unpublished draft report
on file at Texas Historical Commission.

15

