AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
NORTHEAST PRESERVE AND J STREET PARK
SAN ANTONIO, TEXAS

Anne A. Fox

This report is submitted to the
Texas State Antiquities Committee
in accordance with the provisions of
Antiquities Permit No. 23.
March, 1973

ABSTRACT
This report presents the results of an archeological
reconnaissance of two parks owned by the City of San Antonio
and developed and administered by the Department of Parks
and Recreation of the City. Four archeological sites are
briefly described and general recommendations are made
concerning future surveys and preservation of sites within
city parks.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This investigation was the result of a growing concern
on the part of the author that the archeological resources
of the public park areas owned by the City of San Antonio
might not be properly recorded and preserved. The period
of increased land acquisition and park development now under
way has seen hundreds of acres of potential park land wisely
acquired for the future enjoyment of the residents of the
city. Under the guidance of City Parks and Recreation
Department Director Robert Frazer, development has been
carefully planned so as to enhance the natural beauty of
the areas while at the same time making them usable and
accessible.
Until this year, there has not been any archeological
survey work done on city parks since it was not generally
known that such sites might be found there. Once advised
of this possibility, Mr. Frazer has been most cooperative in
smoothing the way for the survey and has taken a personal
interest in its results. His help, interest, and cooperation
have been greatly appreciated. Other members of the Parks
and Recreation Department staff have also been helpful. John
R. Laffoon of the Planning and Engineering Department has
spent time digging out information and maps from the files,
and Horticulturist Thomas L. Keeter has given information on
the shrubs and trees of the Northeast Preserve.
Thanks are due to anthropology students Paul McGuff and
William Fawcett, who freely shared the benefits of their
survey experience elsewhere in Bexar County and their obser­
vations of possible sites within the Northeast Preserve, and
especially to Mr. Fawcett for his help on the initial J
Street Park survey trip.
The author is particularly grateful to David S. Dibble,
Acting Director of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
for arranging and taking responsibility for the Antiquities
Permit, and for many patient hours of help and advice on
both the survey and the writing of this report. Drafting
of the maps was done by Vance Holliday of the Texas Archeo­
logical Salvage Project. Responsibility for any errors or
omissions rests with the author alone.
.

iii

INTRODUCTION
An archeological investigation of the lands included in
two parks owned by the City of San Antonio was carried out
between February and December of 1972 by the author under
the direction of David S. Dibble of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project. The purposes of the investigation were two­
fold: (1) to inventory the archeological resources 6f the
areas in question, and (2) to assess the efficacy of presently
used methods of park development in respect to conservation
of such resources. This report is submitted as documentation
of the findings of the survey and in compliance with the terms
of Pel mit for Archeological Investigation No. 23 issued to
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project by the Antiquities
Committee of the State of Texas on January 6, 1972.
Although the two parks in question are on the same
drainage system, differences in elevation and in size and
location suggest that they should be considered separately
in this report. It was perhaps fortuitous that these two
particular parks were chosen for this initial survey since
opportunity was given to examine both ends of the spectrum
in terms of size and extent of development . .

1

RESEARCH PROCEDURES
Before beginning the field survey, a thorough search
was made of printed sources and museum files for reported
sites in the general vicinity of the parks. While only one
excavation of a prehistoric site (Schuetz 1966) and two surveys
(Dibble 1972; Dillehay 1972) have been done in Bexar County
by professional archeologists, a number of competent amateurs
have undertaken sampling and survey projects and have turned
in reports for the Witte Museum files (Woolford 1935; Orchard
1938; Menger 1959; Fox 1966a, 1966b; Fox and Kasper 1967).
No archeological sites within the parks had been filed with
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin.
It was anticipated from the research that occupation
sites containing burnt rock, chert flakes, and occasional
artifacts and dating from early Archaic (8000 B.C.) through
Neo-Historic (1000 to 1500 A.D.) times would be found. These
sites would be more frequent on bluffs bordering the creeks
(Dibble 1972; Dillehay 1972). Quarry sites consisting of
large areas of broken chert nodules should be found occasion­
ally where the soils bearing these deposits occur (e.g.
Crawford-Bexar Series).
Field work consisted of many hours of walking over each
park, concentrating first on regions where possible sites
had been observed by McGuff and Fawcett and where past
research and experience indicated they might be present.
Later trips branched out into less promising or accessible
areas until each section of the park had been traversed.
Sites were recorded on standard site survey forms and plotted
on maps provided by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
A selective sample of artifacts was collected.
Disposition of all records, maps, and artifacts will be
decided by the Antiquities Committee as indicated in the
permit.

2

._-_..._-_... - _ _ - - _..._ - - - - _ ...- - - - - - - - - - ­
..

NORTHEAST PRESERVE
The Northeast Preserve, comprised of 713.4 acres located
on the northern edge of San Antonio, was acquired by the
City in 1966 and development was begun in 1967. Located near
the confluence of two tributary creeks with the Salado, much
of the present park is within the floodplain and is densely
overgrown with low brush, liv~ oak, and native grasses. The
terrace and upland areas are or have recently been under
cultivation. Development has been carried out with an eye
to preserving the natural surroundings and creating the least
physical and visual disturbance possible, with a minimum of
clearing and grading.
The area lies in the Balcones fault zone at elevations
from 740 feet in the creek bottoms to 800 feet and higher in
the area to the east of the present development. The majority
of the part currently in use is on Lewisville silty clay soil,
underlain by old alluvium; the uplands are primarily associated
with Brackett soils underlain by chalk. A ridge of Tarrant
soils underlain by fractured limestone and containing numer­
ous nodules of chert occurs at the northeast corner of the
present developed area (Taylor, Hailey and Richmond 1966:
Plate 29). The latter is probably a product of the Edwards
formation (Arnow 1963:14).
Vegetation consists of live oak, with some post oak,
Spanish oak, cedar, elm, gumwood, hackberry, and wild soapberry
(Thomas Keeter, personal communication). Mountain laurel
and dense thickets of agar ita grow on the higher terraces
under live oak and mesquite.
The upper part of Salado Creek, an intermittent stream,
can rise from stream bed to extreme flood in a few hours
after an intense rainfall. Some reaches are known to rise
38 feet in 36 hours and to remain out of banks for about 44
hours. Nineteen major floods have occurred in the Salado
basin since 1900 (Corps of Engineers 1969:1-2). The highest
recorded flood, in October of 1913, appears to have reached
nearly to the 745 foot level in the park area (Ibid: Plates
18 and 19), which would have inundated very little of the
present park, but 5 feet more would cover most of the basin
area. It is not known why only a few scattered sites were
found within the park while the general area abounds in them
(Menger 1959; Dibble 1972). It may be that aboriginal
inhabitants of northern Bexar County were aware of the nature

3

of the streams and the danger of flash flooding and chose
higher elevations for their camp sites. Much credit is due
to the Soil Conservation Service for its current program of
building flood control dams on the Salado and its tributaries.
The control of the ever increasing flooding, which occurs
as a result of overgrazing and the construction of housing
developments in the watershed, should do a great deal to
protect archeological sites from destruction such as has
been reported by older residents on Mud Creek (Dibble,
personal communication).

Archeological Resources
One each of three types of sites were of sufficient
interest to be recorded in the Northeast Preserve, all of
which are common to the general area (Dibble 1972; Dillehay
1972), Site numbers are those assigned by the Texas Arche­
ological Research Laboratory in Austin and are so registered
there.
41 BX 172
The only site found which could with certainty be
identified as a habitation site was a scattered trace of
burnt limestone fragments and chert flakes located at an
elevation of 759 to 760 feet on a low bluff overlooking the
creek bed. One tool fragment found is nearly identical in
size, shape, and manufacturing technique to one reported by
Schuetz (1966:31) from the Upper Level of the Granberg Site
and identified by her as a convex knife base. It measures
5 cm. across and is 1 cm. thick at the center point. The
only other recognizable artifact present was a 4 cm. wide,
concave basal fragment similar to one in Schuetz (Ibid:
Figure 20,a). She identifies it as a Pandora* point, but
this one appears quite large for the projectile point category,
41 BX 173
The second site is merely a scattering of chert flakes
and occasional heavy tools over a large area of the bluff
above the creek with no burnt rock concentrations visible.

*Pandora points are described by Suhm and Jelks (1962:233) as
triangular to leaf-shaped project~le points common to central
Texas, possibly dating 2000 B.C. to 1000 A.D.

4

The only
chopping
straight
is 9 cm.
weighs 8

artifact collected from the area is a heavy triangular
tool with cortex left on the narrow end and a
blade similar to that of an axe head. The artifact
across the hlade, 11 cm. long, and 2 cm. thick, and
ounces.

41 BX 174
The third site is perhaps the most important in its
implications as a quarry for a larger area of northern Bexar
County. This extensive outcropping of chert nodules, ranging
in size from 2 to 6 inches in diameter, extends around the
hillside at the 785 foot level and above and across the park
boundary toward the northeast for a considerable distance.
Broken nodules and chert flakes litter the surface of the
ground across the top of the hill and down the slopes for
several yards. Lithic manufacturing debris and cores comprise
the only evidence of human occupation at the site. The chert
is typical of the Edwards Plateau area, shades of deep brown
with a thin cortex which can be made to readily yield large,
deep flakes when imperfections are not present in the core .

.,,-....

~.

5

J STREET PARK

This park was acquired and developed in 1971 by the City
of San Antonio. It consists of approximately 7 acres,
primarily an elevated peninsula of land at the confluence
of a drainage channel with Salado Creek, about 10 miles down
the creek from the Northeast Preserve. J Street deadends
into the park. Improvements consist of a parking area,
graded pathways and footbridges, and picnic areas.
From artifactua1 evidence observed in the form of sherds
of chinaware and glass, it appears that house building in the
area began in the 1940's. Presently the park is surrounded by
modest houses in the usual development pattern of the 1950's
on.
Elevations range from 580 feet in the creek bed to 610
feet at the highest point. The soil is principally Houston
black clay, a dark gray soil over calcareous clay (Taylor,
Hailey, and Richmond 1966: Plate 54). There are nodules of
chert here and there on the creek bank, some probably washed
down stream and some carried in by early inhabitants.
Vegetation in the park has a surprising amount of
variety, probably due to the recent influx of modern day
inhabitants. Such unexpected shrubs as pyracantha, ligustrum,
and crepe myrtle flourish side by side with the usual mesquite,
cedar, elm, pecan, huisache, and retama. Palm and Spanish
dagger are also represented, along with persimmon and mountain
laurel.

Archeological Resources
41 BX 69
In the center of the elevated portion of the park are
several concentrations of burnt rock, which taken together
with the abundance of chert flakes both here and along the
banks of the Salado to the east, indicate the presence of a
prehistoric site. This was not unexpected, since such sites
are often located at the confluence of a tributary with the
main stream in this county (Orchard, n.d.; personal obser­
vation). Artifacts collected included sherds of chinaware

6

and glass, tile fragments, chert flakes and cores, burnt
rock, river mussel shell fragments, three small chert
scrapers made from flakes approximately 4 cm. long, and a
bifacia11y flaked tip from what may have been a small knife
or dart point. The china, glass, and tile, along with
fragments of plumbing fixtures and other building debris,
appear to have been dumped there in the mid-1900's. The
pre:historic artifacts from the site do not 'aid in dating
this occupation any more precisely than to the Archaic period,
or approximately 8000 B.C. to 1000 A.D.

7

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
It appears that the largest part of the land included
in the developed section of the Northeast Preserve does not
now contain prehistoric habitation sites, either because
they have washed away or because they were never there. What
few remains are present, with the exception of the quarry
area, are too diffuse to warrant further investigation beyond
the work done by this survey, or any particular attempt at
protection from human or natural forces. The quarry is
presently effectively protected by thorny brush and located
away from public use areas. Future interpretive plans might
point out the site and explain the importance of chert to
the prehistoric peoples of Bexar County.
The midden area in the J Street Park does not appear to
be deep enough or extensive enough to warrant more attention,
and it has been greatly disturbed during the operation of
clearing and leveling the area.
It would be helpful if any future park land development
could be preceded by at least a brief reconnaissance to
determine if archeological sites, either historic or pre­
historic, will be affected. Since this would hardly be enough
work to keep an archeologist on the Parks and Recreation
Department staff full-time, the author suggests that the
Planning and Engineering Department call upon her or upon
someone she might train within the staff to briefly assess
the archeolog1cal potential of such park areas, if such a
procedure meets with the approval of the Antiquities Com­
mittee. Such preliminary screening would serve to locate
important sites for future investigation and to advise the
planners so that the areas can be properly protected in
development schemes, and at the same time to contribute to
the record of sites in Bexar County. Any staff member so
trained WOUld, of course, be instructed from the beginning
in the fine points of the Antiquities Code of Texas and its
application to all city park lands, and could in tUrn instruct
the Park Rangers in their responsibilities in this respect.
The Department of Parks and Recreation is to be commended
for its policy of careful development which protects and
preserves the natural surroundings of its parks. Such a
policy together with future archeological survey of the areas
to be developed can result in a major contribution to the
recording and preservation of archeological sites in Bexar
County and to the education of its citizens about the pre­
historic people who lived there.

8

REFERENCES CITED
Published Materials
Arnow, Ted
1963

Ground-Water Geology of Bexar County, Texas.
Geological Survey Water Supply Paper 1588, U.S.
Geological Survey.

Corps of Engineers, U.S. Army. Fort Worth, Texas
1969
District. Flood Plain Information, Salado
Creek, San Antonio, Texas. Prepared for the
San Antonio River Authority
San Antonio.
Dibble, David S.
1972
Archeological Reconnaissance in the Salado
Creek Watershed, Bexar County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Salvage Project Survey Reports,
No. 9, Austin.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1972
An Initial Archeological Reconnaissance of
Areas to be Affected by the San Antonio Ranch
New Town, Bexar County, Texas. Texas Arche­
ological Salvage Project Research Reports, No.
13, Austin.
Schuetz, Mardith K.
1966
The Granberg Site: An Archaic Indian
Habitation in Bexar County, Texas.
Witte
Museum Studies No.1, San Antonio.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descrip­
tions. Texas Archeological Societ~ Special
Publication, No. 1 and Texas Memorlal Museum
Bulletin No.4.
Taylor, F. B., R. B. Hailey, and D. L. Richmond
1966
Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas.
States Department of Agriculture.

9

United

Unpublished Materials
Fox, Daniel E.
1966a
Classen Ranch Site. Unpublished report.
Witte Museum files, San Antonio.
1966b

The Rogers Site. Unpublished manuscript.
Witte Museum files, San Antonio.

Fox, Daniel E., and Damon Kasper
1967
The Classen Rockshelter Site. Unpublished
report. Witte Museum files, San Antonio.
Menger, Rudolph
1959
Site location map and correspondence.
Museum files, San Antonio.

Witte

Orchard, C. D.
1938
Copy of a letter to Mr. A. T. Jackson, Depart­
ment of Anthropology, University of Texas.
Witte Museum files, San Antonio.
n.d.

Map of Bexar County with site locations.
Museum files, San Antonio.

Witte

Woolford, Sam W.
1935
Types of Archeological Sites Found in Bexar
County, An Address Given February 13, 1935,
at the Witte Museum. Witte Museum files,
San Antonio.

10

I

'--.......1

_

-

~

­

r~- - - - - -

1
I

,

(

­ \"\

.\
'; \

)

~(

-

---J

\

\

/

\

/'

J

"......4..

(

",........

l

J

~",..

\
\

'\

:

,---~

I
I
-,

\

I

. . . _L_

-- ,-

....

---,,-

"Ci
G::

/'

".--

'r-~'" -- "-

I

....

\,......

"-

..... -

~ I

-

~

~

"

\

Northeast Preserve
9

500
,
feet

ShowifteJ Locations
of
KnownArcheo.ogicol Sites

'3

•

)

')

-----;­

/

\,

f~j

~

Burned Rock.
Flint Chips

~

0

0

{'.c;; -O~'§ 0

\y\

J Street

\
I

I

(S~

~,

~~

"J" Street Park

/

Showing Location
of 41 BX 69
a-Trees

00

Leo sp

l90

l!fi

feel

L-_
1973

VIH

