A PHASE I CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY OF THE WALKER
COUNTY JAIL AND OFFICE EXPANSION AREA PROJECT

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 1918

by
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 54

1997

A PHASE I CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY OF THE WALKER COUNTY
JAIL AND OFFICE EXPANSION AREA PROJECT

Principal Investigator: William E. Moore

BVRA Project 97-15

Prepared for
Walker County Commissioners Court
1100 University Avenue
Huntsville, Texas 77340

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
An Phase I archeological assessment of a 12.82 acre tract in central Walker
County, Texas was performed on December 8, 1997 by Brazos Valley Research
Associates (BVRA) of Bryan, Texas under Texas Antiquities Permit 1918. This site is
located on land belonging to Walker County and is under the jurisdiction of the Walker
County Commissioners Court. The project area was examined using a 100% Pedestrian
Survey supported by shovel testing. No prehistoric or historic sites were found, and it is
recommended that construction be allowed to proceed as planned. The entire tract
consisted of hard clay at the surface. The project area is considered low a low probability
area for prehistoric sites because of the lack of sandy soils and nearby streams.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The following individuals are thanked for their participation in this project. The
Honorable Charles H. Wagamon, County Judge, Jerry Nemec, County Engineer, and
William Powell, Precinct 1 Foreman. Mark H. Denton of the Division of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission, served as the reviewer for the project. Carolyn
Spock, Head of Records, at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) and
her staff were very helpful during the site records investigation. Lili Lyddon of Lyddon
Illustrations in College Station drafted the figures. Their efforts greatly enhanced the
quality of this report.

iii

INTRODUCTION
This report documents the results of a Phase I assessment of a 12.82 acre tract on
land owned by the County of Walker in central Walker County, Texas (Figure 1). The site
area is on a high clay ridge overlooking a low area to the north. The project area is
bounded on the north by F.M. Road 2821, on the west by the Walker County jail complex,
and on the south and east by private land. Although no creeks are immediately adjacent
to the project area, there are three streams in the area. The lower reaches of Hadley
Creek is approximately 600 meters to the north, the lower reaches of Parker Creek is
approximately 250 meters to the northeast, and two unnamed tributaries of McGary
Creek end approximately 300 meters to the west and 800 meters to the southwest. At its
highest point, the project area is 410 meters above mean sea level.
The project area is in a region where significant prehistoric sites are known to
occur. Therefore, a Phase I cultural resources survey was considered appropriate. The
Walker County Commissioners Court retained Brazos Valley Research Associates to
perform this service. A research design was submitted to the Division of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission, and Texas Antiquities Permit number 1918 was
issued. The Principal Investigator for this project is William E. Moore. The project
number assigned by Brazos Valley Research Associates is BVRA 97-15.
The site is depicted on topographic quadrangle Huntsville dated 1963 and
photorevised in 1976 (Figure 2). A detailed map of the project area showing the location
of shovel tests and existing structure appears in this report as Figure 3. This figure was
drafted from a map prepared by the County Engineer in 1997.

1

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
General
Walker County is located within the Austroriparian biotic province as defined by
Blair (1950) and includes the Gulf coastal plain from the Atlantic Ocean to eastern Texas.
The western boundary of this province in Texas is approximated by a line running north
from western Harris County to western Red River County. The western boundary of the
Austroriparian is also the western boundary of the main body of the pine and hardwood
forests of the eastern Gulf coastal plain (Blair 1950:99). According to Thornthwaite
(1948), these forests are limited on the west by available moisture.
Flora
The Project Area is located within the loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, and upland
hardwood plant community as defined by the United States Forest Service for the four
National Forests in East Texas. According to Ippolito (1983:6-7), the major forest cover
types in this community include loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, slash pine, post oak,
southern red oak, white oak, black oak, blackjack oak, black gum, sweet gum, American
elm, red maple, hickories, and beech. Approximately 70 percent of East Texas is
currently occupied by the Piney Woods with Post Oak Savannah and Blackland Prairie in
the rest of the region (Boyd and Howard 1988:4). Keller (1974:139-156) believes that
deciduous trees may have been more numerous during most of the Holocene and were
probably more important resources to prehistoric populations than the modern flora would
suggest.
Fauna
The vertebrate fauna of the Austroriparian is considered typical of that to the east.
Blair (1950:99) states that at least 47 species of mammals occur or have occurred there in
recent times. Known types include at least 29 species of snakes, 10 lizards, 2 land
turtles, 17 anurans, and 18 urodeles. Ippolito (1983:11) states that there is an inadequate
sample of faunal material for the area in an archaeological context. Therefore,
assumptions concerning prehistoric exploitation of animals must be based on historical
accounts and current populations.
A study by Keller (1974:78-81) of the paleoecology of the middle Neches region
lists those mammals most likely to have been hunted in the area. They are Whitetail deer,
Cottontail rabbit, Swamp rabbit, Grey squirrel, Fox squirrel, Flying squirrel, Raccoon,
Opossum, Red fox, Grey fox, Woodchuck, Bobcat, Spotted skunk, Striped skunk, Mink,
Otter, Long-tailed weasel, and Muskrat. According to Ippolito (1983:11), this list excludes
many species of birds, especially migratory fowl, and fish that can still be found in the
area. Species not found in the area today include Black bear, beaver, and wild turkey.
These were once numerous but were eradicated by uncontrolled hunting and timber
harvesting that irreparably altered their habitats.

5

Climate
The following climatic data were taken from McClintock et al. (1979). The weather
in Walker County consists of hot summers and cool winters. An occasional cold front may
cause temperatures to drop below freezing, sometimes quite suddenly. The average
winter temperature is 51 degrees Fahrenheit with an average daily minimum of 41
degrees. In summer, the average is 82 degrees with an average daily maximum of 94
degrees. The growing season has 234 days above freezing each year. Prevailing winds
are from the south-southeast. Rainfall is uniformly distributed throughout the year and
snowfall is rare.
Soils
According to the Soil Survey of Walker County (McClintock et al. 1979:Sheet 31),
there are two soil types in the Project Area. They are Houston Black clay, 1 to 3 percent
slopes and Ferris clay, 1 to 5 percent slopes (Figure 4). Houston Black clay is described
by McClintock et al. (1979:15) as a deep soil found on convex uplands. Areas are long to
oval and range from 10 to 100 acres. The surface layer is very firm, moderately alkaline
black clay about 27 inches thick. From 27 to 45 inches very firm moderately alkaline, very
dark gray clay is present. The underlying material to a depth of 65 inches is very firm,
moderately alkaline, gray clay.
This is a moderately well drained soil, runoff is
medium, and permeability is rapid when the soil is dry and cracked; it is very slow when it
is wet. The available water capacity is high.
Ferris black clay is described by McClintock et al. (1979:12) as a deep soil found
on upland side slopes on the open prairie and in small, scattered areas in timbered
regions. Areas are long to irregular and range from 8 to 75 acres. The surface layer is
firm, moderately alkaline dark gray clay about 6 inches thick. From 6 to 47 is firm
moderately alkaline, light gray clay mottled with brownish-yellow or reddish-yellow. The
underlying material to a depth of 70 inches is firm, moderately alkaline, light gray clay
mottled with brownish-yellow.
Runoff is rapid and permeability is rapid when the soil
is dry and cracked, but is very slow when the soil is wet.
The project area is adjacent to an area that consists of moderately deep and deep,
sandy and loamy, nearly level to sloping soils on uplands. These soils are defined by
McClintock et al. (1979:3) as Falba-Eimina-Arriola. No evidence of these sandy soils was
found in the area examined.

6

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Although several significant studies involving prehistoric and historic sites have
been conducted in Walker County, most of the site data are based on survey level studies
with little or no subsurface testing. As a result, much of the information for Walker County
is taken from projects in surrounding areas such as Lake Livingston in Polk and San
Jacinto counties (McClurkan 1968; Ensor and Carlson 1988), Lake Conroe in
Montgomery County (McNatt 1978; Shafer 1968; Shafer and Stearns 1975), and the
Gibbons Creek Mine in Grimes County (Rogers 1993, 1994, 1995). Several overviews of
the area provide valuable data for Walker County and vicinity. Some of the major works
are discussed below.
In 1978, a file and literature search was conducted by TARL in an effort to prepare
an overview of the cultural resources within the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston, Angelina,
and Sabine national forests of Texas. Information in the TARL files was compiled by
Ross Fields and Rosario Casarez. This report (Fields 1979) provides a good synthesis of
central East Texas prehistory and assesses 17 sites in Walker County.
John Ippolito (1983), Forest Service Archeologist for the National Forest, Southern
Region, compiled an overview of cultural resources present in the national forests of
Texas which includes 53,490 acres of the Sam Houston National Forest in Walker
County. This volume presents a short history of Texas forests and discusses such topics
as environment and ecosystems, culture history, past archaeological activities relevant to
the National Forests in Texas, and direction for future cultural resource investigations. A
map depicting areas surveyed within the forest and a list of compliance projects with
acreage, date conducted, and sites found are included.
More recently, six studies have been published which are worthy of mention.
These are Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document
compiled by the Department of Antiquities Protection (Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993)
Roger G. Moore's (1995) Ph.D. dissertation entitled The Mossy Grove Model of
Long-Term Forager-Collector Adaptations in Inland Southeast Texas; Volume 66 of the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society which reviews the current state of Archeology
in Texas and contains a chapter devoted to Southeast Texas (Patterson 1995); an
archaeological study by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department at the Huntsville Fish
Hatchery (Davis et al. 1994:20-33); a survey for the Trinity River Authority by Moore
Archeological Consulting (Moore and Moore 1995:6-12); and the recovery of a nearly
complete prehistoric ceramic vessel approximately 1900 meters northwest of the current
project area (Moore 1997).

8

The survey by Moore Archeological Consulting (Moore and Moore 1995) is
particularly noteworthy because of the database created from encoding site data for all
known sites in Walker County at the time of this project. This database was an attempt to
define settlement rules specific to Walker County through the application of an empirical
analysis cross-tabulating site data with environmental variables and was based, as stated
above, on the computerization of data from all of the existing TARL site records for the
county. A total of 181 sites were used for this study; however the analyses utilized only
those sites with prehistoric components since the sample size for historic sites is
inadequate and the settlement criteria for historic sites location are much different and
currently more ambiguous than for prehistoric sites.
This study found that prehistoric sites seem to be found throughout the county
where suitable landforms (sandy ridges and knolls) exist in close proximity to dependable
water sources. The only large concentrations of prehistoric sites are the result of large
area surveys. Single sites along major drainages should not be interpreted as sparse use
of an area; rather, individuals most likely recorded these sites with restricted access to
larger areas.
Chronometric dates for inland Southeast Texas are rare. Many sites in this area
have been assigned to cultural periods by other means such as cross-dating artifacts with
similar types from sites in other areas where absolute dates have been obtained.
Therefore, the dates referred to in the following discussions are estimates and, according
to Story (1981:142), are subject to revision.
The culture history of Southeast Texas begins with the Paleo-Indian period (circa
10,000 B.C. - 6000 B.C.). This is followed by the Archaic period (6000 B.C. - 2000 B.C.),
the Early Ceramic period (200 B.C. - A.D. 700), the Late Ceramic period (A.D. 700 - A.D.
1700), and the Historic period which documents those events following contact with
native Indian groups by European explorers and later settlers to the present. Shafer,
although in agreement with these dates, refers to the Paleo-Indian and Archaic periods as
the Early Lithic and Middle Lithic (Shafer et al. 1975:13-25). Under Shafer's system, the
later part of the Paleo-Indian period conforms to his Early Lithic period; and the Archaic
period conforms to his Middle Lithic period.
The Paleo-Indian period is the least understood time in the prehistory of Southeast
Texas. It is typical to think of Paleo-Indians as small bands of hunters roaming over the
landscape in pursuit of mammoth and other megafauna now extinct. No definite evidence
of exploitation of Pleistocene fauna by man has been found in Southeast Texas.
Therefore, other researchers (Shafer and Stearns 1975) believe that a more mixed
resource base was utilized during this time.

9

Information concerning the Archaic period is also sketchy. Archaic sites are more
common than Paleo sites and they tend to be poorly preserved and often mixed with later
materials (Gadus 1988:6). Story (1981) states that Archaic sites in East Texas do not
always provide the associated context needed for a clear definition of component
structure. A population increase during this period is believed to have occurred based on
the fact that more sites are present. Subsistence patterns and societal structure probably
evolved and eventually adapted to changes in the environment following the Pleistocene.
During this period, according to Gadus (1988:6), "seasonally clustered resources would
have been favorable to a trend toward the reduction of group mobility, an increase in tool
variety, and an increase in the complexity of group organization." Johnson (1962) based
his definition of the La Harpe Aspect on the similarity of tool types and burial methods.
The Late Prehistoric period is marked by the addition of pottery to a lifeway that
was for all practicable purposes Archaic. The temporal placement of this period is based
on a few radiocarbon dates and the presence of pottery from the Lower Mississippi Valley
(Story n.d.:15). According to Fields (1979:13), a primary problem in the identification of
Early Ceramic occupations, especially in the southern portion of central East Texas, is
that of separating them from Late Ceramic components. At sites near the Sam Houston
National Forest the ceramics of the two periods are very similar, if not identical. In
addition to pottery with very sandy paste lacking additional tempering agents (Shafer
1975:250-251), the contracting-stem dart point remained the most diagnostic of the
chipped stone tools (Shafer et al. 1975:18).
Experimentation with horticulture during this period has been suggested (Wyckoff
1971:15-17). In central East Texas, however, there is no direct evidence to support this
theory (Fields 1979:13). It appears that hunting and gathering remained the primary
lifeway during the Early Ceramic (Shafer et al. 1975:18). Sites typically are found on
small sandy knolls or ridges on or adjacent to stream floodplains of major water courses
and their tributaries. A population increase may be hypothesized due to the increase in
sites during this period. Early Ceramic sites have been reported from Lake Livingston
(McClurkan 1968), Lake Conroe (Shafer 1968), and the Davy Crockett National Forest
(Fields 1979).
In terms of material culture, significant changes occurred. A shift from the spear
thrower, or atlatl, to the bow and arrow is indicated throughout central East Texas (Shafer
et al. 1975:20). The change was certainly gradual as contracting-stem dart points
continue through parts of this period. The Atakapa-speaking groups retained many of the
traits of the Early Ceramic period. Plain sandy paste ceramics remain the dominant ware
although grog-or bone-tempered pottery does occur. Influence from the Lower
Mississippi Valley, present in Early Ceramic sites, ceased to exist. Caddoan pottery
types are present and suggest interaction between the two groups.

10

Subsistence patterns in the Caddoan area now included horticulture with such
crops as corn, bean, and squash being commonly grown. Although there is no firm
archaeological data for the practice of horticulture in the Atakapa-speaking area, it is
known that by the beginning of the Historic Period corn was being grown (Newcomb
1986:323; Sjoberg 1951:54-55). Fields (1979:18) states that "it seems likely that for at
least a portion of the Late Ceramic Period, certain groups south of the Caddo were to
some degree horticultural."
In both areas, sites dating to this period tend to be located on the same landforms
as Early Ceramic sites; that is, on sandy ridges and knolls on or adjacent to the
floodplains of major water courses and their tributaries. Occupation was widespread and,
according to Fields (1979:19), "the Late Ceramic appears to have been the most
intensively occupied as well as the most visible to modern researchers."
The first Europeans to encounter native Indian groups in East Texas were Cabeza
de Vaca and his explorers who visited the coast in 1528 and visits by the survivors of the
De Soto expedition to the Caddoan region in 1542. In 1690, Spanish missionaries
established a series of missions across East Texas and signaled the beginning of
European and Indian interaction in the area. Mission San Francisco de los Tejas was
located in Houston County on San Pedro Creek (Newcomb 1986). Early roads
connected the missions and provided trade routes. Later, the Contraband Trace brought
early settlers into Texas. This early road crossed the western edge of the Sam Houston
National Forest in the vicinity of F.M. 149 (Bement et al. 1987:6-5).
Between 1700 and 1835 (when native groups had been removed from East
Texas), Indians in the area underwent rapid and dramatic changes. The Spanish failed in
their efforts to Christianize the Indians of East Texas, but the French were able to involve
them in an extensive trade network (Griffith 1954:135- 152). By 1700, Caddoan and
Atakapan groups began acquiring horses from the Spanish and Indian groups to the
west. The horses were traded to the French or used for hunting deer and bear to acquire
hides and oil which were also traded (Griffith 1954:144-152). In exchange, they received
guns, glass beads, clothing, and alcohol. Griffith (1954:144-154) suggests that this
trading economy upset the established sedentary, horticultural way of life, altered social
systems, and destroyed the self-sufficiency of the East Texas Indians.
Ethnographic data for the Atakapan-speakers are sparse. All groups living
between the Caddo and the Gulf Coast are considered to have been of the Atakapan
linguistic stock (Shafer et al. 1975:22). Groups inhabiting the area near the Sam Houston
National Forest were the Bidai, Deadose, and Patiri (Newcomb 1986). The Bidai spoke
the Caddo language and interacted closely with the Hasinai Caddo in trade (Griffith
1954:142). The Bidai and Deadose are believed to have farmed in addition to hunting
and gathering (Shafer et al. 1975:22-23; Sjoberg 1951:54- 55).

11

No historic sites of these groups have been recorded in Walker County. A possible
exception is 41WA53. This site is situated on a terrace above the Trinity River in a
location very close to an historic Indian village mentioned in a thesis by John W. Baldwin
(1957) entitled An Early History of Walker County, Texas. This site was shovel tested by
William E. Moore in the late 1960s but no historic or contact period artifacts were found.
Virtually the entire site area had been destroyed by pothunters. The site is now inundated
by Lake Livingston.
The remainder of this period is well documented in history books. When the
Spanish lost their hold over the state, the area began to be settled by Americans from the
United States who entered from the Louisiana Territory. After Texas became a Republic,
a period of frontier development ensued (Gadus 1988). Farming, hunting, and fishing
were the main economic activities (Bond and Moore 1980:40). By the end of the 19th
Century, timber was exploited throughout most of East Texas. This resource created the
need for sawmills and railroads that was accompanied by a rapid increase in the
population (Bement et al. 1987:6-8).

12

FIELD METHODS
Prior to entering the field the Principal Investigator checked the site records at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) on the campus of The University
of Texas at Austin for previously recorded sites in the project area and vicinity. It was
determined that, although no sites had been recorded in the area to be investigated, the
proximity of several creeks to the project area and the possibility of sandy soils might
have combined to form a suitable setting for prehistoric or historic utilization. The area
was examined in two stages. First, the Principal Investigator walked over the entire
12.82 acres at 30 meter intervals in an attempt to locate and surface exposures that
might contain exposed cultural materials. The entire area, except the western end that
contains the existing jail facility, was covered with grass, and the surface visibility was
rated at zero. There was good surface visibility in the area around the jail building and
road, and this was closely examined for cultural materials. During the initial surface
examination the Principal Investigator dug six shovel probes in the center of the project
area and at each corner (Figure 3). These were not screened or otherwise examined
except to determine the presence of clay.
Next, the entire 12.82 acres was examined through shovel testing. Each test
was dug with a "sharp-shooter" through the surface clay and into the subsurface to a
depth of at least 30 centimeters at each test. In all, 29 tests were excavated, an
average of 2.26 tests per acre. The shovel tests averaged 50 centimeters in diameter.
A screen (1/4 inch hardware cloth) was utilized; however, it was impossible to screen
the thick clay. Instead, samples of clay from each test was placed in the screen and
broken apart by hand. The results of the shovel testing was recorded on a shovel test
log, and a map depicting the approximate location of the 29 tests was prepared using a
tape and compass. Shovel testing was concentrated on the highest part of the ridge
that runs east west across the project area. A few tests were excavated on the slopes,
but most of the tests were dug on top of this ridge. No photographs were taken, and no
artifacts were observed or collected.

13

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
This study documents a Phase I Pedestrian Survey of a 12.82 acre tract in central
Walker County, Texas. Twenty-nine shovel tests were dug across the project area;
however, not one test produced cultural materials. It is concluded that no prehistoric or
historic sites are present in the 12.82 acre tract, and the area is defined as low probability
for site occurrence. Although the soil survey of Walker County indicated that the entire
project area was composed of clay, the presence of a small area of sandy soil in the area
to be investigated was considered a possibility. One previous survey in the area serves
as an example. In 1990, Moore Archeological Consulting located a prehistoric site
(41WA99) in a 45 acre tract approximately 1100 meters to the southeast (Moore and
Moore 1990). The site was found on a convex upland consisting primarily of local clays.
However, at the apex of this upland hill was a small area of deep, sandy soils in which
cultural materials were found. The nearest permanent source of water, Town Branch, is
700 meters from the site, and an intermittent, unnamed tributary of Town Branch is 450
meters distant. Town Branch drains into Parker Creek, one of the streams in the vicinity
of the current project area.
Based on the comparative data collected by Moore Archeological Consulting, the
presence of a prehistoric site in the current project area seemed to be a possibility.
However, not one of the 29 shovel tests encountered sandy soil, and all were sterile in
terms of cultural materials. It is concluded that, although sites may be present in the area,
the 12.82 acre project area was not utilized in prehistoric times. According to William
Powell, the area may have been used for cotton production in the past. There is no other
evidence of other historic activities on this tract. Other, nearby sites are located on sandy
hills or ridges in close proximity to a dependable water source. The absence of sandy
soils in the current project area adds to the conclusion that this area should be classified
as low probability for prehistoric site occurrence.

14

RECOMMENDATIONS
No evidence of prehistoric or historic utilization of the project area was found as a
result of this Phase I survey. It is, therefore, recommended that the Walker County
Commissioners Court be allowed to proceed in the future with construction as planned.
The presence of an archaeologist to monitor construction is not necessary. It is always
possible that cultural materials may be overlooked during any cultural resources survey.
Should evidence of a prehistoric or historic site be encountered at any time during
construction all work must cease until the situation can be evaluated by the Division of
Antiquities Protection in consultation with the Walker County Commissioners Court and
Brazos Valley Research Associates.

15

REFERENCES CITED
Baldwin, John W.
1957

An Early History of Walker County, Texas. Unpublished masters
thesis, Sam Houston State Teachers College. Huntsville.

Bement, Leland C., Rolfe D. Mandel, Jesus F. de la Teja, Dan K. Utley, and Solveig A.
Turpin
1987
Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake Creek Reservoir,
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research
Report 97.
Blair, W. Frank
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
11(1):93-116.

Bond, Clell L., and William E. Moore
1980
Archeological Investigations in the Davy Crockett National Forest.
Texas A&M University, Cultural Resources Laboratory, Report
Number 1.
Boyd, Douglas K., and Margaret A. Howard
1988
Archeological Testing at 41WA97, Sam Houston National Forest,
Walker County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Technical
Reports, Number 3.
Davis, Michael W., Jan Guy, Marybeth S. F. Tomka, and Daniel J. Crouch
1994
Archeological Investigations at Huntsville Fish Hatchery, Walker
County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Cultural
Resources Program. Austin.
Ensor, H. Blaine, and David L. Carlson
1988
The Crawford Site, 41PK69, Central Trinity River Uplands, Polk
County, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division, Contract Reports in
Archeology Number 4.
Fields, Ross C.
1979

Cultural Resources of the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston, Angelina,
and Sabine National Forests of Texas. Report submitted under
Contract No. 53-432P-8-00219 to the United States Department of
Agriculture, United States Forest Service, by the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

16

Gadus, Eloise F.
1988

Griffith, William J.
1954

Ippolito, John E.
1983

An Archeological Survey of the Existing and Proposed Texas
Eastman Pipeline Easement through Portions of the Sam Houston
and Davy Crockett National Forests, Walker and Houston Counties,
Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Technical Reports, Number 1.
The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Europeans,
1687-1772. Reprinted from Middle American Research Institute,
Tulane University Publication, Number 12, pp. 41-168. New Orleans
Philological and Documentary Studies, Vol. II, No. 3.
A Cultural Resource Overview of the National Forests in Texas.
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Lufkin,
Texas.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962
The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 32:141-284.
Keller, John Esten
1974
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of East
Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula (editors)
1993
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.
McClintock, William R., Jr., Joseph J. Castille, Michael Stewart, and L. E. Andrew
1979
Soil Survey of Walker County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and Forest Service in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
McClurkan, Burney B.
1968
Livingston Reservoir, 1965-66: Late Archaic and Neo-American
Occupations. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
Number 12.
McNatt, Logan D.
1978

Archeological Investigations at the Kaygal Recreation Area Site
(41WA82), Walker County, Texas. Texas A&M University,
Anthropology Laboratory, Report 44.

17

Moore, Roger G.
1995

The Mossy Grove Model of Long-Term Forager-Collector Adaptation
in Inland Southeast Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, Rice University, Houston, Texas.

Moore, Roger G., and William E.
1990
An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Addition to Thomason Park,
City of Huntsville, Walker County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 35.
Moore, William Edward
1997
An Assessment of Prehistoric Site 41WA208 in Walker County,
Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates, Contract Report
Number 50.
Moore, William E., and Roger G. Moore
1995
An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Trinity River Authority
Waterline Project, Walker County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 171.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1986
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press. (Seventh Paperback Printing)
Patterson, Leland W.
1995
The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:239-264.
Rogers, Robert
1993

Data Recovery of Three Prehistoric Sites at the Gibbons Creek Third
Five-Year Mine Permit Area, Grimes County, Texas. Espey, Huston
& Associates, Inc. Document Number 910529.

1994

Excavations at Site 41GM224 in the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine
Permit 38A Area, Grimes County, Texas. Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc. Document Number 930476.

1995

Archeological Excavations at Prehistoric Sites 41GM166, 41GM281,
and 41GM282 in the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine, Grimes County,
Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. Document Number
940611.

18

Shafer, Harry J.
1968

1975

Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin,
Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Number 13.
Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 46:249-254.

Shafer, Harry J., and Thomas B. Stearns
1975
Archeological Investigations at the Scotts Ridge Site (41MQ41),
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas A&M University, Anthropology
Laboratory, Report 17.
Shafer, Harry J., Edward P. Baxter, Thomas B. Stearns, and James Phil Dering
1975
An Archeological Assessment of the Big Thicket National Preserve.
Texas A&M University, Anthropology Laboratory, Report 19.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
1951
The Bidai Indians of Southeastern Texas. Unpublished Masters
thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Story, Dee Ann
1981
n.d.

An Overview of the Archaeology of East Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 26(92):139-156.
An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas. Unpublished
manuscript of a paper given at the Plains Conference, November
1978. Denver.

Thornthwaite, C. W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
Geography Review 38:55-94.
Wyckoff, Don G.
1971

The Caddoan Culture Area: An Archaeological Perspective.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.

19

