AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE FOSSIL
RIM WILDLIFE CENTER SOMERVELL COUNTY TEXAS

By
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 16

1995

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE FOSSIL RIM WILDLIFE CENTER
SOMERVELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Project Number 91-8

Prepared for
Fossil Rim Wildlife Center
Post Office Box 2189
Glen Rose, Texas 76043

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
219 North Main Street
Varisco Building - Suite 309
Bryan, Texas 77803
i

ABSTRACT
An Archaeological Assessment of the 3000 acre Fossil Rim Wildlife Center in
Somervell County, Texas, was conducted by Brazos Valley Research Associates
(BVRA) in 1992 and 1993 with William E. Moore acting as Principal Investigator. This
was not a 100% pedestrian survey as emphasis was placed on visiting known sites and
certain high probability localities within the project area. Except for occasional shovel
tests, no subsurface investigations were carried out. The fieldwork was supplemented
by a literature search of past work in the county and analysis of artifact collections
belonging to Fossil Rim employees.
As a result of this project 11 prehistoric sites, 3 historic sites, and 5 isolated finds
were recorded on Fossil Rim property. In addition, 2 prehistoric sites and 1 historic site
on private land were recorded. The prehistoric sites include lithic scatters, possible
campsites, and a rockshelter in which one flake was found on the surface. Not all of the
rockshelters in the park were examined, and it is possible that others contain evidence
of human occupation as well. The historic sites consist of a standing structure dating to
the twentieth century, an early twentieth century log crib, and two surface scatters of
artifacts dating to the early twentieth century. Other historic sites are known to exist at
Fossil Rim but were not evaluated during this study.
Artifacts collected from prehistoric sites at Fossil Rim date from the Paleo-Indian
Stage of Texas prehistory, circa 8500 BP or earlier, to the Toyah Focus of the
Neo-Archaic Stage, circa 1250 BP to 200 BP. Since all specimens examined, with the
exception of a few flakes recovered during shovel testing, were surface collected, the
two Paleo-Indian artifacts may represent random finds rather than evidence of actual
campsites of this period.
All records pertaining to this project are permanently housed at BVRA and copies
of the final report has been placed in the library at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas and at Fossil Rim Wildlife Center in Glen Rose,
Texas. The artifacts have been returned to the owners. This project was initiated at the
request of Fossil Rim Wildlife Center and is not subject to federal or state review.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank everyone whose cooperation made the completion of this
project possible. Peggy Allman, of the Somervell County Historical Commission,
informed me that the owners of Fossil Rim Wildlife Center were interested in learning
about the archaeology of their property. It was her suggestion that led to my
introduction to Christine Jurzykowski and Jim Jackson, proprietors. The hospitality
extended to me by Christine and Jim and their staff made my visit to Fossil Rim very
enjoyable. I also want to thank Nick Davis, Jim Jackson, Kelly Snodgrass, and Bruce
Williams for making their collections of artifacts available for study and showing me site
locations in the park.
Roger G. Moore of Moore Archeological Consulting in Houston, Texas
accompanied me on one of my visits to Fossil Rim. His knowledge of speleology was
particularly helpful during our inspection of the bluff area where the geological
conditions are suitable for cave formation. I am also grateful to him for his suggestions
regarding the final manuscript.
I am especially appreciative of those who took time from their busy schedules to
create the excellent drawings for this report. Bradley F. Bowman is responsible for the
artifact drawings, and Lili Lyddon prepared the maps for publication.
Bill Dickens is acknowledged for his assistance in artifact analysis. Mr. Dickens
is a graduate student in Anthropology at Texas A&M University and a superb
flintknapper. His knowledge of lithic technology was invaluable in the preparation of this
report. Michael R. Bradle is thanked for sharing his knowledge of Central Texas
projectile point typology and assisting with the mundane task of comparing artifact
counts with the text.
Carolyn Spock, Head of Records at TARL and her assistant, Rosario Casarez
helped with the literature search and site recording process. Solveig A. Turpin was kind
enough to inspect a fragment of rock with red paint from Goat Cave, a large rockshelter
on Fossil Rim property. I greatly appreciate her assistance.
The meticulous task of proof reading the manuscript was cheerfully done by
Eleanor Ann Moore. Her patience and encouragement throughout this project is
gratefully appreciated.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ...............................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS....................................................................................... 3
METHODS ...................................................................................................................... 9
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 11
SITE DESCRIPTIONS .................................................................................................. 22
ISOLATED FINDS......................................................................................................... 36
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 37
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 39
Appendix I: Somervell County sites recorded at TARL
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log
Appendix III: Artifact Descriptions
Appendix IV: Listing of Site Numbers
Appendix V: Sites Recorded at Fossil Rim
Figures
Figure 1. General Location of Project Area .................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Fossil Rim Site Locations ............................................................................... 12
Figure 3. Plainview Dart Point (a) and Drill (b) from 41SV67 ........................................ 14
Figure 4. Drill/Perforator (a) and Unifacial Scrapers (b-c) ............................................. 16
Figure 5. Hoxie (a) and Marshall (b) Dart Points from 41SV67 and 41SV81................. 17
Figure 6. Scallorn Arrow Point from Fossil Rim ............................................................ 18
Figure 7. Bifaces (a-d) from 41SV81 and Stemmed Knife (e) from 41SV88 ................. 20

iv

INTRODUCTION
Fossil Rim Wildlife Center is a private endeavor dedicated to studying and
protecting endangered animals. The owners, Christine Jurzykowski and Jim Jackson,
also recognize the presence of archaeological sites on their property and the potential
significance of these sites for interpreting the prehistory of Fossil Rim and Somervell
County. Their interest in the prehistoric groups who inhabited the sites on their property
prompted them to contract with Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) to evaluate
the archaeological potential of Fossil Rim and make recommendations for site
protection and future work. This task was performed under BVRA Project Number 91-8.
Although this report deals with work conducted in 1992 and 1993, a few
references to recent investigations have been included. For example, reference to a
recent testing project in Dinosaur Valley State Park is mentioned in the Previous
Investigations section and in Appendix I, Somervell County Sites Recorded at TARL.
Fossil Rim Wildlife Center is located in central Somervell County approximately
five miles southwest of Glen Rose, the county seat (Figure 1). With its approximate
3000 acres, Fossil Rim offers an opportunity to investigate a significant portion of a
county that is only 197 square miles in size. The topography of much of the park area is
rugged with uplands reaching 1200 feet in elevation. Steep bluffs with near vertical
faces provide excellent vantage points over much of the landscape below. Along the
edge of these escarpments are numerous areas where the natural limestone has been
dissolved to form numerous overhangs or rockshelters. The park is drained by two
streams, Bowden Branch and Barker Branch, both tributaries of the Paluxy River less
than four miles to the north.
Somervell County is the third smallest county in Texas. It is included as part of
the Grand Prairie geographic zone (Hill 1901, Carter 1931). Altitude ranges from 600
feet to 1300 feet with elevations of 1200 feet in the project area. Overall, the county is
hilly with rugged areas such as eroded plateaus and ravines where dissected by the
Brazos and Paluxy rivers. Squaw and Kickapoo creeks are the two other major streams
that drain the county.

1

Figure 1. General Location of Project Area
2

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
The importance of a review of previous work in a region lies in part in the creation
of a database that can be used for comparative purposes. Researchers should not
commence work in an unfamiliar region without some knowledge of the kinds of sites
known to occur in the vicinity of the project area. A review of site records is essential in
terms of making decisions regarding the significance of sites. For example, hundreds of
prehistoric sites may have been recorded in a particular area, but if sites containing rock
art or burials are not known the presence of either of these would assume great
importance based on the first occurrence of these cultural expressions in the area.
In order for archaeological sites to become part of the database that can be
readily accessed by professional archaeologists they must be formally recorded with
TARL in Austin, Texas. There are many site locations known to local collectors.
However, this information may not available to the archaeological community. Both
prehistoric and historic locations are considered to be archaeological sites and can
receive official site numbers. Historic sites are generally not recorded unless they are at
least 50 years old, one of the criteria for the National Register of Historic Places. The
site recording process results in a trinomial that permanently places each site in the
archaeological record for the benefit of future research. The trinomial defines the state,
county, and site number. Site 41SV67, for example, refers to a site in Texas (the 41st
state alphabetically [Alaska and Hawaii excluded]), located in Somervell County
[abbreviated as SV], and is the 67th site recorded in the county.
Site locations can be recorded at TARL by anybody willing to complete a site form
and provide the necessary information. Most sites are recorded as the result of
professional archaeological work, usually involving surveys of areas where sites have
not been documented. The discussion that follows summarizes a statistical overview of
Somervell County sites as of 1985 and outlines all of the archaeological projects that
have been conducted in the county as well as the recording of sites by individuals.
Somervell County is located in the North Central Texas cultural-geographical
region as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:76) in a statistical overview published by the
Texas Historical Commission (THC). This is an area well documented in terms of
numbers of sites when compared to other regions in Texas. When the statistical
overview was compiled in 1985, a total of 2678 sites (13.25% of the state) were
recorded in the entire region. Only one other region (Central Texas) reported more
sites or had a higher percentage statewide.

3

In terms of county statistics, however, 21 of the 39 counties in the region had as
many or more reported sites as Somervell County in 1985 (Biesaart et al. 1985:35).
The 47 sites known to exist in 1985 comprised 1.76% of the region and .23% of the
state. The reader is referred to the overview for more statistical information concerning
Somervell County and its relation to the rest of Texas. The statistical overview has
been discontinued, so it is not possible to incorporate new data into the existing
database.
A review of the site files at TARL revealed that at the time this project was
conceived site forms existed for 54 prehistoric sites and 6 historic sites in Somervell
County. While this project was underway, site forms for an additional 21 prehistoric
sites and 6 historic sites have been added to the TARL files. During the course of this
study a site on Fossil Rim property was recorded with TARL as 41SV101. This site was
visited by Jeff Mercard who made surface collections of artifacts before ownership
changed to Fossil Rim. He brought his collection to the attention of Dr. Dee Ann Story,
former Director of TARL, who assisted him in the site recording process. With the
addition of 13 prehistoric sites and 4 historic sites recorded as a result of this study the
number of sites (including 41SV101) recorded at TARL is now 105, an increase of 58
sites (60.9%) since 1985. A discussion of all Somervell County prehistoric and historic
sites recorded at TARL is included as Appendix I.
According to Biesaart et al. (1985:185), all major periods of Texas prehistory
were documented in Somervell County in 1985. Sites classified as General Archaic and
Late Prehistoric were the most numerous with 26 examples. The rest of the inventory
included 3 Paleo-Indian, 1 Early Archaic, 3 Middle Archaic, and 6 Late Archaic sites.
Four sites have been designated as State Archeological Landmarks. Information for the
county in 1985 came primarily from surface collections (27 sites) with little data from
testing (2 sites) and excavation (1 site).
The first professional work in the county consisted of an intensive survey and
preliminary testing program within the proposed Squaw Creek Reservoir by the
Archaeology Research Program at Southern Methodist University (SMU) in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). This project examined an area of approximately 3200
acres along a six mile segment of the Squaw Creek Valley. The fieldwork was
conducted by the authors with assistance from student employees and volunteers from
various parts of Texas. The report states that 27 sites were located within the
boundaries of the proposed Squaw Creek Reservoir; however, only 26 are discussed in
the report. These consist of 16 prehistoric sites (41SV28, 41SV31-41SV34,
41SV36-41SV41, 41SV44-41SV45, 41SV48, 41SV52, and 41SV54), and 6 historic sites
(41SV29, 41SV35, 41SV42-41SV43, 41SV46, and 41SV53) in Somervell County.
4

In Hood County, 2 prehistoric sites (41HD55 and 41HD57) and 1 historic site
(41HD56) were recorded within the reservoir boundaries. One site (41SV30) contained
both prehistoric and historic components. If site 41SV30 is listed twice, the total
matches the original number of sites (27) stated in the report. In addition, 25 prehistoric
sites (41SV6 - 41SV27, 41SV49 - 41SV51) were recorded outside the boundaries of the
proposed reservoir in Somervell County. Thus, the Squaw Creek project resulted in the
addition of 48 newly recorded sites to the archaeological record for Somervell County.
The sites recorded at Squaw Creek represent the first site recordings at TARL for
Somervell County. That the site numbers for this project begin with 41SV6 is a
reflection of the site recording methods used by Southern Methodist University at that
time.
Site locations at Squaw Creek were found to occur on a variety of landforms.
The distribution of sites includes the Upper and Middle Squaw Creek floodplain,
limestone benches, uplands, alluvial terraces, and steep limestone bluffs. The only
microenvironment where sites were not found was the floodplains adjacent to the
The prehistoric remains at Squaw Creek were found to range in age from 8000
B.C. to A.D. 1500 with the majority of this occupation belonging to the Late Archaic
period. The beginnings of historic utilization of the area was found to date to circa 1855.
No evidence of Historic Indian occupation was found.
In addition to a surface survey, controlled surface collecting and testing was
conducted at sites 41SV30 and 41SV40 in Somervell County and test excavation was
carried out at 41HD55 in Hood County.
Excavation at the Hopewell School site (41SV30) was undertaken by Southern
Methodist University in the summer of 1974 following the pedestrian survey conducted
earlier that resulted in the recording of this site. Over 300 square meters were
excavated to bedrock in large block areas. The site was found to contain a temporally
mixed occupation, although the Late Archaic period was best represented (Gallagher
and Bearden 1976:iii).
In August of 1974, the Archaeology Research Program at Southern Methodist
University conducted a pedestrian survey of the proposed Comanche Peak Steam
Electric Station transmission line and intake and return pipeline rights-of-way in
Somervell and Hood counties (Gallagher 1974b). The size of the area surveyed is not
mentioned in the report. This project recorded 1 prehistoric site (41SV55) in Somervell
County, 2 prehistoric sites (41HD58 and 41HD59) in Hood County, and 1 historic site
(41HD60) in Hood County.
5

The Somervell County site is described as a moderately dense scatter of
prehistoric lithic debris and stone tools. Gallagher (1974b:5) refers to this site as a base
camp and the only known base camp in the Central Brazos Valley that is not located
near a permanent water source.
A reconnaissance survey of Dinosaur Valley State Park was performed by
Southern Methodist University in September of 1974 (Gallagher 1974a). * This study
was initiated partly to add to the growing body of data for the region and partly out of
concern for the archaeological resources of the park that are potentially threatened by
an increase in tourism. The survey was intended primarily to examine portions of the
park thought most likely to contain archaeological materials and no attempt was made
to conduct a systematic investigation of the entire park. As a result of this
reconnaissance, four archaeological sites were located (41SV56 - 41SV59). No
artifacts were collected and no shovel tests were dug.
The sites found consist of buried middens and lithic scatters with no diagnostic
artifacts observed. According to Gallagher (1974a:6), "the most striking aspect of the
archaeology of Dinosaur Valley State Park is its apparent consistency in site location
and artifact assemblage. Each site recorded during our reconnaissance survey was
located on the ecotone between the river bottoms, flood plain, and the upland bluffs."
Very little cultural materials were found in those portions of the river bottoms and
uplands inspected. It is stated, however, that the survey was biased in the selection of
the area examined, and it is not known at this time if the site distribution in the park
accurately reflects the aboriginal settlement pattern. The possibility of buried sites is
suggested by an occasional shell fragment or flint chip across the river bottom and
buried cultural material in the banks of stream cuts.
Two small area surveys were conducted by the Texas State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation in 1975. On June 18, 1975 an investigation was
made of F.M. 201 from U.S. 67 to the Somervell County line (Letter report on file at the
Texas Historical Commission, Somervell County files). No sites were found. On June
19, 1975, an investigation was made of F.M. 205 from F.M. 204 to Glen Rose (Letter
report on file at the Texas Historical Commission, Somervell County files). No sites
were found.
Two sites were recorded in 1982 by Laurie Moseley, III of Springtown, Texas.
Moseley is an amateur archaeologist who participated in the 1974 reconnaissance of
Dinosaur Valley State Park (Gallagher 1974a). The two sites, recorded as a private
project, consist of a prehistoric campsite (41SV1) described to be very prolific in terms
of artifacts and a historic pioneer cemetery (41SV2) that contains graves from the 1820s
and 1830s.
6

On January 30, 1989, the Texas Water Development Board conducted an
archeological reconnaissance of proposed wastewater system improvements (Whitsett
1990). The pedestrian survey was largely confined to the line route leading from the
existing wastewater treatment plant to near the corner of Farm-to-Market Road 144 at
the Glen Lake Camp. "Spot checks" were conducted along Farm-to-Market Road 205
where a few visible surfaces were present and along Paluxy Street on the south bank of
the river between Farm-to-Market Road 144 and Montgomery Branch. No sites were
observed. Development along the river and shallow soils are offered as reasons for a
lack of prehistoric sites on the south side of the river; while, the lack of cultural remains
on the northern side is probably a result of the rather narrow and deeply entrenched
river valley and floodplain where it appears that erosion, rather than deposition, has
occurred as a result of flooding in the recent past.
Jimmy Smith, a member of the Texas Archeological Society and Steward for the
Office of the State Archeologist, recorded a prehistoric rockshelter site (41SV60) in
1990 after he visited it with Don Lemens, local artifact collector (TARL site files). This is
an important site containing at least one burial, Perdiz, Washita, Bonham, and Scallorn
arrow points, deer and fish bone, burned rock, a deer antler flaking tool, and possible
shell scoop. The site has been vandalized by Mr. Lemens who plans to destroy it
completely.
A survey of the Glen Rose Golf Club was conducted by BVRA in April of 1991
(Moore 1991). A pedestrian survey supported by shovel testing was carried out over a
tract of approximately 200 acres adjacent to Squaw Creek just to the east of the town of
Glen Rose. One previously recorded site (41SV51) was visited and evaluated. The
rock art mentioned on the site form was found and discovered to be along the creek
bank below the ridge on which the site is situated. Four new prehistoric sites (41SV3 41SV5, 41SV47) were recorded. Only site 41SV47 was considered to possess
significant research potential, as the rest of the sites were too disturbed due to ongoing
construction. Site 41SV47 was recommended for nomination as a State Archeological
Landmark. The rock art at 41SV51 is unique to the area. Therefore, it was suggested
that it be protected and considered a candidate for the National Register of Historic
Places.
Daniel J. Crouch of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department visited Dinosaur
Valley State Park in 1991 and recorded 2 prehistoric sites (41SV61 - 41SV62) and 3
historic sites (41SV63 - 41SV65). Site 41SV64 is a possible grave associated with a
rock cairn. The addition of these sites increased the total number of known sites in the
park to nine.

7

S. Alan Skinner (1991) of AR Consultants conducted a pedestrian survey of 10
acres near Chalk Mountain for the Erath County Electric Cooperative in September of
1991. One historic house site, consisting of a standing chimney was recorded as
41SV66. Based on bottle glass found near the house it is believed this house dates to
after the turn of the century.
Second to the Squaw Creek survey by Southern Methodist University, Jimmy Smith
has recorded the most sites in the county at this time. As part of a Soil Conservation
Service Training Program, Mr. Smith submitted forms for five prehistoric sites (41SV69 41SV73) and two historic sites (41SV68 and 41SV74) to TARL in March of 1992. In
cooperation with local collector, Don Lemens, forms for fourteen prehistoric sites
(41SV102 - 41SV115) were submitted to TARL in October of 1991. Counting site
41SV60, recorded earlier, Jimmy Smith is responsible for adding 22 site forms to the
files at TARL. Mr. Smith continues to be active in the county and has recorded and
examined additional sites for which forms are on file at TARL.
_______
* Since this report was written two sites in Dinosaur Valley State Park (41SV56 and
41SV57) have been tested by TARL for the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
(Turpin 1994).

8

METHODS
The assessment of Fossil Rim consisted of four separate tasks - archival research,
field reconnaissance, artifact analysis, and report writing. William E. Moore supervised
all phases of this project and served as Principal Investigator.
Prior to commencement of the field reconnaissance, the files at TARL were
checked for previously recorded sites in the project area and vicinity. Reports
documenting work by other researchers were reviewed and a complete list of previously
recorded sites in the county was prepared for this project (Appendix I). Data concerning
soils were obtained by consulting the soil survey for Somervell County prepared by the
Soil Conservation Service (Coburn 1978).
The current study was not a 100% survey of the 3000 acre wildlife center as
coverage was restricted to known site locations and examination of as many high
probability areas within the park as possible. Access to some areas was restricted or
not possible because of the potential danger of wild animals. Due to the shallow nature
of soils throughout the project area shovel testing was not viewed as practical at most
site locations and only five prehistoric sites (41SV67, 41SV76, 41SV77, 41SV81, and
41SV83) were shovel tested. In all, 17 shovel tests were dug at these sites and a
shovel test log was maintained (Appendix II). Excavated dirt from each test was
screened through one-quarter inch hardware cloth and all artifacts recovered through
shovel testing were collected. In the absence of extensive shovel testing, sites were
evaluated primarily by surface inspection. Site locations were plotted on the 7.5'
topographic map, Glen Rose West, and an attempt was made to establish boundaries.
In some cases, the presence of potentially dangerous animals prevented the
investigators from walking over entire site areas. The size of each site was determined
by the amount of surface area containing artifacts and the landform on which each site
is located. Dimensions were obtained in many cases by taking measurements from the
topographic map on which each site is plotted. Diagnostic artifacts were collected.
The database for the prehistoric sites discussed in this report consists of a sample
of 191 lithic artifacts. Of this number, 103 specimens are classified as tools, 87 are
debitage or flakes, and 1 is a raw material sample. These specimens were examined in
an attempt to evaluate the sites at Fossil Rim. Each artifact was assigned a catalog
number in the laboratory that allows for discussion and/or retrieval of individual
specimens at a later date. This number consists of the site trinomial followed by a
specimen number. Under this system, for example, artifact 41SV67-5 represents the
fifth artifact examined from site 41SV67. Artifacts from each site were examined and
are described in Appendix III.
9

Statements relating to the age and type of artifacts at Fossil Rim were supported by
two scholarly volumes, Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions (Suhm and
Jelks 1962) and A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians (Turner and Hester
1985). It must be noted that the artifact analysis was not an in-depth study and was
based solely on surface collected specimens, some with little or no provenance. Many
of the statements regarding projectile point types found at Fossil Rim are based on
comparative studies from other parts of the state, most notably Central Texas.
Therefore, as new data are collected for this area some of the type names used in this
report may be changed.
All prehistoric and historic sites evaluated during this project have been recorded at
TARL and assigned official site numbers. No site number was assigned to a locality not
visited by the Principal Investigator. The term isolated find is used in this report to
describe locations where single or isolated artifacts have been reported by Fossil Rim
personnel or found during the current project. Formal site numbers were not assigned.
Each site location was assigned a temporary site number in the field. For example,
Temporary Site 1 is abbreviated elsewhere in this report as TS 1 and isolated finds are
abbreviated as IF. In addition to these designations, each site has been assigned a
BVRA number for cross referencing (Appendix IV). This project was documented
through field notes, 35 mm color photography, and pertinent forms. Although the works
of several authors were examined while writing this report, Elton R. Prewitt's (1981)
thorough article on cultural chronology in Central Texas served as a major reference.
The dates used in this report were taken from the work by Prewitt (1981), Turner and
Hester (1985), and Suhm and Jelks (1962).

10

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The background study revealed no previously recorded prehistoric or historic sites
in the project area. A review of site records at TARL showed that, excluding the current
effort, 10 projects have been conducted by professional archaeologists in the county, 9
field surveys and 1 excavation. In terms of areas investigated, only the Squaw Creek
Reservoir survey (3200 acres) and the Glen Rose Golf Course survey (200 acres)
appear to be substantial in size. The amount of acres involved in the remainder of
these surveys was not found during the literature review, although it can be inferred
from the reports that several are quite small while others did not provide 100%
coverage. In all, 63 sites were located and recorded as a result of these surveys. This
figure represents 66.1% of the 105 sites currently recorded at TARL for Somervell
County. Subsurface investigations have been sparse as well with only two prehistoric
sites (41SV30 and 41SV40) tested and one (41SV30) excavated.
As a result of this project 17 sites (41SV67, 41SV75-41SV90) were recorded in
Somervell County. The location of these sites is depicted in Figure 2 as they appear on
the 7.5' topographic quadrangle, Glen Rose, 1966 edition (photorevised 1979) and they
are listed in Appendix V. Descriptions of the artifacts appear in Appendix III. Three of
these sites (41SV82, 41SV86, and 41SV87) are on private property outside the
boundaries of Fossil Rim Wildlife Center. Because of their distance from Fossil Rim
boundaries, two of these sites (41SV86 and 41SV87) are not shown in Figure 2.
Thirteen of the sites recorded are prehistoric and four. Sites (41SV78, 41SV84,
41SV86, and 41SV90) are historic.
In addition to the 17 formally recorded sites, 5 isolated finds were documented
(Figure 2). Three isolated finds (IF-1, IF-2, and IF-5) were reported by Fossil Rim
personnel and not confirmed by the Principal Investigator, while two isolated finds (IF-3
and (IF-4) were found during this study.
Prehistoric and historic sites were located and evaluated. Sites of the prehistoric
period include lithic scatters, campsites, and utilization of a rockshelter. The temporally
diagnostic stone tools at Fossil Rim date from the Paleo-Indian Stage (circa 8500
Before Present [BP]) through the Neo-Archaic Stage (1250 - 200 BP). Data regarding
specific time of occupation are only available for 5 of the 13 prehistoric sites recorded
(see table below). The remainder failed to produce diagnostic artifacts, although in
some cases general statements can be made. The single dart point found at 41SV80,
for example, can only be classified as General Archaic at this time.

-11

Figure 2. Fossil Rim Site Locations
-12

Fossil Rim Sites According to Time Periods Occupied
_________________________________________________________________
Stage
Age
Site Number
_________________________________________________________________
Paleo-Indian

? - 8500 BP *

41SV67

Early Archaic

8500 - 4600 BP

41SV67, 41SV75

Middle Archaic

4600 – 2250 BP

41SV67, 41SV75, 41SV79
41SV81, 41SV101

Late Archaic

2250 - 1250 BP

41SV67, 41SV75, 41SV81

Late Prehistoric
(Neo-Archaic)

1250 - 200 BP

41SV81, 41SV101

Historic

200 - Present

41SV78, 41SV84, 41SV86
41SV90
_________________________________________________________________
_________________________________________________________________
* Before Present
The four historic sites consist of a standing house erected during the early to
middle 20th century, a log crib dating to the early 20th century, and two scatters of
historic artifacts that suggest the presence of homesteads probably occupied during the
late nineteenth and/or early twentieth centuries.
The earliest groups to inhabit Fossil Rim may have been small bands of hunters
and gatherers who were in the region sometime prior to 8500 BP Unfortunately, little is
known about these people in areas away from the High Plains where sites of this period
are more numerous. Historically, the term Paleo-Indian has been used to describe
those cultures that have been described by many archaeologists as small bands of
hunters who exploited now extinct megafauna such as mammoth, mastodon, and Bison
antiquus. Perhaps the most common and well-known Paleo-Indian sites consist of kill
sites where stone tools have been found in association with the bones of the animals
they hunted. Distinctive dart or spear points such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview are
some of the types typically found at these sites.

-13

The main weapon of the Paleo-Indian was the atlatl or spear thrower that was used
for thousands of years before the invention of the bow and arrow. Artifacts described by
archaeologists as dart points are assumed to have been used with this device and
should not be confused with the term arrowhead. Evidence of Paleo-Indian occupation
is often limited to surface finds, often only a single specimen. The lack of Paleo-Indian
sites in North Central Texas is discussed by Skinner and Humphreys (1973) who state,
"it has been impossible to discover and excavate an in-place Paleo-Indian campsite or
even a kill site attributable to this stage." Of the 105 sites recorded for Somervell
County, only three have produced Paleo-Indian artifacts. In addition to 41SV67, a
possible Folsom point was found at 41SV1 and an unidentified Paleo-Indian point was
found on the surface of 41SV51.
Two Plainview dart points (Figure 3 a, b) were found at Fossil Rim (site 41SV67).
Since these artifacts are the only examples of Paleo-Indian occupation at Fossil Rim
and were found on the surface, the presence of an actual Paleo-Indian component at
this site is speculative. Unless additional artifacts of this period are found in an
undisturbed context and in direct association with other materials at 41SV67 these tools
should not be considered part of the total artifact collection.

Figure 3. Plainview Dart Point (a) and Drill (b) from 41SV67
(Dots indicate areas of basal grinding or smoothing)
-14

It is not uncommon to find Paleo-Indian tools on the surface of more recent sites.
Therefore, the possibility that these tools were collected and perhaps used by later
groups must be considered. They may also have been lost or discarded by
Paleo-Indians only to remain on the site surface until collected during this project. Site
41SV67 is the only prehistoric site at Fossil Rim to produce evidence of Paleo-Indian
occupation.
It was during the Archaic Stage (8500 BP - 200 BP) that the first major occupation
of sites at Fossil Rim occurred. Skinner and Humphreys (1973) refer to the Archaic
Stage as being represented by numerous sites along the terraces and bluffs of the
Brazos River and its tributaries where natural resources were available. This was a
time of change in terms of population increase and numbers of site locations utilized. A
greater variety of tool types was present in Archaic times and is viewed by some
archaeologists as an indication of a greater variety of subsistence activities being
practiced. According to Elton R. Prewitt (1981:67), the term Archaic has been used by
some archaeologists to separate hunting and gathering peoples from their
predecessors, the Paleo-Indians.
It is evident, however, that the prehistoric economy of the Archaic peoples who
inhabited Fossil Rim was based in part on hunting as evidenced by the presence of dart
points. The atlatl was still the major weapon used. Some of the scrapers could have
been used for scraping hides, and most of the debitage present at the various sites in
Fossil Rim probably represents the waste materials from the manufacture or reworking
of these hunting tools. A virtual absence of primary flakes was noted at all of the
prehistoric sites. This suggests that the early stages of tool manufacture were
conducted elsewhere. These findings are consistent with the nearby Squaw Creek
survey conducted by Southern Methodist University in 1972. According to Skinner and
Humphreys (1973:54), the "removal of primary flakes and chips seems to be uncommon
at any site and in most cases represents less than 5 percent of the assemblage." They
also state that no primary flakes were found at the upland sites in their project area. At
Squaw Creek flakes and chips were the only artifact class represented at all of the sites
studied.
A variety of raw material types found at certain Fossil Rim sites was noted,
however, no source of raw material has been found in the project area except for the
possibility of stream cobbles. At Squaw Creek no evidence of quarry or chipping station
sites was found. Sparse lithic scatters on upland bluffs at Fossil Rim, such as 41SV82,
may have been selected for their view of the valley below where game could be
observed. Archaic sites do not appear to be restricted to specific landforms as evidence
of this stage was found in the uplands and terraces along the stream banks.

-15

In addition to hunting, food was obtained by gathering of wild plants. Activities
other than hunting are suggested by artifact types such as scraping tools (possibly used
for woodworking or cutting plants), drills or perforators, and a mano (possibly used for
processing plants). Although illustrated as part of this discussion, drills/perforators are
known to occur during the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods and unifacial scrapers
have been found at sites dating from Paleo-Indian times through the Late Prehistoric.
Figure 4 illustrates examples of a drill or perforator from site 41SV75 (Figure 4a), a
unifacial side and end scraper with no site provenance (Figure 4b), and a keeled-end
unifacial scraper from site 41SV89 (Figure 4c). There is no evidence for the practice of
agriculture in this part of Texas by Archaic groups.

Figure 4. Drill/Perforator (a) and Unifacial Scrapers (b-c)

That the Archaic was an important period of Fossil Rim prehistory is evidenced by
the fact that every formally recorded prehistoric site in the project area yielding
diagnostic artifacts can be attributed, at least in part, to this stage. The beginning of the
Archaic Stage is referred to as the Early Archaic (circa 8500 BP - 4600 BP). Two Fossil
Rim sites have been classified at this time as Early Archaic. They are 41SV67, based
on the presence of two Hoxie dart points (Figure 5a), and one Martindale dart point, and
41SV75, based on the presence of one Martindale dart point.

-16

Figure 5. Hoxie (a) and Marshall (b) Dart Points from 41SV67 and 41SV81

(Dots indicate areas of grinding or smoothing)
Following the Early Archaic was the Middle Archaic period (circa 4600 BP - 1250
BP). An increase in population and activity at Fossil Rim during this period is suggested
by an increase in sites from two to five, 41SV67, 41SV75, 41SV79, 41SV81, and
41SV101. These sites are classified as Middle Archaic based on dart point types
Marshall, Palmillas, Pedernales, and Travis. A single Pedernales found at IF-1 also
belongs to this period. An example of the Marshall type found at site 41SV81 is
depicted in Figure 5b above. The Late Archaic, circa 2250 BP - 1250 BP, is the last
period of the Archaic Stage prior to the beginning of what is referred to as the Late
Prehistoric period. A moderate decline in activity is suggested by a reduction in
numbers of sites at Fossil Rim from five in the Middle Archaic to three in the Late
Archaic. The three Late Archaic sites are 41SV67, 41SV75, and 41SV81. Their
classification is based on dart point types Godley, Lange, and Palmillas. At two sites
(41SV67 and 41SV75), Ensor dart points were found. This type is considered by Turner
and Hester (1985:94) to be associated with the Transitional Archaic (circa 200 B.C. A.D. 600 or later). Prewitt (1981:76) places it in the Late Archaic period (2250 - 1250
BP).

-17

The Archaic was followed by the Neo-Archaic Stage (Late Prehistoric), 1250 BP 200 BP Sites of this period are similar in surface appearance to Archaic sites and are
often found in the same location. The appearance of the bow and arrow is the major
recognized technological change associated with this period. The arrow point replaced
the dart point. Typically, arrow points are much smaller and thinner than dart points that
has led to the incorrect term bird point used by collectors.
Gathering was still a major lifeway and it is possible that limited agriculture or
horticulture was practiced in some areas. The Neo-Archaic is seen as representative of
the last prehistoric way of life prior to contact with Europeans, referred to as the Historic
Stage. The Austin and Toyah phases have been recognized as belonging to the
Neo-Archaic Stage. The Austin is the earliest and is recognized by Scallorn arrow
points, followed by Toyah Phase containing Perdiz arrow points. It was during the
Toyah Phase that local prehistoric groups were most closely similar to the historic
Indians that inhabited the area. An example of a Scallorn type is illustrated in Figure 6.
Based on the presence of arrow points, sites 41SV81 and 41SV101 and 2 isolated
finds (IF-2, IF-3) at Fossil Rim are classified as Neo-Archaic. Site 41SV81 with 10
arrow points may be the best example of a site of this period in the project area. Both
the Austin and Toyah phases are present at this site as indicated by Scallorn and Perdiz
arrow points. Except for the two Perdiz arrow points at 41SV81, a possible Perdiz point
from 41SV101, and one Perdiz point with no provenience, there is no evidence for the
Toyah Phase at Fossil Rim. Site 41SV101 is classified as belonging to the Austin
Phase based on the presence of Scallorn arrow points from the artifact collections of
Jeff Merkard and Kelly Snodgrass.

Figure 6. Scallorn Arrow Point from Fossil Rim

-18

Conclusions regarding the prehistoric groups who resided at Fossil Rim are general
in part because of the biased artifact sample. Except for a few pieces of debitage
excavated from shovel tests, all of the specimens analyzed in this study were collected
from the surface. The collections consist of only finished or broken formal tools such as
dart points, arrow points, and scrapers. Therefore, the sites are represented by a very
biased sample of artifact types. Additional information is not available in that at least 25
dart points and other tools collected by Fossil Rim personnel can't be assigned to
specific sites.
Four thin bifaces were found at site 41SV81 (Figure 7a-d). According to Kelly
Snodgrass, they were observed on the surface in very close proximity to each other.
These four specimens are very similar in workmanship that suggests the same person
made them. It was observed that the method of flake removal (angle and length of
flakes) is strikingly similar in each of the four bifaces. The function of these tools is not
known but they could have served in their present form as knives or scrapers or they
could represent preforms for dart point manufacture. Given that a local source of raw
material has not been identified at Fossil Rim these bifaces could have been reduced to
their present size and shape elsewhere where chert is available and transported to site
41SV81 to be made into dart points or other tools at a later date. Trade involving dart
point preforms or blanks are not uncommon in Texas and is discussed in detail in an
excellent report by Curtis Tunnell (1978).
It is important to note that the shape of an artifact does not necessarily imply
function. The four bifaces discussed above were fashioned into rather amorphous
shapes that may appear to some as a non-finished artifact such as a preform or blank.
While this may be the case, it must be remembered that these specimens could have
been used as tools in their current condition. The presence of retouch along the edges
of some of these bifaces is suggestive of a finished tool. It is also true those artifacts
that appear to have functioned as projectile points may have actually been used for
other purposes. Artifact 41SV101-6 (Figure 7e) is a large stemmed blade that
resembles a spear point. However, the heavy retouch on both lateral edges with
alternate unifacial beveling suggests it probably was used as a knife. Without edge
wear analysis it is impossible to state with certainty the function of most artifacts.
Therefore, there is a bias inherent in any artifact discussion lacking this level of
analysis.

-19

Figure 7. Bifaces (a-d) from 41SV81 and Stemmed Knife (e) from 41SV88

-20

Data from other sites in Somervell County provide useful and relevant information
for Fossil Rim. Two rockshelter sites, 41SV60 and a site locally referred to as Panther
Cave, have produced burials. At this time, these are the only sites in the county where
mortuary data are available. Unfortunately, both of these have been vandalized,
perhaps to the point of no longer containing significant research potential.
Site 41SV51, located on the grounds of the Glen Rose Golf Club, contains a panel
of petroglyphs. This is the only example of prehistoric rock art known to occur in the
county. Rock art is not common in this general area.
Trade or interaction with distant groups has been identified by the presence of
obsidian at site 41SV5, also located on the grounds of the Glen Rose Golf Club. The
obsidian samples have been traced to their source in the Jemez Mountains in New
Mexico near Albuquerque.
The presence of Washita arrow points at site 41SV60, a rockshelter containing
burials, suggests influence or trade by agricultural groups in Oklahoma into North
Central Texas. This Late Prehistoric arrow point type is commonly found across the
Panhandle and northeast Texas as well as Oklahoma. It is similar to the Harrell type
also found in North Central Texas and parts of Oklahoma.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries three major tribes inhabited this part of
Texas, the Comanche, Tonkawa, and Wichita. Unfortunately, few sites of the historic
Indian period have been found and studied by archaeologists. No evidence of sites of
this period has been found at Fossil Rim. Gallagher and Bearden (1976:19-24) present
a thorough discussion of Tonkawa history in the region and problems associated with
identifying sites of these people. Newcomb's (1961) book of Texas Indians provides the
most comprehensive review on this subject.
The project area is part of a region that was settled from the 1830s through the
1860s by colonists who came chiefly from the Upper South and North (Meining
1988:44). Settlement was rapid in the area to the east where the towns of Dallas and
Fort Worth were emerging as major transportation and cultural centers. The first
permanent settlement in the area now referred to as Somervell County occurred in the
1850s. In 1860, Charles Barnard built a gristmill and trading post on the Paluxy River
not far from its confluence with Squaw Creek. A number of historic sites are still present
along this drainage and provide evidence of early settlement of the area.
Somervell County, created in 1875 from Hood and Bosque counties, was part of an
area that differed from East Texas in that cotton was relatively unimportant, and slaves
were few (Meining 1988:50). According to the Texas Almanac (Kingston and Harris
1983:269), the agricultural economy consists mainly of beef cattle and hogs, hay,
peanuts, small grains, and pecans.
-21

SITE DESCRIPTIONS
41SV67
This prehistoric site is on the west bank of Bowden Branch on a terrace that varies
in elevation from 900 to 940 feet. Site boundaries have not been determined, but 200 x
400 meters appear to be a reasonable estimate. The soil is shallow with clay at or very
close to the surface. Four shovel tests, all sterile, were dug with the deepest being 35
centimeters. Artifacts were mainly observed in gullies and other areas where they have
been exposed due to removal of topsoil by erosion.
A variety of artifact types have been collected from the surface of this site. They
include 3 biface distal tips, 21 dart points, 1 chopper, 1 drill, and 1 hammerstone that
was utilized as a mano. Flakes were seen at the site but were not collected. During the
field inspection of 41SV67 it was noted that the majority of flakes observed could be
classified as interior or tertiary thinning flakes.
Several statements regarding subsistence activities at 41SV67 can be made based
on the artifact assemblage. Dart points, typically attached to spear throwers and used
for killing game, are associated with a hunting economy. Although the chopper found at
this site (41SV67-26) appears to have been used as a woodworking tool, these kinds of
artifacts also served as implements for grubbing, hacking, and butchering or food
processing. The mano (41SV67-25) was probably utilized for grinding and processing
wild plant foods, while drills or perforators (41SV67-2) were used for a variety of
activities. Not all artifacts resembling dart points, however, were used as projectiles, as
some may have been hafted and used as knives to perform cutting or sawing tasks.
Some of the flakes may evidence edge wear or other indications of utilization as tools,
possibly for cutting or scraping of hides or in plant processing. More detailed
microscopic analysis will have to be conducted to make this determination.
The virtual dominance of dart points over other artifact types is a strong indicator
that hunting took precedence over plant processing as the major subsistence activity at
41SV67. Evidence of cooking pits or hearths where game may have been cooked for
consumption was not found.
Small thinning flakes are indicative of the latter stages of tool manufacture or
refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores suggests that
primary core reduction was conducted on a limited basis. One artifact, the
hammerstone (41SV67-25), was probably used for testing cobbles or primary reduction
as it exhibits obvious battering over much of its surface.

-22

In summary, it appears that site 41SV67 is an area where the primary subsistence
activity focused on finishing and/or maintaining stone tools associated with hunting
activities. Although the processing and/or consumption of game may have been
conducted at this site, no evidence of this was observed during this project. It is
hypothesized that hunters returned with their kills to other locations where the meat was
processed and cooked, possibly site 41SV77 where possible hearths were seen. Since
only a few artifacts were found that could be identified with plant processing, it is
suggested that this activity was a minor one when compared to hunting. However, it
must be made clear that plant remains do not always preserve in open sites such as
41SV67, and the importance of plant processing/consumption at this site is based solely
on the presence of artifact types such as the chopper and mano.
Based on the variety of activities suggested by the tool assemblage, it seems
reasonable to assume that utilization of this site was more than transitory. Therefore,
site 41SV67 is categorized in this report as a campsite. Its proximity to a dependable
water source adds strength to this argument.
The time of occupation of this site appears to have been primarily during the
Archaic period. If the Paleo-Indian artifacts are included in the assemblage there is
evidence to suggest a continuum from circa 8500 BP or earlier through circa 1000 BP or
later. As discussed above, the estimated dates for the sites at Fossil Rim are based
solely on temporally diagnostic artifacts that have been collected from the surface of site
41SV67 and other sites in the project area.
The possible Paleo-Indian component at 41SV67 is indicated by a Plainview dart
point (41SV67-1) and Plainview point (41SV67-2) reworked into a drill or perforator.
Three Early Archaic dart points have been found at 41SV67. They are two Hoxie dart
points (41SV67-17 and 41SV67-27) and one Martindale dart point (41SV67- 10). The
Middle Archaic is represented by two Pedernales dart points (41SV67-8, 41SV67-9),
while a single Palmillas dart point (41SV67-6) may belong to the Middle or Late Archaic
period. Four Ensor dart points (41SV67-7, 41SV67-11, 41SV67-12, and 41SV67-13)
are viewed as examples of the Transitional Archaic period, while the Late Archaic is
exemplified by one Godley dart point (41SV67- 16) and two Lange dart points (41SV6718 and 41SV67-19).
Due to the shallow nature of the soil and extent of disturbance in the area, site
41SV67 is not considered to possess significant research potential in terms of
undisturbed, stratified deposits. The presence of Paleo-Indian artifacts is noteworthy,
but it is not likely that additional evidence of this time period will be found at 41SV67 in a
meaningful context. Surface collections, although limited in value, are capable of
providing useful data; and the research potential of site 41SV67 is probably limited to a
controlled surface collection with limited subsurface testing.
-23

41SV75
This prehistoric site is on the west bank of Bowden Branch on an upland terrace
that varies in elevation from 950 to 990 feet. The site probably extends to the
southwest onto private property and could reach the 1000 foot contour or higher. Site
boundaries have not been determined, but that portion on Fossil Rim property is
estimated at 100 x 200 meters. The landform is rocky with much exposed limestone,
has very little soil, and is littered with fossils. No shovel tests were dug. Artifacts were
observed scattered across the site surface with several dense concentrations that may
represent cultural activities.
A variety of artifact types have been collected from the surface of this site. They
include 6 dart points and 1 unifacial scraper. A dense concentration of flakes and a few
tools was collected and identified as Feature 1. Materials collected from this feature
include 1 drill/perforator (Figure 4a), 1 flake with edge retouch, and 32 pieces of
debitage consisting of primary, secondary, and tertiary flakes. A few of the flakes were
discolored due to extreme heat. Since this discoloration was present on both faces,
these flakes were probably burned due to natural causes. Additional flakes were
observed at this site but not collected. It is worth noting that several kinds of chert are
present in the lithic assemblage.
The presence of primary, secondary, and tertiary flakes suggests that all stages of
tool manufacture were performed as well as tool repair or refurbishing, although the
former probably only to a limited extent. Dart points suggest a hunting economy, while
more sedentary activities are implied by the presence of the unifacial scraper and
drill/perforator. No tested cobbles or cores were observed.
There is no evidence that the use of this location was more than transitory. Areas
of burned rock were noted, but they appear to have resulted from natural causes. The
distance from this site to Bowden Branch is considered to be a negative factor in terms
of regular or permanent utilization of this landform as a campsite. This site probably
served best as a vantage point for viewing game in the valley below. If we argue that
there is no nearby source of chert for making stone tools, it seems reasonable to
assume that the major activities carried out here involved limited tool manufacture
and/or repair while utilizing this landform as a vantage point as mentioned above.
Therefore, site 41SV75 is categorized in this report as a lithic scatter.

-24

The time of occupation of this site appears to have been primarily during the
Archaic period ranging from the Early Archaic to sometime in Late Prehistoric times.
The Martindale point (41SV75-4) is the single example of an Early Archaic occupation,
while the Late Archaic is exemplified by two Marshall points (41SV75-1 and 41SV75-2).
The one Ensor point (41SV75-3) is typical of the transitional period between the Archaic
and Late Prehistoric, and the possible Godley point (41SV75-5) represents the Late
Archaic through Late Prehistoric. Drills or perforators made on flakes such as the one
collected as part of Feature 1 (41S75-7) are believed to also be representative of Late
Prehistoric times. The flake tools could have been used during either the Archaic or
Late Prehistoric periods.
Due to the shallow nature of the soil, site 41SV75 is not considered to possess
significant research potential in terms of undisturbed, stratified deposits. Surface
collections, although limited in value, are capable of providing useful data; and the
research potential of site 41SV75 is probably limited to a controlled surface collection
with limited subsurface testing.
41SV76
This prehistoric site is on the west bank of Bowden Branch on an alluvial terrace at
the 920 foot contour and approximately 100 meters northeast of the base of the slope
on which site 41SV75 is located. Bowden Branch is 40 meters north of Shovel Test 2.
Site boundaries have not been determined, but shovel tests demonstrate a size of at
least 13 x 20 meters. Four shovel tests were dug, and flakes were found in two of the
tests between 15 and 20 centimeters below the ground surface. Clay was encountered
at a depth of 26 centimeters. No artifacts were seen on the surface. In all, 12 flakes
were recovered from the two shovel tests, 10 in Shovel Test 2 and 2 and Shovel Test 3.
The presence of small thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool
manufacture or refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores
suggests that primary core reduction was conducted elsewhere. No burned rock or
indications of cooking were found.
It is difficult to classify this site in terms of its function. However, the presence of
buried materials on an alluvial terrace in close proximity to a dependable water source
is a combination of factors that favor a more than transitory occupation. Therefore, site
41SV76 is categorized in this report as a campsite.
The time of occupation of this site is unknown. However, given its proximity to
nearby sites 41SV67, 41SV75, 41SV77, and 41SV81, it was probably inhabited
sometime during the Archaic or Late Prehistoric periods.

-25

Due to the presence of buried deposits in an area where soil development is rare,
site 41SV76 is considered unique and may possess significant research potential.
Subsurface testing is viewed as the only means of evaluating this site.
41SV77
This prehistoric site is on the east bank of Bowden Branch on a terrace at the 930
foot contour and across the creek from 41SV75 and 41SV76. It is situated at the
confluence of Bowden Branch and an unnamed tributary. Site boundaries are
estimated at 20 x 100 meters based on artifacts observed on the site surface. Two
shovel tests, both sterile, were dug to 40 centimeters.
Artifacts observed include flakes and a unifacial scraper (41SV77-1) that was
collected. During the field inspection of 41SV77 it was noted that the majority of flakes
observed could be classified as interior or tertiary thinning flakes.
The presence of small thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool
manufacture or refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores
suggests that primary core reduction was conducted elsewhere. The unifacial tool
could have been used for a number of purposes such as scraping hides or in plant
processing. Exposed areas of burned rock were seen which might represent hearths
exposed on a deflated surface. This is the only prehistoric site at Fossil Rim where
evidence of hearths was found.
Based on the presence of what appears to be hearths, it seems reasonable to
assume that utilization of this site was more than transitory. Therefore, site 41SV77 is
categorized in this report as a campsite. Its proximity to a dependable water source
adds strength to this argument. It was suggested above that hunters returning with
game might have brought it to sites where cooking and consumption was carried out.
Because of the possible presence of hearths, 41SV77 may be one of these locations.
Since no diagnostic artifacts were observed at 41SV77, the time of occupation of
this site is unknown. However, its proximity to nearby sites 41SV67, 41SV76, 41SV80,
and 41SV81 suggests it was probably occupied during the Archaic and/or Late
Prehistoric periods.
Due to the presence of burned rock that is believed to represent the presence of
hearths or campfires, site 41SV77 is considered to possess significant research
potential. This site should be evaluated by a controlled surface collection and
subsurface testing.

-26

41SV78
This historic site is on the west bank of Barker Branch on a terrace between the
1000 and 1010 foot contour. Site boundaries have not been determined, but artifacts
were observed scattered over an area of 20 x 50 meters. No shovel tests were dug.
Artifacts observed include 2 shotgun caps, 1 undecorated ceramic fragment, 1
ceramic fragment decorated with either the decal or transfer method, 1 purple glass
fragment, 1 brown glass fragment, 1 piece of cast iron dated 1896 (possible stove part),
and several pieces of brick. No collection was made.
The presence of glass and ceramics in association with bricks strongly suggests
the presence of a house site. The kinds of artifacts present at this site were
manufactured and utilized during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Although this
site is not viewed as highly significant, a controlled surface collection of artifacts
combined with archival research might reveal useful information regarding historic
settlement in the area.
41SV79
This prehistoric site is at the confluence of Barker Branch and an unnamed
tributary on a series of terraces that vary in elevation from 1020 to 1080 feet. Site
boundaries are estimated to be 100 x 250 meters based on the surface exposure of
artifacts and size of landform. Very little soil is present, and it was decided that shovel
testing would not be productive; therefore, no tests were dug. Scattered areas of
burned rock were observed, but they appear to be the result of natural causes such as
grass fires.
A few flakes were seen scattered over the surface and one dart point was collected
which resembles the Pedernales type (41SV79-1). During the field inspection of
41SV79 it was noted that the majority of flakes observed could be classified as interior
or tertiary thinning flakes.
The presence of small thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool
manufacture or refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores
suggests that primary core reduction was conducted elsewhere. The dart point
suggests a hunting economy.
Since no features were observed, it seems reasonable to assume that utilization of
this site was probably transitory. Therefore, site 41SV79 is categorized in this report as
a lithic scatter.

-27

Based on the one Pedernales point observed this site has been tentatively dated to
the Middle Archaic period, circa 4600 BP to 2250 BP
Due to the shallow nature of the soil, site 41SV79 is not considered to possess
significant research potential in terms of undisturbed, stratified deposits. Surface
collections, although limited in value, are capable of providing useful data; and the
research potential of site 41SV79 is probably limited to a controlled surface collection.
41SV80
This prehistoric site is on the northeast bank of a tributary of Bowden Branch on a
terrace at the 950 foot contour. Site boundaries have been estimated at 50 square
meters. The soil is shallow in this area with clay very close to the surface. No shovel
tests were dug. Artifacts were only observed in areas where exposed due to removal of
topsoil by erosion.
Only one artifact, an unclassifiable dart point fragment (41SV80-1), was collected.
In addition, a low-density scatter of flakes was observed on the surface, the majority of
which could be classified as interior or tertiary thinning flakes.
The presence of small thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool
manufacture or refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores
suggests that primary core reduction was conducted elsewhere. No burned rock or
indications of cooking were found. The dart point suggests a hunting economy.
This site is very close to 41SV77 and on the same landform, so it is possible they
are one site. Based on the absence of features, site 41SV80 is categorized in this
report as a lithic scatter. However, its proximity to a dependable water source and
prehistoric site 41SV77, which appears to contain hearths, suggest that additional work
at this site may change this classification to that of campsite.
The time of occupation of this site appears to have been primarily during the
Archaic period based on the presence of a single dart point. Since this specimen does
not appear to conform to a known type the age of this site can't be assigned to a
specific period of the Archaic Stage.
Due to the shallow nature of the soil, site 41SV80 is not considered to possess
significant research potential in terms of undisturbed, stratified deposits. Surface
collections, although limited in value, are capable of providing useful data; and the
research potential of site 41SV80 is probably limited to a controlled surface collection
with limited subsurface testing. An attempt should be made to determine the
relationship of 41SV80 to its neighbor, site 41SV77.
-28

41SV81
This prehistoric site is on the southeast bank of Bowden Branch on a terrace that
varies in elevation from 900 to 950 feet. Site boundaries have been estimated at 100 x
300 meters, but it is probably much larger. Six shovel tests were dug with the deepest
being 40 centimeters. Only one shovel test produced cultural materials; two flakes were
found in the third shovel test. Very few artifacts were observed on the site surface.
A variety of artifact types have been collected from the surface of this site. They
include 4 bifaces, 1 dart point, and 10 arrow points. During the field inspection of
41SV81 it was noted that the majority of flakes observed could be classified as interior
or tertiary thinning flakes. Two flakes (41SV81-13 and 41SV81-14) were collected from
shovel testing.
The presence of small thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool
manufacture or refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores
suggests that primary core reduction was conducted elsewhere. No burned rock or
indications of cooking were found. Dart points and arrow points suggest a hunting
economy. The role of the four bifaces in terms of subsistence is not known. They could
have functioned as knives or scrapers, or they may represent a cache of preforms to be
fashioned into finished tools at a later date. Microscopic analysis will have to be
performed to make a determination.
It is difficult to classify this site in terms of its function. However the presence of
buried materials on an alluvial terrace in close proximity to a dependable water source
is a combination of factors that favor a more than transitory occupation. Therefore, site
41SV81 is categorized in this report as a campsite.
The time of occupation of this site appears to have been limited use during the
Archaic period with increased use during the Late Prehistoric period. The single dart
point, an example of the Marshall type (41SV81-1), is a time marker for the Middle to
Late Archaic, circa 4600 B.P to 1250 BP. The majority of projectile points from this site
are arrow points which were in use during Late Prehistoric times after the introduction
and acceptance of the bow and arrow. Arrow point types from this site have been
classified as Perdiz (41SV81-4 and 41SV81-5), Scallorn (41SV81-2 and 41SV81-3),
and Bonham (41SV81-6). Site 41SV81, based on the ratio of six arrow points to one
dart point, is hypothesized as having been occupied mainly during the Late Prehistoric
period, circa 1250 BP to 200 BP or into historic times. The two Perdiz arrow points
(41SV81-4 and 41SV81-5) are associated with the Toyah Focus, the last prehistoric
period before contact with Europeans and the Historic period, circa 650 BP to 200 BP

-29

Due to the presence of buried deposits in an area where soil development is rare,
site 41SV81 is considered unique and may possess significant research potential. It is
recommended that this site be tested.
41SV82
This prehistoric site is on an upland bluff overlooking Bowden Branch to the east at
an elevation from 1190 feet. The size of this site is unknown as only a few flakes were
found in deflated areas along the bluff edge. Very little soil is present in this area which
consists mainly of exposed limestone bedrock. No shovel tests were dug. The field
inspection of 41SV82 revealed that virtually all of the flakes observed were tertiary
flakes without cortex. Heavy grass cover made it difficult to observe much of the site
area.
The presence of small thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool
manufacture or refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores
suggests that primary core reduction was conducted elsewhere. No burned rock or
indications of cooking were found. Flakes were observed close to the bluff edge that
suggests the major activity might have been re-sharpening of tools while using this
landform as a vantage point for watching game in the valley below.
Based on the sparse scatter of cultural materials, virtual absence of soil, and lack
of features, site 41SV82 is categorized in this report as a lithic scatter. An absence of
diagnostic artifacts precludes placing this site in time. No collection was made at this
site.
Due to the shallow nature of the soil and extent of disturbance in the area, site
41SV82 is not considered to possess significant research potential in terms of
undisturbed, stratified deposits. Surface collections, although limited in value, are
capable of providing useful data; and the research potential of site 41SV82 is probably
limited to a controlled surface collection.
41SV83
This prehistoric site is located beneath an overhang in the east side of a bluff edge
at the head of a draw above a tributary that eventually feeds into Bowden Branch. This
site is located at an elevation of approximately 1150 feet. The rockshelter in which
41SV83 is located was measured at 7 meters 50 centimeters long, 2 meters 60
centimeters deep, and 1 meter 20 centimeters high. The soil is shallow within the
shelter with bedrock reached at 18 centimeters in the only shovel test dug at this site.
The only artifact observed is a flake that was collected from the surface

-30

The presence of a single flake provides little information for determining site
function. Therefore, site 41SV83 is categorized in this report as a site of unknown age
situated within a small rockshelter. Sites in rockshelters have the potential to yield
significant information. In many cases the rock overhangs protect the deposits within
from moisture allowing otherwise perishable materials to remain intact. Also,
rockshelters sometimes contain burials, and two such sites are known in Somervell
County. Even though the deposits appear to be quite shallow at this site, it is believed
that this site may possess significant research potential. Testing is recommended.
41SV84
This historic site is located about 80 meters from a county road that joins Farm-toMarket Road 203 approximately 1300 meters to the southwest. The site is situated just
above the 1200 foot contour in the uplands. No shovel tests were dug, and no historic
artifacts were observed on the surface.
Site 41SV84 is a standing structure that was constructed as a residence sometime
during the early to middle twentieth century. Frame houses of this type are not
uncommon; therefore, this site is not considered to possess significant research
potential based on its architectural style. Although this site is not considered worthy of
archaeological investigation, a check of the chain of title and interviews with persons
who are familiar with this house may provide useful information regarding utilization of
this area during the first half of the twentieth century.
41SV85
This prehistoric site is situated on an upland bluff at an elevation of approximately
1170 feet and above an unnamed tributary that flows into Barker Branch to the
northwest. The size of this site is not known, as its only manifestation was three flakes
observed on the surface of an area about 20 square meters in size. The artifacts were
observed in a horse pen where animal manure made it difficult to examine much of the
site area. The soil appears to be very shallow in this area, and no shovel tests were
dug. The flakes observed were on the ground surface in areas deflated by erosion. No
artifacts were collected. The field inspection of this site revealed the majority of flakes
observed could be classified as interior or tertiary thinning flakes.
The presence of small thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool
manufacture or refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores
suggests that primary core reduction was conducted elsewhere. No burned rock or
indications of cooking were found.

-31

Based on the paucity of cultural materials and apparent lack of features, it seems
reasonable to assume that utilization of this site may have been transitory. Therefore,
site 41SV85 is categorized in this report as a lithic scatter of unknown age.
Due to the shallow nature of the soil, site 41SV85 is not considered to possess
significant research potential in terms of undisturbed, stratified deposits. Surface
collections, although limited in value, are capable of providing useful data; and the
research potential of site 41SV85 is probably limited to a controlled surface collection
with limited subsurface testing.
41SV86
This historic site is located on a prominent landform near the 900 foot contour and
above an unnamed tributary that flows into Cross Branch to the east. No shovel tests
were dug and no historic artifacts were observed on the ground near the site.
Site 41SV86 is a log crib that is believed to be at least 75 years old and possibly
much older. The logs are milled, but the joints appear to be hand cut. Square nails
were seen in the corners. This structure was measured at 3 meters 40 centimeters by 4
meters 70 centimeters. The distance from the ground to the top of the wooden crib was
measured at 1 meter 75 centimeters. Nearby, a storm cellar was observed that might
be as old as the crib. Since this site is not on Fossil Rim property, no further work is
recommended.
41SV87
This prehistoric site is on the west bank of Cross Branch near the confluence of this
stream and an unnamed tributary and on a terrace that varies in elevation from 800 to
840 feet. Site boundaries have not been determined, but 300 x 400 meters appear to
be a reasonable estimate based on the presence of artifacts on the surface. The soil is
shallow in this area with clay very close to the surface. No shovel tests were dug. All of
the artifacts observed were in deflated areas exposed due to removal of topsoil by
erosion. During the field inspection of 41SV87 it was noted that the majority of flakes
observed could be classified as interior or tertiary thinning flakes. No artifacts were
collected.
The presence of small thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool
manufacture or refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores
suggests primary core reduction was conducted elsewhere. No burned rock or
indications of cooking were found.

-32

Due to a lack of features at this site it seems reasonable to assume that utilization
of this site may have been transitory. However, flakes were present in seemingly large
numbers adjacent to an apparently dependable water source argue for a more than
temporary occupation. Therefore, site 41SV87 is categorized in this report as a
campsite of unknown age. Since this site is not on Fossil Rim property no further work
is recommended.
41SV88
This prehistoric site is on the east bank of Bowden Branch on a terrace that varies
in elevation from 900 to 1200 feet. Site boundaries have not been determined, but 200
x 200 meters appears to be a reasonable estimate based on the presence of artifacts
on the surface. The entire site was not investigated and the boundaries were taken
from the topographic map, Glen Rose West.
The soil appears to be shallow in this area with clay very close to the surface and
no shovel tests were dug. Flakes were observed scattered over the surface in the
primary site area and occasionally upslope away from the main site concentration. The
majority of flakes observed could be classified as interior or tertiary thinning flakes. No
artifacts were collected.
The presence of small thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool
manufacture or refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores
suggests that raw material procurement and primary core reduction were conducted
elsewhere. A collection of 2 dart points, 1 arrow point, 2 distal tips, and a large
stemmed knife was made by Kelly Snodgrass during previous visits to this site. The
artifact types from this site suggest an occupation during the Middle Archaic and Late
Prehistoric periods. No features were observed. However, the presence of a possible
spring in the area where the main concentration of artifacts was observed suggests
41SV88 may have been occupied on a regular basis. Therefore, this site is classified
as a campsite.
Due to the apparent shallow nature of the soil, site 41SV88 is not considered to
possess significant research potential in terms of undisturbed, stratified deposits.
Surface collections, although limited in value, are capable of providing useful data; and
the research potential of site 41SV88 is probably limited to a controlled surface
collection with limited subsurface testing.

-33

41SV89
This prehistoric site is on an upland terrace about 300 meters east of an unnamed
tributary of Bowden Branch at an elevation of approximately 1000 feet. This is a small
site with boundaries estimated at 20 meters in diameter. Very little soil is present and it
was decided that shovel testing would not be productive; therefore no tests were dug.
A few flakes were seen scattered over the surface and one unifacial end scraper was
collected. During the field inspection of 41SV89 it was noted that the majority of flakes
observed could be classified as interior or tertiary thinning flakes. The presence of small
thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool manufacture or refurbishing. The
paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores suggests that primary core
reduction was conducted elsewhere. The scraper could have been used for a number
of tasks related to hunting or plant processing. Microscopic analysis is needed to make
a determination.
Since no features were observed it seems reasonable to assume that utilization of
this site was probably transitory. Therefore, site 41SV89 is categorized in this report as
a lithic scatter.
This site can't be dated on the basis of the single unifacial scraper as these
artifacts have been documented in sites of various time periods. However, they appear
to be most common in Late Prehistoric sites.
Due to the shallow nature of the soil, site 41SV89 is not considered to possess
significant research potential in terms of undisturbed, stratified deposits. Surface
collections, although limited in value, are capable of providing useful data; and the
research potential of site 41SV89 is probably limited to a controlled surface collection.
41SV90
This historic site is on an upland terrace between two unnamed tributaries of
Barker Branch at an elevation of 950-980 feet. Site boundaries have not been
determined, but artifacts were observed scattered over an area of at least 20 meters in
diameter. No shovel tests were dug.
Artifacts observed include crockery fragments, brown glass, clear glass, purple
glass, possible window glass, and various miscellaneous pieces of metal. According to
Kelly Snodgrass pieces of farm machinery have been found at this site. No collection
was made.

-34

The presence of glass and ceramics suggests the presence of a house site.
Although this site is not viewed as highly significant, a controlled surface collection of
artifacts combined with archival research might reveal useful information regarding
historic settlement in the area.
41SV101
This prehistoric site is on the east bank of Bowden Branch on a terrace that varies
in elevation from 900 to 1200 feet. Site boundaries have not been determined, but 200
x 200 meters appears to be a reasonable estimate based on the presence of artifacts
on the surface. The entire site was not investigated, and the boundaries were taken
from the topographic map, Glen Rose West.
The soil appears to be shallow in this area with clay very close to the surface and
no shovel tests were dug. Flakes were observed scattered over the surface in the
primary site area and occasionally upslope away from the main site concentration. The
majority of flakes observed could be classified as interior or tertiary thinning flakes. No
artifacts were collected.
The presence of small thinning flakes is indicative of the latter stages of tool
manufacture or refurbishing. The paucity of primary cortex flakes and absence of cores
suggests that raw material procurement and primary core reduction were conducted
elsewhere. A collection of 2 dart points (types Marshall and Travis), 1 arrow point
(possible Scallorn), 2 distal tips, and a large stemmed knife was made by Kelly
Snodgrass during previous visits to this site. An additional collection was made by Jeff
Mercard (date unknown) prior to the transfer of ownership of this site to Fossil Rim.
Based on a photograph of specimens reported to have been collected from this site by
Mr. Mercard, the following types are represented: Castroville-like, Darl/Godley,
Pedernales dart points and Perdiz and Scallorn arrow points. The artifact types from
this site suggest an occupation during the Middle Archaic, Late Archaic, and Late
Prehistoric periods. Some archaeologists view the Darl type as belonging to a
transitional period between the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods. No features were
observed. However, the presence of a possible spring in the area where the main
concentration of artifacts was observed suggests 41SV101 may have been occupied on
a regular basis. Therefore, this site is classified as a campsite.
Due to the apparent shallow nature of the soil, site 41SV101 is not considered to
possess significant research potential in terms of undisturbed, stratified deposits.
Surface collections, although limited in value, are capable of providing useful data; and
the research potential of site 41SV101 is probably limited to a controlled surface
collection with limited subsurface testing.

-35

ISOLATED FINDS
IF-1
This find consists of a Pedernales dart point, circa 200 B.C. to 1200 B.C. as
defined by Turner and Hester (1985:139), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
The specimen is complete and one lateral edge has been re-worked removing most of
one shoulder. Probable hunting loss or discard. Collected by Nick Davis. The location
of this find was not confirmed by the Principal Investigator and its approximate location
is plotted on the topographic map (Figure 2).
IF-2
This find consists of a Scallorn arrow point, circa A.D. 700 to A.D. 1200 as defined
by Turner and Hester (1985:189), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is missing distal tip due to bending fracture. Probable hunting loss or
discard. Collected by Kelly Snodgrass. The site of this find is the top of a very
prominent landform at least 1200 feet in elevation (Figure 2). The Principal Investigator
visited the site and found no additional artifacts. The artifact is illustrated in Figure 6.
IF-3
This find consists of a large unifacial flake with possible retouch one edge. Found
by William E. Moore but not collected. A thorough search of the area failed to produce
additional evidence of a site (Figure 2).
IF-4
This find consists of a Dart point, age and type unknown. Specimen is complete
and retains some cortex on the blade that is steeply beveled on both edges. It appears
to have been subjected to heat (probably post-depositional). Probable discard or
hunting loss. Collected by William E. Moore. A thorough search of the area failed to
produce additional evidence of a site (Figure 2).
IF-5
This find consists of an Arrow point fragment, age and type unknown, made of
chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen is missing basal edge and exhibits
pre-manufacture heat annealing. Possible hunting loss or discard. Collected by Kelly
Snodgrass. This find was made in front of the gate to the wolf pen area. It was not
possible to plot the location of this isolated find on the topographic map.
-36

RECOMMENDATIONS
This preliminary study has revealed that prehistoric and historic sites are present
on Fossil Rim property. Some of these sites are believed to possess research potential
that could make a significant contribution to the archaeological database for this area.
Since this is a privately funded endeavor the criteria normally imposed on site
significance do not apply. In this situation all sites are viewed as important in terms of
their relationship to each other and the region in which they occur. Therefore, the
protection of each prehistoric and historic site on Fossil Rim property is recommended
until a plan designed to retrieve meaningful data from these sites can be implemented.
In terms of the prehistoric sites there are two ways in which data are collected controlled surface collecting and subsurface investigation. First, however, each site
should be permanently marked. It is recommended that a metal staker be placed on
each site with a metal tag that identifies the site by its official number.
Many of the prehistoric sites are found on deflated surfaces. These kinds of sites
are best examined by means of a controlled surface collection. However, since many of
these sites were not shovel tested or thoroughly field checked it is possible that buried
deposits may be present in some cases. Therefore, it is recommended that a shovel
testing program be attempted during any site investigation. Only one site (41SV76) was
located solely through shovel testing, and its research potential can only be evaluated
through subsurface investigation.
Two sites are considered particularly important. Site 41SV77 is the only prehistoric
site found to date that appears to contain evidence of hearths, and site 41SV83
represents the only evidence of prehistoric use of a rockshelter on Fossil Rim property.
It is recommended that the rockshelter site be tested and a controlled surface collection
and shovel testing be carried out at 41SV77. It is recommended that the remainder of
the prehistoric sites be subjected to controlled surface collections and shovel testing
when practical.
The three historic sites on Fossil Rim property (41SV78 and 41SV84) are not
considered potentially significant. However, useful data regarding late nineteenth and
early twentieth century settlement of the area may be obtained through artifact analysis
and archival research. Of the two sites, 41SV78 is probably the oldest and should be
subjected to a controlled surface collection in addition to archival research.

-37

Continued artifact collecting by employees of Fossil Rim should be discouraged.
However, if this is allowed to continue it is important that a system of cataloging all
artifacts found in the park according to their provenance should be initiated. The effort
that has been expended in this project should culminate in an attempt to share the
information with the public. Artifacts from Fossil Rim could be placed in a temporary or
permanent display that would help to educate and inform those that visit this facility of
the need to identify and protect our cultural resources. Using this report as a guide, a
popular version could be written for sale or free distribution to school children or adults.
It is suggested that some of the more significant artifacts be replicated for sale by
means of casting and/or appearing on postcards. Color photographs of certain artifacts
might be attractive as post cards and ink drawings could decorate greeting cards.
Information relating to archaeology could be added to the pamphlets provided tourists
for their drive through the park. This kind of information could also be presented via a
walking tour of the park that could visit certain sites.

-38

REFERENCES CITED
Biessart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office
of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission, Special Report
28.
Carter, W. T.
1931

The Soils of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station Bulletin 41.
College Station.

Coburn, Winfred C.
1978
Soil Survey of Hood and Somervell Counties, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, in cooperation
with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Gallagher, Joseph G.
1974a
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Dinosaur Valley State Park. Southern
Methodist University, Archaeology Research Program, Research Report
Number 44.
1974b

Results of Small Survey of Comanche Peak Transmission Lines and
Pipeline Right-Of-Ways. Unnumbered report prepared by the
Archaeology Research Program, Southern Methodist University.

Gallagher, Joseph G., and Susan E. Bearden
1976
The Hopewell Site: A late Archaic Campsite in the Central Brazos River
Valley. Southern Methodist University, Institute for the Study of Earth
and Man, Contributions in Anthropology Number 19.
Hill, R. T.
1901

Geography and Geology of the Black and Grand Prairies, Texas with
Detailed Description of the Cretaceous Formations and Special
Reference to Artesian Waters. In Twenty-First Annual Report to the
United States Geological Survey 1899-1900, Part 7 - Texas.

Kingston, Michael T., and Ruth Harris (Editors)
1983
Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide. A. H. Belo Corporation.
Dallas.

-39

Meining, D. W.
1988
Imperial Texas: An Interpretive Essay in Cultural Geography. The
University of Texas Press. Austin.
Moore, William E.
1991
An Archaeological Survey of the Glen Rose Golf Club Project,
Somervell County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates, Contract
Report Number 11.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press. Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.
Skinner, S. Alan
1991
Cultural Resource Survey near Chalk Mountain, Texas. AR
Consultants, Cultural Resources Report 91-9.
Skinner, S. Alan, and Gerald K. Humphreys
1973
The Historic and Prehistoric Archaeological Resources of the Squaw
Creek Reservoir. Southern Methodist University, Institute for the Study
of Earth and Man, Contributions in Anthropology Number 10.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Archeological Society, Special Publication Number 1 and Texas
Memorial Museum, Bulletin 4.
Tunnell, O. Curtis
1978
The Gibson Lithic Cache from West Texas. Texas Historical
Commission, Office of the State Archeologist, Report 30. Austin.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press.
Austin.
Turpin, Jeff
1994

Where the Dinosaur Roam: Testing of 41SV56 and 41SV57, Dinosaur
Valley State Park, Somervell County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, Cultural Resource Program Report 94-1.
-40

Whitsett, W. Hayden
1990
An Archeological Reconnaissance of Proposed Wastewater System
Improvements, City of Glen Rose, Somervell County, SRF 2577. Texas
Water Development Board. Austin.

-41

APPENDIX I: SOMERVELL COUNTY SITES RECORDED AT TARL
41SV1:

This prehistoric campsite was recorded in 1982 by Laurie
Moseley, III, a member of the Texas Archeological Society. It is
described on the site form as very prolific in terms of artifacts
with 100 Perdiz arrow points, 50 Scallorn arrow points, and at
least 100 dart points. Pottery, hearths, and a possible Folsom
point are also discussed as being part of this site. At the time of
this recording 41SV1 was in danger of being destroyed due to
gravel quarrying.

41SV2:

This historic pioneer cemetery was recorded in 1982 by Laurie
Moseley, III, a member of the Texas Archeological Society.
Graves date from the 1820s and 1830s and may represent the
first settlers in the area.

41SV3:

This prehistoric habitation site was recorded in 1991 by Brazos
Valley Research Associates during a survey of the proposed
Glen Rose Golf Club project (Moore 1991). Shovel testing and
surface inspection revealed a site virtually destroyed by
construction activities. Artifacts observed include debitage,
cores, and a thin biface that resembles the Covington type. No
further work was recommended.

41SV4:

This prehistoric habitation site was recorded in 1991 by Brazos
Valley Research Associates during a survey of the proposed
Glen Rose Golf Club project (Moore 1991). Shovel testing and
surface inspection revealed a site virtually destroyed by
construction activities. Artifacts observed include debitage and
one dart point that resembles the Palmilla type. No further work
was recommended.

41SV5:

This prehistoric habitation site was recorded in 1991 by Brazos
Valley Research Associates during a survey of the proposed
Glen Rose Golf Club project (Moore 1991). Shovel testing and
surface inspection revealed a site virtually destroyed by
construction activities. Artifacts observed include debitage,
unifaces, a biface fragment, and two pieces of obsidian. No
further work was recommended.

41SV6:

This concentration of lithic debris, chipped stone tools, and a
mano covering an area approximately 100 meters in diameter
was recorded by Southern Methodist University during the
Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys
1973). This site is classified as Archaic; further work not
recommended.

41SV7:

This scatter of flakes and chips (no tools observed) in an area 5
meters in diameter was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not
known, and no further work was recommended.

41SV8:

This scatter of lithic debris (no tools observed) eroding out of a
shallow deposit 30 meters in diameter was recorded by Southern
Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in
1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not
known. Controlled surface collection was recommended.

41SV9:

This dense concentration of cultural materials containing mussel
shell, burned rock, lithic debris, chipped stone tools,
hammerstones, and other artifacts over an area of 140 x 500
meters was recorded by Southern Methodist University during
the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). This site is classified as Archaic and
Neo-American. Controlled surface collection and excavation
were recommended.

41SV10:

This scatter of lithic debris, chipped stone tools, and mussel shell
over an area of approximately 50 x 130 meters was recorded by
Southern Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir
project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). A midden (10
meters in diameter) containing burned rock and other cultural
refuse is located in the north-central part of the site and has been
vandalized. The age of this site is not known. Controlled surface
collection and excavation were recommended.

41SV11:

This dense scatter of lithic debris, burned rock, mussel shell, and
other artifacts covering an area 10 meters in diameter was
recorded by Southern Methodist University during the Squaw
Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973).
The site has been vandalized and no further work was
recommended.

41SV12:

This midden marked by mussel shell and other artifacts over an
area of 10 meters in diameter was recorded by Southern
Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in
1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not
known and no further work was recommended.

41SV13:

Two middens and associated scattered lithic debris,
hammerstones, manos, metates, and chipped stone tools over
an area 50 meters in diameter was recorded by Southern
Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in
1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The site is classified as
Archaic. Both middens have been vandalized. Controlled
surface collection and excavation were recommended.

41SV14:

This scatter of flakes eroding out of a low rise was recorded by
Southern Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir
project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The size and
age of this site are not known. Testing was recommended.

41SV15:

This scatter of lithic debris (no tools observed) was recorded by
Southern Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir
project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The size and
age of this site are not known. No further work was
recommended.

41SV16:

This scatter of lithic debris and chipped stone tools over an area
50 x 100 meters was recorded by Southern Methodist University
during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not known and no
further work was recommended.

41SV17:

This concentration of flakes exposed in a road cut (15 x 30
meters) was recorded by Southern Methodist University during
the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not known and no
further work was recommended.

41SV18:

This scatter of lithic debris and chipped stone tools exposed in a
road over an area 70 meters in diameter was recorded by
Southern Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir
project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The age of this
site is not known and no further work was recommended.

41SV19:

This concentration of lithic debris, chipped stone tools, and
hammerstones over an area 20 x 30 meters was recorded by
Southern Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir
project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). This site is
classified as Archaic and Neo-American. Controlled surface
collecting and excavation were recommended.

41SV20:

This scatter of lithic debris, chipped stone tools, pecked stone
tools, and other artifacts in two separate concentrations, each 20
x 30, meters was recorded by Southern Methodist University
during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). This site is classified as Archaic and
Neo-American. Controlled surface collecting and excavation
were recommended.

41SV21:

This scatter of lithic debris and chipped stone tools over an area
of 20 x 60 meters was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not
known. Excavation was recommended.

41SV22:

Two concentrations of lithic debris, mussel shell, and chipped
and pecked stone tools over an area of 10 x 30 meters was
recorded by Southern Methodist University during the Squaw
Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973).
The age of this site is not known. Excavation was recommended.

41SV23:

This scatter of lithic debris and chipped stone tools on the
surface and buried within a sandy deposit covering an area 60 x
110 meters was recorded by Southern Methodist University
during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). This site is classified as Archaic and
Neo-American. Testing was recommended.

41SV24:

This scatter of lithic debris, chipped stone tools, and various
historic artifacts over an area 100 meters in diameter was
recorded by Southern Methodist University during the Squaw
Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973).
The age of this site is not known. No further work was
recommended.

41SV25:

This light lithic scatter over an area 25 meters in diameter was
recorded by Southern Methodist University during the Squaw
Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973).
The age of this site is not known. No further work was
recommended.

41SV26:

This scatter of lithic debris and chipped stone tools over an area
of 60 x 250 meters was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). This site is classified as Archaic
and Neo-American. No further work was recommended.

41SV27:

This thin concentration of flakes and chips over an area of 30 x
50 meters was recorded by Southern Methodist University during
the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not known. No further
work was recommended.

41SV28:

This thin scatter of lithic debris over an area of 30 x 50 meters
was recorded by Southern Methodist University during the
Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys
1973). The site is classified as Archaic. No further work was
recommended.

41SV29:

This scatter of glass, pottery, and iron artifacts associated with a
collapsed stone chimney was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). No further work was
recommended.

41SV30:

This dense concentration of lithic debris, chipped stone tools,
ground stone tools, hammerstones, burned rock, and mussel
shell over an area of 50 x 100 meters was recorded by Southern
Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in
1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). This site is classified as
Late Archaic and Neo-American and is also the location of the
Hopewell Community School. Excavation was recommended.
This site was excavated in 1974 by Southern Methodist
University (Gallagher and Bearden 1976). A temporally mixed
site was revealed with the Late Archaic period the best
represented.

41SV31:

This thin scatter of lithic debris and chipped stone over an area
30 meters in diameter was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). This site is classified as
Archaic. No further work was recommended.

41SV32:

This thin scatter of lithic debris and chipped stone tools over an
area 20 meters in diameter was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not
known. No further work was recommended.

41SV33:

This scatter of lithic debris and a hammerstone over an area 10
meters in diameter was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not
known. No further work was recommended.

41SV34:

This dense concentration of lithic debris, chipped stone tools,
and historic artifacts covering an area of 40 x 70 meters was
recorded by Southern Methodist University during the Squaw
Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973).
This site is classified as Archaic and Neo-American. No further
work was recommended.

41SV35:

The remains of a house (chimney), barn, and corral associated
with a modern windmill was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). No further work was
recommended.

41SV36:

This concentration of flakes and chipped stone tools over an area
10 meters in diameter was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not
known. No further work was recommended.

41SV37:

This small concentration of lithic debris over an area 10 meters in
diameter was recorded by Southern Methodist University during
the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not known. No further
work was recommended.

41SV38:

This scatter of lithic debris over an area 10-15 meters in diameter
was recorded by Southern Methodist University during the
Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys
1973). The age of this site is not known. No further work was
recommended.

41SV39:

Two concentrations of lithic debris and retouched pieces over an
area of 50 x 100 meters was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not
known. No further work was recommended.

41SV40:

This scatter of lithic debris, burned rock, chipped stone tools, and
a piece of pottery over an area of 90 x 150 meters was recorded
by Southern Methodist University during the Squaw Creek
Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973).
Following a controlled surface collection and testing at this site,
no further work was recommended.

41SV41:

This scatter of lithic debris was recorded by Southern Methodist
University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972
(Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The size and age of this site are
not known. No further work was recommended.

41SV42:

This chimney of hand-hewn local limestone associated with
glass, iron, and ceramic artifacts was recorded by Southern
Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in
1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). No further work was
recommended.

41SV43:

This rectangular house foundation with chimney in both ends and
associated with a stone-lined well or storm cellar was recorded
by Southern Methodist University during the Squaw Creek
Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). No
further work was recommended.

41SV44:

This scatter of lithic debris over an area of 25 x 100 meters was
recorded by Southern Methodist University during the Squaw
Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973).
As the scatter was exposed by plowing, a buried component is
suspected. The age of this site is not known. Testing was
recommended.

41SV45:

This scatter of flakes over an area 25 x 50 meters was recorded
by Southern Methodist University during the Squaw Creek
Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The
age of this site is not known. testing was recommended.

41SV46:

This standing stone chimney associated with a house foundation
that appears to have been burned and glass, iron, and ceramic
artifacts was recorded by Southern Methodist University during
the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). No further work was recommended.

41SV47:

This prehistoric habitation site was recorded in 1991 by Brazos
Valley Research Associates during a survey of the proposed
Glen Rose Golf Club project (Moore 1991). Shovel testing
revealed undisturbed cultural materials and possible hearths
below the ground surface. Artifacts observed include debitage
and an untyped arrow point as well as mussel shell and deer
bone. Site 41SV47 is considered to possess research potential
and is eligible to become a State Archeological Landmark. This
site is classified as Late Prehistoric. Testing was recommended.

41SV48:

This buried midden deposit exposed in a creek bank and
containing flakes and chipped stone tools was recorded by
Southern Methodist University during the Squaw Creek Reservoir
project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). The age of this
site is not known. Testing was recommended.

41SV49:

This concentration of lithic debris, chipped stone tools,
hammerstones, and manos covering an area of 50 x 100 meters
was recorded by Southern Methodist University during the
Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys
1973). This site is classified as Archaic. No further work was
recommended.

41SV50:

This concentration of lithic debris, chipped stone tools,
hammerstones, and manos covering an area of 75 meters in
diameter was recorded by Southern Methodist University during
the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). This site is classified as Archaic and
Neo-American. No further work was recommended.

41SV51:

This scatter of lithic debris, chipped stone tools, mussel shell,
hammerstones, and burned rock covering an area 50 x 75
meters was recorded by Southern Methodist University during
the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). This site is classified as Paleo-Indian,
Archaic, and Neo-American. No further work was recommended.

This site was visited in 1991 by Brazos Valley Research
Associates during a survey of the proposed Glen Rose Golf Club
project (Moore 1991). Artifacts observed include flakes, bifaces,
and unifacial tools. Its size was estimated at 500 x 1600 feet.
Much of the site had been disturbed and no furthe work was
recommended. The rock art that was reported as part of this site
was found to be on the bank of the creek below and presumably
outside the boundaries of 41SV51. It was recommended that the
rock art be protected.
41SV52:

This thin deposit of lithic debris over an area of 50 x 300 meters
was recorded by Southern Methodist University during the
Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys
1973). The age of this site is not known. No further work was
recommended.

41SV53:

This historic lime kiln with no associated artifacts was recorded
by Southern Methodist University during the Squaw Creek
Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and Humphreys 1973). No
further work was recommended.

41SV54:

This scatter of lithic debris and a mano covering an area of 30 x
50 meters was recorded by Southern Methodist University during
the Squaw Creek Reservoir project in 1972 (Skinner and
Humphreys 1973). The age of this site is not known. No further
work was recommended.

41SV55:

This scatter of lithic debris and stone tools over an area of
65,000 square meters was recorded by Southern Methodist
University in 1974 during a transmission line and pipeline
right-of-way survey for the Comanche Peak Steam Electric
Station (Gallagher 1974b). The age of this site is not stated.
Excavation was recommended.

41SV56:

This prehistoric midden exposed in a creek bank was recorded
during a reconnaissance survey of Dinosaur Valley State Park by
Southern Methodist University in 1974 (Gallagher 1974a). A
partially eroded hearth, mussel shell, ash, and lithic debris were
observed in the exposed midden profile. The age of this site is
not known. Protection was recommended.

This site was tested in 1993 by the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory for the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department (Turpin 1994). A cutbank exposed at least five intact
occupational levels dated to the Late Prehistoric period by two
radiocarbon samples.
41SV57:

This scatter of lithic debitage and mussel shell over an area of
200 square meters was recorded during a reconnaissance
survey of Dinosaur Valley State Park by Southern Methodist
University in 1974 (Gallagher 1974a). The age of this site is not
known. Protection was recommended.
The site was visited by Ron Ralph of the Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department in 1980.
This site was tested in 1993 by the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory for the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department (Turpin 1994). This site proved to be a largely
deflated assemblage of flakes, tools, ceramics, burned rock, and
mussel shell, indicative of a Late Prehistoric campsite.

41SV58:

This buried midden site containing mussel shell, charcoal, and a
single flake was recorded during a reconnaissance survey of
Dinosaur Valley State Park by Southern Methodist University in
1974 (Gallagher 1974a). The age of this site is not known.
Protection was recommended.

41SV59:

This scatter of mussel shell and lithic debris was recorded during
a reconnaissance survey of Dinosaur Valley State Park by
Southern Methodist University in 1974 (Gallagher 1974a). The
age of this site is not known. No further work was recommended.

41SV60:

This rockshelter site was recorded by Jimmy Smith in 1990 after
he visited it with Don Lemens, local artifact collector (TARL site
files). This is an important site containing at least one burial,
Perdiz, Washita, Bonham, and Scallorn arrow points, deer and
fish bone, burned rock, deer antler flaking tool, and possible shell
scoop. The site has been vandalized by Mr. Lemens who plans
to destroy it completely.

41SV61:

This isolated hearth and possible campsite was recorded by
Daniel J. Crouch of the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department in
1991 during a visit to Dinosaur Valley State Park (TARL site
files). The age of this site is not known.

41SV62:

This surface scatter was recorded by Daniel J. Crouch of the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department in 1991 during a visit to
Dinosaur Valley State Park (TARL site files). The age of this site
is not known.

41SV63:

This historic habitation site and trash scatter dating from the
1930s - 1950s was recorded by Daniel J. Crouch of the Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department in 1991 during a visit to Dinosaur
Valley State Park (TARL site files).
This site was assessed for impact by the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory for the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department in 1993 (Turpin 1994). This site was found to be not
significant and no further work was recommended.

41SV64:

This possible historic grave associated with a rock cairn was
recorded by Daniel J. Crouch of the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department in 1991 during a visit to Dinosaur Valley State Park
(TARL site files).

41SV65:

This historic farmstead dating to the late nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries was recorded by Daniel J. Crouch of the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department in 1991 during a visit to
Dinosaur Valley State Park (TARL site files).

41SV66:

This standing structure dating to the 1930s was recorded by AR
Consultants on September 4, 1991 during a survey for the Erath
County Electric Company (TARL site files).

41SV67:

This prehistoric campsite was recorded in 1992 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the initial assessment of the Fossil
Rim Wildlife Center (Moore 1992). This site is estimated at 300 x
600 meters in size and consists of a scatter of debitage,
hammerstone/mano, chopper, and numerous dart points. No
features were observed. Based on two Plainview-like artifacts
this site is classified as Paleo-Indian and Archaic. Controlled
surface collection is recommended.

41SV68:

This house/farmstead site with possible grave dating from the
late nineteenth through early twentieth centuries was recorded by
Jimmy Smith in March of 1992 as part of the Soil Conservation
Service Training Program.

41SV69:

This prehistoric lithic scatter was recorded by Jimmy Smith in
March of 1992 as part of the Soil Conservation Service Training
Program. A Perdiz arrow point dates this site to the Late
Prehistoric period.

41SV70:

This prehistoric lithic scatter and possible burned rock midden
with mussel shell was recorded by Jimmy Smith in March of 1992
as part of the Soil Conservation Service Training Program. The
age of this site is not known.

41SV71:

This prehistoric lithic scatter with burned rock was recorded by
Jimmy Smith in March of 1992 as part of the Soil Conservation
Service Training Program. The age of this site is not known.

41SV72:

This prehistoric campsite containing burned rock, manos,
metates, and a rock cairn (possible burial) was recorded by
Jimmy Smith in March of 1992 as part of the Soil Conservation
Service Training Program. This site is classified as Transitional
Archaic and Late Prehistoric.

41SV73:

This prehistoric campsite containing mussel shell and historic
pottery was recorded by Jimmy Smith in March of 1992 as part of
the Soil Conservation Service Training Program. The age of this
site is not known.

41SV74:

This historic log cabin was recorded by Jimmy Smith in March of
1992 as part of the Soil Conservation Service Training Program.
The age of this site is not known.

41SV75:

This prehistoric lithic scatter was recorded in 1992 by Brazos
Valley Research Associates during the current assessment of
Fossil Rim.

41SV76:

This prehistoric campsite was recorded in 1992 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the current assessment of Fossil
Rim.

41SV77:

This prehistoric campsite was recorded in 1992 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the current assessment of Fossil
Rim.

41SV78:

This historic house site was recorded in 1992 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the current assessment of Fossil
Rim.

41SV79:

This prehistoric lithic scatter was recorded in 1992 by Brazos
Valley Research Associates during the current assessment of
Fossil Rim.

41SV80:

This prehistoric campsite was recorded in 1992 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the current assessment of Fossil
Rim.

41SV81:

This prehistoric campsite was recorded in 1992 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the current assessment of Fossil
Rim.

41SV82:

This prehistoric lithic scatter was recorded in 1992 by Brazos
Valley Research Associates during the current assessment of
Fossil Rim.

41SV83:

This prehistoric rock shelter site was recorded in 1992 by Brazos
Valley Research Associates during the current assessment of
Fossil Rim.

41SV84:

This historic house site was recorded in 1992 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the current assessment of Fossil
Rim.

41SV85:

This prehistoric lithic scatter was recorded in 1992 by Brazos
Valley Research Associates during the current assessment of
Fossil Rim.

41SV86:

This historic log crib was recorded in 1992 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the current assessment of Fossil
Rim.

41SV87:

This prehistoric campsite was recorded in 1992 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the current assessment of Fossil
Rim.

41SV88:

This prehistoric campsite was recorded in 1992 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the current assessment of Fossil
Rim.

41SV89:

This prehistoric lithic scatter was recorded in 1993 by Brazos
Valley Research Associates during the current assessment of
Fossil Rim.

41SV90:

This historic trash scatter was recorded in 1993 by Brazos Valley
Research Associates during the current assessment of Fossil
Rim.

41SV91:

This number has not been used.

41SV92:

This number has not been used.

41SV93

This number has not been used.

41SV94:

This number has not been used.

41SV95:

This number has not been used.

41SV96:

This number has not been used.

41SV97:

This number has not been used.

41SV98:

This number has not been used.

41SV99:

This number has not been used.

41SV100:

This number has not been used.

41SV101:

This prehistoric campsite was recorded in 1992 by Jeff Merkard
(TARL site files). It dates to the Archaic and Late Prehistoric
periods.
This site was visited by Brazos Valley Research Associates
during the current assessment of Fossil Rim.

41SV102:

This prehistoric open campsite was recorded in October of 1991
by Jimmy Smith during a project to evaluate and record sites
known to Don Lemens, local collector. The age of the site is not
stated.

41SV103:

This prehistoric open campsite was recorded in October of 1991
by Jimmy Smith during a project to evaluate and record sites
known to Don Lemens, local collector. Based on dart and arrow
points, the age of this site is assumed to be Archaic and Late
Prehistoric.

41SV104:

This prehistoric open campsite was recorded in October of 1991
by Jimmy Smith during a project to evaluate and record sites
known to Don Lemens, local collector. Based on the presence of
arrow points, the age of this site is assumed to be Late
Prehistoric.

41SV105:

This prehistoric rockshelter site was recorded in October of 1991
by Jimmy Smith during a project to evaluate and record sites
known to Don Lemens, local collector. Based on the presence of
arrow points this site is assumed to be Late Prehistoric. The site
has been vandalized, and two test trenches were excavated by
Jimmy Smith and Don Lemens.

41SV106:

This prehistoric rockshelter site was recorded in October of 1991
by Jimmy Smith during a project to evaluate and record sites
known to Don Lemens, local collector. Based on the presence of
arrow points, this site is assumed to be Late Prehistoric. A one
meter square test pit was excavated by Jimmy Smith and Don
Lemens.

41SV107:

This prehistoric rockshelter site with a hearth and animal bone
was recorded in October of 1991 by Jimmy Smith during a
project to evaluate and record sites known to Don Lemens, local
collector. Based on the presence of arrow points, this site is
assumed to be Late Prehistoric.

41SV108:

This prehistoric open campsite was recorded in October of 1991
by Jimmy Smith during a project to evaluate and record sites
known to Don Lemens, local collector. The age of the site is not
stated. It has been vandalized.

41SV109:

This prehistoric open campsite was recorded in October of 1991
by Jimmy Smith during a project to evaluate and record sites
known to Don Lemens, local collector. The age of the site is not
stated. According to the site form this site has been destroyed
through artifact collecting.

41SV110:

This prehistoric open campsite was recorded in October of 1991
by Jimmy Smith during a project to evaluate and record sites
known to Don Lemens, local collector. The age of the site is not
stated. It has been vandalized.

41SV111:

This prehistoric open campsite was recorded in October of 1991
by Jimmy Smith during a project to evaluate and record sites
known to Don Lemens, local collector. Based on the presence of
arrow points, this site is assumed to be Late Prehistoric.

41SV112:

This prehistoric open campsite containing manos and metates
was recorded in October of 1991 by Jimmy Smith during a
project to evaluate and record sites known to Don Lemens, local
collector. This site is classified as Archaic.

41SV113:

This prehistoric open campsite containing burned, manos, and
metates was recorded in October of 1991 by Jimmy Smith during
a project to evaluate and record sites known to Don Lemens,
local collector. The age of the site is not stated.

41SV114:

This prehistoric open campsite containing manos, metates, and
cores was recorded in October of 1991 by Jimmy Smith during a
project to evaluate and record sites known to Don Lemens, local
collector. The age of the site is not stated. According to the site
form this site is almost destroyed, partly through construction.

41SV115:

This prehistoric open campsite containing manos and metates
was recorded in October of 1991 by Jimmy Smith during a
project to evaluate and record sites known to Don Lemens, local
collector. The age of the site is stated as Archaic. According to
the site form this site is almost destroyed, partly through
construction.

41SV116:

This prehistoric rockshelter site was recorded by Jimmy Smith.

41SV117:

This possible historical structural remnant with associated trash
scatter and thin prehistoric component was recorded during
testing at Dinosaur Valley State Park (Turpin 1994). Avoidance
was recommended.

41SV118:

This prehistoric site was recorded during testing at Dinosuar
Valley State Park (Turpin 1994). This site consists of two badly
disturbed burned rock middens. Avoidance was recommended.

41SV119:

This prehistoric burned rock midden and associated chert and
mussel shell scatter was recorded during testing at Dinosaur
Valley State Park (Turpin 1994) and independently by park staff.
Avoidance was recommended.

41SV120:

This prehistoric scatter of burned rock, mussel shell, and
debitage was recorded during testing at Dinosaur Valley State
Park (Turpin 1994). Avoidance and protection of the remainder
of the site was recommended.

REFERENCES CITED
Gallagher, Joseph G.
1974a
A Reconnaissance Survey of the Dinosaur Valley State
Park. Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research
Program, Research Report Number 44.
1974b

Results of Small Survey of Comanche Peak Transmission
Lines and Pipeline Right-Of-Ways. Unnumbered report
prepared by the Archaeology Research Program, Southern
Methodist University.

Gallagher, Joseph G., and Susan E. Bearden
1976
The Hopewell Site: A late Archaic Campsite in the Central
Brazos River Valley. Southern Methodist University, Institute
for the Study of Earth and Man, Contributions in
Anthropology Number 19.
Moore, William E.
1991

1992

An Archaeological Survey of the Glen Rose Golf Club
Project, Somervell County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research
Associates, Contract Report Number 11.
An Archaeological Assessment of the Fossil Rim Wildlife
Center, Somervell County, Texas. Brazos Valley Research
Associates, Contract Report Number 16.

Skinner, S. Alan, and Gerald K. Humphreys
1973
The Historic and Prehistoric Archaeological Resources of the
Squaw Creek Reservoir. Southern Methodist University,
Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Contributions in
Anthropology Number 10.
Turpin, Jeff
1994

Where the Dinosaur Roam: Testing of 41SV5 and 41SV57,
Dinosaur Valley State Park, Somervell County, Texas. Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department, Cultural Resource Program,
Report 94-1.

APPENDIX II: SHOVEL TEST LOG
________________________________________________________________
Test
Date
Depth
Diameter Results
_______________________________________________________________
41SV67
01
02
03
04

11-21-91
06-08-92
06-08-92
06-08-92

30 cm
30 cm
20 cm
35 cm

25 cm
25 cm
25 cm
25 cm

sterile
sterile (clay)
sterile (clay)
sterile (clay)

41SV76
01
02
03
04

06-08-92
06-08-92
06-08-92
06-08-92

26 cm
25 cm
26 cm
25 cm

25 cm
33 cm
30 cm
25 cm

sterile (clay)
flakes (clay)
flakes (clay)
sterile

41SV77
01
02

06-08-92
06-08-92

40 cm
40 cm

25 cm
25 cm

sterile
sterile

41SV81
01
02
03
04
05
06

11-21-91
11-21-91
06-08-92
06-08-92
06-08-92
06-08-92

25 cm
20 cm
25 cm
15 cm
30 cm
40 cm

25 cm
25 cm
25 cm
25 cm
25 cm
40 cm

sterile
sterile
flakes
sterile
sterile
sterile (cutbank)

41SV83
01
06-09-92 18 cm 35 cm
sterile
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX III: ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS
________________________________________________________________
Artifact Number
Description
________________________________________________________________
Artifacts with provenience
41SV67-1

Plainview dart point, circa 7000 B.C to 4000 B.C. (Suhm and
Jelks 1962:239), made of heavily patinated white chert believed
to be from the Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits extensive
re-working along both lateral edges and is alternately beveled.
Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by Bruce Williams (see
Figure 3a in report).

41SV67-2

Drill or perforator made from Plainview point, circa 7000 B.C. to
4000 B.C. (Suhm and Jelks 1962:239), made of heavily patinated
white chert believed to be from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is missing distal tip and exhibits a bending snap
fracture. Probable discard and is indicator of a small campsite.
Found by Bruce Williams (see Figure 3b in report)

41SV67-3

Dart point, type and age unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits heavy lateral edge
re-touch modification and is the remains of a much larger artifact.
Only the proximal half remains with the break due to a bending
fracture. Probable discard or hunting loss. Found by William E.
Moore.

41SV67-4

Distal tip of unknown artifact type, probably a dart point, made of
chert from the Edwards formation. Probable discard or hunting
loss. Found by William E. Moore

41SV67-5

Dart point, type and age unknown, probably a Late Archaic type,
made of chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen is
complete and, because of its small size, may have been
reworked from a larger artifact. Probable hunting loss. Found by
Kelly Snodgrass.

41SV67-6

Palmillas dart point, circa Middle to Late Archaic (Turner and
Hester 1985:134), made of dark gray chert from the Edwards
formation. Specimen is complete. Probable hunting loss. Found
by Kelly Snodgrass.

41SV67-7

Ensor dart point, circa 200 B.C. - A.D. 600 or later (Turner and
Hester 1985:94) made of translucent chert from the Edwards
formation. Specimen is complete. Probable hunting loss. Found
by Bruce Williams.

41SV67-8

Pedernales dart point, circa 2000 B.C. - 1200 B.C. (Turner and
Hester 1985:139-140), made of chert from the Edwards
formation. Specimen is complete and may have been re-worked
from a larger size. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by
Bruce Williams.

41SV67-9

Probable Pedernales dart point, circa 2000 B.C. - 1200 B.C.
(Turner and Hester 1985:139-140), made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen is broken due to an impact
fracture that has removed the distal tip and part of the blade.
This artifact may not be a Pedernales type as some re-work to
both lateral edges has removed shoulders, but its present
appearance is Pedernales-like. Probable hunting loss or discard.
Found by Bruce Williams.

41SV67-10 Martindale dart point, circa 3000 to 4000 B.C. to 1000 A.D. or
greater part thereof (Suhm and Jelks 1962:213-214), made of
chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen is missing distal tip
due to impact damage. A possible attempt to re-work the
fracture edge was noted. Probable hunting loss or discard.
Found by Bruce Williams.
41SV67-11 Ensor dart point, circa 200 B.C. - A.D. 600 or later (Turner and
Hester 1985:94), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is complete. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found
by Bruce Williams.
41SV67-12 Ensor dart point, circa 200 B.C. - A.D. 600 or later (Turner and
Hester 1985:94), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is complete. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found
by Bruce Williams.
41SV67-13 Ensor dart point, circa 200 B.C. - A.D. 600 or later (Turner and
Hester 1985:94), made of white chert from the Edwards
formation. Specimen is missing distal half. Probable hunting
loss or discard. Found by Bruce Williams.
41SV67-14 Dart point, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen re-worked from a larger artifact.
Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by Bruce Williams.

41SV67-15 Dart point, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen has some red coloring from heat.
Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by Bruce Williams.

41SV67-16 Godley dart point, Late Archaic to Late Prehistoric (Turner and
Hester 1985:102), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is complete. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found
by Jim Jackson.
41SV67-17 Hoxie dart point, Early Archaic (Turner and Hester 1985:106),
made of chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits
alternate beveling and some smoothing and grinding on the stem
edges and the distal tip is missing due to possible impact
damage. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by Jim
Jackson.
41SV67-18 Lange dart point, circa 4000 B.C. to A.D. 100 or greater part
thereof (Suhm and Jelks 1962:203-204), made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen is complete. Probable hunting
loss or discard. Found by Jim Jackson.
41SV67-19 Lange dart point, circa 4000 B.C. to A.D. 100 or greater part
thereof (Suhm and Jelks 1962:203-204), made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen is complete. Probable hunting
loss or discard. Found by Jim Jackson.
41SV67-20 Dart point, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen is missing the proximal tip due to
a snap fracture and is heavily re-worked. Probable hunting loss
or discard. Found by Jim Jackson.
41SV67-21 Dart point, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen is broken with only a lateral edge
and one shoulder remaining. Probable discard. Found by Jim
Jackson.
41SV67-22 Dart point, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen is missing the distal portion due
to a bending or snap fracture. Probable hunting loss or discard.
Found by Jim Jackson.
41SV67-23 Distal tip of probable dart point, made of chert from the Edwards
formation. Specimen exhibits a bending or snap fracture.
Probable discard. Found by Jim Jackson.

41SV67-24 Distal tip of probable dart point, made of chert from the Edwards
formation. Specimen exhibits a bending or snap fracture.
Probable discard. Found by Jim Jackson.
41SV67-25 Possible hammerstone or mano, age and type unknown, made
from a large cobble. Specimen exhibits pitting around lateral
edges; however, this damage may have resulted, at least in part,
from post- depositional activities. Probable discard. Found by
Bruce Williams.
41SV67-26 Cobble tool, age and type unknown, made from a possible chert
river cobble from the Uvalde formation, with several large
unifacial flakes removed from one end. Specimen exhibits userelated damage on fracture end suggesting wood working activity
such as a chopper. Probable discard. Found by William E.
Moore
41SV67-27 Hoxie dart point, circa 2500 B.C. to 6000 B.C. (Turner and
Hester 1985:55), with some similarities to the Angostura type,
circa 6000 B.C. to 6500 B.C. (Turner and Hester 1985:66-67),
made of chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen is missing
distal tip due to impact damage. Probable hunting loss. Found
by Kelly Snodgrass (see Figure 5a in report).
41SV75-1

Marshall dart point, circa 1000 B.C. or earlier
(Turner and Hester 1985:119), made of chert from the Edwards
formation. Specimen exhibits bending fracture on proximal end
and has been heated. Probable discard. Found by Bruce
Williams.

41SV75-2

Marshall dart point, circa 1000 B.C. or earlier (Turner and Hester
1985:119), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen exhibits perverse fracture on proximal end and has
been heated. Probable discard. Found by Bruce Williams.

41SV75-3

Ensor dart point, circa 200 B.C. to A.D. 6000 (Turner and Hester
1985:94), made of chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen
is missing distal tip due to a perverse fracture. Probable discard.
Found by Bruce Williams.

41SV75-4

Martindale dart point, circa 4000 B.C. to A.D 1000 (Turner and
Hester 1985:120), made of a black chert with a heavy gray/white
patina from the Edwards formation. Specimen is missing a
portion of one shoulder and has been extensively re-worked.
Probable discard. Found by Bruce Williams.

41SV75-5

Possible Godley dart point, a type occurring during the Late
Archaic to Late Prehistoric periods, circa 1000 B.C. to A.D. 1600
(Turner and Hester 1985:54- 55), made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen is missing distal half due to a
bending snap fracture. Probable discard. Found by Bruce
Williams.

41SV75-6

Dart point, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits some impact damage to
distal tip and possesses lateral edge re-work. Probable discard.
Found by Bruce Williams.

41SV75-7

Scraper, age and type unknown, probable fragment of larger
specimen made on chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen
is unifacial and exhibits modification on end (unbroken) and
lateral side. Opposite side shows minor wear but may be postdepositional. Some pot-lidding from heat (also post-depositional)
is present and may be the reason for breakage. Probable
discard. Found by Jim Jackson.

41SV75-8

Flake scraper, age and type unknown, made on secondary flake
of chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen has been
modified on only one lateral edge and was probably heat
annealed prior to manufacture. Probable discard. Found by
William E. Moore

41SV75-9

Flake tool that probably functioned as a perforator or drill, age
and type unknown, made on large flake of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen is missing distal end. One edge
may have been used as a scraper. Probable discard. Found by
William E. Moore (see Figure 4a in report).
Debitage (N=31) from 41SV75. These specimens are not
individually numbered and consist of 1 primary flake, 9
secondary flakes, and 21 tertiary flakes. Most exhibit evidence of
heat treatment in the form of reddened color and/or pot lids.
Probable discard or waste material. Found by William E. Moore.

41SV76

Debitage (N=12) from 41SV76. These specimens are not
individually numbered and consist of 2 primary flakes, 2
secondary flakes, 7 tertiary flakes, and 1 quartzite cobble
fragment, all of chert from the Edwards formation, stream
cobbles and tabular forms. Probable discard or waste material.
Found by William E. Moore through shovel testing.

41SV77-1

Flake tool, age and type unknown, which probably functioned as
a scraper made of chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen
made on secondary decortication flake and exhibits one modified
edge. Probable discard. Found by Roger G. Moore.

41SV77-2

Small chalcedony nodule that exhibits minor flaking typical of
materials that have been tested for suitability for artifact
manufacture. No evidence of use-related damage. Probable
discard. Found by Roger G. Moore.

41SV78

No collection

41SV79-1

Pedernales dart point, circa 2000 B.C. to 1200 B.C. (Turner and
Hester 1985:139), made of chert from the Edwards formation
very similar to the Leona Park variety. Specimen is complete.
Found by William E. Moore.

41SV80-1

Dart point, age and type unknown. Specimen is fragmented with
proximal and medial portion only remaining. It appears to have
been subjected to heat (probably post-depositional). Probable
discard or hunting loss. Found by William E. Moore.

41SV81-1

Marshall dart point, circa 1000 B.C. or earlier (Turner and Hester
1985:119), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is fragmented with approximately one-half of the distal
end missing. Probable discard or hunting loss. Found by Bruce
Williams (see Figure 5b in report).

41SV81-2

Scallorn arrow point, circa A.D. 700 - A.D. 1200
(Turner and
Hester 1985:189), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is missing tip and shoulders, or barbs, due to bending
fractures. Probable discard or hunting loss. Found by Kelly
Snodgrass.

41SV81-3

Scallorn arrow point, circa A.D. 700 - A.D. 1200 (Turner and
Hester 1985:189), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is missing tip and shoulders, or barbs, due to bending
fractures. Probable discard or hunting loss. Found by Kelly
Snodgrass.

41SV81-4

Perdiz arrow point, circa A.D. 1200 - A.D. 1500 (Turner and
Hester 1985:187), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is missing tip due to bending fracture. Probable
discard or hunting loss. Found by Kelly Snodgrass.

41SV81-5

Perdiz arrow point, circa A.D. 1200 - A.D. 1500 (Turner and
Hester 1985:187), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is missing tip due to bending fracture. Probable
discard or hunting loss. Found by Kelly Snodgrass.

41SV81-6

Bonham arrow point, circa 800 A.D. - 1200 A.D. (Suhm and Jelks
1962:267), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is complete and made on a small flake. It has been
heated to a "red" color, but it is not known if this was done before
or after manufacture. Probable discard or hunting loss. Found
by Kelly Snodgrass.

41SV81-7

Arrow point, age and type unknown, although serration and
shape of shoulders suggest the Perdiz or Scallorn types, made of
chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen is missing tip, one
barb, and stem or base. Slight reddish color indicates some
heating, probably post-depositional. Probable discard or hunting
loss. Found by Kelly Snodgrass.

41SV81-8

Arrow point, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen is missing tip due to a bending
fracture and is made on a heat treated flake.

41SV81-9

Late stage biface, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits minimal lateral edge
retouch and may have served in some cutting activity. Since this
specimen and three other similar artifacts were found in close
proximity to each other it is possible that were reserved for some
function that was never realized and may represent an artifact
cache. Found by Kelly Snodgrass (see Figure 7a in report).

41SV81-10 Late stage biface, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits minimal lateral edge
retouch and may have served in some cutting activity. Since this
specimen and three other similar artifacts were found in close
proximity to each other it is possible that were reserved for some
function that was never realized and may represent an artifact
cache. Found by Kelly Snodgrass (see Figure 7b in report).
41SV81-11 Late stage biface, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits minimal lateral edge
retouch and may have served in some cutting activity. Since this
specimen and three other similar artifacts were found in close
proximity to each other it is possible that were reserved for some
function that was never realized and may represent an artifact
cache. Found by Kelly Snodgrass (see Figure 7c in report).

41SV81-12 Late stage biface, age and type unknown, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits minimal lateral edge
retouch and may have served in some cutting activity. Since this
specimen and three other similar artifacts were found in close
proximity to each other it is possible that were reserved for some
function that was never realized and may represent an artifact
cache. Found by Kelly Snodgrass (see Figure 7d in report).
41SV81-13 Interior flake removed during late stage tool manufacture or
refurbishing. Cortex is removed. Discard or waste material.
Found in shovel test by William E. Moore.
41SV81-14 Interior flake removed during late stage tool manufacture or
refurbishing. Cortex is removed. Discard or waste material.
Found in shovel test by William E. Moore.
41SV81-15 Proximal portion of a probable Scallorn arrow point, circa A.D.
700 to A.D. 1200 (Turner and Hester 1985:189), made of chert
from the Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits a transverse
fracture and has been burned, an indication of heat annealing
prior to manufacture. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by
Bruce Williams.
41SV81-16 Mid-section of an arrow point, age and type unknown, made of
chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits bending
fractures on both the proximal and distal ends. Probable hunting
loss or discard. Found by Bruce Williams.
41SV81-17 Arrow point fragment, possibly Scallorn type, circa A.D. 700 to
A.D. 1200 (Turner and Hester 1985:189), made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen is missing distal tip, one lateral
corner, and basal edge of stem and exhibits pre-manufacture
heat annealing. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by
Bruce Williams.
41SV82

No collection

41SV83-1

41SV84

Flake made of chert from the Edwards formation. Specimen
exhibits damage to one lateral edge, probably post-depositional
and has been heated. Found by William E. Moore
No collection

41SV85

No collection

41SV86

No collection

41SV87

No collection

41SV89-1

Unifacial (keeled-end) scraper, age not known, made of chert
from the Edwards formation. Specimen was made from a
primary flake and has retouch on one end and one lateral edge.
Probable discard. Found by William E. Moore (see Figure 4c in
report).

41SV90

No collection

41SV101-1 Marshall dart point, circa 1000 A.D. or earlier (Turner and Hester
1985:119), made of chert from the Edwards formation.
Specimen is missing extreme distal tip and one shoulder which
has been reworked. Damage to the distal tip is probably post
deposition. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by Kelly
Snodgrass.
41SV101-2 Possible Travis dart point, circa 2650 B.C. to 2060 B.C. (Turner
and Hester 1985:153), made of chert from the Edwards
formation. Specimen is complete. Probable hunting loss or
discard. Found by Kelly Snodgrass.
41SV101-3 Possible Scallorn arrow point, circa A.D. 700 to A.D. 1200
(Turner and Hester 1985:189), made of chert from the Edwards
formation. Specimen is missing most of stem. Probable hunting
loss or discard. Found by Kelly Snodgrass.
41SV101-4 Projectile point distal tip, probably dart point, made of chert from
the Edwards formation. Specimen broken due to bending
fracture. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by Kelly
Snodgrass.
41SV101-5 Projectile point distal tip, probably arrow point, made of chert
from the Edwards formation. Specimen broken due to bending
fracture. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by Kelly
Snodgrass.
41SV101-6 Large stemmed knife, type and age not known, made of chert
from the Edwards formation. Specimen exhibits heavy retouch on
both lateral edges with alternate unifacial beveling. The stem is
missing due to a bending "snap" fracture. Probable discard.
Found by Kelly Snodgrass (see Figure 7e in report).

Artifacts with no provenience
No number

Dart points (N=25). These artifacts are without provenience and
classified as general surface. Types consist of Martindale (2),
circa 4000 B.C. to A.D. 1000 (Turner and Hester 1985:120-121),
Pedernales (1), circa 2000 B.C. to 1200 B.C. (Turner and Hester
1985:139-140), Marcos (1), circa 600 B.C. to 200 A.D. (Turner
and Hester 1985:117- 118), possible Marshall (4), circa 1000
B.C. or earlier (Turner and Hester 1985:119), Lange (1), circa
4000 B.C. to A.D. 1000 or greater part thereof (Suhm and Jelks
1962:203), possible Ensor (1), circa 200 B.C. to A.D. 600 (Turner
and Hester 1985:94), Yarbrough (1), circa 500 B.C. to A.D. 1000
(Suhm and Jelks 1962:261-262), and unknown types (13).
Probable hunting losses or discards. Found by Kelly Snodgrass.

No number

Debitage (N=41). These artifacts are without provenience and
classified as general surface. These specimens are not
individually numbered and consist of 0 primary flakes, 2
secondary flakes, and 39 tertiary flakes. Probable discard or
waste material. Found by Jim Jackson.

No number

Bifacial Tool (N=1). This artifact is without provenience and
classified as general surface. Specimen is made of chert from
the Edwards formation and represents a rejected mid-stage
biface with failure due to unsuccessful thinning. Probable
discard. Found by Kelly Snodgrass.

No number

Unifacial edge modified tools (N=6). These artifacts are without
provenience and classified as general surface. These
specimens are not individually numbered. Artifacts in this
category contain varying degrees of lateral edge modification
from one edge to the total edge. Two thinner specimens exhibit
"cutting" wear, all others probable "scraping" wear. Two are
fractured and the remainder is complete. Probable discards.
Found by Kelly Snodgrass and Bruce Williams.

No number

Distal tip (1). This artifact is a fragmented tip of a biface that
probably once was part of a dart point. Probable discard. Found
by Kelly Snodgrass.

No number

Perdiz arrow point (N=1), circa A.D. 1200 to A.D.1500 (Turner
and Hester 1985:187). This artifact is without provenience and
classified as general surface. Specimen is made of translucent
chert from the Edwards formation and is missing the extreme
distal tip. Probable hunting loss or discard. Found by Kelly
Snodgrass.

No number

No number

Biface fragments (3). These artifacts are without provenience
and classified as general surface. Specimens are probable
un-notched bifaces and may have been used for cutting and
perforating activities. Probable discards are waste material.
Found by Kelly Snodgrass.

Flake scraper, type and edge not known, made of chert from the
Edwards formation. Specimen was made on a secondary flake
and has retouch on one end and two lateral edges. Probable
discard. Found by Bruce Williams (Figure 4b).
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX IV: LISTING OF SITE NUMBERS
________________________________________________________________
TARL Number
Temporary Number
BVRA Number
_______________________________________________________________
41SV67

TS 1

91-15

41SV75

TS 2

92-05

41SV76

TS 3

92-06

41SV77

TS 4

92-07

41SV78

TS 5

92-08

41SV79

TS 6

92-09

41SV80

TS 7

92-10

41SV81

TS 8

92-11

41SV82

TS 9

92-12

41SV83

TS 10

92-13

41SV84

TS 11

92-14

41SV85

TS 12

92-15

41SV86

TS 13

92-16

41SV87

TS 14

92-17

41SV89

TS 16

93-03

41SV90

TS 17

93-04

41SV101
TS 15
93-02
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX V: SITES RECORDED AT FOSSIL RIM
________________________________________________________________
Site Number

Type of Site

Artifacts
Shovel Tested
Collected
________________________________________________________________
41SV67

prehistoric campsite

yes

yes

41SV75

prehistoric lithic scatter

yes

no

41SV76

prehistoric campsite

yes

yes

41SV77

prehistoric campsite

yes

yes

41SV78

historic house site

yes

no

41SV79

prehistoric lithic scatter

yes

no

41SV80

prehistoric lithic scatter

yes

no

41SV81

prehistoric campsite

yes

yes

41SV82

prehistoric lithic scatter

no

no

41SV83

prehistoric rockshelter

yes

yes

41SV84

historic house

no

no

41SV85

prehistoric lithic scatter

no

no

41SV86

historic log crib

no

no

41SV87

prehistoric campsite

no

no

41SV89

prehistoric lithic scatter

yes

no

41SV90

historic trash scatter

no

no

41SV101
prehistoric campsite
yes
no
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
Sites 41SV82, 41SV86, and 41SV87 are on private land.

