Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of
the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract,
Spring, Montgomery County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 7949
HJN 160092 AR

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Manhard Consulting, Ltd.
The Woodlands, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

March 2017

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of
the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract,
Spring, Montgomery County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Manhard Consulting, Ltd.
2445 Technology Forest Blvd., Suite 200
The Woodlands, Texas 77381

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
HJN 160092 AR

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 7949

March 2017

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by Manhard Consulting, Ltd.
(MCL), on behalf of Montgomery County Municipal Utility District (MUD) No. 119, to conduct a
cultural resources inventory survey and assessment for the proposed expansion of the existing
Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) in Spring, Montgomery County, Texas. The
Harmony WWTP is an existing facility located at the end of a private gravel road along the
southeastern edge of the Spring Trails residential subdivision. The proposed undertaking would
involve expansion of the existing facility onto an adjacent 0.8-hectare (2.0-acre) tract of currently
undeveloped land. For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is considered
to consist of the 0.8-hectare (2.0-acre) expansion tract.
The proposed project is being sponsored by Montgomery County MUD No. 119, a political
subdivision of the state of Texas. Consequently, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction
of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this time, no
federal permits or agency involvement have been identified for the project. As the project
represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact cultural resources, the
project sponsor was required to perform a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the
project area.
On March 13, 2017, Horizon Project Archeologist Briana Smith and archeological
technician Jacob Lyons, under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator,
performed an intensive survey of the project area to locate any cultural resources that may be
impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area on foot
and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area consists of an undeveloped tract of coastal forest and was
characterized by pine, oak, and sycamore trees with dense undergrowth of shrubs, weeds, and
grasses. Relatively little prior disturbances were observed, and the project area appeared to be
largely intact.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 3 shovel tests per acre for project areas measuring
2.0 acres or less in size; as such, 6 shovel tests would be required within the 0.8-hectare (2.0acre) project area. Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating a total of 10 shovel tests. The
pedestrian survey with shovel testing revealed yellowish-brown, reddish-brown, and pale brown

HJN 160092 AR

v

Management Summary

sandy loam and loamy sand sediments extending to the maximum depth of shovel tests at depths
ranging from 65.0 to 100.0 centimeters (25.6 to 39.4 inches) below surface. The majority of the
project area is characterized by fluviomarine sediment deposits of Late Pleistocene age. Due to
the antiquity of these sediments, shovel tests were capable of fully penetrating sediments with
the potential to contain archeological deposits.
A single aboriginal ceramic sherd was observed in one of the shovel tests excavated within
the project area at a depth of 40.0 to 50.0 centimeters (15.7 to 19.7 inches) below surface. This
sherd is sand-tempered, undecorated, and relatively thin, and it appears to have derived from a
moderate to large vessel. The characteristics of the ceramic sherd are reminiscent of either the
Goose Creek Plain style, which dominated upper Texas coast pottery assemblages during the
Early Ceramic period (ca. A.D. 100 to 600), or the Rockport Plain style, which was manufactured
by the inhabitants of the central Texas coast (possibly ancestors of the historic Karankawa tribes)
by A.D. 1250 to 1300. The relative thinness of the sherd (4.6 millimeters) suggests a closer
affiliation with the Rockport series of the Late Prehistoric period (ca. A.D. 600 to 1500), though a
more definitive classification would require a larger sample. No other aboriginal cultural resources
were observed on the modern ground surface or in any of the other shovel tests excavated within
the project area. Consequently, the single ceramic sherd has been designated as an isolated
artifact occurrence and has not been recorded as an archeological site. While the ceramic sherd
is broadly indicative of an aboriginal presence within the project area, it does not by itself meet
any of the criteria of significance under the Antiquities Code of Texas and is not eligible for
designation as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL).
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends a finding of “no
historic properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended in connection
with the proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are
protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or
burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery and the Texas Historical Commission
(THC) should be notified immediately.

vi

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 5
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 5
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 5
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 6
2.4
Flora and Fauna ............................................................................................ 9

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................11
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) ....................................................11
3.2
Archaic Period (5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) ........................................................12
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................13
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) ...................................................14
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ......................................................14
3.6
Historic Period (ca. 1700 A.D. to Present) ....................................................15

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................19

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................21

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................27

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................29
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................29
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................30
7.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................31
7.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................32

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................33
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

HJN 160092 AR

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.

Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .................................... 2
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 3
Soils Mapped within Project Area ............................................................................. 7
Previously Recorded Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area .................20
View of Existing Harmony WWTP Adjacent to Project Area (Facing North) .............22
View of Heavily Forested Project Area from Western End (Facing East) .................22
Typical View of Dense Vegetation within Project Area (Facing North)......................23
Typical View of Moderately Deep Sandy Loam Sediments in ST BS01 ...................23
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area ........................................24
Aboriginal Plainware Ceramic Sherd Observed in ST JL02 .....................................27

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.
Table 2.

viii

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area ......................................................... 6
Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ...................19

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by Manhard Consulting, Ltd.
(MCL), on behalf of Montgomery County Municipal Utility District (MUD) No. 119, to conduct a
cultural resources inventory survey and assessment for the proposed expansion of the existing
Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) in Spring, Montgomery County, Texas. The
Harmony WWTP is an existing facility located at the end of a private gravel road along the
southeastern edge of the Spring Trails residential subdivision. The proposed undertaking would
involve expansion of the existing facility onto an adjacent 0.8-hectare (2.0-acre) tract of currently
undeveloped land. For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area is considered
to consist of the 0.8-hectare (2.0-acre) expansion tract (Figures 1 and 2).
The proposed project is being sponsored by Montgomery County MUD No. 119, a political
subdivision of the state of Texas. Consequently, the proposed project falls under the jurisdiction
of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this time, no
federal permits or agency involvement have been identified for the project. As the project
represents a publicly sponsored undertaking with the potential to impact cultural resources, the
project sponsor was required to perform a cultural resources inventory and assessment of the
project area.
On March 13, 2017, Horizon Project Archeologist Briana Smith and archeological
technician Jacob Lyons, under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator,
performed an intensive survey of the project area to locate any cultural resources that may be
impacted by the proposed undertaking. The cultural resources investigation consisted of an
archival review, an intensive pedestrian survey of the project area, and the production of a report
suitable for review by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas
Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the
Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods.
Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents
cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

HJN 160092 AR

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle
2

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

HJN 160092 AR

3

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area tract is located in Spring, Texas, in south-central Montgomery County.
Montgomery County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas, which is a
structural basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which extends as
far north as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment,
consists of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic
origin, that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The Houston
area is underlain by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite young in a geological
sense, ranging from modern to Miocene in age. These consist predominantly of a series of
fluviodeltaic bodies arranged in an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian,
littoral, and estuarine facies making up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major
bounding disconformities between these formations are usually interpreted to represent
depositional hiatuses that occurred during periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this
fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As a result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger
rock units crop out in subparallel bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
Physiographically, the tract is situated on the remnants of a Pleistocene-age fluviomarine
terrace structure that forms an upland interfluve between Spring Creek to the south and an
unnamed, intermittent tributary of Spring Creek to the north. Spring Creek forms part of the West
Fork of the San Jacinto River watershed. No natural water features are present within the project
area, though a few limited areas of standing water were observed during the survey. Elevations
within the tract are relatively flat, approximately 29.0 meters (95.0 feet) above mean sea level.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Geologically, the project area is underlain by the Beaumont Formation (Shelby et al.
1968). The Beaumont, or Prairie, terrace is the youngest continuous coastwise terrace fronting
the modern Gulf (Abbott 2001). The Beaumont Formation consists of clay, silt, and fine sand
arranged in spatial patterns that reflect the distribution of fluvial (e.g., channel, point bar, levee,
and backswamp) and mudflat/coastal marsh facies (Van Siclen 1985). Sandy deposits
associated with littoral facies are also frequently considered part of the Beaumont. Many
investigators (cf. DuBar et al. 1991; Fisk 1938, 1940) have correlated the Beaumont terrace with

HJN 160092 AR

5

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

the Sangamon Interglacial (ca. 130 to 75 thousand years ago [kya]), although age estimates
range from Middle Wisconsinan (Alford and Holmes 1985) to 100 to 600 kya (Blum and Price
1994). While debate about the temporal affiliations of and correlations among the deposits that
underlie the major coastline terraces remain active, they are of little direct geoarcheological
relevance because virtually all investigators agree that these deposits considerably predate the
earliest demonstrated dates of human occupation in North America.
Geomorphologically, the majority of the project area is situated on Bissonenet loam, 0 to
1% slopes (BisA), which consists of Late Pleistocene-age loamy fluviomarine deposits (NRCS
2017) (Table 1; Figure 3). The southwestern corner of the project area is situated on a sliver of
Landman fine sand, which is composed of Holocene-age loamy and/or sandy alluvium (NRCS
2017) (see Table 1; see Figure 3).
In Southeast Texas, aboriginal archeological resources are commonly found in upland
settings and on alluvial terraces adjacent to prominent streams and springs. Based on the
physiographic setting of the project tract on the remnants of a Pleistocene-age terrace structure
that forms an upland interfluve between Spring Creek and one of its tributaries, the project tract
was considered to possess a high potential to contain aboriginal archeological resources.
Historic-age archeological resources may occur in virtually any physiographic setting, but are
most common in urban areas and in rural settings suitable for agriculture. The location of the
project tract in a remote wooded setting near Spring Creek suggested relatively minimal potential
for historic-age archeological or architectural resources.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). While
the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway (1985)
present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes three separate
climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late Glacial
Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was

Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Ab

Landman fine sand

Loamy and/or sandy alluvium on stream
terraces

0-47: Fine sand
47-83: Fine sandy loam

Bissonnet loam,
0 to 1% slopes

Late Pleistocene-age loamy fluviomarine
deposits derived from igneous,
metamorphic, and sedimentary rock on flats

0-13: Loam
13-34: Silty clay loam
34-80: Silty clay

BisA

Typical Profile
(inches)

Parent Material

Source: NRCS 2017
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

6

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 3. Soils Mapped within Project Area

HJN 160092 AR

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were
gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During
the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable.
The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The
drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions
lasting from roughly 6000 to 5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate
that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by
1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects the
influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with the
urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give the
Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout much
of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water, humidity in
the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often exceeds 50%
even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high humidity
characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and a modest
diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly high
temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in January to a
high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to 9°C (38 to 47°F)
in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average low temperatures
range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range from 27 to 29°C (75 to
79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The Houston region experiences two precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott
2001). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent cold
fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late summer
to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and hurricanes
from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early spring are
relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms that are
relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation varies from
a low of approximately 100.0 centimeters (40.0 inches) to a high of more than 132.0 centimeters
(52.0 inches). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5.0 to 8.0 centimeters (2.0 to
3.0 inches) in March to more than 19.0 centimeters (7.5 inches) occurring locally on the coast
during September. Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely
rare, occurring in measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

8

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

Montgomery County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texan biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al.
(1984) further define four broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic
province that lies on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie,
(3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are strongly
controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the seasonal
water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically dominated by
little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter environments
are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria, bulrushes, smooth
cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush, saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh
aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and
other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained environments are characterized by such
taxa as seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum, gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass,
red lovegrass, bushy sea-oxeye, and glasswort. A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore
zone. Important larger taxa include raccoon, nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many
birds, including ducks, geese, herons, and many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth
of fish and shellfish adapted to brackish to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal
marsh/barrier island zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs and
woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the north
and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses are
found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver bluestem,
buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian sunflower,
Engelmann daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow neptunia,
snoutbean, prairie clover, tick clover, wild bean, western indigo, paintbrush, bluebonnet, ragweed,
croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring in the coastal prairie
include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live oak, elm, hackberry,
bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as the coastal prairie
grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland environment with common
stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie is home to a diverse fauna,
including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many small rodents, amphibians and
reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and pronghorn were also present
at various times in the past.

HJN 160092 AR

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak, sweetgum,
hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and sumac.
Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are grasses
such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the coastal gallery forest
include white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and
rodents, turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the
past, and a number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger deciduous
trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory vegetation varies
from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and young trees.
Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle, greenbrier, Virginia
creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A variety of fauna is also
present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit, mink, skunk, various small
rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was also present at times in the
past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the transition zone to the coastal
prairie environment.

10

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The proposed project tract is located within the Southeast Texas Archeological Region, a
21-county area extending from the Colorado River on the west to the Sabine River on the east
and measuring about 200.0 kilometers (124.3 miles) inland from the Gulf of Mexico coastline.
Much of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the
Southern Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story
1990). Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These two subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25.0 kilometers (15.5 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological
variability characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands,
marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable
ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to denote
Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural characteristics of
Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring regions. For instance, the
Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and Southeast Texas, and
Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time in
Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit evidence of
reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be associated
with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of subsistence-related
activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired clay balls (at some
sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites tend to consist of
multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain few lithic artifacts, oyster shell tools, large
quantities of pottery (in later cultural components), and numerous bone tools.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (10,000 TO 5000 B.C.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;

HJN 160092 AR

11

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists have historically discounted claims of much earlier human
occupation during the Pleistocene glacial period. However, recent investigations of the Buttermilk
Creek Complex in Bell County, Texas, have raised the possibility that a pre-Clovis culture may
have been present in North America as early as 15,500 years ago (Waters et al. 2011).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end-scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas are
known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of
small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is little evidence in
this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in North
America; rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced during all
prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into two periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period
(8000 to 5000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (5000 B.C. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signaled the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.

12

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods. In
Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5000 to 3000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of Bell,
Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The Bell
point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains. Many of
the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3000 to 1500 B.C.) and several new
types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and probably the GaryKent series. The Late Archaic period (1500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is characterized by Gary, Kent,
Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition developed
in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981; Patterson
1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period but reached
full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as boatstones and
bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang knives, stingray
spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial practices included the
systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre, and use of locally made
grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most burials are found in extended
supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials are also known. Burial direction
is usually consistent within single sites but varies from site to site. Patterson et al. (1993) report
that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton
counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area by
about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995). Southeastern
Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where Aten (1983)
established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville
Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
129.0 kilometers (80.2 miles) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal
exception of a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found
on the Gulf coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods (Aten
1984; Patterson 1995; Perttula et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility ware

HJN 160092 AR

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain for
about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods before
once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety, Goose
Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor pottery
types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway (Aten
1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte types
are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste (like
Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the latter
part of the Late Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in Southeast
Texas. Along the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e., spearthrower) and
spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though they continued to be
used in the inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the Late Prehistoric period
(Ensor and Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In fact,
Patterson (1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in Southeast Texas as early
as the end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points that consisted of marginally
retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a generalized date of adoption of the bowand-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca. A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas.
In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade
technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba, Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial
sequence for these point types has not been established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn
points appear to predate Perdiz points throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (i.e., crushed-sherd-) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto Plain
and Baytown Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small
proportion of small-sized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that
are often visible on vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek pottery
remained in use throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt Coated
pottery from the Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in Southeast Texas
during the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue. Aten (1983) has reconstructed

14

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century, including the
Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (possibly Karankawa), and Tonkawa. The presence of the
Tonkawa in Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central Texas in the
17th and 18th centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought to have
occupied the coastal margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the corresponding
mainland (Aten 1983). Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east of the San
Bernard River, the ethnic association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe may be in
doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic Indian
sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and Cuney
points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified by the
presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1700 A.D. TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez Cabeza de
Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay;
however, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The
first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as
the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social
systems. This process is clearly discernible at the Mitchell Ridge site, where the burial data
suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased participation
on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time heavy settlement of
Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was
greatly diminished. The Alabama/Coushatta Indians who currently reside in Southeast Texas are
migrants who were displaced from the east in the late 18th to early 19th centuries (Newcomb
1961).
The earliest European explorer of what became Montgomery County was probably the
Frenchman René Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle, who evidently passed through the area in
16871. When news of French incursions reached Spanish authorities, they sent several
expeditions to the region to reclaim it for Spain. During the mid-19th century, the Spanish made
several attempts to establish settlements in the area and eventually set up three missions on the
banks of Spring Creek within the current boundaries of Montgomery County, but the missions
were abandoned in 1756 and no permanent Spanish settlements were established. The future
Montgomery County area was included in the colonization contracts issued by Spanish and later
Mexican authorities to empresario Stephen F. Austin, and, during the early 1820s, AngloAmerican settlers began moving into the region. Forty-two families of Austin’s colony obtained

1

The following history of Montgomery County, Texas, is adapted from TSHA (2017).

HJN 160092 AR

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

land titles from the Mexican government and settled in western Montgomery County. Among the
earliest settlers was Andrew Montgomery, who established a trading post at the crossroads of the
Loma del Toro and lower Coushatta traces. He was soon joined by relatives and others, and the
settlement eventually grew into the town of Montgomery. During the early 1830s, the population
of the region increased rapidly, and, in December 1837, the Republic of Texas Congress
established Montgomery County, which was named for its largest settlement. The new county
was carved from Washington County, and its borders originally extended from the Brazos River
on the west to the Trinity on the east, and from the Old San Antonio Road on the north to the San
Jacinto River on the south, an area that included future Grimes, Walker, San Jacinto, Madison,
and Waller counties. The county’s present boundaries were established after the establishment
of Waller County in 1870.
On the eve of the Civil War, Montgomery County was in most ways typical of the counties
of the region, decidedly Southern in character and outlook, with a rapidly developing plantation
economy. Montgomery remained the largest town, but several other trading centers had
emerged, including Danville, Bay’s Chapel, Cincinnati, and Waverly. Methodist minister I.L.G.
Strickland began preaching in Montgomery in the early 1840s, and, in the early 1850s, Baptists
had organized the first church there. Several private schools also began operating during the
1850s, including the Montgomery Academy, which earned a reputation as one of the preeminent
schools of the region. The Civil War and its aftermath brought profound changes to the county.
Not surprisingly, given its large number of slaveholders, Montgomery County’s citizens
overwhelmingly supported the Southern cause, and nearly 80% (318 of 416) of those who went
to the polls cast their votes in favor of secession. The county’s men volunteered for the
Confederate army in large numbers, a sizeable number of them serving in the Fourth Texas
Regiment of Hood’s Texas Brigade; others joined Terry’s Texas Rangers (Eighth Texas Cavalry).
Many of the early volunteers saw considerable action during the war, and as many as threefourths of them were killed or injured before war’s end. For those who remained at home, there
were other problems to deal with, including lack of markets for goods, shortages, and wild
fluctuations in Confederate currency. The end of the war brought wrenching changes to the
county’s economy. For many of Montgomery County’s white inhabitants, the abolition of slavery
meant devastating economic loss. Prior to the Civil War, slaves had constituted nearly half of all
taxable property in the county, and their loss, coupled with a decline in property values, caused a
profound disruption for most planters. The African-American population of Montgomery County
fared even worse. Most blacks left the farms owned by their former masters to seek better working
and living conditions; however, for the vast majority, the change brought only marginal
improvement. Most ended up working as agricultural laborers or as sharecroppers, receiving
one-third or one-half of the crop for their labors.
Montgomery County escaped much of the strife that many other Texas counties
experienced during Reconstruction. No permanent federal garrison was stationed in the county,
and there was no Freedmen’s Bureau. Citizens nevertheless chafed under local Republican rule,
and there were isolated acts of violence and intimidation directed at African-American officials.
By the early 1870s, the local white elite had once more gained control of the county’s affairs, and,
through the use of the White Primary, literacy tests, and threats, managed to effectively
disenfranchise the black population until the 1960s. Like most of the counties in the state,

16

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

Montgomery County experienced a prolonged post-war agricultural depression. During the Civil
War, prices for cotton had skyrocketed, and landowners had planted ever-increasing amounts of
land in cotton to reap the benefits. After the war, falling prices and the loss of cheap slave labor
combined to severely depress the local economy. To make ends meet, many landowners opted
to grow even more cotton, badly depleting the soil in the process. By the 1880s, the soil in many
areas of the county was so poor that cotton yields were as low as one-third to three-quarters of a
bale per acre. Some farmers turned to livestock-raising or other small grains, such as corn and
wheat, but cotton nevertheless remained the county’s leading cash crop until the end of the
century.
The county’s economy began to recover in the 1870s and early 1880s with the
construction of several railroads. In 1871, the International-Great Northern Railroad was built
across the county; in 1879, a narrow-gauge line known as the Houston, East, and West Texas
was constructed; and, in 1880, the Houston and Texas Central built a branch line from Navasota
to Montgomery and extended eastward to Conroe. The construction of the railroads touched off
an intense controversy concerning the location of the county seat. The first railroad missed the
town of Montgomery. Willis, a new town on the railroad, was voted county seat in 1874, but the
county seat was moved back to Montgomery in 1880, after the Houston and Texas Central was
built. In 1889, however, the county seat was moved to the fledgling community of Conroe, which
was situated at the junction of the International-Great Northern and the newly built Gulf, Colorado,
and Santa Fe Railway. The construction of the railroads also sparked a major period of expansion
in the county. Numerous new towns grew up, and the population, which had risen only slightly
since the Civil War, saw a marked increase. Despite the loss of considerable territory due to the
splitting off of several new counties, the number of residents grew from 6,483 to 10,154 between
1870 and 1880, and population increased to more than 17,000 over the next two decades.
The construction of the railroads also marked the beginnings of the county’s great
lumbering boom. Commercial lumbering had begun in the county prior to the Civil War, but the
lack of easy access to river or rail transportation severely hampered efforts to exploit the area’s
rich timber resources. With the arrival of the railroads, however, lumbering quickly developed into
a major industry. By 1882, 45 steam sawmills were in operation, and lumbering emerged as the
county’s largest source of income within a short time. The lumber boom gave rise to numerous
new communities, including Bobville, Cowl Spur, Dobbin, Egypt, Fostoria, Honea, Karen, Keenan,
Mostyn, Leonides, and Security, all of which developed as lumber shipping points or mill sites.
The boom also helped to transform the county in other ways. As late as the early 1870s, 80% of
the county was still covered by thick pine forests. Over the next four decades, much of the county
was deforested, permanently altering the landscape and opening the way for a steady increase
in livestock-raising and farming.
The agricultural economy, which had been on the wane since the Civil War, began to
recover in the 1880s. Spurring its growth was the introduction of tobacco, which began to be
planted in large quantities in the 1890s. Much of the tobacco was a fine-grade variety known as
Vuelta Abajo, grown from seeds imported each year from Cuba. The center of the industry was
Willis, which had seven cigar factories by 1895. High railroad shipping costs and the high initial
investment and labor involved in curing and sweating the tobacco, however, discouraged many

HJN 160092 AR

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

farmers; between 1898 and 1901, the amount of land given over to tobacco production fell
dramatically from more than 1,000 acres to only 70. The subsequent lifting of a US tariff on Cuban
tobacco, which had kept prices artificially high, finally ended the experiment, and no tobacco was
being grown in the county within a few years. The agricultural economy stagnated at the turn of
the century; however, by 1910, it began to show slow but steady growth.
The county, however, experienced a dramatic reversal of fortune in 1932, when oil was
discovered southeast of Conroe. Evidence of oil had been found in the county as early as 1901,
when Santa Fe Railroad engineers drilled a water well and noted traces of oil. Natural gas was
found southwest of Conroe in 1924, and several major oil companies acquired leases in the area.
The initial tests, however, were unsuccessful, and the companies lost interest. In August 1931,
however, wildcatter George William Strake began drilling a test well southeast of Conroe and, on
December 13 of the same year, hit oil; by June 1932, Strake had brought in a second, even larger
well, which was spewing out more than 900 barrels daily. The discovery immediately triggered a
tremendous oil boom. Within days, thousands of fortune-seekers, wildcatters, financiers,
roughnecks, and hangers-on flooded the area. The population of Conroe, estimated at 2,500 in
December 1931, blossomed to more than 10,000 within a few months. At the beginning of 1933,
more than 100 wells had been drilled, and more that 25,000 barrels per day were being produced;
by the end of the year, the number of producing wells had grown to 679, and the daily output was
more than 52,000 barrels. Oil was subsequently discovered in several other areas of the county,
and the combined oilfields of Montgomery County made it one of the richest oil-producing areas
in the nation. Although the vast majority of Montgomery County residents did not benefit directly
from the oil discovery, oil money contributed to a general prosperity that helped offset the worst
effects of the depression. Proceeds from the oil also helped to remake the face of the county.
Roads were graded and paved, new schools were built, and public buildings and monuments
were erected. Conroe experienced a construction boom as numerous new buildings, including
banks, offices, and homes, were erected with oil money. The population of the county swelled
during the boom, growing by nearly 10,000 between 1930 and 1940, increasing from 14,588 to
23,055. The prosperity continued during the years of World War II. Oil refineries and a carbon
black manufacturing plant were built, and efforts were intensified to produce as much oil as
possible for the war effort. After the war, oil production declined somewhat, but it has remained
one of the county’s leading sources of income; in 1990 alone, more than 2.7 million barrels of oil
were produced.

18

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon performed background archival research on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) for information on previously recorded cultural
resources sites and historic properties in and near the proposed project tract as well as previous
cultural resources investigations conducted in the vicinity of the proposed project tract. Based on
this archival research, 2 known archeological sites are located within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile)
radius of the project tract (Table 2; Figure 4) (NPS 2017; THC 2017). None of the known cultural
resources identified during the desktop review are located within or in immediate proximity to the
project area, and no historic properties listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
or designated as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL) were identified within the archival review
area.
No previous cultural resources surveys have been conducted within the project tract.

Table 2. Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area
Site
No./Name

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility Status1

Distance/Direction
from Project Area

Potential to
be Impacted
by Project?

Archeological Sites
41HR1018

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Undetermined

0.5 miles southwest

No

41HR1123

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Determined
ineligible within
surveyed area

0.7 miles southwest

No

1

Determined eligible/ineligible = Site determined eligible/ineligible by SHPO
Recommended eligible/eligible = Site recommended as eligible/ineligible by site recorder and/or sponsoring
agency but eligibility has not been determined by SHPO
Undetermined = Eligibility not assessed or no information available
NRHP National Register of Historic Places
SAL State Antiquities Landmark
SHPO State Historic Preservation Office

HJN 160092 AR

19

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 4. Previously Recorded Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

20

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

On March 13, 2017, Horizon Project Archeologist Briana Smith and archeological
technician Jacob Lyons, under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator,
performed an intensive survey of the project area to locate any cultural resources that may be
impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area on foot
and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area consists of an undeveloped tract of coastal forest located
immediately adjacent to the eastern side of the existing Harmony WWTP. At the time of the
survey, the tract was characterized by pine, oak, and sycamore trees with dense undergrowth of
shrubs, weeds, and grasses. Relatively little prior disturbance was observed, and the project area
appeared to be largely intact (Figures 5 to 8).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of 3 shovel tests per acre for project areas measuring
2.0 acres or less in size; as such, 6 shovel tests would be required within the 0.8-hectare (2.0acre) project area. Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating a total of 10 shovel tests
(Figure 9). In general, shovel tests measured approximately 30.0 centimeters (11.8 inches) in
diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 meters (3.3 feet) below ground surface, to
the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable, and all sediments were
screened through 6.35-millimeter (0.25-inch) hardware cloth. The pedestrian survey with shovel
testing revealed yellowish-brown, reddish-brown, and pale brown sandy loam and loamy sand
sediments extending to the bottom of shovel tests at depths ranging from 65.0 to
100.0 centimeters (25.6 to 39.4 inches) below surface. The majority of the project area is
characterized by fluviomarine sediment deposits of Late Pleistocene age. Due to the antiquity of
these sediments, shovel tests were capable of fully penetrating sediments with the potential to
contain archeological deposits. The Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates of all
shovel tests were determined using hand-held Garmin ForeTrex global positioning system (GPS)
devices based on the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83). Specific data for all 10 shovel
tests excavated within the project area are summarized in Appendix A.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic log
was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources. Diagnostic
artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to be

HJN 160092 AR

21

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5. View of Existing Harmony WWTP Adjacent to Project Area (Facing North)

Figure 6. View of Heavily Forested Project Area from Western End (Facing East)

22

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

Figure 7. Typical View of Dense Vegetation within Project Area (Facing North)

Figure 8. Typical View of Moderately Deep Sandy Loam Sediments in ST BS01

HJN 160092 AR

23

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 9. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area

24

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location in
which they were found. As no cultural resources were encountered during the survey, the
collections policy was not brought into play.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 CFR
800.3.

HJN 160092 AR

25

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

A single aboriginal ceramic sherd was observed in one of the shovel tests excavated within
the project area at a depth of 40.0 to 50.0 centimeters (15.7 to 19.7 inches) below surface
(Figure 10). This sherd is sand-tempered, undecorated, and relatively thin, and it appears to have
derived from a moderate to large vessel. The characteristics of the ceramic sherd are reminiscent
of either the Goose Creek Plain style, which dominated upper Texas coast pottery assemblages
during the Early Ceramic period (ca. A.D. 100 to 600), or the Rockport Plain style, which was
manufactured by the inhabitants of the central Texas coast (possibly ancestors of the historic
Karankawa tribes) by A.D. 1250 to 1300. The relative thinness of the sherd (4.6 millimeters)
suggests a closer affiliation with the Rockport series of the Late Prehistoric period (ca. A.D. 600
to 1500), though a more definitive classification would require a larger sample.

Figure 10. Aboriginal Plainware Ceramic Sherd Observed in ST JL02

HJN 160092 AR

27

Chapter 6.0: Results of Investigations

No other aboriginal cultural resources were observed on the modern ground surface or in
any of the other shovel tests excavated within the project area. Consequently, the single ceramic
sherd has been designated as an isolated artifact occurrence and has not been recorded as an
archeological site. While the ceramic sherd is broadly indicative of an aboriginal presence within
the project area, it does not by itself meet any of the criteria of significance under the Antiquities
Code of Texas and is not eligible for designation as an SAL.

28

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with
3 primary management goals in mind:



Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.



Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for designation
as SALs.



Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or federal
codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a
function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs, though
historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important historic events
and/or personages. Under the Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources are evaluated
according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological resources for
designation as SALs.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

HJN 160092 AR

29

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least on one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

30

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

On March 13, 2017, Horizon Project Archeologist Briana Smith and archeological
technician Jacob Lyons, under the overall direction of Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator,
performed an intensive survey of the project area to locate any cultural resources that may be
impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologists traversed the project area on foot
and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age cultural
resources. The project area consists of an undeveloped tract of coastal forest and was
characterized by pine, oak, and sycamore trees with dense undergrowth of shrubs, weeds, and
grasses. Relatively little prior disturbances were observed, and the project area appeared to be
largely intact.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of 3 shovel tests per
acre for project areas measuring 2.0 acres or less in size; as such, 6 shovel tests would be
required within the 0.8-hectare (2.0-acre) project area. Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by
excavating a total of 10 shovel tests. The pedestrian survey with shovel testing revealed
yellowish-brown, reddish-brown, and pale brown sandy loam and loamy sand sediments
extending to the maximum depth of shovel tests at depths ranging from 65.0 to 100.0 centimeters
(25.6 to 39.4 inches) below surface. The majority of the project area is characterized by
fluviomarine sediment deposits of Late Pleistocene age. Due to the antiquity of these sediments,
shovel tests were capable of fully penetrating sediments with the potential to contain archeological
deposits.
A single aboriginal ceramic sherd was observed in one of the shovel tests excavated within
the project area at a depth of 40.0 to 50.0 centimeters (15.7 to 19.7 inches) below surface. This
sherd is sand-tempered, undecorated, and relatively thin, and it appears to have derived from a
moderate to large vessel. The characteristics of the ceramic sherd are reminiscent of either the
Goose Creek Plain style, which dominated upper Texas coast pottery assemblages during the
Early Ceramic period (ca. A.D. 100 to 600), or the Rockport Plain style, which was manufactured

HJN 160092 AR

31

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

by the inhabitants of the central Texas coast (possibly ancestors of the historic Karankawa tribes)
by A.D. 1250 to 1300. The relative thinness of the sherd (4.6 millimeters) suggests a closer
affiliation with the Rockport series of the Late Prehistoric period (ca. A.D. 600 to 1500), though a
more definitive classification would require a larger sample. No other aboriginal cultural resources
were observed on the modern ground surface or in any of the other shovel tests excavated within
the project area. Consequently, the single ceramic sherd has been designated as an isolated
artifact occurrence and has not been recorded as an archeological site. While the ceramic sherd
is broadly indicative of an aboriginal presence within the project area, it does not by itself meet
any of the criteria of significance under the Antiquities Code of Texas and is not eligible for
designation as an SAL.

7.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified that meet the
criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends a finding of “no
historic properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended in connection
with the proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are
protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or
burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or ongoing
maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should cease
immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery and the THC should be notified
immediately.

32

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J.T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Alford, J.J., and J.C. Holmes
1985
Meander Scars as Evidence of Major Climate Changes in Southeast Louisiana.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75:395-403.
Aten, L.E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory, pp.
72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The Florida
State Museum, Gainesville.

Blair, W.F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Blum, M.D., and D.M. Price
1994
Glacio-Eustatic and Climatic Controls on Quaternary Alluvial Plain Deposition, Texas
Coastal Plain. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
44:85-92.
Bryant, V.M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.

HJN 160092 AR

33

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
DuBar, J.R., T.E. Ewing, E.L. Lundelius, E.G. Otvos, and C.D. Winkler
1991
Quaternary Geology of the Gulf of Mexico Coastal Plain. In The Geology of North
America, Volume K2: Quaternary Non-Glacial Geomophology, Conterminous United
States, edited by R. B. Morrison, pp. 583-610. Geological Society of America, Boulder,
Colorado.
Ensor, H.B., and D.L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 8, Archeological
Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Fisk, H.N.
1938
Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 10.
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.
1940

Louisiana

Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 18. Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.

Hall, G.D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hudgins, J.D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.
Keller, J.E., and F.A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.

34

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
McMahon, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984
The Vegetation Types of Texas, including Cropland. Map and Accompanying
Illustrated Synopsis, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
National Park Service (NPS)
2017
National Register of Historic Places online database. <http://nrhp.focus.nps.gov>.
Accessed March 13, 2017.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2017
Web Soil Survey. <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed March 15, 2017. US Department of Agriculture.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Patterson, L.W., J.D. Lockwood, R.L. Gregg, and S.M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.

HJN 160092 AR

Houston

35

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Perttula, T.K., M.R. Miller, R.A. Ricklis, D.J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus
Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.

Shelby, C.A., M.K. McGowen, S. Aranow, W.L. Fisher, L.F. Brown, Jr., J.H. McGowen, C.G.
Groat, and V.E. Barnes
1968
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Beaumont Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin (revised 1992).
Story, D.A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by D.A. Story, J.A. Guy, B.A. Burnett, M.D. Freeman, J.C. Rose,
D.G. Steele, B.W. Olive, and K.J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes. Research
Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2017
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Restricted Database. <https://www.thc.atlas.state.
tx.us/>. Accessed March 10, 2017.
Texas Natural Resources Information System (TNRIS)
2017
50-cm NC/CIR Compressed County Mosaics, Montgomery County, Texas.
Orthoimagery Program.
Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2017
Montgomery County. The Handbook of Texas Online. <http://www.tshaonline.org/
handbook/online/articles/hcm17>. Accessed March 15, 2017.
US Geological Survey (USGS)
1982
Maedan, Texas, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle.
1995

Maedan, Texas, 7.5-minute topographic quadrangle.

Van Siclen, D.C.
1985
Pleistocene Meander-Belt Ridge Patterns in the Vicinity of Houston, Texas.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 35:525-532.

36

160092_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

Waters, M.R., S.L. Forman, T.A. Jennings, L.C. Nordt, S.G. Driese, J.M. Feinberg, J.L. Keene, J.
Halligan, A. Lindquist, J. Pierson, C.T. Hallmark, M.B. Collins, and J.E. Wiederhold
2011
The Buttermilk Creek Complex and the Origins of Clovis at the Debra L. Friedkin Site,
Texas. Science 331:1599-1603.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

HJN 160092 AR

37

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the Harmony Wastewater Treatment Plant’s
Proposed 2.0-acre Expansion Tract, Spring, Montgomery County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

JL01

271321

3330955

0-45
45-85+

JL02

271281

3330945

0-95

95-100+
JL03

271212

3330956

271289

3330948

271285

3330962

BS02

BS03

BS04

271203

271239

271246

271281

3331027

3330998

3330968

3330947

271264

HJN 160092 AR

3330962

Wet mottled light brown/yellowishbrown/light gray sandy clay

None

Light reddish-brown loamy sand

1 aboriginal
ceramic
sherd at
40-50 cmbs

None

Compact light yellowish-brown sand

None

Orange-brown sand

None

Compact mottled light gray/yellowishbrown sand

None

Orange-brown loamy sand

None

Compact mottled light gray/yellowishbrown/orange-brown sand with FeO2
staining

None

0-50

Yellowish-brown wet sandy loam

None

50-60

Pale brown wet sandy clay loam

None

60-65+

Mottled pale brown/grayishbrown/yellowish-brown/pink wet sandy
clay

None

0-50

Yellowish-brown moist sandy loam

None

50-80

Pale brown moist fine sandy loam

None

80-85+

Mottled pale brown/pink/yellowishbrown compact moist sandy clay

None

0-50

Yellowish-brown moist sandy loam

None

50-60

Pale brown moist fine sandy loam

None

60-65+

Mottled pale brown/pink/yellowishbrown compact moist sandy clay loam

None

Yellowish-brown sandy loam

None

Light yellowish-brown fine sandy loam

None

0-50

Yellowish-brown moist sandy loam

None

50-70

Pale brown moist fine sandy loam

None

0-55

0-30

0-70
70-100+

BS05

None

Light reddish-brown loamy sand

0-90

30-100+

BS01

Wet light brown loamy sand

None

55-75+
JL05

Artifacts

Compact light yellowish-brown sand

90-100+
JL04

Soils

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)
70-75+

Soils
Mottled pale brown/pink/yellowishbrown compact sandy clay loam

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

A-2

160092_arch_survey_report

Artifacts
None

