TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE PROPOSED
GABRIEL SUBSTATION SITE
Williamson County, Texas

Ulrich Kleinschmidt

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Technical Bulletin No. 34
THE UNtVERSITY OFl'EXAS,AT· AUSTIN

1979

\

ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF THE
PROPOSED GABRIEL SUBSTATION SITE
WilZiamson County

On October 23, 1979, the proposed site of the Lower
Colorado River Authority Gabriel substation in Williamson
County, Texas was surveyed by a Texas Archeological
Survey field crew consisting of Ulrich Kleinschmidt,
Christian Nightengale, J. Peter Thurmond and Richard
Accola. The entire 26 acres was investigated.
The surface was covered by short bermuda grass and
low shrubs, but was visible except for spotty patches
near the stream, listed on the maps as Pecan Branch,
which runs roughly northwest-southeast through the
property. The only trees were immediately adjacent to
this stream and along the fence lines. Mo modern or
other historic structures are present.
The soil was very dry, heavily cracked, and appeared
to be an unstable Vertisol with a high montmorillonitie
clay content. The soil immediately north of Pecan Branch
could be augered to a depth of at least 40 em., indicating
the possibility of some buried materials. The majority
of the property forms a gradual slope and the soil is
not as deep as that near Pecan Branch. Vertic cracking
of the soil has probably allowed smaller artifacts to
migrate below the surface, accounting for the small
number of such specimens encountered.
Three areas on the land were identified as archeological
sites; all are light surface lithic scatters. The first
41WM378, is located on the southern bank of Pecan Branch
in the w~stern half of the property at a point where the
stream widens. Worked cobble cores, large flakes and one
biface were found in an area 100 meters long (E-W) and 20
meters wide (N-S).
The second site, 41WM379, consists of scattered cores
and flakes in a field south of Pecan Branch. At least
five clusters of worked lithics, covering a combined area
of approximately 100 square meters, were found within the
site.
The final and largest site, 41WM430, follows the base
of the slope which runs roughly north-south on the eastern

,

-2­

half of the property. Numerous large flint cores and
flakes were found in a possible outcropping of the
Georgetown Limestone Formation. Smaller flakes, and
some bifaces, occur up the slope and on part of the
crest.
Diagnostic artifacts (projectile points) were not
found on any of the sites, although the previously
mentioned soil conditions may be responsible for moving
smaller lithics below the surface. From the materials
observed, the area appears to have been one where raw
materials (Georgetown Flint) were procured for lithic
manufacture, tested, and either discarded or removed
from the site. The flakes found were generally large
primary pieces; no interior flakes were located. Some
of the debitage seemed to be high quality materials,
indicating that in situ processing may have occurred
in some instan~es.
No controlled testing is recommended for these sites.
There is not sufficient density nor any apparent patterning
in the distribution of surface material at any of the sites
to warrant controlled surface collections. Features, such
as hearths or burned rock middens, were not present at any
of the sites. Finally, the only significant site, 41WM430,
appears to be entirely surficial. Sub-surface testing is
therefore not warranted at any of the three sites. However,
a sample of the flints occurring at 41WM430 has been
collected and stored at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory for future comparison to probable trade
items recovered at prehistoric sites in other areas of the
s ta te .

Ulrich Kleinschmidt
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin

