A CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY FOR A PROPOSED
PUMP STATION SITE AT LAKE O' THE PINES RESERVOIR
IN MARION COUNTY, TEXAS

by
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report 52

1997

A CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY FOR A PROPOSED PUMP STATION SITE
AT LAKE O' THE PINES RESERVOIR IN MARION COUNTY, TEXAS

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
Freese-Nichols, Inc.
311 North High Street, Suite B
Longview, Texas 75601

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
A Phase I cultural resources survey for a proposed pump station site at Lake O'
the Pines reservoir in northwest Marion County, Texas was performed by Brazos Valley
Research Associates (BVRA) on July 3, 1997 and September 5, 1997. The areas
surveyed are 2 acres (Area A) and 1.84 acres (Area B) in size and are on land owned
by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District. Shovel testing
revealed one prehistoric site (41MR114) in Area A and two prehistoric sites (41MR162
and 41MR180) in Area B. Site 41MR114 is a Caddo site situated in an upland setting
overlooking the current channel of Big Cypress Creek to the north. It is believed that
this site was occupied between the Middle Caddoan period (A.D. 1300 - A.D. 1400) and
the Late Caddoan period (A.D. 1400 - A.D. 1680). This site is potentially eligible for
inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places, and Phase II testing is
recommended to determine its significance. Sites 41MR162 and 41MR180 are 500-600
meters southwest of 41MR114 and also overlook the channel of Big Cypress Creek.
These sites produced only flakes; therefore, their age and function are not known.
Since these sites are on the edges of the proposed construction area, they were not
adequately tested to determine their research potential. They will not be affected by the
pump station, and no further work is recommended. All artifacts and records have been
placed in permanent curation at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
in Austin, Texas, and copies of the final report are on file at the United States Army
Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth District and BVRA.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
BVRA is grateful to the following individuals for their assistance during this
project. Daniel E. McGregor, Archaeologist at the Fort Worth Corps of Engineers, and
William A. Martin of the Division of Antiquities Protection assisted with the research
design and reviewed the report. During the two field surveys several individuals were
present and assisted by helping with mapping chores and delineating project area
boundaries. They are Larry D. Schuelein, P.E., Project Manager, and Jearl Morris of
Freese and Nichols, Inc.; Pedram Farahnak, Director of Utility Services, and Rolin C.
McPhee of the City of Longview; Jonice Young, an engineer for KSA Engineers, and
Harold "Ike" Ivies, Park Ranger at Lake O' the Pines. Archaeologist Michael R. Bradle
assisted with the fieldwork. Carolyn Spock, Head of Records, at TARL and her staff,
Rosario Casarez and Jean Hughes, as well as Darrell Creel, Head of Collections, are
thanked for their assistance with the records check and subsequent artifact curation.
The ceramic analysis was performed by Linda Wootan Ellis of Archeological Consulting
Services in Austin, Texas. Timothy K. Perttula, Ph.D. is thanked for sharing his
knowledge of Caddoan archaeology and examining the decorated ceramics from site
41MR114. Figures 1-4 were drafted by Lili Lyddon of Lyddon Illustrations, and the
artifact drawings (Figure 5) were drafted by Pamela J. Headrick of Archeological
Consulting Services. Ike Ivies took the photographs used for figures 6 and 7.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ...............................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 6
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS....................................................................................... 7
CULTURAL OVERVIEW ............................................................................................... 13
METHODS .................................................................................................................... 16
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 18
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 22
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 23
Appendix I: Shovel Test Log (Area A)
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log (Area B)
Appendix III: Ceramic Analysis (41MR114)
Figures
Figure 1. General Location Map...................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area A .................................................................................................. 3
Figure 3. Project Area B .................................................................................................. 4
Figure 4. Project Area and Sites on Topographic Map.................................................... 5
Figure 5. Arrow Point and Decorated Sherd.................................................................. 19
Figure 6. Site 41MR114 (Looking Southeast) ............................................................... 20
Figure 7. Site 41MR114 (Looking South) ...................................................................... 20

iv

INTRODUCTION
The City of Longview, Texas plans to construct a pump station on a 1.84 acre
site overlooking Lake O' the Pines in northwest Marion County, Texas on land owned by
the United States Army Corps of Engineers (Figure 1). Freese and Nichols, Inc. is the
firm retained by the City of Longview to design the pump station and evaluate any
potential affects of this project to the environment including archaeological sites,
prehistoric and historic. Two visits to the area were required before a suitable site was
located. On July 3, 1997, a two acre tract (Area A) was examined and found to contain
a prehistoric Caddo site (41MR114). This site was abandoned in favor of a 1.84 acre
tract (Area B) that does not contain significant cultural resources. Area A is illustrated
by Figure 2, and Area B is illustrated by Figure 3. Both areas are depicted on the 7.5'
topographic quadrangle, Lassater dated 1961 (Figure 4).
Although the pump station will be less than two acres in size, the entire project
area will be affected by its construction. The station will be located at the edge of the
bluff overlooking the lake to the north. The pipeline will connect to the station and
traverse the landscape in a southwestern direction where it will be tied in to an existing
line. The exact route of the pipeline has not been determined awaiting the findings of
this project. Subsurface disturbance in the project area will vary between seven feet for
the pipeline and fifty feet for the pump station. An access road is also planned, but its
route is also undetermined at this time. Should this location be utilized, the routes for
the pipeline and access road will be investigated under Section 106 once they have
been selected.
Marion County is located in a region that contains numerous significant
archaeological sites. Unfortunately, much of the area encompassing the Lake O' the
Pines and the Cypress Valley watershed has never been systematically assessed. In
addition, sites are frequently destroyed by vandals in order to obtain Caddo pots for sale
or display in private collections. An ongoing survey of the area by Timothy K. Perttula,
Rodney "Bo" Nelson, and Mike Turner, has demonstrated the need for site identification
and protection in this archaeologically sensitive area. In fact, Bo Nelson found site
41MR114 during this project.
The City of Longview, through Freese and Nichols, Inc., contracted with BVRA to
conduct a Phase I cultural resources survey of the two tracts under Section 106
guidelines. William E. Moore was the Principal Investigator and was assisted in the field
by Michael R. Bradle. The project number assigned by BVRA is 97-07.

1

Figure 1. General Location Map

2

Figure 2. Project Area A

3

Figure 3. Project Area B

4

Figure 4. Project Area and Sites on Topographic Map

5

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Marion County is part of the West Gulf Coastal Plain, a region of relatively young
sediments that roughly parallels the modern Gulf Coast. It begins west of the
Mississippi Alluvial Plain and continues into northeastern Mexico (Story 1990:5). The
climate is defined as subtropical with mainly continental influences except along the
Gulf Coast.
The project area is part of the Austroriparian biotic as defined by Blair (1950).
The Austroriparian province, as limited by Dice (1943), includes the Gulf coastal plain
from the Atlantic Ocean to eastern Texas. The western boundary is approximated by a
line running north from western Harris County to western Red River County. The
western boundary of the Austroriparian is the western boundary of the main body of the
pine and hardwood forests of the eastern Gulf coastal plain.
The area surveyed is located on a prominent upland ridge between the 250 and
260 foot contours overlooking the Big Cypress Creek valley now inundated by Lake O'
the Pines. The drowned channel of Big Cypress Creek is present north of the ridge.
There is no published soil survey for Marion County. According to Pete McKone
(personal communication, 1997), the project area is located in Cuthbert fine sandy
loam, 5-30 percent slopes. Typically, this soil has a surface layer of approximately eight
inches before reaching underlying reddish-yellow clay.
At the time of this survey, the area consisted of a mixed forest of pines and
hardwoods. Virtually the entire ground surface was obscured by leaves, pine needles,
dead trees and branches, and a mantle of recently formed soil caused by the decay of
various plants.
Except for the massive erosion affecting the northern part of this landform,
resulting in an artificial beach below, the project area appears to have been relatively
undisturbed. According to Ivies (personal communication, July 3, 1997), there has been
some recent clearing; and, according to Timothy K. Perttula (personal communication,
August 3, 1997), most of this area has been cleared and plowed, perhaps as early as
the 1840s.
Other sources that provide detailed discussions of the environmental setting of
the project area and vicinity are found in two overviews of the Cypress Creek basin by
J. Peter Thurmond (1981, 1990) and a major work entitled The Archeology and
Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain (two volumes) by Dee Ann Story, et al. (1990).
Marion County is included in An Archeological Bibliography for the Northeastern Region
of Texas compiled by William A. Martin (1990). This volume not only contains
references to previous archaeological work in the county, but it also has a selected
environmental bibliography.

6

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Introduction
The Lake O' the Pines and Cypress Valley Watershed are known to contain
significant archaeological sites. Unfortunately, the archaeological record of the Lake O'
the Pines area is defined by Perttula et al. (1996:3) as "seriously incomplete." J. Peter
Thurmond (1990), in his review of the Cypress Creek Basin, states that a basic but
minimal understanding of the nature of the archaeological resources in the Cypress
Valley watershed has been reached through intermittent professional archaeological
investigations over the last 75 years aided by the contributions of avocational
archaeologists. However, he also believes that there is much that still remains to be
accomplished in order to obtain a comprehensive knowledge of the watershed's cultural
heritage. According to Perttula, et al. (1996:4):
One of the main reasons that the archeological record of the Lake O' the
Pines and Cypress Valley watershed is poorly known is that much of the
area has never been properly or systematically assessed for its
archeological potential, and threats to the protection of watershed
archeological resources have steadily increased in the last ten years.
Many sites at Lake O' the Pines and in the region have been destroyed by
vandals digging for ceramic vessels for sale or display. In the area where Caddo sites
are known to occur, this is a serious problem that has destroyed a significant
percentage of these important cultural resources.
Regional Studies
A variety of studies relevant to the prehistory of the Project Area has been
conducted. In fact, Thurmond (1990:22) refers to the published works for this area as
"voluminous." He states that many of the early studies are either mutually contradictory
or have been rendered obsolete by more recent data. His (Thurmond 1981, 1985,
1990) overviews of the area are very thorough and cover the entire Cypress Creek
basin. These works should be consulted by any researcher with a serious interest in
Northeast Texas prehistory. Types of field investigations conducted in the area include
reservoir surveys, floodwater retardation structures, highway rights-of-way, sewage
treatment facilities, wastewater treatment facilities, water lines, and critical area
treatments.
According to E. Mott Davis (1970a:29), "systematic archeological work did not
begin in the Texas part of the lower Red River basin until about 1930, but the previous
two decades had seen occasional reconnaissance." Clarence B. Moore of the
Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia travelled up the Red River in 1912
investigating mound and burial sites in Louisiana and Arkansas. During this excursion
he visited three sites on the Texas side of the River near Fulton, Arkansas (Moore
1912:637-638) and observed that relic hunters were destroying sites along the river.

7

In 1919 and 1920, J. E. Pearce of the University of Texas made two
reconnaissance trips into northeastern Texas for the Bureau of American Ethnology.
He visited and excavated sites in the valleys of the Neches, Sabine, and Red rivers. In
1929, he made another brief trip. This time he recorded information on sites in the Red
River Basin in Lamar and Red River counties. Pearce was not trained in archaeology
but had a strong interest in antiquities. His sojourns into northeast Texas convinced him
that it was an area rich in sites and badly in need of professional archaeological
exploration. Although he did not return with much meaningful data from the area, he did
record many leads on informants and possible sites. Davis (1970a:30) believes that the
work by Pearce provided the impetus for the more systematic archaeological work of
the 1930s in northeast Texas.
In 1930, Pearce was able to finance field parties in northeast Texas. Between
1930 and 1939 crews worked not only along the Red River but throughout the entire
Texas portion of the Caddoan archaeological area. University of Texas crews worked in
this area virtually every year from 1930 through 1939. Most of this work, except for the
first few years, was sponsored by the Works Progress Administration (WPA). The main
objective of the early University of Texas investigations was the recovery of intact or
restorable artifacts, especially ceramic vessels, to be added to the university collections.
The vast amount of records and collections that accumulated from work under his
supervision provided a major part of the database on which his successors were able to
construct a picture of Caddoan culture history. Most of the sites explored in the 1930s
contained burials. It was the practice at that time to collect only complete or restorable
grave goods and note their associations. In a summary of the first field season (Pearce
1932:51-52) it was noted that in 1930 more than 1000 pottery vessels were brought
back to the laboratory.
Jackson and his peers were aware of other kinds of sites and, according to Davis
(1970a:31), "they occasionally tested mounds, trenched middens, uncovered house
patterns, and noted intrusions and other evidence of sequence." These early
researchers were not trained in modern techniques of stratigraphic control and
recording. Also, they were unable to analyze fragmentary specimens such as
potsherds. Therefore, it was the burial sites with complete pottery vessels that attracted
them and it was on these kinds of sites that they concentrated their work. Much of this
work remains unpublished and exists only in the form of notes and forms in the files and
records at TARL.
The Second World War brought a temporary end to archaeological work in
northeast Texas. However, the arrival of Alex D. Krieger at the University of Texas at
Austin resulted in a trained professional who in 1941 began analyzing the vast amount
of data collected during the 1930s. He supplemented his laboratory work by visiting
sites and comparing notes with Clarence H. Webb, M.D. of Shreveport, Louisiana, the
other worker most active in the field at that time. Dr. Webb's (1948) work in Louisiana
was as influential in describing and defining Caddoan chronology as the earlier field
work in Texas (Davis 1970a:32).

8

Krieger and Webb were interested in ceramic and non-ceramic sites, but since
there was virtually no data on non-ceramic materials they focused their attention on
ceramic sites. Following the Midwestern Taxonomic System developed by McKern
(1939), they divided the ceramic assemblages of the four state area into the Gibson and
Fulton aspects. Each was viewed as a time period as well as a formal unit.
Alex D. Krieger, a major early personality in Texas archaeology, initially
published his views on the various Caddoan cultures of Texas at a conference in 1943
(Krieger 1944). Later, he presented his findings in more detail in his work Culture
Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas (Krieger 1946). His final statement was
made in a review of Caddoan archaeology written shortly before he left this field for
other research. This work, published in volume 25 of the Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, is still considered one of the major references on Caddoan
archaeology.
In 1946, the Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program in federal reservoirs
was created. In the late 1940s an office of the River Basin Surveys, a federal
archaeological salvage unit, was established in Austin under the direction of Robert L.
Stephenson who was later assisted by Edward B. Jelks. This office, under the
Smithsonian Institution and later the National Park Service, conducted preliminary
archseological surveys in a number of reservoir basins in northeast Texas. Many of the
surveys conducted during this time led to significant excavation projects.
Although some major sites in other areas such as Womack (41LR1) and Sanders
(41LR2) in Lamar County and Harling (41FN1) in Fannin County (E. Mott Davis 1962a,
1962b, 1970b) had been recorded and, to some degree, tested it was the beginning of
the reservoir surveys that allowed for greater numbers of sites to be recorded in various
parts of the area. Now sites were being identified in different kinds of environmental
settings which provided comparative data not available before.
Southern Methodist University (SMU) has been largely responsible for most of
the reservoir-related archaeological studies in the Cypress Creek basin. During the
period 1968-1975, six major projects were completed by SMU archaeologists working
with the United States Army Corps of Engineers and local reservoir authorities. These
are the Caddo Lake Enlargement project (Gibson 1969), Titus County Reservoir
Reconnaissance (Hsu 1969), Lake Swauano - now Welsh Reservoir - (McCormick
1973b; Cliff et al. 1974), Lake Cypress Springs (Hsu et al. 1969), Lake Monticello
(McCormick 1973a, 1974), and Lake Bob Sandlin (Sullivan 1975).
It should be stated here that, although the work done by SMU was impressive in
terms of the amount of area studied, the level of work was far below today's standards.
Investigations rarely went beyond simple site recording with little or no testing or serious
site evaluation. As a result, according to Thurmond (1990:28), "many important
archeological sites were destroyed in these areas with no attempt at mitigation."

9

Following Krieger's work, the first major overview for Northeast Texas was
assembled as part of volume 25 of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
(Suhm, Krieger, and Jelks 1954) mentioned above. This detailed discussion of the
archaeology of the area was used as a model by other researchers for many years.
In 1960, Volume 29 of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society [published
for 1958] was dedicated to the review of Texas archaeology. It is divided into two
sections; the first consisting of overviews of the state by region and the second a guide
to the literature. The review of Northeast Texas was written by Clarence H. Webb
(1960:35-62). The bibliography portion of the Bulletin is arranged by region, county,
culture, and topic.
Volumes 30 and 31 of the Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society contain
discussions of proceedings of the Conference on Caddoan archaeology and articles
providing more in-depth material on particular aspects of Caddoan archaeology. These
articles include works in Volume 30 by Edwin N. Wilmsen (1961:35-49) and Volume 31
by E. Mott Davis (1961a:3-10; 1961b 77-143), Clarence H. Webb (1961:11-21), James
B. Griffin (1961:27-36), Robert E. Bell (1961:53-59), Edward B. Jelks (1961:65-69), and
T. N. Campbell (1961:145-151).
In 1970, a major study of the archaeological and historical resources of the Red
River Basin was published by the Arkansas Archeological Survey with Hester Davis as
editor (Davis 1970). This work represents the first detailed synthesis of this major
drainage and covers its length through Texas, Oklahoma, Arkansas, and Louisiana in
what is viewed as the "heartland" of the Caddoan cultural area. Each section was
written by a prominent archaeologist known for his research in Caddoan archaeology.
The four sections each contain discussions of the environmental setting, previous
investigations, culture sequences, and comprehensive bibliographies.
In 1974, Gulf South Research Institute (1974) conducted an assessment of the
natural environment, archaeology, and history of a United States Army Corps of
Engineers navigation channel from the Mississippi River to Daingerfield, Texas. In all,
this project recorded 21 sites in Marion County (41MR25, 41MR27, 41MR37-41MR42,
and 41MR44-41MR56).
Arguably, one of the more important contributions to a better understanding of
Northeast Texas archaeology is the synthesis of data regarding the Cypress Creek
drainage basin by Thurmond (1981) in his Masters thesis for the Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin. His work summarizes the natural
environment and history of archaeological investigations within his study area that
includes Marion County. This exhaustive work describes the 476 archaeological sites in
the Cypress Creek basin recorded in the site records at TARL and/or described in
previous publications.

10

Perhaps the most significant work relevant to the current Project Area is the
planning document for the Eastern Region of Texas prepared by the Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission which was published in 1993
(Kenmotsu and Perttula 1993). This comprehensive work is the result of years of
research involving a thorough review of site records and literature on file at the various
state agencies in Texas. No serious research for projects in Northeast Texas should be
conducted without consulting this reference.
Project Area Specific Studies
During the period of federally funded reservoir studies, the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir (now Lake O' the Pines) project was initiated by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers. A reconnaissance survey of scattered sections of the reservoir
basin was funded by the Smithsonian Institution in 1951 under the direction of
Stephenson (Miller et al. 1951). The original survey was not sophisticated by today's
standards as it consisted mainly of tracking down leads provided by local informants
and the inspection of easily accessible landforms believed to be likely locations for
archaeological sites. In all, 31 sites were located and recorded.
Although an intensive, systematic survey designed to locate and inventory all
identifiable cultural resources within the reservoir basin was never attempted, several
random surveys were conducted and some sites were tested. Reports of tested and
excavated sites within the basin were written by E. Mott Davis (1958), Jelks and Tunnell
(1959), Davis and Gipson (1960), Davis and Golden (1960), William A. Davis (1961),
and William A. Davis and E. Mott Davis (1960).
According to Thurmond (1990:24), the Ferrell's Bridge studies were "strong on
the provision of detailed intrasite information of specific site types, but weak in the
assessment of overall site density and distribution." Thurmond (1990:25) states that the
greatest research contribution of the Ferrell's Bridge project was perhaps its intensive
investigation of a number of Caddoan mound and occupation sites belonging to a
ceramic complex termed the Whelan complex by E. Mott Davis (1958).
In the summer of 1994, Moore Archeological Consulting examined 525 acres at
Lake O' the Pines (Moore et al. 1997). The report of this work is, however, not yet
available, but information has been obtained from site forms. This study located and
recorded eleven previously unrecorded sites in Marion County (41MR128 - 41MR138)
and relocated and evaluated two previously recorded sites in Marion County (41MR30
and 41MR45). In addition, six prehistoric localities (41LMR1 - 41LMR6) were recorded,
all in Marion County.

11

In December 1994, Daniel E. McGregor of the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, Fort Worth District, conducted a cultural resources survey of a ten acre tract
in the Pine Hill area at Lake O' the Pines (McGregor 1995). His investigation identified
a single flake recorded as an isolated find and two historic sites (41MR143 and
41MR144). The historic sites are described as relatively recent house sites containing
artifacts dating to the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Site 41MR143 was
first noted during the summer 1994 survey by Moore Archeological Consulting but was
not recorded at that time because it was located outside the project area. Based on the
data obtained by McGregor, sites 41MR128, 41MR129, and 41MR130 have been
replotted.
In 1995, Geo-Marine, Inc. surveyed 550 acres at Lake O' the Pines (Hunt et al.
1995). This study resulted in the identification and recording of four previously
unrecorded sites (41MR139 - 41MR142) and three localities classified as non-sites.
Three of the newly recorded sites are historic, while the remaining site is prehistoric. All
are considered eligible for the National Register of Historic Places. The localities are
not considered eligible.
The most recent, and ongoing, project at Lake O' the Pines is a survey of Corps
of Engineers property for unrecorded sites by Timothy K. Perttula, Rodney "Bo" Nelson,
and Mike Turner (1996). This study, which has been in progress since the summer of
1994, is being conducted under Archeological Resources Protection Act (ARPA) Permit
94-1. Eighteen new prehistoric and three historic sites were identified and recorded at,
or immediately adjacent to, Lake O' the Pines. The prehistoric sites have been
tentatively dated as Archaic, Early, Formative, and Late Caddo. The Three historic sites
date to the twentieth century. One of the sites found during this study is 41MR114.
This site was found by Bo Nelson who reported four pieces of debitage and a dart point
on the eroded beach below Area A.

12

CULTURAL OVERVIEW
There are several excellent sources that provide detailed discussions of the
cultural-historical sequence of the project area and vicinity. The interested researcher is
advised to consult the following works for more information: Campbell (1960), Davis
(1961a), Davis and Gibson (1960), Davis and Golden (1960), Davis and Davis (1960),
Griffin (1961), Jelks (1961), Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993), Krieger (1946), Martin
(1990), Miller et al. (1951), Orr (1952), Pearce (1932), Story et al. (1990), and
Thurmond (1981, 1985, 1990). These represent only a fraction of the available
literature regarding Caddo archaeology; however, they include sources specific to Lake
O' the Pines and some of the older major works.
The project area is situated in a broader region that is well known for the
presence of significant Caddoan sites. These sites range from small activity areas
and/or isolated finds of small numbers of artifacts to permanent villages, some
containing mounds and elaborate burials such as the Davis site in Cherokee County
(41CE19). Small hamlets or semi-permanent village sites also occur. Five broad
temporal periods have been identified for this area. They are Paleoindian (10,000 B.C.
- 7000 B.C.), Archaic (7000 B.C. - 200 B.C.), Early Ceramic (200 B.C. - A.D. 800),
Caddoan (A.D. 800 - A.D. 1680), and Historic (A.D. 1680 - Present).
The earliest evidence for aboriginal occupation in Northeast Texas is found at
sites dating to the Paleoindian period. Paleoindian sites, however, are not common and
rarely found to contain good contextual integrity. Most of the artifacts dating to this
period have been found on the surface. This problem is discussed by Hunt et al.
(1995:9-10) in the following:
At the present time, no dated Paleo-Indian sites in good context are
known within Northeast Texas, and the temporal span (ca. 10,000 - 7,000
B.C.) must be inferred from sites to the west.
Although the majority of Paleoindian remains have been reported as surface
finds, "buried sites of the Paleo-Indian period do undoubtedly exist within the deep
floodplain and terrace deposits along East Texas rivers" (Hunt et al. 1995:10). One
example is the Forrest Murphey site (41MR62) at Lake O' the Pines. This site
apparently contained spatially discrete concentrations of diagnostic Paleo-Indian tools
and the remains of extinct mammals. However, it was destroyed before investigation
could be completed (Hunt et al. 1995:10).

13

The Archaic period is also hindered by a lack of data from stratified or single
component sites. Although sites of this period are more numerous than those dating to
Paleoindian times, "Archaic components have yielded little additional information
concerning settlement-subsistence strategies" (Hunt et al. 1995:10). Most Archaic sites
in Northeast Texas are surface finds or multi-component sites with mixed assemblages.
During the latter stages of the Northeast Texas Archaic, there was an apparent increase
in the number of sites, a more expansive distribution of sites over the landscape, and
some evidence of sedentism (Hunt et al. 1995:10).
Between 200 B.C. and A.D. 800, there was a period of great variation and
change in terms of local cultural patterns and exterior influence throughout all of East
Texas and the surrounding area. This time of change is referred to as the Early
Ceramic Period and is characterized by the introduction of pottery, mound building,
ceremonialism, and horticulture into Northeast Texas (Hunt et al. 1995:11). This time is
viewed by some researchers as a pre-Caddoan period in which local groups were
influenced by external sources, especially in the manufacture of ceramics that were
either made elsewhere or locally. The form and decoration of the locally produced
ceramics are believed to have been influenced by stimuli from elsewhere (Hunt et al.
1995:11).
The Caddoan period is the final prehistoric manifestation in Northeast Texas and
has been divided into three subperiods: Early, Middle, and Late dating from A.D. 800 to
A.D. 1680. Much has been written about this major prehistoric period in Northeast
Texas, and the brief discussion below has been excerpted from the various sources
mentioned at the beginning of this section. Caddoan culture was a horticultural
economy based on the production and consumption of maize. The various Caddo
groups contained ranked or stratified sociopolitical systems that participated in
extensive interaction and trade with groups in the Lower Mississippi Valley, on the
Southern Plains, and Central Texas. A distinctive trait of Caddoan culture is a highly
developed and distinct ceramic tradition.
Early Caddo Sites
It was beyond the scope of this report to identify all known sites of this period.
However, it is important to note that Early Caddo sites are present at Lake O' the Pines.
During the recent survey by Perttula et al. (1996), one site (41MR103) was described as
containing components of the Formative and Early Caddo periods, circa A.D. 800 - A.D.
1200. Six sites were tentatively dated to after circa A.D. 800. More information is
needed to place them in their proper temporal context.

14

Middle Caddo Sites
According to the report authored by Hunt, et al. (1995:12) in 1996, only fourteen
sites belonging to the Middle Caddoan Period in the western Cypress Creek basin had
been identified at that time, all found in the upper reaches of Big Cypress Creek. Site
41MR114, the subject of this report, is a Middle or Late Caddo site based on the
presence of brushed design elements on three of the sherds found during the current
survey. This period is viewed as being transitional from the Early Caddoan Period 2 to
the Late Caddoan Whelan phase.
Late Caddo Sites
During the Late Caddo period, sites in the Lake O' the Pines area belong to the
Whelan (A.D. 1400 - A.D. 1500) and Titus (A.D. 1500 - A.D. 1600) phases. The Titus
phase represents the final prehistoric occupation of the upper Cypress Creek basin.
Thurmond (1990) has defined four regional sub-clusters within the Titus phase. The Big
Cypress Creek sub-cluster is concentrated at Lake O' the Pines with two outliers to the
south along Little Cypress Creek and the Sabine River. There is some evidence that
the Titus phase lasted to A.D. 1600 and perhaps later based on reports of glass trade
beads by collectors and Wichita ceramics at some sites. Thurmond believes that the
large number of Titus phase burials and the dearth of historic artifacts is indicative of a
real decline in this phase and an abandonment of the western Cypress Creek basin
prior to the historic period. At Lake O' the Pines, two probable Titus phase sites have
been reported (41MR110 and 41MR122) by Perttula et al. (1996). These sites contain
cemeteries that have been extensively destroyed by vandals.

15

METHODS

Prior to conducting the Phase I survey, the Principal Investigator checked the site
records at TARL and discussed the project with Daniel E. McGregor, Archaeologist with
the Fort Worth Corps of Engineers, William A. Martin, Department of Antiquities
Protection, and Larry D. Schuelein, P.E. of Freese and Nichols, Inc. Relevant literature
was examined in order to become more familiar with previous work in the area and the
kinds of sites present.
The initial field survey was conducted on July 3, 1997. On this date, a two acre
tract (Area A) was examined by surface inspection of the beach and shovel testing
(Figure 2). Two archaeologists, William E. Moore and Michael R. Bradle, accompanied
by Larry D. Schuelein; P.E. (Associate and Manager for Freese and Nichols, Inc.); Rolin
C. McPhee, Engineering Services Division - City of Longview; and Harold "Ike" Ivies,
Park Ranger, examined the project area. Thirteen shovel tests (ST) were excavated,
and all dirt was screened through quarter-inch hardware cloth, and all artifacts were
collected and bagged. The tests were recorded on a shovel test log (Appendix I). The
project was documented by field notes. Due to the dense vegetation, no photographs
were taken. However, several color photographs taken from the beach were made
available to BVRA by Mr. Ivies.
A prehistoric site (41MR114) had been reported by Archeological Steward,
Rodney "Bo" Nelson, working with Dr. Timothy K. Perttula under an ARPA permit for the
Fort Worth District of the Corps of Engineers. Very little information was available
except that four pieces of "lithic debris" and one dart point were found (Perttula et al.
1996:30). According to Dr. Perttula (personal communication, August 3, 1997), no site
form has been completed, and these artifacts represent the only information regarding
this site. It is not known if they were collected. Mr. Nelson had indicated the location of
the site at the eastern edge of the landform. Since he only examined the beach for
evidence of sites, it is not possible to associate the artifacts he found with those found
by BVRA during this study. After consulting with Rosario Casarez at TARL, it was
decided to retain the site number 41MR114 for this project.
The project area was not flagged prior to this survey. In the field, Larry D.
Schuelein and Rolin C. McPhee indicated the preferred location for the pump station.
Shovel testing was concentrated in this area that is the highest part of the landform.
The area was wooded, and shovel tests were placed in clearings in order to avoid roots.
The first test, for example, was not finished because of large roots and is not included in
the shovel test log. Shovel testing began at the northwest corner of the proposed pump
station site, and tests were excavated in an east-west direction. The last test in this
transect (ST 8) was negative, close to the eastern edge of the project area, and
downslope from the positive tests. It was decided at that point to excavate a series of
tests from east to west and in a line south of the first row of tests. The site area was
thus defined as situated on the highest point of the landform. All of the shovel tests dug
downslope from the site were sterile. The site map was created using a compass and
tape (Figure 2).

16

On September 5, 1997, William E. Moore and Michael R. Bradle returned to Lake
O' the Pines and examined Area B, a 1.84 acre tract (Figure 3). The field survey relied
on shovel testing to locate buried cultural materials. Sixteen shovel tests were
excavated in Area B (Appendix II). The first test was dug at the western edge of the
proposed pump station site. This test produced two flakes, and the next tests were dug
to the east where the landform seemed to be lower. The tests were continued at 20
meter intervals until the eastern edge of the project area was reached. Tests 5 and 6
produced single flakes. In order to help define site boundaries and determine the
research potential of this area, additional tests were excavated to the south and west of
the positive shovel tests. Only one more shovel test (ST 9) was positive (1 flake). The
two areas containing artifacts were found to be approximately 80 meters apart, based
on negative shovel tests. These areas are considered separate sites and were
assigned field numbers TS 1 and TS 2. Later, official TARL numbers 41MR162
replaced temporary number TS 2 and 41MR180 replaced TS 1. Site 41MR180 is
defined by one shovel test (ST 1). A single shovel test was excavated approximately 15
meters southeast of ST 1 and was negative. Therefore, it is believed that site 41MR180
extends to the west. Since this area will not be affected by the pump station, it was not
shovel tested. Due to the dense vegetation, no photographs were taken. A site map
was created using a tape and compass.
No formal lithic analysis was conducted. The single arrow point could not be
assigned to a known type, and only eleven flakes were recovered from the three sites.
Linda Wootan Ellis performed ceramic analysis, and the results are presented in
Appendix III.

17

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Archival Research
A check of the site records at TARL indicated that no previously recorded sites
were known to exist in the project area. However, after consulting with Daniel E.
McGregor, it was learned that a prehistoric site had been located by Archeological
Steward Rodney "Bo" Nelson. Site 41MR114 consisted of four pieces of debitage and a
dart point found on the eroded beach below Area A. Mr. Nelson, who refers to the site
as probably Archaic, did not examine the upland crest and did not dig any shovel tests.
This project began not knowing if his location on the topographic map was correct. He
simply plotted the site as above that part of the beach where he found artifacts.
Area A
No artifacts were found on the beach. Shovel testing revealed the presence of a
prehistoric Caddo site approximately 30 meters (north-south) by 60 meters (east-west)
in size. The site is located between the 250 and 260 foot contours on an upland ridge
overlooking Big Cypress Creek to the north (Figure 2). It is covered with a mixed
pine/hardwood forest and has an understory of saplings, brambles, and vines.
Thirteen shovel tests were excavated at site 41MR114 (Figure 2). Of this
number, six produced artifacts and seven were sterile (Appendix I). Artifacts recovered
include 6 flakes, 1 burned sandstone rock exhibiting polish on one edge, 1 arrow point,
and 6 ceramic fragments. Although the site area was adequately tested, it should not
be inferred from this report that additional cultural materials are not present elsewhere
on this landform. It is also important to note that the site's horizontal extent to the south
and southeast has not been established by shovel testing. The boundary in this
direction, as depicted in Figure 2, is approximate. The landform in this area was
considered low probability and not tested. More tests will be needed in this area to
firmly define the site's south and southeast boundaries.
Site 41MR114 is believed to be a small Caddo house site or special activity area.
The presence of brushed design elements on three of the sherds suggests that they
were manufactured during the Middle to Late Caddo period or after A.D. 1300. The
presence of a small arrow point are consistent with a site belonging to either of these
periods. Appendix III presents the results of the ceramic analysis by Linda Wootan
Ellis. Figure 5 illustrates the arrow point and one of the decorated sherds. Both
specimens are actual size.

18

Figure 5. Arrow Point and Decorated Sherd
It is not known how much, if any, of site 41MR114 has been destroyed by erosion
of the lake to the north. However, since no artifacts were found on the beach it seems
likely that most of the site remains unaffected. The dart point and flakes found by Mr.
Nelson may represent a separate, Archaic component; however, it is not possible to
associate these artifacts with those found during this Phase I survey. Figures 6 and 7
are two views of the site area from the beach.
Area B
No artifacts were found on the beach. Sixteen shovel tests revealed the
presence of two prehistoric sites containing sparse amounts of lithic debitage (flakes).
Site 41MR162 was discovered when one flake was found in ST 5. Subsequent testing
produced two additional positive tests (ST 6 and ST 9), each containing one flake.
Although the site boundaries have not been delineated in all directions, especially to the
east, it is believed to be approximately 30 meters (north-south) by 45 meters (east-west)
in size (Figure 3). These dimensions are estimates based on the positive shovel tests.
The presence of negative shovel tests to the west and southeast suggests the site does
not extend in these directions. The site is located between the 250 and 260 foot
contours on an upland ridge overlooking Big Cypress Creek to the north (Figure 4). It is
covered with a mixed pine/hardwood forest and has an understory of saplings,
brambles, and vines.
At 41MR162, three positive tests were surrounded by seven negative tests
(Figure 3). The artifact inventory consists of three flakes. The lithic debitage from
41MR162 appears to consist of locally available materials, probably fine-grained
quartzite. The extent and artifact density of this site to the east is not known; however,
based on the paucity and lack of diagnostic artifacts within proposed site of the pump
station, this site is not considered to possess significant research potential. Its age and
function are not known.

19

Figure 6. Site 41MR114 (Looking Southeast)

Figure 7. Site 41MR114 (Looking South)

20

Site 41MR180 was found approximately 80 meters west of 41MR162 (Figure 4).
It was discovered when two flakes were found in ST 1. At this point, the western edge
of the project area, shovel testing was continued to the east, and no additional tests
yielded cultural materials. The last test (ST 16) was excavated approximately 20
meters southeast of the discovery test and was also negative. Because this site is
represented by only one positive test, the site boundaries have not been delineated in
all directions, especially to the west (Figure 3). It is possible that the two flakes are
isolated occurrences, or they could represent the eastern end of a larger site that
extends to the west outside the current project area. The site is located between the
250 and 260 foot contours on an upland ridge overlooking Big Cypress Creek to the
north (Figure 4). It is covered with a mixed pine/hardwood forest and has an understory
of saplings, brambles, and vines.
The artifact inventory consists of two flakes. The lithic debitage from 41MR180
appears to consist of locally available materials, probably fine-grained quartzite. The
extent and artifact density of this site to the west is not known; however, based on the
paucity and lack of diagnostic artifacts within proposed site of the pump station, this site
is not considered to possess significant research potential. Its age and function are not
known.

21

RECOMMENDATIONS
Prehistoric Caddo sites often produce burials and fine pottery. These sites are
targets for vandals, and many of the better sites have been looted by those who want to
own or sell pottery. As a result of these activities, the number of intact sites in the area
is diminishing rapidly, and several sites on Corps land have been virtually destroyed.
Sites containing evidence of contact between the prehistoric Caddo and Europeans
exist in the area as well. Artifacts found at these sites include trade beads,
commercially manufactured gunflints used for trade, and other metal items. These sites
are few in number and very significant in terms of providing information regarding this
little known period of history. Most of the prehistoric sites have been identified during
reservoir surveys that do not examine the upland areas out of the area to be inundated
by floodwaters.
Site 41MR114 is a small, apparently intact prehistoric Caddo site containing
diagnostic artifacts that may make it possible to place it in its proper chronological
sequence. The presence of a possible metate suggests some food processing took
place, or it may represent a small hamlet or village site. If 41MR114 is a Caddo house
site, it is possible that burials may be present. This site is located in a setting that offers
an opportunity to collect data for a site in an area for which more data are needed. It is
recommended that Phase II testing be conducted at this site to determine its eligibility
for the National Register of Historic Places.
It is not uncommon to find sparse scatters of lithic debitage along upland ridges
in areas where more permanent sites are located. Because of the lack of diagnostic
artifacts, sites 41MR162 and 41MR180 can't be discussed in terms of their age and
function. However, it may be assumed that the flakes represent limited activity areas
such as tool refurbishing, or the areas where the artifacts were found are on the edges
of larger, perhaps more permanent sites. It is also possible that, given the lack of
ceramics and arrow points, these sites may date to the Archaic period. Additional data
are necessary in order to more fully understand and discuss these two sites. Since they
are located at the east and west ends of the project area and since construction can
proceed without affecting these areas, it is recommended that the City of Longview be
allowed to place the pump station in Area B as long as no subsurface disturbance is
conducted outside the project area boundaries as depicted in Figure 3.

22

REFERENCES CITED
Bell, Robert E.
1961
Relationships Between the Caddoan Area and the Plains. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 31:53-59. (for 1960)
Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Campbell, Thomas Nolan
1960
A Review of Texas Archeology: Part One. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 29:177-254. (Published for 1958)
1961

Caddoan Radiocarbon Dates. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
31:145-151. (for 1960)

Cliff, Maynard B., Carol Carter, and Linda Verrett
1974
Archaeological Survey of the Welsh Power Plant. Archaeology Research
Program, Research Report 33. Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
Davis, E. Mott
1958
The Whelan Site, a Late Caddoan Component in the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir, Northeastern Texas. Division of Research in Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1961

Southern Plains, Southwest, and Texas Papers. Plains Anthropologist
6(12):61-66.

1961a

The Caddoan Area: An Introduction to the Symposium. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 31:3-10. (for 1960)

1961b

Proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Caddoan Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 31:77-143. (for 1960)

1961c

Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on Caddoan Archeology. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 30:1-33. (for 1959)

1962a

Archaeological Salvage Investigations of the Harling Mound in Fannin
County, Texas. American Philosophical Society, Year Book 1961, pp.
487-489.

1962b

The Harling Site (41 FN 1) Fannin County, Texas. Plains Anthropologist
7(16):86.

23

Davis, E. Mott (continued)
1970a
Archaeological and Historical Assessment of the Red River Basin in
Texas. In Archeological and Historical Resources of the Red River Basin,
edited by Hester A. Davis, pp. 27-65. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Publications on Archeology, Research Series No. 1.
1970b

A Summary Report of Excavations at the Harling Mound, Fannin County,
Texas. Manuscript on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory.

Davis, E. Mott, and Jules R. Gipson
1960
The Dalton Site: A Late Caddoan Mound Site in the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir Area, Northeastern Texas. Division of Research in
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Davis, E. Mott, and Bernard Golden
1960
The Ben McKinney Site, a Titus Focus Site in the Ferrell's Bridge
Reservoir, Northeastern Texas. Division of Research in Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Davis, Hester A. (Editor)
1970
Archeological and Historical Resources of the Red River Basin. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Publications on Archeology, Research Series No. 1.
Davis, William A.
1961
The Isadore Segal Site at Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir, Northeastern Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Davis William A., and E. Mott Davis
1960
The Jake Martin Site, an Archaic Site in the Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir
Area, Northeastern Texas. University of Texas, Department of
Anthropology, Archaeology Series, No. 3.
Dice, L. R.
1943

The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press. Ann
Arbor.

Duffield, Lathel F.
1961
The Limerick Site at Iron Bridge Reservoir, Rains County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 30:51-116. (for 1959)
Gibson, J.
1969

Archaeological Survey at Caddo Lake, Louisiana and Texas. Contributions
in Anthropology Number 6. Southern Methodist University.

24

Griffin, James B.
1961
Relationships Between the Cadaoan Area and the Mississippi Valley.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 31:27-36. (for 1960)
Gulf South Research Institute
1974
Red River Waterway, Louisiana, Texas, Arkansas, and Oklahoma:
Mississippi River to Shreveport, Louisiana; and Shreveport, Louisiana to
Daingerfield, Texas; Environmental Analysis, Volume 5: Archeology,
History, and Culture. Gulf South Research Institute, Design Memorandum
15. Baton Rouge.
Hayner, E. W.
1961
Indian Grinding Stones or Metates in East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 31:117-122. (for 1959)
Hsu, Dick Ping
1969
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Titus County Reservoir: Titus,
Camp, and Franklin Counties, Texas. Texas State Building Commission,
Archeological Survey Report 4. Austin.
Hsu, Dick Ping, James V. Sciscenti, and S. Alan Skinner
1969
Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Big Cypress (Franklin
Reservoir). Texas State Commission, Archeological Survey Report 4.
Austin.
Hunt, Steven M., Darryl Pleasant, and Maynard B. Cliff
1995
Cultural Resources Survey of 550 Acres at Lake O' The Pines, Marion
County, Texas. Geo-Marine, Inc., Miscellaneous Report of Investigations
Number 103.
Jelks, Edward B.
1961
Relationships Between the Caddoan Area and Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 31:65-69. (for 1960)
Jelks, Edward B., and Curtis D. Tunnell
1959
The Harroun Site, A Fulton Aspect Component of the Caddoan Area,
Upshur County, Texas. The University of Texas at Austin, Department of
Anthropology, Archaeology Series 2.
Kenmotsu, Nance Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document.
Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource Management
Report 3, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.

25

Krieger, Alex D.
1944
Archaeological Horizons in the Caddo Area. In El Norte de Mexico y el Sur
de Estados Unidos. Tecera Reunion de Mesa Redonda de la Sociedad
Mexicana de Antropolgia, pp. 154-156. Mexico, D.F.
1946

Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas. The University of
Texas Publication, No. 4640. Austin.

McCormick, Olin F., III
1973a
The Archaeological Resources in the Lake Monticello Area of Titus
County, Texas. Department of Anthropology, Contributions in
Anthropology 8. Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
1973b

Lake Swauano: An Archaeological Reconnaissance. Archaeology
Research Program, Southern Methodist University.

1974

Archaeological Excavations at Lake Monticello. Archaeology Research
Program, Southern Methodist University.

McGregor, Daniel E.
1995
Letter Report: Cultural Resources Survey of a Ten-Acre Timber Tract at
Lake O' The Pines, Marion County, Texas. United States Army Corps of
Engineers, Fort Worth District.
McKern, W. C.
1939
The Midwestern Taxonomic Method as an Aid to Archeological Study.
American Antiquity 4(4):301-313.
Martin, William A.
1990
Archeological Bibliography for the Northeastern Region of Texas.
Department of Archeological Planning and Review, Cultural Resource
Management Report 1 and Office of the State Archeologist, Special
Report 32. Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Miller, E. O., E. H. Moorman, and Edward B. Jelks
1951
Archeological Survey of Ferrell's Bridge Reservoir: Harrison, Marion,
Upshur, Cass, Morris, Titus, and Camp Counties, Texas. Typescript
report submitted to the United States Army Corps of Engineers by the
National Park Service and the Smithsonian Institution River Basin
Surveys. Austin.
Moore, Clarence B.
1912
Some Aboriginal Sites on Red River. Journal of the Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia. 14(4):481-644.

26

Moore, Roger G., Timothy K. Perttula, Robert C. Booth, and William E. Moore
1997
A Cultural Resources Survey of Four Tracts of Forested Land Around
Lake O' The Pines Reservoir in Marion and Upshur Counties in Northeast
Texas. Moore Archeological Consulting, Report of Investigations Number
136. DRAFT
Orr, Kenneth G.
1952
Survey of Caddoan Area Archaeology. In Archaeology of the Eastern
United States, edited by James B. Griffin, pp. 239-255. University of
Chicago Press.
Pearce, J. E.
1932
The Present Status of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 4:44-54.
Perttula, Timothy K., Rodney "Bo" Nelson, and Mike Turner
1996
Initial Report on Archeological Investigations at Lake O' The Pines, a U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers-Owned Lake Facility in Northeast, Texas.
Friends of Northeast Texas Archaeology.
Story, Dee Ann
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and
Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain, by Dee Ann Story, Janice A. Guy,
B. A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman, J. C. Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W.
Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Research Series Number 38.
Arkansas Archeological Survey. Fayetteville.
Story, Dee Ann, Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman, Jerome C.
Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl J. Reinhard
1990
The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain: Volume I.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Research Series Number 38.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 25:151-227.
Sullivan, Timothy L.
1975
Archaeological Investigations at Lake Bob Sandlin, Texas. Archaeology
Research Program, Research Report 99. Southern Methodist University.
Dallas.
Tharp, B. C.
1939
The Vegetation of Texas. Texas Academy of Sciences, Non-Technical
Series 1(i-vi):1-74.

27

Thurmond, J. Peter
1981
Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin, Northeastern Texas
and Northwestern Louisiana. Unpublished Master's thesis, The University
of Texas at Austin.
1985

Late Caddoan Social Group Identifications and Sociopolitical Organization
in the Upper Cypress Basin and Vicinity, Northeastern Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 54:185-200. (for 1983)

1990

Archeology of the Cypress Creek Drainage Basin, Northeastern Texas
and Northwestern Louisiana. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
Studies in Archeology 5. The University of Texas at Austin.

Webb, Clarence H.
1960
A Review of Northeast Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 29:35-62. (for 1958)
1961

Relationships Between the Caddoan and Central Louisiana Sequences.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 31:11-21. (for 1960)

Wilmsen, Edwin M.
1961
A Suggested Developmental Sequence for House Forms in the Caddoan
Area. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 30:35-49. (for 1959)

28

APPENDIX I: SHOVEL TEST LOG
(Area A)
________________________________________________________________
Shovel Test
Depth
Results
________________________________________________________________
01

54 cm

sterile

02

55 cm

sterile

03

65 cm

2 flakes (20-30 cm)

04

56 cm

1 flake (20-30 cm)

05

57 cm

1 body sherd (50-57 cm)
1 arrow point (50-60 cm)
charcoal (45-60 cm)

06

58 cm

sterile

07

45 cm

1 flake (20-30 cm)
1 body sherd (40-45 cm)

08

58 cm

sterile

09

46 cm

sterile

10

45 cm

3 sherds (40-45 cm)
burned sandstone rock
(40-45 cm)

11

85 cm

1 body sherd (50-70 cm)
2 flakes (50-70 cm)

12

70 cm

sterile

13
55 cm
sterile
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX II: SHOVEL TEST LOG
(Area B)
_______________________________________________________________
Shovel Test
Depth
Results
_______________________________________________________________
01

58 cm

1 flake (10-20 cm)
1 flake (40-50 cm)

02

34 cm

sterile

03

48 cm

sterile

04

48 cm

sterile

05

52 cm

1 flake (45-52 cm)

06

55 cm

flakes

07

80 cm

sterile

08

50 cm

sterile

09

68 cm

1 flake (60-68 cm)

10

60 cm

sterile

11

64 cm

sterile

12

38 cm

sterile

13

60 cm

sterile

14

60 cm

sterile

15

62 cm

sterile

16
40 cm
sterile
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX III: CERAMIC ANALYSES (41MR114)
Introduction
This report describes eight sherds recovered from site 41MR114 in Marion
County. The sorting procedure involved two levels of examination. First, each
sherd was examined in an effort to identify all sherds that could be joined
together (i.e., fitters) or could confidently be determined to be part of the same
vessel. Identifications were made on the basis of similarity in paste, decorative
motifs, and/or distinctive surface modifications. Second, if sherds could be joined
or matched, it was noted whether the joined edges represented a "fresh break"
(i.e., those broken during excavation or processing) or an "old break" (i.e., those
broken prior to excavation). Identifying "fitters" serves to reduce overrepresentation in a collection by minimizing the number of times a single vessel
is counted with respect to a given problem. During the initial examination, two
sherds were fitted with mates, reducing the total sample size to six. Both of the
paired sherds had fresh breaks that occurred during excavation.
Analysis
During analysis, the six recovered sherds were characterized according to
their technological style (i.e., the method of manufacture and execution used
during the pottery manufacturing process) and their typological class. Table 1
shows the five technological attributes recorded for each sherd. In general, the
paste constituency and surface finish of each sherd resembles that normally
associated with Caddoan ceramics, as do the decorative elements found on
three of the sherds (Figure 5b in text). [For a detailed discussion of the potential
usefulness of ceramic studies focusing on technological characteristics, as well
as definitions of the major attributes, the reader is referred to Ellis (1992:
Chapters 4 and 5, 1995, 1997)].
Although the brushed design elements present on three of the sherds are
common to several established Caddo types, the sherds were too small to
determine an overall design motif. Because it is the combination and
configuration of the various design elements that identify specific types, it was
not possible to accurately assign any of the sherds to a specific ceramic type.
However, the mere presence of brushed design elements on three of the sherds
suggests that they were manufactured during the Middle to Late Caddo period or
post-A.D. 1300 (Tim Pertulla, personal communication 1997).

Table 1. Sherd Attributes

5-1

Shovel
Test
ST 5

7-1

ST 7

40-45 cm

10-1

ST 10

40-45 cm

10-2

ST 10

40-45 cm

10-3

ST 10

40-45 cm

11-1

ST 11

50-57 cm

Sherd

Elevation
50-57 cm

Exterior
Surface
Bone & Grog Dryin a Silty Paste Smoothed/
Burnished
Bone & Grog Dryin a Silty Paste Smoothed
Grog In a Silty DryPaste
Smoothed
Bone & Grog Dryin a Very Fine Smoothed
Sandy Paste
Grog in a Very DryFine Sandy
Smoothed
Paste
Grog In a Silty DryPaste
Smoothed
Paste

Interior Decorative
Class Thickness
Surface
Elements
DryNone
Body
0.79 cm
Smoothed
DrySmoothed
DrySmoothed
DrySmoothed

None

Body

0.60 cm

None

Base

1.15 cm

Brushed

Body

0.80 cm

DrySmoothed

Brushed/
Incised

Upper
Body

0.71 cm

DrySmoothed

Brushed

Body

0.68 cm

REFERENCES CITED
Ellis, Linda Wootan
1992 Technological Style in Upper Texas Coastal Ceramics: A Case
Study from Site 41HR616, Harris County, Texas. Unpublished
Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
1995 Ceramic Analysis. In Archeological Data Recovery Excavations at
the Kingwood Site, 41HR616, Harris County, Texas, edited by
Roger G. Moore, pp. 97-165. Report of Investigations Number 100.
Moore Archeological Consulting. Houston.
1997

Technological Style in Early Upper Texas Coastal Ceramics: A
Selected Sample from 41CH252. In Data Recovery at the Eagle*s
Ridge: A Stratified Archaic and Clear Lake Period Shell Midden,
Wallisville lake Project, Chambers County, Texas, edited by H.
Blaine Ensor. Wallisville Technical Series Number 4. Geo-Marine,
Inc. Plano, Texas. (Draft)

