A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND
ASSESSMENT IN THE NORTH CENTRAL AUSTIN
GROWTH CORRIDOR,
TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS
Technical Bulletin 63

Henry B. Moncure

Principal Investigator:

David S. Dibble

A final report submitted to Nash Phillips/Copus, Inc. by the
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texa~ at Austin.

June 1983

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Ba/cones Research Center
10100 Burnet Road

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR
David S. DibbZe

EDITOR
Solveig

A.

Turpin

ABSTRACT
V~n9

Febnuany, 1983, the

Tex~ Anc..heo~og~c..al

Sunvey, The

U~ven6~y

Tex~ at AU,6t~n, c..onduc.ted a pnognam 06 c.uUunal n~ounc..e J.>unvey and
~J.>~J.>ment 06 appnoum:ddy 438 aM~ w.i...t~n the Nonth CentJuc.l Au.J.>tin Gnowth
Cawdon, TnaVM County, Tex~. The anea will be mo~Med by n~Me~
devdopment aetiv~y. The pnognam WM J.>poMoned by N~h Phi1.Up,~/Copu.J.>

06

Homebu.ildeM 06 AMtin, Texa.J.>. The anea, a poJttion 06 the Nonth CentJuc.l
AuJ.>tin Gnowth Cowdon, Mu~upal U~~ VLo~d #1, M a c..entJuc.l poJttion
06 that bounded by State H~hway 1325 on the nonthw~t, N. Laman &vd. on
the J.>outh~t, Pahmen Lane on the vwnthea.J.>t and Knamen Lane on the J.>ou.thw~t.
It M bLoeded by the Walnut CILeek dn~nage 6nom nonthw~t to J.>ou;the~t and
indu.d~ poiliom 06 .6ev~ mbwn ~buta.ni~ 06 that .6tfLeam. V~ng the
.6unvey deven anc.heo~og~c.al J.>~e/:J wene nec..onded, noun 06 th~e da.ting a6teIL
h.L6to~c.. Mfttement 06 the. ane.a.
One. 06 the. h.L6to~c.. J.>~~, the Fulk.6
Hom~te.ad, 41TV638, ha.J.> been .6c..heduied by the .6pOMOn 60n 6unthefL pn06eM~o~
anc.heo~ogic..al inve.6tiga.tion additive to ~n-pnoglL~J.> anc..~val and anc.hitedunal
n~eMc.h and doc..umentation c..onduded by the .6pomon'.6 .6ta66.
Th.L6 .6~e IAU.tt be
addJz.u.6ed ~n detail in a .6epMate nepont.
The nem~ng thnee h.L6to~c.. .6~~,
41TV639. 41TV642, and 41TV643, ane de.6~bed heILun. The futten .b~e, a
nuined ~og c..a.b~n, h~ 6untheIL inv~tiga.Uon v~e ~6 an appolLpniate ~.60c..ia.­
tion Lo uta.bfuhed but M in veny poon c..ondition and ~c..k.6 the mat~,
tec..h~c..al OIL anc..hitedunal me!LU to IAJCUCJtCtnt 6unthen e.660nu wUhout a notab~e
c..ifLc..u.m.btanc.e. ~.6oua.Uon.
The eight pneh.L6to~c. .6UU wUhout exc..eption ane when .6ha.Uow,
futunbe.d .6W1.6ac..e Whlc. .bc..atteM w~h 6ew cita.gno.6,tic. Mti6ac.t.b on ane ~oc..ated
in that pMt 06 the c..neek 6~oodp~a.in .6ubjeded to nepeated, c.ompMa.tivdy
.6evelLe 6~00d futunbanc..u in the p~t. The one J.>Ue ~oc..ated ~n the weU­
60nmed floili nonth 06 the Meek pnoved to be a .6~oW depOJ.>~ .6ubjeded to
p~oW-ing/.6oil neten:Uon futunbanc..e.
None 06 the pneh.L6to~c.. .6~~ J.>howed
.6ig~6~c..ant pote~ 60n namina.Uan 6an Na.tio~ RegMten .6ta.tuJ.> ~ a.n
individual entity. They ane, ~n mO.6t c..~u, c..ompa.tib£.e wUh the neMby
Walnut CILe.ek Mc..heo~ogic..al VM~c.. du.J.>ten 0-6 J.>ilu but add Wile to the
.6igni6~c..anc.e 06 the dL6~d athen than aneal extent.

ii

-_

.. _

- - - - - - ­

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract . . . . • . . .
Introduction . . . • . . .
Environmental Background
Archeological Background
Historical Background
Survey Design • . . . .
Results of the Survey
Site Descriptions
Artifact Descriptions
Conclusions and Recommendations . . . . .
Glossary . . . . .
. • . .
APPENDIX I - Texas Log Cabin Register
References Cited
Acknowledgements.

· ii
1
3

.11
· 14
16
. . 19
· 20

32
34

· 36
· 38
. • 39

· 44

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure
Figure
Figure
Fi gure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Project and Site location Map . .
Walnut Creek Cross Section
Project Area, General Photographs.
Wal nut Creek Road . . . . . . . . .
Aerial Photograph, Project Area .
Prehistoric Artifact Photographs
Historic Site Photographs . . .
Historic Artifact Photographs

2
6
8

· 17
· 21
· 24
. . • 26
28

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1.
Table 2.

Characteristics of Environmental Units
Summary, Study Area Environment

10
11

I NTRODUCTI ON

A cultural resource survey of designated areas of Travis County, Texas
was conducted for Nash Phillips/Copus, Inc. (NPC) by the Texas Archeological
Survey (TAS), The University of Texas at Austin, during February, 1983. The
study was designed and carried out in conformance with criteria and guidelines
set forth by the Texas Historical Commission for intensive survey. The
general objectives of this survey were to provide data on the specific nature
of the cultural resources present, to ascertain the extent of impact of the
proposed development on those resources, and to recommend, as required,
appropriate mitigative actions to minimize the impact of the proposed land
modification on resources identified during the survey.
The area surveyed (Figure 1) is an irregularly shaped, metes and bounds,
property line defined land segment astride Walnut Creek in the North Central
Austin Growth Corridor. The total area surveyed is approximately 438 acres
not all of which is scheduled for development; some is reserved for park or
greenbelt purposes. The longest dimension, north northwest to southeast, is
2.15 km. The north bank of Walnut Creek bounds the area for the a short
distance, approximately .5 kID.; and the south bank serves as a border for
about .4 km., giving a stream bank 1 inear distance of about 2 kID •• including
that part wholly within the area.
The specific aims of the survey and its accompanying assessment were
to prov i de the sponsor with:
1) a detailed inventory and evaluation of the scientific or historic
Significance of cultural resources within the area subject to
modification;
2) an estimate of the nature of the impact of the projected land use
on such resources, and;
3) recommendations for lessening, avoiding and otherwise mitigating
adverse effects on the identified resources.
In accordance with the stated aims of the survey and assessment, the following
specific tasks were accomplished:
1) research was conducted in the State Archives, the Travis County
Property and Probate Records, the libraries of the University of
Texas, including the Barker Texas History Center and other special
collections. The holdings of the Austin Public library's Travis
County Collection and those of the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, state repository for archeological records. were examined
in detail;
2) a land ownership search was conducted to identify any cultural
resources which could have been associated with persons of historical
note or local or national prominence;
3) the full length and breadth of the designated study area was syste­
matically field surveyed, and;
4) special subject research and analysis of the survey findings were
conducted preparatory to this report.
This report includes both the survey and research results.

Figure 1.

PROJECT AND SITE LOCATION MAP

Nash Phillips-Copus Proposed Subdivision
North Cenuat GrOwth Corridor

Austin, Texas

..

Approximate site location
AI! site numbers are pr_dod by 41TV

o

500

1000

2500

iiiiiI.
f ••t

3

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION
The study area ;s within the area shown in Figure 1, and is located in
the area covered in the United States Geological Survey's Pflugerville West,
Texas Quadrangle 7.5 minute series map. It lies within an area bounded by
Texas .State Highway 1325 on the northwest, Parmer Lane on the northeast,
North Lamar Boulevard on the southeast and Kramer Lane on the southwest.
GEOMORPHOLOGY
The study area lies within that portion of Travis County included in
the West Gulf Coastal Plain physiographic province (Arbingast et al. 1967:7
and Freeman 1938:100-103). Physiographic descriptions of this section of
Texas are most commonly based on the surface manifestations of the underlying
rock. In the study area the Blackland Prairie is the applicable physiographic
district, overlying the rocks of the Upper Cretaceous Austin Chalk Formation.
This formation provides the rock parentage for the soils above it. The
prairie is gently rolling and moderately dissected with slopes in the 2 to
5 percent range (Garner 1974:101, 108). This range is well within that
preferred for urban development with respect to drainage and the minimizing
of supplemental engineering design for structures (ibid. :105). Within the
study area proper the most prominent topographic features are those resulting
from the formation of the Walnut Creek stream valley, its cut bank and
floodpl atn. El evation above mean sea level (jl.MSL) ranges from approximately
750 feet down to 630 feet with most of the property above the 680 foot
contour.
GEOLOGY
Most of Travis County, and specifically that portion within which the
study area lies, is subject to the direct structural effects of the Balcones
Fault Zone which forms the margin of the Gulf Coastal Plain. The fault
zone is marked by local fractures which may locally alter the dip and strike
of geologic units from those generally prevalent in the area. Units on the
upthrown side of the fault zone dip at about 20 feet per mile toward the
northeast; those near the fault zone dip about 50 feet per mile to the east;
and those on the downthrown side increase to about 100 feet ger mile (Garner
1974:101). Strikes within the Balcones system are about N40 with all faults
normal. Most fault displacements are less than 50 feet. No movement has
been detected during modern times (Weeks 1945:1693-1770).
The surface geology 1n the study area is characterized by Cretaceous
soft limestone, the Aust'in Chalk. This formation is gray to white,
variably thin to thick bedded, massive to slightly nodular, fine-grained
limestone, marly limestone and chalk. The deposit averages 114 meters (375
feet in thickness. The Austin Chalk may be further subdivided into five
distinct subdivisions which are, from top to bottom, the Burditt (marl and
limestone), the Oessan (chalk), the Johan (limestone), the Vinson (chalk),
and the Atco (chalk and marly limestone). The Burditt marl and limestone,
generally the surface strata within the study area, is a light gray shell­
containing calcareous clay overlying hard chalk (Sellards, Adkins and Plunvner
1966:450).

4

The combined effect·~f the structural characteristics of the rock units,
the soils formed from them (see Soils, below) and the geomorphic forms
produced from them is one favorable to both prehistoric and historic habitation
utilization by man, but is not conducive to the retention of stratified
deposits from these past occupations.
SOILS
The soil associations, mapping units of the Soil Conservation Service
(SCS), within the study are are the channeled Frio soils, the Austin silty
clay, the Eddy gravelly loam, the Brackett clay loam and the Stephens silty
clay (SCS 1974:sheets 24, 25, 34 and 35). The Austin Chalk Formation
furnishes the rock parentage for much of the area soils. The Brackett is
an unspecified limestone and marl derivative and the Frio is formed from
sediment from the creek floodplain. The others are directly derived from the
Austin Chalk. The vegetation regime native to these soils, which is adapted
to these soils' characteristics and the local climate, is discussed under
its own heading. From a ranching or farming standpoint, the Austin silty
clay is the soil most appropriate for crops, pasture, hay or range. The
Stephens silty clay is considered suitable for range or pasture, the Eddy for
range, and the frequently flooded Frio soils are best suited to .grasses.
Due to poor water retention and high limestone fragment content, the Brackett
soils are the least suited to crops and are better left as range or wildlife
habitat (ibid. :12, 15, 22. 23, 38). It should be noted that the Brackett
and Eddy soils are very shallow and generally lack the depth to provide much
potential for archeological sites with good stratigraphic characteristics
promising for excavation. The Frio soils have the requisite depth but are
frequently subject to severe erosion and deposition during the runoff
following precipitation within the creek drainage basin. Long term habi­
tation refuse on the Frio soils is not a likely circumstance. Cultural re­
sources deposited there are subject to quick burial or are washed away and
those currently in place are probably the result of transport downstream
from other parts of the basin. Incidents of sudden flooding of major pro­
portions are a matter of record in specific studies of the floodplain and .
in the accounts of the area's early settlers (Corps of Engineers 1972,
1980; Atkinson and Giles 1981:19, 23). It is just these shallow soils, the
Brackett and Eddy, and the flood~rone Frio which are the most likely to show
cultura1 resource surface evidence because of their proximity to the major
stream, the wild1 ite habitat they afford and their position on the dominant
1andforms.
HYDROLOGY
The major aquifer of the study~ea is the Edwards (Balcones Fault
Zone - Austin Region) which is considered separate from that portion of the
fault zone lying in the San Antonio region (Muller and Price 1979:15, Fig. 6).
It is composed of the Edwards and associated limestones in hydraulic
continuity and consists of Cretaceous aged cherty, gypseous, argillaceous
limestones. The Edwards limestone is the primary water-bearing formation
and is characterized by its wide area solution channeling. In some instances,
this shows up as a honeycomb effect and in the extreme may produce cavernous
strata such as Inner Space Caverns near Georgetwon, a few miles north of the
study area.
Recharge of the aquifer is primarily accomplished by downward percolation

- - _ ... _ - - _ ..

_--_

....

- - - - - _..._ - - _.... - - - - - - - - - ­

5

of surface water from streams traversing the outcrop, including Walnut
Creek. In addition, lateral underflow from the Glen Rose Formation provides
a small amount of recharge.
Ground water effects rapid movement through the aquifer. The volume
of available water in response to rainfall is quickly expressed in natural
spring flow, such as Austin's Barton Springs. Natural flow is drastically
reduced duri ng drought periods. Fortunately, recharge can be effected duri ng
wet periods. The numerous springs, large and small, associated with this
aquifer make the area particul arly suitabl e for human habitation both now
and in the past. Indeed, a study aimed at the relationship between large
springs and early American Indians is currently in progress (Shiner 1983:1-7).
STREAM PATTERN AND DRAINAGE
The study area lies within the Colorado River Basin. Walnut Creek,
which shares that name with at least two dozen other Texas streams (Webb
1952:958-9) rises in northern Travis County near the Will iamson County 1ine
and flows in a generally southeast direction about 15 miles from the surveyed
area to its confluence with the river at river mile 286.7 measured from
Matagorda Bay (U.S. Corps of Engineers 1972:2). Walnut Creek and its tribu­
taries have a total drainage area of 53.6 square miles and accomplish this
drainage in a northeast to southwest dendritic pattern. About 17 square
miles of this watershed lies upstream of the study ~rea. Elevations within
the creek watershed reange from about 945 feet above mean sea level (AMSL)
to about 400 feet AMSL where Walnut Creek joins the river. In the study area,
el evati on extremes are about 750 feet Ar1SL south of the waterway and about
625 feet in the creek bed. The streambed slope averages approximately 16
feet per mile (ibid. 1972:2). The combination of watershed size, aquifer
water passage characteristics, elevation range, and streambed slope lends
itself to episodic flooding. Atkinson and Giles (1981:23) cite an account
of Walnut Creek's flooding tendencies, liOn the brightest sunny day, he who
failed heed ta warning that water was coming down the creek) might face a
wall of water rolling soundlessly down to plunge him against Walnut's rock
ledges - thence to be swept, swirling, to the Colorado . . . ". A cross
section of the creek at mile 15.32 above the river, near the center of the
study area, shows characteristics of the stream channel and the vulnerability
of the bottomland Frio soils (Figure 2; see also Figure 3a).
CLIMATE
Travis County is located within Carr's (1976:6 map) South Central Texas
climatic division and his Interior climatic region. The former is based on
blocks of counties having similar rainfall amounts, and the latter on blocks
of climatic divisions having a common seasonal rainfall pattern. The county
averages an annual rainfall of 32.49 inches (Belo Corporation 1982:330) with
twin maximum rainfall periods in May and September and a low precipitation
period in February and March (Carr 1947:7). Annual evaporation, runoff and
water consumption result in little or no water surplus from local precipi­
tation in any season (Russell 1945:43-46). Travis County has a0 mean annual
temperature of 68 0 F with Januasy having an average norm of 53.5 F and August
an average annual norm of 84.7 F (ibid. :8). Below freezing temperatures
occur less than 25 days a year on the average and there is a growing season,
the frost-free period, of about 270 days a year.
Winds are generally southerly throughout the year, however, winter

Figure 2

Elevation
In feet:

Cross Section No. 26 Mile 15.32

590

580

~

570
Standard I proiect flood
Intermediate

~-

560

~-- ~.~on7

v

550

~GROUND

V

/

~ """"

-

v

LINE

~
0+

2+00

See Glossary for definitions.

4+00

6+00

8+00 feet

From Walnut Creek Cross Sections
the Corps of Engineers,

by

U.S. Army. Fort Worth District.

- I

7

shifts to northerly winds allow Canadian continental polar cold fronts
to introduce abrupt temperature drops several times a year. Maritime
tropical fronts generated in the Gulf of Mexico dominate the summer season.
coming in off the Gulf with no abrupt land elevation change until the
Balcones Escarpment. These warm, moist air masses provide the major com­
ponent of the areals climatic characteristics which is basically humid and
subtropical.
VEGETATION
The study area is within Gouldls (1975:2) Texas Vegetational Region 4,
the Blackland Prairie, but is close to the juncture of that region with both
Region 7, the Edwards Plateau, and Region 5, the Cross Timbers Prairies.
Little of that original plant regime remains as it was prior to Anglo-American
settlement. The early situation of the state capitol in the area provided
a hub for urban and suburban development and a locus for farmers and ranchers
taking advantage of the fertile soils to the east. Improved pastures, seeded
with Dallisgrass, common and coastal Bermuda and other introduced grasses,
are common.
The native vegetation, according to Gould. is true prairie with little
bluestem as a climax dominant (1975:11). Other important components of this
grassland are big bluestem. Indiangrass, switch grass, sideoats grama, silver
bluestem, and Texas wintergrass. In areas. such as some of the study area,
where soil characteristics or landforms do not lend themselves to farming
or ranching and at the margins of such areas, cedar brakes (Juniper) and
mesquite are found. The study area·s-oils have an alkalinity too high for
post and blackjack oak and tap-rooted trees are severely 1 imtted in root
development in the shal10w soils. Spanish oak, 1 ive oak and redbud are native
to the Brackett soils, and live oak to the Eddy soils. Native wild flowers
are bluehonnet, Mexican hat, mountain pink, rain lily, western yarrow, wil d
daisy and wild verbena. Native shrubs are evergreen sumac, yaupon, yucca,
agarita. and lantana.
.
The overall vegetation pattern and mix was suitable for aboriginal ex­
ploitation both as the source of support for abundant game .and directly as
ttle source of pl ant foods, fuel, shelter and fi ber.
FAUNA
The study area lies within the Texan biotic province which is, as yet,
not fully divided into districts for lack of full investigation (Blair
1959:101). Blair feels the Blackland Prairie probably should constitute such
a district, separate in some major characteristics from others in the province.
Due to the sweeping alterations to the landscape and vegetation which followed
Anglo-American settlement, the current faunal array is much changed from that
found previously. In general, there has been a drastic reduction in large
bodied vegetarian mammalian species and carnivores. an increase in the smaller
mammal s and an influx of highly adaptable species which can 1ive well on the
introduced vegetation. Within the study area rabbits. qua il. doves. ~songbirds
and squirrels were sighted by the survey team. It is probable that wild
turkey and deer have recently util ized the area and coyotes, raccoons, skunks
and gophers are undoubtedly present along with the armadillo.
The current array of reptile and amphibian species probably matches that
of the past and includes 39 snake species, 16 lizard species, at least 2
turtle species and 18 amphibians. The small size of the study area mediates
against all these species being present but most have probably been in

_

....

__ __ . - - - - - - ­
...

- - - - - - - _ . _ - - _ __
...

.--

-----------------­

Figure 3

a.

Flood plain seen from south bank.

b. South bank bluff (Austin Chalk)

Note flood effects on vegetation.

c.

Cedar (juniper) brakes

d.

Chert concentration .
the result of artifact hunting

10
evidence at some point in time.
From an archeological standpoint, the present areal faunal array would
represent a reasonable resource base for the support of an aboriginal popu­
lation of some significant density. There is reason to believe that species
not now found in the area would have enhanced the area's attraction to a
hunting and gathering people and could have supported an even greater
population density within the general vicinity. Fauna not now native to
the area, the remains of which have been found in archeological context in
the Texan province. include bison, pronghorn antelope, peccary, wolf, puma,
jaguar, ocelot, badger and black bear (House 1978:110-114). All fauna still
found in the general study area have also been found in an archeological
context within the Texan province. An over-representation of ,deer, and the
formerly present bison, which occurs in archeological sites is possibly at­
tributable to the durability of large bones rather than superior use of these
species.
In sum, the faunal array of potential exploitable resources in the study
area was adequate to support aboriginal activity sufficient to leave artifactual
evidence.
Table

1 Characteristics of Environmental Units

Geologic Substrate Soi 1
Unit
Flood
plain

Clay over Frio
cha 1k

Low
terrace

Slope Vegetation Hydrologic & Erosional Land
Depositional Processes Use
0-2%

Grasses

Range
Wildlife
habitat
Range
pasture

Live oak
grasses

Frequent flooding,
severe erosion/
deposition
Infrequent flooding,
gradual erosion,
sudden deposition
Runoff
sheetwash

Chalk

Stephens 3-5%

Shrubs
grasses

Roll i n9
prairie

Chalk

Cha 1ky
ridge

Marl &
cha 1 k

Austin 2-5%
sil ty
clay,
Brackett
clay loam
Eddy
3-6%
gravelly
loam

Juniper
1ive oak
shrubs

Runoff
sheetwash
gullying

Range
wildlife
habitat

Cropland
improved
pasture

LAND USE
The study area most recently been allowed to become a wildlife habitat.
Within the recent past, the portion lying north of the creek has been used
as cropland and improved and natural pasture. That lying south of the creek
has apparently been rangeland with small patches devoted to gardening.
Juniper invasion of the chalky ridgeland (Figure 3b) on the south side of the
creek is in some areas very far advanced and it is difficult to ascertain any
prior use (Figure 3c). Material remains of at least two structures on the

11

ridge, one with accompanying corral and a trash scatter extending downslope
toward the creek, and several north-of-the-creek historic era remains, in­
cluding a house-shed-water tank-barn complex. show the study area was home­
steaded in the past. These sites are described and ex:amined under Survey
Results, Historic Resources. The 30 minute United States Geological Survey
(USGS) map of Austin surveyed in 1895-1896 shows few structures in the study
area. Structures do appear on this map, but at the 30 minute scale the
degree of full representation is unknown. The USGS 15 minute Austin, Texas
map dated 1955 shows two outline (unoccupied) structures south of the creek
in an area since used as a modern trash dump and one solid (occupied) and two
outline (unoccupied) structures north of the creek. Those north of the creek
are analagous to the house-shed-water tank-barn complex mentioned above.
In addition at least two very recent shanties or make-shift shelters are in
place on the chalky ridge. The materials from which these are made and their
accompanying artifacts and trash show them to be the work of recent squatters,
there is no evidence older than a few years ago.
Table No.2 Summary, Study Area Environment
Location:
Physiography:
Surface Geology:
Structural Geology:
Soils:
Hydrology:
River Basin:
Climate:
Vegetation Region:
Biotic Province:
Archeologically
significant
circumstances:

Central Travis County, Texas
West Gulf Coastal Plain/Blackland Prairie
Cretaceous limestone deposits
Balcones Fault zone
Silty clay, sediments, clay loams and gravelly
clay loams
Edwards Aquifer (Balcones Fault zone - Austin Region)
Colorado
Mesothermal, humid, winter dry season and occasional
drought
Blackland Prairie
Texan
Shallow ridge soils, episodic bottomland flooding
Readily available water supply, excellent game
animal habi tat.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATION AND CHRONOLOGY
In terms of number of sites recorded, Travis County is close to the top
of Texas' 254 political divisions.
Few counties, generally those with
large area mining or reservoir construction, exceed the total of 637 site'
numbers assigned within Travis' bounds at this writing. It is safe to say
that Travis County has had more separate investigation at the professional
level than any other Texas county - only Bexar Couny is close - yet much of
its area remains unsurveyed.
Material culture representing all of the prehistoric and historic periods

---

--

-----------

- - - - -

12

and stages described below have been reported in Travis County. The records
of the repository for archeological records~ the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL), indicate no sites have been recorded within the current
study area but that 55 sites are listed for the Walnut Creek watershed to
date (TARL files). Investigations currently in progress are doubtless adding
to that figure. In the immediate vicinity of the study area, Lynn and Fuszek
(1980:1) recorded 9 prehistoric and 7 historic sites within Walnut Creek
District Park's 289 acres. This cluster of prehistoric sites has been desig­
nated the Walnut Creek Archeological District, sites 41TV366 through 41TV374,
and placed on the National Register of Historic Places.
The Walnut Creek District Park sites consist of a series of lithic
scatters and burned rock middens at the confluences of Tar Branch and Walnut
and Wells Branch and Walnut Creek. Most have been disturbed to varying
degrees by plowing, motorcyle trails, or construction of power lines. The
sites in the area are of shallow depth owing to the soil characteristics with
a few deeper deposits mostly to the north of Walnut Creek (TARL site records).
One of the deeper sites, 41TV368, was test excavated in 1980 (Lynn and Fuszek)
and the area photographed for National Register records in 1981 (Kleinschmidt,
TARL files). Recently conducted archeological testing of areas in the Well
B.ranch watershed is in the analysis and reporting stage, but results are not
yet available in the TARL repository (Carolyn Spock:Personal Communication).
Indicators of Paleoindian~ Archaic and Late Prehistoric utilization of the
district exist in the artifact inventory collected or recorded.
Upstream from the study area in the vicinity of Watters Park (now named
Waters Park) community, several similar sites have been reported - most of
them affected by the development of the Northwood community (Seelinger 1980).
It is noted that the characteristics of the watershed change geomorphologically
to a wider floodplain with less steep incisement of the south bank.
The Central Texas cultural sequence has been the subject of an ongoing,
evolving interpretation since early in this century. Contributions leading
to the establishment and refinement of a cultural chronology are still in
progress. Early contributions and interpretations were made by J.E. Pearce,
A. T. Jackson and Charl es Kell ey. Expansions, refinements and interpretations
of a major nature have been offered by Alex Krieger, Thomas Campbell and Edward
Jelks. Frank Weir, (1976), now of the Texas Highway Department, made the
Central Texas Archaic the subject of his doctoral dissertation and, most
recently, Elton Prewitt {1981:65-89} offered a refined chronological model.
Prewitt defines the region under consideration as the "eastern hal f of
the Edwards Plateau, the Llano Uplift, most of the Lampassas Cut Plains, the
Commanche Pateau, the southern end of the Grand Prairie, and the Blackland
Prairies bordering the Balcones Escarpment" (Prewitt 1981 :71). The latter
sector is that within which the current study area is located. The chrono­
logy he suggests includes four major stages of development within the area.
These are termed the Paleoindian, the Archaic, the NeoArchaic (Late PrehistoriC),
and the Historic. Within the Archaic and NeoArchaic, further divisions
(phases) are made, eleven for the former and two for the latter. The number
of phases, named after towns in the Central Texas region, is generally pro­
portional to the quantity of evidence currently available for each of the
stages of development; the Archaic is far and away the most dominant in this
respect. An abbreviated summary of the four developmental stages is included
below. Phase differentiations have been proposed based predominantly on the
lithic artifact types, most frequently projectile points, found in usable
archeological contexts.

13

Paleoindian Stage
The Paleoindian stage i~cludes the earliest currently recognized human
occupation of the New World. It is evidenced by the presence of lanceolate
points such as the Clovis, Folsom and Plainview types. The economy is
considered to have emphasized the hunting of now-extinct mega-fauna such as
mastodon, mammoth, and forms of bison larger than the living species. Prewitt
(1980:75) places the termination of this period at approximately 8,500 years
before the present (B.P.). It should be understood that a stage of develop­
ment is of an evolutionary nature and thus has no abrupt boundary with its
succeeding stage. Thus, an approximation is appropriate especially when the
size of the area addressed is taken into cons iderati on. The commencement of
the Paleoindian stage is as yet undefined and the subject of considerable
debate.
Eleven thousand years B.P. is acceptable to most investigators with
some researchers willing to adopt dates more than twice that. The Paleoindian
stage is poorly known in Central Texas; its presence there usually manifested
by single implement finds. Site 41BX52 in Bexar County is a notable instance
of an isolatable component attributable to this stage (Henderson 1980:14-15)
arid the Wilson-Leonard Site, 41WM235, still under field investigation in
Will iamson County is another.
Archaic Stage
The Archaic stage is that period which lies sequentially between the era
of the big-game hunting-dependent peoples (Paleoindian) and the era of the
bow-using, ceramic-making peoples of the Late Prehistoric (NeoArchaic). It
is characterized by what is termed a hunting and gathering culture, a food
collecting people whose subsistence strategy is more accurately described as
hunting, gathering, scavenging and foraging with no more emphasis on anyone
aspect than another. It commences, following the Prewitt model, ca. 8500
years B.P. and grades into the Late Prehistoric in Central Texas ca. 1250
years ago (Prewitt 1981:75). As stated above, this 7,000 year span has been
subdivided into eleven phases based on key indicator artifact and feature
types. These phases will be included in the artifact identification/attri­
bution/description where appropriate to the time spans they represent. A
wide variety of key index markers are diagnostic of the Archaic - Wells, Nolan,
TPavis~ Pedernales~ Bulverde, Frio and Ensor projectile points and burned
rock middens, all well represented in Central Texas.
Late Prehistoric Stage
In Central Texas, this spans the era from approximately 1250 years B.P.,
It is characterized
by no major changes in subsistence strategy, hunting and gathering, but
instead by the adoption of the bow and arrow over the dart and atlatl, the
making of ceramics, and the use of cemeteries predominating over isolated
interments.
The Neoarchaic (Late Prehistoric) holds Perdiz, ScaZlorn and Cliffton
points, Leon Plain ceramics and cemeteries among the items on its diagnostics
list.
ca. A.D. 700, to about 200 years B.P., ca. A.D. 1750.

Historic Stage
This begins when European influence on the aboriginal population reached
significance and the extant culture was affected. The advent of a recorded
history for the aboriginal population commences with first Spanish contact,
but the time when that contact, continued, produced changes in aboriginal
lifeways marks the practical beginning of this stage. It is characterized in
the artifactual record by use of items of European manufacture, the adoption
of European materials for the production of traditional items, and the
imitation of European styles in the manufacture of items adaptive to culture
change induced by that European contact. Decorative trade beads, metal and
glass arrow points and hide horse tack are some examples. No specific date
can be ascribed to the commencement of the Historic stage in Central Texas,
but it is safely ahead of the major Anglo-American influx into the area about
1820, preceding that circumstance by at least a century. This stage is not
well known in Central Texas and is not currently a subdivided stage.
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The framework for historic archeology in Texas coincides with the division
of Texas history as follows (Pass 1974:75):
I. Indian Era: Pre-European arrival in 1519 (conquest of Mexico)
II. Conquest and Colonization (1519-1835)
A. Early exploration and missionaries (1519-1690)
B. Mission period and Spanish domination (1690-1793)
C. Spanish decline and filibustering era (1793-1821)
D. Mexican era and Anglo-American colonization (1821-1835)
III. Revolution and Republic (1835-1845)
A. Revolution (1835-1836)
B. Republic (1836-1845)
IV. Texas in the United States (1845-present)
A. Pre-Civil War (1845-1861)
B. Confederate Sta;te (1861-1865)
C. Reconstruction (1865~1874)
D. Early economic development (1874-1899)
E. Industrialization and Urbanization (1899-present)
The Spanish, during the first two divisions of the Historic Period II,
were undoubtedly present at least fleetingly in the general Walnut Creek area
but they established no known permanent settlements 1n the vicinity. The
more realistic chance for historic remains would fall to those attributable
to the last subdivision of Period II when Anglo-American colonization had
begun with the probability of some cultural remains increasing with each suc­
ceeding period or subdivision of a period.
At the time the earliest Anglo-American colonists arrived in the area,
the only inhabitants were the Tonkawa Indians. The Tonkawa had been in more
or less continuous contact with Europeans since Alonso de Leon's 1690 expedition
(Bo1 ton 1916:359) and as a result of this contact, had been exposed to mission
influence, European custom and introduced diseases. By the 19th century, the
remnants of the various Tonkawa bands had been consolidated into the Tonkawa
tribe, an entity not numerically as large as the aggregate of the bands
(Newcomb 1961 :136). The Tonkawa were nomadic hunters and gatherers and

15
utilized nearly the full range of animal and plant foods available, ter­
restrial and aquatic, fresh or carrion (ibid. :138-9). Their tool assemblage
was held to a minimum. Only lithic, and later, metal, arrowheads and possibly
some pottery, either made or obtained from the Caddo area to the east, are
1 i kely to have surv·ived. Most other items, baskets, mats, shi el ds, items of
clothing, bows, belts and ropes, were fashioned from rapidly perishable
materials. At the time Anglo-American colonists came upon the Tonkawa, these
Indians were caught between the advance of the colonists from the east and
the dominance of the much more powerful Commanche in the west. The Tonkawa
receive sporadic, footnote-like reference in the colonists' records and dis­
appear quietly into history. Noah Smithwick (1900:245-248), in his Pne Evo­
lution of a State, recounts a number of impressions of the Tonkawa, most
of them as amusing or amazing sidelights to his story of early Texas. The
colonists' contact with Indians in or near the study area was not always
friendly. The first recorded instance of a conflict in Travis County occurred
at Walnut Creek in August, 1833. This affair, which made one of its partici­
pants famous, is the incident in which Josiah Wilbarger was scalped and
survived the experience to live an additional nine years. The incident, des­
cribed in the most melodramatic fashion by the victim's brother, J.W. Wilbarger,
demonstrates the distinct advantage that a literate culture has over a non­
literate one when history is being recorded. J.W. Wilbarger (1890:7-14)
entitles his book Indian Dep::t'edations in Texas and couches his description
accordingly. Stripped to its essence, the incident finds a group of armed and
mounted colonists proceeding up the stream valley and encountering a single
Indian, who refuses to allow their close approach and flees. The colonists
pursue him for some distance until he succeeds in eluding them. The colonists
then backtrack down the creek drainage to a point somehwat southeast of the
study area and pause to rest. Indians, who have apparently joined the one
being pursued, attack them at this point, killing two of the party, scalping
Wilbarger and putting the others to rout. Wilbarger's survival is undeniably
remarkable and worthy of recording, particularly in light of the level of
medical treatment available at that time. It also appears that he and his
fellow colonists provoked the incident and should have gleaned little glory
from its results.
Walnut Creek, but not that portion included in the study area, played
host to an encampment of Mirabeau Lamar's Santa Fe pioneers as that expedition
set out for New Mexico in 1841 (Austin City Gazette). It was also the setting
for the "Archive Warll of 1843 during which President Houston ordered the re­
moval of land office records from Austin to Houston. His agents proceeding
with the records were overtaken by a superior force of Austin residents at
Walnut Creek. The archives were returned to Austin without actual combat and
their retention by that city helped maintain its position as the capital
(Wortham 1924:254).
Anglo-American settlement, in or in close proximity to the study area,
along Walnut Creek, appears to have begun in earnest in the early 1850's.
The 1845 headright of one Thomas D. Hendricks was acquired in part by John C.
Brooke of San Augustine County prior to 1853. This included 1,280 surveyed
acres on Walnut Creek and the Hendricks certificate to one third of a league
adjacent to the surveyed land. Brooke sold both the property and the certi­
ficate to Henry W. Sublett on May 4, 1853 for a total of $1,388.00 (Travis
County Deed Book K:684-685), a transaction recorded in 1856. At this time the
area was sufficiently populated such that the Walnut Creek Baptist Church
(Rock Church) was founded in 1856 with an initial membership of ten persons
(Barker History Center mss. 10861). The church, still conducting services,
/

•

16
is located less than a mile downstream and east of the study area. Several
neighbors of Fulks (or Fu'lkes, the latter spell ;ng adopted by many of his
heirs) show up on the church's early membership rosters and it ;s not clear
whether the J.D. Fulkes baptized into the church in October 1863 is or is not
Albert's son, J.D., born in 1856 (ibid. :2; Gracy and Gentry 1967:58). The 1860
U.S. Census for the county includes another J.D. Fulkes. At any rate,
Fulk(e)s family ownership and occupancy of the study area north of the creek
continues into the 20th century with several acquisitions and sales altering
the size of their holdings until the death of Albert's widow in 1913 when the
heirs inherited 173 acres (Travis County Probate Files 3854). The structures
located on the Fulk(e)s homestead property could, in part, date from any time
after 1854 though initial examination indicates much of the remains are of
later origin. As previously stated, a separate study of these structures is
in progress (Guarino and Moncure:in prep.).
The portion of the study area south of the creek lies within the John C.
Brooke survey and was acquired by the J.W. Bird family prior to Fulk's ac­
quisition of the land north of it. Fulks bought seven acres north of the
creek from Bird in 1854 (Travis County Deed Book 258:97-98), The Bird property
within the study area appears not to have been the location of the family
homestead but to have been, in part, tenant occupied. A road, Walnut Creek
Road, passed through the study area on this side of the creek linking Lower
Georgetown Road (Figure 4), now North Lamar Boulevard, with Upper Georgetown
Road, now Route 1325 (Commissioners Court Road Records, Travis County, Pre­
cinct 2:330-331), This road, designated as a second class public roadway
as late as 1902, passed through the floodplain of the study area and has been
washed away in the intervening years. The structural remains of buildings
just off its former right-of-way remain.
SURVEY DESIGN
INTRODUCTION
A variety of archival and field methods were employed during the survey.
The major components were a background data search, a field survey of the
entire study area, limited test probing and limited artifact analysis. Re­
search sources, other than the files and library of the Texas Archeological
Survey and the personal holdings of the author, are described in the intro­
ductory section.
An assessment was made of the results of prior investigations in nearby
areas having similar environmental settings. Since the survey was to cover
the entire study area, the assessment was to provide an indication of a
high-probability-of-significant-resources, not to select areas for survey.
Considered in the conduct of the research and survey was the treatment
of the Fulks homestead already under independent archival and architectural
investigation and scheduled for further, separate, archeological investigation.
Under the foregoing circumstances, only preliminary archival and archeological
investigation was conducted for this site, 41TV638.
SITE DEFINITION
Sites of prehistoric age in this area typically show reasonable quantities
of lithic debitage, lithic source material, with occassional recognizable
lithic tools. Burned rock marks some areas and may be present in quantities

•

.' ,\..-i ....

. .. _--".;,..--:

r1

It
~

~

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

18

to warrant midden status .. So;l depth can vary considerably within the
general vicinity and may be a prime determinant of a site's ultimate potential
for further research. Site indications within the floodplain require test
probing and are likely to be affected by continued episodes of severe
flood-borne deposition or erosion. Lag deposits of larger, heavier lithics
are relocated by the larger flood episodes and buried by the lesser ones.
Smaller remains are proportionally affected, creating a non-cultural distr'i­
bution of material remains and a consequent lesser scientific value for such
deposits. Sites then, within the study area, are evidenced primarily by
concentrations of surface lithics with their extent detenn;ned by subsurface
probing where necessary.
Sites of historic European affiliations are most frequently marked by
building materials, both as part of the original construction and in a surface
scatter; glass and ceramic trash scatter with occassional other items such
as wells, cisterns, walls, fences and the like. The designation, site, is
easily applied and site significance, not identification, becomes the primary
consideration. Standing structures 50 years of age and older are recorded as
examples of rare, for the area, use of materials, design or location.
Structures affiliated with persons, groups, events or ongoing circumstances
of unusual local, state, regional or national prominence are recorded and
recommended for further research and evaluation.
SITE DOCUMENTATION
Those sites located during the survey were recorded on standard Texas
Historical Commission site survey forms, with descriptions of surficial features
and residues, their sizes~ types, frequencies, spatial distributions and
possible associations. Environmental settings, locational information and·
current condition were noted, sketch~mapped and a photographic record made.
Active and dormant erosional and depositional processes, as well as human
activities, past and present, which might affect site characteristics, were
also recorded.
Sites receive a designation within the trinomial system used by the state
wherein the state~ co.unty and individual site number within the county sequence
are i ndi ca ted.
Artifacts collected during the survey and the original documentation with
data generated from those data and archival sources are filed with the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory at Balcones Research Center, The University
of Texas at Austin.
FIELD SURVEY
The field survey was initiated on February 10, 1983, and was carried out
by members of the Texas Archeological Survey staff listed in the acknowledge­
ments. Ten work days were expended in field survey.
Survey methods were matched to the terrain, the vegetation and forest
litter cover and to the soil circumstances of the various segments of the
study area. Skirmish line transects with crew members spaced directly pro­
portional to ground visibility conditions constituted the normal survey mode.
Where ground visibility was laterally limited by cedar breaks, individual
transects were more closely spaced and assumed a more zigzag progress. Where
forest litter or heavy grass cover was the limiting factor, shovel probes
were employed. Shovel probing was utilized in the alluvial soils of the
floodplain and in the deeper soils found to the north of the creek. The stream

19

banks, Walnut and its tributaries, were examined for evidence of buried
. horizons containing cultural material. In those areas affected by construction
approved prior to the institution of this project (Texas Historical Commis­
sion letter, December 30, 1982), advantage was taken of cutbanks and exca­
vations incidental to road building and underground util ities service placement
to ascertain the presence or absence of buried cultural resources.
RESULTS OF THE SURVEY
PREHISTORIC RESOURCES
Seven prehistoriC sites were found within the study area. Five of these
are located on the shallow soils of the area south of the creek. One is in
the floodplain alluvium and one is located in the pasture/cropland between
Walnut Creek and its Tar Branch tributary. Three isolated finds were recorded.
An isolated find is a recognizable artifact with6ut supporting indication
of a site, that is. sparse surficial evidence, unpatterned and without useful
spatial association, consisting of nondiagnosttc or single, poorly provenienced
artifacts. It may represent the deposition of only a single item, or, more
commonly, be the result of some form of disturbance of the original deposition
locale. Designation of isolated find is not applied until a thorough search
has failed to produce supporting material and where shovel probing, where
possible, has also produced negative results. Site definition is described
above. Individual site descriptions and evaluations are found in a subsequent
section, as are individual descriptions of diagnostic artifacts.
HISTORIC RESOURCES
The study area contained four historic sites recorded by the survey team.
Three of these have significant structural remains of a building or buildings
and the fourth is an intact cistern orwell with only sparse evidence of any
closely associated structure. Site 41TV638~ the Fulks Homestead, consists of
a house and associated outbuildings and features and is undergoing separate
investigation under the sponsor1s auspices (Guarino and Moncure:in prep.).
It will be described herein without final evaluation or in-depth analysis and
archival coordination. Site descriptions, evaluations and descriptions of
significant individual artifacts are included in a following section of this
report.

20
SITE DESCRIPTIONS
PREHISTORIC SITES
41 TV640
This site is, by its surface scatter, a roughly oval-shaped area 400 ft.
{122 m} east-west and 100 ft. (30.5 m) north-south. It parallels Walnut Creek,
lying within its floodplain (Figure 1). It consists of alight density scatter
of chert flakes with an occasional spent core. One Gower projectile point
fragment was found, indicative of the San Geronimo phase of the Early Archaic.
The area has been subjected to multiple disturbances. It lies within the inter­
mediate regional flood profile and well within the standard project flood pro­
file (Figure 2) for Walnut Creek. Its lower boundaries are subject to lesser
flood conditions. Additionally, the lower creekside area is cut by a dirt track
in an east-west direction, a track in existence since at least 1937 (TNRIS File
Aerial Photo, Travis County No. 58) (Figure 5). There is evidence of plowing,
and shovel probing turned up recent historical debris at a depth of 10 em. The
shovel probes did not establish any positive evidence of significant site depth
and showed no stratification. The National Register potential of this site is
low when content, condition and degree of disturbance are considered.
41 TV641
This site is a lithic procurement area on the Austin chalk bluff immediately
to the south of Walnut Creek (Figure 1). The site is a surface scatter of lithic
flakes with an occasional core or projectile point fragment. It is approximately
200 ft. (61 m) east-west and 100 ft. (30.5 m) north-south inan oval shape. Its
exact bounds are difficult to establish due to its superimposition on the chert
nodule-bearing chalk foundation which furnished the raw material for the arti­
facts present. The above stated paced measurements are based on having reached
a perimeter interval of 12 m without a chert fragment recognizably human-altered.
No diagnostic artifacts were found. Two projectile point tip fragments and two
rough bifaces were recovered. A small quantity of burned rock was noted! how­
ever the area has seen squatter or camper use recently and there is evidence of
a number of open fires. There are several concentrations of debitage (Figure 3d)
so recently aggregated that soil still clings to some fragments indicating pos­
sible surface search for artifacts by parties unknown. This may account for the
lack of diagnostics. Similar circumstances have been described by Hester (1980:
112). Shovel probing showed soil depth of less than 5 cmto the chalk formation,
ruling out significant site depth or stratified deposits. In our opinion, the
site shows no potential for National Register status.
41 TV644
This site lies at the confluence of two small intermittent tributaries of
Walnut Creek in the shallow soils atop the Austin chalk formation to the south
of Walnut Creek (Figure 1). It is a thin, low density lithic scatter limited
in three directions by the stream channels. The cultural remnants found in­
clude a single medial fragment of an untyped projectile point among the debi­
tage which constitutes the remainder of the evidence for a site. Limited by
the stream channels as stated, the site is roughly circular with an approxi­
mate radius of 87 ft. (26.5 m). Shovel probing showed soil depth to bedrock
to be less than 10 em and revealed no subsuface cultural material. The site

22

is currently covered by juniper brakes, a vegetation pattern also visible in
the 1937 TNRIS aerial photograph (Figure 5). Lithic resources, chert nodules
present in the Austin chalk, and therefore readily available in the tributary
stream banks, are reasonable evidence that the cultural material presentre­
sults from lithic procurement and working activities. The site shows little
potential for useful further investigation or for National Register status;
however, it is compatible with the nearby Walnut Creek Archeological District.
41TV64S

This site is centered on the 700' AMSL contour of the south bank Austin
chalk bluff above the confluence of Walnut Creek and an intermittent but deeply
incised tributary (Figure 1). Chert flakes, chips and the nodules from which
they were derived form a thin scatter over an area of a quarter acre. Dense
juniper brakes cover the area and comparison with the 1937 TNRIS file aerial
photograph (Figure 5) indicates a thickening of this cover since that date.
A single diagnostic artifact, a SeaUorn projectile point fragment indicative
of Late Prehistoric, Austin Phase age, was found during the survey. Shovel
probing showed soil depth to be less than 10 cm and produced no additional
cultural material. The southeast boundary of the site extends to an area of
road construction. An examination of the cuts produced by this work showed no
evidence of buried cultural material on either side of the road. Due to the
shallow nature of the deposit and the Character of most of its artifact compo­
nent, this site shows no real potential for further useful investigation or
singular consideration for National Register status. Its proximity to the Wal­
nut Creek Archeological District is worth noting as collateral information per­
taining to that entity. It is compatible to the district rather than signifi­
cant to its value.
41 TV646

This roughly dog bone-shaped site follows an outcrop of chert nodules in
Brackett clay loam soil west of Tar Branch and well north of Walnut Creek (Fig­
ure 1). The area concerned is 394 ft. (120 m) long and nearly 100 ft. (30.S m)
wide at each end, narrowing to 66 ft. (20 m) in the center. The long axis is
northwest-southeast. The area, unlike the adjacent property to the east, has
been heavily disturbed by erosion control contour, the stepped plowing which
shows so distinctly in Figure 4. The area is now a short grass-covered open
field. Cultural materials found during the survey include chert flakes and
chips with a few spent cores among nodules of raw material. No diagnostics
were located. No e"vidence of subsurface cultural material was found during
shovel testing. The soil depth is very shallow. The character of the cultural
remains and their location concurrent with lithic raw material mediate toward
assigning a lithic procurement function to the site. The degree of site dis­
turbance, lack of site depth indicate no appreciable potential exists for fur­
ther investigation or for consideration for National Register status.
41 TV647

This site lies to the southwest of a major south dipping meander of Wal­
nut Creek and west of a deeply incised tributary stream which empties into the
meander bow (Figure 1). It consists of a half-acre sized, patchy, lithic scat­
ter showing comparatively few recognizable tool forms among a fair amount of
debitage. A single diagnostic, a BuZvepde projectile point fragment indicative
of the Middle Archaic, Marshall Ford Phase, was found.

23
The area in which this site lies is characterized by thin soil overlying
the Austin chalk and shows evidence of runoff washing, in keeping with the
ground slopes toward the main and tributary streams. The area has been sub­
jected to further human-caused disturbance. Walnut Creek Road, a public
second-class road, once ran through a portion of the area crossing to the
south side of the creek at the western arc of the meander bow (Travis County
Commissioners Court records 1898-1902: 331). An apparent attempt at well
sinking is present and evidenced by a 3 inch galvanized iron pipe with a
threaded fitting at ground level. Current construction activity had obscured
the southern extent of its boundaries and the area is known to have been sur­
face collected to some degree by relic hunters.
In view of the degree of aisturbance and the unlikelihood of intact sub­
surface cultural material, this site holds little potential for further invest­
igation or for possible National Register consideration.
41 TV648
This site is located close to the study area boundary on the south side of
Walnut Creek. It is bounded on the west by a tributary stream drainage oriented
north/northwest-south/southwest (Figure 1). Dirt roads, not attributable to,
but in use during current construction cut through the site on the east side
and bound it on the south. The site is characterized by a lithic scatter of
uneven distribution which contains a greater quantity of recognizable tools and
tool fragments than any other prehistoric site found in the current study. The
survey team recovered the tip fragments of four projectile points or knives,
the medial fragment of another, a basal fragment and a point identifiable as a
reworked Angostura. The latter pOint (Figure 5) is diagnostic of the Circleville
Phase of the Early Archaic though the reworking could have come in a later phase.
The basal fragment is that of an Ensor point, (Figure '5), a Late Archaic. Twin
Sisters Phase diagnostic. The typing of projectile points by their tip frag­
ments alone is not a well-developed capability due to too few distinguishing
characteristics being present. However, the tip fragments found at this site
have sufficient size to assign them dart or knife point rather than arrow point
status. To imply anything more than possible Archaic origin from these frag­
ments would be to stretch the evidence. Such an implication is in keeping with
the other evidence found which stretches nearly the full range of the Archaic's
ascribed 7,250 year span.
All cultural materials were surface finds. Shovel probing was nonproductive
in the thin soil cover which has been subjected to considerable disturbance.
The area, both at present and in the recent past (Figure 5) has less juniper
cover than nearby areas and is more easily passable by humans and animals as a
result .
Directly to the northeast of this site, outside the current study area,.at
a distance of approximately 250 ft., lies site 41TV372, a part of the Walnut
Creek Archeological District. This neighboring site, occupying the forward
slope of the same ridge and lying within the same drainage confines, was char­
acterized by its investigators (TARL records) as being of similar age. and is
described as having similar content, a greater artifact density, as lying on
somewhat deeper soil, and was recorded as having been even more disturbed by
recent human activities. Surface evidence that the two sites are connect.ed is
lacking but the spatial and circumstantial evidence is that 41TV648 should be
a collaterally l.isted entity related to the Walnut Creek Archeological District.
As separately considered, its condition, lack of depth and lack of features do
not offer any considerable potential, for further investigation or National Reg­
ister inclusion but it is certainly appropriate to include it as compatible with

- - - -

25
and in close proximity to the Walnut Creek Archeological District.
HISTORIC SITES
41 TV638
The Fulks Homestead, 41TV638, is a house, outbuilding, outlying feature com­
plex which is located to the north of Walnut Creek off a dirt road curving from
Running Bird Lane (Figure 1). The property involved was acquired by Albert A.
Fulks in 1854 with no evidence that any previous landowner actually lived on it.
Occupancy by the Fulks family is established, but just when the complex recorded
here was constructed and its archeological potential is the subject of a separate
investigation (Guarino and Moncure: in prep.) This survey recorded the complex
as a site, conducted basic background archival research (see Historical Back­
ground) and evaluated the results as being worthy of further investigation. The
house (Figure 7<a) has seen additions, repairs and modifications of comparatively
recent vintage, but contains axed and smoothed juniper framing indicative of an
earlier age. It has been severely damaged. An important outlying feature is a
possible root cellar to the rear of the house (Figure 7b). The house and roo t
cellar offer the most potential for investigation while the other features of
the complex, several sheds and shed remains, a corral remnant, a water tower
and a barn, appear to be of rather recent vintage (the water tower is marked 1953).
The details of this site are included in a separate report as requested by the
sponsor.
II

ll

41 TV639
This is a stone-lined well or cistern (Figure 7C) located north of Walnut
Creek on a low knoll close to and within a fence line which probably marks the
property line of the Fulks Homestead. It lies just off the course of a dirt
road which led eventually to the Fulks complex. This road is no longer extant
and is not shown on the 1968 USGS topographical map, but is visible, though ob­
scured by plowing, in the 1936 aerial photo (Figure 5). The well or cistern is
the only extant site feature though some small amount of limestone in no regular
pattern may indicate a former foundation. As stated above, the area has been
plowed and preparatory to this, may have been cleared of obstacles. The lack
of ceramic and glass remains is noteworthy, not ruling out a former structure
but mediating against one used as a dwelling. Domestic vegetation is also lack­
ing but may be a plow casualty. The well is partially filled with earth showing
no trash content at the surface. Though the well fill might produce an artifact
array if excavated, there is no known association of this feature with persons,
groups, events or circumstances of particular note and its cohstruction makes use
of no unusual technique or material. Its potential for significant value result­
ing from further investigation is rather low and it appears not to represent a
potential candidate for National Register consideration.
41 TV642
This site is located on the bluff south of Walnut Creek on and immediately
to the south of the former right-of-way of Walnut Creek Road (Figure 1, 4). It
consists of sufficient dressed limestone to constitute a structure's foundation
remnants, a very few bricks, and a light density sheet refuse scatter of glass
and ceramics. There are no apparent related structures or features in the vicin­
ity. Artifacts having diagnostic val ue are few. The bricks present are of three
distinct types. One type is hand-molded, unbranded, low fired, poorly homogenized

- - - - - - - - -

Figure 7

a. 41TV638, the Fulks house, front view

b. The 'root cellar' well

I

Figure 8

a. Bottle fragment neck treatment
- 41TV642

o

1

2

I

I

I

3
I

4

5
I

I

White ironstone sherd with registry mark - 41TV642

c. Explanation of registry mark

..\
B
C
D
E

= Class
= Year
= ~Ionth

= Date
= Parcel
1842

:Months
Jan. e
Feb. G
'\lar. \V
Years

184-2
184-3
184-4­
1845
184-6
184-7
184-8
184-9
1850

to

1867

Apr. H
.\Iav E
June .\J
X
H

e
A
I
F
U
S
\'

1868

to

.J uly

1883

I
Aug. R
Sept. D

1851
P
1852
D
y
1853
1854­
.J
1855
E
1856
L
1857
K
1858 .B
1859
,\1

B

Oct.

Xov . K
Dec. A

1860
1861
1862
1863
1864­
1865
1866
1867

Z

R
0
G
~

\V

Q
T

30
clay. A second is wire cut, unbranded, two holed, pressed common brick. The
third is wire cut,pressed common brick' with a Groesbeck. brand, lackjl1lg a frog.
The branded brick ;s probably older than the unbranded two holed brick and
probably postdates the 1870's when railroad service into the Austin area from
Groesbeck was established. Since reuse cannot be ruled out, and because there
are no bricks in place as lain, the most significant thing about these remains
is that there are three types present without evidence of a chimney fall which
may indicate non-structural use.
A bottle neck with a laid on, flared band, neck finish was recovered (See
artifact descriptions, p. 32). The process used in manufacturing such a bot­
tle is ascribed to the period 1840 to 1870 (Newman 1970:75). Since the reten­
tion and reuse of the bottle cannot be ruled out only a not-earlier-than date
;s supplied by this artifact which is described more fully in a subsequent sec­
tion of this report.
Among the ceramic sherds recovered by the survey crew is one small white­
ware type (Figure 8) bearing a partial registry mark which identifies its maker,
manufacturi'ng locale, manufacturing day of the month, lot number and, due to
a change in the composition of the registry mark, supplies a no-later-than date
for its production of 1867 and a no-ear1ier-than date of 1842 (Wetherbee 1981 :22,
Gohm 1968:206). (See artifact descriptions, p. 32). Since the company which
made this item, Joseph Clementson of Hanley, England, was in business only from
1839 to 1864 (Wetherbee 1981 :27), the not-earlier-than date for this item to
have been manufactured is narrowed to 1842-1864.. Since it is unlikely that any
appreciable amount of whiteware was shipped from England to Texas during the
War Between the States, antebellum arrival in Texas is a possibility.
In view of the trace nature of this site, it is of limited potential for
further investigation. It is not the homestead of the Bird family, which lies
outside the study area, but is probably attributable to a tenant on that family's
property. The Travis County Deed Index shows several late 19th century leases
of property by that family (Travis County Index to Deeds records 1893-1908).
There appears to be insufficient evidence of site significance to warrant National
Register consideration.
41TV643
This site, the remains of a log building, lies to the east of 41TV642 on
the south side of Walnut Creek (Figure 1). The map representation of a build­
ing appears in this location on the USGS maps portraying data collected in 1896
and still shows on the edition representing 1973 aerial data. The TNRIS files
photo of 1937 shows the structure and at least two additional structures with
connecting dirt tracks so clear of vegetation as to suggest at least recent, if
not current, use (Figure 5). This is in marked contrast to 41TV642 where no trail
or track shows such characteristics in the 1937 photo and no map symbol for build­
ing appears on either the 1896 or 1973 data based maps.
The log structure is only a remnant of what was present (Figure 7d). Only
enough logs remain in place to show single saddle notching as the corner joinery
method (Jordan 1978:60). Saddle notching is quite rarely recorded for Texas houses
prior to the Civil War and continues to be the most rare of the four most common
notch types (Dovetail, "V", square and saddle) through 1889. Thereafter it be­
comes, by far, the most used type, showing as 58.5% on the rolls of the Texas
Log Cabin Register (ibid:81). Saddle notching is the most prevalent type in
Texas and in the eastern United States for outbuildings. It is also the most
common method, in Texas, where the wood used is cedar as is the case at this site.
(ibid: 58, 76).

•

31

The cabin shape is a 20 ft. x 30 ft. rectangle with an apparent brick chim­
ney fall at its east end. The overall size and chimney placement, apparently
in the center, mediate for a basic double pen saddle bag floor plan, the simplest
two room log house in the European tradition. Without additional investigation
it cannot be determined that a mid-point dividing wall existed which would con­
firm the above postulated floor plan but cedars with near uniform diameter sec­
tions thrity feet long are not nearly as abundant in Central Texas as they are
in East Texas or the Cross Timbers. Since log cabin construction, for stability
reasons, normally involves the cutting of entrance ways and windowS after"the
logs are in place, such log length would be necessary if this were a single pen
cabin (Bealer 1978:44, Connor 1949:112, Weslager 1969:18). The chimney fall
contains branded, frogless, fire brick inscribed P.R.M. & M. Co., and No.1
(Figure 8). The initials stand for Parker Russell Mining and Manufacturing Com­
pany with the number 1 showing this is their best grade of brick. This company
began business in 1866 in St. Louis, Missouri (I.B.C.A. files). Large quantities
of St. Louis-made brick were shipped down the Mississippi to the Gulf destined
for Texas ports in the next to last decade of the 19th century and again in the
first decade of the 20th century (Roberts 1950:4, 18). Much of this was fire brick
which requires a higher temperature and a different clay composition than common
brick and is better able to withstand fireplace and chimney firebox use. Common
brick was availaBle in the Austin area by the l850's~ (Park 1963:1) but fire brick
clays were not locally available as they are in East Texas (Fisher 1965:86).
Texas fire clay sales in 1929 amounted to only 3,047 tons for the year (Potter and
McKnight 1931 :13). When compared to the 1930 U.S. census estimate of total brick
production for Texas' 43 brick plants of 4,000,000 bricks a day, about 8,000 tons,
it is obvious that the state had not begun to produce fire brick in great quantity
even at that late date. The chimney fall also contains common molded brick lack­
ing both brand and frog, unattributable as to origin without chemical analysis
of the ~lay. These bricks lack the yellow color characteristic of Austin bricks
produced by normal firing process, but are in the color range of those from the
E1 gin area.
.
The site has a considerable domestic sheet refuse scatter composed of glass,
ceramics and metal. A surface search to determine site boundaries revealed no
items. having tightly datab1 e cnaracteristics but the forward slope of the creek
b1 uff lias been used as an informal disposal area. Therefore, ampl e opportunity
exists for an tntensive surface collection to find such artifacts. No trash pit
or outhouse feature was evident. A double post and rail fence remnant 1ies to
the west of the cabin remains. The fence has been augmented or replaced by the
use of posts and barbed wire. It is notabl e as the type of fenc"ing which found
use wfiere strength was likely to be at a premium, as in a corral. Barbed wire is
an invention of the1870 t s but does not become readily available or accepted in
Texas until somewhat later. The types found here are not early types and are still
i.n production.
In sum, 41TV643 isa ruined log structure dwelling at least some portion of
which dates to the 1890's and perhaps earlier. It's nearly destroyed condition
does not warrant preservation and its potential for further investigation is depen­
dent upon the demonstration of some association with person, groups, events or
circumstances of note. No evidence of unusual use of materials, techniques or
architectural composition is seen in the remains. The potential for National Reg­
ister consideration is, on the face of the survey investigation, lacking. A
follow-up investigation and report has been contracted for by the sponsor based
on this survey.

32
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS
PREHISTORIC ARTIFACTS
Only those artifacts diagnostic of a given era, lifestyle, technology or
circumstance are given mention here. It is emphasized that these are only a
small fraction of the total artifacts found but that most of the others are the
results of the manufacture of lithic items, the debitage, and were not further
subject to easily recognizable human use or alteration. Their diagnostic value,
other than to designate an activity area, is severely limited. Some few items,
utilized flakes, appear to have seen limited, perhaps one time, use of their
sharper edges but lack typological form characteristics to assign further asso­
ciations at present.
Typological identifications are based on information drawn from the Handbook
of Texas Archeology: TYpe Descriptions by Suhm and Jelks (1962); The CentFal
Texas AFchaic by Weir (1976); Digging Into South Texas PrehistoFY by Hester (1980);
and/or CultuFal ChFonology in Central Texas by Prewitt (1981). All measurements
are in centimeters; L = length, W= width, T = thickness, * = measurement of
incomplete artifact.
1.

CZear FOFk gouge (Figure 6a).

Isolated find (see Prehistoric Resources)
found on the slJrface apprOXimately 250 m south/southeast of 41TV642 in
a disturbed context.
Description - classic diagnostic of the Clear Fork Phase of the Middle
Archaic. Convex working end edge and pyramidal plano-convex cross­
section. Light brown chert with grainy texture and surficial weathering.
Dimensions:

2.

L = 6.64, W= 4.34, T

1.68

=

Edgewood projectile point (Figure 6b).

Isolated surface find found ap­
proximately 120 m south of 41TV648 in a disturbed context.
Description - One barb is missing and the tip of the other is also gone.
Tip is lightly chipped. Triangular blade with slight convex edges.
Concave base and expanding stem. Not a common type in any complex but
considered as Late Archaic in origin. Mottled tan chert with moderate
weathering.
Dimensions: L = 4.38*, W= 2.91*, T
ment is 1.375, widest is 2.02.

3.

Thin ovate biface fra9ment (Figure 6c). Isolated surface find recovered
on the opposite (west) side of the tributary drainage from 41TV644. Area
disturbed by an old dirt track fording the stream and by current use dur­
ing construction activity.
Description - Light tan, weathered chert with prominent central thinning
flake scar on one face.
Dimensions:

4.

= 0.74. Stemls narrowest measure­

L; 4.13*, W; 4.57, T

=

0.965

GoweF projectile point fragment (Figure 6d).

41TV640
Description - Short, parallel edged stem with markedly concave base.
Tip missing, one barb tip missing, other barb removed and shoulder re­
worked. Gray chert with small macrofossil inclusions. Typing from
Shafer (1963) and Prewitt (personal communication).

33
Dimensions:
at base.
5.

L = 3.43*, W= 2.91*, T

ScaUorn projectile point (Figure 6e).

41TV645
Description - Slender triangular blade with finely serrated edges.
Straight base as wide as the shoulders. Well barbed. Tip missing.
Stem formed by well-controlled notching. Light tan chert with low
surface gloss.
Dimensions:

6.

L = 3.1*, W= 1.62, T

= 0.41, Stem = 0.62

Bulverde projectile point fragment (Fi gure 6 f).

41 TV647
Description - Brown lightly weathered chert. Tip, barbs and base all
chipped or missing. Near rectangular base with sharp, slightly convex
edge.
Dimensions:

7.

= 0.63. Stem 2.0 at barb base, 2.1

L = 3.8*, W= 3.38*, T

= 0.695, Stem = 1.88

Biface medial fragment (Figure6'g). 41TV647. Possible gouge.
Description - Mottled gray-brown chert with vitrous luster. Slightly
convex blade edges. Pyramidal cross-section with unequal taper from
the apex. Both ends missing.
Dimensions: L = 7.22*, W= 3.8, T maximum = 1.81, T minimum at point
of break = 0.775, at other point of break = 1.25

8.

Angostura proj ect i 1e po i nt, reworked (Fi gure 6 h) .

41 TV648
Description - Brown, semi-vitrous chert with light patina. Lanceolate
blade incurving to base. Smoothed stem edges. Concave base.
Greatest width is at the shoulders. Reworked tip.
Dimensions:

9.

L = 3.53, W= 1.87, T

= 0.66, Stem = 1.71

Ensor proj ectil e poi nt fragment (Fi gure 6 i ) .

Description - Medium gloss brown chert.
blade with straight edges. Broad stem.
and in line with the blade edges.
Dimensions:

L = 3.18*, W= 2.12, T

4lTV648
Tip missing. Triangular
Base wider than shoulders

= 0.71, Stem = 1.44

HISTORIC ARTIFACTS
The ideal historic artifact, from an archeological point of view, is one
with a descrete date as part of its markings and one which is found in a con­
text which narrowly delimits its use. Photographs of a site, with dated cap­
tions, fulfill these characteristics but few other items do so. Because of the
human tendencies to save even that which is obsolete or expended, to salvage the
old for reuse, and to carry such items far from their initial use location, most
items can supply only a not-earlier-than date from which inferences can be drawn
or support for other evidence obtained. Three such items were turned-up during
this survey found on the sites not currently scheduled for further investigation.
1.

Bottle fragment (Figure 8a) 41TV642
Description - This dark green, nearly opague neck fragment shows the
neck finish indicative of a laid on lip. This process, as previously

34
stated. is ascribed to the time frame 1840 to 1870. Additionally, the
glass finish is that found in bottles blown into a contact mold. This
process was superseded about 1870 (Lorraine 1968:44) by the chilled
iron mold. Since bottles, especially early ones are frequently reused,
this fragment supplies only the not-earlier-than date (1840) for its
deposition as fact, but by inference supports attributing 19th century
age to the site.
2.

White ironstone sherd (Figure 8b) 41TV642
Description - This sherd, among five of the same material found on this
site, bears a portion of a registry mark and a portion of the manufactur­
ing firm's name. Figure 8c includes a key to registry marks, this type
in use from 1842 to 1867. The portion available to us on the sherd shows,
at the bottom, the parcel number, which distinguishes this mark from the
type that followed it in use. The later mark would have a letter in this
position. It also shows the day of the month when this design was reg­
istered. In the later mark once again this symbol would be a letter.
The manufacturing location. Hanley, and the portion of the firm's name ­
ENTSON - is enough to ascribe the item to the Joseph Clementson firm
of that location (Wetherbee 1981 :27). Since this firm operated between
1842 and 1864, registry of this pattern must have fallen in that period.
The item then must be produced, exported and make its way to Texas.
Production by this firm, as stated, ceased 1864, but it is doubtful that
much in the way of export demand existed during the 1861 - 1865 Civil
War era. The heirloom effect cannot be ruled out nor can later arrival
with an immigrant settler, but the not-earlier-than date of 1842 is estab­
lished.

3.

Fire brick (Figure 8d) 41TV643
Description - See site description. Terms used in the description unique
to brick are included in the glossary. The producer has been in business
since 1866, another not-earlier-than date.
Dimensions: L = 8 3/4 inches, T = 4 3/4 inches, Height = 2 1/2 inches.
length, by Brick Institute of America (BIA) specifications is the
longest dimension, thickness the measurement at right angles to the
length and height the measurement perpendicular to the length (BIA 1975:1).
The dimensions here are indicative of fire brick, being larger than
most face brick.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Travis County, though subjected to a good deal of archeological investiga­
tion, is not yet sufficiently well investigated to allow a meaningful synthesis
of its prehistoric cultural sequence. The Archaic stage is the best documented
time period within the context of Central Texas. Preservation, the length of
time for adverse factors to operate, and the governing of survey efforts by modern
cultural requirements, all contribute to the scarcity of pre-Archaic data. At
the other end of the time scale, material culture remains which are within the
Historic era have only recently begun to receive attention with much of that
biased toward the unusual rather than the norm of the times. A tendency to rely
on the recorded viewpoints of early eyewitnesses who made records of the more
bizarre, non-European traits of the existing non-literate cultures requires bal­
ancing with the record of the average citizen.

35

The present study demonstrates some of the shortcomi ngs buil t into i nvest;'­
gation limited by current land ownership boundaries. Several of the prehistoric
sites located, 41TV648, 41TV645, and 41TV644 at a minimum, are so compatible
with the nearby Walnut Creek Archeological District, that their omission from
it is obviously a matter of their location outside the bounds of the investi­
gation which produced that district's nomination. As entities. none of the
prehistoric sites found during this study has the potential for producing
significant data; however, their close proximity to the Walnut Creek Archeologi­
cal District, is note-worthy and important to future synthesis efforts. Distance,
context, espeCially soil type and depth. and natural feature separation more
easily allow distinction of the other study area sites from the district cluster.
None of these sites, 41TV640, 41 TV641 , 41TV646, and 41TV647 shows promise for
good return on further investigative effort and all show evidence of disturbance.
Excluding, by pre-survey agreement, 41TV638, the Fulks Homestead, the
historic sites found during this survey show only limited potential for future
investigation. Site 41TV639, the cistern/well lacks significant association
with the historic record, has no unusual materials, and employs no architectural
or construction principles worthy of note. Site 41TV642 is so small a remnant
of what was once present, has been so completely disturbed, and is so lacking
in archival association that further effort appears non-productive. Site 41TV643,
the log cabin remnant, has provided a quantity of useful data for inclusion
in the Texas Log Cabin Register. Because of the degree of destruction to the
building's components, preservation is not recommended; :nothing of significance
remains to preserve. No archival material adding significance to this site has
been found in the early deed, probate, commissioner's court, early tax, or census
records. It is recommended that investigation at the archival level be completed
by examination of the tax records for the late 19th century and the holdings of
the Travis County Library Collection. The latter source was closed to use during
the conduct of this survey. Further investigation of this site becomes appropriate
only if significant association can be demonstrated. No current reason exists
to believe the cabin is anything more than a tenant farmer dwelling and should
the above mentioned records not prove otherwise, additional investigation holds
little potential for adding significant data to the record.
In summary, the seven prehistoriC sites found within the study area warrant
further attention only in the noting of the spatial relationship of at least
three of them to the \~alnut Creek Archeological District. Of the historic sites,
exclusive of the Fulks Homestead, only one, the log cabin remnant, shows the
potential for future investigation and that only if archival material can be
found which demonstrates an association of significance. The basic recording
of site 41TV638, the Folks Homestead, has provided the necessary platform for its
investigation in a follow-up effort as requested by the sponsoring agency.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ . _ - - - - - - - - _ ...........................

_._-­

36

GLOSSARY
Branded brick -

Bricks having a manufacturer's mark, either letters or
symbo1s or both.

Chert -

Opaque chalcedony, silica, which breaks with a pronounced
conchoidal fracture. As used herein, the term is synonymous
with flint, there being no general agreement that the two
terms represent distinctly separate materials.

Debitage -

Lithic debris produced in stone tool manufacture.

Dip -

The angle at which a stratum or any planar feature is in­
clined from the horizontal.

Drainage area -

The area tributary to a stream. As used herein, it is
synonymous with catchment area~ watershed. and stream basin.

Face brick -

Brick sufficiently defect and blemish free to be used in
wall facing.

Frog -

An indented area usually on one of the largest faces of
a brick frequently containing the brand. The frog improved
bonding and shearing strength between adjacent bricks by be­
coming a receptacle for mortar.

Intermediate
Regional Flood -

A flood having an average frequency on the order of once in
100 years although the flood may occur in any year.

Mean sea 1evel -

A standard datum for heights based on the average level of
the ocean's waters.

Neck finish -

With respect to bottl es, the treatment in manufacturing of
that area from the top of the container down to a point
where the neck is unaltered for capping, stoppering, or other
closure. The neck finish always includes but is not limited
to the lip which may in some cases constitute the entire
neck fini sh.

Normal faul t -

A fracture of the earth's rock mantle in which the rock mass
above the fault plane has been depressed relative to the rock
mass below that plane.

Registry mark -

Marks regulated by the British Patent Office in use from
1842 to 1883 inclusive. The marks show the class of the
goods. the year, month and date manufactured, and the parcel
number of those goods. Classes include designs in metal,
wood, glass, earthenware, porcelain, ivory, bone, printed
patterns, and a wide variety of textile items.

37

Standard project ­
flood

The flood that may be expected from the most severe
combination of hydrological and meteorological
conditions that are reasonably characteristic of
the geographic area in which the drainage area is
located. Generally a product of continued heavy
precipitation in a drainage area which is already
at or near water saturation.

Strike ­

The direction or bearing of a horizontal line in the
plane of an inclined stratum, joint, fault or other
structural plane. It is perpendicular to the
direction of the dip.

- -.....

- - - ..........•.............

------------~---

-----------­

APPENDIX I

38

TEXAS LOG CABIN REGJSTER

Dept. of Geography
North Texas State University
Denton, Texas 76203

Please fill out as completely as possible, but fragmentary reports are also very
helpful. Answers to some of the questions may no longer be available.
County of location ____~__~T-r-a-v~'-·-s~-----------------------------(if cabin has been moved, give both)
Specific location
Big Walnut Creek
(original and p~esent location)

Unknown

Name of builder

Place of birth of builder

Unknown

1 s the cab in presen t ly occupied?
Present condition of cabin

_ _N_o__________________________________

Almost completely destroyed
earlier than 1896

Approximate date of construction

half saddle

'Type of corner patch (see attached illustration)
(attach photo of notching if possible)
Logs are (circle one)
Type of wood used

1.~SqUared)

2.

round

3.

half- round

Juniper

Type of chimney (circle one)

1.

stone

2.

~

3.

cat (mud and stick)

Fire brick from St. Louis company in business since 1866.

Floor plan (sketch. showing approximate dimensions)

~---

- ---- ------ --,

I

No ' ' ;-<l-<:'+ UJv..lls.
.
v; \\ \o'!..S,1
1"\0\
Y\l\uc1-- ""o,,~.

I

I

I

I
I

I

r - .. es,.,..,,,....
b
1

<'"

~
4. __ ,
:

Ct.5e

I
I.t­I

:!.I.;!cl

,I
I

Name and address of person making this report

L___

_

4-

_

_~

I

_ _ _ _ _ ..1

Si\\ l0'il

"0.\..11 f\o-tc:J... ~oi .... "d

Henry B. Moncure
Texas Archeological Survey
10,100 Burnet Road
Austin, Texas 78758

If possible, attach a photograph of the cabin.

::s:

39

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, Stanley A., Lorrain G. Kennamer, Robert H. Ryan, Alice Lo,
David L. Karney, Charles P. Zlafkovich, Michael E. Bonine, and
Roberta G. Steele
1973
Att~ 06 Tex~.
Bureau of Business Research, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Atkinson, Mary Jourdan and Eugene V. Giles
1981
Kingdom Come! Kingdom Go!. Eakins Press, Burnet, Texas.
Austin City Gazette
1841
June 16, 1841 issue.
Barker History Center
1956
Manuscript 10861
Austin, Texas.

Ch~Qh ReQo~~.

Walnut Creek Baptist Church.

Bealer, Alex W.
1978
The Log Cabin.

Barre Publishing, Borre, Massachusetts.

Belo Corporation, A.H.
1982
Tex~ AimanaQ.

Dallas, Texas.

Blair, W. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.

The

Tex~ Jo~nal

06

S~enQe,

2(1):93-117.

Bolton, Herbert E. (editor)
1916
Sp~h Explo~ation in the Southw~t, 1542-1706.
Narratives of Early American History. New York.
Brick Institute of America
1975
B~QQ Build~ Not~ #1.

Original

McLean, Virginia.

Carr, John T.
1967
The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
Board Repo~ No. 53. Austin.

Water Development

Connor, Seymour V.
1949
Lo~ Cabins of Texas.
53(2}:105-116.

Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938
PhY.6iog~aphy 06 Ea.6t~n United
Company, New York.

Stat~.

~1cGraw

Hi 11 Book

40
Fisher, W.L.
1965
Rock and Mineral Resources of East Texas. Bureau of Economic
Geology Repo4t 06 Inv~tigati?n6 No. 54. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Garner, L. E.
1974
Environmental Geology - An Aid to Urban Planning: Austin Area,
Texas. Approaches to Environmental Geology. Repo4t 06
rnv~~gation6 No. 81:101-122.
Bureau of Economic Geology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Guarino, Michea1 and Henry B. Moncure
In prep. A Brief Architectural and Historical Analysis of the Albert
Fulkes Homestead. An Archeological Inquiry into the Albert
Fulkes Homestead.
Gohm, Douglas
1968
Small

Ant1qu~.

ARCO Publishing Company, Inc.

New York.

Gould, Frank W.
1969
TexltO PR..aVLt6, A Chec.k1.J..4-t and Ec.oR..ogic.aR.. SummaJty. Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A &MUniversity,
College Station.
Gracy, Alice Duggan and Emma Gene Seale Gentry
1967
TlLav.[o COUMY, TexM, The Five Sc.heduR..~ 06 -the 1860 Fe.deJLaR..
Ce.n6U6. Privately Published, Austin.
Henderson, Jerry
1980
A Preliminary Report of Texas Highway Department Excavations
at 41BX52 - The Paleo Component. Te.xltO AlLche.oR..ogy, N0W~R..ette.ll.
06 -the. Te.xltO AlLc.heoR..ogic.aR.. Soc.i~y 24(2):14-15.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980
Vigging IMO Sou-th Te.xlt6 PlLe.h.[o-tOlLY.
San Antonio.
House, Kurt D.
1978
Texlt6 AlLche.oR..ogy.

Corona Publishing Comapny,

Southern Methodist University Press, Dallas.

International Brick Collectors Association
1983
Brick Manufacturers Files Compiled from the Member's Records.
Copperas Cove, Texas.
Jordan, Terry G.
1978
TexltO Lag
London.

BuiR..ding~.

Kleinschmidt, Ulrich
1983
Personal Communication

University of Texas Press, Austin and

41

Lorrain, Dessamae
1968
An Archeologist's Guide to Nineteenth Century American Glass.
H~to4ical Ancheo!ogy 2:35-44.
Lynn, Warren M. and John R. Fuszek
1981
Wall1.Ut CJteek. V~~c.t PMk, Ancheologica.t Te6u.ng at the WeLt6
SUe 41TV368, Cay 06 Awdin, TJUtv~ cou.nty, Texa.6. Parks
and Recreation Planning Associates, Inc., Austin.
Muller, Daniel A. and Robert D. Price
1979
Ground-Water Availability in Texas.
Resources RepoJtt 238, Austin.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1961
The India~ 06 Texa.6.

Texas Department of Water

University of Texas Press, Austin.

Newman. T. Stell
1970
A Dating Key for Post-Eighteenth Century Bottles.
AJtcheo!ogy 4:70-76.

H~to4ical

Park, Phocion
1963
Brickmaking in Early Austin.
Austin.

23(5):2-7.

Pass, Fred R. (editor)
1974
The Texa.6 Almanac, 1974-1975.

The JunioJt

H~to4ian

Dallas.

Potter, A.D. and David McKnight
1931
The Clays and the Ceramic Industries of Texas.
of Texas Bulletin No. 3120. Austin.

The University

Prewitt, Elton R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin
AJteheotogieal Soeiety 52:65-89. Fort Worth,
1983
personal communication.

06 the Texa.6

Roberts, Clarence M.
1950
A History of the Firebrick and Refractories Industry in Missouri.
Missouri School of Mines Bulletin Technical Series No. 75,
Rolla, Missouri.
Russell, Richard Joel
1945
Climates of Texas. An~ 06 the
GeagJUtpheM 35(2}:37-52.

A~~oeiation

06 AmeJtiean

Seelinger, Terry
1980
Archeological Reconnaissance of Portions of Walnut and Little
Creeks, Austin, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Technical
Bulletin No. 36. The University of Texas at Austin.

42
Sellards, E.H., E.S. Adkins and F.B. Plummer
1932
The Geology of Texas. Vol. I, Stratigraphy.
Texas Bulletin No. 3232. Austin.

The University of

Harry J.
1963
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site; A Stratified Terrace
Site in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin on the Tex~ AnQheologiQal
SoQiety 34;57-81.

Shafer~

Shiner, Joel L.
1983
Large Springs and Early American Indians.
28:99:1-7.

Plaina AnthtopologiJt,

Smithwick, Noah
1900

The Evolution

06

a State.

Nanna Smithwick Donaldson -compiler.

Gamme1 Book Co., Austi n.
Soil Conservation Service (SCS)
1974
Soil sunvey 06 TkaviJ County, Tex~.
of Agriculture. Washington, D.C.

United States Department

Suhm, Dee Ann, A.D. Krieger and E.B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
TeXM AnQheologiQal SoQiety No. 25.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
ms.
Site Report files for Travis County.

Bulletin

on

the

TARL files, Austin.

Texas Historical Commission
1982
Letter to Michael Guarino, Nash Phillops/Copus.
1982. Re: Walnut Creek Survey.

December 30,

Texas Natural Resources Information System (TNRIS)
1937
Travis County Photograph #58 Edgar Tobin Aerial Survey.
files, Austin.

TNRIS

Travis County Deed Records
ms.
Index to Deeds 1893-1908 Reverse.
ms.
Index to Deeds N - 0 - P - Q - R Direct. January 1,1931­
January 1,1939.
ms.
Deed Record Books Vol/pg G/251. G/252, K/684, K/733, T/320,
W/577, Y/31 , Z6z/582, 267/20, 310/129, 323/246/ and 523/376.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
1972

1980

Flood Plain In6oJunaUon: Big and Ut:t.ie Walnut CtLeefu"
AMlin, Tex~. Fort Worth.
Walnut and William.6on CtLeefu,: Expanded Flood Plain
In6oJuna.ti..on Study, Vol. III. EnvitLonmnual ConaidetLa.ti..ana.

Fort Worth.

43

U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)
1900
Map. Austin Quadrangle 15 minute.
1955
Map. Austin Quadrangle 15 minute.
Webb, Walter P. (editor)
1952
The Handbook 06 TeXa4.
Association, Austin.

Vol. II.

The Texas State Historical

Weeks, A.W.
1945
Quaternary deposits of Texas Coastal Plain between Brazos
River and Rio Grande. American Association of Petroleum Geologists
Bulletin 29(2):1693-1720.

Weir, Frank A.
1976
The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
Washington State Universi ty, Pullman.
Wes1ager, Clinton A.
1969
The Log Cab~n
New Jersey.

~n Am~ea.

Wetherbee, Jean
1981
A Look at White I~on6Zone.
Des Moines, Iowa.
Wilbarger, J.W.
1890
Indian

Vep~ed~on¢ ~n

Wortham, Louis J.
1924
H~zo~y 06 Texa6 6~om
Company, Fort Worth.

~---~

--~-

~-

......................................

Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick,

Wallace-Homestead Book Company,

Texa6.

Hutchings Printing, Austin.

Witd~ne6~

zo Commonwealth.

Molyneaux

--------.~------------------_._----------_

......... _ - - - - ­

44
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This project, located as it is close to the TAS office, was conducted
free of most travel and all accomodations considerations and provided
an unusual opportunity for maximum participation in its accomplishment.
This report caps the combined efforts of the Texas Archeological
Survey staff and those of a notable group of other contributors. Field
work efforts included participation by Deborah Smith, Carol Fabac, Solveig
Turpin, Ann Magennis, Jack Jackson and the author. The photographic
expertise of Kit Brooking and Dana Kolflat turned an unusual variety of
photographic negatives into printworthy results. Kit's efforts in artifact
photography and reproduction of old photos are especially noteworthy.
Carol supplied the graphics, Deborah the typing and Solveig the editorial
and compositional guidance.
Micheal Guarino of Nash Phillips/Copus' Land Management office
provided invaluable assistance in coordinating the field efforts.
In addition he produced documentary material which expanded the back­
ground data and supplied welcome corroboration of the archeological
evidence.
The staff of the Travis County Commissioners Court responded to
requests for file information with assistance that significantly exceeded
that experienced by the author in similar records holding facilities and is
much appreciated.
Mr. Louis Falconieri of the Texas Natural Resources Information System,
Systems Central, was most helpful in obtaining aerial photographs.
This effort is dedicated to the future residents of Cindy Carol Loop,
Gracy Woods, Section 8, who should enjoy their surroundings as much as
we did.

