TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

PRELIMINARY CULTURAL RESOURCE INVENTORY AND ASSESSMENT
OF A PROPOSED LIMESTONE QUARRY AND CEMENT PLANT,
COMAL COUNTY, TEXAS

Pamela Denney
Susan Lisk

Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin No. 41

The University of Texas at Austin
1980

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcortes Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

PRELIMINARY CULTURAL RESOURCE INVENTORY
AND ASSESSMENT OF A PROPOSED LIMESTONE
QUARRY AND CEMENT PLANT
CornaZ County> ,Texas

Pamela Denney and Susan Lisk
Principal Investigator: David S. Dibble

A report submitted to Radian Corporation in partial
fulfillment of the terms of a grant letter dated
April 17, 1980.
1980

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . .
Introduction
Location and Setting
Archeological Background
Cultural Background
Survey Procedures
Survey Results . .
Site Descriptions
Summary and Conclusions
References Cited . . . .

.

. 1
· 1

.

· 3
• 4

. . . . . 6
.

.

.

. 7

.

.

. 8

. ..

9

17
19

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.
Figure 2.

Project Area Location
Site Locations Within Project Area

• 2
10

LIST OF TABLES

Table 1.

Summary of Prehistoric Site Attributes . . . .

11

ABSTRACT
A cuZturaZ resource and assessment survey of 960 acres
in ComaZ

County~

Texas was conducted by staff members of the

Texas ArcheoZogicaZ Survey

~n

May 1980.

The survey yieZded

a totaZ of nine archeoZogicaZ sites: eight prehistoric sites
and one historic site.

Three prehistoric sites have been

recommended for additionaZ work.

INTRODUCTION
The following report details the results of a cultural
resource survey and assessment of 960 acres in Comal County,
Texas (Fig. 1) which are the projected site of a limestone
quarry and cement plant. The survey was conducted by Pamela
Denny and Susan Lisk, staff members of the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin, in May 1980, in
conjunction with an environmental survey conducted by Radian
Corporation of Austin.
The survey consisted of a background literature and
records search and a field survey. The purpose of the survey
was manifold. Specific objectives included:
1)

2)
3)

4)

precise location and description of all cultural
resources to be affected by the proposed quarrying;
evaluation of these resources in terms of their
scientific or historic value;
recommendations to the sponsor to avoid, or minimize
the adverse impact of quarrying on any archeological
or historic materials of demonstrable significance; and
recommendations for additional research related to
the interpretation of these resources which exceeds
the scope of the present study.

2

...L

\

.'/
.

\x'

d'

I

..

)1

\

~

I
FIGURE 1.

Project Area Location.

3

LOCATION AND SETTING
The project area is in the southeastern portion of
Comal County, approximately 7 kilometers due west of New
Braunfels (Fig. 1). The 960 acres which comprise the
project area form a strip of land approximately 5 kilometers
long and about 800 meters wide. This strip runs northwest
by southeast roughly parallel to and 1 kilometer west of
an unnumbered ranch to market road.
The northeast trending Balcones Escarpment traverses the
study site, dividing it into two physiographically discrete
units, the Edwards Plateau and the flood plain of Dry Comal
Creek.
The northern 80 percent of the project area lies within
the Edwards Plateau. General topography is characterized by
moderate to severely dissected hilly uplands. Gently sloping
terrain in the northernmost portion of the study area grades
into moderately steep slopes and abrupt bluffs further south.
An unnamed tributary of Dry Comal Creek, which runs southeast
by northwest, drains this area. The soils here are primarily
shallow clay lithosols with occasional outcroppings of lime­
stone bedrock. Numerous chert outcroppings were observed.
Vegetation is characteristic of Blair's (1950) Balconian
Biotic province. Mexican cedar (Juniperus ashei), live oak
(Quercus fusiformis) , Texas oak (Quercus texana) and mesquite
(Prospopis glandulosa) are predominant in the upland forest
communities. Various hardwoods such as Texas persimmon
(Diospysos texana) , cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia) and sycamore
(Platanus occidentalis) are found along the Dry Comal Creek
tributaries.

4

The remaining 20 percent of the project area lies within
the flood plain of Dry Comal Creek. The creek runs northeast
by southwest across the project area. Here the topography is
characterized by gently sloping terrain with terraces immediately
adjacent to Dry Comal Creek. Sediments reach a moderate depth
and include the typical undulating, alkaline to slightly acid
soils of the Blackland prairies.
Vegetation in this area is characteristic of Blair's
Texas Biotic Province (1950). Some bottomland forests remain,
but most of this portion of the site is cultivated. In the
areas not under cultivation, vegetation consists of a mesic
forest of oaks, hackberries, pecans and other trees. Mexican
cedar is also present.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Systematic archeological investigations in Comal County
began with the Smithsonian River Basin Survey's reconnaissance
of Canyon Reservoir in 1951 (Stephenson 1951). Extensive
investigations were done in th
same reservoir in 1959-60
when The University of Texas excavated three typical central
Texas sites: a burned rock midden, the Wunderlich Site; an
open occupation, the Footbridge Site; and a rockshelter, the
Oblate Site (Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962). Further work
was done by the Texas Archeological Society at the Oblate
Site in 1963, but the results are unpublished. Shafer's (1963)
reconnaissance survey of Blieder's Reservoir yielded four
sites
two middens and two lithic scatters.
Since 1975, the Center for Archaeological Research at
The University of Texas at San Antonio has conducted a recon­
naissance (Hester, Bass and Kelly 1975) and a follow-up survey

5

(Kelly and Hester 1975a) in portions of the Comal Creek water­
shed. In all, twenty-five prehistoric sites were located
and some limited testing was done along the Dry Comal Creek
and the West Fork of Dry Comal Creek. As a result of recom­
mendations made in the second survey, an intensive testing
and controlled surface collection strategy was employed at
selected sites in the Dry Comal watershed (Kelly and Hester
1975b).
All sites documented in the survey area were linked
to the procurement of chert, and the reduction of chert cobbles
to cores, flakes, and crude bifaces and unifaces. Kelly and
Hester (1976a) have reported several specific site types for
the Kendall-Comal area:
1)
lithic workshops/chipping stations characterized by
chert nodules, the presence of chipped stone tools,
a high percentage of large flakes and rough bifaces,
and lithic debitage;
2) burned rock middens detected as mounded accumulations
of fire-cracked rock and other evidence of human
occupation;
3)
long-term or preferred occupation sites characterized
by projectile points spanning a lengthy period of time,
the possible presence of hearths and artifact-rich
occupation areas within the site; and
4)
temporary campsites or loci for hunting and gathering
activities determined by lithic scatters and shallow
deposits.
The same functions have been ascribed to sites in
neighboring Kendall County along the Cibolo Creek drainage
(Kelly and Hester 1976a) and in Guadalupe County in the
vicinity of McQueeney (Kelly and Hester 1976b). Patterson's

---

~-

------

--------~

-----

--

-~-----

- - - - - -

--

---- ----------- - -

6

(1974) survey in Hays County on the upper San Marcos River
located twenty-two sites - all termed "lithic resource pro­
curement localities", again characterized by chert cobbles
and lithic debris representing various stages in the reduction
of chipped tools.
Additionally, sites termed "quarries" due to the abundance
of chert nodules have been located in the Dry Comal watershed
(Kelly and Hester 1975b) and in the McQueeney area (Kelly and
Hester 1976b). Rockshelters, such as the Oblate Site, and
burials, none of which have been scientifically excavated,
have also been reported in Comal County.
The majority of sites found have been lithic workshops
(Patterson 1974) or temporary camps (Kelly and Hester 1976a),
both of which are consistent with the concept of the Archaic
and Late Prehistoric hunter and gatherer on seasonal rounds
in central Texas. In particular, these lithic workshops merit
more attention because they "represent a facet of prehistory
sorely neglected in previous central Texas archeological
research (Hester, Bass and Kelly 1975: 22).
A 1978 survey conducted by Environmental Research and
Technology, Inc. in an area immediately adjacent to the survey
region, located scattered prehistoric materials suggesting an
Archaic occupation; however, prehistoric materials were not
found in sufficient density or variety to indicate an extended
occupation of the area (Howry 1978: 2-12).
CULTURAL BACKGROUND
Continued archeological work in the area supports the
original temporal division of the region's prehistory:

7

Paleo indian (11,000-8,000 B.P.); Archaic (8,000-2,500/
3,000 B.P.); and Late Prehistoric (2,500/3,000 B.P.- European
contact) (Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962). Each time period is
defined by changed in artifacts, particularly projectile
point styles.
Paleoindian information for this region is lacking, but
good evidence for the transition from that stage to the
Archaic comes from sites in Kendall County (Kelly and Hester
1976a) where one site (41KE63) has artifacts ranging from
Paleoindian to Late Prehistoric occupations. Most documented
sites are Archaic or Late Prehistoric, the chronologic affiliation
unknown if no diagnostic point types are present.
Settlement pattern information is as yet largely unknown
due to the limited area subjected to archeological investigation.
Most sites found in Comal County are situated on, or adjacent to,
creek drainages because most archeological work has concentrated
in areas to be affected by the construction of various dams or
wastewater facilities. Thus, a sampling of different environmental
zones in the area is lacking.
SURVEY PROCEDURES
Prior to the fieldwork, a literature search was conducted
in order to determine the type of cultural resources which
could be expected within the study area. The results of the
environmental study conducted by Radian Corporation were
utilized, as were the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
les on archeological sites previously recorded in the general
project area.
Field procedures varied with the topography. In the
northern half of the project area, where the drainage of Dry

8

Comal Creek forms a gently sloping terrain, transect lines
were walked. Spacing of crew members varied from fifteen to
thirty meters depending upon the vegetation. In the southern
half of the project area, where the creek cuts sharp bluffs,
contour lines were followed along both sides of the watercourse.
Sites were recorded on standard University of Texas forms.
Sketch maps and photographs were made of each site. Locations
were plotted on U.S.G.S. 7.5 minute series maps. All
documentation is on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory.
Artifacts were not collected. Drawings and photographs
were made to record diagnostic and representative specimens.
SURVEY RESULTS
The survey concentrated on locating and recording all
archeological sites within the project boundaries. Site
recognition was affected by post-occupational debris, land
modification and dense vegetation. Of these three factors,
vegetation had, undoubtedly, the greatest adverse effect.
Normal spring growth, combined with several inches of rain
the week prior to survey, resulted in a dense growth of grasses
in open areas. In wooded areas, fallen leaves contributed
to poor ground visibility.
Although the survey was limited to surface inspection,
certain general observations can be made regarding the nature
of the identified resources. Tentative determinations of
si te "type I! , following Kelly and Hester I s (197 Sb) definitions,
have been made. The spatial extent of each site is, in most
cases, based on surficial exposure. Chronological placement

9

has not been attempted. However, it is probable that most
sites fall within the Archaic-Late Prehistoric periods.
A total of eight prehistoric sites were recorded (Fig. 2).
These sites may be categorized as seven lithic workshops/chipping
stations (also called lithic procurement areas), and one
campsite. No burned rock middens, rockshelters, or burials
were noted. The sites are evenly dispersed throughout the
project area, and vary in size, topographic location, and
materials observed (Table 1).
In addition, one historic site was documented. This
site is the foundation of a Telsmith Gyratory rock crusher
bought in 1914 by the Coma1 County Commissioner's Court
(see Site Descriptions).
SITE DESCRIPTIONS
41CM112
This site is located on a gently sloping upland terrain
at an elevation of 890-920 feet MSL. The area is in the
drainage basin of an unnamed tributary of Dry Comal Creek.
Sediments are shallow, well-drained, clayey soils belonging to
the Eckrant Rumple Association (Radian 1980). Limestone
bedrock outcrops are numerous within the site boundaries.
Juniper, mesquite, live oak, prickly pear, and mixed short
and tall grasses characterize the present vegetational cover.
The site was designated a lithic procurement area, or
chipping station, because of the large numbers of cobbles,
cores and flakes. Preforms, side and end scrapers, retouched
akes, and choppers were also noted.
A large area, approximately 700 by 200 meters was included
ln the site boundaries. However, the density of artifacts was

~

- - - -........

....

-~~---~~-

~~~~-

.............

~-------~

....-

----­

10

a

o

Archaeological and
Historical Sites

.5
MILES

FIGURE 2. Site Locations Within Project Area. ,

1

..
....
....

()

TABLE 1.

Summary of prehistoric site attributes.
Coordinates
UTM Zone 14
East North

Site
Number

Elevation . Physiographic
ft. AMSl
Zone

Predominant
Vegetation

Soil

Drainage

Distance to
Drainage
Horiz. Vert.

.,.
Site Type

Condition:

41CM112

574820 3284690

890-920

upland slope

cedar-mesquite

clayey gravels

Dry Comal
tributary

150

41CM113

577090 3281420

670-680

alluvial
terrace

cedar-oak

clay loam

Dry Comal
Creek

50

41CM114

576770 3281630

680-690

lowland

cedar-oak
mesquite

clay loam

Dry Comal
Creek
tributary

100

41CM115

576540 3281840

720-740

upland flat

mesquite

clay loam

Dry Comal
Creek
tributaries

100 3-10 lithic procurement!
chipping station

possibly buried

41CM116

576020 3283440

790-810

terrace

cedar-oak

clayey gravels

Dry Comal
Creek
tributaries

10 3-7

lithic procurement!
chipping station
possible campsite

erosion,
powerline
construction

41CM117

575820 3283070

upland flat

cedar

clayey gravels

Dry Comal
Creek
tributaries

25

13 lithic procurement!
chipping station

erosion

-'-"CM,18

576100 3282250'

cedar-oak

clayey gravels

Dry Comal
Creek
tributary

150

25 lithic procurement!
chipping station

erosion

clayey gravels

Dry Comal
Creek
tributary

200

15

41CM119'.

I

576230 3282990

820

190-838 . . upland flat

790-810

upland slope

cedar

7 lithic procuremen:tl
chipping station

eroded

7 campsite

bulldozed,
buried

3

lithic procurement!
chipping station

lithic procurement!
chipping station

erosion,
historic habitation,
road construction

erosion - .... -_.­

f-'
f-'

12

not uniform throughout the entire area. A controlled surface
collection is recommended to define concentrations and spatial
relationships of lithic material.
41CMl13
This site is located on a terrace approximately 50 meters
north of Dry Comal Creek at an elevation of 670-680 feet MSL.
Soils belong to the Branyon-Krum-Lewisville Soil Association
and are deep, moderately well to well-drained, nearly level
and gently sloping clayey soils. Vegetation in the immediate
site vicinity included juniper, live oak and Texas oak.
The site has been disturbed by recent bulldozing. The
topsoil was removed and used as fill for domestic grass culti­
vation (Mrs. Archie Schmidt, personal communication). This
disturbance is only surficial; no pitting was observed.
The site has been designated a campsite because of the
presence of a variety of tool types and the low frequency
of cobbles, cores and flakes.
In addition, the close proximity
of this site to water would make it a preferred camp location
for prehistoric peoples. Designation of this site as either
a temporary campsite, or a long term occupation site, is
pending further investigation ..
Artifacts noted include projectile points, side and end
scrapers, flakes with retouch, spokeshaves, biface tools and
biface fragments. Thinning flakes and a few cores were also
recorded. No burned rock or hearths were seen.
Site boundaries were largely defined by ground visibility ­
when grass and leaf litter became so dense that the ground was
obscured, the site limits were drawn. Raking of the ground
cover and shovel testing are needed to accurately assess the
site's extent.

13

Because of the potential depth of this site, recommendations
include a controlled surface collection and testing.
41CM114
This site is situated between two dirt roads and a
railroad track, approximately 150 meters east of a farmhouse.
Outbuildings associated with the farmhouse fall within the
site boundaries.
Located on gently sloping terrain near Dry Comal Creek,
the site is at an elevation of 680-690 feet MSL. Sediments
are deep, moderately well to well-drained clayey soils. The
present vegetational cover consists of mixed grasses, oak and
small cedar trees. It is apparent that the land has been
cleared of cedars, and due to its proximity to the farmhouse,
could have once been in cultivation.
The site consists of two distinct areas of lithic con­
centration designated as Areas A and B which are approximately
100 meters apart. A light scatter of flakes and tools characterize
the area between and around these areas of concentration.
Area A (50 x 50 meters) is a moderately dense scatter of
cobbles, cores and flakes. Cultural material observed at
Area B (35 x 30 meters) includes cores, flakes, retouched flakes
and end scrapers. The site is designated a lithic procurement!
chipping station.
Because construction activities, such as the building of
roads, outbuilding and railroad tracks, have affected this site,
no further work is recommended.

...............

~------

~~~.-

.........

---~~--~~.~~~-~-~~

.................

14

41CMl15
This site is located on an upland flat between two
tributaries of Dry Comal Creek. Elevation ranges from 720
to 740 feet MSL. Sediments belong to the Houston Black-Heiden
Soils Association and are deep, moderately well to well-drained,
clayey upland soils. Vegetation at the site consists of a
moderate grass cover, numerous small mesquite trees, yucca,
prickly pear, post oak and elm. There was a notable absence
of cedar.
Cultural material was noted within an area 400 meters long
and 100 meters wide. Artifacts observed included retouched
flakes, scrapers, choppers, one core blank, and one well-formed
biface. A large number of cobbles, cores and primary flakes
were also noted.
Because of the presence of cobbles, cores, and flakes,
this site has been tentatively designated a lithic procurement
area/chipping station. The site area is deflated; no further
work is recommended.
4lCMl16
This site is located on a terrace between, and at the
confluence of, two minor Dry Comal Creek tributaries. Elevation
ranges from 790 to 810 feet I-.ISL. Soils belong to the Eckrant­
Rumple Association. Vegetation consists of a moderate grass
cover, mesquite, live oak and dense cedar stands.
The site is evidenced by a moderately dense lithic
scatter. Material observed includes cobbles, cores, choppers,
scrapers, primary and secondary flakes, retouched flakes, bi­
faces, preforms and quarry blanks. The site is designated a
lithic procurement area/chipping station because of the large

15

number of cores and flakes. However, the close proximity to
water, and the variety of tools observed, suggests possible
use as a campsite.
A powerline with cleared right-of-way traverses the
long axis of the site. Cultural material was observed for
approximately 300 meters along the power corridor. Because
of this powerline construction which has disturbed the
cultural deposits, and the deflation of the site area, no
further work is recommended.
4lCMll7
The site lies on top of a steep bluff overlooking a
tributary of Dry Comal Creek at an elevation of 820 feet
MSL. Sediments are of the Eckrant-Rumple Association.
However, limestone bedrock outcrops predominate. The site
area is in a clearing with a sparse cover of grasses;
surrounding vegetation consists of dense cedar brakes.
Observed in the clearing was a localized (30 x 50 meters)
lithic scatter consisting primarily of cobbles, cores, and
flakes. A scraper and preform were also noted. The site is
a good example of a small lithic procurement area/chipping
station.
Because of its small size, and the shallowness of the
soil, no further work is recommended for this site.
4lCMl18
This site is located on an upland flat southwest of
one tributary of Dry Comal, and south of a lesser tributary.
Elevation ranges from 790 to 838 feet MSL. Sediments at the
site are from the Eckrant-Rumple Association. Vegetation consists

16

of live oaks, agarita bush, several varieties of cactus
and numerous cedar trees.
Artifacts observed as 41CMll8 include four bifaces, three
preforms, cores, cobbles and flakes. Also noted were scrapers,
a few crude choppers, and two projectile point fragments.
This site has been designated as a lithic procurement areal
chipping station.
Due to heavy leaf cover, ground visibility over the entire
area was poor. Artifacts were observed in areas where patches
of ground could be seen. Hence, it is possible that this site,
covering an area of over 350 meters, could actually be several
small sites. In addition, artifacts were observed in a road­
cut at the base of the steep slope which borders the site on
its southeastern boundary; it is probable that these artifacts
were washed down from the site.
Due to the disturbance of the surface deposits caused by
erosion, and to the shallowness of the soil, no further work
is recommended.
4lCM119
This site is located on an upland flat east of the Dry
Comal Creek tributary. Elevation at the site is 790 to
810 feet MSL. Sediments are from the Eckrant-Rumple Association.
Vegetation consists of a moderate grass cover with intermittent
cedar stands.
This site is an excellent example of a lithic procurement
area/chipping station. Material observed includes numerous
cobbles, cores, flakes, three chopping tools, bifacial tools
and quarry blanks.

-

..

-

.......

~-.~.~-

......

~-.~.~

~~----~-

17

41CM120
This historic site is located in the creek bottom
of an unnamed tributary of Dry Comal Creek. It is the foundation
for a Telsmith Gyratory rock crusher purchased by the Comal
County Commissioners Court in 1914 for $2,025. An Emerson
Big Four road tractor was also purchased at the same time.
These purchases signalled the first attempts to build
macadamized roads as the automobile was coming into general
use in the county.
The history of the rock crusher has been well documented
ln Oscar Hass' History of New Braunfels and Carnal County:
1844-1946. In addition, numerous photographs were taken by
the survey crew to record the present condition of the structure.
Hence, the site has been recorded in case it is of future
interest to scholars. No further work is recommended.
SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The archeological resources documented during the 1980
field survey help substantiate the previous research in
Comal County. The seven lithic procurement/chipping station
sites and the one campsite that were located fit well within
the site typology defined by Hester and his associates (see
Archeological Background). The location of these sites on
terraces or upland areas near water courses parallel locations
of previous recorded sites. Site descriptions, especially
with reference to horizontal extent and materials observed,
are also commensurate with previous studies. In summary,
documentation of the nine previously unrecorded sites has
produced no unexpected information.
Three prehistoric sites, 41CMl12, 41CMl13, and 41CM119,
are believed to be excellent examples of lithic procurement/

18

chipping stations and a campsite. Due to their excellent
condition and potential for adding to our existing knowledge
of the prehistory of the area, they are recommended for
the following additional investigations:
1) Testing to determine whether subsurface cultural
materials are present;
2) Surveying to determine the horizontal extent in
instances where site boundaries were not delineated; and
3) Controlled surface collecting and/or additional
photo recording of cultural materials.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Bass, E.A., Jr., and T.R. Hester
1975 An Archaeological Survey of the Upper Cibolo Creek
Watershed, Central Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, Archaeological Survey Report No.8, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Science~ Vol. 2, No.1.

The Texas Journal of

Hass, Oscar
1968

History of New Braunfels and Comal County:

1844~1946.

Steck Company, Austin.
Hester, T.R., F.A. Bass Jr. and T.C. Kelly
1975 Archaeological Survey of Portions of the Coma1 River
Watershed, Comal County, Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research, Arehaeologieal Survey Report No.6, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Howry, Jeffrey C.
1978 Cultural Resources Survey for GPI Properties in Comal
and Guadalupe Counties, Texas. Environmental Research
and Technology, Inc., Concord, Mass.
Johnson, L., Jr., D.A. Suhm and C. Tunnell
1962 Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich~
Footbridge and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum~
Bulletin No.5, The University of Texas at Austin.
Kelly, T.C. and T.R. Hester
1975a Additional Archaeological Survey in the Dry Comal
Watershed, Comal County, South Central Texas. Center
for Archaeologieal Research, Archaeologieal Survey
Report No. 10, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
1975b

Archaeological Investigations at Four Sites in the
Dry Comal Watershed, Comal County, South Central
Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, Archaeological
Survey Report No. 15, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

1976a

Archaeological Investigations at Sites in the Upper
Cibolo Creek Watershed, Central Texas. Center for
Archaeological Research, Archaeological Survey Report
No. 17, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

20

Kelly, T.C. and T.R. Hester (cont.)
1976b The McQueeny Municipal Utility District Project:
An Archaeological Reconnaissance. Center for
Archaeological Research, ApchaeoZogicaZ Supvey
Repopt No. 19, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Patterson, P.E.
1974 Upper San Marcos River Watershed, Hays County,
Texas: An Archeological Survey of Areas Proposed for
Modification. Texas Archeological Survey, Reseapch
Repopt No. 42, The University of Texas at Austin.
Radian Corporation
1979 Preliminary Environmental Studies for a Proposed
Limestone Quarry and Cement Plant, Comal County,
Texas.
Shafer, H.J.
1963 An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Bleiders
Creek Reservoir, Comal County, Texas. Report submitted
to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project.
Stephenson, R.L.
1951 Archeological Survey of Canyon Reservoir on the
Guadalupe River, Comal County, Texas. Mimeographed
report prepared by the River Basin Surveys,
Smithsonian Institution .

•

