An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of
North Fork, South Fork and Laneport Reservoirs,
Williamson County, Texas
By

Harry J. Shafer and James E. Corbin

Report Submitted to the National Park Service
by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas
in accordance with the provisions of
Memorandum of Agreement 14-10-0333-1121

JULY, 1965 /AUSTIN, TEXAS

.
RCHEOLOGICAL f<!:.St.AriCH LABORAT0li1J

APPRAISAL OF THE ARCHEOLOGICAL
RESOURCES OF NORTH FORK, SOUTH FORK, AND LANEPORT RESERVOIRS,
WILLIAMSON COUNTY, TEXAS

by
Harry J. Shafer and James E. Corbin

Report Submitted to the National Park Service
by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas
in accordance with the provisions of
Memorandum of Agreement 14-10-0333-1121
Austin, Texas

July, 1965

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

. .. .

INTRODUCTION

1

LOCATION AND CHARACTER OF THE RESERVOIRS .

3

DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

5

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND .

7

THE SURVEYS

10

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

12

North Fork Reservoir

12

South Fork Reservoir

32

Laneport Reservoir

47

Non-reservoir Sites •

58

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

63

REFERENCES CITED • • . • • .

75

LIST OF FIGURES

Following Page

Figure No.
1.

Map of Williamson County showing the location
of the reservoirs, the bordering counties, and
4

the Balcones Fault

2.

Map of North Fork Reservoir • •

3.

Two sites in North Fork Reservoir, 41 WM 53
and 41 WM 74

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

.

16

LIST OF FIGURES (Cont'd.)

Figure No.

Following Page

4.

Map of South Fork Reservoir .

33

5.

Map of Laneport Reservoir •

48

6-12.

Artifacts from various sites in, or
near to, North Fork, South Fork, and
Laneport reservoirs

62

LIST OF TABLES

Table No.

1.

Page

Provenience of artifacts from Dobbs Hollow
sites

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.

Significant data, North Fork Reservoir

3.

Significant data, South Fork Reservoir

4.

Significant data, Laneport Reservoir

. . . . . .

61
66

....

70

. . .

73

INTRODUCTION

From September 4 through October 31, 1963, the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project (T. A. S. P.) conducted preliminary surveys along portions of the San Gabriel drainage
to be affected by the proposed North Fork, South Fork, and
Laneport reservoirs in Williamson County, Texas (Fig. 1).
Many of the

io9

sites located are potentially important as

sources of archeological data.
The necessary preparatory work and an initial visit to
the North Fork and South Fork reservoir areas were made by
Mark L. Parsons, then an employee of the T. A.

s.

P., who

contacted landowners and recorded several of the sites.

The

bulk of the field reconnaissance, however, was carried out
by the writers, under the provisions of Memorandum of Agreement No. 14-10-0333-1121 between the National Park Service
and The University of Texas, and as a parr of the nationwide
Inter-Agency Archeological Salvage Program:
Without the cooperation of many individuals, these
archeological surveys would have been very difficult to complete.

Special thanks are due Mr. Sherwin Cavitt, of George-

town, who was kind enough to guide the survey party to sites
on his land, as well as to the many other landowners who
never hesitated in granting permission for passage onto their

-1-

2

properties.

The writers are also grateful to John Greer, who

directed the party to five sites he had previously located,
and to the

u. s.

Army Corps of Engineers for furnishing maps

and other data pertinent to the reservoirs.

LOCATION AND CHARACTER OF THE RESERVOIRS

The North and South forks of the San Gabriel River head
in Burnet County and flow in an easterly direction, mergingat
Georgetown.

Here they form the San Gabriel proper, which

continues an easterly course, draining into the Little River
in Milam County and eventually flowing .into the Brazos River.
Other than the North and South forks, the major tributaries
of the San Gabriel River are the Middle Fork, which drains
into the South Fork immediately west of Georgetown; Willis
Creek, which empties into the San Gabriel River about eight
miles east of Granger; and Brushy creek, which flows into the
San Gabriel in Milam County.
Plans for the North Fork Dam, to be constructed approximately three miles west of Georgetown (Figs. 1, 2), call for
an earthen structure 12,300 feet long and a maximum of 188
feet high.

The reservoir will inundate about 12 river miles

of the North Fork and will have a maximum width of 1.5 miles.
It will provide for 221,600 acre feet of storage capacity,
including conservation storage, sedimentation reserve, and
flood control storage.
The south Fork Dam, also to be an earthen structure, will
be located about three miles south of the North Fork Dam and
about the same distance west of Georgetown (Figs. 1, 4).

-3-

It

4
will be 7,100 feet long and will rise to a height of 167 feet.
The narrow lake to be created behind this dam will be approximately 10 miles long and one mile wide, and will have a maximum storage capacity of 138,500 acre feet.
The Laneport Dam, to be constructed in the same manner
as the other two, will be 111 feet high and about 16,000 feet
long, and will be located about eight miles east of Granger
(Figso 1, 5).

With a total capacity estimated at 331,900

acre feet, Laneport Reservoir is to extend approximately 15
river miles upstream from the dam, inundating about eight
miles of Willis Creek.

FIGURE 1

FIGURE lo

MAP OF WILLIAMSON COUNTY SHOWING LOCATIONS OF THE
RESERVOIRS, THE BORDERING COUNTIES, AND THE BALCONES
ESCARPMENT (OR FAULT)

I

I

I

200
t

A

~

$

S

1965

~
G)

8

State

u. s.

Highway

Highway

Highway

Interstate

<

\
~

~
Balcones

Reservoir
Fault

Area

VMB

! e20 I Form or Ranch Road

COUNTY

\

\

>-/

' "'-~(

N

J\., ,,--./"' '\_

~I

•

~

X

~f

'l
I

E

MAP

WILLIAMSON

I

0

T

LOCATION

\..__,

J

I

0

,_/

Miles

I

5

TRA1115

I

10

c--'"'--1.
Oul\'rj:'.""--

~ '"\,..... ""-- ./\._

r-,

~~

\

\I'
~

\'V~

\..

Ou~
4-r ,..

'Z-

y/

/

c:. ....
~ ..i..

0

"\'i

~ \<

(..

(-

~

~ ~-­
c,OU~~i

\

~o"'~
c

4.s,.'-.....

l!J :--.....-

(

I

I

rI

/

/

DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA

The Balcones Escarpment runs approximately north and south
through this area and cuts Williamson County in half (Fig. 1),
dividing it--and the regions to be affected by the reservoirs-into two contrasting environs.

The western part of the county,

where the North and south Fork reservoirs are located, lies
in the southeastern portion of what has been provisionally
called the Comanche dissected plateau (Fenneman, 1931: 55-57).
This physiographic unit is characterized by Fenneman as a submaturely dissected plateau with a maximum relief of 100 feet.
Variations in elevation are fairly pronounced with the canyon
walls of the streams generally ranging from steep slopes to
vertical cliffs.
The biology of the western part is typical of the Balconian Biotic Province.

Vegetation consists of various shrubs

and grasses along with Mexican cedar, Texas oak, stunted live
oak, and mesquite.

A mesic forest of large oaks, elms, hack-

berries, and pecans occupies the stream valleys.

Fifty-seven

species of mammals can be found, although none of these is
restricted to this province.

Reptiles and amphibians in the

area include Terrepene ornata, 16 species of lizards, 36
species of snakes, 15 species of anura, and seven species of
urodela (Blair, 1950: 112-117).

-5-

6

The eastern half of the county consists of two contiguous
soil belts separated from one another by a generally low scarp,
the White Rock Escarpment (Fenneman, 1938: 100-108, Figs.27,
28).

The first soil belt, the Eagle Ford Prairie, is a 10

mile wide strip of rolling hills bound on the west by the
Balcones fault and on the east by the White Rock Escarpment.
Immediately to the east is the second belt, the Taylor Prairie,
whose gently undulating countryside is hardly distinguishable
from that of the Eagle Ford.

The Taylor Prairie, in which

the Laneport Reservoir is located, consists of almost flat,
black lands with the major relief occurring around the stJ:eam
valleys.

Typical fauna and flora of the Texan Biotic Pro-

vince are to be found in this area.

Where the land is not

under cultivation, grasses and shrubs are the main vegetation
with mesic forests of live oaks,

elm~

hackberries, and other

timbers occurring in the stream valleys.

Mammals are repre-

sented by 49 species; reptiles and amphibians by two species
of Terrepene, nine species of lizards, 39 species of snakes,
five species of urodela, and 18 species of anura (Blair,
1950: 112-117).

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Although few systematic archeological investigations
have been conducted in Williamson County (Campbell, 1948r
Schuetz, 1957), close ties can be seen between the archeological remains collected by the survey and those reported
from sites in surrounding portions of central Texas.

These

comparative data, combined with the findings described herein,
suggest that evidence of all four of the stages--Paleo-Indian7
Archaic, Neo-American, and Historic--commonly recognized in
Texas archeology (Suhm, et al., 1954: 16-22) might be expected
to occur in the reservoir areas.

These stages and their

specific manifestations are briefly reviewed below (from
earliest to latest):
I.

Paleo-Indian.

While the T. A. S. P. survey crew

found only two dart points (Fig. 9, A, B) that can be tentatively assigned to this stage, Schuetz (1957) has noted
Paleo-Indian dart points at several Williamson County sites.
In nearby Travis county, even more discrete evidence of an
early occupation was found at the Levi Site (Alexander, 1963).
II.

Archaic.

This stage is unusually well represented

in the survey collection, being most easily recognized by
dart point types affiliated with the Edwards Plateau Aspect
(Figs. 6-8).

Following a provisional sequence established

-7-

8

by Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell (1962) largely on the basis of
findings made at Canyon Reservoir, Comal County, the major
dart point styles can be divided into four chronologic periods.
The early period is marked by types Bulverde, Nolan,,and Travis;
the middle period by types Pedernales and Bulverde; the late
period by types Castroville, Ensor, Fairland, Marcos, and
Montell; and the transitional period by the Darl type.
Schuetz (1957) also reports numerous Archaic Edwards
Plateau Aspect artifacts for Williamson County, and Campbell
(1948) has briefly described the deeply buried Merrill Site.
The lower levels of the Merrill Site yielded generally nondiagnostic, but probably Archaic, artifacts, while stratigraphically above these were definite Edward Plateau Aspect
types.

Culturally-related remains are abundant in the adja-

cent counties and excavations at typical Edwards Plateau
Aspect sites have been made in Bell (Watt, 1936; Miller and
Jelks, 1952; Shafer, 1963; Shafer, et al., 1964) and Travis
(Suhm, 1955; 1957; Sturgis, 1956; Kelly,, 1961) counties.
III.

Nee-American.

Although apparently less well

represented than the above, a number of sites found by the
survey provide evidence of this stage.

Specifically, both

the Austin and Toyah foci of the Central Texas Aspect can be
recognized, with Scallorn type arrow points being the most
distinctive trait of the former, and Perdiz ._and Cliffton

9

arrow points being typical of the latter (Fig. 9).

Similar

materials from adjacent regions have been reported by watt
(1936); Miller and Jelks (1952); Suhm (1955; 1957; 1959);
Jelks (1962); Johnson (1962); Johnson, Suhm, and Tunnell
(1962); and Shafer, Suhm, and Scurlock (1964).
IV.

Historic.

No significant archeological remains of

this stage have yet been recorded in either Williamson or
nearby counties, although the important San Xavier missions
are believed to be located in Milam County, presumably near
the mouth of Brushy creek.

These three missions, San Xavier

de Horcasitas, San Ildefonso, and Nuestra Senora de la
Candelaria, were established in 1748 but had to be abandoned
in about 1752 due to financial difficulties and inadequate
fortifications against nomadic Apache tribes (Castaneda,
1958).

THE SURVEYS

Prior to the survey, the Williamson county files at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas, were carefully searched for any previously located
sites in the reservoir areas, and one site--41 WM 28--was
found.

Reservoir maps provided by the.u.

s.

Army Corps of

Engineers were also examined for promising locations of
archeological sites.

The Texas Highway Department road map

of Williamson County was compared with the reservoir maps
for access roads leading into the areas.
The field work was made relatively easy by the numerous
accessible roads (public and private), the cooperative attitude of the landowners, and the extremely dry weather which
permitted fording of the river.

In areas covered by grasses-

where sites might have been easily overlooked--close inspection
was made on extensive walking tours.

For the most part, how-

ever, the survey party would drive over an area, see a likely
location, and then proceed to check this locality by foot.
The sites are numbered by the trinomial system employed
by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.

For example,

Site 41 WM 30 signifies that the site is located in Texas
(41 is the numerical designation for Texas), in Williamson
County (WM is the county abbreviation), and is the 30th site

-10-

11

recorded in that county.

A standard survey form used by the

·T. A. S. P. was filled out for each site recorded, and site
locations were placed on a Texas Highway map as well as on
the respective reservoir maps.

Photographs were taken of

typical sites, and artifact collections were made whenever
possible.

The artifacts were placed in appropriately labeled

paper bags, and taken to the T. A.
where they were processed.

s.

P. laboratory in Austin

In addition to the above-mentioned

records, a daily log was kept to indicate the areas visited,
the landowners contacted, and other activities of the survey
party.

Data collected during these surveys are on file at

the research laboratory in Austin.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

North Fork Reservoir

Of the 44 sites recorded in this reservoir (Table 2),
over half are burned rock middens or sites buried in alluvial
deposits.

Only one ceramic site (41 WM 71) was found.

Nine-

teen are recommended for further work.

41 WM 33
This site is located on the north side of the river
approximately four miles west-northwest of the dam.

Occu-

pational debris is exposedalong the river bank from the mouth
of a small unnamed creek westward for a distance of about
250 feet.

The material is buried in an alluvial deposit but

the exact depth could not be determined.

The artifact collec-

tion includes a Castroville dart point (Fig. 6, C), an end
scraper, two miscellaneous unifacial implements, three blade
fragments, a thick bifacial implement, a utilized flake, a
chopper, and a metate.
Since the site may have a stratified cultural deposit,
testing is recommended.

41 WM 34
Site 41 WM 34, located approximately four air miles east
of Highway 183 and some five miles northwest of the dam site,

-12-

13

is in an alluvial accumulation on the south side of the river.
It consists of several areas of occupation, with the most productive portion being situated at the eastern end of a cultivated field.

The cultural-bearing deposit here is under cul-

tivation and appears to extend for about three feet below the
surface, to judge from an eroded cut along the northern periphery.

Artifacts collected include two dart points, a

Castroville and a Tortugas (Fig. 8, F).
Limited testing is recommended for 41 WM 34.

41 WM 49
A burned rock midden, 41 WM 49, was recorded on the
north side of the river approximately 0.1 of a mile below
the dam site.

This midden, cut through by a drainage ditch,

extends from the base of a low limestone bluff onto an adjacent cultivated field.

The undisturbed portion of the de-

posit reaches a depth of three to four feet.

Artifacts col-

lected include a Pedernales and an unidentifiable dart point,
an ovoid knife, and

oth~miscellaneous

unifacial and bifacial

implements.
The north end of the proposed dam is to be anchored a
short distance southwest of 41 WM 49, endangering the site
by construction activityo

Limited testing is recommended.

FIGURE 2

FIGURE 2

o

MAP OF THE NORTH FORK RESERVOIR SHOWING THE
LOCATION OF ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES

1965

Area

Miles

I
I

I

Reservoir

Archeologicol

0

[Jill

•

Site

I

2

State
Form

!Zml

U.S.

@

8

or

Ranch

Highway

Highway

Rood

NORTH FORK RESERVOIR

1·

VMB

14

41 WM 50
This site, located about three miles northwest of Georgetown, is buried in an alluvial deposit on the north bank of
the river.

Cultural materials can be seen on the west bank

of a small, unnamed stream which cuts through this deposit,
as well as in an exposure on the eastern side.

The survey

party collected a lanceolate dart point, a subrectangular
knife fragment, and two miscellaneous bifacial implements.
Since the site may yield stratified cultural remains,
limited testing is recommended.

41 WM 51
Another alluvial site is located at the east end of a
cultivated field, less than a mile west of the proposed dam
site and on the south side of the river.

Bordering the field

on the east is an unnamed creek that drains into the river
immediately north of the site.

The survey team found cul-

tural debris scattered over about an acre of the field and,
as evidenced by eroded areas within the site, the midden deposits apparently extend below the plow zone.

The surface·col-

lections included a Pedernales dart point (Fig. 8, C), an
Ensor dart point, a subrectangular knife base, a burin, three
thick bifacial implements (Fig. 11, A), and miscellaneous

-.

unifacial implements.

15

Since the site may yield stratified occupational remains,
limited testing is recommended.

41 WM 52
A very promising site--41 WM 52--was found in an alluvial
accumulation immediately east and across the spring-fed creek
from 41 WM 51.

Here a culturally-rich, deposit is exposed in

a small cultivated field and lateral migration of the creek
has revealed that the deposit extends below the surface for
at least five feet.
two acres.

The entire site covers an area of about

Among the artifacts collected are Castroville,

Fairland (Fig. 7, B), Yarbrough, and two Ensor dart points,
two subrectangular knives, four end scrapers, a side scraper,
and miscellaneous unifacial and bifacial implements.
Since this site is situated near the south side of the
proposed dam and will surely be destroyed by early construction activity, extensive excavations at the earliest possible
time are strongly recommended.

41 WM 53
Buried in alluvial silts immediately east and across a
small creek from 41 WM 52 is Site 41 WM 53.

The occupational

debris is restricted to a high ridge paralleling the river and
is exposed in a vertical face on the east bank of the creek.
The cultural-bearing deposit extends to at least a depth of

16

two and a half feet below the surface (Fig. 3, B).

Two Darl

dart points, a blade fragment, and two thick, bifacial implements were collected from the surface.
Since 41 WM 53 is also within the dam construction area,
it is recommended for test excavations in conjunction with
the excavation of 41 WM 52.

41 WM 54
This small surface site lies on the west side of the unnamed, spring fed creek just south of 41 WM 51.

All of the

cultural material is apparently restricted to the surface,
and significant concentrations of debris could not be found.
The only artifact collected was a Nolan type dart point.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 55
Another surface site, 41 WM 55, was recorded about half
a mile south of 41 WM 54.

Here cultural· material, such as

flakes and scattered burned rock, was noted around several
springs that outcrop at the head of the creek.

The only

artifacts collected were two thick, bifacially-chipped
implements (Fig. 11, B) and a gouge.
No further work is recommended.

FIGURE 3

FIGURE 3o

TWO SITES IN NORTH FORK RESERVOIR

A,

View of one of the burned rock middens at 41 WM 74;

B,

View of cultural-bearing deposits at 41 WM 53.

A

.-

B

17
41 WM 56
This site lies buried in alluvial sediments on the south
side of the North Fork, approximately 0.2 of a mile upstream
from 41 WM 33.

Occupational debris litters a high ridge

paralleling the river, and extends to a deep gully which cuts
through the terrace.

Although most of the site is under cul-

tivation, cultural refuse appea:i:sto extend well below the
plow zone.

An interesting assemblage of artifacts was col-

lected from the surface, including: two dart points, a Fairland and a Marcos; five end scrapers and a side scraper (Fig.
11, E); an ovoid, five subrectangular-based (Fig. 10, E),
and three miscellaneous knives; five thick, bifacial implements; an adz; a gouge; a hammerstone; a mane; and an obsidian flake (Fig. 12, E).
As this site may yield additional trade materials (such
as the piece of obsidian) and may be stratified, test excavations are recommended.

41 WM 57
Site 41 WM 57, which consists of two or more burned rock
middens, is to the east of, and across the small gully from

41 WM 56.

Most of it lies in a cultivated field, extending

westward into a barnyard.

Even though the middens have been

cultivated for some time, they still reach a height of approximately two to three feet and a diameter of about 40.0 feet.

18
Among the artifacts collected are three Bulverde, a Lerma (Fig.
7, F), three Marshall (Fig. 7, I), and two Nolan dart points,
two ovoid, a subrectangular based, a stemmed (Fig. 10, G), a
corner-tanged (Fig. 10, H), and two miscellaneous knives (Fig.
10, I); a side scraper; a stone pendant (Fig. 12, C); and a metate.
Since the site may yield early Archaic materials, test
excavations are recommended.
41 WM 58
This site was encountered approximately half of a mile
east of 41 WM 57, on the west side of a small, unnamed creek.
It was covered by vegetation at the time of the survey, and
neither the exact nature of the cultural deposit nor its size
could be determined.

A mano, a metate, and a blade fragment

were the only artifacts collected.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 59
Located east of a northern tributary creek and about four
miles northwest of Georgetown, this site is situated in an old
cultivated field about 300 yards west of the North Fork.

Ero-

sion has revealed a brown, humus-stained soil underlain by a
culturally-sterile tan caliche.

The upper zone produced two

Marcos and a Marshall dart point (Fig. 7, J), a subrectangularbased knife, five ovoid knives (Fig. 10, B), a miscellaneous
knife, a fragmentary scraper, and a pitted mano.

19

Since the midden has no apparent depth, no further work
is recommendedo

41 WM 60
This site, located a short distance south of 41 WM 59,
lies on a high terrace overlooking the confluence of a small,
unnamed creek and the river.

Only scattered cultural debris

was observed, as the area had not been cultivated in sometime
and the vegetation covering the site prevented close inspection.
No further investigations are necessary.

41 WM 61
Site 41 WM 61, a large burned rock midden, is located
across the creek from 41 WM 59.

The midden, lying immediately

off the river's flood plain and on a limestone hill slope,
is being eroded by the lateral migration of the creek, revealing at least two cultural-bearing layers.
layer consists of a dark gray soil and

m~ny

The upper

fire-cracked

limestone stone fragments, snail shells, flakes, and artifacts.
The lower layer is a yellowish-tan soil also mixed heavily with
cultural material, although the amount of fire-cracked rock
appears to be less.

The exact dimensions of the midden could

not be determined, but the deposit has a depth of at least
five feet.

Artifacts collected include a Pedernales dart

20

point, a subrectangular-based knife, four blade fragments, a
heavy bifacial implement, and a side scraper.
Test excavations are recommended as the deposit is
stratified and has not been excessively disturbed by erosion.

41 WM 62
This large site is about 0.3 of a mile west of 41 WM 60
and on the south side of the river.

As evidenced by erosion,

all materials are restricted to the surface even though the
area of occupation exceeds two acres.

A Montell dart point,

a subrectangular-based knife, a blade fragment, and a mano
were collected.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 63
No artifacts were collected from this small site which
consists of a concentration of flakes and burned rock about
0.2 of a mile east of 41 WM 34.

However, since the area was

covered with vegetation, the exact depth and nature of the
concentration could not be determined.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 64
Downstream from 41 WM 63, on the south bank of the
river, is another small site, 41 WM 64.

The area in which

21

the site is located has been cultivated, but is presently
covered by grass, limiting the exposure of cultural material.
Although only one artifact, an end scraper (Fig. 11, D) was
collected, the deposit appears to be rich and may have considerable depth.
Limited testing is recommended to determine more fully
the nature and affiliation of the site.

41 WM 65
Site 41 WM 65, located on a hill slope on the south
side of the river approximately one mile upstream from
41 WM 62, covers about one acre.

The cultural refuse con-

sists mainly of workshop debris and is apparently restricted
to the surface since no buried deposit could be seen in several
eroded areas.

Included in the artifact inventory are an uni-

dentifiable dart point fragment, a miscellaneous knife, two
blade fragments, and a unifacially-chipped stone implement.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 66
Scattered occupational material was found on an old
wagon road along a high, south bank of the river about 0.2
of a mile downstream from 41 WM 65.

This area, which at the

time of survey was covered with dense vegetation, appeared
to lack any significant concentrations of refuse.

An arrow

22

point fragment, a dart point fragment, and a blade fragment
were collected from the

road~

No further work is recommended.

41 WM 67
This small burned rock midden, discovered at the head
of a canyon east of 41 WM 66, is on a shelf of the canyon rim
where several large springs outcrop.

Since much of the midden

has been leveled by the construction of a home and swimming
pool, its exact dimensions could.not be accurately determined.
Only one artifact, an end scraper, was collected.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 68
Another burned rock midden was encountered on a sloping
north bank of the river almost a mile upstream from 41 WM 62.
The midden proper has a diameter of approximately 50.0 feet
and a height of two feet, while additional cultural material
is scattered over about half of a acre surrounding the midden.
In the artifact collection from the site are a Pedernales
dart point, three blade fragments, and two heavy bifacial
implements.
Limited testing is recommended.

23

41 WM 69
Lying in an old cultivated field, this small burned rock
midden is located about 0.1 of a mile northwest of 41 WM 68
and on the same terrace.

Plowing has reduced the midden to

nothing more than a surface accumulation which yielded an
unidentified dart point and an end scraper.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 70
Located approximately a mile northwest of 41 WM 68 on a
hillside just north of the river, this site gives evidence of
surface accumulation only.

The eroded surface yielded a

Pedernales and an unidentifiable dart point, two subrectangular-basedknives, two ovoid knives, a miscellaneous concavebased knife, six blade fragments, and a mano.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 71
The only definite ceramic site found in the North Fork
Reservoir area is 41 WM 71.

It i.s located about three miles

east of Highway 183, in an alluvial accumulation on the north
side of the North Fork, at the confluence of a spring-fed,
creek and the river.

Most of it is presently being cultivated,

but a small wooded section at the eastern end of the field
promises to yield an undisturbed deposit.

Since the site

24

covers about an acre and appears to be prolific, a large
collection of artifacts was made.

Among these are 21 pot-

sherds of which 16 are plain (Fig. 12, G, H), one is incised
(Fig. 12, I), two are brushed (Fig. 12, J, K), one is possibly
painted, and one is a. handle fragment (Fig. 12, F).
Projectile points collected include one specimen each
of dart point types Ensor and Fairland (Fig. 7, C), four
Perdiz (Fig. 9, E, F), four Cliffton (Fig. 9, D), a Young
(Fig. 9, J), and five unidentifiable arrow points.

Knives

are represented by three Cleburne type, an ovoid-shaped
specimen, and 12 blade fragments.

Other artifacts include

16 end scrapers, three side scrapers, five miscellaneous
unifacially-chipped implements, six utilized flakes, five
burins, a gouge, and a chopper.
Extensive excavation is recommended, particularly since
41 WM 71 may yield a good sample of local pottery types.

41 WM 72
This site, discovered just:east and across a spring-fed
creek from 41 WM 71, is buried in alluvial silts on the
north side of the river.

Never having been cultivated, it

shows a thin cultural zone exposed by erosion.

The remain-

ing portions of the site are undisturbed and covered with
grass.

An unidentifiable dart point fragment and an end

scraper were the only artifacts collected.

25

No further work is recommended.

41 WM 73
At the base of a low limestone bluff about 0.2 of a
mile east of 41 WM 72 and across another small creek is an
undisturbed burned rock midden about 50.0 feet in diameter
and some four feet high.

A Castroville dart point, an un-

classified dart point, an end scraper, a side scraper, and
a burin were collected.
Since the midden is undisturbed and may yield a good
cultural sequence, test excavations are recommended.

41 WM 74
Consisting of three burned rock middens, this site lies
hear the community of Rockhouse, approximately one air mile
east of the Highway 183 bridge which crosses the North Fork
River.

It is situated on a high alluvial terrace just west

of the confluence of the river and a small creek.

The largest

midden (Fig. 3, A) is about six feet high and 100.0 feet in
diameter.

The entire site covers about one and a half acres,

most of which is under cultivation.

Artifacts collected in-

clude a Pedernales point, two unidentifiable dart point fragments, and two manes.
Due tofue size and apparent depth of the middens, extensive excavation is recommended.

26

41 WM 75
At the east end of the same cultivated field and near
41 WM 74 is a small site which covers less than half of an
acre.

It is exposed on a ridge slope overlooking the creek .

and the river.
house cemetery.

Part of the site extends into the old RockA Darl point, a blade fragment, and a thick

bifacial implement are the only artifacts collected.
No further work is deemed necessary.

41 WM 76
This insignificant site is exposed in a cultivated field
immediately east of Highway 183 and south of the river.

Thin-

ly scattered cultural debris was observed over an area of
less than half an acre, and no artifacts were collected.
The site does not warrant further investigation.

41 WM 77
This large, but apparently shallow,.site is located on
a hilltop just south of 41 WM 76, and covers more than five
acres.

Several large and small burned rock concentrations

are visible along the north side of the hill, possibly representing small, single component occupationso

The large

artifact collection includes a Pedernales dart point, an
Ellis dart point (Fig. 6, H}, a Darl dart point (Fig. 6, G),
a Nolan dart point, a Lange dart point (Fig. 7, D), a Morrill

27

dart point, two unidentifiable dart point fragments, an ovoid
knife, a subrectangular-based knife, a miscellaneous knife, an
end scraper, a drill, two burins, a burin spall, and six blade
fragments.
Since this site is just above the flood pool elevation,
no further work is recommended.

41 WM 78
This large surface site, covering about 3.0 acres, is
located on a south terrace of the river about half a mile
southwest of 41 WM 71.

It hps long been in cultivation,

with the result that erosion has largely destroyed any depth
the deposit may have had.

Artifacts collected include a

Scallorn arrow point, two Pedernales, a Castroville, and two
Darl (Fig. 6, F) dart points, two subrectangular-based knives,
a miscellaneous knife, five blade fragments, and a burin.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 79
Another surface site was found about 0.2 of a mile east
of 41 WM 78, on a hillside between two creeks.

This site,

about half an acre in extent, consists mainly of workshop
debris, although a few artifacts were collected.

They include

a Pedernales dart point, an unidentifiable dart point, a
knife, two blade fragments, a thick bifacial implement, and
a burin.

28

Since all materials are apparently restricted to the surf ace, no further work is recommended.

41 WM 80
Only a trace of prehistoric material was found at this
small, insignificant site which is located about 0.3 of a
mile southeast of 41 WM 59, on the south side of the river.
There is clear evidence of a fairly recent dwelling on the
sitee

One Yarbrough dart point (Fig. 8, H) was collected.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 81
This burned rock midden, found about 0.2 of a mile
northwest of 41 WM 50 and in the same field, is situated on
a limestone hill slope, just above the river.

so.a

feet in diameter and some three feet high.

It is about
An Edgewood

dart point, an unidentifiable dart point fragment, an ovoid
knife, and a blade fragment were collected from the surface.
Since the midden has considerable depth, limited testing
is recommended.

41 WM 82
Overlooking the river immediately to the south, this site
is situated on a high bluff west of 41 WM 81.

The ground sur-

face consists of limestone outcroppings and small patches of
soil resting on the limestone.

The cultural refuse is mainly

29

restricted to these patches of soil, clearly indicating that
much of the midden concentration has long since eroded away.
Artifacts collected include five Pedernales, a Bulverde, a
Yarbrough (Fig. 8, I), and three unidentifiable dart points,
an ovoid knife, seven blade fragments, and one thick bifacial
implement.
No further work is recommended for this site.

41 WM 83
Site 41 WM 83, a small burned rock midden south of 41 WM 50
and across the river in a large cultivated field, is situated
at the base of a limestone bluff.

The midden is about 25

feet in diameter and approximately a foot high.

Artifacts

collected from the surface include a graver, two blade fragments, and three unifacially-chipped implements.
Since the midden concentration has little depth, no
further work is recommended.

41 WM 84
Site 41 WM 84 is a small surface site located just southeast of 41 WM 83.

Midden refuse covers less than half an

acre, all of which is presently under cultivation.

The only

artifacts collected by the survey party were a gouge, a side
scraper, and a heavy bifacially-chipped

implement~

No additional investigations are recommended.

30

41 WM 85
This burned rock midden is located about 0.1 of a mile
west of 41 WM 68 and on the same terrace.

It is about 60

feet in diameter and two feet in maximum height.
been no noticeable disturbance to the midden.

There has

Artifacts col-

lected from the surface include an end scraper, a side scraper,
a"unifacially-chipped implement, a blade fragment, and a
chopper.
Limited testing is recommended since the midden seems to
be intact and to have considerable depth.

41 WM 86
Site 41 WM 86, a burned rock midden on the south side of
the river, is situated on a hill slope about 0.2 of a mile
northwest of 41 WM 65.

Because of the heavy vegetation cover,

the exact height of the midden could not be determined, but
the diameter appeared to be at least 100.0 feet.

Cultural

debris extended over an area of slightly more than half an
acre.

Artifacts collected include a Pedernales dart point

(Fig. 8, D) an unclassified dart point, a concave-based knife,
an end scraper, a side scraper, a burin, and eight thick bifacial implements.
Since more promising site are available for investigation,
no further work is recommended.

31

41 WM 87
This site is situated on the eastern end of a south
terrace, half a mile south of 41 WM 70.

The terrace has

been cultivated, but at the time of the .survey vegetation
covered the site and prevented close inspection.

However,

surface material was noted over a fairly large area--about
three acres--and the main concentration appears to be along
a ridge of the terrace parallelling the river.

Four end

scrapers, an ovoid knife, and a utilized flake were collected.
Since end scrapers are numerous, the site may have NeoAmerican affiliation.

Test excavations are recommended.

41 WM 88
Site 41 WM 88, a burned rock midden, is located at the
base of a limestone hill, about 0.2 of a mile southwest of
41 WM 87.

It is approximately 35.0 feet in diameter and

rises approximately two to three feet above the natural
ground surface.

No artifacts were collected by the survey

party since vegetation was fairly thick, making surface inspection difficult.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 89
This small surface site lies about 0.2 of a mile southeast of 41 WM 88, on a sloping terrace of a tributary creek.

32

Refuse was observed scattered over about half an acre, and a
subrectangular-based knife, two thick bifacial implements, a
burin, and two blade fragments were collected from the surface.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 115
A short distance northeast of 41 WM 89, and across the
small creek, is Site 41 WM 115.

It lies buried in an alluvial

deposit and appears to cover about 2.0 acres, although at the
time the site was visited the extent and nature of the deposit could not be fully determined because of a dense grass
cover.

The few artifacts collected included a Castroville

dart point, an unidentifiable dart point fragment, a burin,
a blade fragment, t-wo thick bifacial implements, and a utilized flake.
Site 41 WM 115 is recommended for limited testing.

South Fork Reservoir

Almost half of the 30 sites located in this reservoir
are burned rock middens.

Of the total number of sites re-

corded, 17 are recommended for further investigation.

41 WM 28
Approximately a mile and a half east of Highway 183 are
two burned rock middens in a plowed field on a southern

33

terrace of the river.

A small sample of artifacts--including

a Granbury arrow point, an unidentifiable dart point fragment,
three blade fragments, two end scrapers, and a utilized flake-was collected.
No testing is recommended.

41 WM 42
Buried two to three feet below the surface of an alluvial
deposit, this site consists of a layer of burned rock and other
cultural debris exposed in the south bank of the river just
south of 41 WM 44.

No artifacts were collected.

Testing is recommended to determine the nature of the
site.

41 WM 43
This site, a burned rock midden, was discovered south
of the river, on a rocky knoll in the southwest corner of
a plowed field west of 41 WM 42.

It has. been slightly dis-

turbed by plowing and by a private ranch road which crosses
the western portion of the site.

Artifacts collected in-

clude a Scallorn eddy arrow point and an unidentifiable arrow
point fragment, a Williams dart point, a Nolan dart point,
four unidentifiable dart points, an end scraper, a side
scraper, a gouge, a spokeshave, a drill (Fig. 9, K), a burin,
three ovoid knives, a utilized flake, six blade fragments,

FIGURE 4

·-

FIGURE 4.

MAP OF THE SOUTH FORK RESERVOIR SHOWING THE
LOCATION OF ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES

.)

~--~~~~~~--129r

1965

..__

122211

State

@

I

0

I

I

Miles

Farm or Ranch Road

Highway

U.S. Highway

§

I

2

EiJ

°'

I

3

Reservoir

Site
Area

Archeological

VMB

GEORGETOWN~

SOUTH FORK RESERVOIR

.46

-

34

and three thick bifacials.
Limited excavations are recommended.

41 WM 44

Located on a rise in a plowed field north of the river,
this small midden has been scattered along the flood plain by
high waters and plowing, leaving little, if any, undisturbed
deposit.

All the projectile points collected were dart points:

15 Pedernales, four unidentified expanding stem typEFt a Nolan,
a Travis, a Marshall, a Williams, and a possible Paleo-Indian
point (Fig. 9, A).
drills, two

Other specimens collected include three

unifacially-ch~pped

flake, 17 blade

stone implements, a utilized

fragments, nine thick bifacials, and a

hammerstone.
Since the site is largely destroyed, no further work is
recommended.

41 WM 45
In a field about three miles west of Georgetown, and
south of the river, is a large burned rock midden.

Additional

occupational material is scattered through a field previously
plowed but not presently under cultivation.

Although numerous

artifacts have been collected by the landowner, the survey
party was able to obtain a fair sample.

Dart point types in-

cluded a Montell (Fig. 7, L), two Lange (Fig. 7, E), an Ensor,

35

a Castroville, and three unidentifiable fragments.

Other bi-

facially worked implements are represented by two triangular
knives (Fig. 10, D), a rectangular base knife, 13 blade fragments, and four thick bifacials.

A side scraper, two scraper-

gravers (Fig. 11, F), a miscellaneous unifacially-chipped
implement, three burins, a mano (Fig. 11, G), and a quartz
crystal also were collected.
Limited excavations are recommended for this site before
actual construction begins since it is located approximately
where the dam is to be anchored.

41 WM 90
A shallow burned rock midden was observed in a cultivated
field on a high river terrace approximately three miles east
of Highway 183.

No noticeable rise could be seen and appar-

ently there is no depth to the deposit.

An unidentifiable

dart point fragment, a triangular knife, and two blade fragments were collected.
Because of the shallow nature of the site, no testing
is recommended.

41 WM 91
A short distance downstream from 41 WM 90, but on the
opposite (north) side of the South Fork River, scattered
burned rock and flint flakes were found over about an acre

36

of a plowed field.

Although the character of the fill is un-

known, its depth appears to be quite shallow.

A concentration

of burned rock was observed, but cultivation has destroyed
the majority of the site.

No artifacts were collected.

No work is recommended for this site.

41 WM 92
Two burned rock middens, separated from one another by
a small creek, were located on the south side of the river
approximately 200 yards south of 41 WM 91 and just east of
41 WM 90.

That portion east of the creek (designated Area A)

consists of a small burned rock midden 35.0 to 40.0 feet in
diameter, as well as scattered midden materials on the terrace between the creek and a limestone bluff to the east.
Area B, across the creek and west of Area A,has a larger
midden surrounded by additional occupational refuse on the
creek terrace.
one acre.

Together, these middens cover approximately

The fill, which exceeds four feet in depth, is

quite ashy and contains a large amount of cultural debris.
Artifacts collected include an Ensor dart point, an unidentifiable dart point fragment, an end scraper, a subrectangular knife, an ovoid knife, seven blade fragments, two thick
bifacials, a utilized flake, a burin, and a hammerstone.
Although the site is being excavated by persons unknown,
limited investigations are recommended.

37

41 WM 93
This small burned rock midden is on the north side of
the river, just northeast of 41 WM 44.

It lies at the edge

of a grass and cedar-covered terrace and is disturbed only
by a small! erosional gully.

OccupationaJ_ debris covers

about a quarter of an acre, and indications are that the
cultural-bearing deposit is very shallow.

A blade frag-

ment and a thick bifacial were the only artifacts collected.
Due to the shallowness of the midden deposit, no· testing
is recommended.

41 WM 94
Situated on the slope of a hill immediately above the
flood plain on the south side of the river, this large burned
rock midden is approximately 200 yards south of 41 WM 42.
Just east of the occupation area a small creek meanders down
to the river.

The midden proper is approximately four feet

high and 100 to 105 feet in diameter; associated occupational
materials cover about an acre.

A Pedernales dart point and

a thick bifacial were collected.
The site is undisturbed and extensive excavations are
recommended.

38

41 WM 95
This site, located approximately 100 yards northeast of

41 WM 94, is exposed in the east bank of a small creek.

Here

occupational materials were observed in the cut bank of the
creek and on a terrace between the creek and a steep bluff to
the east.

The site covers about half an acre, is undisturbed,
'

and reaches an estimated three feet in depth.

Artifacts col-

lected include a Pedernales dart point, a side scraper, a
burin, and a thick bifacial.
Limited excavations are recommended.

41 WM 96
South of the river and directly across a small gully
from 41 WM 45, the field party discovered this alluvial
terrace site.

Cultural residue was thickly scattered over

about an acre and appeared to have considerable depth.

The

area was under cultivation, but seemed relatively undisturbed.
Artifacts collected from the surface include 27 dart points-three Bulverde, four Marcos (Fig. 7, G, H), six Fairland,
seven Ensor (Fig. 6, K), two Castroville, four unidentifiable
expanding stem specimens (Fig. 8, K), and an

unidentifia~le

dart point fragment1-two triangular knives, two rectangularbased knives, and an ovoid knife, a drill, three end scrapers,
two burins, six blade fragments, three thick bifacials, two
quartz crystals.

39

Since this site appears to be quite rich, to have considerable depth, and will be damaged by dam construction, extensive excavation as soon as possible is strongly recommended.

41 WM 97
Located between two unnamed creeks, this site is atop a
small, grassy knoll on the highest terrace north of the river.
It consists of cultural detritus in an area of approximately
a quarter of an acre.

Artifacts collected are a Darl dart

point, two side scrapers, a utilized flake, and a burin.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 98
On the same alluvial terrace and approximately 200 yards
north of 41 WM 97 is a surface site.

Midden material was

observed scattered over about an acre of the highest portion
of the deposit, at the edge of a hill slope.

An Ensor dart

point, a blade fragment, and a calcite crystal were collected.
As all indications point to a light occupation, no further
work is necessary.

41 WM 99
This site consists of scattered midden refuse observed
over about an acre of a hillside overlooking the flood plain
on the north side of the river.

The small artifact sample

40

collected includes a rectangular-based knife, a burin, and
two blade fragments.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 100
Midden refuse marking this site is scattered over two
acres of a field on the highest
side of the river.

alluv~al

terrace on the north

The main concentration, however, appears

to be on a knoll in the middle of this area.

The field has

been cultivated and is undergoing moderate erosion.

Dart

points collected are a Pedernales, two Bulverde (Fig. 6, A),
a Castroville, an undefined corner-notched type, and an unidentifiable fragment.

The remaining specimens include an

arrow point fragment, a rectangular-based knife, four blade
fragments, a small biface, a thick biface, an end scraper,
and a utilized flake.
Testing is recommended to further determine more fully
the nature of this site.

41 WM 101
Approximately a quarter of a mile east of 41 WM 98 and
on the same alluvial terrace scattered cultural rraterials
were observed.

The heaviest concentration appears to be in

the west end of a plowed field, although refuse was noted to
extend over about three acres.

The dart points recovered

41

include nine Pedernales, three Bulverde (Fig. 6, B), a Lange,
a Nolan, a Travis, an untyped specimen, and four unidentifiable
fragments.

Additional artifacts collected are an ovoid knife,

two end scrapers, two side scrapers, five blade fragments, and
two thick bifacials.
Limited testing is recommended to determine the nature
and depth of the fill.

41 WM 102
This small burned rock midden lies on the north side of
the river, on a high bluff which was formed by a small creek
cutting into a steep hill slope.

Cultural refuse covers an

area of approximately 0.1 of an acre and the midden proper
has an estimated maximum depth of three feet.

Recent col-

lections obviously have been made at the site, as there is a
small pothole in the center of the midden.

The field party

recovered only a burin, a triangular knife fragment, and a
thick bifacial.
Limited testing is recommended to determine the nature
of the site.

41 WM 103
Approximately 100 yards southwest of 41 WM 102, on the
flood plain north of the river, is a hogback ridge which
contains scattered flint flakes and burned rocks.

Once

42

cultivated, the area is now covered with vegetation and it is
difficult to determine the exact area of occupation.

Arti-

facts were scarce, and the party collected only a side scraper,
an ovoid knife, and a unifacially-chipped stone fragment.
Since there is a possibility that some undisturbed occupational refuse remains, testing is recommended.

41 WM 104
In a plowed field two and a half miles east of the Highway 183 bridge and 300 yards north of the river, scattered
occupational debris was noted on the upper portions of a
terrace, just below a low hill.

The area of occupation covers

between one and two acres and apparently has no depth.

While

collecting from the site, it was noted that the northern and
eastern portions produced Nee-American artifacts, while the
southwestern portion produced Archaic materials.

Artifacts

found include two Perdiz arrow points, a Granbury arrow point,
four arrow point fragments, three plain potsherds, nine end
scrapers (Fig. 11, C), a Bulverde, Darl, and three Tortugas
dart points, a

rectangular~based

knife, five blade fragments,

two thick bifacials, three side scrapers, four miscellaneous
unifacials, a burin, 14 utilized flakes, a metate fragment,
and a perforated 1841

u.

So dime (Fig. 12, D).

Because of the surface nature of this site, no testing
is recommendedo

43

41 WM 105
On the same side of the river and 0.8 of a mile west of
41 WM 104, a burned rock accumulation and other cultural debris was encountered on an alluvial deposit east of a small
creek.

About half of the area covered by the site is being

cultivated, but the remainder is undisturbed.

Specimens col-

lected from the surface include 10 dart points--a Pedernales,
a Bulverde, two Ensor, a Darl, a Figueroa, a Tortugas, and
three unidentifiable--, a gouge, a spokeshave, a utilized
flake, nine blade fragments, and two thick bifacials.
Limited excavations are recommended to determine the
exact nature of the site.

41 WM 106
This large burned rock midden is just upstream from
41 WM 104, on a south terrace of the river between two small
gullies which cut through the terrace.

The midden lies on

the east bank of the western gully, covers approximately 0.2
of an acre, and has a maximum depth of six feet.

The site

has been dug into, but much undisturbed midden remains.

No

artifacts were collected by the field party.
Testing is recommended to determine the cultural affiliations of the site.

44

41 WM 107
On the same side of the river and just east of 41 WM 106
is another large burned rock midden.

This site is about 50

yards from the river at the west end of a plowed field.

Addi-

tional occupational refuse extends into a brush thicket west
of the main midden area, which covers approximately one acre
and is perhaps as much as five feet deep.

A Marshall dart

point, an ovoid knife, and a blade fragment were the only
artifacts collected.
Although the site is badly potted, limited excavations
are recommended for the undisturbed area.

41 WM 108
Occupational material extending over at least an acre
was observed approximately a mile and a half downstream
from the Highway 183 bridge, in a field on a north terrace
of the river.

Approximately fifty per cent of this site,

including a small burned rock midden, is being cultivated:
the remainder is undisturbed.

Dart points recovered from

the surface include five Pedernales (Fig. 8, E), a Lange, a
Marcos, an Ensor, an undefined type, and two unidentifiable
fragments.

A drill, two plain potsherds, an end scraper, a

triangular knife, a rectangular knife, a side scraper, three
miscellaneous unifacial fragments, a small biface, a burin,
14 blade fragments, a thick bifacial, and a mano were also
collected.

45

Extensive testing is reconunended.
41 WM 109
Approximately a quarter of a mile northwest of 41 WM 91,
on the north side of the river, are three small burned rock
middens situated on a high ridge overlooking the flood plain.
The middens are shallow and there is a small pothole in the
center of each.

A drill (Fig. 9, L) is the only artifact

collectedo
Limited excavations are reconunended for these middens.
41 WM 110
This large burned rock midden on the south side of the
river is just across from 41 WM 100.

It is situated on a

natural knoll at the base of a hill 75 yards south of the
river.

Cultural material covers approximately an acre and

appears to be three feet or more in depth.

Although the site

has been potted and partially cultivated, a large portion
remains relatively undisturbed.

Artifacts collected include

a Bulverde, a Lange, a Castroville, an unidentifiable dart
point fragment, and a blade fragment.
Limited excavation is reconunended.
41 WM 111
In a cultivated field on a south terrace of the river,
approximately half a mile from the Highway 183 bridge, are two

46

burned rock middens, each of which is estimated to be one and
a half to two feet thick.

Cultural refuse is scattered over

at least an acre, but no artifacts were collected.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 112
This small midden area is
a mile upstream from 41 WM 43.

situat~d

in a field almost

It apparently represents light

occupation, as cultural refuse was found thinly distributed
over an area less than a quarter of an acre.

Artifacts col-

lected include a spokeshave, a utilized flake, and two thick
bifacials.
No further investigation is recommended.

41 WM 113
A short distance west of 41 WM 112 and on the same side
(south) of the river a very concentrated midden is situated
on a small terrace between two bluffs.

·The total areal ex-

tent of occupation is approximately an acre, while the maximum
depth, as shown by a gully that cuts through the middle, is
three to four feet.

Two utilized flakes, two blade fragments,

and two thick bifacials are the only artifacts collected.
Limited excavations are recommended.

47

41 WM 114
This terrace site is about half a mile west of 41 WM 113
r

and on the same side of the river.

Occupational debris was

observed over much of the terrace, but was concentrated only
at the extreme east end of a plowed field where the terrace
begins its slope up to the highlandso

Artifacts collected
'

include a Montell dart point, an end scraper, a rectangularbased knife, and two utilized flakes.
Because of the lack of depth, no further work is
recommendedo

Laneport Reservoir

Of the 22 sites discovered in this reservoir, 10 are
recommended for further

investigation~

While both burned

rock middens and alluvial terrace sites are common in the
North Fork and South Fork reservoirs, only the latter type
of site can be said to be typical of the. Laneport areao

41 WM 117
This site is located about four miles northeast of
Circleville and about four miles southeast of Granger.

Here

cultural residue was found along the north side of the river,
on a high terrace that parallels the flood plaino

Much of

the site is under cultivation and, although it covers about
five acres, the occupation refuse did not appear to have any

48

depth.

Artifacts collected by the survey party include a

Lange, Bulverde, Castroville, Ensor, and possible PaleoIndian dart point (Fig. 9, B), two triangular and two ovoid
knives, a gouge, and several fragments of miscellaneous unifacial and bifacial implements.
Since the cultural material has no apparent depth, no
further work is recommended.

41 WM 118
This site was found on a lower terrace of the river
almost half a mile south of 41 WM 117.

The occupational

refuse was first observed at the east end of a cultivated
field, but was found to extend beyond the limits of the field,
into undisturbed bottom land (covered with pecan trees) where
alluvial silts protected the midden deposits.

The artifact

assemblage consists of two Scallorn arrow points (Fig. 9,
G, H), a Perdiz arrow point, two triangular knives, three
side scrapers, and two hammerstones (Fig. 11, I), indicating
only Nee-American components are present.
Since some of the deposit lies undisturbed and this is
one of the few Neo-American sites located in the reservoir,
test excavations are recommended.

FIGURE 5

FIGURE 5.

MAP OF LANE PORT RESERVOIR SHOWING THE LOCATION
OF ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES

..

~-:;~

'."~····

1965

I

0

Scale

I

I

State

@

in

Miles

I

2

Site
Area
Highway

Reservoir

Archeological

D

"'

I

3

VMS

LANEPORT RESERVOIR

N

49

41 WM 119
Site 41 WM 119 lies a short distance east of Highway 95,
on the north side of the rivero

Thinly scattered occupational

debris was found over about half an acre of a cultivated field
on the slope of a high terraceo

The survey party failed to

find any artifacts, but the landowner had several projectile
points including a Castroville and a Pedernales he had recovered from the siteo
No additional investigations are recomrnendedo

41 WM 120
Site 41 WM 120, located approximately two and a half
miles southeast of Granger, is on a high southern terrace of
Willis Creeko

A concentration of cultural material was ob-

served on the eroded north side of the site, but the over-all
area of midden debris is less than half an acreo

The site is

considerably disturbed by cultivation, erosion, and extreme
dry weather cracking of the soilo

A Darl dart point and

Ensor dart point, a graver, two thick bifacial implements,
a chopper, and a blade fragment were collectedo
Since the site is badly disturbed, no further work is
recomrnendedo

50

41 WM 121

--

This large surface site, covering approximately three
acres, is about a mile south-southwest of Friendship and on
the north side of Willis Creek.

The entire area of occupa-

tion is being cultivated and apparently all of the cultural
refuse is restricted to the surface.

A triangular knife, an

ovoid knife, a blade fragment, two thick bifacial implements,
and two utilized flakes were collected from the surface.
Since the site has no · apparent depth and all signs of
occupancy are thinly scattered over a large area, no further
work is recommended.

41 WM 122

This promising site was found on a relatively low, flat
terrace between Willis Creek and the San Gabriel River.

It

is approximately a mile and a half southeast of Friendship.
In recent years, flood waters from the two streams have cut
a gully through this terrace exposing a rich, buried occupation zone.

Bill Brookshire, the landowner, reported that

many projectile points have been found in this erosional cut-especially after heavy rains.

Although the survey party found

only a thick bifacial implement and three utilized flakes,
it is apparent that a prolific cultural zone is present.
Since the site is largely undisturbed and may yield a
stratified cultural deposit, extensive excavation is recommendedo

51

41 WM 123
This site lies across Willis Creek from 41 WM 122 and
consists of cultural refuse thinly scattered over a hillside.
The area of occupation is about an acre, all of which is
under cultivation at the present time.

An unidentified ex-

panding stem dart point (Fig. 8, J), a discoidial scraper,
and a thick bifacial implement were collected.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 124
Located on the north side of the San Gabriel River,
about two and a half miles northeast of Circleville, is
another thinly scattered hillside midden--41 WM 124.

Al-

though the landowner, Mr. Fox, reported that many projectile
points had been recovered from the site, the survey party
found that the midden was less than one foot in depth and
badly disturbed by erosion and cultivationo

Artifacts

collected from the surface are two unidentified dart points
and an end scraper.
Since the cultural refuse is shallow and the site has
been disturbed, no further work is recommended.

41 WM 125
This concentrated midden is located approximately four
miles northeast of Circleville and on the south side of the

52
river.

Here occupational refuse was observed on a hill west

of a large spring and onto the adjacent flood plain.

On the

hilltop, the midden soil is less eroded, is quite ashy, and
has a depth of at least two feet as evidenced by a deep armadillo burrow.

Included in the artifacts found on the surface

are a triangular knife, a burin, two end scrapers, two side
scrapers, nine thick bifacial implements, two choppers (Fig.
12, B), five manos, and a hammerstone.
Since the site is prolific and may yield a good sample
of cultural material, limited testing is recommended.

41 WM 126
Located on the east side of the above-mentioned spring
and just northeast of 41 WM 125, this small undisturbed site
lies atop a low eminence bordered on the west by the creek
and on the north by the San Gabriel flood plain.

Although

the site is covered with grass and only limited surface inspection could be made, the deposits appear to contain
abundant evidence of occupation.

Only an ovoid knife was

collected.
Since the site may yield a rich, undisturbed cultural
bearing deposit, limited testing is recommended.

53

41 WM 127
This site, consisting of a small area of scattered cultural debris on the south side of the river, is located about
four and a half miles north-northeast of Circleville and about two miles northeast of waterloo.

The cultural refuse

is restricted to a slight rise paralleling a small slough
which cuts through the flood plain.

Although the entire rise

is being cultivated, no artifacts were collectedo
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 128
This site is a short distance southwest of 41 WM 127
and on the west side of the above-noted slough.

Cultural

detritus was found in the northeast corner of a cultivated
field and extended eastward into a pasture.

Although the

site does not cover more than half an acre, the deposits
appear to be relatively prolific and may have some depth.
Included in the artifact inventory are a plain potsherd, two
gouges, an end scraper, two side scrapers, and two thick
bifacial implements.
Since this is the only ceramic site located in Laneport
Reservoir, testing is recommendedo
.•

54

41 WM 129

Located on the south side of the river, this large surface site lies just west of the proposed dam site.

Evidence

of occupation was found on a low hill just above the flood
plain and immediately south of a large slough.

The midden ma-

terial is scattered over an area of some two to three acres
on the north side of the hill.

One Fairland dart point, an

unidentified expanding stem dart point, a miscellaneous knife,
three burins, a discoidal scraper, and a thick bifacial implement were collected by the survey party.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 130
Site 41 WM 130, encountered on the south side of the
river almost three miles northeast of Waterloo, lies on what
appear to be a second terrace of the river.

The refuse is

exposed over about half an acre of a cultivated field but
concentrated only along the terrace ridge paralleling the
rivero

Artifacts collected from the surface include an

Edgewood dart point (Fig. 6, I), a Darl dart point (Figo 6,
E), an unidentifiable dart point fragment, two end scrapers,
a blade fragment, and a utilized flake.
Since the site may yield stratified cultural remains,
limited testing is recommendedo

55

41 WM 131
A small area showing evidence of prehistoric occupancy,

41 WM 131, was found just east of 41 WM 130, between two
small creeks.

The refuse deposit lies at the north end of a

cultivated field and appears to have been exposed only recently.
Collected from the surf ace are two blade fragments and a thick
bifacial implement.
Limited testing is recommended since it appears that
much of the midden lies undisturbed and may yield a stratified
deposit.

41 WM 132
This rich midden is situated on a high bluff which overlooks the river to the morth and which lies about three miles
northeast of Circleville.

Cultivation and erosion have evi-

dently diminished the height of the middens to some extent,
although the exact depth of the deposits are unknown.

Among

artifacts collected from the surface are two Scallorn arrow
points {Fig. 9, I), a Darl, an Ensor, and Travis, and an
unidentifiable dart point, two miscellaneous knives, three
thick bifacial implements, a hammerstone, and two manos {Fig.

11, H).
Limited testing is recommended to determine the nature
of the undisturbed portions of the site.

56

41 WM 133
This large terrace site is located at a bend in the river
approximately a half mile southwest of 41 WM 1240

A long

{100 feet) exposure in the north bank of the river reveals
thick cultural-bearing deposits as much as six feet below
the surface.

Although the site is being disturbed considerably

by amateur collectors, it is unlikely that this activity will
destroy the site, expecially in view of its apparent size and
deptho

Specimens collected by the survey are a Granbury

{Figo 9, C), a Cliffton, and a Young arrow point, an unidentified rectangular stem dart point, a stemmed, 12 triangular,
and six ovoid knives, 22 blade fragments, three thick bifacial implements, a chopper, five utilized flakes, a mano,
and a shell pendanto
Since the site is large and deep, extensive excavation
is recommendedo

41 WM 134
This large surface site is atop a low hill on the south
side of Willis Creek, two miles southwest of Friendshipo
Occupational refuse was discovered scattered over about two
acres of the hill but mainly concentrated on the north sideo
A cross section of the deposits, revealed by a small gravel
pit, indicated that the cultural-bearing soils do not exceed

57

half a foot in depth.

Collected from the surface were two

triangular knives, an ovoid knife, and a blade fragment.
No additional investigations are recommended.

41 WM 135
Located about 0.2 of a mile east of 41 WM 134, this
half-acre site is exposed in a cultivated field south of
Willis Creek.

A gravel excavation on the terrace has disbut~

turbed much of the western portion of the site,

a small

section between this disturbed area and the cultivated field
promises to yield a good undisturbed deposit.

Artifacts col-

lected from the surface include a triangular knife, a side
scraper, a thick bifacial implement, and a mano.
Limited testing is recommended.

41 WM 136
This site is located just south of 41 WM 135 in the
same cultivated field.

The cultural refuse was found to

cover an area of about an acre, but much of the material
has undoubtedly been scattered by terracing and plowing.
The survey party was able to collect an Ensor dart point, a
large drill, two triangular knives, two ovoid knives, and
four thick bifacial implements from the surfaceo
No further work is recommended.

58

41 WM 137
This small site is located about two and a half miles
southeast of Granger on a low, north terrace of Willis Creek.
It consists of light evidence of occupation found at the south
end of a large fieldo

From this area, two utilized flakes

and a small fragment of copper were collected.
No further work is recommended.

41 WM 138
Located on the north side of Willis Creek about a mile
west of 41 WM 137 are three separate occupational areas along
a low terrace of the creeko

All areas are under cultivation

and the cultural deposits seem to be quite thin.

A Darl dart

point was the only artifact collected from the surface.
No further work is recommended.

Non-reservoir Sites

Thirteen sites (11 in the vicinity of the North Fork
Reservoir and two in the neighborhood of the South Fork
Reservoir) recorded by the survey team lay outside the areas
to be inundated and, therefore, were not included in the
above sections or in Tables 2-4.

It is appropriate, however,

that these sites be briefly described.

59
Sites 41 WM 31-32 and 41 WM 35-41 are in or along the
rim of Dobbs Hollow, a small canyon which drains into the
North Fork of the San Gabriel River about
proposed dam site (Fig. 2)o

bne~mile

below the

Since the sites will not be en-

dangered by the reservoir, a detailed description of them is
not necessary.

Suffice it to note that sites 41 WM 31, 41

WM 32, 41 WM 35, 41 WM 38, and 41 WM 41 are burned rock middens;
sites 41 WM 36, 41 WM 37, and 41 WM 39 are rockshelters, and
Site 41 WM 40 is a buried terrace site at the mouth of the
canyon.

The artifacts from the sites (see Table 1) indicate

the presence of both Archaic and Nee-American componentso

41 WM 47
This large burned rock midden site is located in a cultivated field directly across from Dobbs Hollow.

A large

collection of artifacts was made including examples of dart
point types Pedernales, Castroville, Ensor, and Fairland
(Fig. 7, A), end scrapers, ovoid knives, subrectangularbased knives, burins, and manoso

41 WM 48
This site lies on a north terrace of the river about a
quarter of a mile west of 41 WM 470

It consists of two burned

rock middens found at the base of a limestone bluff, in a cultivated field.

Included in the large collection of artifacts

60

from the site are Pedernales, Bulverde, Castroville (Fig. 6,
.::

D), Montell, Ensor (Fig. 6, J), Fairland, Darl, and Marcos
dart points, drills (Fig. 9, M), burins, end scrapers, side
scrapers, a triangular knife (Fig. 10, C), subrectangularbased knives (Fig. 10, F), ovoid knives (Fig. 10, A), thick
bifacial implements, and miscellaneous unifacially and bifacially worked implements.

41 WM 30
Site 41 WM 30, which is several miles below the proposed
South Form dam site (off the map shown in Figure 4), consists
of two rockshelters with adjacent midden area.

No diagnostic

artifacts were collected and the cultural affiliation remains
undetermined.

41 WM 46
Approximately two air miles south of the proposed dam
site lies 41 WM 46 (Fig. 4), a cluster of five or more burned

rock middens.

Dart points collected from the surface include

five Pedernales, four Bulverde, four Nolan (Fig. 8, A, B),
two Travis (Fig. 8, G), a Marshall, and an unidentified expanding stem point (Fig. 8, L).
burins were also recovered.

One stemmed knife and two

61
TABLE 1

Provenience of Artifacts from Dobbs Hollow Sites

r-1

N

!"')

!"')

I.{)
!"')

\0
!"')

!""!"')

co

!"')

O'\
("I')

~

~

~

~

~

~

~

r-1

r-1

r-1

r-1

r-1

r-1

r-1

0

r-1

""'

""

~

...:I

r-1

r-1

0
8

~

"" ""' ""' ""' ""' ""' "" ""' ""'

ti)

~

ARROW POINTS
Scallorn

1

1

2

1

1

2

DART POINTS
Marshall
Montell
Unidentifiable

1

2

Unidentified

1

3

5

3

3

KNIVES
Ovoid
Blade frags.

1
6

2

DRILLS

15

1
1

3

2

26

1

1

GRAVERS

2

2

BURINS
BURINS SPALLS

1

1

1

2

1

1

THICK BIFACES

4

SIDE SCRAPERS

2

UTILIZED
FLAKES

3

4

1

1

2

1

1

17

3

4

5
6

2

30

62

TABLE 1

(continued)

r-1

N

l!)

l.D

I'

CX)

("')

("')

("')

("l'1

("')

("')

~

~

~

~

~

~

r-1

r-1

r-1

r-1

r-1

r-1

0

r-1

°' "" ""

CJ)

~

~

~

...:I

.-I

.-I

r-1

0

("l'1

"" "" "" "" "" "" "" "" ""

GOUGE
2

MISC.
UNIFACIAL

1

TOTALS

I'"

17

1

52

1

4

1

2

3

E-1

1

1

CHOPPERS

~

1

5

4

14

1

3

4

100

FIGURE 6

FIGURE 6.

DART POINTS

A, B,

Bulverde (41 WM 100, and 41 WM 101):

C, D,

Castroville (41 WM 33, and 41 WM 48):

E-G,

Darl (41 WM 130, 41 WM 78, and 41 WM 77):

H,

Ellis (41 WM 77):

I,

Edgewood (41 WM 130):

J, K,

Ensor (41 WM 48, and 41 WM 96).

I

l

c

B

A

I

I

'

I

l

F

E

D

,,

G

I

1

A

,J
0

I

4

K
8

CM

10

I

FIGURE 7

FIGURE 7.
A-C,
D, E,

F,

DART POINTS

Fairland (41 WM 47, 41 WM 52, and 41 WM 71);
Lange (41 WM 77, and 41 WM 45);
Lerma (41 WM 57);

G, H,

Marcos (41WM96);

I, J,

Marshall (41 WM 57, and 41 WM 59);

K, L,

Montell (41 WM 40, and 41 WM 45).

c

8

A

D

I
I

E

F

\

H

G

I

0

I

2

+

CM

"

8

\

L

K

J

._

\

10

I

FIGURE 8

FIGURE 8.
A, B,
C-E,

DART POINTS
Nolan {41 WM 46):
Pedernales (41 WM 51, 41 WM 86, and 41WM108);

F,

Tortugas (41 WM 34);

G,

Travis (41 WM 46);

H, I,
J-L,

Yarbrough (41 WM 80, and 41 WM 82);
Miscellaneous expanding stem (41 WM 123,
41 WM 96, and 41 WM 46).

A

c

B

0

I
I
I

I

I

I
I

E

F

J
()

2

H

G

K
8

4

L

m

I

I
CM

FIGURE 9

FIGURE 9.

A, B,

DART POINTS, ARROW POINTS 1 AND DRILLS

Possible Paleo-Indian dart points
(41 WM 44, and 41WM117);

C,

Granbury (41WM133);

D,

Cliffton (41 WM 71);

E, F,
G-I,
J,

K-M,

Perdiz (41 WM 71);
Scallorn (41WM118, 41WM118, and 41WM132);
Young (41 WM 71);
Drills (41 WM 43, 41WM109, and 41 WM 48).

I

I
I

A

c

B

D

E

~

I

\

•

G

J

H

M

~y

0

2.

I

l

4

CM

6

B

10

I

I

I

FIGURE 10

'

•'

FIGURE lOo

KNIVES

A, B,

Ovoid (41 WM 48, and 41 WM 59):

C, D,

Triangular (41 WM 48, and 41 WM 45):

E, F,

Rectangular-based (41 WM 56, and 41 WM 48):

G,

Stemmed (41 WM 57)

H,

Corner-tanged (41 WM 57) :

I,

Large miscellaneous (41 WM 57).

~

A

c

8

l

'

D

E

F

I
I

G

H

.....
0

8

4

10

I

I

CM

·-

FIGURE 11

FIGURE 11.

THICK BIFACIAL IMPLEMENTS, END SCRAPERS, SIDE
SCRAPER, SCRAPER-GRAVER, MANOS, AND HAMMERSTONE

A, B,

Thick bif acial implements (41 WM 51, and 41 WM 55):

c, D,

End scrapers (41 WM 104, and 41 WM 64):

E,

Side scraper (41 WM 56):

F,

Scraper-graver (41 WM 45);

G, H,

I,

Manos (41 WM 45, and 41 WM 132);
Hammerstone (41WM118).

....

c
A

D

8

E

F

G

H
0

I

8

4

I .

CM

10

I

FIGURE 12

FIGURE 12.

CHOPPERS, STONE PENDANT FRAGMENT, PERFORATED
1841 U. S. DIME, OBSIDIAN FLAKE, POTTERY HANDLE
FRAGMENT, PLAIN POTSHERDS, INCISED POTSHERD, AND
BRUSHED POTSHERDS

A, B,

Choppers (41 WM 38, and 41WM125);

c,

Stone pendant fragment

D,

Perforated 1841 Uo So dime (41WM104);

E,

Obsidian flake (41 WM 56);

F,

Pottery handle fragment (41 WM 71);

G, H,

I,
J, K,

(41 WM 57);

Plain potsherds (41 WM 71);
Incised potsherd (41 WM 71);
Brushed potsherds (41 WM 71).

B

A
,I

•

D

•

F

E

G

..

G

J

H

0

I

4

8

K

10

I

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Archeological sites located and recorded in the preliminary surveys number 96.

Of the three reservoirs proposed for

Williamson County, 44 sites were located in the North Fork
Reservoir (Fig. 2, Table 2), 30 in the south Fork (Fig. 4,
Table 3), and 22 in the Laneport (Fig• 5, Table 4).
additional sites adjacent to, but not
voir areas were also recorded.

included~in,

Thirteen
the reser-

Both Archaic and Nee-American

components are well represented in all three reservoirs, and
although only tentatively identified, it is possible that
the Paleo-Indian and Historic stages are also present at a
few of the sites.
Eight archeological sites are recommended for extensive
excavation: three in the North Fork area, three in the South
Fork, and two in the Laneport area.

Of these, two sites--

41 WM 52 (North Fork) and 41 WM 96 (South Fork)--are in the
proposed dam right-of-ways and should be excavated before
construction begins.

Another 21 sites are recommended for

extensive testing: seven in the North Fork Reservoir, nine
in the South Fork Reservoir, and five in the Laneport Reservoir.

Two of these, 41 WM 45 (South Fork)< and 41 WM 53

(North Fork), should be tested early since they will also be
destroyed by dam construction.

In addition, 17 sites are

64

recommended for limited testing, nine on the North Fork, five
on the South Fork, and three in the area to be affected by
the Laneport Reservoiro

Therefore, in order to salvage a

representative sample of the archeological resources within
the proposed reservoirs, 4o4 excavation units ($99,000.00)
are recommended.
An excavation unit is defined as follows:
1 archeologist, for one year o • o • o • • o • •
1 assistant archeologist, for three months •
1 laboratory assistant, for nine months
••••
1 clerk-typist, for three months • • • • • •
8 laborers, for three months • • o o • • • o • •
Field and travel expenses • • • • •
Transportation • • • • • • • • • • • •
• • •
E~ipment
• • • • . • . . . . • • • • • • •
Supplies and materials •
• • • • • • • • • •
Administrative overhead o • • • • • •
• ••
Miscellaneous and reserve for contingencies
TOTAL

$ 6,400.00
975.00
2,475.00
750.00
5,160.00
1,500.00
700.00
350.00
350000
2,934.78
905.22
$22,500.00

Archeologically-speaking, central Texas is unusual that
more excavations have been carried out in this area than in
any other part of the state: yet the chronological and cultural developments remain vague and poorly defined.

In

addition, a better understanding of the possible cultural
and/or geologic relationship between the different types of
midden accumulations--particularly burned rock middens and
terrace sites containing what now appear to be related
archeological remains--is needed.

The number of promising

sites found in the survey undoubtedly contain irreplaceable

65
information that will aid materially in the reconstruction of
the prehistory of this part of the state.

Therefore, it is

strongly urged that the recommendations set forth above be
carried out before completion of the dams and reservoirs.

66

TABLE 2

Significant Data, North Fork Reservoir

SITE NO,

PROBABLE
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS

RELATIONSHIP
TO RESERVOIR

INVESTIGATION
REQUIRED IN
EXCAVATION UNITS

41 WM 33

Archaic

Below normal
-pool

. 05

41 WM 34

Archaic

Below normal
pool

. 02

41 WM 49

Archaic

In dam construction area

.01

41 WM 50

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 51

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 52

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.40

41 WM 53

Archaic

In dam construction area

. 05

41 WM 54

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 55

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 56

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.10

41 WM 57

Archaic

Below normal
pool

. 05

41 WM 58

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 59

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

67

TABLE 2

SITE NO.

(continued)

PROBABLE
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS

RELATIONSHIP
TO RESERVOIR

INVES'rIGATION
REQUIRED IN
EXCAVATION UNITS

41 WM 60

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 61

Archaic

Below normal
, pool

.10

41 WM 62

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 63

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 64

Unknown

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 65

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

Below normal
pool

None

None

41 WM 66

Archaic,
Neo-American

41 WM 67

Unknown

Below flood
pool

41 WM 68

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 69

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 70

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

Below normal
pool

.40

41 WM 71

Archaic,
Neo-American

41 WM 72

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 73

Archaic

Below normal
pool

. 05

68

TABLE 2

SITE NO.

(continued)

PROBABLE
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS

RELATIONSHIP
TO RESERVOIR

INVESTIGATION
REQUIRED IN
EXCAVATION UNITS

41 WM 74

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.40

41 WM 75

Archaic

Below normal
-pool

None

41 WM 76

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 77

Archaic

Above flood
pool

None

41 WM 78

Archaic,
Nee-American

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 79

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 80

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 81

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 82

Archaic

Below normal
po·ol

None

41 WM 83

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 84

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 85

Unknown

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 86

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

69
TABLE 2

SITE NO.

(continued)

PROBABLE
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS

RELATIONSHIP
TO RESERVOIR

INVESTIGATION
REQUIRED IN
EXCAVATION UNITS

41 WM 87

Unknown

Below normal
pool

.10

41 WM 88

Unknown

Below normal
-pool

None

41 WM 89

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 115

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.01

TOTAL

1.8

70

TABLE 3

Significant Data, South Fork Reservoir

SITE NO.
41 WM 28

41 WM 42

41 WM 43

PROBABLE
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Archaic,
Neo-American
Unknown

Archaic,
Neo-American

RELATIONSHIP
TO RESERVOIR

INVESTIGATION
REQUIRED IN
EXCAVATION UNITS

Below normal
pool

None

Below normal
pool

.01

Below normal
pool

.OS

41 WM 44

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 4S

Archaic

Below normal
pool

. OS

41 WM 90

Archaic ?

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 91

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 92

Archaic

Below normal
po·o1

• OS

41 WM 93

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 94

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.30

41 WM 95

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.OS

41 WM 96

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.30

41 WM 97

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

~

71

TABLE 3

-,

SITE NO.

{continued)

PROBABLE
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS

RELATIONSHIP
TO RESERVOIR

INVESTIGATION
REQUIRED IN
EXCAVATION UNITS

41 WM 98

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 99

Unknown

Below normal
.pool

None

41 WM 100

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 101

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 102

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 103

Unknown

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 104

Archaic, NeoAmerican & Historic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 105

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.05

41 WM 106

Unknown

Below normal
pool

.05

41 WM 107

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 108

Archaic,
Neo-American

Below normal
pool

• 50

41 WM 109

Unknown

Below normal
pool

.05

41 WM 110

Archaic

Below normal
pool

.05

41 WM 111

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

72

TABLE 3

SITE NO.

(continued)

PROBABLE
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS

RELATIONSHIP
TO RESERVOIR

INVESTIGATION
REQUIRED IN
EXCAVATION UNITS

41 WM 112

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 113

Unknown

Below normal
-pool

• 05

41 WM 114

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

TOTAL

1.6

73

TABLE 4

Significant Data. Laneport Reservoir

SITE NO.
41 WM 117

41 WM 118

PROBABLE
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS
Paleo, Archaic,
and Historic
Nee-American

RELATIONSHIP
TO RESERVOIR

INVESTIGATION
REQUIRED IN
EXCAVATION UNITS

Below normal
-pool

None

Below normal
pool

• 05

41 WM 119

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 120

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 121

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 122

Archaic ?

Below normal
pool

.40

41 WM 123

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 124

Archaic

Below normal
po'ol

None

41 WM 125

Unknown

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 126

Unknown

Below normal
pool

.01

41 WM 127

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

Below normal
pool

• 05

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 128

Nee-American

~

41 WM 129

Archaic

74

TABLE 4

-

SITE NO.

(continued)

PROBABLE
CULTURAL AFFILIATIONS

RELATIONSHIP
TO RESERVOIR

INVESTIGATION
R:J::QUIRED IN
EXCAVATION UNITS

41 WM 130

Archaic

Below normal
pool

. 05

41 WM 131

Unknown

Below normal
,pool

.01

41 WM 132

Archaic,
Neo-American

Below normal
pool

. 01

41 WM 133

Archaic,
Neo-American

Below normal
pool

.40

41 WM 134

Unknown

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 135

Unknown

Bel ow normal
pool

. 01

41 WM 136

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 137

Historic ?

Below normal
pool

None

41 WM 138

Archaic

Below normal
pool

None

TOTAL

1.0

REFERENCES CITED

Alexander, Herbert L., Jr.
1963.
The Levi Site: A Paleo-Indian Campsite in Central Texas. American Antiquity, Vol. 28, No. 4,
pp. 510-528.
Blair, Frank W.
1950.
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 112-117.
Campbell, T. N.
1948.
The Merrell Site: Archeological Remains Associated with Alluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society, Vol. 19, pp.
7-35
Castaneda, Carlos E.
1958.
Our Catholic Heritage in Texas, Vol. III.
Boeckmann-Jones Company.
Fenneman, N. M.
1931.
Physiography of Western United States.
Hill.
1938.

Physiography of Eastern United States.
Hill.

Von

McGraw-

McGraw-

Jelks, Edward B.
1962.
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas
Aspect Site in Hill County·, Texas. Archaeology
Series, No. 5. Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962.
Survey and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir on the
Lampasas River, Bell County, Texas. Typed report submitted to the u. s. National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
The University of Texas
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr., Dee Ann Suhm, and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962.
Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The
Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites. Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin, No. 5.
-75-

76

Kelly, Thomas c.
1961.
The Crumley Site: A Stratified Burnt Rock Midden,
Travis County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 31 (for 1960), pp. 239272.
Miller, E.
1952.

o.,

and Edward B. Jelks
Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell County, Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society,
Vol. 23, pp. 168-217.

Schuetz, Mardith K.
1957.
A Report on Williamson County Mound Material.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society.
Vol. 28, pp. 135-168.
Shafer, Harry J.
1963.
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A
Stratified Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 34, pp. 57-81.
Shafer, Harry J., Dee Ann Suhm, and J. Dan Scurlock
1964.
An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Belton Reservoir, Bell and
Coryell Counties, Texas. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project Miscellaneous Papers No. 1,
Austin, Texas.
Sturgis, H. F.
1956.
A Burnt Rock Midden Site in Travis County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 27, pp. 111-128.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955.
Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society, Vol. 26, pp. 7-54.
1957.

Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis
County, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science,
Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 26-58.

1959.

The Williams Site and Central Texas Archeology.
The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 11, No. 2,
pp. 218-250.

77
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954.
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 250
Watt, Frank H.
1936.
A Prehistoric Shelter Burial in Bell County,
Texaso Bulletin of the Central Texas Archeological Society, No. 2, pp. 5-27 •

.,._

