FAYETTE POWER PROJECT
An Interim Report on the Assessment
of Its Impact on the Cultural Resources

Marsha F. Jackson
and
Duford W. Skelton

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
August 31, 1975

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION ....................................................

Purpose of the Assessment ............

« .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ..

1
1

'* . . . . ,. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • .. .. .. ..

General Objectives of the Assessment •••••••••••••.••.••••••

1

Research Procedures...............................................................................

2

HISTORIC RESOURCES.............................................

3

Historic Perspectives

II

..

....

..

•

..

..

•

..

..

..

....

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

...

•

..

..

...

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

..

Historic Sites Inventory ......•.•.•................•..••.•.

3

5

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES.......................................... 16
Background.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 16

General Nature of Prehistoric Sites ••....••.•••••..•...•... 16
Prehistoric Sites Inventory................................ 19
SUlIlffiary and Conclus ions.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .... 37

REFERENCES CITED .............................................................. "........................ 41

Figures
1.
2.

Locations of Archeological Resources •..•••••••••••••..••... iii
Sites 41 FY 87 (Legler Log House) and 41 FY 94 (Biegel
House) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. • .. .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. . .. .. .. .. • .. .. .. .. • • .. .. • .. .. . .. .. .. .. • • • • • • • . . . .

9

3.

Site 41 FY 95 (Polasek-Krall-Gentner Farmstead) ...•........ 13

4.

Test Excavations at 41 FY 70 and 78, Hearth Exposed During
Test Excavations, and Alluvial Deposits at 41 FY 82 ••..•... 25

5.

Examples of Finished Tools Collected from the Surface:
Projectile Points, Bifaces, and Hammerstones ••••••••.•.•••• 28

Tables
1.

Recommendations for Mitigation Procedures ...••.•.•••.••••.• 40

I

FAYETTE POWER PROJECT
CULTURAL RESOURCES

"

:. . . . . /.
.....:. ... ... ~
. .:...,' .' .': 'i.,.

-

:.,

....

\..,

'.
'

..
.

(

~

:.

'"

("').

. v.? ';
'.

~

..::J 7"

_.'

r

f'. .. rC;:::I

....
..... \!i
~

i~94/'
................

eta
89

9

79 .~

.

r··
.)
.; "- ... J
\.

88
(!)

'\

t

N
82APREHISTORIC
899HISTORIC

SITE

SITE

85<!) C E MET E R Y

/'".

)

a
I

MI LE

NOTE: ALL SITE NUMBERS
PRECEDED BY 41 FY.

INTRODUCTION

An assessment of the cultural resources in the Fayette Power Project
area was made by the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin, for the Lower Colorado River Authority. These resources--archeolog­
ical/architectural/historical--located as a result of the survey are inven­
toried and described herein and assessed in terms of anticipated impacts of
project construction on the resources.
Purpose of the Assessment
The Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA), Austin, Texas, has proposed
construction of a lignite-fueled power plant approximately 8 miles southeast
of La Grange, Fayette County. The plant, known as the Fayette Power Project,
will consist of the power plant, coal storage areas, disposal areas, access
roads, stacks and a cooling pond--initially all on the Cedar Creek drainage
(Fig. 1). The resultant body of water on the dammed creek will be approxi­
mately 72,000 acre-feet (at 450 msl) and is designed for public recreation
as well as power generation.
Information presented here on the cultural resources is in response to
a request of the Lower Colorado River Authority to assess the impact of these
proposed land modifications on this particular aspect of the environment.
Where conflicts with potentially valuable locales are demonstrated or
anticipated, evaluation of the significance of the resource is given and a
discussion of the appropriate mitigating action outlined. Because a judge­
ment based solely on surficial examination of an area or sites can be mis­
leading, a program of subsurface testing was conducted in the area to be af­
fected. These minor probes were for evaluative purposes only and did not
represent attempts at mitigation. Locations of these sites relative to the
project are given in Figure 1.
Additionally, it must be stated that subsurface remains not visible may
be contacted dur~ng the course of construction. In this event, appropriate
regulatory agencies, such as the Texas Historical Commission, should be noti­
fied and action taken.
General Objectives of the Assessment
Under the terms of Interagency Cooperation Contract lAC (74-75)-1557
between The University of Texas at Austin (Texas Archeological Survey) and
the Lower Colorado River Authority, the following general objectives were
outlined:
1

2

1) The precise location and description of identified resource areas
or sites to be affected by project construction;
2) An evaluation of identified resources in terms of their scientific
or historic value;
3) Recommendations for feasible measures to avoid or lessen adverse
effects associated with project construction;

4) Recommendations for any additional studies related to the interpre­
tation of these resources which may exceed the investigative scope of this
survey.

Research Procedures
Prior to the initiation of field work, examination of the files at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, and the
Texas Historical Commission--National Register Program, Texas Landmarks Pro­
gram and Office of the State Archeologist~-was made to identify any previous­
ly recorded archeological, historical or architectural sites. Recorded sites
were noted and a reevaluation of them undertaken in the field.
Knowledgeable local informants were contacted regarding locations of any
cultural resources.
Additionally, a literature search was undertaken by the authors to 1)
identify previously described locales within the area and region and 2) to
familiarize the authors with the general regional background.
Subsequent to field identification and surficial examination, a testing
program was instituted at sites considered to contain significant cultural
materials or features and thought to be directly affected by the proposed
land modifications. The tests, designed to secure a representative sample
of the cultural material from the sites, included subsurface shovel tests,
cores and/or test pits. The results of these tests have provided a more re­
liable basis for evaluation.
For matters of convenience, the report is divided into two sections-­
Prehistoric Resources and Historic Resources. All the identified sites are
enumerated in Table 1. Their general locations relative to the project area
are shown in Figure 1. All sites located as a result of this survey have
been registered at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The Univer­
sity of Texas at Austin. Each has been assigned an identifying number. For
example, 41 FY 87, indicates that the site is in Texas (41), in Fayette Coun­
ty (FY) and is the 87th site recorded in that county. All notes, photographs
and collections generated from this survey will be permanently deposited with
TARL.

HISTORIC RESOURCES
Historic Perspectives
16th-19th Century Aboriginal Groups
In proto-historic and historic times in Central Texas, there were no
sedentary aboriginal groups. By this time, most of the transient Indian
population had been introduced to the horse and, therefore, had expanded
their range somewhat from this increased mobility.
In the 16th-18th centuries, the study area was predominantly utilized
by small independent bands of Indians.
It was not until the 19th century,
when remnants of these independent bands united to form a single group, his­
torically known as Tonkawan, that we begin to have descriptions of their
1ifeways (Newcomb 1960:2, 8). The presumption on the part of archeologists
is that these historic Tonkawa are the historic or late development of the
Archaic groups whose prehistoric camps are also present in the study area
(Newcomb 1960:9). A description of these people is found in W.W. Newcomb's

Indians of Texas (1962).
By the mid-19th century, other plains groups had pushed the Tonkawa
somewhat southward and were sharing this Central Texas area. These tribes
principally the Lipan Apache and the Comanche, were equestrians who followed
the bison herds and migrated throughout the area exploiting the natural re­
sources. A thorough description of their 1ifeways and their material culture
is also found in Newcomb (1962).
With the advent of the sedentary Anglo, conflict between the two cul­
tures intensified. Manpower and better arms, along with the relentless pur­
suit of the red man, eventually culminated in the Texas Indian being placed
on reservations in Texas in 1854 and their ultimate move to Oklahoma Terri­
tory reservations in 1859. By this time their numbers and power had been
greatly reduced and they had little choice but to go to the allotted terri­
tory.
The one exception to this was the Comanche who continued fighting until
the late 1870's when they were finally defeated and driven onto the reserva­
tion.
19th Century Anglo Occupation
The early 1830's saw the influx of Anglo settlers corning from the south
and from the northeast as part of the Stephen F. Austin colonization effort.
3

4

These early arrivals included persons with land grants in that area now
known as Fayette County. Major roads and traces passed through this area.
The later German arrivals obtained their land from these early occupants,
as by the time of the German emigration to Texas, most land had been par­
celed out.
19th Century German Emigration to Texas
Following, yet overlapping some of the transient aboriginal occupation
of the Central Texas area, and subsequent to the initial Anglo settlement
of the area, the first wave of European emigrants poured out of a restive
Germany burdened by overpopulation, crop failures, and increasing industrial­
ization. The culmination of these forces in mid-19th century Germany result­
ed in the flocks of emigrants sailing to America, and more specifically to
Texas, where relief from these miseries was sought. Rural Germans came,
prompted by the colonization promises of the Vepein zum Schutze deutschen
Einwandepep in Texas (The Society for the Protection of German Immigrants in
Texas), a colonization plan conceived by noblemen for both economic gain and
philanthropic interest (Jordan 1966:38-43), The society's purchase of about
3 million acres of land between the Llano and Colorado rivers in Central
Texas (generally known as the Fisher-Miller Grant) promised a new start for
struggling farmers (Webb 1952 1:604). Emigration through this society of­
fered the prospective emigrant, depending on the marital status (For $120.
if single or $240. if a head of household):
11.,,(1) free transportation of the colony, (2) free land in the
colony (160 acres for a single man and 320 acres for a family),
(3) a free log house, (4) provisions and all goods necessary to
begin farming, supplies on credit until the second successive
crop had been harvested, and (5) numerous public improvements,
such as the construction of roads, mills ••• " (Jordan 1966:43).
It is, then, no wonder that such large numbers of oppressed rural Ger­
mans sought such a promised land. Most of the newcomers sailed to the port
of Galveston and then down to Indianola (on Matagorda Bay) where they disem­
barked and made the long trek overland afoot, on horse, or by ox cart. The
reader is referred to several excellent sources on German settlement in the
state: R.L. Biesele, The Histopy of the Gevrnan Settlements in Texas (1930)
and T.G. Jordan, Gevrnan Seed in Texas SoiZ (1966). Both sources were relied
on heavily in this synthesis of the historical background of the area under
consideration.
Although the first settlers made their way inland with difficulty, a
second wave of immigration during the latter part of the century (the 1870's
and 80 1s) came with the high and reasonable expectations of prosperity and
economic success spurred by the sales of American goods abroad and their
large and efficient production (Jordan 1966: 43). Obviously, this group suf­
fered much less, for by this time inland stage and rail routes had been es­
tablished and the once virgin sod broken and proved fertile.

5

Fayette County and Her Development
Fayette County numbers among the first settled areas in Texas subse­
quent to frequent aboriginal occupation. The county, established in 1837
by the Republic of Texas, was organized in 1838 (Webb 1952 1:588). Adja­
cent Austin County is noted for having the first German settlement in
Texas--the town of Industry--which had its roots in the establishment of
the Fredrich Ernst farm there in 1831; the town itself was formally platted
in 1838. Ernst's enthusiastic description of the bountiful life to be had
in Texas no doubt encouraged many others to seek a new life here. Among
those settlers joining him in 1834 was Joseph Biegel (Biesele 1930:45).
In 1832, the second German settlement, Biegel's Settlement, was established
by Joseph Biegel on his league in present-day Fayette County about 8 miles
from La Grange. The league is sited between Baylor and Cedar creeks (Fig.
1) (Biesele 1930:48) and is, in fact, directly within the project area.
Historic Sites Inventory
Because the project area was known to be one of high historic and/or
architectural site potential, an architect with experience in the field of
preservation, restoration and identification of historic buildings was re­
tained to consult on evaluations of Historic Period archeological sites
with extant remains. These evaluations are incorporated in the overall
site descriptions.
In the identification of Historic Period sites, it is essential that
an interdisciplinary approach be adopted. In contrast to prehistoric sites,
one is dealing with 1) the availability of written records to corroborate
ground information and 2) the frequent occurrence of extant buildings at
the site. Whereas an historic archeologist does have knowledge of building
techniques and the material culture connected with it, the archeologist ob­
viously would not have the expertise of an architect who practices the
profession of design and construction and whose field is the study of his­
toric structural remains. The combination of the talents and expertise
from these three areas--archeology, history and architecture--therefore con­
stitute the only professional way to examine an historic feature which con­
sists of both above-ground and below-ground elements and which has suppor­
tive written records.
Thus, it will be noted in the following site descriptions that two
site recommendations call for this tripartite approach.
Three kinds of historic sites were noted during the survey:
sugar press remains and farmsteads.

cemeteries,

Cemeteries
Documentation of cemetery areas was carried out by the Coates Field
Service for the LCRA. As part of the procedure of project site preparation,
cemeteries must be located and remains exhumed. Exhumation is a legal prob­

6

lem and one which involved Coates Field Service, LCRA, and the families of
the deceased. The interest of the TAS was of an historical nature, and
the documentation of this by Coates personnel for LCRA was adequate for
our inventory. In only two cases did the location of a cemetery become an
archeological problem--sites 41 FY 94 (Biegel House) and 41 FY 95 (Polasek­
Kroll-Gentner Farmstead). This involvement will be discussed within the
description of the entire site which follows. Cemetery areas which are as­
sociated with other cultural features (e.g., house sites) are marked by an
asterisk (*) in the following list:
41 FY 85 Scherer Cemetery
41 FY 87* Legler Log house (grave of Jenny Meitzen)
41 FY 88 Rock cairn with unmarked headstone; not inventoried by Coates
but currently under investigation by them. The size and con­
formation of the stones suggest a human interment.
41 FY 90 Malcik
41 FY 94* Biegel House (Biegel - December Cemetery)
41 FY 95* Polasek-Krall-Gentner Farmstead (Baby Kroll and Helmut Conrad
Kroll)
41 FY 97 Asa Hill
Farmsteads
Four locales with extant structural remains were identified during
the course of the survey. Two of the sites, 41 FY 94, Biegel House, and
41 FY 95, Polasek-Krall-Gentner Farmstead, are considered to fulfill the
criteria for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. Spe­
cific mitigating action is outlined to lessen the loss of these important
resources.
41 FY 86
Log foundations made up of hand-adzed floor beams set on cedar piers
were located north of the project area (Fig. 1). The bea~ were mortised
at intervals along the west and east walls, presumably to support vertical
framing. No artifacts associated with this structural remnant were found.
The location of this site outside of the project area and on private pro­
perty should insure its preservation.
Recommended mitigation:
Photographic documentation and written description of this feature
were made during the survey. Further work at the site is not indicated.
41 FY 87
Legler Log House
The site of a late 19th Century homesite was evidenced by the extant
remains of one pen of a double log structure (Fig. 2a). It is located ap­
proximately 8 1/2 miles east of La Grange off county road FY 121. The
condition of the standing portion of the house is fair; some of the tim­
bers making up the fabric of the building are rotted, others are not orig­
inal to the structure and are reused. All, however, appear to be cedar
and are adzed square. The obvious reuse of some of the logs is seen in

7

1) different corner notching, 2) cuts which were originally intended to
receive other framing members and which are now within the center of the
wall (see north wall), and 3) obvious difference in size, hewing technique
and joinery.
The standing house, which measures approximately 16 feet elw by 14
feet nls was covered by a corrugated metal roof which is not original to
the structure. The present floor is also a new addition. The size of the
planks in the floor suggests that it may be from an old bridge.
Evidence of the second pen is visible to the west as a square mounded
area. The breezeway is defined by the overhang of the roof as well as the
space between the two pens (Fig. 2a).
Horse drawn farm machinery and a buggy were associated with the house.
Although much of the fabric of this structure is not original to it
(that is, floor, roof and several timbers within the walls), it is felt
that portions of it would be valuable for reuse. With such a plan in mind,
recommendations were made to and action taken by the Lower Colorado River
Authority to transfer this structure to the Winedale Inn Museum, The Uni­
versity of Texas at Austin, at the time of the survey. Therefore, in the
following list of recommended mitigative action, some of these stipulations
have already been taken care of and will be so noted.
Recommended mitigation:
1. Disposition of Structure and Artifacts:
During the survey period, through a series of conversations among the
Texas Historical Commission, Wineda1e Inn and the Lower Colorado River
Authority, and through our recommendation, arrangements were made for the
large farm machinery to become part of the Winedale Inn Museum collection
and for the log structure to be dismantled and removed to Wineda1e for use
in an interpretive exhibit. Staff members of the Winedale Inn Museum
marked and dismantled the structure and an archeologist from the Texas Ar­
cheological Survey was present for the procedure.
2. Architectural:
Photographic documentation of the structure and measurements were
made during the survey of the area. Additional photographic work was done
prior to the dismantling of the house by Winedale Museum staff.
3. Archeological:
Testing will be required at the site (a) to confirm and better define
the second pen, (b) support through recovered artifacts the dates of occu­
pation at the site. This work will be done subsequent to the removal of
the structure.
4 • Archival:
Since arrangements have been made for this structure to be donated to
the Winedale Inn Museum, it is assumed that this agency will be responsible
for any further archival work regarding its history.

- - - - - - _ ......

8

FIGURE 2:
a

Sites 41 FY 87 (Legler Log House) and
41 FY 94 (Biegel House)
Extant log pen. The extension of the roof indicates the
location and width of the breezeway of the dog run structure.
View is of southwest corner.
The plan map indicates the relationship of the extant build­
ing with the mounded location of the second pen.

b

Northeast corner of the Biegel House. The 1850 1 s cabin is
covered by siding on the west and the view of the exposed
north wall is obscured by the shadows.
The plan map indicates the relationship of the residential
structure to the outbuildings.

10

41 FY 94
Biegel House and Biegel~December Cemetery
The Biegel House and Biegel-December Cemetery are located on a seg­
ment of the original Joseph Biegel League (Fig. 1). Historically signifi­
cant structures at the site include: 1) a cedar log house (pre-1860) and
2) a frame wing attached to the log house (circa 1870-80) (Fig. 2b). Out­
buildings present at the site include a well house, two barns and a shed.
These elements post-date the previously mentioned structures. Historic
modifications to the log house (the 1880 wing and a more recent addition
on the west) have done very little to detract from the integrity of the
building.
Portions of the original fabric still intact include: 9 over 6 double
sash windows, beaded trim, and some siding. The 1870-80 wing addition may
have been constructed as part of the earlier structure or may have been
simply salvaged from a site elsewhere and added. It does bear study as a
transition element.
A cemetery southwest of the house contains family members of the Bie­
gel and December families and as such is important to the historic defini­
tion of the site.
Biegel House dates to the initial settlement of the area by Europeans.
Structures at the site are still in the original siting. The house, which
is a recorded State Landmark (1965; Texas Historical Commission files),
fulfills the criteria for inclusion on the National Register of Historic
Places.
Recommended mitigation:
Three phases of interdisciplinary research are called for in the exam­
ination of this important cultural resource. These phases are not singular,
unrelated acts, but together will provide the necessary body of data to ade­
quately describe the site.
1. Architectural:
Documentation at the site should include:
(a) Preparation of measured drawings of the log house and the
circa 1880 structure. These would include floor plans, ex­
terior elevations, and sections. Window and door details,
interior stairways and trim should also be measured and
drawn. Selected historic elements of the small shed and
barn should also be recorded. These drawings should be in
accordance with and to the standards of the Historic Amer­
ican Buildings Survey (HABS). Standard HABS forms should
be filled out on the site.
(b) A site map should be prepared which shows the relationship
of the buildings to one another and the entire site to the
topography.
(c) A photo data book should be prepared which includes all
structures. This photo data book should be in accord with
those standards set up by HABS.

- - ------ --

11

2.

Archeological:
(a) Archeological investigation should occur in order to de­
termine the extent of the pre-1860 development: wells,
cellars, additional structures, fence locations, etc.
(b) An effort should be made through excavation at the site
to obtain a representative sample of the material culture
as manifest there.
3. Archival:
Additional archival work should be carried out regarding the past
owners and the general regional history.
It is further recommended that these three elements be under the
general supervision of the archeologist.
The Biegel log house and the associated parts in the small shed
should be salvaged for future reuse. They are significant as physical
remnants from the birth of the State of Texas. The Texas Archeological
Survey will be glad to assist the LCRA and Texas Antiquities Committee
in formulating plans for the ultimate disposition of the architectural
remains. Since the property is now owned by the LCRA (i.e., is State
land), then it is covered by the Texas Antiquities Code as a State Arche­
ological Landmark. As such, ultimate disposition is the decision of the
Antiquities Committee. The Texas Archeological Survey can act only in an
advisory capacity.
41 FY 95

Polasek-Krall-Gentner Farmstead
The most important Historic Period site within the survey area, a
collection of architecturally significant structures and its anticipated
archeological information, is located in a centrally vulnerable position
relative to the proposed plant activities (Fig. 1). The site now unfor­
tunately altered by the removal of its buildings, has, nonetheless, the
potential of providing abundant data on the initial settlement of the
area and its subsequent development. The site chronology as cited in the
following descriptions of the buildings and building periods at the site
is substantiated by deed records. The site was a focal point in the com­
munity during~he period of the l860-80s and its occupant at that time,
Helmut Conrad !roll, was a well-known Texas cabinet maker. It is antici­
pated that additional archival work will reveal a wealth of data relevant
to the site, its history, and its occupants.
When the site was initially visited, extant structures consisted of a
log house (Fig. 3a), and a store (formerly an adjoining unit to the log
house) dating from 1850 and a pre-1870 unit added to the log house. Out­
buildings included log and framed structures (Fig. 3b,c). Much of the ma­
terial in the outbuildings is historic and had been salvaged from earlier
structures. A site plan prior to the recent modifications is shown in
Figure 3. The following list itemizes the modifications which have been
made to the site since its initial recording by TAS personnel:

- - - - - - - - - - -

--

~~------------------------~-----

12

FIGURE 3:

Site 41 FY 95, Polasek-Kroll-Gentner Farmstead

a

1850 log cabin. The cedar logs have been covered
by a board and batten siding; however, the logs
were visible along the north wall shrouded here
by the porch. The unit at the rear is attached
to the 1870's addition. View southeast.

b

1870 (?) log outbuilding. Locally this structure
was referred to as the '~ickle factory." The roof
framing was tied by mortise and tenon joints held
with pegs. Hand-adzed logs made up the walls.
The photograph was taken as the building was being
dismantled for removal from the site. View north.

c

1850 (?) log barn. This building has now been dis­
mantled and removed from the site. View northwest.

The plan map indicates the relationships of the buildings at
the site when it was initially visited. No structures current­
ly remain at the site.

--------------_.--

--------------------------------------------------------­

14

(a) Extant historic structures have been sold and removed from
the site.
(b) Two backhoe-dug holes were dug (6.13.75) under observation
of an archeologist from the Texas Archeological Survey. (One hole was
dug [6.13.75] without permission of and unobserved by staff from the
Texas Archeological Survey.) These backhoe probes were made in an at­
tempt to locate the burial sites of Helmut Conrad Kroll and Baby Kroll-­
both late 19th Century burials.
While the Texas Archeological Survey recognizes that exhumation is
a legal problem, it became an archeological one as well when the grave
sites fell within the confines of an important historic site.
The site easily fulfills the criteria for nomination to the Nation­
al Register of Historic Places.
Recommended mitigation:
Although the site has suffered greatly from the disruption of re­
moval of extant historic structures, it is felt that significant his­
torical information can be gained if the following recommendations are
heeded:
1. Architectural:
(a) Preparation of measured drawings of the log house, the
store, the pre-1870 unit. These would include floor
plans, exterior elevations and sections (as of pre-1870),
window and door details, interior details including
stairway, and interior details of store. Selected
structural and architectural details of outbuildings
should be recorded and examined against their use in the
original structures.
(b) A photo data book should be prepared which includes all
structures.
(c) Remaining debris extant at the farmstead site should be
protected from outside intrusions by whatever means are
necessary.
Recommended architectural work would be done in accord­
ance with and to the standards of the Historic American
Buildings Survey (HABS).
2.

Archeological:
(a) Archeological investigations should occur in order to de­
termine the extent of the pre-1870 development: wells,
cellars, additional structures, fence locations, etc.
(b) Located features should be excavated at the discretion of
the archeologist in charge in order to recover a good
sample of the material culture of the periods of occupa­
tion at the site.
(c) A site map based on present extant information as well as
one based on archeological evidence should be prepared.

-------------------------------------------------------- -----

15

3. Archival:
Additional archival work should be done on the individual occupants
of the site.
The important elements of the Polasek-Kroll-Gentner Farmstead have
been removed from the original location without adequate historic docu­
mentation. Not only were these units in their original siting important
as one of the very few remaining mid-19th Century farmsteads in situ, but
they also contain unique decorative elements important to the state as
cultural artifacts.
Other Sites
41 FY 89

In an area south of the plant area, an accumulation of flat field
stones was recorded (Fig. 1). Local informants had pointed the area out
as one which was the possible location of an area where sugar cane had been
processed.
The feature is completely collapsed, if indeed it were ever even
built up. Adjacent to the accumulation of stones is an old well. No arti­
facts were found in association with the features.
Proposed mitigation:
Adequate documentation of this site was made during the survey;
therefore, no additional work is required.
41 FY

A second location contains the structural remains of a square stone
feature 3 feet wide by 6 feet long by 2 feet high. A metal pipe protrudes
from the center of the feature which is filled in with dirt.
Local information was that this locale was one where sugar cane was
processed. The size and conformation of the structural remains compares
favorably with other examples of similar ovens used for this purpose. No
artifacts were found in association with this feature.
Proposed mitigation:
Adequate documentation of this site was made during the survey and
no further work is recommended.

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES
Background
Fayette and adjacent counties are located within a physiographic and
cultural transitional zone between Coastal and Central Texas. Previous
archeological studies dealing with this zone have been primarily restrict­
ed to surficial survey designed to identify and record the prehistoric
resources. Systematic investigations resulting in comprehensive published
reports dealing with this region of Texas are lacking. Data collected by
these investigations have proved to be inadequate for definitive state­
ments on specific cultural manifestations.
Chronological schemes suggested for Central and Coastal Texas prehis­
tory may be divided into three cultural stages: Paleo-Indian (Early Pre­
historic), Archaic (Middle Prehistoric), Formative (Late Prehistoric).
These periods represent generalized temporal horizons based on cultural
variability or observed changes of subsistence patterns. Generally, the
Paleo-Indian Stage (ca. 7000 B.C.) includes the first evidence of human oc­
cupation and usually refers to an economy based on big-game hunting. The
Archaic Stage (ca. 5000 B.C.-A.D. 500) is considered a preceramic stage
with technology now related to an economy of hunting-and-gathering. The
Formative Stage (ca. A.D. SOO-A.D. 1500) has been recognized as a period
of technological innovation, with the introduction of ceramics, the bow­
and-arrow, and/or agriculture.
General Nature of Prehistoric Sites
During the course of reconnaissance, 19 prehistoric sites were iden­
tified and recorded which will either be directly or indirectly affected
by the proposed land modifications and construction of the project. Prior
to the commencement of the survey no prehistoric sites had been formally
reported within the project limits. Due primarily to the fact that the
prehistoric archeology of the study area was unknown, it was decided that
all areas exhibiting materials of aboriginal activities, regardless of the
extent of the occupation, would be recorded as a site. The surficial in­
dications of aboriginal habitations subsequently varied from that of a few
flint flakes, probably revealing small chipping stations and/or occupation­
al zones, to areas where extensive amounts of lithics were located. The
approximate locations of all sites identified during the study are given
in Figure 1.
All sites recorded are discussed in relation to their environmental
setting. Attention was given to physiographic features, the ecological
zones expressed within those features, and the relative locations of any

16

-~~-------

17

natural resources encountered that may have been utilized by the aboriginal
inhabitants. Such factors as the placement of the sites with respect to
land formations and water source are considered. These discussions are not
intended to present settlement pattern configurations, because of the insuf­
ficient sample and limited area surveyed, as well as the general lack of
specific sets of data, i.e. ecological zonation, site function, and tempor­
al placement, which would yield such information. This analysis does sug­
gest, however, certain kinds of data on the aboriginal awareness of the en­
vironmental zones relative to these factors.
Prehistoric sites recorded during the reconnaissance have several en­
vironmental features in common; that is, proximity to water source, similar
ecological zones, biological communities within those zones, and availabil­
ity of other natural resources such as flint. To eliminate needless repe­
tition in the discussions of these sites, two descriptive categories are
used--upland sites and alluvial terrace sites. Site classification is ar­
bitrary and used only as an index in describing the aboriginal activities
in different micro-environmental zones. Neither are they intended for in­
terpretive purposes; rather, their use is intended for descriptive conve­
nience.
Upland Sites
Upland sites, in watersheds examined, are open habitational areas lo­
cated on gently sloping bluffs or knolls well above the floodplain and some
distance from present streams, having little opportunity to be superimposed
by alluvium. Upland sites recorded within the study area are located ad­
jacent to a confluence of two or more streams, providing a variety of di­
verse micro-environments for the extraction of natural resources.
The survey identified three upland sites during intensive field in­
spections (41 FY 70, 78, and 92). Placement of sites with respect to drain­
age patterns and availability of natural resources, seems more than fortui­
tous and could yield information on the methods of subsistence adopted by
the aboriginal groups and possibly the environment required to implement
those methods. Strategic positioning of these occupational areas provide
protection from flood waters while supplying the needs for a proximal water
source.
The size of these localities may vary greatly, depending upon the area
of occupation, the number of times occupied, and the range of activities ex­
pressed at the site, which seems to be proportional to the geographic ex­
tent of the environment being exploited and the diversity of tool assem­
blages represented at the sites. Settlement size within the project limits
seems to express a relationship to the availability of water and other re­
sources. Upland sites were located in proximity to at least one major
stream, and one or more intermittent tributaries. Fluctuations in the en­
vironment also had a direct effect upon the size of these habitats.
Based on surface inspections, minor subsurface probes and limited
test excavations the horizontal extent of these settlements varied between

18

1,000 and 4,000 square meters. The vertical extent of the cultural depos­
its was generally around 30 em. although one site (41 FY 78) contained ar­
tifactual materials to a depth of 50 cm in some sections of the occupation.
The cultural refuse is generally contained in a brown sandy loam, which has
been eroded away in some areas exposing numerous flint flakes.
Characteristic of these localities is a low incidence of chronological­
ly diagnostic artifacts although large quantities of lithic debris commonly
occurs in eroded areas. The paucity of time diagnostic artifacts is prob­
ably due in part to surface collecting by nonprofessionals due to the visi­
bility and accessibility of these localities. During test excavations sev­
eral lithic and ceramic artifacts were recovered; however, they were frag­
mented and generally could not be grouped into established tool assemblages.
Prehistoric artifacts that were recovered during test excavations included
an example of a knife form which exhibits morphological characteristics sim­
ilar to the Cleburne type knives (Fig. 5f) as defined and described by Jelks
(1962:45-46). This knife form occurred in all occupational levels at the
Kyle site in Central Texas; therefore, no specific cultural affiliations are
suggested. Other specimens recovered include pottery fragments of the sandy
paste variety. which occur in Coastal sites through most of the Late Prehis­
toric Period (Aten 1967:10).
For the present, geographic and temporal affiliations of upland sites
cannot be conclusively demonstrated. Based on the limited archeological
data collected during the study and information obtained from knowledgeable
local informants it is tentatively suggested that similarities exist be­
tween the prehistoric occupations located by the survey and those that oc­
cur in Central and Coastal regions of Texas. It is predictable that some
similarities would exist in view of the geographic proximity of the areas
relative to the project site.
In general, the present condition of 41 FY 70 and 78 seems to be good,
based on data collected during initial survey and subsequent test excava­
tions. Although these sites have been subjected to surface collecting by
amateurs for several years, they appear otherwise undisturbed. 41 FY 92
has been totally disrupted by post-depositional disturbances and, there­
fore, lacks potential for yielding scientific data on the prehistoric ar­
cheology of the area.
Alluvial Terrace Sites
Alluvial terrace sites are herein defined as concentrations of aborig­
inal occupational residue that occur in association with stream terrace sys­
tems. These sites are generally located near concentrations of fist size
gravels which have been laid down in stream channel bottoms. In the south­
ern regions of the project site, especially below the confluence of Cedar
Creek and Groce Branch, the gravels contain numerous chert nodules. The
aborigines were probably exploiting these gravels for raw materials to be
used in the manufacture of lithic artifacts. Sites of this type are recog­
nized by the presence of extremely large quantities of thermally fractured
and percussion-chipped detritus. Generally, cultural materials are buried

19

by alluvial sediments and are visible only in stream cut-banks or gullies
where they have been exposed by water-generated erosion.
These sites were generally characterized by a paucity of chronologi­
cally diagnostic artifacts in association with the burned materials. Areas
where time-diagnostic artifacts were recovered did not contain large quan­
tities of thermally fractured rocks, suggesting some relationship and/or
correlation between tool assemblages and activity areas. Artifacts that
were recovered during the survey and test excavations include established
dart point types, williams (Fig. 5d), Pedernales (Fig. 50), Bulverde (Fig.
5a), and other miscellaneous forms representative of the Archaic and post­
Archaic Stages.
The survey identified 16 alluvial terrace sites in the proposed project
area (FY 65, 66, 67, 69, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, and 84;
Fig. 1). These vary widely in extent with occupational areas ranging from
approximately 25 to more than 1,000 square meters. The cultural deposits
were usually contained in a sandy matrix and rarely exceeded 50 cm in depth.
The present condition of the occupational residue represented at these lo­
calities may be divided into three categories: undisturbed (FY 65 and 69),
partially disturbed (FY 67, 71, 74, 82, and 86), and severely disturbed
(FY 66, 68, 72, 73, 75, 76, 79, 84, and 98; Table 1).
"Undisturbed" sites are represented by apparently intact deposits dis­
playing only minor disruptions, primarily by rodent burrowing and root ac­
tion. Localities designated as "partially disturbed" have been affected
by road-cuts, wind and water-generated deflation, erosional gullies, and
displacement to more than 50% of the observed midden debris. A prehistoric
occupation defined as "severely disturbed" is one where extensive erosion,
deflation, and modifications by man have been responsible for the destruc­
tion of at least half and in some instances total disruption of the observed
archeological remains.
Prehistoric Sites Inventory
All prehistoric sites identified by the survey within proposed limits
of the power plant, including the adjoining access roads, power transmission
lines, and pipe line right-of-ways are briefly described (Fig. 1). The dis­
cussion will include such attributes as type of site, environmental setting,
horizontal and vertical extent, general condition of cultural deposits, eva­
luations of site potential and recommendations. Data concerning stratigraph­
ic composition, occupational features and nature of cultural materials ex­
posed during limited testing is presented when appropriate. In some in­
stances, environmental situations such as dense vegetation precluded the re­
cording of all information at certain sites during the survey. However, it
is believed that other data collected at these localities were sufficiently
intensive as to allow for accurate assessment.

20

41 FY 65
41 FY 65 is a prehistoric site situated in a sandy clay terrace over­
looking an old silted channel scar approximately 100 meters inward from the
west bank of Cedar Creek. The site is located about 0.5 miles downstream
from the junction of Cedar Creek and Fayette County Road 119.
The area has been cleared and subsequently seeded with bermuda grass,
although thorny brush is still prevalent in localized areas, usually near
gullies. Trees, including the mesquite, juniper and post oak, remain only
along fence lines and creek banks. It is possible that heavy underbrush
and a hardwood forest once encroached upon the site, limiting the area
suitable for habitation. Small springs can be observed seeping from the
base of the terrace, draining onto the floodplain below. Cultural mate­
rials were being exposed and eroded out of the existing zone of alluvia­
tion at approximately 10 cm below the surface; and occupational debris was
scattered almost the entire length of the channel scar. Materials consist­
ed of fire residue and lithic debris, which included an established projec­
tile point type of the Lange (Fig. 5) variety (Suhm and Jelks 1962:~0~.
The survey was unable to determine the exact horizontal limits of the sites,
but it is estimated at approximately 500 square meters.
The site was tested through excavation of two 1 x 2 meter units. One
unit was located near the middle portions of the observed surface debris
just west of a spring where the dart point was found, and the other was
established toward the southern reaches of the site because of the cultural
materials observed in this area. The excavation units were taken down in
arbitrary 10 em levels providing vertical control. All fill was screened
through 1/4-inch mesh. The testing was directed toward recovering informa­
tion on the depth of the cultural deposits, types of chronologically diag­
nostic artifacts, and the general nature of the buried deposits relative
to disturbances and potential for data recovery.
In Test Unit 1 near the mid-section of the site, cultural materials
were recovered to a depth of 25 cm where a culturally sterile clay was en­
countered. Artifactual debris included flint flakes and burned chert
sparsely scattered through the fill. Metal fragments were recovered in
the top 15 cm perhaps denoting some disturbances have occurred at the site,
such as plowing. No diagnostic artifacts were collected from Test Unit 1.
In Test Unit 2 in the southern section of the site, cultural refuse
was recovered to a depth of 40 cm with most of the occupational debris ex­
posed 20 cm to 35 cm below the surface. One bifacially worked flint frag­
ment located approximately 35 cm below surface represents the only defin­
able artifactual material revealed by the test.
Both test units displayed more or less uniform characteristics of the
stratum as observed in the profiles. Generally, there was only slight dif­
ferences noted in soil coloration and texture in the upper 25 cm and these
were gradual changes which graded slowly into one another. In the first 25
cm three strata were noted that consisted of a sandy clay loam which appeared

21

to grade from light greyish brown at surface to a dark yellowish brown at
2S em below surface. A mottled basalt clay, sterile of cultural materials
was exposed below the sandy clay loam.
Although no true diagnostic artifacts were recovered from the test ex­
cavations, the site may very tentatively be assigned to the Middle Prehis­
toric, based on data collected from the surface and lack of evidence which
would suggest other cultural associations.
Other than the metal fragments recovered in Test Unit I the cultural
deposits appear to be intact displaying only minor disturbance of root ac­
tivity. The site lies below the 390 foot elevation mark planned for the
normal water level of the cooling reservoir. The site will therefore be
completely destroyed by inundation. It is for this reason, along with the
apparent structural integrity of the buried cultural deposits that this
site is recommended for further testing.

41 FY 66
This prehistoric campsite is situated on a wedge-shaped terrace that
separates Cedar Creek and a small tributary stream. The area is located
southwest of the confluence of Cedar Creek with Groce Branch, approximately
0.2 miles downstream from 41 FY 65 and 0.2 miles upstream (north) from the
crossing of Cedar Creek with Fayette County Road 120. An unimproved dirt
road has bisected the occupational area exposing a small assortment of flint
debitage and hearth residue. Based on conversations with local landowners
projectile points of the SaaZZorn variety were previously recovered from
the site, indicating a Late Prehistoric occupation.
The area is presently covered with numerous trees including juniper,
mesquite, and oak. Other vegetation represents a variety of grasses and
thorny brush. Within the stream channel large quantities of fist size gra­
vels were abundant, easily accessible, and probably exploited by the pre­
historic inhabitants as a lithic resource.
Cultural deposits have been severely disturbed and were scattered over
the entire occupational zone roughly estimated at 750 square meters. This
disrupted nature of the midden refuse has resulted from extensive water
erosion caused by precipitation and stream discharge factors. Consequently,
the cultural deposits have been almost totally deflated by post-depositional
factors. Subsurface probes and stream cut bank observations indicated that
the scanty remains of the site are shallow and lack potential for yielding
significant scientific data on the regional prehistoric archeology. There­
fore, no additional work is necessary at the locale.

41 FY 67
This is an alluvial terrace site which lies just south of the Missouri­
Kansas-Texas (Katy) Railroad in the east bank of a small stream that drains
into Cedar Creek approximately 0.5 miles downstream. The site is situated
in a heavily timbered area characterized by mesquite, oaks and juniper trees.
The cultural deposits appear to be relatively undisturbed except where bi­
sected by a dirt road.

22

Occupational debris observed on the surface included several bifacia1ly
worked flint tools, flint flakes, and thermally altered stone. The horizon­
tal and vertical extent of the cultural deposits were not determined by the
survey due to time limitations, and the location of the site outside the
project area. Time-diagnostic artifacts were neither collected nor observed,
thus the site was not assigned to any established cultural complex.
Since the cultural materials appear to be intact it is believed that the
locality has a high probability for yielding significant information on ar­
cheological problems as yet unsolved within the transitional zone. Although
the site lies beyond the project boundaries, it is situated along the right­
of-way of a proposed landowner access road. It is believed that the midden
deposits would be adversely affected by the planned road construction.
Therefore, a testing program designed to obtain a sample of the site's con­
tents is recommended in the event that protective management is not feasible.
41 FY 68
The disturbed cultural remains of this terrace site are scattered along
the east bank of Cedar Creek at its junction with the KATY Railroad. The
locality lies 0.5 miles south of Fayette County Road 120 in a partially
wooded area. The site has been almost completely destroyed by displacement
along the creek margin, construction of railroad and a landowner access road
which bisects the occupational area.
The site is characterized by the presence of burned and chipped flint
covering an area of less than 100 square meters. In one section of occupa­
tional zone where disruption of cultural deposits was minimal a test unit
was excavated. The unit consisted of a 1 x 1 meter square, oriented north/
south, and excavated in arbitrary 10 cm levels. The test pit revealed a
midden deposit 8 cm below the surface contained in a light greyish sandy
loam superimposed by a brown sandy loam. The midden zone contained a dense
concentration of lithic debris and fire residue approximately 10 em thick,
possibly indicating that the midden deposits have been deflated and subse­
quently reburied by recent alluvium. No time-diagnostic artifacts were re­
covered from the test unit or observed on the surface. However, collections
made by the local landowner included an example of a ScaZZorn type projec­
tile point (Suhm and Jelks 1962). From this it may be suggested that cul­
tural affiliation include those representative of the Late Prehistoric Period.
Data collected from the surface of the site and recovered from the test
pit indicate that this site has been totally disrupted by post-depositional
disturbance and lacks potential for yielding scientific or historical infor­
mation on the prehistoric inhabitants of the area. No mitigating program
regarding protection or testing is recommended for 41 FY 68.
41 FY 69
This is a small terrace site located on the east side of Cedar Creek
approximately 0.3 miles south of Fayette County Road 120 and 0.2 miles north
of site 41 FY 68. The cultural deposits are contained within a sandy clay
secondary spur terrace 25 meters inland from the eastern bank of the present

23

stream channel. The area is characterized by a dense vegetation cover
consisting of various trees, brush, and vines.
Surficial indications included flint debitage and burned rock, which
were exposed along a small, shallow gully worn by running water. No sur­
face materials were collected by the survey.
The site is located within the embankment of the proposed dam for the
cooling reservoir. The area is apparently in immediate danger of destruc­
tion. Therefore, a testing program consisting of one test pit and a back­
hoe trench were excavated in order to sample the presence of artifacts,
features, and maintenance by-products at the site.
A 1 x 2 meter test unit, oriented on a north/south axis and excavated
in 10 cm levels was established in a clearing along the southern sections
of the site, where root disturbance would be minimal. The pit exposed a
very dense deposit of flint debitage and thermally fractured rock at a
vertical depth of 6 cm. The occupational refuse is very shallow averaging
about 10 cm of thickness. The midden materials were deposited over a cul­
turally sterile clay zone.
A back-hoe trench 2 meters deep, 5 meters long, and 0.5 meters wide
was cut across the site to obtain additional information on the cultural
deposit. No noticeable occupational features or materials were exposed
except within the top 15 cm.
No diagnostic artifacts were recovered from the testing operations;
therefore no age estimate of the occupation is suggested. In view of the
apparent paucity of definable artifacts and the shallow depth of the cul­
tural deposits, no further investigations concerning this locality are
recommended.
41 FY 70
41 FY 70 is a prehistoric upland site located on a gently sloping
knoll approximately 0.3 miles south of Fayette County Road 120 and 0.5
miles north of the KATY Railroad. The area lies 125 to 150 meters east
of Cedar Creek and about the same distance south of a small tributary
stream that empties into Cedar just south of site 41 FY 69.
The area has recently been cleared of vegetation and seeded with ber­
muda grass for utilization as pasture land. Only a few scattered juniper
trees remain standing except along the creek margins where vegetational
coverage remains dense (Fig. 4b).
Cultural materials are being exposed and eroded from large ant beds
and rodent back dirt. Artifactual refuse observed consisted of burned
stream cobbles and numerous flint flakes. Although some damage has prob­
ably occurred to the site through clearing processes, the deposits appear
to be relatively intact. Based on surficial inspections, limited testing,
and minor subsurface probes the area of occupation seem to encompass an
area of approximately 2,500 square meters.

24

FIGURE 4:

Test excavations at 41 FY 70 and 78, hearth exposed
during test excavations, and alluvial deposits at
41 FY 82.

a

Road-cut through 41 FY 82 exposing alluvial deposits
of Pleistocene gravels.

b

Test excavations at 41 FY 70 revealed a prehistoric
cultural deposit to a depth of 30 em.

c

Test excavations at 41 FY 78 exposed an intact pre­
historic cultural deposit to a depth of 40-50 cm.

d

Hearth exposed during testing at 41 FY 78 area "B".
In background a cluster of quartzite pebbles used as
hammerstones.

26

The site was tested through excavations of two 1 x 2 meter test units
that were sampled following the same procedures as previously described.
The testing revealed the presence of a very shallow but dense accumulation
of flint and fire residue lying just beneath the present surface. The
lens was approximately 15 em thick and the materials were contained in a
sandy loam. The midden deposits were overlying a culturally sterile clay.
Artifactual materials recovered from the testing included numerous flint
flakes exhibiting striking platform and bulb of percussion, of which 14
displayed signs of utilization. A bifacial fragment, probably the proximal
end of a knife was also recovered. However, no temporal placement can be
ascribed to the site due to the paucity of diagnostic artifacts.
Both
served in
the color
consisted

test pits displayed uniform stratigraphic characteristics as ob­
the test pit profiles. There was only slight variation noted in
and texture of the upper 15 cm of sandy loam. These generally
of gradual changes in coloration which graded into one another.

The site lies in a planned borrow area and will be totally destroyed
by the excavating operation. Preliminary analysis of recovered archeologi­
cal data indicate that the site is relatively undisturbed and exhibits po­
tential for yielding pertinent scientific/historic information on the ar­
cheological problems within the transitional zone.
Due to the precarious location of the site and its generally undis­
turbed nature it is recommended that a sampling program be implemented to
mitigate losses.
41 FY 71
This open prehistoric campsite is situated in
terrace on the eastern bank of a small stream that
approximately 300 meters south. The area lies 200
County Road 120 and 500 meters north of site 41 FY

a partially wooded sandy
drains into Cedar Creek
meters south of Fayette
69.

Plant life includes numerous mesquite, oak, and juniper trees with
thorny brush growing sporadically near the creek margins but increasing in
density toward the inland areas. Evidence of prehistoric occupation con­
sisted of small accumulations of flint chips and flakes with some thermally
fractured quartzite materials suggesting activities associated with hearth
maintenance. No diagnostic artifacts were recovered by the survey, thus,
no temporal placement of the material is possible. The flint debris does,
however, suggest tool manufacturing. The cultural materials were exposed
and eroded from a dirt road that cuts through the site. Other disturbances
that have disrupted the cultural deposits include displacement along the
creek margin, rodent activities, root action, and general weathering. De­
spite the apparent disturbances, it appears that much of the site remains
intact buried beneath a stratum of sterile sandy alluvium.
Although the precise area of occupation could not be determined due
to the apparent sporadic clustering of the deposits, it is estimated between
1,000 and 2,000 square meters. Vertical exposures along the cut bank and

27

FIGURE 5:

Examples of finished tools collected from the surface.
Projectile points, bifaces, and hammerstones.

a

BuZve1."de

41 FY 82

b

Lange

41 FY 65

c

Pede1."rlaZes

41 FY 82

d

WiUiams

41 FY 74

e

Miscellaneous biface

41 FY 76

f

CZebU1'ne-1ike biface

41 FY 78

Thick bifaces

41 FY 78

Hammerstone

41 FY 78

g,h
i

29

minor probing indicated that cultural refuse is scattered throughout the
upper 50 cm of alluvium and lie above a subsoil of culturally sterile clay.
Relative to project construction, the site lies near the planned em­
bankment for the cooling pond dam. The area will probably be affected by
the dam structure itself or almost certainly by traffic of the heavy equip­
ment involved in such operations. The result of either of these actions
will ultimately destroy the entire site. It is therefore recommended that
a program designed to obtain a sample of the midden contents be implemented
to mitigate losses.
41 FY 72
This site is located on a wedge-shaped sandy terrace situated between
Cedar Creek and a small intermittent creek that empties into Cedar Creek
approximately 300 meters south of Fayette County Road 120. The site ex­
tends almost the entire width of the terrace from the confluence of the
streams in the southern reaches of the site, north to the county road 120.
Based on surface inspections and minor subsurface probes, it appears that
the occupational refuse is concentrated in two areas separated by a sterile
zone.
Area A comprises the northern section of the site and is characterized
by numerous flint flakes and burned rock eroded and mixed with gravels
brought in for road construction. Fayette County Road 120 bisects the
middle of the habitational residue and consequently has totally disrupted
and mixed all midden materials.
Area B is located in the southern portion of the site near the conflu­
ence of Cedar Creek and the smaller intermittent stream. This section of
the site has been badly damaged and eroded by implementation of a core
sampling station for the proposed dam along with a dirt access road. Habi­
tational materials were scattered over the surface which had been partially
cleared of vegetation for the core drilling operations and subsequently ex­
posed to erosional factors resulting in displacement of cultural deposits.
The undisturbed portions of the site were tested through excavation of
a 1 x 2 meter test unit and two back-hoe trenches. Excavation procedures
followed have been previously described within this report. The back-hoe
trenches were located in the southern extremities, the 1 x 2 meter test pit
was established in the central section of Area A along the western terrace
edge where cultural materials were exposed along the stream cut-bank. Data
collected as a result of these testing programs indicated that major damage
has occurred to almost the entire occupational strata. No intact midden
was observed during these investigations. Further, no diagnostic artifacts
nor cultural features were exposed or collected during survey and testing
procedures.
A large percentage of the site appears to lack structural integrity
and is characterized by an apparent paucity of cultural material. Since
most of the site has been destroyed, there is little in the way of system­

30

atic investigations that could produce significant scientific or historic
information. Therefore, no further work is recommended for 41 FY 72.
41 FY 73
This site is located in a lOW-lying terrace on the east side of
Groce Branch approximately 75 meters north of its confluence with Cedar
Creek. The site overlooks a small waterfall at the base of which lies a
pool carved out of a sandstone formation. The pool probably afforded a
year-round water source. The site was recorded on the basis of numerous
flint flakes observed on the surface.
No gravel deposits were noted in the stream channel, although infor­
mation gathered from a local landowner revealed their one-time existence.
It is thought that the gravels in this section of the study have been re­
cently buried by alluvium.
The site has been severely disturbed. The scanty remains of the
eroded midden are scattered over the surface of the terrace confines and
along the eroded cut bank. The disrupted nature of occupational debris
has occurred primarily as a result of human activities such as wood-cut­
ting, cultivating, grazing, and other farming related processes. The con­
struction of a dirt road for fording purposes has also caused considerable
damage to the cultural deposits. As a result of these disturbances, the
present condition of this site is very poor. No intact cultural deposit
can be discerned in the vertical exposure of the stream cut-bank. No
further work is recommended at this site.
41 FY 74
The site is situated on the western side of Cedar Creek just north
of Fayette County Road 120 and south of the confluence of Cedar Creek and
a small tributary. Cultural materials Were exposed in three distinct con­
centrations, either on the surface or along the eroded cut-bank. The three
midden exposures are scattered over an area of approximately 4,000 square
meters.
A test pit was excavated at each of the three localities. These units
were generally located in promising areas usually along the terrace edge
where eroded materials were observed.
Area A is located in the northern reaches of the site on a sandy, heav­
ily wooded terrace overlooking a confluence of Cedar Creek and a small tri­
butary. Occupational refuse was scattered over the general area which ten­
tatively suggested that the site had been totally deflated. A 1 x 2 meter
test was excavated in an area which appears to exhibit some depth to the
cultural deposits. However, the test indicated that surficial impressions
were correct; the area has been deflated and lacks potential for providing
additional data.
Area B is located in the southern portion of the site just north of
the county road 120. This section of the occupation is characterized by

31

vegetational cover which is common along creek margins within the project
limits and includes oak, mesquite and juniper trees and various shrubby
flora. Cultural materials were first noticed eroded from the cut-banks
of two ravines. A closer examination revealed the presence of several
flint flakes on top of a gravelly ridge adjacent to the creek.
A 1 x 2 meter test pit was excavated in an area which appears, from
observations of the cut-bank, to display some depth to the cultural depos­
its. The testing exposed a thick gravel zone containing very few occupa­
tion materials within the upper 10 cm at the base of which was deposited a
culturally sterile clay. The testing and surficial inspections revealed
a severely disturbed midden deposit. The post-depositional disruptions
have been primarily the result of deflation and other natural agencies
which have left this area unworthy of further attention.
Area C is located on the floodplain in between the two previously de­
scribed localities in an area that has been cleared and seeded for cattle
grazing. This section was recorded as part of the general site on the ba­
sis of several flint flakes and some burned rock which had eroded along
the cut-bank of Cedar Creek. The area looked promising for recovery of
significant data, and did not appear to be deflated or disturbed other
than what damage occurred by the vegetation-clearing process. Subsequent­
ly it was decided to test the area in hopes of recovering a sample of di­
agnostic artifacts enabling a temporal placement of site, and, to collect
data on the vertical extent of the cultural deposits.
A 1 x 1 meter test pit was established along the terrace edge where
the occupational remains had been observed. The unit was oriented on a
north/south axis and was sampled in 10 em levels. All fill was passed
through 1/4 inch mesh and materials were placed in a labeled bag.
As a result of the testing occupational refuse buried within the ter­
race alluvium was exposed. However, no distinct physical stratigraphy was
recognized in the pit profiles. The midden refuse was contained in a sandy
loam which exhibited gradual changes in coloration and texture from a gray­
ish brown at surface to dark grayish brown in the lower levels. The sandy
loam was superimposed over an apparently culturally sterile sandy clay zone.
However, there does appear to be some stratified cultural deposits with
late prehistoric residue occurring in the upper levels and middle prehis­
toric materials represented in the bottom levels.
Artifactual materials collected from the excavations included large
quantities of flint flakes of which 5 show signs of utilization, 1 distal
tip of a thin biface, 5 pottery sherds, and an example of an established
projectile point type of the Williams variety (Suhm and Jelks 1962).
This site will soon be totally destroyed by construction of the earth­
en dam and subsequent inundation of the areas below the 390 foot elevation.
Based on preliminary analysis of artifactual materials, the site appears
to be reasonably productive in Area C which consists of 60% to 70% of the

- - - - - -

.......

~

..-

......

---.~------

---------_.

32

occupation. More extensive excavations at this site could yield important
archeological data on chronological sequence and subsistence economic sys­
tems of the prehistoric inhabitants within the study area. Therefore, the
site is recommended for further excavations designed to sample the popula­
tion of artifacts, features, and maintenance by-products possibly contained
within the cultural deposits.
41 FY 75
is a terrace site located on the eastern bank of Cedar Creek
approximately 300 meters north of Fayette County Road 120 and 400 meters
south of the confluence of Cedar Creek with Groce Branch. The site is lo­
cated in an area that has undergone extensive clearing and plowing for cul­
tivation that has resulted in severe disruption of the buried cultural de­
posits. Flint debris was exposed along the stream cut-bank indicating that
some displacement of cultural materials has occurred at the locality. Con­
versation with the landowner revealed that erosion along the terrace edge
has been extensive with an estimated loss of 5 feet within the past 10
years. The removal of vegetation for cultivation processes has resulted in
the appearance of several gullies along the creek margin. The effects of
these erosional processes will eventually result in the total destruction
of this site in the very near future. It was decided therefore to implement
a testing program at this locality. (Testing procedures have been previously
described within this report.)
The testing consisted of excavation in two 1 x 2 meter pits located
along the cut-bank in the apparent center of the occupations area where
flint debris was most prevalent.
Both test units at this site resulted in vegetative evidence. No dis­
tinct cultural strata were noted in either of the test pits. Further, no
artifactual material or occupational features were observed or recorded.
However, the test pits were only systematically excavated to a depth of 30
cm at which time a more cursory approach was adopted which also exposed
only culturally sterile layers.
Due to the apparent total disruption and unproductiveness of the mid­
den deposit, it is thought that the site has been totally destroyed. There­
fore, no further work is recommended at this site.
41 FY 76
This site is located in a low-lying terrace on the west side of a tri­
butary stream that drains into Groce Branch about 0.2 miles downstream.
The area is situated south of State Highway 159, one mile southeast of its
intersection with Fayette County Road 119. The vegetation is typical of
the terrace sites.
The site was recorded on the basis of several pieces of burned rock
and a few flint flakes. One bifacial flint specimen was collected from the
surface just north of the occupation but no discernable cultural feature
could be found in association with the artifact. The locality has been

33

badly eroded by stream discharge and surface water run off. No intact
cultural deposits were exposed from subsurface probing on observation of
cut-bank profiles.
Due to the eroded, scattered, and unproductive nature of the site,
no further work is recommended.
41 FY 78
41 FY 78 represents the second of the three upland sites located by
the survey. The site is situated approximately 0.2 miles north of Fayette
County Road 120 and 0.5 miles east of Fayette County Road 119. It occu­
pies a slightly south-sloping knoll composed of sandy loam over a cultur­
ally sterile clay, and overlooks the confluence of Cedar Creek and Groce
Branch (Fig. 4). Surficial inspections and minor subsurface probes sug­
gest that the site is very extensive, being the largest known in the study.
Occupational residue were strewn over an area which covers at least 5,000
square meters. Presently the area is characterized by an occasional juni­
per or less frequently a mesquite tree except along the creek confines
which are covered with a dense stand of oak, juniper, mesquite, cottonwood,
and various scrubby flora.
Cultural refuse was first noticed in three distinct concentrations.
These were delineated as separate occupational areas and treated as such.
Two of the areas, Areas Band C, are located in the southeast sections of
the site along the creek terrace. These probably represent small Prehis­
toric activity areas established for exploiting the micro-environmental
zones existing along the creek margin. The third area, Area A, represents
the largest concentration of cultural material scattered over the surface
of the knoll.
All these occupational areas were tested through excavation of 1 x 2
meter pits to collect precise data on the vertical extent of the midden
deposits and obtain a limited sample of the materials and features pres­
ent. The placement of test pits within each area was designed to provide
information on depositional sequences, internal structure of deposits,
and perhaps yield data on site function. All sections tested exposed
evidence for aboriginal occupation.
Test Pit 1, located in what is presently believed to be the center
portion of Area A, exposed cultural materials to a depth of 25 cm below
surface. Large quantities of flint debris and fire residue contained in
a sandy loam were collected. Artifactua1 materials included various
flint chips and flakes, of which 15 showed signs of modification and/or
utilization. One core was also recovered; however, no time-diagnostic
artifacts were exposed.
Test Pit 2, located in Area B, was placed along the terrace edge
overlooking Groce Branch. The unit revealed refuse to a depth of 60 cm
and appears to exhibit intact stratigraphic succession of cultural de­
posits expressed in variations of vertical distributions and densities

34

of artifactual remains. Material collected includes 66 utilized flakes,
2 modified flakes, 5 core fragments, 3 bifacial fragments, 2 distal ends
of thin bifaces (possibly projectile points), I knife of the Cleburne
variety (Jelks 1962:44-45), 3 pottery sherds, 3 utilized quartz cobbles,
and 1 smoothed stone.
A partially disturbed hearth, exposed at a depth of 20-25 cm below
surface, represents the only habitational feature recognized during the
limited testing (see Fig. 4d). It consisted of quartz materials all dis­
colored and shattered by heat. The hearth residue was concentrated in a
small subcircular area with a diameter of about 50-60 cm. To the north
of the hearth area but within the same stratum, a group of quartzite
pebbles was exposed along with several flint flakes, chips, and I bifa­
cially worked fragment. The feature probably relates to cooking activi­
ties although no indication of charcoal, ash, or bone was recovered.
In Area C, a 1 x 2 meter test unit was placed along the creek margin
in a section that was thought to have some depth in cultural deposits.
This assessment was based primarily on observing the vertical exposure
of the cut-bank. The results of this test did not support the original
expectation. Occupational refuse was limited to the upper 25 cm of the
alluvium which consisted of a sandy loam. Collected materials consisted
of hearth residues, flint chips and flakes including 7 utilized flakes,
2 crude bifacial implements, 1 bifacial blade fragment, and 1 core frag­
ment.
Data collected from the vertical exposures of the profiles revealed
marked differences in stratum characteristics. The most notable aspect
was the fact that a culturally sterile clay was reached in Test Pits 1
and 3 at a depth of approximately 23 cm below surface; however, in Test
Unit 2, the clay zone was buried beneath 50 cm of sandy loam. Further,
artifactual materials were more extensive in Test Pit 2 and the unit re­
vealed the only habitational feature discovered at this site. No distinc­
tions in aboriginal activities or site function are advanced due to the
limited sample. However, the delineated sections and data collected from
them do exhibit some characteristics suggestive of limited activity areas
within the larger complex occupational site.
The cultural deposits appear to be stratified and relatively intact
displaying only minor disturbances of root action and activities connect­
ed with cultivation. The site offers an opportunity to study the spacial
distribuLions of activity areas and site function. The site is situated
within the cooling reservoir and will be totally destroyed upon comple­
tion of the dam. Therefore, a sampling of this site is recommended in
order to mitigate losses.

-------~--------------------------------------------~----------------------------------------------------

35

41 FY 79
41 FY 79 is a terrace site situated in the west bank of a tributary
that empties into Cedar Creek approximately 0.2 miles downstream (south).
The area is located just south of the KATY Railroad and just across the
creek from 41 FY 67.
This locality has general characteristic features in common with the
terrace sites. Vegetation includes juniper, oak, and mesquite trees with
thorny brush and vines within proximity to the creek. Cultural materials
were exposed and eroded along the stream cut-bank and in eroded areas where
the site has been modified by activities associated with the railroad con­
struction. The survey was unable to determine the horizontal or vertical
extent of the site because of physical limits imposed by time. However,
based on extensive surface inspections it appears that the site is at least
partially intact and therefore a possible significant resource. This site
is located near a proposed access road right-of-way and should be protected
from possible modification and/or disruption resulting from planned con­
struction. If protection of the site is not feasible, mitigative action
should be taken.

41 FY 80
The scanty remains of this site are situated in a sandy wedge-shaped
terrace above the confluence of an intermittent tributary and a large ra­
vine. The area is generally located about 0.2 miles south and 0.1 mile
west of the intersection of Fayette County Roads 120 and 119.
The terrace is covered with a dense vegetation which is typical of
floodplain sites in the project area. The area has been severely eroded
from excessive water run off and is characterized by an undulating surface.
The cultural materials remaining were concentrated toward the point of the
terrace overlooking the stream channels below, and covering about 50 square
meters. The occupational refuse consisted of large quantities of thermally
fractured quartz, probably extracted from the stream beds below where ex­
tensive resource materials were deposited from eroded cut-banks. The fire
residue was generally scattered away from the central concentration. There
was an apparent paucity of flint flakes exhibiting platforms or bulbs of
percussion and the survey recovered no diagnostic artifacts, perhaps sug­
gesting that the site represents activities generally connected with hearth
maintenance. Based on minor subsurface probing and observations of verti­
cal exposures of cut-bank, the habitational refuse is shallow, in poor con­
dition, and lacks potential for yielding important scientific data on the
prehistory of the area.
No further work concerning protection or mitigation are recommended
for this site.

36

41 FY 81
This site is located on the east side of Cedar Creek, 0.3 miles north
of Fayette County Road 120 and 0.2 miles east of Fayette County Road 119.
The area is characterized by numerous mesquite and juniper trees. Other
foliage includes various shrubby plants and thorny vines. Information col­
lected from inspecting the vertical exposures of the stream cut-bank and
limited shovel tests provided preliminary indications suggesting that the
midden has been deflated. A 1 x 2 meter testing unit, placed in an area
that was thought to contain intact cultural deposits, was excavated to pro­
vide data on the internal nature of the midden. The results of testing
were generally negative. No cultural materials were recovered from the
testing except within the first 5 cm below surface. It appears that this
site has been totally modified by deflation.
No further work involving 41 FY 81 is justified; therefore, no recom­
mendations are presented.
41 FY 82

This site is situated on a high gravel-bearing terrace overlooking a
fossil floodplain of the Colorado River drainage system. The area is lo­
cated between Baylor and Cedar creeks south of the community of Gay Hill,
approximately 3 miles east of the city limits of La Grange on State Highway
71 (Fig. 4a). Cultural remains were disseminated over the entire occupation
area which extended for 0.5 miles along the terrace edge and covered an es­
timated 4,000 to 5,000 square meters. Artifactual materials recovered from
the surface of the site included 2 established projectile point types, Bul­
vepde and Pedernales, representative of the Middle Prehistoric Stage (Suhm
and Jelks 1962).
A river access road, cut through the terrace to decrease the steepness
of the terrace slope, has resulted in a vertical exposure of the buried de­
posits. An examination of this profile combined with excavation of a 1 x 2
meter pit provided ample evidence demonstrating the surficial nature of the
cultural deposit. All observations suggested that the site lacks vertical
stratigraphy. Conversations with a local nonprofessional who has surface
collected the site for a number of years support this conclusion.
Due to the apparent surficial nature of the cultural refuse, no further
work at this site is justified; therefore. no recommendations are made.
41 FY 84
This site is situated on the west side of Cedar Creek at its intersec­
tion with the KATY Railroad approximately 0.5 miles south of Fayette County
Road 120. The area is located across the creek from site 41 FY 68. The
cultural materials are strewn over a remnant terrace and cover an area of
approximately 100 square meters.

The area has been cleared of vegetation and seeded with bermuda grass.
The railroad and a parallel drainage ditch mark the southern boundary of
the locality. A dirt farm road has been cut along the upper (western) por­
tions of the site.

37

In order to determine the vertical extent of the midden refuse, a se­
ries of small subsurface shovel tests were made. The result of these was
negative. The site appears to have eroded as a result of the vegetation­
clearing processes. What remains of the site is apparently scattered over
the surface. No further work is justified at this site and no recommenda­
tions concerning protection or mitigation are presented.
41 FY 92
The displaced remains of this upland site lie on an eastward-sloping
knoll overlooking the west bank of Cedar Creek just south of Fayette County
Road 120. The physical evidence of prehistoric occupation was represented
by various cultural materials such as chipped flint and thermally fractured
quartz. The midden has been disturbed by recent plowing and refuse is scat­
tered over an area that covers approximately 1,000 square meters. Artifac­
tual materials recovered from the surface consisted of three flint specimens:
1 bifacial blade fragment (probably a knife), 1 modified flake, and 1 core.
A 1 x 2 meter excavation unit was oriented in the northwestern sections
of the site thought to contain intact cultural deposits. The testing was
included in the survey to recover interpretative data on vertical extent,
temporal placement, and internal structure of the midden. All information
collected from the testing was of a negative nature. No stratified cultur­
al deposits were exposed. The small sample of occupational refuse explored
was generally of a scattered nature and appeared to lack structura~ inte­
grity. No diagnostic artifacts were recovered from the testing.
The site is not thought to be of importance in understanding the pre­
history of the region. This assessment is primarily based on the disturbed
nature of the artifactual remains. No further work is recommended at this
locality.

Summary and Conclusions
An intensive archeological survey designed to locate and evaluate
the potential of the cultural resources within areas to be affected by
the planned modifications of the Fayette Power Project resulted in the
identification of 19 prehistori.c sites. These consisted of 16 Alluvial
Terrace sites and 3 Upland type sites. Several of these were tested
through extensive subsurface probing, augering, and minor shovel testing,
as well as controlled excavations of I x 2 meter test units and machine­
aided testing. Prior to this survey no prehistoric sites had been offi­
cially recorded within the study area. However, surface collecting by
relic-hunters has been prominent for several years, but their concern is
for archeological specimens and not scientific inquiry.

38

The present condition of the cultural deposits located during the
survey may be divided into three categories: undisturbed, partially dis­
turbed, and severely disturbed (Table I). "Undisturbed" archeological
sites are represented by apparently intact deposits displaying only minor
disturbances such as rodent burrowing and root action. Localities desig­
nated as "partially disturbed" have been affected by road-cuts, deflation
(wind and/or water-generated), erosion gullies, or displacement to no more
than 50% of the observed midden refuse. A prehistoric habitat defined as
"severely disturbed" is one where extensive erosion, deflation, and modifi­
cation by man have been responsible for the destruction of not less than
50% and in some situations total disruption of the observed cultural debris.
The evidence for prehistoric activities varies from small concentra­
tions of lithic debris, probably associated with tool production system,
to extensive lithic accumulations spread over large areas perhaps suggest­
ing diversity in site function. Chronologically diagnostic artifacts col­
lected during the study were few in number, resulting not only from exten­
sive surface collecting by local nonprofessionals, but related also to the
probable intermittent, rather than continuous occupations by aborigines.
This may also explain the occurrence of artifacts associated with disparate
cultural components represented at the same locality.
The cultural affiliation and age of the occupations within the study
area are difficult to assess with presently available information; however,
similarities do exist between those archeological materials.identified dur­
ing the survey and complexes associated previously with Central and Coastal
Texas physiographic and cultural zones. It is predictable that some simi­
larities would exist in view of the geographic proximity of the areas. Ar­
tifactual materials collected by the survey indicate that the area was prob­
ably occupied from the Late Archaic continuing through the Post-Archaic or
Late Prehistoric Stage, with a time range from about 2000 B.C.-A.D. 1500
(4000 B.P.-500 B.P.). They also appear to be representative of a subsis­
tence pattern based primarily on hunting and gathering.
The vast majority of the cultural deposits were lying on or near the
present surface having sustained disturbances from activities relating to
and/or resulting from agricultural land use, as well as disruptions asso­
ciated with natural agencies such as wind and water erosion. Further, the
cultural deposits are characteristically shallow, rarely exceeding depths
of 30 cm, and lack visible stratigraphic separations. Consequently, a
large percentage of the recorded sites are in poor condition. However, the
survey did isolate a number of demonstrably significant archeological sites
exhibiting potential for productive investigation which appear to be endan­
gered by project-related modifications. Assessments of site potential were
based on observed characteristics of surface inspections, minor subsurface
probing, and limited test excavations. Also of importance in the evalua­
tions and recommendations was the fact that the planned project lies in a
transitional zone representing a blending of two major cultural and geo­
graphic regions. Few comprehensive archeological investigations have been
conducted in this marginal zone. For these reasons, recommendations con­

39

cerning protective management if at all possible should be of primary con­
cern. The avoidance of land modifications or other project-related activi­
ties near the resources would preserve their present condition. Planned
construction activities would detrimentally affect these sensitive areas
and result in irreversible and irretrievable losses of valuable archeologi­
cal resources. If protective management is not feasible, appropriate miti­
gative action should be taken prior to modification.
Of the 19 prehistoric sites located by the survey, seven are felt to
be of significant importance as to warrant further investigations. These
are recommended on the basis of demonstrable potential for yielding valuable
archeological data. In order to salvage a representative sample, four of
the sites are recommended for excavation. Specifically, these prehistoric
sites include 41 FY 65, 70, 74, and 78. The additional three sites, includ­
ing 41 FY 67, 71, and 79, are recommended for further testing. The remain­
ing eleven sites were judged to have no significant potential for yielding
further scientific data other than that collected during the survey and lim­
ited testing; no recommendations concerning protection and/or excavation is
presented for these localities.
The sampling and hand excavation
mented with heavy machinery such as a
is thought appropriate by the primary
be oriented toward collecting data on
and material culture.

in designated areas should be supple­
back-hoe or front-end loader when it
investigator. Such a program should
site function, resource utilization,

40

TABLE I.

65
66
67
68
69
70
FY71
FY72
FY 73
FY 74
FY 75
FY 76
FY 77
FY 78
FY 79
FY 80
FY 81
FY 82
FY 84
FY 85
FY
FY
FY
FY
FY
FY

FY 86
FY 87
FY 88
FY 89
FY 90
FY 91
FY 92

FY 94
FY 95
FY 96
FY 97

Recommendations for Mitigation Procedures

Terrace
Terrace
Terrace
Terrace
Terrace
Upland
Terrace
Terrace
Terrace
Terrace
Terrace
Terrace
Upland
Terrace
Terrace
Terrace
Terrace
Terrace
Cemetery
Log foundation
Legler
log
house
Cemetery
Sugar
press
Cemetery
Sugar
press
Upland
Biegel
house and
cemetery
Polasek
house
Spring
Hill
cemetery
Asa Hill
cemetery

Terminal Archaic
Post-Archaic
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Late Archaic
Late Post-Archaic
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Historic
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indeterminate
Indetermina te
Middle Archaic
Indeterminate
Historic

Partially
Severely
Partially
Severely
Undisturbed
Undisturbed
Partially
Partially
Severely
Partially
Severely
Severely

TEST
RECORD
TEST
RECORD
TEST
TEST
TEST
TEST
RECORD
TEST
RECORD
RECORD

Partially
Partially
Severely
Partially
Partially
Severely
Undisturbed

TEST
TEST
RECORD
TEST
TEST

Historic

Undisturbed

Historic
Historic

Undisturbed
Undisturbed

RECORD
REMOVAL OF HOUSE
AND IMPLEMENTS TO
WINEDALE MUSEUM; TEST
RECORD

Historic
Historic

Severely
Undisturbed

RECORD
RECORD

Historic
Indeterminate

Partially
Severely

Historic

Undisturbed

Historic

Partially

RECORD
RECORD
ARCHITECTURAL RECORDING AND ARCHEOLOGICAL
EXCAVATION
ARCHITECTURAL RECORDING AND ARCHEOLOGICAL
EXCAVATION

Historic

Partially

RECORD

Historic

Undisturbed

RECORD

RECORD

---------------

~-

-­

.....

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E.
1967
Excavations at the Jamison Site (41 BL 4), Liberty County,
Texas. Houston Archeological SocietYJ Report No.1.
Biesele, Rudolph L.

1930

The History of the Ger.man

Settl~ents

in Texas.

Houston.

Jelks, Edward B.
1962
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in
Hill County, Texas. Archaeological Series J No.5. Depart­
ment of Anthropology, The University of Texas. Austin.
Jordan, Terry G.

1966

German Seed in Texas Soil.

The University of Texas Press.

Austin.
Newcomb, W.W., Jr.
1960
Indian Tribes of Texas. BulZetin of the Texas ArcheoZogi­
cal SocietYJ Vol. 29 (for 1958): 1-35.

1962

The Indians of Texas:

From Prehistorio to Modern Times.

University of Texas Press.

Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R.
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Wil­
1974
liamson County, Texas. Research Report No. 49. Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and Edward B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Special
PUbtioationB J No.1, Texas Archeological Society, and
Bulletin No.4, Texas Memorial Museum. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Webb, Walter P. (Editor)

1952

The Handbook of Texas.
Association.

Volume I.

Austin.

41

Texas State Historical

42

Submitted in fulfillment of the terms of Interagency Cooperation
Contract No. LAC (74-75)-1557 between the Lower Colorado River Author­
ity and The University of Texas at Austin (Texas Archeological Survey)
Work carried out in the Fayette Power Project area by the Texas
Archeological Survey~ The University of Texas at Austin, was under the
auspices of Antiquities Committee Permit for Archeological Investiga­
tions No. 78.

