AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE WEST SIDE
FACILITY PROJECT IN BRAZOS COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 04-16

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
The City of Bryan
Post Office Box 1000
Bryan, Texas 77805

ABSTRACT
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) conducted an archaeological
survey of the proposed West Side Facility Project in central Brazos County,
Texas in June of 2004 and January of 2005 under Antiquities Permit 3444. The
Principal Investigator was William E. Moore, and the Project Archaeologist was
Edward P. Baxter. The project area occupies an upland setting north and east
of Thompson’s Creek and the surrounding floodplain (61.1 acres).
Shovel testing revealed the presence of a prehistoric site (41BZ158) on
the sandy hill overlooking Thompson’s Creek, and additional investigations using
a backhoe were performed in accordance with Texas Historical Commission
guidelines. The size of this site is approximately 400 meters east/west by 300
meters north/south. Cultural materials were found in shovel tests to a depth of
110 centimeters. A concentration of gravels, silicified wood, and possible burned
clay balls were found in a backhoe trench at a depth of 150 centimeters. It
appears that artifacts are present throughout the sandy mantle overlying the
culturally sterile clay stratum. No diagnostic artifacts were found; however,
41BZ158 is believed to date to the Late Prehistoric period of Texas prehistory
based on a collection of arrow points and ceramics in the possession of the
landowner. Artifact analyses indicate a campsite where tool refurbishing and
possibly arrow point manufacture were conducted.
One feature was found during the second visit to the site which involved
backhoe trenching. The authors believe this feature represents a disposal site
for materials used during cooking as it does not have the characteristics of a
hearth. Although burials and intact features have been found at other sites along
the Brazos River in similar topographic settings, no such feature was found at
41BZ158. Therefore, significance testing is not warranted. The artifacts possess
no research potential and have been discarded.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
BVRA is appreciative of the assistance provided by CSC Engineering &
Environmental Consultants, Inc. throughout this project. William R. Cullen, P.E.
and Scott A Schautschick, Environmental Specialist, provided maps and
obtained permission from the City of Bryan to examine the project area. Mr.
Cullen also arranged for a backhoe and operator. The Principal Investigator is
grateful to Edward P. Baxter for serving as Project Archaeologist and directing
the field survey. William A. Dickens assisted during the backhoe trenching. At
the State level, Jean Hughes and Allegra Azulay at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas, conducted the file search for
previously recorded archaeological sites in the project area and vicinity. William
A. Martin, Staff Archeologist at the Texas Historical Commission, Archeology
Division, was the reviewer for this project, and his input was valuable to the
success of this investigation. Bradley F. Bowman shared his knowledge of
archaeological sites along the Brazos River, and William A. Dickens examined
the artifacts. Edward P. Baxter and Lili G. Lyddon prepared the figures for this
report. Jennifer R. McMillan and Krystal L. Roberts provided technical editing and
read the manuscript for typographical errors and consistency.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................4
ARCHAEOLOGIAL BACKGROUND.....................................................................7
METHODS OF INVESTIGATION .........................................................................9
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................15
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................18
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................19
Appendix I: Shovel Test Log
Appendix II: Backhoe Trench Log
Appendix III: Backhoe Trench Profiles
Appendix IV: Location of Site 41BZ158
Appendix V: Lithic Analysis
Figures
Figure 1. General Location ...................................................................................2
Figure 2. Project Area ...........................................................................................3
Figure 3. Project Area on Soils Map .....................................................................6
Figure 4. Location of Shovel Tests......................................................................10
Figure 5. Location of Backhoe Trenches ............................................................12
Figure 6. Backhoe Trench 7, North End..............................................................13
Figure 7. Backhoe Trench 11, South End ...........................................................13

iv

INTRODUCTION
The City of Bryan plans to construct a wastewater treatment plant on a
61.1-acre tract in central Brazos County, Texas (Figure 1). CSC Engineering &
Environmental Consultants, Inc. of Bryan, Texas was retained by the City of
Bryan to coordinate the initial planning of this project and address issues such as
wetlands and endangered species, as applicable. BVRA was retained by CSC
Engineering & Environmental Consultants, Inc. to conduct the archaeological
survey for this project. The Area of Potential Affect (APE), or project area, is
depicted on the 7.5’ USGS topographic quadrangle Chances Store (3096-422)
(Figure 2).
The wastewater treatment plant will be situated on an upland terrace that
comprises most of the 61.1 acres to be developed. The proposed construction
will alter the entire hill and may remove soil to the basal clay below the sandy
mantle in some areas. A discharge or outfall line will transport treated water from
the plant to Thompson’s Creek to the south and west. The trench needed to
install this line will be approximately four feet wide and between two and four feet
deep.
Brazos County contains numerous archaeological sites, both prehistoric
and historic, and the 61.1-acre tract is located in the general area where
significant prehistoric sites have been recorded. Therefore, the Texas Historical
Commission, Archeology Division, requested a professional archaeologist
conduct a cultural resources survey of the area to be affected by construction.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
General
Brazos County is located in Southeast Texas about 125 miles from the
Gulf of Mexico and is 590.9 square miles (378,106 acres) in size. The Navasota
River borders the county on the east, and the Brazos River forms the western
boundary. The northern boundary is the Old San Antonio Road (OSR) that was
established in 1691. Numerous streams that flow into the Navasota River and
Brazos River drain the county.
The project area is located within the West Gulf Coastal Plain section of
the Coastal Plain Physiographic Province as defined by Fenneman (1938:100120). He subdivides this province according to the age of the geological
formations (Gulf series) that roughly parallel the Texas coastline. The area is
hilly and situated within the East Texas timber belt. Gould (1969) describes it as
an area characterized by gently rolling to hilly topography with light colored soils
that are acidic sandy loams or sands.
The climate is sub-humid to humid, and the weather is considered to be
predominately warm. Annual rainfall for Brazos County is 39.21 inches. A
January minimum temperature of 42 degrees Fahrenheit and a July maximum
temperature of 95 degrees Fahrenheit combine to produce a growing season of
274 days (Kingston and Harris 1983:180). The altitude varies from 200-400 feet.
Description of Project Area
The 61.1-acre project area is located on a tract of land that is drained by
Thompson’s Creek and Turkey Creek. Elevations vary from 250 feet along the
creek bottoms to 332 feet in the uplands. At the time of the first phase of the
survey, vegetation in the upland portion of the project area consisted of various
grasses, scattered trees, and numerous patches of Bull Nettle, an indicator of
deep sandy soils. The floodplain below the upland ridge contained grasses and
scattered trees. Although most of the upland area has been cultivated in the
past, it was being used as pasture for cattle at the time of this investigation.
Recent improvements on the site include a house trailer, barn, animal pens,
shed, pond, septic field, and dirt roads.
Soils
According to the Soil Survey of Brazos County, Texas (Chervenka
2003:11), soils in the county formed under Post Oak Savannah and prairie
vegetation. The soils that formed under Post Oak Savannah are mostly light
colored and sandy, and many have a dense clay subsoil that is less than 12
inches below the surface. The soils that formed under prairie vegetation are
mostly dark loams and clays.

4

The project area is located within five detailed map units (Figure 3).
These are Chazos loamy fine sand, 1 to 5 percent slopes (ChC); Gredge fine
sandy loam, 2 to 5 percent slopes (GrC2); Rader fine sandy loam, 0 to 2 percent
slopes (RaB); Robco loamy fine sand, 1 to 3 percent slopes (RoB); and Ships
clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes rarely flooded (ShA).
ChC soils are described by Chervenka (2003:38-39) as being found on
stream terraces, summits, and backslopes. Native vegetation in the area is Post
Oak Savannah. This is a very deep, moderately well drained soil with a water
table exceeding six feet. These soils do not flood, and the root zone is very
deep. The surface layer is a loamy fine sand (0-4 inches) that overlies a
subsurface layer of loamy fine sand (4-14 inches) and a clay subsoil.
GrC2 soils are described by Chervenka (2003:52) as being found on
stream terraces, summits, and upper backslopes. Native vegetation in the area
is Post Oak Savannah. This is a very deep, well drained soil with a water table
exceeding six feet. These soils do not flood, and the root zone is very deep but
restricted by the clay subsoil. The surface layer is a loamy fine sand (0-3 inches)
that overlies a clay subsoil.
RaB soils are described by Chervenka (2003:66-67) as being found on
stream terraces and valley fills on broad flats and toeslopes. Native vegetation in
the area is Post Oak Savannah. This is a very deep, moderately well drained soil
with a perched water table between two and four feet. These soils do not flood,
and the root zone is very deep. The surface layer is a loamy fine sand (0-11
inches) that overlies a subsurface layer of fine sandy loam (11-17 inches) and a
clay subsoil.
RoB soils are described by Chervenka (2003:69-70) as being found on
uplands and terraces. Native vegetation in the area is Post Oak Savannah. This
is a very deep, moderately well drained soil with a perched water table between
two and four feet. These soils do not flood, and the root zone is very deep. The
surface layer is a loamy fine sand (0-15 inches) that overlies a subsurface layer
of fine sandy loam (15-28 inches) and a subsoil consisting of sandy clay loam.
ShA soils are described by Chervenka (2003:78-79) as being found on
broad flats of floodplains. Native vegetation in the area consists of hardwood
forest of pecan and elm and an under story of switch grass, wild rye, and
bluestems. This is a very deep, moderately well drained soil with a water table
greater than six feet. These soils rarely flood, and the root zone is very deep.
The surface layer is a reddish-brown alkaline clay (0-8 inches) that overlies a
subsoil consisting of a moderately alkaline clay of various colors.

5

Figure 3. Project Area on Soils Map

6

ARCHAEOLOGIAL BACKGROUND
Archival Research
A review of the records at TARL revealed no archaeological sites have
been recorded in the project area. It was discovered; however, that a number of
sites have been recorded in the region, and several significant archaeological
surveys have been conducted in Brazos County.
The project area is located on a sandy hill between two major streams:
Thompson’s Creek and Turkey Creek. Both of these creeks drain into the
Brazos River approximately 700 meters to the south of the project area, and
numerous sites have been recorded along these waterways. Sites in similar
settings along the Brazos River in Brazos and Burleson counties have produced
intact features and burials. Three examples are 41BZ1, 41BU16, and 41BU17.
The first site to be recorded in Brazos County (41BZ1) is situated on a
sandy ridge overlooking the Brazos River to the west. This is a very extensive
site that has been visited for many years by local collectors. When first recorded,
it consisted of six areas on both sides of State Highway 60. Numerous artifacts
dating from Paleo-Indian to Late Prehistoric times have been found at this site.
In the 1970s, George Carter, a Geology professor at Texas A&M University,
excavated several burials in deep sandy deposits from this site (Personal
Communication from George Carter to William A. Dickens). No written report
documenting this work was found during the TARL search, and no record of
burials from 41BZ1 exists at TARL (Personal Communication from Jean Hughes
to William E. Moore).
Personnel from the Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, excavated prehistoric site 41BU16, in adjacent Burleson County in
1984 (Roemer and Carlson 1987). The site produced four burned rock hearths
and four human burials, all believed to date to the Middle Archaic period of Texas
prehistory (4950 B.P.). Site 41BU16 represents the first major controlled
excavation of a prehistoric site in close proximity to the current project area. The
report by Roemer and Carlson (1987) provides a detailed summary of the
archaeology of the area and is a major reference for this part of Texas.

7

Bradley F. Bowman (1985) excavated Winnie’s Mound (41BU17) in the
1980s. This site produced 12 human burials, numerous chipped stone artifacts,
fired clay balls, wattle-and-daub fragments, and a few sherds of pottery.
Bowman believes that this site represents a prehistoric cemetery with two burial
groups belonging to the Middle Archaic and Late Archaic periods. Evidence of
Paleo-Indian occupation was found in the form of a San Patrice point and a
Plainview-like point, both found in situ during the excavation.The following
archaeological reports contain detailed discussions of the prehistoric chronology
of the area and are recommended as additional reading. They are Kotter (1981),
Prewitt (1981), Roemer and Carlson (1987), Moore and Warren (1993), Thoms
(1993a, 1993b), and Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993).

8

METHODS OF INVESTIGATION
Background Research
The field survey was supplemented by an examination of site records and
other documents at TARL. The TARL records were reviewed for a listing of
known sites in the project area and vicinity. Relevant archaeological reports
documenting work in Brazos County were perused in order to become familiar
with the types of prehistoric and historic sites found in the area. Discussions with
other archaeologists knowledgeable of this area were conducted.
Field Survey
The field crew consisted of William E. Moore, Edward P. Baxter, and
William A. Dickens. The Pedestrian Survey identified the presence of a modern
trailer house, barn, and animal pens. These were discussed in the field notes,
but they were not photographed or recorded as a historic site since the structures
are less than 50 years of age. Due to thick ground cover and lack of exposed
areas such as rodent burrows, no evidence of site 41BZ158 was found on the
surface.
The subsurface was examined through shovel tests and backhoe trenches
in two phases. In all, 61 shovel tests and 15 backhoe trenches were excavated in
the project area, with the majority on site 41BZ158. All excavated earth removed
during shovel testing was screened using ¼ inch hardware cloth. Data obtained
from the shovel tests were recorded on a shovel test log (Appendix I). All shovel
tests were backfilled following evaluation and mapping. Shovel tests were
mapped using a compass and pacing in conjunction with a hand-held GPS unit.
These measurements were then used to demonstrate the coverage of the project
area by the field survey crew and to create site boundaries. Figure 4 depicts the
approximate location of the 61 shovel tests.
The backhoe trenches were excavated with a John Deer 80 backhoe with
a 24-inch wide bucket. These trenches were excavated to determine the soil
types and depths of the site and surrounding portion of the project area. They
were also used to search for buried features within site 41BZ158 and to locate
other sites in the floodplain that might be present. The trenches were 10 meters
long and 80 centimeters wide. In the upland area, each trench was excavated
into the clay when possible or to 2.4 meters, the maximum depth that could be
reached with the backhoe. Some trenches were abandoned due to ground water
infiltration and did not encounter the clay stratum. In the floodplain area and
along the proposed outfall line, every trench was dug entirely through clay. The
maximum depth of these trenches was 1.5 meters which exceeded the proposed
APE of four feet.

9

Figure 4. Location of Shovel Tests

10

All trenches were orientated along a north-south axis except for the four
trenches along the proposed outfall line. These were oriented northeast to
southwest. No material was screened on the site area since the area had been
thoroughly shovel tested. An archaeologist monitored the trench excavation and
examined the excavated soil for artifacts and other indications of a site or feature.
All backhoe trenches were backfilled following evaluation and mapping.
When Feature 1 was discovered, Backhoe Trench 1 was expanded in size
(width) in the area of the feature so the Project Archaeologist could safely
evaluate the find. Soil types and feature data were recorded on a Trench Profile
Form, and digital photographs were taken of each trench. Control was achieved
by the use of a hand-held GPS unit, a Keeson fiberglass tape, hand tape, and a
stadia rod. Soil samples were taken from the different soil layers encountered.
Appendix II is the Backhoe Trench Log, and Appendix III consists of the backhoe
trench profiles. Figure 5 depicts the approximate location of the 15 backhoe
trenches within the project area. Figure 6 illustrates the sandy mantle profile
present in Backhoe Trench 7, which was excavated at site 41BZ158 in the
upland area. Figure 7 illustrates the clay soils present in the floodplain area in
Backhoe Trench 11.
A discussion of the prehistoric site found during this survey is presented in
the Results and Conclusions section of this report. Basic soil descriptions were
taken from the recently published soil survey for Brazos County (Chervenka
2003).

11

Figure 5. Location of Backhoe Trenches

12

Figure 6. Backhoe Trench 7 (North End)

Figure 7. Backhoe Trench 11 (South End)

13

Artifact Analysis
All artifacts recovered from shovel testing were returned to the laboratory
for analysis by William A. Dickens. Four arrow points in the possession of a
family member were photographed in the field. These artifacts are described in
Appendix V(Lithic Analysis).
Artifact Curation
Following analysis, all artifacts were placed in temporary storage at BVRA.
The artifact assemblage was found to lack research potential, and they were
discarded with permission from the Texas Historical Commission.

14

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Background Research
Examination of the files at TARL in Austin, Texas revealed that no sites
have been recorded in the project area, and there was no indication that a
professional archaeologist had surveyed any portion of the 61.1-acre tract,
although several significant archaeological projects have been conducted in
Brazos County and vicinity (see Archaeological Background above).
Condition of Project Area
At the time of the survey, virtually the entire floodplain portion south and
west of Thompson’s Creek was under water due to heavy rains, and the creek
was out of its banks to the point that the actual creek channel was not visible.
The sandy hill that constitutes the major portion of the APE was not as affected
by the rains; therefore, shovel testing was possible. Ground cover consisted of
local grasses, a few trees, and numerous patches of Bull Nettle. Ground surface
visibility was virtually zero. In the past, this area had been subjected to
cultivation; however, at the time of the survey the property was used for cattle.
Recent use of the area consisted of a modern trailer, barn, pens, septic field, and
pond. A second visit was made in January of 2005. At that time, the floodplain
was dry enough for backhoe trenching, and much of the ground surface
vegetation was dormant due to winter temperatures.
Results of Survey
Prehistoric site 41BZ158 was found in the project area (Appendix IV). This
site is located on a sandy hill overlooking Thompson’s Creek to the southwest.
The area was thoroughly investigated through 61 shovel tests and 15 backhoe
trenches. Artifacts were evenly distributed throughout the sandy mantle, and the
vertical extent of the site was found to vary between 110 and 150 centimeters.
Although the number of artifacts (n=137) is considered to be high for 28 positive
shovel tests, no diagnostic artifacts were recovered and no features were
encountered. The only tools present in the assemblage are two utilized flakes. A
member of the family (informant) who owns the property allowed the Project
Archaeologist to photograph four arrow points reportedly collected from the site.
They were identified by type, and they are illustrated in Appendix V (Lithic
Analysis). The artifacts collected during shovel testing were subjected to a
formal analysis, and the results are presented in Appendix V. Ceramics were
also mentioned by the informant as an artifact type found at this site. However,
the informant did not offer any examples for study. The presence of arrow points
and ceramics is indicative of a Late Prehistoric occupation. It is not known at this
time if an Archaic component is present at this site.

15

One feature was identified during backhoe trenching. Feature 1 was
found in Backhoe Trench 1 at a depth of 150 centimeters below the current
surface. It was comprised of a thin layer of small rocks and possible fired clay
balls exposed in the profile of the trench. The surrounding sand showed no signs
of discoloration due to burning, and no charcoal was present. The feature was
located at the interface of two sand layers in the profile. A trace amount of the
feature extended into the opposite profile. Fill removed by the backhoe in this
area contained a concentration of fist-sized chert and quartzite cobbles, pieces of
silicified wood, and possible fired clay balls. This feature may be the result of
cooking, but there is no evidence to suggest it is a disturbed hearth. The rocks
and other materials, for example, were not well concentrated, and no indication
of a pit was observed. It is hypothesized that they may have been deposited in
this area following the cooking method in which hot rocks are placed in a
container of water to produce rapid boiling. No diagnostic artifacts or other
features were found. There was a moderate amount of flakes throughout the
sandy mantle in this area as evidenced by those observed during trench
excavation.
No features were found in the remaining 14 backhoe trenches. In trench
15, a concentration of chert cobbles and one possible fired clay ball was present
at the interface of the bottom layer of the sandy mantle and the top of a reddishorange clay. The cobbles do not appear to have been burned, and no pit outline
or other evidence of a hearth was found. No diagnostic artifacts were found, and
no other materials (flakes) were present.
A major issue regarding archaeological sites in this part of Texas is the
potential for disturbance due to various forms of turbation in the sandy mantle,
and there is disagreement among archaeologists on this issue. This Phase I
survey identified the presence of a site within a deep sandy mantle. The results
of lithic analysis indicate that stone tool maintenance was a major activity at this
site. The vast majority of the debitage consists of small, interior flakes, an
indicator that arrow point manufacture may have been performed. The rock
feature is an indicator of cooking activities and trips to the river and other streams
to procure the various rocks found in the feature.
The setting for 41BZ158 would seem to be ideal, being located on the high
ground between two major streams (Thompson’s Creek and Turkey Creek) that
empty into the Brazos River approximately 700 meters to the south. The ridge
on which the site is located extends to the northwest parallel to the Brazos River;
therefore, it is likely that the boundaries of this site continue in that direction. The
western boundary, as depicted on the site map in this report, was determined by
the limits of the project area. During an earlier survey by BVRA, prehistoric site
41BZ140 was recorded to the north (Moore 2000). Since it is on the same
landform as 41BZ158, the two sites may be related.

16

The large number and even distribution of flakes throughout this site
suggests that 41BZ158 is a prehistoric campsite. Although intact features and
burials may be present in other portions of this site, substantial subsurface
investigations failed to confirm this. Therefore, it is reasoned that the proposed
construction is not likely to affect significant cultural resources. It is the opinion of
the authors that site 41BZ158 is not eligible for listing on the National Register of
Historic Places or for designation as a State Archeological landmark.

17

RECOMMENDATIONS
Prehistoric site 41BZ158 occupies a large portion of the APE as currently
proposed by the City of Bryan. Additional work prior to construction is not
warranted. However, there is a possibility that intact features and/or burials exist
elsewhere in this site. If evidence of an intact feature or burial is encountered
during construction, all work in the area of the find must cease until the situation
can be evaluated by the Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division per
the requirements of the Antiquities Permit.
A modern trailer house, barn, and pens occupy part of the project area
and are not considered to be historic. These structures are less than 50 years of
age; therefore, additional work is not necessary.

18

REFERENCES CITED
Bowman, Bradley F.
1985 Winnie’s Mound (41BU17): A Study in the Prehistory of Burleson
County, Texas, Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
56:39-74.
Chervenka, Glen
2003 Soil Survey of Brazos County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture and Natural Resources Conservation Service in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station and the
Texas State Soil and Water Conservation Board.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938
Phyhsiography of Eastern United States. McGraw Hill. New York.
Gould, F. W.
1969 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary. The Agricultural
and Mechanical College of Texas and Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station. College Station.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3, Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Kingston, Mike, and Ruth Harris (editors)
1983 Texas Almanac and State Industrial Guide. A. H. Belo Corporation.
Dallas.
Kotter, Steven M.
1981 A Preliminary Assessment of the Cultural Resources within the
Millican Project, Navasota River Basin, Brazos, Grimes, Leon,
Madison, and Robertson Counties, Texas. Prewitt and
Associates, Reports of Investigations, Number 19.
Moore, William E.
2000 Archaeological Survey of a 3.6 Acre Tract, the Jones Miller
Unit Number 1 in Brazos County, Texas. Brazos Valley
Research Associates, Letter Report Number 12.

19

Moore, William E., and James E. Warren
1993
A Cultural Resources Survey of the Bush Presidential Library Center
Project, Brazos County, Texas. Archaeology Consultants, Inc.,
Report Number 312. George West, Texas.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 52:65-89.
Roemer, Erwin, Jr., and Shawn Bonath Carlson
1987 Excavations at 41BU16: State Highway 21 at the Brazos River,
Burleson County, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways
and Public Transportation. Contract Reports in Archaeology,
Report Number 1.
Thoms, Alston V. (Editor)
1993a The Brazos Valley Slopes Archaeological Project: Cultural
Resources Assessments for the Texas A&M University
Animal Science Teaching and Research Complex, Brazos
County, Texas. Archaeological Research Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, Reports of Investigations Number 14.
1993b The White Creek Archaeological Project: Cultural Resources
Assessments for the Proposed Texas A&M University
Wastewater Treatment Plant, Brazos County, Texas.
Archaeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
Reports of Investigations Number 13.
Waters, Michael R.
1992 Principles of Geoarchaeology: A North American Perspective.
The University of Arizona Press. Tucson.

20

APPENDIX II
BACKHOE TRENCH LOG*

Trench 1
This trench was excavated on top of the landform where 41BZ158 is located. It
was dug to 180 cm through a sandy mantle and terminated just below the top of
a reddish-orange clay stratum. A water seep in the sand layer just above the
clay made additional excavation unstable, and some wall collapse occurred.
One feature was identified (see Results and Conclusions above)
No diagnostic artifacts were observed, and a moderate amount of flakes was
noted throughout the sandy mantle.
Trench 2
This trench was excavated on top of the landform where 41BZ158 is located. It
was dug through a deep sandy mantle and terminated at 220 cm after
penetrating a reddish-orange clay stratum.
No diagnostic artifacts or features were observed. Flakes were abundant
throughout the sandy mantle with the highest concentration between 75 and 120
cm below the present ground surface.
Trench 3
This trench was excavated on a toe slope of the landform where 41BZ158 is
located. It was dug through a deep sandy mantle and terminated at 200 cm after
penetrating a reddish-orange clay stratum. The trench collapsed during recording
activities.
No diagnostic artifacts or features were observed. There was a moderate
amount of flakes throughout the sandy mantle.
Trench 4
This trench was excavated on top of the landform where 41BZ158 is located. It
was dug through a deep sand mantle and terminated at 290 cm after penetrating
a reddish-orange clay stratum. The trench had water seepage just above the
clay and continually collapsed during excavation.
No diagnostic artifacts or features were observed. There was a moderate
amount of flakes throughout the sandy mantle.

Trench 5
This trench was excavated on the bottom slope of the landform where 41BZ158
is located and the interface with the floodplain. It was dug through a deep sandy
mantle and terminated at 250 cm after penetrating a reddish-orange clay stratum.
No diagnostic artifacts or features were observed. A few flakes were observed in
the sandy mantle.
Trench 6
This trench was excavated on the top of the landform where 41BZ158 is located.
It was dug through a deep sandy mantle and terminated at 250 cm after
penetrating a reddish-orange clay stratum. There was a lot of wall collapse due
to unstable soils.
No diagnostic artifacts or features were observed. A few flakes were observed in
the sandy mantle.
Trench 7
This trench was excavated on the top of the landform where 41BZ158 is located.
It was dug through a deep sandy mantle and terminated at 260 cm after
penetrating a reddish-orange clay stratum.
No diagnostic artifacts or features were observed. A moderate amount of flakes
were observed throughout the sandy mantle.
Trench 8
This trench was excavated on the slope of the landform where 41BZ158 is
located near the interface of the hill and floodplain. It was dug through a deep
sandy mantle and terminated at 170 cm after penetrating a reddish-orange clay
stratum.
No diagnostic artifacts or features were observed. A light concentration of flakes
was observed throughout the sandy mantle.

Trench 9
This trench was excavated in the floodplain area within the footprint of the
proposed outfall line. It was dug through 140 cm of clay.
No artifacts or features were observed.
Trench 10
This trench was excavated in the floodplain area. It was dug through 140 cm of
clay.
No artifacts or features were observed.
Trench 11
This trench was excavated in the floodplain area within the footprint of the
proposed outfall line. It was dug through 130 cm of clay.
No artifacts or features were observed.
Trench 12
This trench was excavated in the floodplain area within the footprint of the
proposed outfall line. It was dug through 150 cm of clay.
No artifacts or features were observed.
Trench 13
This trench was excavated in the floodplain area within the footprint of the
proposed outfall line. It was dug through 150 cm of clay.
No artifacts or features were observed.
Trench 14
This trench was excavated in the floodplain area within the footprint of the
proposed outfall line. It was dug through 150 cm of clay.
No artifacts or features were observed.

Trench 15
This trench was excavated on top of the hill where 41BZ158 is located. It was
dug through a deep sandy mantle and terminated at 200 cm after penetrating a
reddish-orange clay stratum.
A concentration of chert cobbles and one clay ball that may have been fired was
excavated at the interface of the bottom of the sandy mantle and the top of the
clay stratum. The cobbles did not appear to have been burned, and there is no
evidence that these materials were part of a hearth. A feature designation was
not assigned. No artifacts were found in the clay stratum.

APPPENDIX III
BACKHOE TRENCH PROFILES

BACKHOE TRENCH 1

BACKHOE TRENCH 2

BACKHOE TRENCH 3

BACKHOE TRENCH 4

BACKHOE TRENCH 5

BACKHOE TRENCH 6

BACKHOE TRENCH 7

BACKHOE TRENCH 8

BACKHOE TRENCH 9

BACKHOE TRENCH 10

BACKHOE TRENCH 11

BACKHOE TRENCH 12

BACKHOE TRENCH 13

BACKHOE TRENCH 14

BACKHOE TRENCH 15

APPENDIX IV
LOCATION OF SITE 41BZ158

Site 41BZ158

