A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND
ASSESSMENT OF THE PROPOSED WOLF LANE
SUBSTATION AND TRANSMISSION CORRIDOR
Bastrop County, Texas
Technical Bulletin 75

David O. Brown

with an appendix by
Henry B. Moncure

Principal Investigator:

Solve;g A. Turpin

State Antiquities Permit No. 252

Report Submitted to

Lower Colorado River Authority

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
April 1984

ABSTRACT
In February of 1984, the Texas Archeological Survey conducted an
intensive cultural resource survey of an 8.88 acre parcel of land
proposed for use as an electrical substation and transmission line
corridor connecting the planned substation to an existing one on Wolf
Lane. Two prehistoric archeological sites, 41BP269 and 41BP270 , were
These sites, described herein as lithic
recorded at that time.
procurement/primary reduction workshops, are more or less typical of
large, thinly spread procurement sites which occur in Uvalde Gravel
outcrops in the ancient high terraces along the Brazos and Colorado
The former site also contains a small, somewhat
River drainages.
disturbed recent historic component. Brief subsurface probes in the
area of a sandstone slab foundation on 41BP269 revealed no intact
subsurface deposits. Because of the very low density of cultural
material observed at these sites, the apparent lack of identifiable
activity areas and the low probability of buried cultural material at
either site, neither site could realistically be expected to yield
significant cultural information. They are therefore not eligible for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places and no further
work is recommended for them.

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . . . . .
Introduction . . . .
Research Procedures
Environmental Background
Cultural Background
Survey Resul ts . . . . .
Additional Investigations at 41BP269 .
Summary and Conclusions
References Cited . . . . .

11
14
16
17

Appendix

21

1

3
3
5

by Henry B. Moncure

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure.

Site Location Map

2

LIST OF TABLES
Table.

Historic Artifacts from 41BP269

22

INTRODUCTION
In January of 1984, the Texas Archeological Survey was contacted
by the Lower Colorado River Authortty to conduct a cultural resource
survey of the proposed Wolf Lane Substation and a short transmission
line corridor connecting it to the existing Garfield Substation. The
proposed substation, located at the north end of the transmission
corridor,
is
projected
to
be approximately 3.5 acres.
The
transmission corridor is .74 miles (1.19 km) in length and 60 feet
(18.29 meters) in width. Area of the corridor is 5.38 acres and the
total project area is 8.88 acres.
The project area is located north of the existing Garfield
Substation which is on Pearce Lane about 500 meters east of its
intersection with Wolf Lane and approximately 5 kilometers south of
Garfield. It is on the USGS Webberville, Texas 7.5 minute quadrangle.
Figure 1 shows the location of the project area and the sites recorded
within it.
The general aims of this study were to identify archeological and
significant historical resources within the designated area which
would be affected by construction of the substation and the placement
of the single pole transmission line structures along the right-of-way
corridor, and to assess, in a regional perspective, their scientific
potential.
As outlined in the proposal, this survey is designed to
provide the sponsor with:
1) a detailed inventory and evaluation of the scientific or
historic significance of cultural resources within the
corridor and the proposed substation area;
2) an estimate of the nature of the impacts of the project
on such resources; and
3) recommendations for lessening any adverse effects on the
identified resources.
This study is designed to conform to the criteria and guidelines
set forth by the State Antiquities Committee and authorized under
Antiquities Permit No.
252, issued under a Memorandum of
Agreement between the State Antiquities Committee and the Lower
Colorado River Authority.

FIGURE

.-----

;41/11'--_,

Existing power lin~ _

.

-...--1

-100.....
'- • -,.

Proposed
\
LCRA
,
. Substation I
~

,,

'"'*-

, ,,- '"

.I

*J

~-.-

I

I

Wooded area

"
,,,

41BP270

I
• q)

,

!:§ /
• .,

'"

I

~

I

,

r1t
/~ I /

".

I

"

.w"

-f;.­
q,

"

;J \

\
,

\.

,

\

I
I

41 BP269

,

,,

I

d

l

I

Foundation

oIIt~
""

..............

Cattle pen

I

.

I Trash

Xpiles

o 0 [!]~i';:RA

1---------, Shell Pipeline Station

Q

.

Substation

SITe LOCATION MAP
o

100

I

metsrs

Page 3

RESEARCH PROCEDURES
Prior to the start of the fieldwork, a records search was
conducted in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory files at
Balcones Research Center. The National Register of Historic Places
was also consulted for sites which might be nearby. No previously
recorded sites were found in or adjacent to the survey tract.
In
addition, preliminary data on local environment and history was
gathered to facilitate the location, recording and assessment of any
sites which might be found in the area.
Field work for
February 2, 1984
area was covered in
the substation area

this survey project was conducted on Thursday,
by the author and David G. Robinson. The survey
two sweeps, once up and back from the road, and
covered in approximate 10 meter transects.

Sites located within the project area were recorded on standard
State of Texas Archeological Site Data forms. No artifacts were
collected during the project. All notes and copies of the site forms
will be placed on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
Balcones Research Center, Austin, Texas.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Climate
Bastrop County lies at the northernmost edge of the South Central
Texas Climatic division (Carr 1967), where it abuts both the North
Central and Edwards Plateau divisions.
The climate
is
humid
subtropical with hot summers (Baker 1979). Average annual rainfall
for Bastrop County is moderate, totalling 37.18 inches (based on U.S.
Weather Service data from Smithville for the period from 1939 to
1968); with peaks in June and September.
Highest monthly average
totals fall in April, May, June and September with a maximum of 4.44
inches in June. The lowest monthly total is in March, with just less
than 2 inches.
Bastrop County winters are mild with occasional cold spans
lasting between 36 and 72 hours. Cold temperatures are generated by
frequent dry arctic air masses moving down off the plains,' often
bringing rapid drops in temperature along with the strong north winds.
The remainder of the year, the weather pattern is dominated by
moisture laden south and southeasterly breezes off of the Gulf of
Mexico. Thunderstorms are frequent in both April and June as the cold
arctic air masses are overridden by the moisture laden warm Gulf air
masses. Annually, thunderstorms occur an average of 43 days. Summers
are hot and generally dry with little day to day variation except for
sporadic heavy thunderstorms.

Page 4
Physiography and Geology
The study area falls within the western margin of the West Gulf
Coastal Plain (Fenneman 1938). It lies on the Blackland Prai~ie in a
central subzone of that area which Fenneman (1938:108) has designated
the Taylor Prairie for the underlying Taylor marl. He describes the
surface of this zone as " .. nowhere more than mildly rolling ... ", with
broad, flat interstream surfaces occasionally marked by "hog wallows"
(ibid.). Coastward from this area, the prairie becomes increasingly
marginal until some forested areas begin to appear on some of .the
sandier Eocene strata.
A large portion of the upland area south of Garfield is mapped as
undivided Navarro Group and Marlbrook Marl (Barnes 1974). The Navarro
Group, which includes Kemp Clay and Corsicana Marl, and the Marlbrook
Marl, also known as the Bergstrom Formation and the "upper Taylor
marl", are very late Cretaceous sediments with a thickness of
approximately 600 feet. They are described as:
Upper part-clay, calcareous, locally silty, massive, thinly
laminated, conchoidal fracture, medium dark gray; weathers
medium gray ... Lower part-clay, dominantly montmorillonitic,
silt-size quartz becomes more abundant upward, calcite
fragments common, glauconitic, disseminated pyrite, blocky
with conchoidal fracture, strikingly uniform throughout,
light medium gray, weathers light brown to light gray and
becomes slightly fissile. (Barnes 1974)
As noted above, the topography of the Taylor Prairie is very
gently rolling with broad, flat stream divides. Because the project
area lies near the upland edge of the Colorado River valley and has
been cut and filled previously by ancient channels of the river, the
topography is slightly more undulating. In some places, the area is
moderately dissected by small streams cutting down to match the base
Elevations along the survey
level of the modern river valley.
corridor range from about 540 to more than 580 feet above mean sea
1eve 1.
Major drainages in the surrounding area include Dry Creek to the
north which flows directly into the Colorado and Maha Creek to the
south which joins Cedar Creek before entering the Colorado farther
downstream.
A shallow, ephemeral drainage crosses the transmission
line corridor about midway between substations, draining south into
Maha Creek.
With the exception of a small portion of the eastern
portion of the proposed Wolf Lane substation area which drains
eastward into a parallel ephemeral drainage, all of the surveyed area
is drained by the former stream. Although all of the project area
drains
south into Maha Creek, the ridge running west of the
transmission corridor is the drainage divide between Maha and Dry
Creeks.

Page 5
Soil sand Bi ota
Soils in the project area range from sandy Joams formed in the
high alluvial terrace of the Colorado to clays developed on the
Cretaceous marls. Five soil series are mapped along the length of the
transmission corridor (Baker 1979). From north to south, these are
Heiden clay, Houston Black clay, Burleson clay, Wilson clay loam and
Crockett gravelly sandy loam. The first three of these, formed in the
Cretaceous sediments, are Vertisols, while the latter two, on remnant
terrace areas, are both Alfisols (op. cit.,p. 69). Although all of
these soils are generally deep, they are residual soils formed in
marine or ancient terrace sediments and offer little potential for
burial of archeological remains.
Blair (1950) includes the Bastrop County area in his Texan biotic
province, which he describes as ecotonal between the eastern forests
of the Austroriparian zone and the more xerophytic scrub country of
the Ba1conian province. As he points out, there are no species truly
endemic to the region.
The zone includes the grasslands of the
Blackland Prairie to the west and the post oak-hickory forests to the
east, along the edge of the Austroriparian zone.
The project area,
lying on the Blackland Prairie, is primarily a natural grassland.
Garner and Young (1979) describe the Blackland Prairie vegetation as
primarily grassland prairie with scattered mesquites. Gould (1975)
notes that Little bluestem grass (Schizachyrium scoparium var.
frequens) is the climax dominant of the Blackland Prairie. The
transmission line corridor and the substation area have been cleared
for pasture. Small mesquites (Prosopis glandulosa) have grown up over
much of the field area north of Pearce Lane, but particularly in the
southern half of this area. Along the fence row to the west of the
project area, Hackberry (Celtis sp.) is mixed with the mesquite.
Other minor species present include prickly pear cactus (Opuntia
lindheimeri) and tasajillo (Opuntia leptocaulis).
CULTURAL BACKGROUND
Previous Archeological Research
Within the last decade, Bastrop County has been the scene of
several archeological projects with planned lignite mine areas and
other developments {Fawcett 1975; Skelton and Freeman 1979; Kenmotsu
and Freeman 1980; Brown and Kenmotsu 1980; Kenmotsu 1982; Robinson
1983;
and Bement 1984).
Some archeological research has been
conducted in nearby areas of Travis County in the middle and lower
portions of the Onion Creek basin. Several prehistoric and historic
sites have been excavated in the general vicinity of McKinney Falls
state park, including the Collins Site (Suhm 1955), the Smith
Rockshelter (SLihm 1957) and the McKinney homestead (McEachern and
Ralph 1980). Several recent survey and testing projects have been
conducted farther downstream in conjunction with a proposed wastewater
treatment plant (Whitsett and Fox 1979; Brown 1981; Thurmond 1982) .

......_ - - - -

----------- -- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

- _. .- ..-.- ......-..•-­

Page 6
Prehistory
The prehistoric inhabitants of central Texas were, like their
historically documented descendents, probably semi-nomadic hunters and
gatherers. Technological and cultural changes through time have been
sorted into a number of cultural periods. The divisions utilized
here, outlined by Prewitt (1981), are refinements of a culture
chronology scheme that has been many years in formulation by Texas
archeologists (cf Weir 1976, Suhm 1960, Kelley 1947).
The major
division
of Texas prehistory is tripartite, consisting of the
Paleoindian, Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods, each of which has
been divided into various phases or subperiods.
The subsequent
history of the historic Indian tribes and the early European settlers
is placed into the undivided Historic Period.
The Paleoindian Period (>11,000 to 8,500 B.P.)
Although there are some signs that suggest human presence in
North America prior to 11 or 12 thousand years ago, the best
documented early New World cultures date to after about 11,000 years
ago.
These
early people~, called Paleoindians, are generally
characterized as nomadic, band societies emphasizing hunting as a way
of life.
Recent archeological evidence has shed new light on their
subsistence economies, suggesting that outside of the major grasslands
of the continent, where they are often found in association with the
remains of large mammals, these cultures may have placed a much
greater emphasis on small game and the gathering of plant resources
than had been prev i ou sly thoug ht.
.
What perhaps differentiated these people most from their Archaic
successors was their environment which was in transition from the
generally wetter and cooler climates of the Late Pleistocene to the
warmer and dryer climates of the Holocene in central Texas. At the
beginning of this period, numerous species of large herbivores roamed
a countryside that was more densely wooded with tree species such as
spruce and hemlock that are common to much colder climates at present.
By the end of the period, a number of these large mammals were
extinct, perhaps in part due to hunting pressures by human groups, and
the cold climate woodlands were beginning to give way to drier forests
and grasslands. Central issues in Paleoindian research in central
Texas include a more precise understanding of the actual composition
of the fauna and flora of the area, and the utilization of these
resources by the Paleoindian peoples.
The classic chronological division of these peoples into three
succeeding cultures, the Llano, the Folsom and the Plano, has recently
become somewhat muddled by overlapping dates and parallel cultural
traditions but there is 'still some general validity in this scheme.
The earliest of these cultures, the Llano, is marked by
the
distinctive lanceolate style projectile point. The remains of these
peoples, which are generally dated between 10,500 and 11,500 years
B.P., have quite often been found in association with the bones of now
extinct Late Pleistocene fauna, including mammoth, mastodon, ground

Page 7
sloth, camel and the American horse.
A later Paleoindian cultural development, generally identified by
the very distinctive, fluted lanceolate style Folsom projectile
points, apparently arose after the extinction of the large proboscid
herbivores. The remains of these people are often associated with the
large species of extinct bison such as Bison antiquus. Following the
Folsom period, the late Paleoindian cultural traditions begin to
diverge somewhat, leaving behind a number of similar lanceolate forms,
many of which are loosely grouped together as Plainview or Plainview
variants.
Angostura,
Golondrina,
Me
Firstview,
Eden,
Scottsbluff and Lerma are among the many types which have been
variously identified as late Paleoindian or very early in the Archaic
period.
The Archaic Period (8,500 B.P.

to 1,250 B.P.)

The transition from the Paleoindian period into the Archaic was a
gradual process, occurring over a several thousand year period, and
marked by the increasingly efficient exploitation of an environment
which was itself in transition. There is at least some support for
the correlation between this cultural change and the post-Pleistocene
trend toward warmer and dryer climates. The Archaic period cultures
are generally characterized as having a more diversified resource base
than the earlier groups, -although, as noted above, it is quite
possible that archeologists have underestimated the breadth of the
Paleoindian subsistence base. Another traditional characteristic of
the Archaic, the regional differentiation of cultural traditions, is
often noted.
Again, it may well be that archeologists have not only
underestimated the regional fragmentation of Paleoindian cultures
(suggested by the proliferation of Late Paleoindian projectile point
types), but have ignored the widespread distribution of many early
Archaic cultures.
An example of the latter is the deeply notched
point style, variously typed as Bell, Andice and Calf Creek, which
occurs from south Texas up into Missouri (Prewitt 1983). ---~
The long Archaic period is most often subdivided into three or
more subdivisions.
The most common subdivision has been the simple
tripartite separation into Early, Middle and Late periods.
Recently,
Prewitt (1981) has further subdivided these basic periods into a total
of eleven named phases.
These phases, each of which purportedly
represents cultural and perhaps geographic differences, are identified
by Prewitt on the basis of key index markers, primarily projectile
points.
The Early Archaic is composed of four separate named phases:
Circleville (8,500 B.P. to 7,000 B.P), San Geronimo (7,000 B.P. to
6,000 B.P.), Jarrell (6,000 B.P. to 5,000 B.P.) and Oakalla (5,000
to 4,600 B.P.). Many of the projectile pOints from this period
B.P.
are quite well made and exhibit some typical Paleoindian technological
characteristics such as lateral edge grinding.
The variety of
projectile point types distributed over a large area prompts Prewitt
(1983:73) to suggest that these people were organized in small

Page 8
dispersed bands which roamed broad territories.
The last phase
this period ;s seen as transitional into the Middle Archaic.

of

Prewitt has divided the Middle Archaic into four named phases:
Clear Fork (4,600 B.P. to 4,000 B.P.), Marshall Ford (4,000 B.P. to
3,400 B.P.), Round Rock (3,400 B.P. to 2,600 B.P.) and San Marcos
(2,600 B.P.
to 2,250 B.P.). The Middle Archaic in central Texas is
characterized by the rise of the burned rock midden as a specialized
site type.
This site type becomes extremely common during this
period, suggesting an intense and perhaps rather specialized plant
processing economy.
Weir (1976) has even suggested population
increases during this period and possible developments in social
organization.
Projectile points from this period are quite numerous,
occurring in large frequencies at some sites. They tend to be large,
straight-stemmed and are often not as well made as the points from
earlier or later periods.
The Late Archaic is divided into three phases by Prewitt (1981):
Uvalde (2,250 B.P. to 1,750 B.P.), Twin Sisters (1,750 B.P. to 1,400
B.P.) and Driftwood (1,400 B.P. to 1,250 B.P.). Although many of the
burned rock midden sites continue to be occupied during this period,
the accumulation of the middens slows or ceases altogether throughout
much of central Texas.
Prewitt suggests that the proliferation of
projectile points during the earliest phase of this subperiod may
represent a return to the early Archaic pattern of small, dispersed
bands with wide ranging territorial areas. The latter part of this
period appears to be marked by an emphasis on the utilization of a
wide variety of food resources, perhaps indicative of population or
climatic stress at this time.
Along the fringes of north central
Texas, a population increase has been suggested for this period
(Skinner et al 1978).
The Late Prehistoric Period (1,250 B.P.

to 200 B.P.)

This period, which Prewitt (1981) terms the Neo-Archaic, marks
the introduction of several technological advances into central Texas,
most notably the bow and arrow and pottery. The bow and arrow quickly
becomes the standard weapon, replacing the throwing stick or atlatl,
and small, thin stone arrowpoints become a key diagnostic indicator
among the material remains of the period. Pottery, never a major
component of the Late Prehistoric cultures, was slow to take hold,
only becoming noticeable during the latter part of the period. At the
same time, technological and cultural changes in nearby areas, such as
the rise of agriculture and the development of hierarchical societies
in the Caddo area to the east (Story 1981), did not go unnoticed by
the central Texas native. However, the presence of a single corn cob
at Kyle shelter (Jelks 1962) and Caddo trade vessels along the Brazos
do not seem to indicate more extensive cultural
(Watt
1953)
developments in the central Texas culture area.
Jelks (1962) divided the Late Prehistoric (then the Central Texas
Aspect) into two subperiods, the Austin and Toyah. Prewitt (1981)
retains this division, dating the Austin phase to between 1,250 B.P.

Page 9
and 650 B.P.

and the Toyah phase to between 650 B.P.

and 200 B.P.

History
The identities of the earliest historic Indian inhabitants of
central Texas are not clearly recorded.
By the time the first
European settlers had made their way into central Texas in the early
nineteenth century, most if not all of these early groups had been
decimated by disease or displaced by stronger Indian groups.
Newcomb
and Campbell (1982) suggest that the Tonkawa, who were a frequent
visitors to the central Texas area during the early nineteenth
century, may have been located on the Plains during the early Historic
period. In addition to the Tonkawa. the Apache and later the Comanche
were recorded as present in the Hill Country during the eighteenth and
nineteenth century. The nineteenth century also saw small bands and
numerous individuals from tribes of the eastern United States,
drifting westward after the confiscation of their lands and the
breakup of their traditional social groups, pass through the central
Texas area.
Although the arrival of Cabeza de Vaca and his small party to the
Texas coast in 1528 is often considered the beginning of the historic
period in Texas, European settlement did not begin in earnest for
nearly two centuries afterwards.
Although several early Spanish
entradas crossed parts of what is now Bastrop County on their way to
the missions of East Texas, the settlement of Bastrop County began
relatively late.
The first European settlement in Bastrop County was a Spanish
fort located at the ford on the Colorado River near modern Bastrop.
This fort, established in 1805 to protect commerce on the Old San
Antonio Road, was later abandoned (Webb 1952:120). In 1827, Stephen
F. Austin was granted four leagues of land along the Colorado which
became the nucleus of his Little Colony. Settlement, which began
around 1829, was initially centered at Mina whose name was later
changed to Bastrop in honor of Baron Felipe Enrique Neri de Bastrop.
With the revolutionary victory in 1836, Bastrop became one of the 23
original counties of the Republic of Texas.
The project area is contained within a seven-league tract
(30,998.80 acres) granted to Jose Antonio Navarro on July 16, 1833.
Navarro, a native of San Antonio, was active in Texas politics before,
during and after the revolution. There is no. evidence that Navarro,
listed in 1867 as having resided in the same precinct of Bexar County
since birth (White 1983:219), ever lived on the land.
Navarro, through the agency of Samuel May Williams, sold the land
to John Caldwell in April of 1839 (Bastrop County Deed Records,
Vol. D. pg. 19)-. Caldwell, born in Kentucky in 1802, came to Texas
from Alabama in 1831 (Webb 1952:268). After a brief stay at Navidad,
he settled in Bastrop County in 1834 where he became
county
commissioner
in
1840.
He also served in both the House of
Representatives and Senate of the Republic of Texas in the 1840's and

Page 10
was elected to the Convention of 1845 where he, along with Antonio
Navarro, Anson Jones and more than fifty other early Texas political
figures, voted in favor of annexation to the United States of America.
After annexation, he continued his political career as state senator
and president of the Know-Nothing party. A few years before his death
in 1870, he refused the Democratic nomination for gover-nor.
Caldwell, who had originally acquired the entire seven leagues of
the Navarro grant, sold 1,111 acres, including the proposed Wolf Lane
substation site, to John Haynie in December of 1845 (Bastrop County
Deed Records, Vol. E., pg. 264). Haynie, born in Virginia in 1786,
was a Methodist preacher who also came to Texas from Alabama in 1839
(Webb 1952:788).
He began preaching in Bastrop and Austin almost
immediately and became the chaplain of the Congress of the Republic.
In 1843, he was made agent of Rutersville College. Later, he served
as chaplain of the Convention of 1845. Although the facts are not
clear, it seems probable that he and Caldwell, who both came to Texas
from the same town in Alabama, Tuscumbia, may have known each other
prior to their arrival in the state. In addition to the land sale, it
is likely that the two continued to have close dealings with one
another, one as a Congressman and the other as Chaplain of the
Congress. Caldwell, listed as having married a Lucinda W.
Haymie
(sic), may have married Haynie's daughter.
On the same day (December 2, 1845), Haynie sold the land to D.C.
Gilmore and Anson Jones (Bastrop County Deed Records, Vol. E., pg.
263). In August of 1846, Gilmore, about whom little is known, sold
his half interest to Jones (Bastrop County Deed Records, Vol. E, pg.
263). Born in Massachusetts in 1798, Jones practiced medicine in the
east for a number of years before coming to New Orleans and eventually
to Texas in 1833. Settling in Brazoria, he began what was to be a
relatively colorful political career which brought him to the Congress
of the Republic, Secretary of State under Houston and ultimately to
the Presidency of the Republic in 1844. During his presidency, the
Convention of 1845 voted in favor of annexation and in 1846, Jones
stepped down in favor of the new state government, returning to his
plantation at Washington-on-the-Brazos (Webb 1952:922-3).
Jones, in turn, sold 555 and 1/2 acres of the land, including the
area of the substation and transmission corridor, to John Griffin in
February of 1855 (Bastrop County Deed Records, Vol. K, pg.
205).
Griffin, about whom nothing is known, held on to the land for a number
of years, selling it in ~uly of 1873 to a James J. Jones (Bastrop
County Tax Deed Records, Vol. U, pg. 683). For a brief period after
this, the ownership of the land is less than clear. From Jones, it is
apparently passed to a partnership of M.T. Holton and Paul Deats who
traded it back and forth several times. Ultimately, Deats sold the
parcel to John Richards in August of 1883 (Bastrop County Deed
Records, Vol. 6, pg. 176). Richards, who had extensive land holdings.
in Bastrop and Travis Counties, held on to the tract until his death
in 1938 when his property was divided among his heirs. At the time of
the probate division, the substation tract was included in a 506 acre
tract deeded to Shirley Louise Powell and Richard Wilbur Dodd

Page 11
(slightly over 49 acres having been lopped off of the original tract
at the southwestern end).
Dodd immediately sold the tract to
A. W. Young and A. E. and Susie Rosanky. In the deed description at
this time, the tract ;s described as being bisected
by
the
Austin-Cedar Creek or the Austin-Port Lavaca Road, which is apparently
the modern Pearce Lane which fronts on the substation property.
The
Rosankys deeded the portion of the land north of Pearce Lane, a 256
acre tract on which the substation and transmission corridor will be
located,
to
their daughter, Jerrell and her husband, Patrick
M. Donnelly. In 1983, the substation tract became the property of
their daughter Susan Donnelly Fuqua.
In a conversation with Mrs. Rosanky, who now lives in Houston
with her daughter, she remembered an old house being located northeast
of the cattle pen area in 1938. She stated that it continued in use
as a rent house for several years until it was finally torn down. She
also remembered a shed in or near the cattle pen area.
In addition,
she thought that an offset in the fence in this area, not described in
the official deed until 1983 and later, was present when they
purchased the land in 1938.
SURVEY RESULTS
Two prehistoric sites were recorded during the field survey of
the project area. These sites, 41BP269 and 41BP270, are both large,
thinly scattered lithic procurement/primary reduction workshops which
exhibit a patchy distribution over a large area. The location of the
study area which contains these sites is shown in Fig 1.
The
boundaries of these sites, which extend to the boundaries of the
survey corridor in most areas, are an artifact of the limits of the
survey corridor;
the actual boundaries of the sites are expected to
extend east and west of this recorded area in
many
places.
Descriptions of each site are included below.
41BP269
This site is a large lithic procurement/primary workshop area
located south of the ephemeral tributary of Maha Creek which bisects
the project area. It lies on a broad, gently sloping, east-northeast
facing footslope of a larger ridge to the northwest. The site ;s
located primarily on an area mapped as Quaternary high terrace
deposits (Barnes 1974).
Natural chert gravels, derived from the
ancient terrace, are spread widely across the site. Vegetation in the
area of the site is primarily grasses with an overstory of small,
scrub mesquites and hackberrys along the western fence line. Near the
cattle loading pens at the southern portion of the area, prickly pear
and tasajillo cactus are relatively common.
Cultural material at the site is thinly .spread over an area
approximately 300 meters by 20 meters, extending from Pearce Lane
north to just south of the small drainage that
bisects
the
transmission line.
Although natural silicate gravels are spread
widely across the site, the distribution of cultural materials is very

Page 12
patchy and the overall density of these materials is quite low.
Prehistoric cultural material observed at the site included one thick
biface, more than a dozen prepared platform cores, primarily bifacial
specimens, and a dozen or so flakes of various sizes and types, but
mostly larger secondary specimens. A number of cobbles with a single
flake remQval may be tested cobbles but could also be the result of
plow damage.
No prehistoric diagnostics or cultural features were
observed at the site.
In addition to the prehistoric component at the site, a scatter
of recent historic debris was observed in the area of the cattle
loading pens in the southern portion of the site. Two separate areas,
both just north of the pens, contained corrugated roofing tin sheets,
modern bricks, various iron fragments, bottle glass and plain white
ironstone ceramics.
The majority of this material was construction
debris rather than household garbage. Neither of these piles of trash
gave any real indication of having been a structure.
Inside the pens are six sandstone slab piers, the remains of the
foundation of a small structure. This structure, a small rectangle
about 10 by 20 feet, was adjacent to the northern fence of the stock
corrals but not oriented with this fence. Very little artifactual
material was observed in this area.
One large door hinge with a
modern bolt and nut and a large wire nail and a single handmade brick
were the only artifacts noted. No collection was made.
The prehistoric component of the site appears to be a typical,
though lightly utilized, lithic procurement area and primary reduction
workshop. Since soils formed at the site are primarily residual
soils, formed in the ancient terrace, there is little chance for
burial of cultural materials, except through the action of the vertic
clays which are a Significant component of the soil. Historic
agricultural activities at the site have resulted in some disturbance
to the surficial materials. In addition, the paucity of prehistoric
cultural materials and the likelihood that any material found buried
would be disturbed argue that the site would yield very little useful
cultural information.
The prehistoric component at the site is
therefore not thought to be eligible for nomination to the National
Register of Historic Places.
The historic component at 41BP269 consists of several dump areas
and a possible foundation.
With the exception of a single tiny
fragment of purple glass near the main dump area and the handmade
brick found near the foundation, none of the artifacts is old enough
to suggest a date prior to the mid-twentieth century. The 1968 USGS
map of the area shows no structures in the area of 41BP269, but the
1979 photorevised USGS quad map does show two new structures in this
area, both of which have obviously been removed since that time. The
vast majority of historic. artifacts from the site support this recent
date of occupation.
It;s not clear, however, from the map how the
structures relate to the dump areas or the existing foundation, but it
;s quite likely that the larger of the two dumps was one of the
structures. The small structure foundation, which may also be one of

Page 13
the recent structures shown on the map, may have been a small farm
outbuilding, although the use of sandstone block~ as a foundation is
somewhat unusual. After this site was inadvertently disturbed during
construction, a return visit was scheduled and several shovel probes
conducted. The results of this second visit and conclusions regarding
this site are described in a subsequent section.
41BP270
Like 41BP270, this prehistoric site
is
a large
lithic
procurement/primary workshop area.
It is located north of the
ephemeral tributary of Maha Creek which bisects the project area.
It
lies on a broad, gently sloping, northeast facing shoulder slope of a
larger ridge to the northeast. The site is located primarily on an
area mapped as undivided Navarro group and Marlbrook Marl sediments
(Barnes 1974). Despite this, natural chert gravels, derived from the
ancient terrace, are spread widely across the site, per-haps even more
densely than they are to the south on 41BP269. Vegetation in the area
of the site is primarily grasses with an overstory of small, scrub
mesquites and hackberrys along the western fence line.
Cultural material at the site is thinly spread over an area
approximately 300 meters by 20 meters, extending south from the
northern boundary of the proposed substation area right up to the
small drainage that bisects the transmission corridor. Although
natural silicate gravels are spread widely across the Site, the
distribution of cultural materials is very patchy and the overall
density of these materials ;s low. Nonetheless, both natural cobble
and artifact densities are slightly higher at 41BP270 than at 41BP269.
Prehistoric cultural material observed at the site included thick
bifaces, several dozen prepared platform cores, primarily bifacial
specimens, and several dozen flakes of various sizes and types. As at
41BP269, many of these specimens were larger secondary flakes. A
number of cobbles with a single flake removal may be tested cobbles
but could also be the result of plow damage.
No prehistoric
diagnostics or cultural features were observed at the site.
One
recent cultural feature, a stone hearth surrounded by beer cans and
shotgun shells, attested to the possibility of a long tradition of
hunting camp activities at the site.
The prehistoric component of the site appears to be a typical,
though lightly utilized, lithic procurement area and primary reduction
workshop. Since soils formed at the site are primarily residual
soils, formed in the ancient terrace, there is little chance for
burial of cultural materials, except through the action of the vertic
clays which are a significant component of the soil. Historic
agricultural activities at the site have resulted in some disturbance
to the surficial materials. The recent stone hearth noted above has
contributed rather dramatically to moving natural cobbles as well as
chert cores about the site. Whether this ;s an isolated or sporadic
occurrence is not known, but the field survey did note an apparent
marked increase in burned chert at 41BP270 as compared to 41BP269. In
addition, the paucity of prehistoric cultural materials and the

Page 14
likelihood that any material found buried would be disturbed argue
that the site would yield. very little useful cultural information.
This site is therefore not thought to be eligible for nomination to
the National Register of Historic Places.
ADDITIONAL INVESTIGATIONS AT 41BP269
Prior to the construction of the substation and transmission line
as planned, the landowner requested a change in the substation
location from the northern end of the property to the area fronting on
Pearce Lane.
In the process of preparing for this change, a large
area, including portions of 41BP269, was bulldozed.
Since the
bulldozed area included the small structural foundation described
above, for which avoidance had been initially recommended, some
further investigation of the subsequent condition of the site and its
potential significance was deemed, necessary. A second visit to the
site was
scheduled and
several
subsurface
probes planned.
Additionally, a brief historic background search was conducted.
That portion of the site nearest the road .had been completely
cleared of vegetation and the cattle pens in the southwestern corner
of the land removed. A large section of land east of the original
right of way, upon which the substation is now planned to be built,
had also been bulldozed. It was found that both the historic and
prehistoric components of the site extended eastward into this area.
The surficial prehistoric materials at the site were completely
disturbed. Although the sandstone block foundation had been disturbed
by clearing, the lower course of blocks remained essentially in place
and this area was chosen for one af the two shovel tests. Shovel test
number one was located directly in the center of the foundation area
where the ground surface seemed to be slightly mounded. Below less
than ten centimeters of topsoil, however, lay relatively undisturbed
and sterile dark brown clay. Only a few small non-diagnostic metal
artifacts were recovered from the upper portion of this probe.
In
addition to the shovel test, several of the more disturbed foundation
blocks were examined by trowelling along the edges. No artifacts were
recovered from this.
A second shovel test was located in a mounded
area some 15 meters north of the foundation. Part of this area had
been exposed by the bulldozer, showing a concentration of historic
artifacts indicative of a dump area.
This probe went down to 40
centimeters before penetrating the natural clay ground surface.
Included in the fill from this unit, which was excavated in three 15
centimeter levels, were a number of recent historic artifacts which
are briefly described in an appendix to this report.
None of the artifacts recovered from either of the shovel tests
suggest an age greater than fifty years, usually the minimum
acceptable age for nomination of a historic structure or archeological
site
to the National Register of Historic Places.
A surface
collection of selected artifacts from the newly cleared area east of
the original right-of-way yielded slightly earlier materials. Several
artifacts from this collection can be dated to the turn of the century

Page 15
and perhaps even earlier.
Despite the recovery of several earlier artifactual specimens,
the context of all materials remains somewhat questionable because of
the surface disturbances from bulldozing. All of the materials which
are convincingly older than fifty years are widely scattered and show
signs of recent damage.
On the other hand, the materials from
subsurface contexts are possibly quite recent.
It is thus quite
difficult to state whether or not buried materials associated with the
earlier historic occupation can be expected at the site.
Although the early ownership history of the land upon which the
proposed substation will be located contains several names important
in both local and state history, it is not clear if any of these
individuals lived anywhere on the original 1,111 acre tract, much less
in the immediate vicinity of the substation and transmission corridor.
Certainly most, if not all, of these individuals owned land and homes
elsewhere. The surface artifact scatter east of the original survey
corridor, probably associated with the dump areas described in the
original survey, may represent the remains of a house located on the
land when purchased by .A. E.
and Susie Rosanky in 1938. The
artifactual material found here suggests that this house may have been
constructed around the turn of the century, or perhaps slightly
earlier. Because of the extensive damage from bulldozer clearing, it
is unlikely that any preserved remains will be found in this area.
The small sandstone slab foundation which was located within the
cattle pens remains somewhat of an enigma. Mrs. Rosanky (personal
communication, 1984) suggested that there had been a shed in that area
when they ·had purchased the 1and, but was unsure of the exact
location. Several arguments ca be made for its antiquity: the use of
sandstone slabs rather than concrete or wooden piers, the presence of
handmade bricks in that area, the lack of alignment of the foundation
with the immediately adjacent fences (placing it quite awkwardly in
the corner of the then existing corrals), and the offset of the main
property line fence, a small section of which has been offset,
possibly to skirt an existing structure. This property line offset
apparently dates to at least 1938. On the other hand, no artifacts
suggesting an early date (other than the bricks) were recovered from
anywhere near the foundation. In addition, it is quite small to have
been a residence and shows no evidence of ever having had a stone
chimney. It is quite possible that it was the foundation for an early
barn, perhaps being the shed described by Mrs. Rosanky. In any case,
no intact subsurface depOSits were located in this area and the
foundation itself has been slightly disturbed. All things considered,
it ;s unlikely that the remains of this structure, whatever it might
have been, would be likely to yield significant historic information.
It is therefore not considered eligible for the National Register of
Historic Places.

Page 16
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Two prehistoric archeological sites were located during the field
survey of
the
proposed Wolf Lane substation and connecting
transmission corridor. These two sites, 41BP269 and 41BP270, are both
lithic procurement/primary workshop sites which consist of a low
density scatter of cores and large flakes strewn about the surface of
an upland Uvalde gravel outcrop.
The distribution of cultural
materials at both of these sites is patchy, and there is no clear
evidence that aboriginal activity areas are preserved within these
patches.
Because of the lack of any apparent surficial activity areas and
the absence of any potentially datable stratigraphie contexts in the
ancient vertic soils, neither of the prehistoric components at these
sites are deemed worthy of nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places nor are they eligible for consideration as a State
Archeological Landmark.
As noted above, the small sandstone slab foundation found within
the. cattle pens at the site was thought to be an item of potential
historical significance, particularly given the historic status of
some of the early owners of the land. Unfortunately, this small
Subsurface
foundation was inadvertently disturbed during clearing.
testing in this area failed to reveal significant subsurface deposits.
Additionally, none of the materials recovered from the subsurface
Although some of the
probes demonstrated any great antiquity.
materials surface collected from nearby areas do suggest a turn of the
century date, bulldozer disturbances in these areas indicated little
possibility of preserved subsurface remains. Because there is little
evidence for historic subsurface remains, and oecause there is no
evidence that would connect any of the remains found to the early
landowners at the site, it is felt that the site is not eligible for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.

.

Page 17

REFERENCES CITED

Baker, Frank E.
1979 Soil' Survey of Bastrop County, Texas.
United
States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Barnes, Vi rg; 1 E.
1974 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Austin Sheet. Bureau of
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bastrop County Deed Records
m.s.
Various volumes on
Bastrop, Texas.

file

at

Bastrop

Economic

County Courthouse,

Bement, Leland
1984 Excavations at 41BP191 and 41BP192.
Texas Archeological
Survey Research Report 87.
The University of Texas at
Austin.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.

Texas Journal

of

Science

2(1):93-117 .

. Brown, D.O.
1981 Archeological Testing Along the Proposed Route of Wastewater
Pipelines for the Planned Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment
Plant, Travis County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey
50.
The University of Texas at
Technical Bulletin No.
Austin.
Brown, D.O. and R.D. Kenmotsu
1980 Test Excavations in the
Fayette to
Lytton
Springs
Transmission Corridor, Bastrop and Fayette Counties, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No.
77.
The
University of Texas at Austin.
Fawcett, W.B., Jr.
1975
An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Federal Youth
Center, Bastrop County. Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at
Technical Bulletin No. 10.
Austin.

Page 18
Fenneman, N.M.
1938 Physiography of the Eastern United States.
Company. New York.

McGraw-Hill Book

Garner, L.E. and K.P. Young
1976 Environmental Geology of the Austin Area: An Aid to Urban
Planning.
Bureau
of Economic Geology
Report' of
Investigations 86. The University of Texas at Austin.
Gould, F.W.
1975 The Grasses of
Stat ion.

Texas A&M University Press.

Call ege

..c-=.:.=

Jelks, E.B.
1962 The Kyle Site. A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in
Hill County. Texas.
University of Texas Department of
Anthropology Archaeology Series 5.
Ke" ey, J. C.
1947 The Lehman Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah,
Uvalde and
Round Rock Foci.
Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:115-128.
Kenmotsu, Ray D.
1982 Cultural Resource Investigations at
the
Powell
Bend
Prospect, Bastrop County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report No. 84. The University of Texas at Austin.
Kenmotsu, R.D. and M.D. Freeman
1980 Cultural Resource Survey and Monitoring in the Fayette to
Lytton Springs Transmission Corridor, Bastrop, Caldwell and
Fayette Counties, Texas.
Texas Archeological
Survey
Research Report No. 76. The University of Texas as Austin.
McEachern, Michael and R.W. Ralph
1980 Archeological Investigations at the Thomas F.
McKinney
Homestead, Travis County, Texas: An Experiment in Historic
Archeology, Part I. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 51:5-208.
Newcomb, W.W., Jr. and T.N. Campbell
1982 Southern Plains Ethnohistory:
A Re-examination of the
Escanjaques, Ahijados, and Cuitoas. Plains Anthropologist
Memoirs
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981 Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Archeological Society 52:65-89.
1983

- - .•....--..

Bulletin of the Texas

Andice: An Early Archaic Dart Poiht Type.
La Tierra.
Journal of the Southern Texas Archeological ASsOCiation
10( 3): 1-6-.

--------------.~----.-.-.----------.-----.------

....

---------~--

-----.---_....-

... -

............

--.-----.~

.......

Page 19
Robinson, David G.
1983 Additional Cultural Resource Investigations on the Powell
Bend Prospect, Bastrop County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Society Technical Bulletin No. 61. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Ske lton, Duford and M.D. Freeman
1979 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment at Camp Swift,
Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No. 72.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Skinner, S.A., C. Shaw, K. Huckaby and M.L. Bartsch
1978 An Evaluation of the Archaeological Resources at Aquilla
Lake.
Southern Methodist University, Archaeology Research
Program.
Story, D.A.
1981 An Overview of the Archaeology
Anthropologist. 26-92:139-156.

of East Texas.

Suhm, D.A.
1955 Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County,
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 26:7-54.
1957

Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County,
Texas Journal of Science. IX(I):26-58.

1960

A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
Archeological Society 29:63-108.

Plains

Texas.
Texas.

Bulletin of the Texas

=.;...;....;;;;..;;...;..;.;.---­

Thurmond, Peter
1982 Archeological Testing and Assessment of 41TV461 and the
Onion Creek Wastewater Plant Site, Travis County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin No. 49.
The
University of Texas at Austin.
Watt, F.H.
1953 Pottery Diffusion of the Central
Texas Archeologist 6:57-85.
Webb, Walter Prescott
1952 The Handbook of Texas
Associ at ion. Aust i n-.--

The

Brazos

Texas

Valley.

State

Wei r, F.A.
1976 The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished Ph.D.
Washington State University, Pullman.
White, Gifford
1983 1830 Citizens of Texas Eakin Press.

-----_.

_ ...

- - - _......

_ - - - - - _ .... - - - - _....

Central

Historical

Dissertation,

Austin.

_--_._-_ .. __ ......_ - - - - _

..

- - - - _ ...... - - - _...- - - - - -......

----~--

Page 20
Whitsett, Hayden and D.E. Fox
Texas Department
Cultural Resources of Lower Onion Creek.
1979
of Water Resource~ Construction Grants and Water Quality
Planning Division. Austin, Texas.

Page 21

APPENDIX I
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS
HISTORIC COMPONENT AT 41BP269
by
Henry B. Moncure

The location and methods of artifact collection for site 41BP269
are contained in the body of this report (see Survey Results and
Additional Investigations at 41BP269).
The following individual
descriptions are those of artifacts which are considered important in
assessing the age and function of the site. The tabular data includes
all artifacts collected from the several surface locations and the
test pits (Table). ,
Surface Collection Original Right-of-Way
An intact medicine bottle with raised letters on the bottom of
the base IIVick l s Vatro-nol" around the outer base edge and "VW II logo
in the center. The bottle once contained an inhalant made by the
Victor, West Chemical Company (Bartholomew 1970:85). The bottle, 58.8
mm in height and 32 mm at the base, is brown in color, and has a
standard continuous thread neck finish.
The neck finish places
manufacture subsequent to 1924 when the standardized continuous thread
closure (c.t.) was adopted (Lief 1965:27). Other automatic bottle
machine characteristics (characteristic seam lines, lack of pontil
scars, etc.) are present but the C.t. closure is the best indicator
of earliest possible date.
A fragment of clear, patterned pressed glass including part of a
tumbler base.
Collectors distinguish between pressed glass and
pattern glass, the latter being of later origin.
Pressed glass, an
imitation of cut glass, has a stippled background while pattern glass
(also made by pressing) has a clear background (Miller 1974:231;
Lorrain 1968:39).
This fragment has a clear background and has no
evidence of purpling due to sun exposure.
A slight iridescence is
present, indicating weathering. Selenium as a decolorizing agent is
indicated and with it a not-earlier-than date circa 1916 (Kendrick
1968:189).

Table

Historic Artifacts from 41 BP269.

Artifact

Provenience

Diagnostic Feature(s)

Date Range

Medicine bottle
Glass fragment, tumbler
Bottle fragment
Whiteware sherd
Bottle base fragment
Bottle base fragment
Embossed base fragment

R.O.W.
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
R.O.W.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.

Maker's mark, closure
Color, manufacture method
Non-definitive
Non-definitive
Ring seam line
Ring seam line
Embossing*, color

After 1920
After 1916

Bottle base fragment
Bottle neck fragment
Bottle neck fragment
Bottle neck fragment
Pattern glass fragment
Pattern glass fragment
Swirled pattern glass
fragment
Press and mold pattern
glass fragment
Four-part mold pattern
glass fragment
Pottery sherd
Brick
Marshall pottery sherd
Pressed glass cup handle
fragment
Red glass fragment
Pottery sherd
Mocha ware ri m sherd
Bottle neck fragment
Glass fragment
Strap clamp harness
hardware
Wire nail
Barbed wire fragment
Iron fragment
Fence staples (2)
Wire fragments (3)
Wire nail fragment
Copper wire fragment
Bottle glass fragment
Electric plug terminal
Thick clear glass fragment
Thin clear class fragment
Wire fragment
Wire nail
Earthernware sherd
Mortar fragment
Clear glass fragments (2)
Bottle glass fragment
Wire fragment
Earthernware sherd
Iron fragments

E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.

Manufacture method, color
Double collar applied lip
Vertical seam line, manufacture method
Non-definitive
Rosette pattern
Non-definitive
Color

E.S.A.

Color

Before 1916

E.S.A.

Color, decoration

After 1916, ca. 1930

E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.

Maker's mark
Manufacture method
Manufacture method, distinctive markings
Color
-

1900 - 1948
1870 - 1910
Mid-19th C - present
Before 1916

E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.
E.S.A.

Non-definitive
Non-definitive, partial maker's mark
Non-definitive
Lip treatment, manufacture method
Non-definitive
Similar itmes in 1895 Montgomery Ward
and 1922 Sears catalogs
Common 6d size
Glidden barb type, carrier and barb only
Possible can
Non-distinctive
Hog wire guage, non-distinctive
Non-distinctive
Possible handle ring
Non-distinctive
Non-distinctive
Non-disti nctive
Non-distinctive
Hog wire guage, non-distinctive
Common 6d size
Non-distinctive
Non-distinctive
Non-distinctive
Non-distinctive
Non-distinctive
Non-distinctive
Thickness and shape eliminate cans but
don't assist otherwise

20th century

TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP
TP

1
1

1
2-1
2-1
2-1
2-1
2-1
2-1
2-1
2-1
2-2
2-2
2-2
2-2
2-3
2-3
2-3
2-3
2-3

E.S.A. = extended substation area TP = test pit
R.O. W. = right-of-way
*see text for caveat
1 Montgomery Ward (1895:308); Sears, Roebuck and Co. (1922:1057)
2Swank (1892:450)
3Glover (1980: 352)

-1, -2, -3,

1830 - present
After 1920
After 1920
1896 - 1901*,
Before 1916
1903 - 1916
1850 - 1913
After 1920
1870's - early 1900's
Before 1916

After 1920
Late 19th C - present 1
After 18842
1874 - present 3
1890 - present
After 18842
20th century

After 1890

= test

pit level

Page 23

Also collected were a clear glass fragment from the body of a
container and a single white ware wave edged rim sherd, both lacking
sufficient definitive characteristics for close analysis. The former
shows the physical shape of olive oil bottles as manufactured over the
past half century while the latter appears to be a fragment of a
relish dish or flower pot.
The Expanded Substation Area
BOTTLE FRAGMENTS
Bases: Three pharmaceutical type bottle bases were recovered.
Each has purpling characteristics indicative of manganese decoloring
agent used and implying manufacture prior to circa 1916. One has the
off center swirled pontil mark indicative of post-automatic bottle
machine (post 1903) manufacture (Newman 1970:73). The type continues
in use to the present. It also has a rim seam, partial evidence of
automatic bottle machine manufacture of the 1920s and later (ibid:72).
The fragment does not include the whole of the side seam which would
confirm the 1920s or later attribution.
A second pharmaceutical bottle base has, in addition to manganese
decolorizer evidence, ring seam marks and raised -side located letters,
- ASTROP TEXAS. The implication is post 1920 origin and use by a
local pharmacist in Bastrop, Texas for prescription medicine.
The third bottle base is such a badly broken fragment that aside
from manganese decoloring agent use and what appears to be a ring seam
section, few characteristics can be ascertained.
The bottom shows
"A.C.W", or "A.G.W." in raised letters. Breakage has removed the
portion adjacent to the lIA", however, the spacing of the letters with
respect to the projected base size indicates no letter preceded those
present. If the second letter is a G, the letter sequence would be
the logo of the Atlas Glass Works of Washington, Pennsylvania, in use
from 1896 to 1901 (Toulouse 1977:139).
A fourth bottle base has a size and thickness placing it in the
soft drink size range.
It shows manganese decolorizer use and
automatic bottle machine base marking. No inscription is present.
A
date bracket between 1903 and circa 1916 is indicated.
Bottle Neck Finishes: A small lip bottle fragment 20 mm in
diameter has the applied lip type termed a double collar or double
bead (Watson 1965:40; Herskovitz 1978:4). Such finish methods were
employed in a date bracket extending from 1850 to circa 1913 (Newman
1970:74): The color, aqua, is the second most common found in bitters
bottles (Watson 1965:39).
A neck fragment extending from the bottle shoulder to a small
portion of the lip shows vertical seams to the top of the lip and
purpling showing the use of manganese decolorizer.
The
first

Page 24
characteristic is the result of the use of an automatic bottle machine
indicating manufacture no earlier than 1920 (Newman 1970:72).
The
decolorizer is usually indicative of pre-1916 manufacture since that
was the approximate time when selenium replaced manganese as the most
It is probable the color is
used decolorizer (Kendrick 1968:185).
present due to the use of old glass fragments, cullet, in the
manufacture of new glass. This;s common practice in the production
of cheap bottle glassware (ibid:25). The post 1920 date indicated by
the machine markings is the more reliable indicator of date.
A neck fragment including a small section of the bottle shoulder
and the bottom of the neck finish but lacking full neck circumference,
shows no swirl marks or seams. The neck finish base is a collar but
no further identification is available from the fragment. The color,
clouded transparent aqua, is affected by weathering and pitting.
The
fragment has no tightly attributable diagnostic characteristics.
PATTERN GLASS
Five pattern glass fragments from as many vessels were recovered.
Four are vessel base fragments. One of these shows a diamond rosette
pattern recognized among collectors, and attributed to
several
Pittsburgh factories with a general date bracket, 1870s to 1900s
(Miller 1974:279). The fragment is too small to assign to a vessel
type.
Miller lists twelve possibilities and notes there are probably
many more (ibid:279).
A second,vessel base fragment is the entire pedestal base of a
tumbler-sized vessel. The pattern is a simple geometric. It is found
on so many pattern glass items made by various companies over such a
long time period that its diagnostic value is minimal.
A third vessel base presents no unusual, attributable pattern but
shows the pattern present only on its inner surface. The outer and
unpatterned inner surfaces show swirl marks and no seam lines.
The
vessel was turned within its mold to remove seam marks and then
pressed with a patterned mold on part of its inner surface.
The
vessel, in order to be so moled, had to be circular in cross section
at all horizontal levels. Additionally, the mouth opening would have
to have been large enough to admit the pattern mold. The glass shows
the purpling effect of ultra violet light on manganese decolorizer.
In sum, this base fragment shows two molding operations to achieve an
unusual inner surface patterning with a seamless outer surface
performed on a wide mouth vessel prior to circa 1916. Its cost, when
compared to other vessels serving the same utilitarian purpose, would
have been increased by the double molding operation.
The fourth base fragment is press-and-blow molded with an
unattributed_ outside surface pattern.
Again, the color indicates
probable manufacture prior to circa 1916.

Page 25
One additional pattern glass fragment was recovered. It shows a
mold seam around the base and two more which are vertical but not
opposed to one another. They are separated by 120 degree of arc.
This evidences the prior existence of a third seam mark and of a four
part mold. This mold was used to make a very small, circa 21 inches
in diameter, circular item 5/8in high at the rim and 1/4in thick in
the circular depression in its top. The top depression and the lower
portion of the outside surface, have been flashed orange. The outside
unflashed surface is press patterned. The thickness, size and shape
are those of a rug caster for heavy furniture. The incidence of
flashing, an additional manufacturing step, in an item such as this,
is unusual since it adds expense without utilitarian gain and serves
to decorate an item not usually closely viewed. A post 1916 date is
indicated by the color however the decoration method is indicative of
an even later manufacture - about 1930.
POTTERY

A single pottery sherd containing enough of its maker's mark to
be attributed was recovered. The partial, but identifiable, mark is
that of the Edwin M. Knowles China Company of West Virginia.
The
company operated from two locations in that state and marked its semi
vitreous ware as in the case of this sherd from 1900 to 1948.
The
inscription "Made in U.S.A." was added in 1930, however, this sherd is
not inclusive of that section of the manufacturer's mark (Gates and
Ormerod 1982:99-100).
BRICK
A small quantity of hand made brick was present in the vicinity
of the foundation.
Most examples were broken bats but a few whole
specimens were present. The specimen collected is 7 3/41n by 2 1/4in
by 3 1/2in.
The brick is not uniform in any plane and the
measurements stated are the greatest extension for length, qepth and
width.
The side and bed surfaces show the results, by marks, of sun
drying in stacks after molding_ This brick had been a bottom brick in
There are grass impressions on one bed surface and one
the stack.
side. The impression of the next highest brick in the drying stack is
on the other bed surface.
The color after firing is typical for the dominant clay type of
the general area, a light brown tinged with darker inclusions where
the clay had not been finely screened or homogenized indicating both
processes were manual not machine accomplished. The brick is not hard
fired, glazed or blackened, nor ;s it significantly underfired.
The
former indicates it was probably not part of the inner ring in kiln
firing or it was clamp fired. Additionally, it was probably not used
in the firebox or lower inside flue of a chimney. The latter
indicates middle ring kiln firing or clamp firing.
In summary, the
specimen has all the physical characteristics of brick produced close
at hand to the project where it was to be used. This was accomplished
by hand operations including non-sanded molding in a wood mold without
top or bottom, drying in stacks placed directly on the ground, and

-----~-

.......

Page 26
firing at comparatively moderate temperature. The clay was probably
of local origin and the brick was not subjected to high post firing
heat while in use. None of the above rules out reuse after the brick
was salvaged from another location.
The specimen is not tightly
datable but could have originated anytime during the latter half of
the nineteenth century right on through the first decade or so of the
twentieth. In 1905 Texas· 50 commercial brick manufacturers had among
them 185 clamp kilns and only 7 continuous kilns. Eight hand presses
were still employed as were 27 ring pits for tempering clay and four
mold sanders (Hall 1908:909). With early twentieth century commercial
operations still using a number of hand molding and unautomated
processes to produce brick, it follows that non-commercial or job
specific local manufacture would also. Some hand made brick is still
commercially produced today (Garlick 1983:personal communication).
Summary
The surface artifact assemblage is that of the dump/sheet refuse
of a dwelling or dwellings.
Its composition shows some items
indicative of purchase for reasons not limited to utility.
The
collective assemblage, where datable, clusters about the World War I
era with a few earlier manufactured items which may extend into the
late nineteenth cnetury. The group ;s heavily oriented toward South's
kitchen category with emphasis by datable item collecting bias toward
that category (South 1977:145). Architectural category items, brick,
nails and wire, do not deviate from the kitchen category in date span.
The test pit assemblage is, at all three levels, that of the
twentieth century with insufficient date sensitive characters to
assign a central period. Not a single item is definitive and all
could have been deposited within the last decade or any other period
since circa 1920. The subsurface assemblage is neither linked with
nor separated from the surface assemblage.
The total artifact assemblage is not, by itself, supportive of a
for
additional
investigation.
A positive
recommendation
recommendation for State Historic Landmark eligibility or National
Register potential would not be warranted on the basis of the
artifacts analyzed.

Page 27

REFERENCES CITED
Ba rtho 1omew, Ed
1970 1200 Old Medi
Texas-.-

i

Bottles.

Frontier Book Co.

Fort

Garlick, Mellor
Communication.
Data from
files
1983 Personal
International Brick Collectors Association. Mr.
the Association Historian.

Davis,

of
the
Garlick is

Gates, William C., Jr. and Dana E. Ormerod
1982 The East Liverpool Pottery District:
Identification of
Manufacturers and Marks. Historical Archaeology Volume 16,
Numbers 1-2.
Glover, Jack
1980 The "Bobbed Wire" Bible
Texas.

VI.

Cow Puddle

Press.

Sunset,

Ha 11, Charl es E.
1908 Cl ay Products.
Manufactures 1905.
Part II 1.
Speci a 1
Reports on Seclected Industires. Department of Commerce and
Labor, Bureau of the Census.
Government Printing Office.
Washington. D.C.
Herskovitz, Robert W.
1978 Fort Bowie Material Culture.
University of Arizona 31.
Tuscon.
Kendri ck, Grace
1968 The Mouth-Blown Bottle.
Nevada.

Anthropology Papers of the
University of Arizona Press.

Published by

the Author.

Fallon,

Li af, Alfred

1965

Close-up of Closures.
Institute. New York.

~

Lorrain, Dessamae
1968 An Archaeologist's Guide to
Glass. Historic Archaeology.

Glass

Container Manufacturers

Nineteenth

Century American

2:35-49.

Miller, Robert W., compiler and editor
1974
Price Guide to Antiques and Pattern Glass. Second
Wallace-Homestead Book Company. Des Moines.

Edition.

Page 28
Montgomery Ward Company
1894 1894-5 Montgomery Ward Catalog.

Chicago.

Newman, T. Stell
1970 A Dating Key for Post-Eig hteenth
Historical Archaeology 4:70-75.

Century

Sears, Roebuck Co.
1922 Sears, Roebuck and Company Catalog, 1922.
South, Stanley
1977 Method and Theory in Historical Archeology.
New York.

Bottles.

Dallas.
Academic Press.

Swank, James M.
1892 History of the Manufacture of Iron and Particularly in the
Times
to 1891.
United States from Colonial -- Burt Franklin.
New York.
Toulouse, Julian Harrison
1977 Fruit Jars. Everybody's Press Inc.
Watson, Richard
1965 Bitters Bottles.
Toronto.

- -..

~

. .-

.~~

..................

~-~~-.-~~

............

-~.~~-

-~.--~

Thomas Nelson

............

-.~

..- ..

--~--.-=--

Hanover, Pennsylvania.

and Sons.

New York and

- - _ . . . . . . . - - - . - - - -..

...........- - - - - ­

-~.~--

