AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY ALONG
US 385 FROM CRANE TO McCAMEY,
CRANE AND UPTON COUNTIES, TEXAS

Ecological Communications Corporation

CSJ#s 0229-03-033, 0229-04-049
TAC Permit 4758
April 2008

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY ALONG
US 385 FROM CRANE TO McCAMEY
CRANE AND UPTON COUNTIES, TEXAS
CSJ#s 0229-03-033, 0229-04-049

Written by:
Antonio E. Padilla and Rachel Feit

Principal Investigator:
Rachel Feit

Prepared by:

Ecological Communications Corporation

Prepared for:
HDR, Inc.

Texas Antiquities Committee Permit #4758
April 2008

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

ABSTRACT
The Odessa District of the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) proposes to
expand a segment of roadway along US 385 from Crane to McCamey, Texas (CSJ#022903-033, 0229-04-049). The expansion will require an average of 100 feet of additional
right-of-way along the entire 21-mile segment. In compliance with Section 106 of the
National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) and the Antiquities Code of Texas Ecological
Communications Corporation (EComm) conducted an intensive archeological survey of
the proposed project, where right-of-entry was available, under Texas Antiquities
Committee (TAC) Permit #4758. The survey included shovel testing on private
properties and in the existing right-of-way. Since soils are typically shallow in this
region of Texas, EComm did not conduct backhoe trenching. EComm archeologists had
access to all of the existing right-of-way and approximately 2.1 miles of the proposed
new right-of-way (ROW).

The survey documented one new prehistoric site, 41CR40, which consists of three flakes
and two fire-cracked rocks. The site is not recommended for further NRHP-eligibility
testing. All notes, records and documents from this project will be curated at TARL in
Austin, Texas. This report documents the results of the investigations and recommends
that no additional archeological work is warranted on any of the properties surveyed.

Ecological Communications Corporation

i

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................................ i
1.0
INTRODUCTION................................................................................................. 1
2.0
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND.............................................................. 4
3.0
CULTURAL BACKGROUND............................................................................ 6
3.1
Paleoindian Period .............................................................................................. 6
3.2
Archaic Period .................................................................................................... 7
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period........................................................................................ 7
3.4
The Southern High Plains Region in Relation to the Cultural Chronology........ 7
3.5
The Trans-Pecos Region in Relation to the Cultural Chronology. ..................... 8
3.6
Historic Period .................................................................................................... 9
3.7
Previous Archeological Investigations ............................................................. 10
4. METHODOLOGY ..................................................................................................... 11
5. RESULTS .................................................................................................................... 13
5.1 Site 41CR40 ............................................................................................................ 19
5.0
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS ................................................................. 21
6.0 REFERENCES.......................................................................................................... 22
APPENDIX A:................................................................................................................. 24

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1. Project Location in Crane and Upton Counties................................................... 1
Figure 2. Proposed ROW on the Sparks Property. ........................................................ 12
Figure 3. The Sunset Cemetery......................................................................................... 13
Figure 4. The Garden of Memories Cemetery .................................................................. 14
Figure 5. Typical view of disturbances in existing ROW................................................. 15
Figure 6. Fiber Optic lines running along the edge of the existing ROW ........................ 15
Figure 7. Roadside Park on Eastern side of ROW............................................................ 16
Figure 8. Oil Pad Site on the Capps Property in Upton County ....................................... 17
Figure 9. Disturbances caused by bulldozing on the Capps property............................... 18
Figure 10. Bladed Road running along Sparks Property all the way CR 468. ................. 18
Figure 11. View of Site 41CR40....................................................................................... 19
Figure 12. Plan of Site 41CR40 ........................................................................................ 20

Ecological Communications Corporation

ii

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

1.0

INTRODUCTION

In February 2008, Ecological Communications Corporation (EComm), in compliance
with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) and the Antiquities
Code of Texas, conducted an intensive archeological survey of the proposed road
expansion along US 385 from Crane to McCamey, Texas (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Project Location in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

1

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

The archeological survey, which included shovel testing on private properties and in the
existing right-of-way, was conducted under Texas Antiquities Committee (TAC) Permit
#4758. The survey was undertaken for the Odessa District of the Texas Department of
Transportation (TxDOT), which plans to expand the existing roadway and average of 100
feet for a distance of approximately 21 miles (CSJ#0229033, 0229-04-049).
The project area is located in a rural setting in west Texas; land use in this area is
generally devoted to ranching and oil extraction. The undertaking involves roadway
expansion between Lilley Lane in Crane and Nimitz Street in McCamey. The Area of
Potential Effects (APE) for the project is defined as the footprint of the proposed
improvements within both existing and new location ROW, plus the vertical extent of
impacts. Based on schematics and projects of this type, the majority of the project will be
built at grade with impacts of no deeper than three feet. The vertical APE is thus
approximately three feet. The average typical width of the existing facility is 150 feet.
The proposed new facility will have an average typical width of at least 240 feet. Rightof-way (ROW) Expansion will occur mainly on the west side of US 385, though near the
towns of McCamey and Crane, new ROW will be needed on the east side of the roadway.
The total new ROW area required is approximately 228 acres. Once complete, the total
area of the proposed new facility will be approximately 608 acres.
The proposed project will be built using federal and state funds; hence the project falls
under the provisions of Section 106 of National Historical Preservation Act and the
Antiquities Code of Texas. The object of the archeological survey was to identify,
document, and assess archeological resources that could be impacted by the proposed
improvements.
The survey consisted of a 100% pedestrian inspection within the APE of the undertaking,
wherever right-of-entry was available. Archeologists had access to the entire existing
ROW and approximately 2.1 miles of the proposed new ROW. Investigations involved
pedestrian inspection of all the proposed and existing ROW to which archeologists were
able to access (see Appendix A). Shovel testing occurred at a rate of 16 tests per mile on
all areas of proposed new ROW. Shovel tests were also excavated in the existing ROW
at drainages and in areas that appeared to be undisturbed by roadway construction,
maintenance, or other activities. Archeologists dug a total of 100 tests and found that due
to various disturbances, the existing ROW has no potential for cultural material. One
new prehistoric archeological site, 41CR40, was recorded within the proposed new ROW
in Crane County. Investigators noted three flakes in two shovel tests buried between 0
and 20 centimeters below the surface. Two fire cracked rocks were noted in one shovel
test approximately 60 centimeters below the surface. These artifacts were not collected.
The site is recommended to be ineligible for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places. No additional cultural material was documented during the survey.
All work was conducted in compliance with 36 CFR 800 and 13 TAC 26, which pertain
to the guidelines for implementing Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act

Ecological Communications Corporation

2

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

(NHPA) (16 U.S.C. 470 et seq.) and the Antiquities Code of Texas. Work was conducted
under Texas Antiquities Permit #4758.
Weather conditions during the investigation were cold and cloudy, with rain and sleet
occurring on the last day of work. Rachel Feit functioned as Principal Investigator;
Antonio Padilla was project archeologist and was assisted by Matt Carter during
investigations. Remaining sections of this report detail the environmental and cultural
background of the project area, field methods used, results of investigations and
conclusions. All records, photos and site data will be permanently curated at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

Ecological Communications Corporation

3

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

The project area lies at the intersection of three ecological regions—the Edwards Plateau,
Trans-Pecos, and the Southern High Plains.
This area is characterized by rolling
topography punctuated by isolated hills and mesas. Drainage basins feed into the Pecos
River and tend to be wide, shallow and oftentimes ephemeral.
Vegetation consists of principally fourwing-saltbrush-creosotebush scrub, as defined by
McMahan et al (1984), which features principally mesquite, salt-cedar, creosote, tarbush,
prickly pear, tasajillo, sacaton, grama, broom snakeweed, James’ rushpea, tabosa, mesa
dropseed, purple three-awn and jimmyweed.
Common fauna in this region include Black-tailed jackrabbit (Lepus californicus), desert
cotton tail (Sylvilagus audubonii), Merriam’s pocket mouse (Perognathus merriami),
collared peccary (Tayassu tajacu), Mexican ground squirrel (Spermophilus mexicanus)
White-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), opossum (Didelphis virginiana), tarantula
(Aphonopelma chalcodes), and western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox).
The project area elevation is approximately 2400 feet AMSL. The underlying geology of
the APE is characterized by Quaternary wind-blown alluvial and colluvial deposits
interspersed with Cretaceous limestone bedrock (Bureau of Economic Geology 1992).
This latter geologic feature is confined mainly to hilly areas and mesas present on the east
side of US 385. Soils within the APE can be shallow or deep, depending on mapping
unit. There are seven main soil mapping units within the project area. These are
provided in the table below, with descriptions, starting from the mapping unit that
occupies the largest area within the APE (Watson 1978, Wiedenfeld 2003).
Table 1. Soil Mapping Units in the Project APE
Soil Mapping Unit
RRA- Reakor
Association
TEC- Tencee
Association
RaA, RaB- Reagan
Loam
LZG, LZD Lozier
Gravelly Loam
WaB- Wickett
Association
SAC- Sanderson very
gravelly loam
KWB- Kinco-Ima
Association

Appr. %
32
25

12
11
11
4
5

Description
Nearly level. Surface layer of silty clay loam or clay loam. These soils
are deep and easily penetrated by plant roots.
Undulating. This mapping unit occupies uplands and has a surface of
very gravelly loam or gravelly sandy loam. Soils are very shallow to
shallow. Soil is prone to water erosion
Deep nearly level soil formed on calcareous loam materials that are a
mixture of water and wind deposits
Very shallow or shallow to hard limestone bedrock on the tops and sides
of hills
Gently undulating. Occupies uplands and has a surface layer of loamy
fine sand and fine sandy loam that is very prone to Aeolian forces.
Deep gently sloping to moderately sloping soil on footslopes and at bases
of steeper limestone hills.
Gently undulating. Occupies uplands and has a surface layer of
calcareous sandy loam. Prone to Aeolian forces.

Though few sites have been recorded along the alignment, this is largely a result of lack
of previous survey. There is potential for archeological sites to be shallowly buried
within limited portions of the project area, particularly within Tencee, Wickett, Reagan,

Ecological Communications Corporation

4

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Sanderson, and Kinco Ima soils, which have potential to bury and preserve sites through
Aeolian, alluvial or colluvial forces. These are typically located near the base of hills, or
along shallow drainages, where archeological sites are commonly found in this region.
Flat stable uplands that are less prone to Aeolian forces, such as those that encompass
Reakor Association soils, have a lower potential for archeological sites, though isolated
surface scatters could be present. The site type most likely to be present in the APE is the
prehistoric campsite featuring a burned rock midden (or the remnants thereof), or
shallowly buried hearths.

Ecological Communications Corporation

5

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND

Within the state of Texas, archeological regions of the state tend to reflect that of
topographical settings. This division is seen in Turner and Hester’s (1999) model of the
archeological regions of Texas, where Texas is divided in to nine archeological regions,
all based on geographical regions. Although the divisions of Turner and Hester’s (1999)
are generally accepted, Perttula (2004) further divides these regions into 16 distinct
archeological regions based on physiographic zones and biotic communities. Both
models are used interchangeably by archeologists when describing and defining the
cultural chronology of their project area. Despite these regional breakdowns of the
archeological areas of Texas, not all archeological projects fall within the clear cut
chronological sequences provided for these areas. In some cases archeological projects
may lie at the cusp or confluence of two or three distinct archeological regions, therefore
reflecting different aspects of those different regions. In cases such as these, rather than
confining the project area to one regional chronological sequence, chronological
sequences of the surrounding regions must also be taken into consideration.
The project area is located in the Permian Basin of the Southern High Plains (Llano
Estacado) archeological region, which lies immediately to the east of the Pecos River, a
physiographic dividing line of the Trans-Pecos and the Southern High plains
archeological regions. (Perttula 2004; Turner and Hester 1999). Both archeological
regions have been extensively researched and comprehensive chronological sequences
have been established for these regions (Turner an Hester 1999). According to research
conducted at archeological sites in both regions, evidence of human occupation in the
regions roughly spans 12,000 years before present (BP) (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004;
Johnson and Holliday 2004). These 12,000 years of occupation are typically divided into
four main periods, based on technological and cultural changes seen throughout the
archaeological record. These four main periods are as follows: the Paleoindian
(12,000/11,500–8,500/8,000 BP); the Archaic (8,500/8,000–2,000300 BP); the Late
Prehistoric (2,000/1,500 B.P.–1650 A.D.); and the Historic (A.D. 1650–1950’s) (Miller
and Kenmotsu 2004; Johnson and Holliday 2004). The following is a general overview of
trends seen during each period, followed by a discussion of what occurred in the
Southern High Plains and the Tran-Pecos regions.
3.1

Paleoindian Period

It is commonly thought that the Paleoindian Period throughout Texas was dominated by
nomadic big-game hunters who heavily relied on megafauna of the Pleistocene (e.g.,
mammoth, mastodon, bison, camel, and horse) for subsistence (sensu Willey 1966).
However, a more accurate description of this stage is presented by Bousman et al.
(1990:22): “…this period may have seen use by small, mobile bands of nonspecialized
hunters and gathers occasionally utilizing megafauna perhaps only as the opportunity
arose.” Thus, according to Bousman et al. (1990), Paleoindians used a wider variety of
resources than previously thought. Evidence of this broader resource subsistence is

Ecological Communications Corporation

6

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

echoed is the works of Johnson (1977), Collins (1998: 1505–1506), and Collins and
Brown (2000). Johnson (1977) reviewed reports on numerous Paleoindian sites that
indicated a range of small and medium fauna were harvested in addition to big game.
Investigations at the Wilson-Leonard site (41WM235), the Gault site (41BL323), and
Lubbock Lake (41LU1) provide evidence of small and medium faunal remains (i.e.,
turtle, rabbit, squirrel, snakes, gopher, and deer) associated with megafaunal remains (i.e.,
bison and mammoth) (Collins 1998: 1505–1506). Clovis and Folsom points are the
primary diagnostic artifacts associated with this period (Turner and Hester 1999; Collins
1995).
3.2

Archaic Period

The Archaic stage signifies a shift from heavily nomadic subsistence strategies to a less
mobile, more generalized subsistence strategy. This change in subsistence strategies
shows a greater exploitation of local environments with the greater reliance on plants and
animals located in the immediate vicinity. Along with the change in subsistence practices
a change is also seen in lithic technology. Evidence of this is apparent in the
archaeological record where lanceolate-shaped points give way to dart points that were
stemmed and barbed. Groundstone becomes a more common feature of the artifact suite
for Archaic period sites (Black 1989; Collins 2004). Although Archaic peoples were
still nomadic, archeologists believe that their migrations became more seasonal in order
to exploit specific resources at various locations.
3.3

Late Prehistoric Period

The Late Prehistoric is marked by the replacement of the atlatal with the bow and arrow
and by the production of small arrow points (Hester 1981:122). With this technological
advancement an apparent increase in warfare is reported (Black 1989; Prewitt 1974;
Story 1985). During this stage new technological adaptations came about. As previously
mentioned Late Prehistoric peoples began to use the bow and arrow. However, this is not
the only technological innovation of this time period. Ceramics and agriculture became
an important technological advancement in the lifeways of the Late Prehistoric peoples.
3.4

The Southern High Plains Region in Relation to the Cultural Chronology

Although a complete chronological sequence is well represented in the Southern High
Plains region, it is limited to the northern half of the Southern High Plains.
Representation of archeological sites in the southern half of the Southern High Plains—
particularly within the study area (Crane and Upton counties), is generally scarce, and
knowledge of prehistoric lifeways in this area is incomplete. This is in part due to a lack
of resources within the area. This lack of resources, particularly in the Midland/Odessa
area kept populations low, therefore keeping sites to a minimum. A review of
archeological sites found in Crane, Ector, Midland, Ward, and Upton Counties revealed
Ecological Communications Corporation

7

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

that the majority of sites are open campsites consisting of scatters of lithic debris on the
surface or are shallowly buried and burned rock features. Although these types of sites
are commonly found throughout Texas, they are easily disturbed by erosion and modern
intrusion (Turner and Hester 1993). Although the southern half of the Southern Plains
region is lacking in long-term occupation sites and quarries, the region does contain an
important site dating to the Folsom period (10,800–10,300 B. P.). This particular site,
unearthed at Scharbauer Ranch in 1953 is known as the “Midland Minnie” Site (41MD1).
The Midland Minnie Site is one of the earliest sites known within this region.
Investigation of he site revealed the remains of what researchers believed to be a Folsom
period (ca. 9,000 BP) female buried with fossil evidence of extinct mega-fauna (Leffler
2008a).
As the Southern High Plains moved into the Archaic Period, the southern half of the
Southern High Plains entered a long antithermal phase that lasted around 4000 years
(7,000–3,000 B.P.). The altithermal is characterized as a period warmer and drier
climate, that ultimately leading to severe xeric conditions. According to researchers, the
altithermal phase resulted in the “decreased use, if not complete abandonment” of the
region (Johnson and Holliday 2004, Stafford 1981). Most sites recorded in the Southern
Panhandle Plains region date to the Middle Archaic though Late Prehistoric period,
which reflects a return to more mesic conditions, and an increase in population
throughout Texas.
3.5

The Trans-Pecos Region in Relation to the Cultural Chronology.

The Trans-Pecos region, much like the Southern High Plains contains well established
chronological sequence, however it encompasses a considerably more dynamic cultural
environment than the southern half of the Southern Plains around Midland/Odessa.
The Trans-Pecos Region is characterized by its numerous natural rock shelters that
formed in limestone cliffs, abundant lithic material, isolated micro-environments formed
in mountain ranges or at springs. Limitations of accessibility between various
environments contributed to distinctive prehistoric site types (Turpin 1995). Prehistoric
sites are often found within natural rock shelters located in many of the limestone cliffs,
which are ideal conditions for the preservation of burned rock middens, organic
materials, burials, and various types of rock art. Native peoples utilized these rock
shelters throughout all periods of prehistory well into the historic period.
Paleoindian sites in the Trans-Pecos occur rather infrequently. However those that are
known are primarily kill sites found in or near rock shelters where ancient peoples
processed mega fauna such as bison, camel, and bear (Turpin 1995). Other evidence of
the existence of Paleoindian inhabitants comes from Paleoindian tools or points found in
isolated occurrences or points found within multicomponent scatters (Seebach 2001).
During the Archaic, habitation sites within rock shelters became more prevalent, along
with rock art. The Late Archaic (4,000–1,500 B.P.) is best known period of the three

Ecological Communications Corporation

8

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

subperiods of the Archaic, providing data that marks a population increase, an associated
expansion into all available ecological niches, and the use of specialized food processing
earth ovens (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004). In the Late Archaic the more common site
types in the Trans-Pecos are massive burned rock middens, used for large scale food
processing. These middens are typically found exposed on mesa tops overlooking the
surrounding canyons and waterways.
During the Late Prehistoric, sites found in the Trans-Pecos region consisted of tipi rings,
cairn burial sites, rock shelter sites with pictographs and petroglyphs, and pit houses built
on river and stream terraces. It was during this time that the lifeways of the Late
Prehistoric peoples changed, with the development of proto-agriculture, use of the bow
and arrow, and the manufacture of ceramics. Material culture associated with this social
organizational change includes Perdiz arrow points, flake drills, end and side scrapers,
beveled knife fragments, ground stone items, end-notched sinker stones, small bone and
stone beads, tiny turquoise beads, and a few Olivella shell beads.
3.6

Historic Period

The Historic Period in Texas can be divided into two sub-periods: the Protohistoric and
Historic. The Protohistoric (ca. A.D. 1528–1700) is ushered by the venture into south
and southeast Texas by Spanish explorer Cabeza de Vaca in 1528. Archeological sites
dated to this sub-period contain a mix of both European (e.g., metal and glass arrow
points, trade beads, and wheel-made or glazed ceramics) and traditional Native American
artifacts (e.g., manufactured stone tools). The effect the Spanish presence in Mexico had
on Indians in Texas prior to about 1700 is not well-understood. What is known is that the
initial arrival of Spanish missionaries and explorers spread disease that killed, displaced,
and fragmented a huge percentage of the population. As colonization spread from
Mexico, many of the Coahuiltecan groups moved northward to avoid the Spanish. At the
same time, invading Indian groups from the north put pressure on Native American
groups in North Texas (Nickels et al. 1997). Historians believe that these pressures led to
intense territorial disputes, further destabilizing Native American populations. The
establishment of the first Spanish missions and the expansion of the Spanish Colonial
Empire mark the Historic period (ca. 1700–present). Most of our knowledge of this subperiod is through the written records of early Spanish missionaries and by records kept by
local land officials.
Spanish exploration, however, had little direct impact on Crane and Upton Counties.
These areas were too remote, and, except for the area around the Pecos River, remained
largely unexplored by Europeans until the end of the nineteenth centuries. Both counties
were created in 1887 from Tom Green County. Up to that time Comanches and Apaches
traversed the region, hunting buffalo and other game, and on their way to raid settled
populations to the east. The first European settlers were ranchers who came in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, though lack of water and other resources
hindered significant population growth. In 1890, for instance, there were only 52 people
living in Upton County (Hunt and Leffler 2008), and only 15 people living in Crane

Ecological Communications Corporation

9

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

County (Leffler 2008b). This area remained very sparsely populated until oil was
discovered in 1926. The following year the population in Crane was reported at 4,500,
while McCamey reportedly had 10,000 people. Both counties still rely on the petroleum
and ranching as the primary industries today, with permanent populations of less than
5,000 people in each county.
3.7

Previous Archeological Investigations

A review of online archeological site records maintained by the Texas Historical
Commission determined that the majority of the proposed project area has not been
previously inventoried for cultural resources. Only one previous survey project,
conducted by PBS&J for Texas Wind and Power in 2001, intersects the APE of the
proposed expansion undertaking. This was a linear survey performed in advance of
public utility (likely an electrical transmission line) installation. The survey was not
conducted under a Texas Antiquities Code Permit, and the online atlas does not have any
detailed records about it. However, no archeological sites are recorded with the survey
alignment, and no archeological sites have been recorded within the APE of the current
undertaking. However, there are two sites within one mile of the project APE: Sites
41UT27 and 41UT41.
Site 41UT27 was recorded in 2000 by SWCA as a prehistoric campsite with a burned
rock scatter of unknown age. Investigators observed burned rock and flakes on the
surface, but did not record any diagnostic artifacts. The site was not recommended as
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places and no further work was considered
warranted. Site 41UT27 is located 1,200 feet southwest of US 385, near the foot of King
Mountain.
Site 41UT41 is located approximately ½ mile north of McCamey, on the north and east
side of US 385. The site, recorded by LCRA in 2002, was in advance of an electrical
transmission line upgrade. The site consists of scattered burned rock with no obvious or
diagnostic features. The rocks are buried under approximately 10 centimeters of windblown, fine silty loam. Investigators recommended no further work, and the site was
recommended as ineligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.

Ecological Communications Corporation

10

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

4. METHODOLOGY
Prior to field investigations, EComm archeologists conducted a review of records
maintained by the Texas Historical Commission, noting all previously recorded
archeological sites and archeological surveys within a one mile (1,600 m) radius of the
APE. In addition, USDA soil survey maps and the Geologic Atlas of Texas for Crane
and Upton counties were consulted to assess the potential for deeply buried deposits.
On Jan 22–24, 2008, archeologists from EComm conducted a pedestrian and windshield
survey of a 21 mile linear segment of US Hwy 385, between the towns of Crane and
McCamey. The goal of the survey was to identify and document cultural resources that
could be impacted by the proposed expansion of the highway.
During the survey, 100 shovel tests were excavated in order to determine whether the
project area contained intact subsurface deposits. Shovel test locations are shown in
Appendix A. The primary goal of shovel testing was to locate and identify subsurface
cultural resources. A shovel test is defined as a 30 centimeter (cm) diameter unit. Every
shovel test was assigned a unique number. Excavation was conducted using 20
centimeter arbitrary levels to a maximum depth of 80 centimeters below surface (cmbs)
or until bedrock, road base gravels, or ancient soils. All matrix removed was screened
through a ¼-inch mesh hardware cloth. A shovel test form was filled out for every
shovel test excavated during the survey. The UTM coordinates of all shovel tests were
taken using a handheld GPS. On the shovel test form, detailed notes were recorded that
delineate the nature of soils encountered during excavation.
Archeologists conformed to the minimum standards on all areas of proposed new ROW
for which right-of-entry was available, digging one test at least every 100 meters (328 ft).
However, within the existing ROW investigators observed extensive disturbances to the
ground surface. The types of disturbances observed related to buried fiber-optic cables,
natural gas lines, artificial drainage ditches, concrete culverts, and intersecting asphalt
roads. In the existing ROW, shovel tests were excavated near natural drainages, and in
areas that appeared to contain intact surfaces, at the discretion of the field crew.
Of the 100 shovel tests conducted, 22 were placed along the existing western ROW, 29
shovel tests were placed along the existing eastern ROW, 22 were excavated within the
Cowden property, five were placed within the Young property, 10 within the Dominguez
property, and 12 within the Crider property (see Appendix A). Five of the 12 shovel tests
within the Crider property were to determine the extent of 41CR40. No shovel tests were
excavated on the Sparks property, due a 12 meter bladed road running the length of the
property, immediately inside the fence line (Figure 2).

Ecological Communications Corporation

11

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Figure 2. Proposed ROW on the Sparks Property. This property was bladed and disturbed.

Ecological Communications Corporation

12

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

5. RESULTS
At the time of survey investigators had access to just 2.1 miles of proposed new ROW on
private property, plus the existing ROW on state-owned land. Thus, much of the
proposed project area could not be assessed However, wherever possible, investigators
made notes on private properties that could be assessed from the roadway, such as those
with large gravel pits so that those properties would not have to revisited in the future.
The archeological survey consisted of systematic pedestrian survey, windshield survey,
and the excavation of 100 shovel tests. The survey resulted in the discovery of
prehistoric site 41CR40, discussed fully below.
Two cemeteries are located along US 385 adjacent to the APE: the Sunset Cemetery,
outside of Crane and the Garden of Memories Cemetery outside of McCamey (see
Appendix A). The earliest graves in both cemeteries date to the 1950s. Both are welltended and still in use. Sunset Cemetery is a community cemetery located on the western
edge of the US 385 ROW south of Crane. The boundary of the cemetery is fenced on all
four sides of the parcel, with the eastern fence line sitting on the edge of the existing
ROW (Figure 3), outside the APE for the project. Graves within the cemetery are all
located within the boundaries of the cemetery, the closest being more than 20 feet from
the fence along the US 385 ROW.

Figure 3. The Sunset Cemetery

The Garden of Memories Cemetery is an African American cemetery located on the west
side of US 385, at the northern end of McCamey, just before entering the city limits. The
boundary of the cemetery is marked by a fence that encompasses the burials; the closest
to the ROW is approximately 15 feet from the fence. The eastern portion of the fence is
located on the edge of the existing ROW (Figure 4). The Garden of Memories Cemetery

Ecological Communications Corporation

13

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

is in the process of becoming designated as a Historical Cemetery by the Upton County
Historical Commission. The cemetery has undergone renovations that included the
marking of unmarked graves. To date all graves are marked except for three that are
recent and known to be within the cemetery boundaries. All interments are accounted for
and are located within the cemetery boundaries, none exist within the US 385 ROW
(Peggy Kelton, personal communication 2008). Moreover, no new right-of-way will be
taken in front of either of these cemeteries, so the marked boundaries are outside the APE
for the undertaking. Shovel tests were dug around the Sunset Cemetery, and
investigators found no evidence that burials could be located outside the cemetery limits.
Visual inspection and information provided by the Upton County Historical Commission
around the Garden of Memories Cemetery resulted in similar conclusions.

Figure 4. The Garden of Memories Cemetery

The project APE within the existing ROW had been tremendously impacted by prior
construction activities (Figure 5).
The majority of the eastern and western ROW had been raised, graded and mowed.
Deposits of asphalt, road base of white caliche and marl, and bedrock were exposed on
the surface. In addition, buried fiber-optic cable, natural gas lines, excavated drainage
ditches and intersecting asphalt roads were also noted through-out the entire length of the
eastern and western ROW. Along the eastern ROW two historical markers and a Picnic
Area were also present, all containing asphalt and cement bases with well maintained
surroundings (Figures 6 and 7).

Ecological Communications Corporation

14

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Figure 5. Typical view of disturbances in existing ROW.

Figure 6. Fiber Optic lines running along the edge of the existing ROW

Ecological Communications Corporation

15

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Figure 7. Roadside Park on Eastern side of ROW

Lands located within proposed new ROW also showed evidence of disturbance. The
majority of the lands within the proposed new ROW are used for ranching and oil
extraction. Evidence of this was seen throughout the entire length of Hwy 385, by the
various ranches and oil pad sites along the highway (Figures 8 and 9). Lands for which
investigators had access also showed disturbance. These lands were used for ranching,
and most of them had been bladed, raked, and cleared of mesquite at one time. The
properties owned by Sparks and Young, for instance, contained a 15 meter wide bladed
road that extended from the fence line along the existing ROW and ran the entire length
of their properties (Figure 10) and continued all the way to the an intersecting road CR
468. Other properties where ROE was not available displayed similar impacts affecting
the upper 20-25 centimeters of the ground surface. These impacted properties are
depicted on the figures in Appendix A.
No prehistoric or historic artifacts were recovered beneath the surface during the shovel
test excavation, except for two shovel tests excavated at Site 41CR40. The majority of
excavated shovel tests, especially those within existing ROW, encountered impenetrable
clays, road fill gravels, and bedrock at relatively shallow depths.
Of the 22 shovel tests along the western side of the existing ROW, 18 encountered road
gravels, asphalt and construction base at depths of 5–25 centimeters below ground
surface (cmbs), 2 contained broken glass, and plastic material up to 50 cmbs, and 2
encountered caliche, bedrock maral at 50–60 cmbs. Shovel tests excavated on the eastern
side of the existing ROW encountered the same materials. Of the 29 shovel tests
excavated in the eastern ROW, 27 encountered road gravel, modern trash, and asphalt at

Ecological Communications Corporation

16

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

depths of 5–45 cmbs, one encountered caliche clasts and bedrock marl at 35 cmbs, and
one contained sandy loam matrices that extended to a depth of 80cmbs.

Figure 8. Oil Pad Site on the Capps Property in Upton County

Shovel tests were excavated on five private properties with right-of-entry granted by the
landowners. Of these five parcels three were located in Upton County. The owners of
these properties were Dominguez, Sparks, and Young. A total of 10 shovel tests were
excavated on the Dominguez property and five were excavated on the Young parcel. No
shovel tests were excavated on the Sparks property due to a 15 meter bladed road running
the entire length of the property, which has impacted the surface to depth of
approximately 20 centimeters. Shovel tests within the Dominguez were fairly deep and
well stratified. Of the 10 shovel tests excavated on the Dominguez property, 7 were
excavated to a depth of 45 to 80 cmbs. These typically contained a silty loam in the
upper 30 to 60 centimeters, underlain by a thick gravel deposit, underlain by caliche
clasts and bedrock marl. The other three shovel tests were shallow, usually terminating a
25 cmbs. Within these shovel tests a mixture of fine silty loam and heavy gravels were
encountered in the first few centimeters. Shovel tests excavated within the Young
property were also mostly shallow with depths reaching 25 to 45 cmbs. These shovel
tests, like the shallow ones on the Dominguez property, encountered a mixture of fine
silty loam and heavy gravels in the first few centimeters.
The remaining private properties investigated are located in Crane County. These are the
Cowden and Crider properties. A total of 22 shovel tests were placed within the Cowden
property and six, excluding the six excavated at the Site 41CR40, were placed within the
Crider property. Unlike the shovel tests conducted in Upton County, the shovel tests in
Crane County were fairly deep. The soils within these shovel tests contained a sandy

Ecological Communications Corporation

17

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

loam, with no gravels present. The majority of the shovel tests on theses properties were
excavated to a depth of 80 cmbs.

Figure 9. Disturbances caused by bulldozing on the Capps property.

Figure 10. Bladed Road running along Sparks Property all the way CR 468.

Ecological Communications Corporation

18

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

5.1 Site 41CR40
Site 41CR40 is a small prehistoric lithic scatter that was initially discovered when
artifacts were revealed in Shovel Test T5-8 on the Crider property. Site size is
approximately 20 x 20 meters and was established entirely on distribution of sub-surface
artifacts found while delineating the site. The site is located within a pasture and
according to the land owner, Bobby Crider, has been impacted by the scrapping and
raking of the land that occurred over 20 years ago (Figure 11). A stock pond located
approximately 40 meters to the north of the site offers further evidence of surface
disturbance. The site is confined entirely to the proposed new ROW.

Figure 11. View of Site 41CR40

During the survey, EComm thoroughly inspected the surface of the site and excavated
five additional shovel tests in areas located within a 30 meter radius of the original
location of Shovel Test T5-8 (Figure 12). Five artifacts were recorded in two shovel
tests, three in the original Shovel Test T5-8, and two in a shovel test excavated five
meters to the north, in Shovel Test T5-8 B. The artifacts consisted of three flakes and two
pieces of angular quartzite debris. (These last items may not be cultural, but since they
were recorded from Shovel Test T5-8, which also contained one flake, they are
considered as artifacts here.). All of the flakes were found 0-20cmbs; the two quartzite
fragments were recovered 60-70cmbs. These artifacts were not collected.

Ecological Communications Corporation

19

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

bladed low area

One meter contour

ROW Line

US 385 Roadway

Stock Pond

Berm for pond

0

20m

40m

N

Postive shovel test
Negative shovel test

Figure 12. Plan of Site 41CR40

Due to the low density of artifacts encountered, the complete lack of features, and poor
integrity, 41CR40 is recommended as not eligible for listing on the NRHP, nor as a SAL.
No further work is warranted.

Ecological Communications Corporation

20

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

5.0

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

EComm conducted an intensive archeological survey along a 21 mile segment of US 385
in advance of road expansion. The intensive archeological survey was conducted in
compliance with Section 106 of the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of Texas, and met to
the guidelines set forth in 36 CFR Part 800 and 13 TAC 26. Work was conducted under
TAC Permit #4758. The existing ROW was visually inspected, shovel tested and found
to be disturbed along the entire length of the project. The proposed new ROW was
visually inspected and shovel tested wherever archeologists had right of entry to private
property. For this project right of entry was minimal, with access to only about 10
percent of the total new ROW that is ultimately required. The investigations documented
one new site, 41CR40 on private property. The site is a thin prehistoric lithic scatter in a
disturbed context. It is recommended as not eligible for listing on the NRHP, nor is it
eligible for listing as a SAL.
Two cemeteries are located along US 385 within the project limits: the Sunset Cemetery,
outside of Crane, and the Garden of Memories Cemetery outside of McCamey. Sunset
Cemetery is local community cemetery located outside the western APE of US 385. The
Garden of Memories Cemetery is an African American community cemetery located on
the west side of US 385, also outside the APE, at the northern end of McCamey, just
before entering the city limits. The Garden of Memories Cemetery is in the process of
becoming designated as a Historical Cemetery by the Upton County Historical
Commission. Of the graves in both cemeteries, the earliest dates to the 1950s. Both are
well-tended and still in use. Pedestrian inspection and information provided by the Upton
County Historical Commission suggests a very low likelihood for graves to be located
outside the marked boundaries of the cemeteries, within the APE of the US 385
undertaking.
In addition, during the survey, investigators were able to evaluate several private
properties within the APE of the undertaking from the existing ROW to determine that no
further work would be needed. Approximately three miles of proposed new ROW were
obviously disturbed, with no potential for intact archeological resources, and hence, these
will not require survey once right-of-way acquisition has taken place. These properties
are shown on the figures in Appendix A.
This report recommends that no further work is warranted within the existing right-ofway and within any of the private properties inspected during the survey (approximately
5.1 miles). However, once right of entry is obtained to the remaining 15.9 miles of
private property to be acquired as new ROW for the undertaking, further archeological
survey is recommended. No artifacts were collected from Site 41CR40; site records, and
notes for Site 41CR40 will be permanently curated at TARL in Austin.

Ecological Communications Corporation

21

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

6.0 REFERENCES
Black, S. L.
1989 South Texas Plains. In From the Gulf of the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central,
South, and Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S. L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive,
A. A. Fox, K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement, pp. 39–62. Research Series No. 33.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Bousman, C. B., S. A. Tomka, and G. L. Bailey
1990 Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, South
Texas: Results of the Phase II Test Excavations. Reports of Investigations No. 76. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society.
66:361–400.
2004 Archeology in Central Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T.K. Perttula, pp.
101–127. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Collins, M. B. (Assembler and Editor)
1998 Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000 Year Archeological Record in Central Texas, Volumes 1–6.
Studies in Archeology 31, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of
Texas at Austin. Archeology Studies Program, Report 10, Texas Department of
Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.
Collins, M. B., and K. M. Brown
2000 Gault Gisement: Some Preliminary Observations. In Current Archeology in Texas
2(1):8–11.
Hester, T. R.
1981 Tradition and Diversity Among the Prehistoric Hunters and Gathers of South Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 26(92):119–128.
Hunt, W. & J. Leffler
2008 Upton County. In Handbook of Texas Online,
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/MM/hcm12.html (accessed
February 5, 2008).
Johnshon, E.
1977 Animal Food Resources of Paleoindians. The Museum Journal 17:65–77
Johnson, E. and V. T. Holliday
2004 Archeology and Late Quaternary Environments of the Southern High Plains. In The
Prehistory of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 283–295. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.

Ecological Communications Corporation

22

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Leffler, J.
2008a Midland County. In Handbook of Texas Online,
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/MM/hcm12.html (accessed
February 5, 2008).
2008b Crane County. In Handbook of Texas Online,
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/MM/hcm12.html (accessed
February 5, 2008).
Nickels, D.L., D.W. Pease, and C.B. Bousman
1997 Archaeological Survey of Lackland Air Force Base, Bexar County, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report No. 248. Center for Archaeological Research, University
of Texas, San Antonio.
McMahan, C.A., R.G. Frye, and K.L. Brown
1984 The Vegetation Types of Texas, Including Cropland. Texas Parks & Wildlife
Department, Austin.
Miller, M. R. and N. A. Kenmotsu
2004 Prehistory of the Jornada Mogollon and Eastern Trans-Pecos Regions of West Texas. In
The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 205–265. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
Perttula, T.
2004 The Prehistoric and Caddoan Archeology of the Northeastern Texas Pineywoods. In The
Prehistory of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 370-407. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.
Seebach, J. D.
2001 Paper presented at the Center for Big Bend Studies 8th annual Conference, November 9–
10, 2001. Sul Ross State University, Alpine, Texas.
Stafford, T. W., Jr.
1981 alluvial Geology and Archaeological Potential of the Texas Southern High Plains.
American Antiquity 46(3):548–565.
Story, D. A.
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West Gulf Costal Plain. In Prehistoric
Food Production in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19–56. Anthropological
Papers No. 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Turner, E.S. and T.R. Hester
1999 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Third edition. Gulf Publishing,
Houston.
Turpin, S. A.
1995 The Lower Pecos River Region of Texas and Northern Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society. 66:541–560.
Willey, G. R.
1966 An Introduction to American Archaeology. Prentice Hall, New York.

Ecological Communications Corporation

23

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

APPENDIX A:
Results of Survey Maps

Ecological Communications Corporation

24

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

25

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

26

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

27

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

28

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

29

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

30

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

31

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

32

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

33

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

34

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

35

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Expansion along US 385 in Crane and Upton Counties

Ecological Communications Corporation

36

