AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
RIO WATER SUPPLY CORPORATION WATER TREATMENT PLANT
PROJECT IN STARR COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 09-10

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Rio Water Supply Corporation
42 North Suntex Road
Rio Grande City, Texas 78582

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of a 22.9 acre tract and 6300 feet of water line in
southern Starr County, Texas was conducted by Brazos Valley Research
Associates (BVRA) in April of 2009 for the Rio Water Supply Corporation (WSC)
under Antiquities Permit 5270. In all, 23.14 acres were examined. No previously
recorded archaeological sites are present within any portion of the project area, and
no previously unrecorded archaeological sites were found. Much of the project
area had been disturbed through road construction and agricultural practices. No
artifacts were collected. The western portion of the 22.9 acre tract is bounded by
the east bank of the Rio Grande River.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to those individuals who participated in this project.
At the Rio WSC office we were assisted by Gloria Salinas (General Manager),
Marissa Trevino (Clerk), Juan Jose Zarate who operated the backhoe, and his
assistants Jaime Martinez and Cesar Piceno. Project area maps were provided by
George E. Lazaro of J. F. Fontaine & Associates, Inc. The reviewer for this project
was Debra L. Beene, staff archaeologist at the Texas Historical Commission (THC).
Jean Hughes, Records Conservator at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL), assisted the Principal Investigator with the records check.
Edward P. Baxter and Lili G. Lyddon prepared the figures in this report. Ms.
Lyddon edited the manuscript.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................6
METHODS OF INVESTIGATION .........................................................................9
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................18
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................19
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................20

Appendices
Appendix I: Shovel Test Log

Figures
Figure 1. General Location ............................................................................................. 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Maps.............................................................. 3
Figure 3. Profile of River Bank (facing south)............................................................ 10
Figure 4. Site of Proposed Water Intake Structure (facing west) ........................... 11
Figure 5. Site of Proposed Water Treatment Plant (facing west) ........................... 12
Figure 6. Location of Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trenches in Area A .................. 13
Figure 7. Location of Shovel Tests in Area B ............................................................ 16
Figure 8. Right-of-Way along Midway Road ............................................................. 17

iv

INTRODUCTION
The Rio WSC is a small water supply corporation located in Rio Grande
City along United States Highway 83 in southern Starr County, Texas. The
proposed project will improve the distribution of water to customers of the Rio
WSC by the construction of a water treatment plant, river intake structure, 1000
feet of raw water supply line, and 5300 feet of water distribution line. Funds for
this project will be provided by the United States Department of Agriculture, Rural
Utilities Services.
The river intake structure and water treatment plant will be constructed
within a 22.9 acre tract (Area A) of land owned by the Rio WSC. Approximately
1000 feet of raw water supply line (16-inch) within this tract will connect the two
structures. An additional 5300 feet of water distribution line (Area B) will be
placed in the right-of-way of Midway Road and connect the water treatment plant
with the existing water distribution system at United States Highway 83. The
river intake structure will occupy a footprint of 10 feet x 10 feet and will pump
water from the river from a depth of 40 feet below the existing ground surface.
The water treatment plant will occupy a footprint of approximately 30 feet x 50
feet and will receive the water from the river. The water will be treated, and then
it will be transported through a 16-inch pipe to the existing water distribution
system mentioned above. The water line within the 22.9 acre tract and along
Midway Road will be placed in a trench two feet wide and three feet deep. The
general location of the project area is depicted in Figure 1.Topographic coverage
of the project area is provided by the 7.5’ USGS topographic quadrangles Los
Garzas (2698-232) and Roma-Los Saenz East (2698-233) (Figure 2).
The project area is in a region where significant prehistoric and historic sites
have been recorded. In fact, there is a National Register District (Fort Ringgold)
four miles to the east. This is the closest historic district to the project area. Since
the project area is adjacent to the Rio Grande River and in an area where
significant historic sites are known to occur, a cultural resource survey was
requested in a letter from the THC to George E. Lazaro of J. F. Fontaine &
Associates, Inc. In order to satisfy this requirement, the Rio WSC retained the
services of BVRA to perform an archaeological survey of the project area.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Maps

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The following information for Starr County was taken from the published
soil survey (Thompson et al. 1972), a study of mammals of Texas (Davis 1974),
a planning document published by the THC (Mercado-Allinger et al. 1996:25),
and The Handbook of Texas Online (2001). Starr County is located in the South
Texas Brush Country and is part of the Rio Grande Plain region. It comprises
1226 square miles with elevations from 200 to 400 feet above sea level. In the
southwest part of the county, soils are gray to black crackling clay. In some
areas, limestone can be found within forty inches of the surface. Along the river,
brown to red loams cover crackling clayey soils. The nearest major source of
permanent water is the Rio Grande to the south. The county has a warmtemperate, subtropical steppe climate. Rainfall between 1931 and 1962
averaged about 43 centimeters annually. Most of the rain falls in the form of
thunderstorms; however, occasional tropical disturbances produce heavy rains in
early fall. The month of September has the highest monthly rainfall average.
The driest months are November and December. Temperatures are high in the
summer with daily maximums exceeding 100 degrees Fahrenheit in July and
August. Winter temperatures do not usually fall below 40 degrees Fahrenheit.
Freezes are not regular annual occurrences. Natural resources include caliche,
clay, gravel, oil, and gas. Gas and oil production is significant. Starr County is in
the South Texas Plains Vegetation region and is characterized by mid and short
grasses, thorny shrubs, mesquite, cacti, live oak, and post oak. Other natural
plants in the area include spiny hackberry, ebony, lime prickly ash, guayacan,
Texas persimmon, lotebush, coyotillo, and cenizo. Grasses and forbs include
Arizona cottontop, Texas bristlegrass, lovegrass tridens, fourflowered trichloris,
hooded windmill grass, pink pappusgrass, and knotroot panicum. Overgrazing;
deep root plowing; and irrigation, which have resulted in a lowering of the water
table, have resulted in an alteration of the natural vegetation. The natural
vegetation in prehistoric and early historic times probably consisted of more
grasses and less mesquite and brushy thorn because of the practice of large
scale burning. In 1982, 80 percent of the land was in farms and ranches with 17
percent of the farmland under cultivation and 19 percent irrigated. Numerous
species of mammals occur in Starr County today or were living there in the past.
These include opossum, mole, shrew, black bear, raccoon, weasel, skunk,
badger, fox, coyote, ocelot, cougar, jaguarundi, bobcat, squirrel, gopher, mouse,
rat, beaver, rabbit, javelina, antelope, and deer.
There are two soil types in the 22.9 acre tract and three soil types along
Midway Road. The soils within the 22.9 acre tract are Lagloria silt loam (La) and
Rio Grande silt loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes (RgA). The La soils constitute the
majority of the tract, while the RgA soils occupy the extreme western portion of
the area and include the riverbank. These soils are described below.

4

Lagloria silt loam is described in the soil survey by Thompson et al. (1972)
as a soil typically found in broad, irregularly shaped areas with a slope of less
than one percent. These soils can be deep and well drained and found on old
flood plains or terraces that no longer receive sediments from flooding. They
also developed in loamy calcareous sediments. The depth to the water table is
more than 80 inches, and the available water capacity is moderate.
Rio Grande silt loam is described in the soil survey by Thomson et al.
(1972) as a soil found on stream terraces, with the parent material consisting of
calcareous silty alluvium. It is typically found on slopes 0 to 1 percent. This is a
well drained soil with a water table at more than 80 inches. Floods are described
as occasional, and the available water capacity is high. The parent material is
calcareous silty alluvium.
There are three soil types along Midway Road. From north to south they
are McAllen fine sandy loam (Mc), Lagloria silt loam (La), and Reynosa silty clay
loam (Re).
Lagloria silt loam is described in the soil survey by Thompson et al. (1972)
as a soil typically found in broad, irregularly shaped areas with a slope of less
than one percent. These soils can be deep and well drained and found on old
flood plains or terraces that no longer receive sediments from flooding. They
also developed in loamy calcareous sediments. The depth to the water table is
more than 80 inches, and the available water capacity is moderate.
McAllen fine sandy loam is found on stream terraces on slopes of 0 to 3
percent. These soils are well drained. The depth to the water table is more than
80 inches, and the available water capacity is moderate. Frequency of flooding
is described as none. Calcareous loamy alluvium is the parent material.
Reynosa silty clay loam is found on stream terraces on slopes of 0 to 2
percent. These soils are will drained. The depth to the water table is more than
80 inches, and the available water capacity is high. The parent material consists
of calcareous loamy alluvium.
According to a geoarchaeological study of Rio Grande terrace flood plain
alluvium from Amistad Dam to the Gulf of Mexico by Gustavson and Collins
(1998:10), the slope of the river in the project area is 0.2 km, and sinuosity is 1.5.
Resacas (segments of former river channels) are preserved on the flood plain
surface below Rio Grande City. The only soil series discussed in the study by
Gustavson and Collins is the Rio Grande Series and the Lagloria Series. Soils of
the Rio Grande series developed on the silts and sands of natural levees, while
soils of the Lagloria series are more mature and occur on older sediments.

5

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
According to a statistical overview published by the THC (Biesaart et al.
1985:76), Starr County is located in the Southern Coastal Plains CulturalGeographical Region of Texas. In 1985, when the overview was published, the
number of archaeological sites in the region was 1516 or 7.50% of the state. In
1985, there were 228 recorded sites in the county. This accounted for 15% of
the region and 1.13% of the state. Although three Paleo-Indian sites were
reported, the majority of sites in the county in 1985 were listed as Archaic (n=51)
and Late Prehistoric (n=12). Site disturbance is common in the area. Biesaart et
al. (1985:185) mention erosion disturbance (173 sites), construction disturbance
(63 sites), disturbed and artificially capped (9 sites), deflated (14 sites), dispersed
(108 sites), potted and/or surface collected (10 sites), and destroyed (1 site).
Sites with subsistence related features were also common with hearths present
(73 sites), burned rock features (18 sites), shell middens (5 sites), pits (1 site),
midden soil (1 site), and other (15 sites). Twenty-four quarry sites were known to
exist. Today there are 396 recorded sites in Starr County.
According to a planning document for the Central and Southern Planning
Region of Texas as defined by the Texas Historical Commission (MercadoAllinger et al. 1996:13), Starr County is located in the Rio Grande Plains
Archeological Region. This is one of the major oil producing areas in the state. It
also contains significant amounts of coal-bearing formations and is on the
eastern edge of Falcon Reservoir. The area is rapidly changing due to an
increase in tourists and seasonal residents (Winter Texans). These factors are
major contributors to site disturbance in the area.
Sites defined as Paleo-Indian in South Texas are typically limited to
surface discoveries of distinctive lanceolate spear points (Hester 1980a). As
stated above, Archaic and Late Prehistoric sites are common and consist of
campsites with subsistence-related features and, in some cases, burials.
According to Hester (1980b:57), there are two kinds of occupation sites in
South Texas, surface-exposed sites and sites buried in stream silts. He states
that “Erosion, often helped along by cultivation, cattle grazing, ranch roads, and
droughts, has exposed many prehistoric occupation sites.” He cites Starr County
as an area where erosion has been so severe that sites have been completely
exposed. As a result, the artifacts of different time periods became mixed and
then were covered again by recent silting and deposition. Hester believes that
these sites are likely to be of little archaeological value.

6

The earliest account of Europeans in the vicinity of the current project area
was the route taken by Cabeza de Vaca in the sixteenth century when he
crossed what is believed by Alex D. Krieger (1961) to be the Rio Grande at the
present-day site of Roma, Texas (Fox 1983). In the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries, the Spanish established colonies and missions in parts of South
Texas. In 1749, for example, Spanish colonists found the land in what is now
Starr County to be suitable for cattle and sheep raising. Some of the earliest
settlements were Roma-Los Saenz (founded in 1767) and Salineño (formerly the
headquarters of Rancho Salinas. Neither of these settlements are near the
current project area.
Starr County has been the focus of numerous surveys by professional
archaeologists. Much of the work in this area has been the direct result of oil and
gas exploration and the construction of the Falcon Reservoir in Starr and Zapata
counties. In the 1950s, salvage archaeology was carried out along the Rio
Grande River prior to impoundment of the waters of the Falcon Reservoir
(Krieger and Hughes 1950 and Hartle and Stephenson 1951). Numerous sites
were recorded and several towns were relocated to higher ground.
In 1996, James E. Warren of Archaeology Consultants, Inc. supervised an
intensive survey of all land above the 307-foot contour interval at Falcon
Reservoir (McCulloch et al. 2003). This study examined an estimated 28,175
acres. In addition to assessing known sites, 353 previously unrecorded sites
were documented. At or below the 407-foot contour an additional 636 sites are
known to exist. Prehistoric sites visited and/or recorded include campsites and
quarries or workshops dating to Archaic and Paleo-Indian times. Historic sites
include cemeteries, farmsteads, urban house sites, ranches, ancillary ranch
facilities, towns, quarries, bridges, and water control features. Structures in
Warren’s project area consisted of houses, outbuildings, house ruins, bridges,
cemetery headstones, and ranching structures.
Two surveys by professional archaeologists have been conducted near
the project area. In 1997, archaeologists from the Texas Water Development
Board examined the right-of-way along United States Highway 83. This study did
not include any portions of the project area, but one prehistoric site (41SR335)
was found to the south of the highway, and this is the nearest recorded site to the
project area. Site 41SR335 is described on the site form as an open campsite
containing a very thin scatter of chipped stone exposed in the silty, sandy alluvial
soils of a fallow agricultural field immediately south of United States Highway 83,
about 500 meters west of the intersection of the highway and Midway Road. The
site form describes it as a possible river terrace as the river channel may have
been near the site in the past. Most of the area had been cleared for agriculture,
residential development, and roadways. It size was estimated at 60 meters in
diameter. No comments regarding its significance or further work appear on the
site form. The report documenting this survey was not available at the time of
this study.

7

The other survey in the area was conducted by archaeologists from the
Texas Water Development Board in 1999. This study examined two areas in and
near the current project area. The east bank of the Rio Grande River was part of
the study area, and it included the extreme western portion of the 22.9 acre tract.
In addition, this survey examined a short linear segment at a right angle to
Midway Road. No sites were found in either of these areas or in the remainder of
the survey area. The report documenting this survey was not available at the
time of this study.
Additional survey and testing by professional archaeologists have been
conducted in the county.
One testing project, conducted by the State
Department of Highways and Public Transportation (now TxDOT) in the 1990s
(Price 1992) revealed the disturbed nature of sites in the county. Site 41SR191
was recorded as a surface scatter of burned rock and lithic debitage in a fallow
field occupying an area of approximately 50 meters x 150 meters. Although this
site was not initially viewed as significant, it was selected as one of two sites from
a sample of 25 prehistoric sites most likely to yield significant information. The
work at this site consisted of eight square meters and machine excavation of two
backhoe trenches, each approximately 40 meters in length and 2 meters in
depth. Testing yielded only five prehistoric biface fragments, none of which was
temporally or culturally diagnostic, and relatively small quantities of lithic
debitage. The debitage was found at the surface and to a depth of 30
centimeters. Historic artifacts were found mixed with the prehistoric materials. It
was concluded that this site had been very disturbed through historic land
clearing and cultivation activities. Since site 41SR191 was one of only two sites
believed to possess research potential, this study reveals the disturbed nature of
many of the lithic scatters found in this part of Texas.
Additional small area surveys have been conducted in Starr County. For
more information regarding other work in the area researchers are advised to
consult the site files at TARL and the THC. No bibliography has been published
for that part of South Texas that includes Starr County. There is a published
series entitled Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology (published by the THC
and compiled by William E. Moore) that documents all work in Texas from 1988
through 1992. As mentioned above, there are several overviews of South Texas
that provide excellent data for the area. These are Archeology in the Central and
Southern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document (Mercado-Allinger et al.
1996), Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists
(Hester 1980b), Texas Graveyards: A Cultural Legacy (Jordan 1988); Prehistoric
Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview (Biesaart et al. 1985), and
Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450 Years (Fox
1983).

8

METHODS OF INVESTIGATION
General
Prior to the field survey, the site records at TARL were checked for known
sites in the project area and vicinity. In addition, the Texas Archeological Atlas
was checked for known sites and previous surveys. Relevant reports by various
contract archaeologists and state agencies were reviewed in order to determine
the kinds of sites likely to be present in the area. This survey was documented
through the utilization of Microsoft Word and Excel documents. Location data
were collected and documented with Garmin GPS-aided computer topographic
mapping programs, National Geographic Topo, and ESRI ArcMap. A Kodak
digital camera was used to document the project through photography, and
photographs were enhanced using Adobe Photoshop software. Shovel test data
were logged onto an Excel spreadsheet that was used to create the shovel test
log (Appendix I).
Area A
Area A is a 22.9 acre rectangular area between the Rio Grande River to
the west and Midway Road to the east. It is in this area that the water intake
structure and the water treatment plant will be constructed, and the raw water
supply line will be installed. The majority of the 22.9 acre tract is flat and was
covered with low grasses at the time of this survey. The western portion of this
tract is bounded by the east bank of the Rio Grande River. This bank is very
steep and highly eroded (Figure 3). The riverbank presented a good profile that
was examined for evidence of an archaeological site. The proposed water intake
structure will be constructed in the western portion of this tract (Figure 4). The
water treatment plant will be constructed in the eastern portion of this tract
(Figure 5), which is bounded by Midway Road to the east.
In the 22.9 acre tract, eleven shovel tests were excavated to a depth of
100 centimeters. The location of the shovel tests is depicted in Figure 6. These
shovel tests were dug through silt loam with an underlying clay loam with some
clay content in two tests. All fill was screened through ¼ inch hardware cloth.
Shovel test information was recorded in the field, and this information appears in
this report as Appendix I. Four shovel tests were dug in the vicinity of the
proposed water treatment plant, two shovel tests were dug in the vicinity of the
proposed 16-inch raw water supply line, one shovel test was dug in the vicinity of
the proposed river intake structure, and four shovel tests were dug randomly
within the 22.9 acre tract.

9

Figure 3. Profile of River Bank (facing south)

10

Figure 4. Site of Proposed Water Intake Structure (facing west)

11

Figure 5. Site of Proposed Water Treatment Plant (facing west)

12

Figure 6. Location of Shovel Tests and Backhoe Trenches in Area A

13

In addition to the eleven shovel tests, three backhoe trenches were
excavated in the 22.9 acre tract. Samples of the matrix were collected from each
trench, and Munsell color values were recorded for each zone of the profiles. All
trenches were backfilled after sampling. The profiles of the three trenches
exhibited a homogeneous silt loam that differed only by the degree of moisture
content. The ultra dry silt loam comprised the upper 60 to 70 centimeters of the
profiles. The location of the backhoe trenches is depicted in Figure 6.
Backhoe Trench 1 was excavated nearest the river (Figure 6) in the
vicinity of the proposed water treatment plant. The size of this trench was 10
meters long, 170 centimeters deep, and 100 centimeters wide. Three soil zones
were observed within the profile of this trench. Zone 1 consisted of a light
brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) silt loam that was very dry from the surface to a depth
of 70 centimeters. Zone 2 consisted of a darker grayish-brown (10YR 5/1) silt
loam that had higher moisture content. Zone 3 consisted of a darker brown
(10YR 5/2) silt loam with a greater amount of clay content. This clay content was
mainly in the southern portion of the trench from 100 centimeters below the
ground surface to the bottom of the trench at 100 centimeters.
Backhoe Trench 2 was excavated in the vicinity of the proposed 16-inch
raw water supply line that will connect the river intake structure and the water
treatment plant (Figure 6). It was 10 meters long, 180 centimeters deep, and 100
centimeters wide. Two soil zones were observed within the profile of this trench.
Zone 1 consisted of a light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) silt loam that was very dry
from the surface to a depth of 55 centimeters. Zone 2 consisted of a darker
grayish-brown (10YR 5/1) silt loam that had higher moisture content.
Backhoe Trench 3 was excavated in the vicinity of the proposed river
intake structure (Figure 6). It was 10 meters long, 210 centimeters deep, and
100 centimeters wide. Two soil zones were observed within the profile of this
trench. Zone 1 consisted of a light brownish-gray (10YR 6/2) silt loam that was
very dry from the surface to a depth of 70 centimeters. Zone 2 consisted of a
darker grayish-brown (10YR 5/1) silt loam that had higher moisture content.
Area B
Area B is the route of the 16-inch water line within the right-of-way on the
east side of Midway Road, and it was covered with high grass at the time of this
survey. This part of the survey area varies from 500 meters to 1300 meters from
the river, and no smaller watercourses or tributaries were observed in this area.
The roadside ditch was deeply cut below the surface of the road and the original
ground surface. The east side of the ditch had a cut bank that was measured at
75 centimeters, and a clean profile can be seen behind the grass cover.

14

In all, five shovel tests were dug in this area (Figure 7). Shovel tests in
the ditch revealed a disturbed fill to a depth of 50 centimeters overlying a lens of
silt loam to a depth of 50 centimeters. Gravels were observed in the disturbed
fill. Since adjacent shovel tests in the 22.9 acre tract had no gravels, the gravels
in the disturbed fill are believed to have been brought in during road construction.
There is an existing water line in the right-of-way at the top of the bank
next to the property fence. The proposed water line will have to be placed in the
bottom of the ditch that, in most cases, is two to three feet below the original
ground surface. One and a half feet of this area is disturbed fill. Figure 8 depicts
a typical view along the right-of-way of Midway Road.
Shovel tests in the ditch, the 22.9 acre tract and an examination of the
eroded banks near the river did not reveal any indications of recent alluvial
deposition. The silt loam in the project area is believed to be an Eocene deposit
that pre-dates human occupation. Therefore, any archaeological site would have
to be on or near the current surface. The five shovel tests excavated in this area
varied in depth from 50 centimeters to 100 centimeters. The remainder of the
right-of-way was “spot checked” with ditch profiles and shallow shovel probes to
ascertain if the bottom of the ditch consisted of disturbed fill. In two areas there
were recently plowed fields adjacent to the right-of-way. The surfaces of these
areas were examined for evidence of an archaeological site.

15

Figure 7. Location of Shovel Tests in Area B

16

Figure 8. Right-of-Way along Midway Road

17

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
According to the site records at TARL and the Texas Archeological Sites
Atlas, there are no previously recorded sites within any portion of the project
area. The nearest historic district is Fort Ringgold in Rio Grande City. There
have been previous surveys by professional archaeologists in the vicinity (see
Archaeological Background above), but only a small portion of one of these
surveys is in close proximity to the current project area. The list of properties
listed in the National Register of Historic Places and a listing of historic districts
was checked, and no such properties are in or near the current project area. The
nearest cemeteries to the project area are the Los Garzas Cemetery 600 meters
to the north of the 22.9 acre tract and at least 625 meters west of Midway Road
and a single grave 290 meters west of Midway Road. Both areas are on the
Roma-Los Saenz East quadrangle. The grave was visited and found to be
fenced, and its location is consistent with the plotting on the topographic map.
The Los Garzas Cemetery was not visited.
The project was examined through a surface inspection, examination of
the riverbank, shovel tests and probes, and backhoe trenches, and no cultural
materials were found within the 22.9 acre tract or in the right-of-way along
Midway Road. Although the western portion of the 22.9 acre tract is adjacent to
the Rio Grande River, this area is considered to be an unlikely setting for a
deeply buried prehistoric site because the soils in this area are believed to date
to the Eocene epoch, a time that pre-dates human occupation of the region. The
area along Midway Road is considered to be an unlikely setting for a prehistoric
site because of its distance from water. Although historic sites can be present
anywhere on the landscape, no evidence of a historic site was observed. The
majority of the 22.9 acre tract had been disturbed through agricultural practices,
and the western end at the river exhibited severe erosion. The right-of-way along
Midway Road had been disturbed through road construction.

18

RECOMMENDATIONS
No archaeological sites were found to be within the project area. Should
evidence of a prehistoric or historic site be observed during the construction of
the intake structure, water treatment plant, or installation of the water line; all
work in the area of the find must cease until the THC can assess the situation.
Should construction plans change to include new areas that will affect
undisturbed ground, the THC must be notified as a return visit by a professional
archaeologist may be required.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical
Commission.
Davis, William B.
1974 The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Bulletin 41 (Reprinted 1978)
Finsley, Charles
1989 A Field Guide to Fossils of Texas. (Reprinted 1999) Gulf Publishing
Company. Houston.
Fox, Anne A.
1977 The Archaeology and History of the Spanish Governors Palace
Park. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report Number 31.
Fox, Daniel E.
1983 Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450
Years. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.
Gustavson, Thomas C., and Michael B. Collins
1998 Geoarcheological Investigations of Rio Grande Terrace and Flood
Plain Alluvium: From Amistad Dam to the Gulf of Mexico. Jointly
published by The University of Texas at Austin (Technical Series
49) and the Texas Department of Transportation (Archeological
Studies Program Report Number 12)
Hartle, Donald D., and Robert L. Stephenson
1951 Archeological Excavations at the Falcon Reservoir, Starr County,
Texas. Report published by the Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980a A Survey of Paleo-Indian Archaeological Remains Along the Texas
Coast. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by
Lynn Highley and Thomas R. Hester, pp. 1-12. Center for
Archaeological Research, Special Report Number 11. The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
1980b Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur
Archaeologists. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.

20

Jordan, Terry G.
1988 Texas Graveyards: A Cultural Legacy. University of Texas Press.
Krieger, Alex D.
1961 The Travels of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca in Texas and Mexico,
1534-1536. In Homenaje a Pablo Martinez del Rio en el XXV
Aniversario de la Edición de los Origenes Americanos, the Instituto
National de Antropologia y Historia, pp. 459-474. Reprinted in An
Ethnohistorical Survey of Texas Indians by L. L. M. Skeels, Texas
Historical Survey Committee, Archeological Report Number 22, pp.
57-73.
Krieger, Alex D. and Jack T. Hughes
1950 Archaeological Salvage in the Falcon Reservoir Area: Progress
Report Number 1.
McCulloch, Samuel D., James E. Warren, James Thomas Dureka, and Timothy
K. Perttula
2003 A Report on the Reconnaissance of Cultural Resources on Lands
Managed by the U.S. Section, International Boundary and Water
Commission, Falcon Reservoir, Zapata and Starr Counties.
Archaeology Consultants, Report Number 500.
Meadows, Richard K., Christopher W. Ringstaff, Brandon S. Young, James T.
Jones, and David O. Brown
2005 Cultural Resources Survey of Proposed Improvements to U.S. 83 in
Zapata and Starr Counties, Texas. Report prepared by Blanton &
Associates, Inc. Austin. (Project Number 00101)
Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A., Nancy A. Kenmotsu, and Timothy K. Perttula
1996 Archeology in the Central and Southern Planning Region, Texas: A
Planning Document. Office of the State Archeologist, Special
Report 35 and the Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural
Resource Management Report 7. Texas Historical Commission.
Moore, William E., Andrea C. Schulz, and James E. Warren
2005 An Archaeological Survey for the Goliad Water Supply Corporation
Water and Wastewater Project in Goliad County, Texas.
Archaeology Consultants, Inc., Report Number 597.
Price, G. R. Dennis
1992 Archeological Significance Testing at Site 41SR191, Starr County,
Texas. Unnumbered report prepared by the State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Division of Highway Design.

21

Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas. (Volume I – Stratigraphy). The University of
Texas at Austin Bulletin 3232 (6th printing, 1975).
Sheldon, Robert A.
1979 Roadside Geology of Texas. (2nd printing – 1982) Mountain Press
Publishing Company. Mizzoula, Montana.
Thompson, Charles M., Russell R. Sanders, and DeWayne Williams
1972 Soil Survey of Starr County. United States Department of
Agriculture in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Thompson, Ida
n.d. The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Fossils. Alfred
A. Knopf. New York.

22

APPENDIX I: SHOVEL TEST LOG
SHOVEL TEST
NUMBER

DEPTH
IN CM

SOIL TYPE

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
60
50
60

silt loam
silt loam
silt loam
silt loam
silt loam
silt loam/clay loam
silt loam
silt loam/clay loam
silt loam
silt loam
silt loam
disturbed fill/silt loam
disturbed fill/silt loam
disturbed fill/silt loam
disturbed fill/silt loam
disturbed fill/silt loam

COMMENTS
vicinity of water treatment plant
vicinity of water treatment plant
vicinity of water treatment plant
vicinity of water treatment plant
along proposed 16-inch raw water line
along proposed 16-inch raw water line
near footprint of river intake structure
within the 22.9 acre area
within the 22.9 acre area
within the 22.9 acre area
within the 22.9 acre area
along Midway road in disturbed right-of-way
along Midway road in disturbed right-of-way
along Midway road in disturbed right-of-way
along Midway road in disturbed right-of-way
along Midway road in disturbed right-of-way

