Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project,
Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8659
BOA042-9909.NNWP

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

Berg-Oliver Associates, Inc.
Houston, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

November 2018

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project,
Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas
By:
Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

Berg-Oliver Associates, Inc.
1907 Ascension Boulevard, Suite 440
Arlington, Texas 76006

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jeffrey D. Owens, Principal Investigator
BOA042-9909.NNWP

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8659

November 2018

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) conducted an intensive cultural resources
survey for the proposed Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project in Fresno, Fort Bend
County, Texas, on behalf of Fort Bend County and its environmental permitting contractor, BergOliver Associates, Inc. (Berg-Oliver). The proposed undertaking would involve constructing
approximately 3.5 kilometers (2.2 miles) of new roadway extending from the northern terminus of
Chimney Rock Road in the Cambridge residential subdivision northward to the intersection of
McHard Road and Chimney Rock Road. In other words, the proposed Chimney Rock Parkway
right-of-way (ROW) would connect two separate, existing roads named Chimney Rock Road. For
purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area consisted of an approximately 3.5kilometer- (2.2-mile-) long linear corridor measuring approximately 45.7 meters (150.0 feet) in
width, covering a total area of 16.2 hectares (40.0 acres).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by Fort Bend County, a political subdivision
of the state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of
Texas. In addition, the project may require permitting by the US Army Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District (USACE), under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA); as such, the
project would also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA). The purpose of the survey was to determine if any archeological sites are located
within the project area and, if any exist, to determine if the project has the potential to adversely
affect any sites listed on or considered eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) and for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL).
On November 20, 2018, Horizon archeologists Benjamin Johnson, Briana Smith, Charles
Bludau, Elizabeth Sefton, Foster Duncan, Jacob Lyons, and Rachel Naasz conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal
Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit no. 8659. The survey
entailed intensive surface inspection and subsurface shovel testing efforts along two parallel
transects within the approximately 3.5-kilometer- (2.2-mile-) long project area. The project area
is situated on a low-lying coastal flat and traverses a largely undeveloped, heavily vegetated area
adjacent to Mustang Bayou that contains numerous poorly drained, marshy areas. The project
area appears to be largely undisturbed, though the project area crosses several existing linear
utilities, and some push piles resulting from vegetation clearing were observed in a few areas.
Specifically, the project area crosses the modified channel of Mustang Bayou, two artificial

BOA042-9909.NNWP

v

Management Summary

irrigation/drainage canals, and two existing pipeline corridors. Vegetation within the project area
consists of greenbrier, dewberry vines, and tall clump grasses, with some larger water oak and
pecan trees present near the western end. Visibility of the modern ground surface was typically
poor due to dense vegetative ground cover (<30%), and large areas of standing water were a
common occurrence.
The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum
of 16 subsurface shovel tests per 1.6 kilometers (1.0 mile) for each 30.5-meter- (100.0-foot-) wide
transect unless field conditions warrant more shovel tests (e.g., in cultural high-probability areas)
or fewer shovel tests (e.g., on steep slopes, in areas with excellent ground surface visibility, in
heavily disturbed areas). As such, a minimum of 70 shovel tests would be necessary within the
project area in order to comply with the TSMASS. Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating
a total of 73 shovel tests within the project area.
Shovel testing predominantly revealed dense, wet clay sediments, though a few shovel
tests contained shallow surficial lenses of silty clay loam. Many shovel tests contained iron
concretions and dense clayey sediments, suggesting that shovel testing was capable of
penetrating Holocene-age soils with the potential to contain subsurface archeological resources
and also that the soils have been subject to perennial inundation.
No archeological sites, historic-age or prehistoric, were recorded within the project area
during the survey. A review of historical aerial photographs and United States Geological Survey
(USGS) topographic maps indicates that no historic-age structures have been present within the
project area since at least the mid-20th century. No cultural materials were observed or collected
during the survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the
NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,”
and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and
Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent
discovery, and the Texas Historical Commission (THC) should be notified immediately.

vi

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 7
2.1
Geology and geomorphology ........................................................................ 8
2.2
Climate .......................................................................................................... 8
2.3
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................11

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................15
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 10,000 to 5,000 B.P.) ..............................................16
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 5,000 B.P. to A.D. 100)..................................................16
3.3
Early Ceramic Period (A.D. 100 to 600) .......................................................17
3.4
Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 600 to 1500) ...................................................18
3.5
Protohistoric Period (A.D. 1500 to 1700) ......................................................19
3.6
Historic Period (A.D. 1700 to Present)..........................................................19

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................25

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................27

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................33

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................35
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................35
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places .....36
7.3
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................37
7.4
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................38
7.5
Management Recommendations ..................................................................39

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................41
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

BOA042-9909.NNWP

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.

Vicinity Map of Project Area ...................................................................................... 2
Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .................................... 3
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 4
Soils Mapped within Project Area ............................................................................. 9
Overview of Project Area (Facing Northeast) ...........................................................28
Dense Vegetation and Standing Water within Project Area (Facing East) ................28
Earthen Berm Resulting from Brush Clearing (Facing North) ...................................29
View of Mustang Bayou within Project Area .............................................................29
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area (North Half) .....................30
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area (South Half) ....................31

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.

viii

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area ........................................................10

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) conducted an intensive cultural resources
survey for the proposed Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project in Fresno, Fort Bend
County, Texas, on behalf of Fort Bend County and its environmental permitting contractor, BergOliver Associates, Inc. (Berg-Oliver). The proposed undertaking would involve constructing
approximately 3.5 kilometers (2.2 miles) of new roadway extending from the northern terminus of
Chimney Rock Road in the Cambridge residential subdivision northward to the intersection of
McHard Road and Chimney Rock Road. In other words, the proposed Chimney Rock Parkway
right-of-way (ROW) would connect two separate, existing roads named Chimney Rock Road. For
purposes of the cultural resources survey, the project area consisted of an approximately 3.5kilometer- (2.2-mile-) long linear corridor measuring approximately 45.7 meters (150.0 feet) in
width, covering a total area of 16.2 hectares (40.0 acres) (Figures 1 to 3).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by Fort Bend County, a political subdivision
of the state of Texas; as such, the project falls under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of
Texas. In addition, the project may require permitting by the US Army Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District (USACE), under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (CWA); as such, the
project would also fall under the jurisdiction of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation
Act (NHPA). The purpose of the survey was to determine if any archeological sites are located
within the project area and, if any exist, to determine if the project has the potential adversely
affect any sites listed on or considered eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic
Places (NRHP) and for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL).
On November 20, 2018, Horizon archeologists Benjamin Johnson, Briana Smith, Charles
Bludau, Elizabeth Sefton, Foster Duncan, Jacob Lyons, and Rachel Naasz conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal
Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit no. 8659. The cultural
resources investigations consisted of archival research, an intensive cultural resources survey of
the project area, and the production of a report suitable for review by the State Historic
Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the Texas Historical Commission’s (THC) Rules
of Practice and Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA)
Guidelines for Cultural Resources Management Reports.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

1

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 1. Vicinity Map of Project Area

2

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

BOA042-9909.NNWP

3

Chapter 1.0: Introduction

Figure 3. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

4

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods
Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0 presents
cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

5

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

The project area is located northwest of Fresno in eastern Fort Bend County, Texas. Fort
Bend County is situated on the Gulf Coastal Plain in southeastern Texas about 104.6 kilometers
(65.0 miles) inland from the Gulf of Mexico shore. The Gulf of Mexico represents a structural
basin formed by lithosphere deformation. The Texas Coastal Plain, which extends as far north
as the Ouachita uplift in southern Oklahoma and westward to the Balcones Escarpment, consists
of seaward-dipping bodies of sedimentary rock, most of which are of terrigenous clastic origin,
that reflect the gradual infilling of the basin from its margins (Abbott 2001). The region is underlain
by rocks and unconsolidated sediments that are quite young in a geological sense, ranging from
modern to Miocene in age. These consist predominantly of a series of fluviodeltaic bodies
arranged in an offlapped sequence, with interdigitated and capping eolian, littoral, and estuarine
facies making up a relatively minor component of the lithology. Major bounding disconformities
between these formations are usually interpreted to represent depositional hiatuses that occurred
during periods of sea level low stand. The oldest rocks in this fill are of Late Cretaceous age. As
a result of the geometry of basin filling, successively younger rock units crop out in subparallel
bands from the basin margin toward the modern coastline.
The project area is situated on a low-lying coastal flat and traverses a largely undeveloped,
heavily vegetated area adjacent to Mustang Bayou that contains numerous poorly drained,
marshy areas. Mustang Bayou flows southeastward across the approximate midpoint of the
project area. Mustang Bayou meanders generally southeastward across the coastal plain,
transitioning into Persimmon Bayou and New Bayou before discharging into the Gulf of Mexico at
Chocolate Bay.
The project area appears to be largely undisturbed, though the project area crosses
several existing linear utilities, and some push piles resulting from vegetation clearing were
observed in a few areas. Specifically, the project area crosses the modified channel of Mustang
Bayou, two artificial irrigation/drainage canals, and an existing pipeline corridor. Vegetation within
the project area consists of greenbrier, dewberry vines, and tall clump grasses, with some larger
water oak and pecan trees present near the western end. Visibility of the modern ground surface
was typically poor due to dense vegetative ground cover (<30%), and large areas of standing
water were a common occurrence. Elevations across the project area are relatively flat, ranging
only from approximately 22.3 to 22.9 meters (73.0 to 75.0 feet) above mean sea level (amsl).

BOA042-9909.NNWP

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

2.1

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Geologically, the project area is underlain by the Beaumont Formation (Barnes 1982).
The Beaumont, or Prairie, terrace is the youngest continuous coastwise terrace fronting the
modern Gulf (Abbott 2001). The Beaumont Formation consists of clay, silt, and fine sand
arranged in spatial patterns that reflect the distribution of fluvial (e.g., channel, point bar, levee,
and backswamp) and mudflat/coastal marsh facies (Van Siclen 1985). Sandy deposits
associated with littoral facies are also frequently considered part of the Beaumont. Many
investigators (cf. DuBar et al. 1991; Fisk 1938, 1940) have correlated the Beaumont terrace with
the Sangamon Interglacial (ca. 130 to 75 thousand years ago [kya]), although age estimates
range from Middle Wisconsinan (Alford and Holmes 1985) to 100 to 600 kya (Blum and Price
1994). While debate about the temporal affiliations of and correlations among the deposits that
underlie the major coastline terraces remain active, they are of little direct geoarcheological
relevance because virtually all investigators agree that these deposits considerably predate the
earliest demonstrated dates of human occupation in North America.
Soils within the project area consist predominantly of a mosaic of clayey and loamy
fluviomarine deposits of Quaternary age (Figure 4; Table 1) (NRCS 2018). These soil units are
of considerable antiquity. No alluvial soils deposited during the Holocene epoch are mapped
within the project area.
Aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered in deep alluvial sediments
adjacent to major streams in southeast Texas. Based on the physiographic setting of the project
area adjacent to a prominent waterbody, the project area has moderate to high potential to contain
aboriginal archeological resources. However, these resources would be expected to occur in
surficial or shallowly buried sediments potentially lacking in integrity within the relatively ancient
fluviomarine sediments that characterize most of the project area due to erosion and the poor
preservation contexts represented by the perennially saturated soils. Historic-age cultural
resources may occur in any physiographic setting and tend to be observable on the modern
ground surface, though the relatively remote and waterlogged setting of the project area suggests
that use of the project area in the historical past was probably limited.

2.2

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). While
the paleoclimatic history of the coastal region remains unclear, Bryant and Holloway (1985)
present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas that includes three separate
climatic periods—the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.), the Late Glacial
Period (14,000 to 10,000 B.P.), and the Post-Glacial Period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence
from the Wisconsin Full Glacial Period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was
considerably cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was
more heavily forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway
1985). The Late Glacial Period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow
warming and/or drying trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were

8

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Figure 4. Soils Mapped within Project Area

BOA042-9909.NNWP

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Typical Profile
(inches)

Parent Material

Be

Bernard-Edna complex,
0 to 1% slopes

Clayey and loamy fluviomarine
deposits on flats

Bernard:
0-6: Clay loam (Ap)
6-31: Clay (Bt)
31-50: Clay (Btk1)
50-80: Clay (Btk2)
Edna:
0-9: Loam (A)
9-38: Clay (Bt1)
38-50: Clay (Bt2)
50-80: Sandy clay loam (Btk)

Ea

Edna loam,
0 to 1% slopes

Loamy fluviomarine deposits on flats

0-9: Loam (A)
9-38: Clay (Bt1)
38-50: Clay (Bt2)
50-80: Sandy clay loam (Btk)

La

Lake Charles clay,
0 to 1% slopes

Clayey fluviomarine deposits on
backswamps

0-11: Clay (A)
11-53: Clay (Bss)
53-69: Clay (Bkss1)
69-80: Clay (Bkss2)

Wa

Gessner loam,
0 to 1% slopes,
frequently ponded

Loamy fluviomarine deposits on flats

0-8: Loam (A)
8-17: Loam (Bg)
17-59: Clay loam (Btg)
59-80: Clay loam (Bt)

Wc

Oil-waste land

Waste land

Variable

Source: NRCS 2018
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

gradually replaced by grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During
the Post-Glacial Period, the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable.
The deciduous forests had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The
drying and/or warming trend that began in the Late Glacial Period continued into the midHolocene, at which point there appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions
lasting from roughly 6,000 to 5,000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate
that modern environmental conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by
1,500 years ago.
The modern climate of the upper Texas coast, including the region surrounding Houston,
is classified as subtropical humid (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983), forming a transitional
zone between the humid southeastern US and the semiarid to arid west. The climate reflects the
influences of latitude, low elevation, and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, which combine with the
urban heat island formed by the tremendous concentration of asphalt and concrete to give the
Houston area a notorious modern climate that is oppressively warm and moist throughout much
of the year. As a result of proximity to the Gulf and the abundance of surface water, humidity in
the early morning can approach 100% even on cloudless summer days, and it often exceeds 50%
even on the warmest afternoons. Largely as a consequence of the relatively high humidity

10

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

characteristic of the region, temperature patterns exhibit a moderate annual range and a modest
diurnal range that increases slightly with distance from the coast. Average monthly high
temperature ranges from a low of 17 to 19°Celcius (°C) (59 to 63°Fahrenheit [°F]) in January to a
high of 38 to 40°C (89 to 96°F) in August. Average monthly lows range from 4 to 9°C (38 to 47°F)
in January to 25 to 29°C (72 to 79°F) in July and August. Annually, average low temperatures
range from 15 to 21°C (56 to 65°F), and average high temperatures range from 27 to 29°C (75 to
79°F) (Abbott 2001; Larkin and Bomar 1983).
The region experiences two precipitation peaks throughout the year (Abbott 2001; Mowery
et al. 1960). The first occurs in the late spring (i.e., May to June) due to the passage of infrequent
cold fronts that spawn chains of powerful frontal thunderstorms. The second occurs in the late
summer to early autumn (i.e., August to September) due to the incidence of tropical storms and
hurricanes from the Atlantic and, occasionally, Pacific oceans. In contrast, winter and early spring
are relatively dry, and high summer rainfall is dominated by convectional thunderstorms that are
relatively brief and localized, albeit frequently intense. Average annual precipitation varies from
a low of approximately 101.6 centimeters (40.0 inches) to a high of more than 132.1 centimeters
(52.0 inches). Average monthly precipitation varies from less than 5.1 to 7.6 centimeters (2.0 to
3.0 inches) in March to more than 19.1 centimeters (7.5 inches) occurring locally on the coast
during September. Almost all of the measurable precipitation falls as rain—snowfall is extremely
rare, occurring in measurable amounts in only 1 in 10 years.

2.3

FLORA AND FAUNA

Fort Bend County is situated near the southeastern edge of the Texas biotic province
(Blair 1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian
provinces and the grasslands of the Kansas, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces. Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texas province. McMahan et al.
(1984) further define four broad communities that characterize that portion of the Texas biotic
province that lies on the Gulf Coastal Plain: (1) coastal marsh/barrier island, (2) coastal prairie,
(3) coastal gallery forest, and (4) pine-hardwood forest (cf. Abbott 2001:24-26).
The coastal marsh/barrier island category includes well-drained, sandy, coastal
environments and saline and freshwater wetlands in the coastal zone (Abbott 2001:24). Marsh
vegetation is typical of areas that are seasonally wet and have substrates composed primarily of
sands and silts, clays, or organic decomposition products. Vegetation assemblages are strongly
controlled by texture, salinity, frequency and duration of inundation, and depth of the seasonal
water table. Sandy, relatively well-drained, freshwater environments are typically dominated by
little bluestem, switchgrass, Florida paspalum, and brownseed paspalum. Wetter environments
are often dominated by marshhay cordgrass, seashore saltgrass, saggitaria, bulrushes, smooth
cordgrass, seashore paspalum, seashore dropseed, olney bulrush, saltmarsh bulrush, saltmarsh
aster, longtom, sprangletop, burhead, arrowhead, coastal waterhyssop, needlegrass rush, and
other sedges and rushes. Slightly higher, better-drained environments are characterized by taxa
like seashore saltgrass, seashore paspalum, gulfdune paspalum, shoregrass, gulf cordgrass, red
lovegrass, bushy sea-oxey, and glasswort. A variety of fauna are characteristic of the shore zone.
Important larger taxa include raccoon, nutria, alligators, turtles, swamp rabbit, and many birds,

BOA042-9909.NNWP

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

including ducks, geese, herons, and many smaller species. Aquatic taxa, including a wealth of
fish and shellfish adapted to brackish to hypersaline conditions, are also important in the coastal
zone.
The coastal prairie category consists primarily of grasses with minor amounts of forbs and
woody plants in areas that are not saturated on a seasonal basis (Abbott 2001:24-26). This
community is characteristic of upland areas and grades into the pine-hardwood forest to the north
and east and into the coastal marsh/barrier island to the south. A wide variety of grasses are
found in the prairie environments, but the principal taxa include big bluestem, little bluestem,
indiangrass, eastern grama, switchgrass, brownseed paspalum, sideoats grama, silver bluestem,
buffalograss, threeawn, and Texas wintergrass. Common forbs include Maximilian sunflower,
Engelman daisy, blacksalmon, penstemon, dotted gayfeather, bundleflower, yellow neptunia,
snoutbean, prairie clover, tickclover, wildbean, western indigo, paintbrush, bluebonnet, ragweed,
croton, milkweed, vetch, verbena, and winecup. Woody plants occurring in the coastal prairie
include mesquite, honey locust, huisache, eastern baccharis, sesbania, live oak, elm, hackberry,
bumelia, and coralberry. The frequency of trees increases dramatically as the coastal prairie
grades into the pine-hardwood forest, forming an open woodland environment with common
stands of hardwood trees and occasional pines. The coastal prairie is home to a diverse fauna,
including coyote, white-tailed deer, skunks, cottontail rabbit, many small rodents, amphibians and
reptiles, and a variety of permanent and migratory birds. Bison and pronghorn were also present
at various times in the past.
The coastal gallery forest consists of diverse, principally deciduous, trees and associated
understory in floodplains and streams that traverse the outer coastal plain (Abbott 2001:26).
Important taxa include water oak, pecan, poplar, American elm, cedar elm, sugarberry, ash,
loblolly pine, water oak, post oak, cherrybark oak, mulberry, swamp chestnut oak, willow oak,
sweetgum, hawthorn, dogwood, hickory, bois d’arc, sassafras cypress, willow, cottonwood, and
sumac. Shrubs and vines such as mustang grape, greenbrier, yaupon, coralberry, possumhaw,
elderberry, honeysuckle, dewberry, and blackberry are common in the understory, as are grasses
such as little bluestem, big bluestem, and indiangrass. The fauna of the gallery forest include
white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, turkey, a variety of small mammals and rodents,
turtles, snakes, and many birds. Black bear was also present at various times in the past, and a
number of fish and a few varieties of shellfish are present in the streams.
The pine-hardwood forest is characterized by a mix of coniferous and deciduous trees,
including longleaf pine, shortleaf pine, loblolly pine, post oak, red oak, white oak, blackjack oak,
willow oak, and live oak (Abbott 2001:26). Riparian environments often support larger deciduous
trees like pecan, cottonwood, hickory, beech, and American elm. Understory vegetation varies
from relatively open to quite dense, and consists of shrubs, vines, forbs, and young trees.
Common shrubs include acacia, yaupon, mayhaw, wild persimmon, myrtle, greenbrier, Virginia
creeper, blackberry, dewberry, trumpet vine, gourd, and poison ivy. A variety of fauna is also
present, including white-tailed deer, opossum, raccoon, squirrel, rabbit, mink, skunk, various small
rodents, turtles, reptiles, and many different birds. Black bear was also present at times in the
past, and bison and pronghorn were occasionally present in the transition zone to the coastal
prairie environment.

12

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

According to Mowery et al. (1960), about 95% of the upland vegetation consisted of coarse
bunchgrasses when Fort Bend County was first settled. However, many of the original
bunchgrasses have been eliminated by heavy grazing over the past 20 or 30 years, and the
vegetation is now of much lower quality. Introduced plants such as bermudagrass, dallisgrass,
and burclover are now common in many pastures.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

13

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within the Southeast Texas archeological region. In broad
terms, much of the archeological record in Southeast Texas represents an interface between the
Southern Great Plains and the Southeastern Woodlands (Aten 1983, 1984; Patterson 1995; Story
1990). Further distinctions are often made between the inland and coastal margin subregions of
Southeast Texas. These two subregions are somewhat culturally distinct, and the inland
subregion has a much longer chronological record. The coastal margin of Southeast Texas
comprises a zone about 25.7 kilometers (16.0 miles) inland from the coast that covers the area
influenced by Gulf tidal flows on the salinity of streams, lakes, and bays. Considerable ecological
variability characterizes this subregion, including woodlands, coastal prairie, lakes, wetlands,
marine coastline, and barrier islands. The inland subregion also encompasses considerable
ecological diversity, including mixed woodlands, coastal prairies, and dense piney woods.
In discussions of the prehistory of Texas, Fort Bend County is often treated as part of a
cultural transition zone. Following Patterson (1995), Southeast Texas is defined as a 21-county
area (including Fort Bend County) that lies between the Colorado River on the west and the
Sabine River on the east, extending about 199.5 kilometers (124.0 miles) inland from the
coastline. Archeological research has shown that it is especially important to consider the
archeology of Fort Bend and Austin counties together with the eastern part of Wharton County,
as this seems to be an area in which much mixing of technologies occurred, and it has a distinctive
Late Archaic mortuary tradition as well.
The human inhabitants of Southeast Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory. While many of the same labels are used to denote
Southeast Texas cultural/chronological periods, the timeframe and cultural characteristics of
Southeast Texas culture periods are often different than in neighboring regions. For instance, the
Archaic and Late Prehistoric time periods are different in Central and Southeast Texas, and
Central Texas lacks the Early Ceramic period that has been defined for Southeast Texas.
Mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time in
Southeast Texas. Inland sites are usually found near a water source, usually exhibit evidence of
reoccupation through time, have well-defined intrasite activity areas, tend not to be associated
with satellite activity sites or separate base camps, and exhibit a range of subsistence-related
activities. Inland sites tend to contain modest pottery assemblages, fired clay balls (at some
sites), abundant lithic material, and an absence of shell tools. Coastal sites tend to consist of

BOA042-9909.NNWP

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

multicomponent Rangia shell middens that contain few lithics, oyster shell tools, large quantities
of pottery (in later cultural components), and numerous bone tools.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 10,000 TO 5,000 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 10,000 B.C. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists have historically discounted claims of much earlier human
occupation during the Pleistocene glacial period. However, recent investigations of the Buttermilk
Creek Complex in Bell County, Texas, have raised the possibility that a pre-Clovis culture may
have been present in North America as early as 15,500 years ago (Waters et al. 2011, 2018).
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Southeast Texas is represented
by the PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 5,000 B.C.) (Patterson 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts.
PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian bands
consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and settlement
pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Southeast Texas are
known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the exploitation of
plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There is little
evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented elsewhere in
North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been practiced
during all prehistoric time periods.
In Southeast Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is divided into two periods based on
recognizable differences in projectile point styles (Patterson 1995). These include the Early
PaleoIndian period (10,000 to 8,000 B.C.), which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile
points (i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period
(8,000 to 5,000 B.C.), which is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview,
Scottsbluff, Meserve, and Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 5,000 B.P. TO A.D. 100)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend signals the beginning of the Archaic stage
(5,000 B.C. to A.D. 100) (Patterson 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a
significant reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Southeast Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding

16

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Southeast Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods. In
Southeast Texas, the Early Archaic period (5,000 to 3,000 B.C.) is marked by the presence of
Bell, Carrollton, Morrill, Trinity, Wells, and miscellaneous Early Stemmed projectile points. The
Bell point is the only type in this period that is closely associated with the Southern Plains. Many
of the latter point types continue into the Middle Archaic period (3,000 to 1,500 B.C.) and several
new types appear, including Bulverde, Lange, Pedernales, Williams, Travis, and probably the
Gary-Kent series. The Late Archaic period (1,500 B.C. to A.D. 100) is characterized by Gary,
Kent, Darl, Yarbrough, Ensor, Ellis, Fairland, Palmillas, and Marcos points.
In the western part of inland Southeast Texas, a Late Archaic mortuary tradition developed
in the lower Brazos and Colorado river valleys and in the intervening area (Hall 1981; Patterson
1995). Organized burial practices actually started during the Middle Archaic period, but reached
full development in the Late Archaic with the use of exotic grave goods such as boatstones and
bannerstones (probably used as atlatl weights), stone gorgets, corner-tang knives, stingray
spines, shark teeth, and marine shell beads and pendants. Other burial practices included the
systematic orientation of burial direction, body position, use of red ochre, and use of locally made
grave goods, such as longbone implements and bone pins. Most burials are found in extended
supine position, though some extended prone and bundle burials are also known. Burial direction
is usually consistent within single sites, but varies from site to site. Patterson et al. (1993) report
that at least 11 sites are associated with this mortuary tradition in Austin, Fort Bend, and Wharton
counties.

3.3

EARLY CERAMIC PERIOD (A.D. 100 TO 600)

The use of pottery did not start uniformly throughout Southeast Texas. Pottery
manufacture appears to have diffused into this region from adjacent regions, primarily from the
east along the coastal margin. Aten (1983:297) argues that pottery was being manufactured on
the coastal margin of the Texas-Louisiana border by about 70 B.C., in the Galveston Bay area by
about A.D. 100, in the western part of the coastal margin by about A.D. 300, and in the ConroeLivingston inland area by about A.D. 500. The practice of pottery manufacture appears to have
progressed first along the coastal margin and then moved inland (Patterson 1995). Southeastern
Texas ceramic chronologies are best known in the Galveston Bay area, where Aten (1983)
established a detailed chronological sequence.
The earliest ceramic periods in the Galveston Bay and neighboring Sabine Lake areas
appear to be approximately contemporaneous with the earliest ceramic periods of the lower
Mississippi Valley (Aten 1984). Early assemblages contain substantial quantities of Tchefuncte
ceramics. In the Sabine Lake region, grog-tempered varieties of Baytown Plain and Marksville

BOA042-9909.NNWP

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Stamped are common, while grog-tempered ceramics do not occur in the Galveston Bay area
128.7 kilometers (80.0 miles) to the west until several hundred years later. With the principal
exception of a few Tchefuncte ceramic types, other southern Louisiana ceramics are not found
on the Gulf coast west of the Sabine Lake area.
Goose Creek sandy-paste pottery was used throughout Southeast Texas and somewhat
farther north in the Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and the early part of the Historic periods (Aten
1984; Patterson 1995; Pertulla et al. 1995). The Goose Creek series is the primary utility ware
throughout the prehistoric sequence in Southeast Texas, though it gives way to Baytown Plain for
about 200 years during the transition between the Late Prehistoric and Historic periods before
once again becoming predominant into the Historic period (Aten 1984). A minor variety, Goose
Creek Stamped, occurs only in the Early Ceramic period (Aten 1983). Three other minor pottery
types—Tchefuncte (Plain and Stamped), Mandeville, and O’Neal Plain variety Conway (Aten
1983)—were used only during the Early Ceramic period. The Mandeville and Tchefuncte types
are characterized by contorted paste and poor coil wedging. Mandeville has sandy paste (like
Goose Creek), while Tchefuncte paste has relatively little sand. Given their technological
similarities, Mandeville and Tchefuncte may represent different clay sources rather than distinct
pottery types (Patterson 1995). The bone-tempered pottery that characterizes ceramic
assemblages elsewhere in Texas is not common in Southeast Texas.

3.4

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 600 TO 1500)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 600 to 1500) (Patterson 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. Elsewhere in Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period, but, as already discussed, ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas. Along
the coastal margin of Southeast Texas, use of the atlatl (i.e., spearthrower) and spear was
generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though they continued to be used in the
inland subregion along with the bow and arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Ensor and
Carlson 1991; Keller and Weir 1979; Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In fact, Patterson
(1995:254) proposes that use of the bow and arrow started in Southeast Texas as early as the
end of the Middle Archaic period, using unifacial arrow points that consisted of marginally
retouched flakes. In contrast, Prewitt (1981) argues for a generalized date of adoption of the bowand-arrow hunting system at about the same time (ca. A.D. 600) in Central and Southeast Texas.
In Southeast Texas, unifacial arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade
technology. Bifacial arrow point types include Alba, Catahoula, Perdiz, and Scallorn. A serial
sequence for these point types has not been established in Southeast Texas, though Scallorn
points appear to predate Perdiz points throughout the rest of Texas.
Grog- (crushed sherd) tempered pottery was used in the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric
periods in Southeast Texas. The grog-tempered varieties include San Jacinto Plain and Baytown
Plain variety Phoenix Lake. San Jacinto pottery contains a relatively small proportion of smallsized temper, while Baytown Plain has larger amounts of sherd pieces that are often visible on
vessel surfaces. As previously mentioned, sandy-paste Goose Creek pottery remained in use
throughout the Late Prehistoric period. Rockport Plain and Asphalt Coated pottery from the

18

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Central Texas Coast (Ricklis 1995) are found at a few sites in Southeast Texas during the Late
Prehistoric and Protohistoric periods.

3.5

PROTOHISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1500 TO 1700)

For the most part, Protohistoric and early Historic Indian sites in Southeast Texas have
not been articulated with the ethnographic record (Story 1990:258). Similarly, reconciling the
ethnographic record to prehistoric Indian groups in this region is problematic. Late Prehistoric
and Historic population movements further complicate this issue. Aten (1983) has reconstructed
the territories of native groups present in this region in the early 18th century, including the
Akokisa, Atakapa, Bidai, Coco (Karankawa?), and Tonkawa. The presence of the Tonkawa in
Southeast Texas may be due to their rapid expansion from Central Texas in the 17th and 18th
centuries (Newcomb 1993:27). The Karankawa Indians are thought to have occupied the coastal
margin of this region as far east as Galveston Island and the corresponding mainland (Aten 1983).
Judging by the scarcity of Rockport pottery on sites east of the San Bernard River, the ethnic
association of the Karankawa Indians with the Coco tribe may be in doubt.
Protohistoric and Historic Indian sites may not be systematically recognized as such
because few aboriginal artifact types changed from the Late Prehistoric to the Historic periods
(Patterson 1993; 1995). Only a few non-European artifact types are useful in identifying Historic
Indian sites, including Bulbar Stemmed and Guerrero arrow points and possibly Fresno and
Cuney points after A.D. 1500 (Hudgins 1986). Historic period Indian sites are usually identified
by the presence of glass and metal artifacts, gunflints, and European types of pottery.

3.6

HISTORIC PERIOD (A.D. 1700 TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Álvarez
de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Cabeza de Vaca crossed
South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near Galveston Bay. However,
European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until after 1700. The first half of
the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission system, as well as the first
effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native culture and social systems.
This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where the burial data suggest
population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994), as well as increased participation on the
part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that heavy settlement of Texas
began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian population was greatly
diminished. The Alabama/ Coushatta Indians who currently reside in Southeast Texas are
migrants who were displaced from the east in the late eighteenth to early nineteenth centuries
(Newcomb 1961).
The settlement of Fort Bend County began in the early 1820s as part of the AngloAmerican colonization of Texas under the auspices of the Spanish government.1 Authorization
to settle 300 families in the valleys of the Brazos and Colorado rivers was initially granted to

1

The following historical summary is adapted from TSHA (2018).

BOA042-9909.NNWP

19

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Moses Austin, but plans were delayed by his death in June 1821 and by Mexican independence
from Spain. Stephen F. Austin assumed the responsibility of leadership from his father and gained
confirmation of the original Spanish grants from the newly established Mexican government in
1823. Following arrangements with Austin, a group of colonists sailed from New Orleans in
November 1821 on the schooner Lively and anchored near the mouth of the Brazos River on the
Texas coast, a few miles south of the APE. In 1822, a small party from this group left the ship
and traveled inland some 144.8 kilometers (90.0 miles) and, on a bluff near a deep bend in the
river, built a two-room cabin. As the settlement grew, the cabin became known as both Fort
Settlement and Fort Bend; the latter name, in time, prevailed. In 1824, the Mexican government
issued documents officially granting to the colonists their leagues of land. Of the 297 grants, 53
were issued to Fort Bend settlers. Karankawa Indians lived near the new colonial settlements.
The first settlers had a few skirmishes, but as the colonies increased, the Karankawas began
moving out of the area. By the 1850s, they had migrated as far south as Mexico.
In May 1837, the Congress of the Republic of Texas passed an act incorporating 19 towns,
including Richmond. Robert Eden Handy of Pennsylvania and William Lusk of Richmond,
Virginia, both of whom had arrived in Texas shortly before the war for independence from Mexico,
founded and named the town with eight other proprietors, including Branch T. Archer, Thomas
Freeman McKinney, and Samuel May Williams. An act establishing Fort Bend County and fixing
its boundaries was passed on December 29, 1837, and Wyly Martin was appointed the first chief
justice. On January 13, 1838, the citizens voted to make Richmond the county seat. The county
was formed from portions of Austin, Brazoria, and Harris counties. Its irregular shape was, in
part, the result of using waterways to form the western and segments of the southern and eastern
boundaries. Several efforts have been made to change the lines but they have met with little
success.
Some of the first settlers in Fort Bend County played prominent roles in early Texas
history. Nathaniel F. Williams and Matthew R. Williams cultivated and milled sugar on their
Oakland Plantation near Oyster Creek in the early 1840s, thus laying the groundwork for an
industry that continued to develop and thrive in Sugar Land; in 1837, Jane Long opened a
boarding house in Richmond, where she lived until her death in 1880; and Mirabeau B. Lamar
moved to Richmond in 1851 and built a plantation home on land purchased from Jane Long. Both
Mrs. Long and Lamar are buried in Morton Cemetery, Richmond. During the Texas Revolution,
many of the people of Fort Bend fled in great haste as Antonio López de Santa Anna’s army
marched through the area. Part of this army camped at Thompson's Ferry on the Brazos River
while part marched on to meet defeat at the battle of San Jacinto. Fort Bend settlers returned
from the Runaway Scrape to find their homes plundered or burned and their livestock scattered
or dead.
Soon after its founding, Richmond developed into a prosperous trade center for the
surrounding agricultural region of the lower Brazos valley. Barges and steamboats plied the
Brazos River, transporting cotton and other products to the port at Galveston, as merchants of
Richmond and other river towns vied with Houston for the lucrative agricultural trade.
Transportation facilities were greatly improved in 1853, when the Buffalo Bayou, Brazos, and
Colorado Railway was completed to Stafford’s Point from Harrisburg, which was located on

20

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Buffalo Bayou’s navigable channel to Galveston.
however, ended with the Civil War.

The prosperity of the 1840s and 1850s,

In antebellum Texas, slaves were essential to the development of the valley plantations.
As early as 1840, there were already 572 slaves in Fort Bend County, and by 1845 that number
had risen to 1,172, placing Fort Bend near the top of counties with the largest slave populations.
In 1850, Fort Bend was 1 of only 6 counties in the state with a black majority. The labor provided
by the burgeoning slave population made possible the growth of the plantation economy. In 1860,
there were 159 farms in Fort Bend County, with about 12,000 acres in cotton, 7,000 acres in corn,
and 1,000 acres in sugarcane; the slave population totaled 4,127, more than twice that of the
2,016 whites. Fort Bend planters, believing that their economic and social successes, among
other reasons, justified the institution of slavery, strongly supported the Confederacy, and in 1861
voted 486 to 0 for secession from the United States. Most of the county’s men volunteered for
Confederate service; many joined the Eighth Texas Cavalry (Terry’s Texas Rangers), a regiment
organized by Benjamin Franklin Terry, a wealthy sugar planter from Sugar Land.
Although battle never reached Fort Bend, the war’s duration and ultimate loss imposed
economic hardships and social and political stress on the community. During Reconstruction,
efforts to live in peace with politics dominated by Radical Republicans and black officeholders
brought no more than an uneasy compromise. White Democrats, outnumbered by blacks more
than two to one, were unable to regain control of local government until the late 1880s, when their
all-out campaign to attract black as well as white votes led to the Jaybird-Woodpecker War. This
brief but violent conflict, which took place on August 16, 1889, abruptly ended the Republican, or
“Woodpecker” rule, and the Democrats quickly formed the Jaybird Democratic Association. With
a constitution that declared as its purpose the “protection of the white race” and “an honest and
economical government,” the association controlled local politics mainly through the white
primary, which excluded blacks until the US Supreme Court supported a lower court’s ruling
forbidding the practice in 1953. The Jaybird Association accepted the ruling, continued for a few
years, and then disbanded in 1959.
Fort Bend County remained a state Democratic party stronghold until the 1970s, when the
combination of population growth and the growing association of conservative political ideas with
the Republican party broke the trend. In a special election held in April 1976, the people of the
county elected Ron Paul, a physician from Lake Jackson in Brazoria County, as congressman,
the first Republican elected to office in Fort Bend County since Reconstruction. Paul focused his
campaign on the evils of “big government” and the “ultraliberalism” of his Democratic opponent.
New towns and a new demography began to develop in the last quarter of the 19th century
as railroads branched out across the county. In 1878, the Gulf, Colorado, and Santa Fe line from
Galveston crossed the Galveston, Harrisburg, and San Antonio (the former Buffalo Bayou,
Brazos, and Colorado) line 1.6 kilometers (1.0 mile) west of Richmond. This junction, called
Rosenberg, became a community when the developers of the New York, Texas, and Mexican
Railway made it their headquarters in 1882. With the addition of the San Antonio and Aransas
pass and the Texas and New Orleans railroads, all parts of the county were served. The new
lines, with routes passing through potentially productive farmlands, attracted new settlers, many
of whom were immigrants from Central Europe. Germans, Austrians, and Bohemians (i.e.,

BOA042-9909.NNWP

21

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Czechs) comprised 400 of the 5,259 new residents entering the county from 1890 to 1900. They
were primarily agrarian in orientation—small farmers or merchants serving farmers—and many
were Catholic. Their distinctly different cultural and linguistic characteristics added a new
dimension to the established Anglo-Protestant community, and their agricultural achievements
contributed to the county’s economic stability and development. Among the many towns founded
in the 1890s by or for these immigrants were Beasley, Needville, and Orchard, which still exist as
small rural communities serving farmers.
Missouri City, on the far eastern edge of the county near Houston, was founded in 1894;
Katy, a tri-county town in Fort Bend, Waller, and Harris counties, developed after the Missouri,
Kansas, and Texas (Katy) Railroad was completed to that point. In the 1890s, a million-dollar
refinery was built at Sugar Land and a new cane mill was constructed; in 1907, they were
purchased by the Imperial Sugar Company, a major industry in the county and the only canesugar refinery in Texas.
In 1920, Rosenberg’s population edged past Richmond's by the thin margin of 1,279 to
1,273; by 1950, Rosenberg residents overshadowed those of Richmond 6,210 to 2,030. Two
decades later, Rosenberg-Richmond, as the “twin cities” population center, had counts of 12,098
and 5,777, respectively, in a county of 52,134 residents. Fort Bend County’s population declined
between 1940 and 1950; however, in the same period, Rosenberg grew by nearly one-third and
Richmond held steady, a fact that reflects the national rural-to-urban movement.
Fort Bend County produces substantial quantities of minerals. Throughout the county,
subterranean salt domes hold concentrated deposits of oil, gas, sulfur, and salt that made early
development possible. Gulf Oil Company brought in the first commercially producing oil well in
1919 at Blue Ridge and located another major field at Big Creek three years later. Thompsons
had a major oilfield in 1921. In 1926, Gulf discovered a major sulfur and gas deposit in Orchard;
the Humble Oil Company (now Exxon Company, U.S.A.) opened a high-producing gas field near
Katy in 1935 and later built a gas plant that produced 450 million cubic feet of gas daily in the mid1980s. Between 1954 and 1957, oil production in the county averaged 30,000 barrels per day,
as compared to the 21,600 barrels per day in 1963. As demand for petroleum increased in the
mid-1970s, developers managed to bring in 40 new wells in 1976 and 1977, providing the county
with $121 million from the sale of crude oil. Since that time, a recession in the petroleum industry
has caused development in the county to drop sharply. In 1976, the top three taxpayers in the
county were, in order, Exxon, Gulf, and Houston Lighting and Power Company; in 1983, the top
three taxpayers were Houston Lighting and Power, Exxon, and Utility Fuels. Gulf had dropped to
fourth place.
Farming and ranching have been the central focus of Fort Bend County’s economic and
social life since its inception. The influx of new settlers in the 1880s and 1890s helped county
agriculture to change from antebellum plantations to productive small farms. The county had
2,365 farms with 183 acres each in 1900, in contrast to 995 farms with 62.3 hectares (154.0 acres)
each in 1890. The national recession of the 1890s, a major flood on the Brazos River in June
1899, and the great Galveston hurricane of 1900 forced many farmers into tenantry. By 1910,
61% of the county’s farmers were working as cash or share tenants. By 1925, of the 3,659 farms
in the county, approximately 72% were operated by tenants, a partial result of a statewide
22

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

economic recession and adverse summer weather from 1919 to 1922. During the World War II
years, with the rural to urban movement and military service, farm tenantry dropped, and full
ownership of farms increased. Since the 1960s, home developments, industry, business, and
commerce in the county have forced a trend toward fewer commercial farms. The 1974 Census
of Agriculture reported 1,340 farms in the county, but only 758 of these reported cash sales in
excess of $2,500. Among the 4 top agricultural commodities for cash income in the mid-1980s
were cotton, sorghum, beef cattle, and rice. Cotton culture, a source of income for nearly 700
families in the county, varies greatly with seasonal weather, allocated acreage, and selling prices.
Sorghum culture has increased in recent years due to favorable selling prices and more consistent
profit. The total value of the crop in the county in 1976 was $11 million. Rice culture began as
early as 1901 with plantings on acreage once considered worthy only of grazing; rice yielded 18
to 20 bags per acre in 1903. The 1990 annual acreage was just above 25,000 acres, with a yield
of 4,488 pounds per acre. In 1982, agriculture provided more than $90 million in average annual
income for the county.
Ample grazing land and free-roaming herds of longhorn cattle encouraged the first settlers
in Fort Bend County to combine cattle raising with farming. The Fort Bend County Book of Brands
indicates that landowners with minimal acreage tried to turn a profit in the cattle business. As
elsewhere in Texas, the boom years of the 1870s and early 1880s culminated in the bottom falling
out of the market by 1886. Local cattlemen began fencing their pastures and upgrading their
herds with shorthorns, Brahmans, and Herefords. Today, more farms in the county produce cattle
than any other cash crop.
Transportation facilities for Fort Bend County include the Southern Pacific and the Santa
Fe railroad systems, two commercial lines of motor-freight services, and two airports for private
and commercial aircraft. The major highways are Interstate 59, which joins US Highway 90
Alternate in the county and runs northeast to southwest; Interstate Highway (IH) 10, an east-towest route through Katy; State Highway (SH) 6, which runs north-to-south through Sugar Land;
and SH 36, which runs north-to-south through Rosenberg. Numerous farm roads serve the rural
areas.
Until the last decade, commerce and industry have been associated with the development
and transport of oil, gas, and sulfur in the county. Local businesses provided agricultural needs
and products and services for the communities. As the population increased in east Fort Bend
County as a result of Houston’s westward expansion, industry and commerce became more
diverse. Among the top 10 commercial taxpayers in Fort Bend County in 1983 were three
property-development corporations and two high-technology corporations.
In the last decades of the 20th century Fort Bend was among the fastest-growing counties
in the US. Between 1980 and 1990, the population nearly doubled, from 130,960 to 225,421. In
1990, 62.6% of the population was white, 20.7% black, 19.5% Hispanic, 6.4% Asian, and 0.2%
American Indian. The largest communities were Rosenberg (20,183), Houston (with 27,027 in
Fort Bend County), Missouri City (32,219 in Fort Bend County), and Sugar Land (24,529). Two
major social and cultural events characteristic of the county and its people are the Fort Bend
County Fair, first held in 1933 and still held annually each October, and the Fort Bend County
Czech Fest, first held in 1976 as a spring tourist attraction and continued annually each May.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon performed background archival research on the THC’s
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA) for information on previously recorded cultural
resources sites and historic properties in and near the project area as well as previous cultural
resources investigations conducted in the vicinity of the project area (THC 2018). Based on this
archival research, no known archeological sites are located within a 1.6-kilometer (1.0-mile)
radius of the project area. No archeological sites, cemeteries, or historic properties listed on the
NRHP or designated as SALs are located within or adjacent to the project area. Two cultural
resources surveys have been performed adjacent to the project area. In 1992 and 1996, the
Federal Highway Administration conducted two surveys just west of the project area. No cultural
resources were recorded during these surveys. No other information is available regarding these
surveys.
In addition to the background archival research, Horizon reviewed historical aerial imagery
and topographic maps for additional information about the potential for historic-age structures
within the project area (NETR 2018). Examination of historical aerial photographs and US
Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps indicate that there have been no structures or other
architectural features within the project area since at least the mid-20th century. The project area
appears to have been used primarily for agricultural purposes.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

25

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

On November 20, 2018, Horizon archeologists Benjamin Johnson, Briana Smith, Charles
Bludau, Elizabeth Sefton, Foster Duncan, Jacob Lyons, and Rachel Naasz conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey entailed intensive surface
inspection and subsurface shovel testing efforts along two parallel transects within the
approximately 3.5-kilometer- (2.2-mile-) long project area. The project area is situated on a lowlying coastal flat and traverses a largely undeveloped, heavily vegetated area adjacent to Mustang
Bayou that contains numerous poorly drained, marshy areas. The project area appears to be
largely undisturbed, though the project area crosses several existing linear utilities, and some
push piles resulting from vegetation clearing were observed in a few areas. Specifically, the
project area crosses the modified channel of Mustang Bayou, two artificial irrigation/drainage
canals, and an existing pipeline corridor. Vegetation within the project area consists of greenbrier,
dewberry vines, and tall clump grasses, with some larger water oak and pecan trees present near
the western end. Visibility of the modern ground surface was typically poor due to dense
vegetative ground cover (<30%), and large areas of standing water were a common occurrence
(Figures 5 to 8).
The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum
of 16 subsurface shovel tests per 1.6 kilometers (1.0 mile) for each 30.5-meter- (100.0-foot-) wide
transect unless field conditions warrant more shovel tests (e.g., in cultural high-probability areas)
or fewer shovel tests (e.g., on steep slopes, in areas with excellent ground surface visibility, in
heavily disturbed areas). As such, a minimum of 70 shovel tests would be necessary within the
project area in order to comply with the TSMASS. Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating
a total of 73 shovel tests within the project area (Figures 9 to 10).
Shovel testing predominantly revealed dense, wet clay sediments, though a few shovel
tests contained shallow surficial lenses of silty clay loam. Many shovel tests contained iron
concretions and dense clayey sediments, suggesting that shovel testing was capable of
penetrating Holocene-age soils with the potential to contain subsurface archeological resources
and also that the soils have been subject to perennial inundation.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel test results. Digital photographs were taken, and a photographic log
was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for cultural resources. Diagnostic
artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with maker’s marks) and

BOA042-9909.NNWP

27

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 5. Overview of Project Area (Facing Northeast)

Figure 6. Dense Vegetation and Standing Water within Project Area (Facing East)

28

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Figure 7. Earthen Berm Resulting from Brush Clearing (Facing North)

Figure 8. View of Mustang Bayou within Project Area

BOA042-9909.NNWP

29

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 9. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area (North Half)

30

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Figure 10. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area (South Half)

BOA042-9909.NNWP

31

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

nondiagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and metal scrap) were to
be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced in the same location
in which they were found. As no cultural resources were observed during the survey, the
collections policy was not brought into play. Following completion of the survey, all project records
were prepared for permanent curation at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL).
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and good
faith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) 800.3.

32

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

No archeological sites, historic-age or prehistoric, were recorded within the project area
during the survey. A review of historical aerial photographs and USGS topographic maps
indicates that no historic-age structures have been present within the project area since at least
the mid-20th century. No cultural materials were observed or collected during the survey.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

33

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:



Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated survey area.



Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for inclusion in
the NRHP and for designation as SALs.



Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their
NRHP and SAL evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the APE and to make preliminary determinations of whether or not the
resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or federal
codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological properties are a
function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research needs, though
historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important historic events
and/or personages. Under the NHPA and the Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources
are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological
resources for inclusion in the NRHP and for designation as SALs, respectively.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

35

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR INCLUSION IN THE NATIONAL REGISTER OF HISTORIC
PLACES

Determinations of eligibility for inclusion in the NRHP are based on the criteria presented
in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) in 36 CFR §60.4(a-d). The four criteria of eligibility are
applied following the identification of relevant historical themes and related research questions:
The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archeology, and culture is
present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of
location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and:
a. [T]hat are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
broad patterns of our history; or,
b. [T]hat are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or,
c.

[T]hat embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose
components may lack individual distinction; or,

d. [T]hat have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or
history.

The first step in the evaluation process is to define the significance of the property by
identifying the particular aspect of history or prehistory to be addressed and the reasons why
information on that topic is important. The second step is to define the kinds of evidence or the
data requirements that the property must exhibit to provide significant information. These data
requirements in turn indicate the kind of integrity that the site must possess to be significant. This
concept of integrity relates both to the contextual integrity of such entities as structures, districts,
or archeological deposits and to the applicability of the potential database to pertinent research
questions. Without such integrity, the significance of a resource is very limited.
For an archeological resource to be eligible for inclusion in the NRHP, it must meet legal
standards of eligibility that are determined by 3 requirements: (1) properties must possess
significance, (2) the significance must satisfy at least 1 of the 4 criteria for eligibility listed above,
and (3) significance should be derived from an understanding of historic context. As discussed
here, historic context refers to the organization of information concerning prehistory and history
according to various periods of development in various times and at various places. Thus, the
significance of a property can best be understood through knowledge of historic development and
the relationship of the resource to other, similar properties within a particular period of
development. Most prehistoric sites are usually only eligible for inclusion in the NRHP under
Criterion D, which considers their potential to contribute data important to an understanding of
prehistory. All 4 criteria employed for determining NRHP eligibility potentially can be brought to
bear for historic sites.

36

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

7.3

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least on one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

37

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.4

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

On November 20, 2018, Horizon archeologists Benjamin Johnson, Briana Smith, Charles
Bludau, Elizabeth Sefton, Foster Duncan, Jacob Lyons, and Rachel Naasz conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. Jeffrey D. Owens acted as Principal
Investigator, and the survey was conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit no. 8659. The survey
entailed intensive surface inspection and subsurface shovel testing efforts along two parallel
transects within the approximately 3.5-kilometer- (2.2-mile-) long project area. The project area
is situated on a low-lying coastal flat and traverses a largely undeveloped, heavily vegetated area
adjacent to Mustang Bayou that contains numerous poorly drained, marshy areas. The project
area appears to be largely undisturbed, though the project area crosses several existing linear
utilities, and some push piles resulting from vegetation clearing were observed in a few areas.
Specifically, the project area crosses the modified channel of Mustang Bayou, two artificial
irrigation/drainage canals, and an existing pipeline corridor. Vegetation within the project area
consists of greenbrier, dewberry vines, and tall clump grasses, with some larger water oak and
pecan trees present near the western end. Visibility of the modern ground surface was typically
poor due to dense vegetative ground cover (<30%), and large areas of standing water were a
common occurrence.
The Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum
of 16 subsurface shovel tests per 1.6 kilometers (1.0 mile) for each 30.5-meter- (100.0-foot-) wide
transect unless field conditions warrant more shovel tests (e.g., in cultural high-probability areas)
or fewer shovel tests (e.g., on steep slopes, in areas with excellent ground surface visibility, in
heavily disturbed areas). As such, a minimum of 70 shovel tests would be necessary within the
project area in order to comply with the TSMASS. Horizon exceeded the TSMASS by excavating
a total of 73 shovel tests within the project area.
Shovel testing predominantly revealed dense, wet clay sediments, though a few shovel
tests contained shallow surficial lenses of silty clay loam. Many shovel tests contained iron
38

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

concretions and dense clayey sediments, suggesting that shovel testing was capable of
penetrating Holocene-age soils with the potential to contain subsurface archeological resources
and also that the soils have been subject to perennial inundation.
No archeological sites, historic-age or prehistoric, were recorded within the project area
during the survey. A review of historical aerial photographs and USGS topographic maps
indicates that no historic-age structures have been present within the project area since at least
the mid-20th century. No cultural materials were observed or collected during the survey.

7.5

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26 or for inclusion in the
NRHP under 36 CFR 60.4. Horizon recommends a finding of “no historic properties affected,”
and no further archeological work is recommended in connection with the proposed undertaking.
However, human burials, both prehistoric and historic, are protected under the Texas Health and
Safety Code. In the event that any human remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered
at any point during construction, use, or ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in
previously surveyed areas, all work should cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent
discovery, and the THC should be notified immediately.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

39

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, J. T.
2001
Houston Area Geoarcheology—A Framework for Archeological Investigation,
Interpretation, and Cultural Resource Management in the Houston Highway District.
Archeological Studies Program, Report No. 27, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas
Department of Transportation, Austin.
Aten, L. E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.
1984

Woodland Cultures of the Texas Coast. In Perspectives on Gulf Coast Prehistory, pp.
72-93. Ripley P. Bullen Monographs in Anthropology and History, No. 5, The Florida
State Museum, Gainesville.

Adovasio, J. M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Alford, J.J., and J.C. Holmes
1985
Meander Scars as Evidence of Major Climate Changes in Southeast Louisiana.
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 75:395-403.
Barnes, V.E.
1982
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Houston Sheet.
University of Texas at Austin.

Bureau of Economic Geology, The

Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Blum, M.D., and D.M. Price
1994
Glacio-Eustatic and Climatic Controls on Quaternary Alluvial Plain Deposition, Texas
Coastal Plain. Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies
44:85-92.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R. G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited

BOA042-9909.NNWP

41

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

by V. M. Bryant, Jr., and R. G. Holloway, pp. 39-70.
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.

American Association of

Collins, M. B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dincauze, D. F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Dillehay, T. D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington D.C.

DuBar, J.R., T.E. Ewing, E.L. Lundelius, E.G. Otvos, and C.D. Winkler
1991
Quaternary Geology of the Gulf of Mexico Coastal Plain. In The Geology of North
America, Volume K2: Quaternary Non-Glacial Geomophology, Conterminous United
States, edited by R. B. Morrison, pp. 583-610. Geological Society of America, Boulder,
Colorado.
Ensor, H. B., and D. L. Carlson (editors)
1991
Alabonson Road: Early Ceramic Period Adaptations to the Inland Coastal Prairie
Zone, Harris County, Southeast Texas. Reports of Investigations, No. 8, Archeological
Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Fisk, H.N.
1938
Geology of Grant and LaSalle Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 10.
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.
1940

Louisiana

Geology of Avoyelles and Rapides Parishes. Geological Bulletin No. 18. Louisiana
Department of Conservation, Baton Rouge.

Hall, G. D.
1981
Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos River Valley,
Texas. Research Report No. 61, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Haynes, C. V., Jr., D. J. Donahue, A. J. T. Hull, and T. H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Hudgins, J. D.
1986
A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 55:29-51.

42

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Keller, J. E., and F. A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Publications in Archeology, Report No. 13. Texas State
Department of Highways, Austin.
Kelly, R. L., and L. C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Larkin, T. J., and G. W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Lynch, T. F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D. J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D. J., D. K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A. W. Barker, D. F. Dincauze, C. V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D. J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4:659-663).
Mowery, I. C., G. S. McKee, F. Matanzo, and E. Francis
1960
Soil Survey—Fort Bend County, Texas. US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, Washington, D.C.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2018
Web Soil Survey, <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed November 27, 2018. US Department of Agriculture.
Nearmap US Photomaps
2018
Nearmap
VerticalTM
digital
orthographic
<https://go.nearmap.com>. Nearmap US, Inc.

photograph,

June 7,

2018.

Newcomb, W. W.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
1993

Historic Indians of Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 64:1-63.

National Environmental Title Research (NETR)
2018
Historic Aerials. <http://www.historicaerials.com>. Accessed November 18, 2018.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

43

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Open Street Map (OSM)
2018
OpenStreetMap. < http://www.openstreetmap .org>. Available under the Open
Database License:
<www.opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl>.
Accessed
November 27, 2018.
Patterson, L. W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.
1993

Identifying Historic Indian Sites in Southeast Texas. Houston Archeological Society
Journal 106:23-26.

1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264

Patterson, L. W., J. D. Lockwood, R. L. Gregg, and S. M. Kindall
1993
Prehistoric Site 41HR354, 730, 731, 732, Harris County, Texas.
Archeological Society Journal 104:25-30.
Pertulla, T. K., M. R. Miller, R. A. Ricklis, D. J. Prikryl, and C. Lintz
1995
Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in Texas.
Archeological Society 66:175-235.

Houston

Bulletin of the Texas

Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
Ricklis, R. A.
1994
Aboriginal Life and Culture on the Upper Texas Coast: Archaeology at the Mitchell
Ridge Site, 41GB66, Galveston Island. Coastal Archaeological Research, Inc., Corpus
Christi, Texas.
1995

Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower Texas Coast: A Regional Overview.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:265-330.

Story, D. A.
1990
Cultural History of the Native Americans. In The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the
Gulf Coastal Plain, by D. A. Story, J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J. C. Rose,
D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard, pp. 163-366. Two Volumes. Research
Series No. 38, Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2018
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas. Access-restricted online database. Texas Historical
Commission. <https://atlas.thc.state.tx.us/>. Accessed November 19, 2018.
Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2018
Denton County, Texas. The Handbook of Texas Online: A Digital Gateway to Texas
History.
<https://tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hcf07>.
Accessed
November 27, 2018.

44

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

US Geological Survey (USGS)
1982
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Almeda, Texas, quadrangle.
Van Siclen, D.C.
1985
Pleistocene Meander-Belt Ridge Patterns in the Vicinity of Houston, Texas.
Transactions of the Gulf Coast Association of Geological Societies 35:525-532.
Waters, M.R., S.L. Forman, T.A. Jennings, L.C. Nordt, S.G. Driese, J.M. Feinberg, J.L. Keene, J.
Halligan, A. Lindquist, J. Pierson, C.T. Hallmark, M.B. Collins, and J.E. Wiederhold
2011
The Buttermilk Creek Complex and the Origins of Clovis at the Debra L. Friedkin Site,
Texas. Science 331:1599-1603.
Waters, M.R., J.L. Keene, S.L. Forman, E.R. Prewitt, D.L. Carlson, and J.E. Widerhold
2018
Pre-Clovis Projectile Points at the Debra L. Friedkin Site, Texas—Implications for the
Late Pleistocene Peopling of the Americas. Science Advances 4(10).
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

BOA042-9909.NNWP

45

APPENDIX A:
Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

BJ01

259773

3274828

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ02

259776

3274720

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ03

259772

3274624

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ04

259776

3274515

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ05

259749

3274407

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ06

259726

3274307

0-30+

7.5YR 4/4 clay

No

BJ07

259682

3274219

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ08

259658

3274093

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ09

259663

3274005

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ10

259658

3273904

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ11

259660

3273805

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ12

259659

3273702

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ13

259658

3273605

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ14

259654

3273504

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ15

259665

3273402

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BJ16

259663

3273299

0-30+

7.5YR 3/1 clay

No

BS276

258961

3271528

0-30+

Disturbed 10YR 2/1 clay

No

BS277

258977

3271624

0-30+

Very wet 10YR 2/1 clay

No

BS278

258962

3271714

0-30+

Wet 10YR 2/1 clay

No

BS279

258966

3271813

0+

Standing water

No

BS280

258955

3271916

0-30+

Mottled, wet 10YR 5/1, 7.5YR 4/8, and
2.5YR 5/4 hydric clay

No

BS281

258956

3272023

0-30

Mottled, wet 10YR 5/1, 7.5YR 4/8, and
2.5YR 5/4 sandy clay

No

30-40+

Mottled, wet 10YR 5/1, 7.5YR 4/8, and
2.5YR 5/4 clay

No

10YR 7/1, 5YR 5/6, and 2.5YR 5/4
sandy clay

No

10YR 3/1, 7.5YR 4/8, and 2.5YR 5/4
clay

No

10YR 4/1 fine silty loam

No

Mottled 10YR 7/1, 5YR 5/6, and 2.5YR
5/4 clay

No

10YR 3/1 sandy clay

No

BS282

258977

3272121

0-30
30-40+

BS283

259026

3272248

0-50
50-60+

BS284

259086

BOA042-9909.NNWP

3272302

0-20

Soils

Artifacts

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

Soils

Artifacts

20-30+

Mottled 2.5YR 5/4, 5YR 5/6, and 10YR
5/1 clay

No

BS285

259136

3272398

0-30+

Mottled, wet 10YR 5/1, 7.5YR 5/4, and
2.5YR 5/4 clay

No

CB01

259752

3274829

0-50+

10YR 2/1 clay

No

CB02

259754

3274723

0-50+

10YR 2/1 clay

No

CB03

259757

3274611

0-50+

10YR 2/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB04

259747

3274511

0-50+

10YR 2/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB05

259725

3274400

0-40+

10YR 2/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB06

259677

3274298

0+

Standing water

No

CB07

259652

3274205

0-30+

10YR 2/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB08

259644

3274110

0-30+

10YR 2/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB09

259642

3274014

0-20+

10YR 2/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB10

259634

3273909

0-40+

10YR 3/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB11

259636

3273806

0-40+

10YR 3/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB12

259639

3273695

0-30+

10YR 3/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB13

259635

3273593

0-30+

10YR 3/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB14

259630

3273492

0-30+

10YR 3/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB15

259641

3273393

0-40+

10YR 3/1 clay with iron concretions

No

CB16

259643

3273291

0-30+

10YR 3/1 clay with iron concretions

No

ES01

259477

3272920

0-30+

Wet, sticky 10YR 2/1 clay

No

ES02

259368

3272772

0-40+

10YR 3/1 and 10YR 6/2 silty clay

No

ES03

259369

3272712

0-30+

10YR 2/1 clay

No

ES04

259462

3272861

0-30+

10YR 2/1 clay

No

ES05

259577

3273039

0-30+

10YR 2/1 clay

No

ES06

259629

3273131

0-30+

10YR 2/1 clay

No

ES07

259655

3273215

0-30+

Standing water

No

FD01

259524

3272996

0-25+

Wet, sticky 10YR 7/1 and 2.5YR 5/4
hydric clay

No

FD02

259404

3272847

0-35+

Wet, sticky 10YR 3/1 clay

No

FD03

259303

3272680

0-35+

Mottled 10YR 4/1 and 2.5YR 5/4 clay

No

FD04

259321

3272624

0-30+

Wet, sticky 10YR 4/1 clay

No

FD05

259434

3272790

0-30+

Wet, sticky 10YR 3/1 clay

No

FD06

259531

3272960

0-30+

Saturated, sticky 10YR 4/1 clay

No

A-2

BOA-9909N_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
Chimney Rock Parkway Improvements Project, Fresno, Fort Bend County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data (cont.)
UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

FD07

259573

3273080

0-30+

Wet, sticky 10YR 3/1 clay

No

FD08

259607

3273167

0-30+

Wet, sticky 10YR 3/1 clay

No

FD09

259617

3273260

0-30+

Wet, sticky 10YR 3/1 clay

No

JL01

258988

3271636

0-30+

Dense 10YR 5/1 clay

No

JL02

258981

3271847

0-30+

Dense, wet 10YR 7/1 clay

No

JL03

258990

3271948

0-30+

Moist 10YR 5/1 silty clay

No

30-40+

Mottled 10YR 3/1 and 10R 4/6 hydric
clay

No

0-40

Mottled 10YR 3/1 and 10R 4/6 hydric
clay

No

40-50+

Mottled 10YR 3/1 and 10R 4/6 hydric
clay

No

Moist 10YR 3/1 silty clay loam

No

Mottled, wet 10YR 7/1 and 10R 4/6
hydric silty clay loam

No

Moist 10YR 3/1 silty clay loam

No

Mottled, dense 10YR 2/1 and 10R 3/6
hydric clay

No

Moist 10YR 4/2 silt loam

No

35-45+

Mottled, dense 10YR 2/1 and 7.5YR
4/8 hydric clay

No

JL04

JL05

259064

259161

3272239

3272401

0-65
65-75+

JL06

259279

3272568

0-50
50-60+

JL07

259199

3272501

0-35

Soils

Artifacts

RN01

258987

3271535

0-30+

Very dense, sticky 10YR 3/1 clay

No

RN02

258988

3271737

0-30+

Very dense, sticky 10YR 3/1 clay

No

RN03

259003

3272048

0+

Standing water

No

RN04

259015

3272155

0-40+

Very dense, moist 2.5R 7/3 clay

No

RN05

259103

3272343

0+

Standing water

No

RN06

259240

3272506

0-30+

10YR 3/1 hydric silty clay loam filled
with water

No

RN07

259246

3272581

0-40

10YR 3/2 silty clay loam

No

Dense 10YR 3/2 clay

No

Standing water

No

40-50+
RN08

259153

3272402

0+

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 15 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83.).
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

BOA042-9909.NNWP

A-3

