AN ASSESSMENT OF THE ARCHEOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL
RESOURCES OF THE: AREA AROUND THE MOUTH OF
THE COLORADO RIVER, TEXAS

Douglas B. Comstock
and
Terry Lynn Galloway

Research Report No. 19
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
September, 1973

ABSTRACT
An archeological and historical inventory and assess­
ment of a prescribed study area including all portions to
be affected by the navigational and flood control improve­
ments on the Colorado River Delta and Matagorda Peninsula
was made by the Texas Archeological Survey (formerly the
Texas Archeolggical Salvage Project), The University of
Texas at Austin, for the Galveston District, U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers. Intensive survey in the study area
resulted in a negative response to the question of whether
detrimental effects to archeological and/or historical
resources would be caused by proposed Corps modifications
in the area. Note is made of both the unknown off-shore
potential for submerged resources, i.e. pri~arily sunken
vessels and the historical and archeological potential for
that area which represents a buffer zone in the study area.

Submitted to the u.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District, by the Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin in fullfillment of
terms of Contract No. DACW 64-73-C-0085
ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

lliTBa9DUCTION .

1

DESCRIPTION OF THESSBRVEY AREA • •

4

SURVEY PROCEDURES.

7

• • •
•

H$STORICAL BACKGROUND • •
SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES CITED • .

.

• .

• • • • • • • • • •

iii

,10

16
,19

INTRODUCTION

An assessment of the area to be affected by naviga­
tional and flood control improvements to the Colorado River
Delta and Matagorda Peninsula was made by the Texas Archeo­
logical Survey (formerly Texas Archeological Salvage Pro­
ject)~ The University of Texas at Austin, through funding
from the Corps of Engineers. Field work was performed
between March 7 and March 3D, 1973, by Douglas B. Comstock
and Terry Lynn Galloway. The survey was conducted to im­
plement preconstruction planning studies by the Corps for
navigation and flood control projects authorized by the
River and Harbor Act of 1968, Senate Document No. 102,
90th Congress, 2nd session. The responsibilities of the
survey team were to assess the effects of proposed modifi­
cation in the area on archeological, historical and cultural
resources, to describe areas where construction of project
features should not be considered and to recommend measures
to be taken to reduce or mitigate detrimental effects.
The specified study area is bounded on the west by
Matagorda Bay. Eastward the boundary is East Matagorda Bay
while to the south the limit is the Gulf of Mexico, thereby
including a short segment of Matagorda Peninsula. Finally,
the Intracoastal Waterway generally marks the northern
boundary, except for the northeast corner of the project
area which extends a short distance north of the Intra­
coastal Waterway_ The specific limits are indicated on the
study area map.
In addition, archeological field examinations occasion­
ally e)Cceeded on the north of the s~ud¥=area indicated on~the
project map (p. 3).
These included transects of the Baxter
Island area which adjoins the town of Matagorda on the west.
The authorized improvements being considered by the
Galveston District, Corps of Engineers in the study area

1

include an entrance channel 15 feet deep and 200 feet wide,
with jetties at the mouth of the existing Colorado River
Channel; a navigation channel 12 feet deep and 100 feet
wide from the Gulf shore to Matagorda, with public use areas
and recreation facilities: bank protection along the Tiger
Island Channel (an opening recently dredged by local people
to provide an outlet into Matagorda Bay from the Colorado
River): a turning basin 12 feet deep, 350 feet wide, and
1,450 feet long with an entrance channel adjacent to the
north side of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway at Matagorda:
and a dam across the present river channel to direct the
Colorado River flows into Matagorda Bay through a diversion
channel 250 feet wide and 20 to 23 feet deep_ The locations
of the authorized improvements are indicated on the study
area map.

2

For the purposes of this report the study area can be
divided into three separate physiographic units: (l) The
Colorado River Delta which includes the portion of the study
area north of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway, (2) Dog Island
Reef, and (3) Matagorda Peninsula. The geological age of the
landforms was of primary importance in determining the con­
centration of effort during the survey as a major portion of
the project area is much too recent a landform to have pro­
vided a surface for ~ehistoric or early historic utilization.
Colorado River Delta
The modern Colorado River Delta is of very recent age,
resulting primarily from the break up of a log jam on the
Colorado River above Matagorda (cf. Wadsworth 1966). In the
spring of 1875 the Colorado River began to empty into
Matagorda Bay immediately west of the present townsite of
Matagorda (Wadsworth 1941: 25). By 1908 a delta had been
formed encompassing and area of 45 acres (Wadsworth 1966: 100).
The successful removal of the log jam, begun in 1925, caused
rapid growth of a delta which now covers an area of some
7,200 acres (Wadsworth 1966: 104). and extends from immediate­
ly below the town of Matagorda to Matagorda Peninsula.
The Colorado River Delta can be demonstrated to be no
older than about 100 years with almost all of it being 50
years of age or less.
Dog Island Reef
Dog Island Reef is an:/oyster reef extending across
Matagorda Bay from Dog Island at the nm~thern end to Tiger
Island to the south. Except for a few emergent shell deposits,
it is at present completely submerged at low tide.
4

Matagorda Peninsula
Matagorda Peninsula is a Holocene (Recent) barrier con­
sisting of sand and shell from the floor m~ the Gulf of Mexico
and from stream discharge. This barrier has formed since the
last rise in sea level, whkh ended about 5000 years B.P.
(Le Blanc and Hodgson 1959:205).
Matagorda Peninsuaa can be divided into several zones or
belts which parallel the long axis of the peninsu~a~. These
consist of beach, sand dunes, a sand-shell flat, and wind
tidal flat. Within the study area the peni~sula is charac­
terized by a sandy beach bounded by the Gulf on the south­
west side and a belt of low sand dunes on the northwest.
This zon~ which is composed mainly of sand, is washed con­
stantly by waves. The sand dunes cgmprise a narrow continu­
ous belt 5 to 10 feet in elevation which are broken by
numerOBS storm channels bordering a sand-shell flat toward the
bay side. The sand-shell flat is cut by numerous inactive
storm channels and is covered by moderate to dense low vegeta­
tion. Bayward, this flat grades into a lowlying wind-tidal
flat and marsh. Numerous depressions which cross the sand­
shell flat represent storm channels cut by hurricanes. The
wiadttidaJ flat is an area of low ground with numerous small
lakes. Sediment in this area ranges from clay to sand
depending upon the e~osional or depositional activity. In
addition, perhaps due to the absence of the delta adjoining
the portion of the ~insmd~, occasional back island dunes
were noticed bordering the bay west of the present mouth of
the Colorado River. These are present as sandy, grass
covered hills less than five feet in elevation.
Matagorda Peninsula exhibits the usual dynamic features
of barrier sslands formed by both violent and ordinary or
everyday processes. Hurricanes exert a tremendous amount of
energy, over a short period of time, on both Gulf and mainland
shorelines. Houses and other structures have been blown and/or
washed away smmetimes along with their foundations, while
high waters caused by the hurricanes cover the peninsula and
lowlying mainland.

5

On the peninsula storm channels are reppened and new ones
may be scoured across the peninsula from Gulf to bay. As
sand dunes are washed away, high water erodes the barrier flat
behind the dunes leaving small lakes in the flat which evaporate
during dry weather leaving depressions. Washover fans are
formed on the bay side of the peninsu~a and prograde into the
bay coveringc,ohher older deposits. Storm surge floods may
inundate the peninsula and scour channels and may deposit
sand and shell within storm channels on the bay side of the
peninsula, or near the peninsula crest as shell ramps.
The wind tidal flat and marsh area are often less
affected by hurricanes although deposition and erosion do
occur (McGowen et al. 1970: 11). Silt in the area which
overlies sand in the small lakes and upon the lowlying ground
between them is largely brought in by hurricanes. To a
lesser extent, II nor thers ll blow sediments carried inhhigh waves
onto the back side of the peninsula from the bay, and more
sand from the dunes out into the Gulf.
Under o~dinary conditions, the peninsuia is a fairly
stable landform; however, changes take place on a smallsscale
which may lead to visible alteration over a long period of
time. The sand dunes, for example, even with a vegetative
cover, still shift while normal tides and air and water currents
cause minute changes overth~e entire length of the peninsula.
Finally, man himself, by introducing particular plants,
and animals and actively altering the land surface, contributes
to change the peninsula.

6

SURVEY PROCEDURES
Prior to the initiation of field work, records of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin, were searched for information on previously
located archeological sites, both prehistoric and historic.
None was listed. Likewise, geological literature was con­
sulted on the growth of the delta and the formation and
make-up of barrier islands and about other geological changes
in the area. Prediction of likely aboriginal occuppaion
areas can be made from this information and subsequently tested
in the field. For the same reason, a literature search,
including published maps, was made to determine the potential
for historic sites in the area. The files of the Texas State
Histost~Bl Survey Committee were checked for historical sites
in the project area. Once field work was begun, local
informants were questioned about known sites in the project
area.
Standard archeological survey methods were followed
using USGS maps and aerial photos of the area ppovided by
the Corps of Engineers. The small portion of the study area
north of the Intracoastal Waterway was briefly examined.
This area was part of the open bay before the build up of
the delta but now is covered in places by several feet of ve~y
recent deposit. Nossites besides a pavilion and two bait
houses are mentioned in late historic accounts, these being
built out into the bay from the pre-delta shoreline. The
main portion of the delta was not examined at all because of
its recent origin. Dog Island Reef was also examined. However,
except for a few shells, it was completely submerged during
low tides. Its site potential was therefore low and indeed
no sites were found. The peninsuaa then offered the only
potential for archeological sites, and thus was intensively
surveyed on foot and by boat.

(7

Archeological Potential of Matagorda Peninsula
In order to predict the kinds of sites which might be
found on the peninsula, an examination of the literature on
the early settlement of the area was made. It reveals pro­
bable occupation by Indians and later more extensive
settlement by Whites. Ethnohistoric accounts discuss the
presence of Karankawas and archeol~gical remains suggest
their presence in earlier times. Late~ relevant accounts
describe White settlement and difficulties with the Indians
which finally led to the expropriation and extermination of
the latter group from the vicinity in the early part of the
19th centgry.
The Karankawas were a nomadic people roaming between
favorite hunting and fishing spots along the coast between
Galveston and Corpus Christi bays (Gatschet 1891: 46).
Various aquatic and terrestrial animals and several vegeta­
ble foods made up their diet (Gatschet 1891: 58-60). No
direct written record was found concerning habitation of
the Karankawa Indians on the peninsula immediately below
the town of Matagorda (i.e., the study area), although it
may be logically assumed based on their recorded subsistence­
related movements and presence in aearby, similar environ­
ments (cf. Gatschet 1891: 23-32).
Gatschet (1891: 28) indicates that theylQ(rankawas
lived upon the barrier islands of the coast in the summer
and moved to the mainland in the winter. He further states
that the Karankawa held or claimed both sides of the
Colorado River. Finally, in discussing the encounter of
La Salle with the Karankawas in the lateer part of the 17th
century, Schaedel (1949: 119) me.bions the latter's
presence in the vicinity of the Rive Maligne or Colorado
River.

Assuming the veracity of these accounts, the Karankawa,
at least during the time of the early White travelers,
were present around the pre-delta mouth of the Colorado.
A group of artifacts comprising the "Rockport Focus"
partially associated with the Karankawa Indians serves as
evidence of their earlier habitation along the coast.
Archeological sites displaying this artifact assemblage
have been found from the Galveston Bay area at least to
Corpus Christi Bay, indicating their presence along the coast.
A survey in 1964 of part of Padre Island yielded fifteen
sites demonstrating Indian occupation on the island. Rock­
port Focus artifacts were found on many of these sites
possibly linking them with the Karankawa Indians (Campbell
1964: 9) .
The evidence for Indian habitation of Matagorda
Peninsula within the boundaries of the study area is by
no means conelusive and lies merely on the fact that it
would provide excellent exploitable resources in the form
of fish, shell fish, and other animals and would be
accessible during milder seasons by boats as well as by land.
Since they most likely occupied the barrier islands at least
occasionally if not extensively and Matagorda Peninsula lay
within their range at least during historic times, it is
concluded that they probably inhabited the area around the
present mouth of the Colorado River.
Habitation of the peninsula by Whites began after
the Indian threat was alleviated with at least one
settlement below Matagorda. This habitation, while
demonstrable through the written record and strongly
suggested through the archeological record in adjacent
areas, was not seen or located in light of visible physical
remains duringtbhe survey_

•9

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The name Matagorda is a linguistic hybrid: a com­
mingling of two Spanish words: mata meaning brush, shrubs or
kill and gorda meaning coarse, thick or fat. Out of the
possible word combinations there are two that are generally
preferred-- "fat kill" (a reference to the abundant game) or
"coarse growth" (a comment on the dense canebrake). The
physiographic interpretation, if less oolorful, is the most
apt--the county's most conspicious geographical feature was
the dense canebrake that bordered the ancient bed of the
Colorado, Old Caney.
The Matagorda Bay area occupies some 500 of the 1,134
square miles of the total land area in the cODb~y (Marr 1928:
2). The Bay itself is separated from theGG1II.ff of Mexico by
the Matagorda Peninsula. Historical reference to the
peninsula as Isla de Culebra (snake island) and the eastern
end of the peninsula as Punta de Culebla (from its resemblance
to the head of the snake) is noted by Thrall (1878: 126).
Aside from the intriguing qualities of their names, the Bay
area and the Peninsuaa abound in an exciting history which
follows a definite plot that can be divided into three
broad periods: The Franco-Spanish occupations, the Anglo­
American pioneering and settlement and the post-Civil War
dea:a:iile.
Franco-Spanish Occupatigns
Prior to 1685, when Robert Cavelier, Sieur de la Salle
unveiled the fleur-de-lis on Matagorda soil, the Karankawa
Indians had almost exclusively occupied the coastal region
between Corpus Christi and Galveston (Gatschet 1891: 93,
Newcomb 1961: 59). The Karankawan gtoups in the Matagorda
area were the Kohanis at the mouth of the Colorado and the
Karankawa proper at Matagorda Bay and Matagorda Peninsula.

These gropps were autonomous but Shared a common language
and culture. These Karankawan bands or groups led a nomadic
life forced by the available foods. Subsistence for these
people revolved around the aquatic resQurces, such as clams,
scallops, tur"tles and a wide variety o:e fish. Additionally,
the mainlandppmowided a variety of animals and plants for
their diet (Newcomb 1961: 59-66).
Even after alien explorers encroached, they had IIlong ,
jand more or less undisputed, possession of the land along
Matagorda Bay" (Marr 1928: 27). In ]685 La Salle
established Fort St. Louis on GarcitasCreek near Lavaca Bay.
Spanish entradas were made to locate tHe site and by the time
of their successful arrival at the fort in 1689, it had al­
ready been destroyed by the nati~ Karankawa (Newcomb 1961: 62).
It was not until 33 ;years later that the Spanish established
the presidio La Bah1a at the same site/and a companion mission,
Nuestra Senora del Espiritu Santo de Zu~iga near-by. The
location of the mission site remainsun~known today. The
Spanish sites were moved in 1726 and Be~p&ement in the area
was stilled until the early l800·s.

Anglo-American Settlement
The Karankawas controlled the Bay and Matagorda County
until the early l800's when Spanish rule over Texas was
ending and Mexican control had begun. It was then that
the Mexi~an government gave Stephen F. iAustin the first
empresario grant allowing him to establish a colony of three
hundred families in the Texas province~ Austin, impressed
by its potential, selected the te~ritoty between the Colorado
and Brazos stiers as the site for the first Texas colonp.
In 1822 the second ~roup of the tfuree hundred families
that were to settle the territory set sail from New Orleans
on the schooner the 1I0nly Son. II They cCilme to anchor on the
west bank of the Colorado River near the present site of the
town of Matagorda. With their arrival t settlement of the
county began in earnest.
11

During the early stages of colonization, the danger from
the Karankawas was manifest and compelled the settlers to
cultivate the land farther up the Colorado and Brazos.
Distance made little difference, however, and Indian raids
were rampant. As early as September, 1821 Austin concluded
that the ~ Karankawa would have to be exterminated before
his colonists could occupy the coast cquntry in any
peace" (Ga tschet 1898: 104-105). Duririg the winter of 1826
a Karankawan group massacred the F1owe~ and Cavanah families
near the Live Oak Bayou on Caney Creek. The settlers pursued
and eventually eliminated the Indians ~t Battle Island and
Dressing Point. The slaughters at Battle IslaBd and Dressing
Point signaled an eventual genocide (Marr 1928: 35). By
1836 there were only two hundred and fifty Karankawas re­
maining on Austin's grant. And these were"making their
home in or near Matagorda County ••• especially on the
Matagorda Peninsula, and, by the time the Texas War for
Independence ended, the Karankawas as a cohesive force had
ceased to exist (Gatschet 1891: 92). The cessation of the
Indian threat, incidentally, left Mata10rda Peninsula open
for settlement. A small German co1onp,was started midway
between the Peninsula's Caney Creek connection and Decrow's
point. It was a thriving community of approximately twelve
houses. The community was destroyed in the storm of 1854 and
was rebuilt only be be destroyed again!in 1875. (Marr 1928: ll4).
Only with the founding of Matagorda Town did the county begin
its growth.
1

I

In 1826 Elias Wightman, who was a~sociated with Austin
as a surveyor, petitioned to build a Gown on the bluff east
of the Colorado River overlooking the ~ay. Although the
general co1onizati on law for Texas stated that IIno settlement
could be made within ten leagues of the coast" (Barker 1925:
136f), there was a reservation that petmitted the first
settlers brought in by Austin to settle within that area.
By bringing this reservation to light, Austin received per­
mission to build the town of Matagorda in 1827. On January
27, 1829, the sixty immigrants who were to comprise the
town arrived at Matagorda on the ship ~'Litt1e Zoe." As
early as 1829, Austin believed that Matagorda would become an
·12

important port in Texas (Barker 1925: 452). After Texas
delcared its independence from Mexico in 1836, Matagorda
thrived. ' The county itself was one of the original twenty­
three counties of the Republic, and the town (once incorpora­
ted) became the county seat. Following the war for Indepen­
dence Matagorda County and its capital witnessed an era of
amazing ~rowth.

Post-Civil War Decling
A nu~er of factors conspired to bring about the ruin
of Matagorda 15 economic and cultural hopes. The Colorado
River, which should have been an ideal shipping route, was
blocked by impassable rafts. In 1853 a bypass channel was
dug 50 boats could pass through. But less than ten years
later a new raft formed around the bypass and the Colorado
was hopelessly clogged again. Thus, "the difficulty of
keeping the river free of rafts, and the development of
Indianola as an excellent seaport, prevented Matagorda from
becoming a great Texas porer (Marr 192$: 271). Planter
prosperity ended with the Civil War. Prior to 1860 Mata­
gorda County was a well established part of the sugar bowl.
With the advent of the Eman~~pation Proclamation, planta­
tions ceased to operate and the area was taken over almost
exclusively by cattle industries. A return to agriculture
in the area was attempted in 1899 with the introduction of
rice growing. But the return to farming has been gradual.
In the early 1900 l s other economic avenues opened to the
county. In the early days of the new century, Matagorda
became a fish and oyster shipping point; and in 1919 a
large sulphur field was uncovered at the town of Gulf.
Curious to the history of the are~ is the geographical
fact that hardly more than fifty years ago, a major portion
of the land mass in the site area was monexistant. In such
a case, the history of the particular area is necessarily an
exteRS.EOn ='-ofttie': h±st:dl.Ej:. ojafpar:ticnlC'ln:;l vicini ty • . A history

13

of the Lower Colorado River site area that excluded the
town of Matagorda would be incomplete. Matagorda was,at
its inception, the pioneering and cultural center of the
countYi and any occureaceE:of historical note within the
project arell.;:-,aas ii:ss rJ:lOdIts Hm ttbe +-u0'I9n <i
Area Sites of Historical

Imp~rtance

There are no known historical sitts within the study
area listed, nominated, or presumably ~ualifying for nomi­
nation to the National Register of Historic Places. More­
over, {excluding the town of Matagorda) there are no known
sites of local, state or national significance within
the area. The town of Matagorda, however, abounds with
sites of historical note. Many of the$e sites have been
recognized by the Texas State Historical Survey Committee
and awarded recognition through the marking ppogram
administered by this agency. The most representative of
these are:
1)
2)
3)
4)
5)

Christ Episcopal Church
Culver Home--c. 1900
Dale-Rugeley Sisk House--c.1800's
Matagorda Cemetery--founded 1829
Matagorda Post Office--c. 1872

Those sites listed for the town ot Matagorda reflect a
local history and no loci of historical import were found
outside of the town--considered here a$ a buffer area to the
project area.
Positive documentation of shipwreck sites within the
project are is negligible; the possibility of the existence
of such sites, however, is open toque$tion. According to
results from an archeological survey in northwestern
Matagorda Bay lithe density of shipwrecks in western Matagorda
Bay is probably unexceeded on the Texa$ coast, and their
remains represent a long and significa$t era in Texas
history
(Instl:itute for Underwater Re$earch, Inc. 1971).
II

Moreover, the survey recommended that portions of the area
be closed to industEiil and commercial activity ~hich ~ould
in any ~ay disturb ~recks or artifacts in that section of
the bay (Institute for Unde~ater Research, 1971). The
restricted portion of the bay, ho~ever, includes only the
area located between Matagorda Ship Chanmel and the mainland-­
from Indian Point on the north to the area south mf Indianola.
No documented or suspected shipwreck sites are located
withintthe Mouth of the Colorado River study area.

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Despite three weeks of intensive survey of the project
area carried out by boat and on foot, no archeological sites
were located. As previously stated, the Colorado River
Delta is a recent feature less than 100 years in age; by
definition this landform would contain no prehistoric sites.
On the other hand, Matagorda Peninsula, because of its prox­
imity to other known areas of occupation, was expected to
yield some late historickaboriginal sites (post-16th century).
Additionally, it is known through the written record that the
peninsula was inhabited during the early 19th century; how­
ever, no site relating to this period of occupation was
located. If sites are present on the peninsula, it is pos­
sible that they may be uncovered during a period of active
erosion such as an extended period of dry weather or during
a hurricane (Campbell 1964: 13). Because Matagorda Peninsula
is predominantly a sandy landform, no cultural stratigraphy
would be present unless deflation did not occur after deposi­
tion of cultural materials. If seriogs deflation had oc­
curred, then it is unlikely that any sites uncovered in the
future would have significant archeological potential.
Field observations in the vicinity of the Town of Mata­
gorda (e.g., Baxter Island) did not result in the finding of
archeological sites or features. On this basis it is assumed
that areas immediately north of the study area have no, or
very limited, archeological potential.
Western Matagorda Bay is known to have a high density
of shipwrecks, but no documented wrecks were noted for the
project area. Furthermore, due to the Dog Island Reef, which
provided an effective barrier to navig~tion, it is doubtful
if any would be in the area.
Finally, the Town of Matagorda, located at the north
end of the project area, is an early settlement and part of

16

the long-lived history of the area. It is noted because of
its close proximity to the project area.
There are no historical sites within the study area
listed on, nominated for inclusion to, or approved for sub­
mission to the National Register of Historic Places.
No substantive demonstration of historic or archeologic
potential or physical remains of prehistoric or historic
aboriginal sites nor historic occupations related to the
early settlement of the area could be made through surficial
examination of the project area. For that reason and those
stated above it is our opinion that the proposed modification
will have no adverse effect upon the cultural resources of
the Colorado River Delta or upon Matagorda Peninsula.

17

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors wish to thank the people of the Galveston
office of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for their
helpful assistance and use of maps of the project area.
M~H1Y thank!;? I.'lre alao due to tbeffi~e:.pe~'jj,l~e Qf'J".M.atg9Qcda
especially John and Emily Kemp and Jim Yeamans, Senio~,
for all their help, and to Judith Seastrunk for her
cooperation.
Dr. J.B. McGowen and Bruce Wilkinson both of
The University of Texas Department of Geology were of
great professional assistance.

18

REFERENCES CITED

Barker, Eugene C.
1925
The Life of Stephen F. Austin.
Ne-w York.

AMS Press.

Campbell, T. N.
1964
A~~raisal of the Archeological Resources of
Padme Island, Texas. Report submitted to the
National Park Service by The University of
Texas. Austin.
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891
The Karanka-wa Indians. Archaeological and
Ethnological Papers of the Peabody Museum,
Vol. I, No.2. Cambridge.
Institute for Under-water Research, Incorporated
1971
Archeological Survey for Shipwreck Sites in
North-western Matagorda Bay, June l€ o 12, 1971.
Dallas.
Le Blanc, Rufus J. and W.D. Hodgson
1959
Origin2 and Development of the Texas Shoreline
In: Transactions of the Gu.lf Coast Association
of Geological Sciences. Vol. IX: 197-220.
Marr, John Columbus
1928
Historv of Matagorda County •.'<.Master
The University of Texas. Austin.

IS

thesis.

McGo-wen, J.H., C.G. Groat, L.F. Bro-wn, Jr., W.L. Fisher, and
A.J. Scott
1970
Effects of Hurricane Celia -- A Focus on Environ­
mental Geological Problems of the Texas Coastal
Zone. Bureau of Economic Geology. Geoloqical
Circular 70-3. The University of Texas at Austin.

19

Newcomb, W.W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas From Prehistoric to Modern
Times. University of Texas Press. Austin.
Thrall, H.S.
1878
Pictorial
Louis.

His~0ry

of Texas.

W.D. Thompson.

St.

Wadsworth, i;.H.
1941
The Lower Colorado River, Texas. Master's
thesis. The University of Texas. Austin.
1966

Historic Deltation of the Colorado River, Texas.
In: Deltas in Their Geological Framework.
Martha Lou Shirley and James A. Ragsdale, editors.
Houston Geological Society: 99-106.

20

