A CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY FOR THE
SMITH POINT 3-D SEISMIC PROJECT IN CHAMBERS COUNTY, TEXAS

Permit Application Number
SWG 05-06-012

BVRA Project Number 06-01

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared for
Frontline Geoservices
4225 Katy Hockley Road
Katy, Texas 77493

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
A cultural resources survey of a portion of the Smith Point 3-D seismic
project in Chambers County, Texas was performed by Brazos Valley Research
Associates (BVRA) in May and June of 2006. Fifteen source points selected for
drilling by Yuma Exploration and Production Company of Houston, Texas in high
probability areas were shovel tested. No archaeological sites were found, and no
artifacts were collected. Copies of this report are on file at the Texas Historical
Commission (THC), United States Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District
(COE), the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), BVRA, Dixie
Environmental Services Co., Inc. (DESCO), and Frontline Geoservices, Inc. This
work was performed under COE application permit number SWG 05-06-012.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors and the staff at DESCO are grateful to the following persons
for their assistance. Nicole Minnichbach, archaeologist for the COE, Galveston
District; William A. Martin, archaeologist at the THC, Archeology Division; and
Steve Hoyt, State Underwater Archeologist for the THC discussed the project
with the Principal Investigator prior to the earlier avoidance plan and the current
field survey. Other informants include Kevin Ladd, Director of the Wallisville
Heritage Park, C. R. Ebersole and Sheldon Kindall, promoters of the Galveston
Bay survey discussed in this report, and William Louis Fullen, the Principal
Investigator for surveys conducted on Smith Point and Frankland Point. The
Project Archaeologist was assisted in the field by Brad LaPoint, John Cox, and
George Cozart who also provided project area maps. The file search wsaa
perfomed by Jean Hughes, Records Conservator at TARL. Figure 1 was drafted
by Lilli G. Lyddon of LL Technical Services, and Jennifer McMillan and Nora
Rogers assisted with editing and report production.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................5
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................7
RESULTS OF ARCHIVAL RESEARCH................................................................8
METHODS..........................................................................................................16
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................17
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................19
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................20
Appendix I: Description of Seismic Operations, Transition Zone, Methodology,
Sequence of Work, and Equipment.
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log
FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location Map ...........................................................................2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map .........................................................3
Figure 3. View of Project Area Lowlands ..............................................................6
Figure 4. View of Project Area Uplands ................................................................6
Figure 5. Area Surveyed by William Louis Fullen in 1983...................................10
TABLES
Table 1 Archaeological Sites in the Project Area ..................................................9

iv

INTRODUCTION
Yuma Exploration and Production Company, Inc. of Houston, Texas
received a permit from the General Land Office (GLO) and the COE, Galveston
District for permission to conduct a 3-D Seismic Survey in a 14,000-acre tract in
south-central Chambers County, Texas (Figure 1). The permittee for this project
is Frontline Geoservices of Katy, Texas. Contact persons are Mark Hartman and
Jeff Sleder.
Earlier, an avoidance plan was conducted in order to identify previously
recorded archaeological sites and high probability areas (Moore 2006). This plan
was submitted to the COE and THC for approval. The client decided that strict
avoidance of all high probability areas was not practical. Therefore, DESCO was
retained to make arrangements for conducting a cultural resources survey of all
source points within high probability areas. No drilling was to occur within any of
the known archaeological sites. The current cultural resources survey was
initiated in order to fulfill requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act
(16 U.S.C. 460), Section 106 with COE permit SWG-05-06-012.
The major portion of the project area is located in Galveston Bay, East
Bay, and Trinity Bay; and the inland portion occupies two land masses referred to
on the topographic maps as Smith Point and Frankland Point. To the north of
Smith Point is Morgan Point, a low marshy area in Galveston Bay separated from
the main portion of Smith Point by a man-made channel. There are no major
streams or rivers on the mainland of Smith Point. The western portions of Smith
Point and Frankland Point are low marshy areas below the five-foot contour
interval. Although the inland areas are higher in elevation, they rarely rise above
the 10-foot contour interval. Other land masses consist of the Vingt-et-un Islands
and several unnamed islands (Figure 1). The project area is depicted on a
composite of four USGS 7.5’ topographic quadrangles. They are Smith Point
(2994-321), Lake Stephenson (2994-312), Oak Island (2994-313), and Umbrella
Point (2994-324). Figure 2 depicts the project area on topographic quadrangles
Smith Point and Lake Stephenson.
The purpose of the seismic survey was to provide a high-resolution image
of subsurface geological features that will allow the client to effectively evaluate
the hydrocarbon reserves underlying the project area. The client plans used a
high velocity energy source consisting of Pentalite with a charge size of 5.5
pounds. The depth of the charges in the bays was 60 feet below mud line, and
the depth of the charges on land was 60 feet below the existing land surface. All
shot holes were four inches in diameter. The distance between shots was 310
feet, the distance between shot lines will be 1240 feet, and the distance between
receiver lines was 1760 feet.

1

Figure 1. General Location Map

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map

3

On land, the point spacing was 220 feet. No air guns were used in the
bays. In the bays, the equipment used consisted of airboats, airboat drills, flat
boats, and pontoon drills. On land, the equipment used consisted of buggy drills
with cane tires and all terrain vehicles. Airboats and airboat drills were used in
marsh areas.
More detailed information regarding the methodology, sequence of work,
and equipment is provided in Appendix I (Description of Seismic Operations:
Transition Zone, Methodology, Sequence of Work, and Equipment).
DESCO was retained by Frontline Geoservices to work with a professional
archaeologist to identify any cultural resources that may be present in the area of
the fifteen relocated source points prior to drilling. In order to fulfill this
requirement, DESCO hired BVRA, a private archaeological consulting firm, to act
as a subcontractor to perform this service. William E. Moore is the owner of
BVRA and primary investigator for this project. Edward P. Baxter was the Project
Archaeologist, and he supervised the field survey.

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
General
Chambers County is located in the extreme southeastern part of Texas. It
is bordered on the south by Trinity Bay, Galveston Bay, East Bay, and the Gulf of
Mexico. Jefferson County is on the east, Liberty County is on the north, and
Harris County is on the west. Chambers County covers a total area of 560,000
acres; of which 381,517 acres is land and 178,483 acres is water. The area is a
nearly level, featureless plain that has very little dissection, although the Trinity
River and several bayous have shallow channels and furnish some drainage.
Project Area
The project area is located at the southern tip of the county and is
surrounded by East Bay. Soils at Smith Point belong to the Stowell-Clodine
association. These are acid and alkaline sandy and loamy soils. According to
the soil survey for Chambers County (Crout 1976:6), this association is slightly
above sea level and has few natural drainage ways. Stowell soils are found on
sandy ridges about 2 to 10 feet above sea level, and Clodine soils are located in
depressions about 1 to 3 feet above sea level. Specific soil types on Smith Point
are Clodine sandy clay loam (Cd), Harris clay (Ha), Ijam soils (Im), and Veston
soils (Ve).
Smith Point is a low-lying area with little relief above the surrounding bay.
Figure 3 depicts the highest elevations or uplands, and Figure 4 depicts the lower
elevations.

5

Figure 3. View of Project Area Lowlands

Figure 4. View of Project Area Uplands

6

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The project area is located in the Southeast Texas Cultural-geographical
region as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:Figure 15) and the Southeast Texas
Archeological Study Region as defined by Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993:Figure
1.1.2). In 1985, this region contained 1630 known archaeological sites – 8.06%
of the state. At that time, there were 240 recorded sites in Chambers County –
the second highest number of sites in the region behind Harris County with 300
known sites. According to Biesaart et al. (1985:119-120), the majority of the sites
recorded in 1985 were Late Prehistoric (n=177). One site was known to be Late
Archaic, and 34 sites were simply described as General Archaic. No sites dating
to the Paleo-Indian period had been documented in the county. Today, there are
at least 375 sites in Chambers County. The majority of these sites have been
recorded as a result of development projects (residential and commercial) and oil
and gas production. The Houston Archeological Society (HAS) has played an
active role in the area as well. The significance of the area is reflected in the
number of sites listed in the National Register of Historic Places (n=13) and
designated as a State Archeological Landmark (n=3). Site disturbance is a major
problem in this part of Texas with 156 sites affected by erosion disturbance and
100 sites affected by construction. In 1985, 40 sites had been vandalized, and
14 sites were listed as destroyed.

7

RESULTS OF ARCHIVAL RESEARCH
The background search revealed several archaeological surveys have
been conducted in the project area and vicinity. These investigations were
performed by the COE, Galveston District, HAS members, archaeological firms,
and the Chambers County Heritage Society. Within the project area there are 10
recorded prehistoric shell middens, 1 recorded prehistoric site (type unknown), 1
historic 20th century shipwreck, 1 historical monument, and 5 cemeteries. Table
1 provides information for the recorded archaeological sites. The cemeteries,
shipwreck, and historical monument are discussed in detail below.
Archaeological Surveys
In the 1950s, Richard B. Worthington and Wayne B. Neyland, HAS
members, visited Smith Point. They documented shell middens, collected
artifacts, took notes, and reported their findings to TARL. Worthington and
Neyland visited three of the sites in the current project area. These are 41CH2,
41CH147, and 41CH149. It is not known if they examined the entire shoreline of
Smith Point.
41CH2 is the first site at Smith Point to receive a trinomial. This was done
following a revisit by E. Raymond Ring in 1960. According to the site card, only a
few “water worn” sherds were visible by Ring, and the site had largely eroded
into the bay. No site form or formal report is on file at TARL.
According to the site card for 41CH147, a trinomial was issued based on
its plotting on the topographic map by Wayne B. Neyland in 1957. There is no
original site form. The site card and revisit form by C. R. Ebersole are very
incomplete. No formal report is on file at TARL. There is a collection of artifacts
from this site at TARL.
41CH149 received a trinomial based on its plotting on the topographic
map by Wayne B. Neyland in 1958. The original site form and site revisit form by
C. R. Ebersole are very incomplete. No formal report is on file at TARL.
In 1979, Jack C. Hudson (1979) conducted a literature search in
association with an archaeological survey in Galveston County. In his report he
mentions the current status of sites 41CH147 and 41CH149. Regarding site
41CH147, he describes it as an area consisting of “shell and human bone
scattered over an area about one mile in length” (Hudson 1979:M-31). He states
that its current condition is “unreported.” Regarding site 41CH149, he describes
it as a site on Smith Point containing potsherds. He states that its current
condition is “unreported.” Hudson did not visit these sites in person.

8

Table 1 Archaeological Sites in the Project Area

9

In 1983, William Louis Fullen of Texas Heritage Services and members of
the Chambers County Heritage Society surveyed 325 meters along the southern
shoreline of Smith Point in an attempt to identify and assess archaeological sites
in the area (Fullen et al. 1992). Prior to the field survey, a literature search,
study of the available remote sensing data for the project area, and interviews
with local citizens familiar with the history of the area were performed. The
historic research was conducted by Jean Epperson and Kevin Ladd. Following
these tasks, a formal archaeological survey was conducted.
The area examined is defined by Fullen et al. (1992:8) as “the beach area
from the high tide mark to the water’s edge beginning at the west fence of the
Abshier Camp and extending along the beach 325 meters to the west as shown
on Figure 2” (Figure 5). The area surveyed is not plotted on the topographic map
at TARL or at the THC.

Figure 5. Area Surveyed by William Louis Fullen in 1983
(Reproduced with permission of Texas Heritage Services)

10

The survey crew was aware of the presence of previously recorded
prehistoric sites 41CH147 and 41CH149 and that a historic homestead and
family cemetery were in the area. In order to identify areas of high artifact
concentrations, a controlled surface collection was made in 13 areas along the
beach (Figure 2). Artifacts belonging to the Smith family homestead were found
on the beach during the 1983 visit, but the exact location of the site was believed
to be under the waters of East Bay. Since the crew was not able to delineate the
boundaries of this site, a TARL number was not assigned.
In 1984, members of the Chambers County Heritage Society returned to
the area and collected more artifacts and located the wooden remnant of a well
that was in the tidal marsh on the east end of the project area. The extensive
collection of artifacts found on the beach by the Abshier family was given to Mr.
Fulllen who turned over all of the artifacts from this project to the Wallisville
Heritage Park for curation. According to Kevin Ladd (personal communication to
William E. Moore on March 7, 2006), these artifacts are still at this facility.
The distribution of pre-1836 ceramics and post-1836 ceramics and the
distribution of certain glass artifacts indicate that the Smith home site was in the
vicinity of collection areas 6 through 13 (Figure 5). According to Fullen et al.
(1992:81), “it is probable that significant historical cultural resources remain in the
higher ground adjacent to these areas.” Although portions of the small family
cemetery were still intact when visited by Fullen, some of the graves had already
been removed to another location in Anahuac.
During the survey by Fullen, the remnants of two previously recorded
prehistoric shell middens (41CH147 and 41CH149) were located and assessed.
It was determined that very little remained of site 41CH147 due to erosion, and
this site was described as being too disturbed to warrant further work. Site
41CH149, however, was found to be only partially disturbed. Fullen states that it
is possible that significant portions of this site remain in the higher ground
adjacent to collection areas 7-9 (Figure 5). He also believes this site may be
eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places or for designation as
a State Archeological Landmark.
Between 1980 and 1984, William Louis Fullen visited the north shore of
Smith Point during his informal Smith Point Archaeological Survey for the
Wallisville Heritage Park. During this time, he recorded 41CH279, a very large
shell midden that was eroding into the cove.

11

In 1986, William Louis Fullen (1987) of Texas Heritage Services
conducted a cultural resources survey prior to construction of the Marina del Oro
by a private developer. During this study he conducted a 100% Pedestrian
Survey of Frankland Point which included the shoreline and inland areas.
Although he found no sites on the shore at Frankland Point, he believes that
there may be some buried cultural materials due to recent deposition (personal
communication from William Louis Fullen to William E. Moore on March 7, 2006).
This study recorded two sites, 41CH276 and 41CH277. Site 41CH276 is
the remains of the Queen, a historic shipwreck in Frankland Pass (see
discussion above). Site 41CH277 is a Rangia shell midden that produced one
flake and four ceramic sherds. The site was examined through shovel testing and
water screening. The environmental setting is described as a bench on an
upland terrace adjacent to a salt marsh. The soils are clay loam and sand on top
of Pleistocene clay. This site was found to be intact, and it was recommended
that this site be designated as a State Archeological Landmark.
In the 1990s, an informal survey of Galveston Bay and vicinity was
conducted by members of HAS led by C. R. Ebersole. The survey crew
examined the shore in a boat and stopped at all areas where shell middens or
cultural materials were visible. Each site location was plotted on a topographic
map, and a site form was completed and submitted to TARL. Some of these
forms contain only minimal data and were not useful in the writing of this report.
No shovel testing was performed, and no report was written. Artifacts
collected are curated at the Wallisville Heritage Park Museum in Wallisville,
Texas. Within the project area, eight, shell middens were recorded along the
shoreline of Smith Point. They are 41CH279, 41CH340, 41CH341, 41CH342,
41CH343, 41CH344, 41CH345, and 41CH346. Many of these sites were
disturbed due to dredging and erosion. Some of the sites recorded by Ebersole
had been visited by HAS members earlier.
Investigations by archaeologists from the COE Galveston District are
depicted on the topographic maps for Smith Point and Lake Stephenson. Not
one of these surveys located archaeological sites. At the time of this writing, no
information was available regarding these surveys except the map plotting and
COE project number. Six COE surveys were conducted on the mainland of
Smith Point. Four have COE project numbers (16220, 17661, 17708, and
17_23), and two are identified only by date (1979 and 1987). In Galveston Bay,
there are four areas depicted with COE numbers. These are 17289, 17437,
17459, and ST 135.

12

Several major studies have been carried out that are especially relevant to
this project. They are the Wallisville Lake salvage project that was started by
Harry J. Shafer (1966) and J. Richard Ambler (1967) and continued by other
archaeologists such as Kathleen Gilmore (1974) and Lawrence Aten’s (1983)
monumental work linking geomorphological and historical information to the
interpretation of shell midden archaeology.
Historical Markers and Monuments
In 1979, a monument was erected in memory of Sarah Ridge Pachal Pix,
a Cherokee Indian who moved to Smith Point circa 1820. She died in 1891 and
is buried in McNeir Cemetery. In the spring of 2006 a ceremony will be held to
dedicate a marker for the McNeir Cemetery.
Cemeteries
Davis Cemetery
This is a local family cemetery where the bodies of the Andy Davis family
are buried. An iron fence currently encloses it, but no headstones are present.
The THC historic cemetery number is CH-C087.
Frankland Cemetery
This is a local family cemetery where the bodies of the Charles Frankland
family are buried. An iron fence currently encloses it. There are approximately
eight graves present (personal communication from Joe Whitehead to William E.
Moore on March 7, 2006). The THC historic cemetery number is CH-001.
Heiman Cemetery
This is a small family cemetery where the members of the Henry Heiman
family were buried. According to a local informant, (Candy Abshier), the remains
of the Heiman family were moved to the Anahuac Cemetery. She said that the
only graves left behind were those of paupers and persons not related to the
Heiman family (Fullen et al. 1992).
In 1952, when the Abshiers bought the property, most of the graves had
washed into the bay. According to Ann Abshier, the cemetery is now completely
in the bay and artifacts from the burials are occasionally found on the shore
(personal communication from Ann Abshier to William E. Moore on March 7,
2006). The Heiman Cemetery is also referred to as the Altman Cemetery, since
Fanny Heiman (a daughter of Henry Heiman) married Theodore Altman.

13

The cemetery is not on the THC list of historic cemeteries. Its
approximate location is depicted in a sketch map prepared by Fullen during his
visit to the area in the 1960s (Figure 5). A field assessment by Fullen et al.
(1992) indicated the family homestead was to the east of the cemetery. Fullen
believes that the cemetery was probably established at a later date (personal
communication from William Louis Fullen to William E. Moore on March 8, 2006).
McNeir Cemetery
This is a small family cemetery where the bodies of the William McNeir
family are buried. According to Joe Whitehead, there are approximately eight
graves present (personal communication from Joe Whitehead to William E.
Moore on March 7, 2006). The THC has been designated it as a State Historic
Cemetery. The THC historic cemetery number is CH-C005.
Robbins Cemetery
This small family cemetery was originally located in a pasture overlooking
Trinity Bay.
According to Bob Wheat and Joe Whitehead (personal
communication to William E. Moore on March 7, 2006) it washed away as a
result of storms such as Hurricane Carla in 1961. It is not on the THC list of
historic cemeteries. This is where the Asa W. Robbins family is buried.
Shipwrecks
Site 41CH276 is the remains of the Queen, a historic shipwreck in
Frankland Pass. It was built in the 1880s and sank in the 1915 storm. It was
originally a 20-ton vessel (sail and engine) that had been stripped of engine and
superstructure and was being used as a shell barge. The study by Fullen (1987)
found the hull to be intact. It was recommended that the wreck be avoided
during construction of the marina. According to the records at TARL regarding
the Queen is listed as Shipwreck Number 1159 and Shipwreck Number 2176.
Shipwreck Number 1159 is located just to the north of 41CH279. Since site
41CH276 and 41CH279 are incorrectly plotted on the TARL maps, BVRA
believes there is no other recorded shipwreck in the area of Shipwreck Number
1159.
Historic Home Sites
John M. Smith established his home site at Smith Point in the latter part of
1832 or early 1833. According to the 1834 census of the Anahuac Precinct, John
Smith resided with his wife, a large household of children and relatives, and 28
slaves. The Smith family abandoned the home site in 1836 when Mr. Smith fled
to Louisiana because his son (William M. Smith) killed his son-in-law, Moses
Alfred Caroll (Epperson 1995). John Smith and his son William were indicted for
murder so he left the area.

14

The site probably remained uninhabited until 1850 when the John
Hampshire family moved to Smith Point and purchased the property or even later
when Henry Heiman bought the property from the Hampshires. Apparently, the
Heiman family occupied the site until the death of Henry Heiman in 1919.
Historic Settlements
The town of Smith Point overlooks East Bay and Trinity Bay on Farm-to­
Market-Road 562 twenty miles from Galveston in southern Chambers County.
Spanish troops landed there enroute to reinforcing the troubled settlement at
Atascosito in 1805. It is believed that the area was named for John Smith who
signed a petition in 1827 protesting Mexico’s failure to grant title to land claimants
in the Atascocito district. The Smith Point post office was established in 1876.
Water transportation remained the chief mode of travel for Smith Point settlers
until the advent of the automobile. About 50 residents lived at Smith Point during
the 1930s. Fishing and ranching provided the chief means of support for local
inhabitants until 1944 when oil was discovered.
Numerous offshore and onshore oil and gas wells have been brought in
since that time, and the oil and gas industry remains active today. Several gas
wells and pipelines are depicted on the topographic map Smith Point. The post
office at Smith Point was discontinued in 1943; however the area continued to be
inhabited, mainly by seasonal residents and small fishing firms. In 1990, the
population was 150. The above information was taken from The Handbook of
Texas Online.
A United States Coast Survey of Smith Point dated 1851 shows no
settlements or roads. Two cleared areas are believed to represent early
homesteads, and the one near the south shore may be the site of the former
residence of John M. Smith. A photocopy of this figure appears in the report by
Fullen et al. (1992:31) as Figure 4.
Sites Listed in the National Register of Historic Places
No sites listed in the National Register of Historic Places are present in the
project area. However, some of the known sites may be eligible for listing.
State Archeological Landmarks
At least two sites (41CH149 and 41CH276) may be eligible for designation
as a State Archeological Landmark.

15

METHODS
Pre-Field Methods
As part of the avoidance data for the Smith Point 3-D Seismic Survey, the
Principal Investigator visited TARL on the campus of The University of Texas at
Austin and the map room at the THC, Archeology Division. At TARL, all relevant
topographic maps were checked for the presence of previously recorded
prehistoric and historic sites and areas surveyed. The topographic maps on file
at the THC were also checked for data that may not be present on the maps at
TARL. Mr. Moore also conducted a search of the Texas Historic Sites Atlas. This
is a restricted online program that contains site data for the entire state.
Mr. Moore discussed this project with Nicole Minnichbach, archaeologist
for the COE, Galveston District; William A. Martin, archaeologist at the THC,
Archeology Division, Steve Hoyt, State Underwater Archeologist for the THC;
Jean Hughes, Records Conservator at TARL; Kevin Ladd, Director of the
Wallisville Heritage Park; C. R. Ebersole and Sheldon Kindall, promoters of the
Galveston Bay Survey; and William Louis Fullen, the Principal Investigator of
cultural resources surveys on Smith Point and Frankland Point. Local informants
interviewed include several members of the Chambers County Historical
Commission: Bob Wheat (President); Jean Epperson, Ben Nelson. Residents of
Smith Point contacted include Ann Abshier, and Joe Whitehead.
Field Methods
The field survey was conducted by the Project Archaeologist during the
months of May and June 2006. Mr. Baxter visited 15 source points and
excavated a minimum of one shovel test at each point. All excavated earth was
passed through ¼ inch hardware cloth, and notes documenting the tests were
kept on a shovel test log (Appendix I). Figure 6 depicts the approximate location
of each test. The survey was documented through field notes and photos taken
with a digital camera. Locational data was obtained using a hand-held GPS.

16

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The archaeological survey of a portion of the Smith Point 3-D seismic
survey area was negative in terms of locating prehistoric and historic sites that
will be affected by the drillers. Although some source points were located in
areas that seemed to be likely settings for archaeological sites, not one site was
found. Based on past work at Smith Point, the majority of prehistoric sites are
located along the shore, and many have been significantly affected by erosion
and wave action. Historic sites can be found inland as well as near the shore.
Prehistoric sites in this area were often occupied seasonally when oyster shells
were available.
The areas most likely to contain significant prehistoric sites are the
shorelines along the mainland where Indians gathered to collect and eat Rangia
shell and the inland bays where they consumed the brackish water clams. As
they discarded the used shells, large middens accumulated. This was a
seasonal practice, and they camped on or near the shell heaps until they moved
to other areas. Evidence for campsites consists of pottery, animal bone, flakes,
and flint tools such as arrow points. Since the prehistoric Indians probably
traversed the entire area now known as Smith Point, any elevated landform
above water is likely to contain evidence of their presence.
The designation of the above-mentioned areas as likely settings for
archaeological sites is based on past surveys in similar terrain in Chambers
County and vicinity. The shoreline along Smith Point, for example, contains
several large shell middens recorded during the Galveston Bay Survey by HAS
member C. R. Ebersole and others. Since the entire shoreline was not examined
through shovel testing, it is possible that sites were missed. Shell middens along
the coastal shorelines of Texas and other states bordering the Gulf of Mexico are
a common occurrence. A recent survey by archaeologists from Prewitt and
Associates (Gadus and Moss 2001), for example, documented shell middens
along the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway from High Island to the Brazos River
Diversion Channel in Brazoria, Chambers, and Galveston counties. Although no
prehistoric sites are recorded on the inland portion of Smith Point, the possibility
of their presence cannot be discounted since professional archaeologists have
not systematically examined this area. A review of the site records at TARL
revealed the presence of archaeological sites along the margins of inland lakes
in Chambers County just to the east of the project area.

17

Historic accounts of Indian activity in the area suggest that the area was
intensively utilized during different seasons of the year. Explorers such as
Cabeza de Vaca observed the local Indians moving about the area where they
subsisted on various foods and animals that were available at that time. He
noted that in the winter they inhabited an island (possibly Galveston Island)
where they ate roots and fish and slept on mats on shells with a few skins for
cover. In the spring they returned to the mainland or seashore where they
collected berries and oysters. In the summer they moved back to the island
where they ate wild potatoes along with a few buffalo and deer (Gilmore
1974:Table 1). Although there is no large island in the project area that
approaches the size of Galveston Island, the practice of moving based on
seasonal availability of certain resources must be considered for the Smith Point
area as well. Certainly, the Indians who lived in the Smith Point area had
seasonal and/or permanent camps throughout the project area.
Joe Whitehead is a resident of Smith Point who has identified most of the
prehistoric sites in the area. He believes that most of the large campsites on the
point have been largely destroyed due to erosion and construction. His
grandfather’s house once was located on top of a midden that was virtually
destroyed by the storm of 1875. Very little remains of that site today. Although
artifacts are still found in some of the shell middens, these once extensive sites
have all but disappeared into the waters of the surrounding bays. He states that
very little of the known sites extend very far inland (personal communication from
Joe Whitehead to William E. Moore on March 7, 2006).

18

RECOMMENDATIONS
The project has been completed, and no evidence of an archaeological
site was found at any of the 15 source points. Therefore, no recommendations
are necessary.

19

REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. Richard
1967 Three Prehistoric Sites Near Cedar Bayou, Galveston Bay Area.
Archeology Program Number 8. State Building Commission, Austin.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast, New World Archeological
Record. Academic Press, New York.
Crout, Jack D.
1976 Soil Survey of Chambers County, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in
Cooperation with Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Epperson, Jean L.
1995 Historical Vignettes of Galveston Bay. Published by Dogwood
Press, Woodville.
Fullen, William Louis
1987 Cultural Resource Reconnaissance of the Marina Del Oro Property,
Chambers County, Texas. Unnumbered report prepared by Texas
Heritage Services.
Fullen, William Louis, Jean L. Epperson, and Kevin Ladd
1992 Cultural Resources Reconnaissance of the John M. Smith
Homesite at Smith Point, Chambers County, Texas. Unnumbered
report prepared by Texas Heritage Services, Deer Park, Texas.
Gadus, E. Frances, and Sue Winton Moss
2001 Cultural Resources Survey of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway from
High Island to the Brazos River Diversion Channel, Brazos,
Chambers, and Galveston Counties, Texas. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Reports of Investigations, Number 130.
Gilmore, Kathleen
1974 Cultural Variation on the Texas Coast: Analysis of an Aboriginal
Shell Midden, Wallisville, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report Number 44. The University of Texas at Austin.
Hudson, Jack C.
1979 Appendix M – History and Archeology. In Proposed Multipurpose
Deepwater Port and Crude Oil Distribution System, Galveston,
Texas. Prepared by Cultural Resource Services, Inc. for the Board
of Trustees, Galveston Wharves Northville Industries Corporation.

20

Moore, William E.
2006 Low Impact Methodology and Cultural Resources Avoidance Plan
for the Smith Point 3-D Seismic Project in Chambers County,
Texas. Brazos Valley Research Associates, Contract Report
Number 161 and Avoidance Plan Number 2.
Shafer, Harry J.
1966 An Archeological Survey of Wallisville Reservoir, Chambers
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project Survey Report
Number 2. The University of Texas at Austin.

21

APPENDIX I
DESCRIPTION OF SEISMIC OPERATIONS, TRANSITION ZONE,
METHODOLOGY, SEQUENCE OF WORK, AND EQUIPMENT

DESCRIPTION OF SEISMIC OPERATIONS
Transition Zone
Methodology, Sequence of Work, and Equipment

The general technique of this type of geophysical exploration is referred to as the seismic
reflection method. This method utilizes an energy source, which sends acoustic energy
into the earth. This energy is reflected from subsurface layers and recorded at the surface
with an instrument used to transform seismic energy into electrical impulses (geophones;
aka receivers). A “source” line is a series of shot-hole (or shot point) locations positioned
in a directional line. A “receiver” line is a series of geophone locations positioned in a
directional line. The source lines combined with the receiver lines compose a grid upon
the earth’s surface. Computers process the collected data to create an image of the
subsurface geology.

The shot-hole method generates seismic waves created by the

detonation of explosive charges placed 60-100 feet below the surface. The seismic waves
are recorded by geophones placed at the surface, which transfer the data electronically via
cable or a wireless method to a recording instrument which stores the data to media. The
data is then processed for interpretation.

There are five phases of field operations associated with a geophysical 3-D seismic
survey located within a coastal zone (transition zone) environment:

Phase 1: Planning and Permitting
Phase 2: Surveying
Phase 3: Drilling
Phase 4: Recording
Phase 5: Clean-up and Reclamation

An explanation of the activities associated with each of the above phases follows.

1

Phase 1: Planning and Permitting
The initial phase includes typical planning tasks associated with developing the program
such as Title research, Ownership verification, Acquiring oil & gas leases, Lease options,
Regulatory permits and Permitted access for geophysical operations on surface and
mineral estates within the 3D seismic project. These tasks are usually underway
anywhere from four to eighteen months prior to the actual surveying phase. The timeline
is dependent on the size and/or complexity of the project. The planning and permitting
phase is essential to the success of the project, public relations are established and the
project completion date is created due to the negotiated lease, option and permit
expiration dates.

Phase 2: Surveying
Prior to actual survey production Hazard/Access survey crews will traverse the area
locating, surveying and mapping the culture (pipelines, houses, oil/gas wells, water wells,
bird rookeries, nesting areas, archeological sites, etc.) and access routes within the project
area. These crews will also contact the area utility and pipeline companies to ensure that
all buried utilities have been identified and located prior to any ongoing operations. Once
an adequate portion of the area is mapped, several survey crews will begin the
“production” surveying. The crews will navigate to and mark the proposed shot-point and
receiver sites with a GPS survey system capable of sub-meter accuracies (in some cases
sub-centimeter systems are used). GPS is the method of choice due to the availability of
open sky in coastal areas, which enables the system to receive the necessary satellite data.
Source and receiver lines are placed in a grid pattern throughout the entirety of the
project area except in cases where shot-points are offset away from sensitive areas. Shotpoint locations are placed at safe/required distances from any identified culture.
Surveyors place cane poles, wooden lathe, PVC pipe or buoys, (as markers) at each shotpoint and receiver location. Survey crews use airboats to access marsh areas and operate
from small skiffs in large bodies of open water. During all phases, airboat travel is
restricted to open water and the source/receiver lines only. In marsh areas airboats are
required to offset their path of travel along the source/receiver lines in order to minimize
impacts to vegetation and substrate in the area.

2

Phase 3: Drilling
Drill crews follow the designated access routes established by the survey crews to access
the shot-holes. Shot-Hole locations, hazards, access routes and culture are identified on
maps generated by the survey crew and distributed to each drill crew. An individual drill
crew consists of two to four men, depending on the type of equipment being used. Shotholes are generally drilled to depths of 60-100 feet, and loaded with 5-10 pound
explosive charges. The diameter of the drilled hole is three to four inches in size. Since
the drilled holes are located in a wet environment that exposes the holes to moving water,
the hole will only be open until the drill pipe is removed. The holes collapse and fill in on
their own; therefore, no plugging is required. The small amount of material displaced
from the drilling of the hole dissipates over the surrounding marsh in vegetated areas and
causes only slight increases in turbidity for short periods of time in open water areas.

Only experienced and certified individuals handle the explosives, and all charge loading
activities are performed under the supervision of an experienced field supervisor. The
refueling of equipment is conducted over an approved absorbent material. This material
is packed out with other equipment and refuse.

Several types of equipment may be used for drilling within the transition zone (coastal)
areas due to the variability of water depths and terrain. All utilize water to circulate the
displaced material and hollow, thin walled drill casing.

Airboat Drill

Airboat drills can be used in vegetated marsh or in open water up to 10-12 feet in depth.
This vessel can move between source points in marsh areas under proper operating
procedures with little damage to the vegetation and substrate. Each airboat drill is
accompanied by a support airboat, which provides access to and from the field for crews
and equipment. The support boats are also used to set up centrifugal pumps (three to five
horsepower) to pump water to the airboat drills via hoses in areas where standing water is
not available due to low tides and small hand dug water pits are not allowed. Sections of
100-foot lengths of fire hose are connected together to cover the necessary distances.

3

Airboat drill and a support airboat drilling in open waters

Airboat drill and a support airboat drilling in marsh

4

Pontoon-Mounted Drill

The Pontoon drill is capable of drilling to depths of greater than 100 feet. It is used in
open water areas that are too deep or too rough for the airboat drill. Like the airboat drills
in open water, the pontoon drills lower two spuds into the substrate in order to hold the
drilling rig in place. The pontoon drills have longer spuds than the airboat drills, which
provide more stability in rough water. A support boat also accompanies this drill. The
support boat generally is a flatboat with outboard engines that moves the pontoon rig
between shot-point locations. The support boat is also used to move equipment and
crews to and from the field.

Pontoon drill

Jack-up Drill
This drilling rig is capable of drilling to depths of greater than 100-feet. It is used in open
water that is greater than 10-15 feet in depth. The Jack-Up drill is a self-powered barge

5

with hydraulic spuds. The drill navigates to each shot-point location then lowers its
hydraulic spuds into the substrate in order to level and hold the drilling rig in place.

Jack-up drill drilling in open waters

Phase 4: Recording
Recording crews follow the designated access routes established by the survey crews to
access the receiver and source lines. Receiver points, shot-hole locations, hazards, access
routes, culture and operational restrictions/instructions are identified on maps generated
by the survey crew and distributed to the recording crew. Geophones and cables are laid
out along the receiver lines using airboats in marsh areas, and flatboats in open water. A
helicopter may be used to move equipment from staging areas to the various boats in the
field to minimize surface impacts and decrease the amount of time required for transport.
A shooter or multiple shooters each equipped with a backpack-mounted electronic
shooting system travel along the source lines in an airboat (in open water a skiff or flat
boat) and connects to each detonating cap wire lead that is attached to each explosive
charge. The charges are remotely detonated at each shot-point, one at a time and the
resulting energy wave is recorded by the recording instrument, which is mounted on a
6

jack up barge or vessel located near the active part of the 3D survey. All explosive
charges are discharged at safe distances (IAGC guidelines) from pipelines and other
applicable installations to avoid unnecessary risk of damage by concussion or otherwise.
Each shot is recorded into the active recording patch. On average the active patch or
spread consists of six to eight receiver lines. These have to be laid out and active for the
recording of each shot. As the project proceeds from one end of the seismic grid to the
other, geophones and cables that are placed on the receiver lines that are no longer active
(behind the shooting operations) will be picked up and moved to receiver lines ahead of
the shooting operations to enable the project to proceed. In essence, operations “roll”
from one side of the project to the other.

Flatboat laying out recording equipment
Phase 5: Clean up and Reclamation
This phase is initiated when Phase 4 begins, and continues through the completion of the
project.

When recording operations are completed, the geophones, cable, survey

markers, and all other equipment and materials are removed from the project area.

7

ACCESS EQUIPMENT
All access to the project areas is accomplished by boat or helicopter. Several types of
boats are used. Airboats are used to survey, support drilling crews, layout and pickup
equipment, and transport crews into the field. Outboard flatboats are used to supply
airboats with equipment and fuel, transport equipment and crews, and layout and pickup
equipment in open and rough waters. Skiffs are used to survey in open water, and
support crews in the field with equipment and supplies.

Airboat drill, support airboat, and support skiff

Helicopters are utilized by some companies to move equipment (through the use of a
long line cable) from the staging area to crews in the field to minimize surface impacts
and increase crew production.

8

Helicopter picking up equipment from a flatboat

9

