AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED SAM
HOUSTON STATE UNIVERSITY CAMP PROJECT
IN WALKER COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 3340

by
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 132

2004

AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED SAM HOUSTON STATE
UNIVERSITY CAMP PROJECT IN WALKER COUNTY, TEXAS

Author and Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

BVRA Project 04-06

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Sam Houston State University
1808 Avenue I
Wilson Building 219
Huntsville, Texas 77341

ABSTRACT
In February and March of 2004, Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA)
conducted a Phase I archaeological survey of 345.58 acres owned by Sam Houston State
University (SHSU) in north Walker County, Texas under Antiquities Permit 3340. William
E. Moore was the Principal Investigator, and James E. Warren and Edward P. Baxter
assisted him. The project area is in an upland setting overlooking Harmon Creek at its
confluence with the Trinity River.
Prehistoric site 41WA2 was recorded in 1965 and is located within the project area.
This State Archeological Landmar was visited, and a large portion of this site was
determined to be severely disturbed through rock quarrying activities. Shovel testing in
undisturbed areas of 41WA2 confirmed the presence of this site and extended its eastern
and western boundaries. In addition, nine previously unrecorded prehistoric sites
(41WA273 - 41WA281) were documented. Site 41WA278 is located to the east of 41WA2
and is on the same landform. Although separated from 41WA2 by a gully, it is possible
that this site is an extension of 41WA2 or was occupied at the same time. Both sites date
to the Late Prehistoric Period based on the presence of ceramics observed by previous
researchers at 41WA2 and collected during this survey at 41WA278.
The majority of the newly recorded sites are small and may represent hunting
camps or short term activity areas where the reworking of tools was a major lithic activity.
At seven of these sites no diagnostic artifacts were collected, and no features were
observed at any of the sites in the project area including 41WA2. One site (41WA275),
however, appears to be significant and is recommended for avoidance. It dates to the
Archaic period of Texas prehistory based on the presence of a Yarbrough dart point, a
Waco sinker, and an apparent absence of ceramics. Since Archaic sites in this part of
Southeast Texas are not well documented, it is recommended that this site be tested for
significance if avoidance is not possible.
Historic artifacts consisting of undecorated crockery fragments, nails, and bottle
glass were found at sites 41WA274 and 41WA275. No evidence of a structure was found
through archival research or during the field survey. These components are not viewed by
BVRA as significant.
The ten archaeological sites located within the boundaries of the project area
confirm the hypothesis that upland margins along major streams in Southeast Texas are
high probability areas for the presence of prehistoric sites.

ii

All artifacts recovered during shovel testing were collected. Following analysis, only
those considered to be diagnostic were retained for curation per an agreement with the
Texas Historical Commission (THC), Archeology Division. The artifacts have been placed
in permanent curation at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) on the
campus of The University of Texas at Austin.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The following individuals are thanked for their participation in this project. At SHSU,
assistance was provided by Karen Murff, Director of Internal Audit; Rodney Conwell,
Facility Project Coordinator; and Keith Jenkins, Assistant Dean of Student Services and
Director of Recreational Sports. Two field crews were utilized. The initial crew consisted of
James E. Warren, Arthur Romine, Kent Romine, Bobby Jemison, Charles Stricklen, and
Manuel Alvarado. Later, Edward P. Baxter finished the project. The file search was
performed by Allegra Azulay (Records File Search Assistant at TARL) and Jean L. Hughes
(Assistant Curator of Records at TARL). Lili G. Lyddon and Edward P. Baxter prepared the
figures that appear in this report. William A. Martin of the THC served as the Project
Reviewer. The lithic assemblage was analyzed by William A. Dickens, and Charles L.
Boyd examined the Waco sinker. The artifacts were prepared for curation at TARL by
Jean L. Hughes. Harry J. Shafer and Wayne Klement provided information regarding
previous work at site 41WA2. Jim Wieferman at the Perry Castañeda Library on the
campus of The University of Texas at Austin is thanked for providing information regarding
an earlier version of the Riverside topographic map. Rodney Conwell personally visited the
Walker County Appraisal District office and searched the tax records with Raymond Kizer,
an employee of that agency, for evidence of a homestead in the project area. James
Patton (County Clerk) and Melba High (Deputy Registrar) checked the deed records for
previous owners and filing of a homestead in the project area.

iv

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .............................................iv
INTRODUCTION ...................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING .........................................4
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ........................................8
METHODS ......................................................12
DISCUSSION OF AREAS SURVEYED ..................................14
SITE 41WA2 .....................................................35
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS ......................................38
RECOMMENDATIONS .............................................40
REFERENCES CITED ..............................................41

Appendices
Appendix I: Trip Report for 41WA2
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log
Appendix III: Lithic Analysis
Appendix IV: Areas Surveyed and Site Locations
v

Figures
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure
Figure

1. General Location Map............................................................................... 2
2. Project Area Depicted on Topographic Map Riverside ................................... 3
3. Area A...................................................................................................15
4. Area B...................................................................................................16
5. Area C...................................................................................................18
6. Area D...................................................................................................19
7. Yarbrough point (a), distal tip (b), and Waco Sinker (c) ...............................22
8. Area E ...................................................................................................22
9. Area F ...................................................................................................23
10. Area G.................................................................................................24
11. Area H.................................................................................................25
12. Area I..................................................................................................26
13. Area J..................................................................................................27
14. Area K .................................................................................................28
15. Area L .................................................................................................29
16. Area M ................................................................................................30
17. Hammerstone from Area M ....................................................................31
18. Area N.................................................................................................32
19. Area U.................................................................................................34
20. Disturbance at 41WA2 ...........................................................................36
21. Disturbance at 41WA2 ...........................................................................37

vi

INTRODUCTION
SHSU plans to develop a 345.58 acre tract of land overlooking Harmon Creek and
the Trinity River in the northern area of Walker County, Texas (Figure 1). The area is
proposed for development as a park, and selective timber cutting is anticipated. The camp
will contain various activity areas such as baseball fields, basketball courts, soccer fields,
tennis courts, cabins, trails, picnic tables, rest rooms, and a swimming pool. The project
area is covered by the 7.5' topographic map Riverside dated 1961 and photorevised 1972
(Figure 2).
The area examined used to belong to the Texas Department of Corrections and
was part of the Ellis Unit, and ownership was transferred to Sam Houston State University
in 2002. It is bounded on the north and east by Harmon Creek and the Trinity River (now
part of Lake Livingston). On the south is State Highway 19, and on the west is State
Highway 980. The area had been used for recreational purposes by the prison system. A
pavilion and 23 cabins were constructed in 1978, and a boat ramp provided access to the
lake. A portion of the area contains natural sandstone rock and gravels which were
quarried in the 1970s and perhaps in the 1980s when this activity was suspended.
Archaeological site 41WA2 is a State Archeological Landmark and is present in the
project area. The aerial photograph in the soil survey (McClintock et al. 1979:Sheet 12)
shows the location of this site to be in a very disturbed setting. In this photograph the area
is cleared and contains several roads. It has been described by other researchers as a
"rather significant Caddoan site because of the quantity of artifacts that have been
collected from it" (see Appendix I). The presence of this site and landforms that appear to
be likely settings for other sites prompted the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical
Commission to require an archaeological survey by a professional archaeologist prior to
any land alteration activities. The University retained BVRA to conduct a Phase I
archaeological survey of the project area to assess the current condition of 41WA2 and
identify other archaeological sites that may be present. This project was carried out under
Antiquities Permit 3340. The BVRA project number is 04-06.

1

Figure 1. General Location Map

2

Figure 2. Project Area Depicted on Topographic Map Riverside
3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
General
Walker County is located within the Austroriparian biotic province as defined by Blair
(1950) and includes the Gulf coastal plain from the Atlantic Ocean to eastern Texas. The
western boundary of this province in Texas is approximated by a line running north from
western Harris County to western Red River County. The western boundary of the
Austroriparian is also the western boundary of the main body of the pine and hardwood
forests of the eastern Gulf coastal plain (Blair 1950:99). According to Thornthwaite (1948),
these forests are limited on the west by available moisture.
Flora
The Project Area is located within the loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, and upland
hardwood plant community as defined by the United States Forest Service for the four
National Forests in East Texas. According to Ippolito (1983:6-7), the major forest cover
types in this community include loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, slash pine, post oak, southern
red oak, white oak, black oak, blackjack oak, black gum, sweet gum, American elm, red
maple, hickories, and beech. Approximately 70 percent of East Texas is currently
occupied by the Piney Woods with Post Oak Savannah and Blackland Prairie in the rest of
the region (Boyd and Howard 1988:4). Keller (1974:139-156) believes that deciduous
trees may have been more numerous during most of the Holocene and were probably
more important resources to prehistoric populations than the modern flora would suggest.
Fauna
The vertebrate fauna of the Austroriparian is considered typical of that to the east.
Blair (1950:99) states that at least 47 species of mammals occur or have occurred there in
recent times. Known types include at least 29 species of snakes, 10 lizards, 2 land turtles,
17 anurans, and 18 urodeles. Ippolito (1983:11) states that there is an inadequate sample
of faunal material for the area in an archaeological context. Therefore, assumptions
concerning prehistoric exploitation of animals must be based on historical accounts and
current populations.
A study by Keller (1974:78-81) of the paleoecology of the middle Neches region lists
those mammals most likely to have been hunted in the area. They are Whitetail deer,
Cottontail rabbit, Swamp rabbit, Grey squirrel, Fox squirrel, Flying squirrel, Raccoon,
Opossum, Red fox, Grey fox, Woodchuck, Bobcat, Spotted skunk, Striped skunk, Mink,
Otter, Long-tailed weasel, and Muskrat. According to Ippolito (1983:11), this list excludes
many species of birds, especially migratory fowl, and fish that can still be found in the area.
4

Species not found in the area today include Black bear, beaver, and wild turkey.
These were once numerous but were eradicated by uncontrolled hunting and timber
harvesting that irreparably altered their habitats.
Climate
The following climatic data were taken from McClintock et al. (1979). The weather
in Walker County consists of hot summers and cool winters. An occasional cold front may
cause temperatures to drop below freezing, sometimes quite suddenly. The average
winter temperature is 51 degrees Fahrenheit with an average daily minimum of 41
degrees. In summer, the average is 82 degrees with an average daily maximum of 94
degrees. The growing season has 234 days above freezing each year. Prevailing winds
are from the south-southeast. Rainfall is uniformly distributed throughout the year and
snowfall is rare.
Soils
According to the Soil Survey of Walker County (McClintock et al. 1979:Sheet 12),
the Project Area is located within eleven soil types. They are the Annona association,
gently undulating (2); Annona association, gently rolling (3); Depcor-Huntsburg association,
gently undulating (9); Elmina association, gently undulating (11); Falba fine sandy loam
(13); Falba complex, 5 to 8 percent slopes (14); Kaufman-Gowker complex, frequently
flooded (29); Kitteril-Rock outcrop complex, 1 to 10 percent slopes (31); Leson clay, 0 to 3
percent slopes (33); Pits (38); and Redco clay, 0 to 2 percent slopes (39).
Annona association soils (2) are described by McClintock et al. (1979:7) as soils on
convex uplands in broad areas on interstream divides. Slopes are 1 to 5 percent, and
areas are irregular to oval and vary from 10 to 500 acres. Typically, the surface layer is a
friable, slightly acid, brown fine sandy loam about 4 inches thick. From 4 to 10 inches, is a
very firm, strongly acid, red clay mottled with strong brown. These soils are poorly drained
and have a high available water capacity. Permeability and runoff are slow.
Annona association soils (3) are described by McClintock et al. (1979:7-8) as deep
soils on the lower parts of slopes on uplands. Slopes are 5 to 10 percent and are slightly
convex. Areas are long and range from 20 to 125 acres. This unit is about 85 percent
Annona soils and 15 percent other soils. Typically, the Annona soils have a surface layer
of friable, slightly acid, grayish-brown fine sandy loam about 7 inches thick. From 7 to 12
inches, very firm, strongly acid, red clay is present. From 12 to 17 inches, a firm, very
strongly acid, mottled red, strong brown, and light gray clay is present. From 17 to 39
inches, a very firm, very strongly acid, light gray clay mottled with red is present.
5

These soils are somewhat poorly drained and have a high available water capacity.
Permeability is very slow, and runoff is slow. Included in this mapping area are small
areas of Ferris clay. These soils make up about 15 percent of any one mapped area.
Wetness and the very slow permeability restrict recreational use.
Depcor-Huntsburg soils (9) are described by McClintock et al. (1979:9-10) as soils
in the uplands on interstream divides. This unit is about 54 percent Depcor soils, 31
percent Huntsburg soils, and 15 percent other soils. Depcor soils consist of loamy fine
sand overlying a sandy clay loam between 44 and 65 inches, while Huntsburg soils consist
of a loamy fine sand overlying a reddish-yellow clay from 22 to 32 inches.
Elmina association, gently undulating soils (11) are described by McClintock et al.
(1979:11) as deep soils on upland interstream divides. The surface layer is a very friable,
strongly acid, light brownish-gray loamy fine sand about 4 inches thick overlying a loamy
fine sand to 32 inches. From 32 to 40 inches is very firm, very strongly acid, grayish-brown
clay mottled with red and yellowish-brown. It is somewhat poorly drained and has a low
available water capacity. Permeability and runoff are very slow.
Falba fine sandy loam, 1 to 5 percent slopes (13) is described by McClintock et al.
(1979:11) as a moderately deep soil on convex uplands. The surface layer is a very
friable, strongly acid, brown fine sandy loam about 5 inches thick. Between 7 and 24
inches is a very firm, very strongly acid, grayish-brown clay. The underlying material to a
depth of 55 inches is very pale brown tuffaceous fine sandstone.
Falba complex, 5 to 8 percent slopes (14) is described by McClintock et al.
(1979:11-12) as a soil found on side slopes of uplands. This unit is about 70 percent Falba
and similar soils and about 30 percent other soils. The typical surface layer consists of a
friable, very strongly acid, grayish-brown fine sandy loam about 8 inches thick. From 8 to
30 inches is a very firm, strongly acid, grayish-brown clay. This soil is somewhat poorly
drained. Surface runoff is medium, and permeability is very slow. Available water capacity
is low. Similar soils are 12 to 17 inches deep over sandstone or have sandy clay loam
subsoil.
Kaufman-Gowker complex, frequently flooded (29) soils are described by
McClintock et al. (1979:17) as deep soils on flood plains that are inundated about twice a
year for periods of 2 to 7 days. Kaufman soils occupy backwater areas and have a surface
layer of very firm, slightly acid, black clay about 30 inches thick. Gowker soils are adjacent
to stream channels and have a surface layer of a firm, slightly acid, very dark gray clay
loam about 9 inches thick. From 30 to 34 inches is a very firm, slightly acid, dark gray clay
mottled with brown.
6

Kitteril-Rock outcrop complex, 1 to 10 percent slopes (31) is described by
McClintock et al. (1979:17-18) as located on uplands. It is about 34 percent Kitteril soil, 34
percent rock outcrop, and 32 percent other soils. The Kitteril soil is a friable, slightly acid,
grayish-brown fine sandy loam about 6 inches thick. The underlying material is gray,
tuffaceous sandstone. The Rock outcrop is gray, tuffaceous sandstone.
Leson clay, 0 to 3 percent slopes (33) is described by McClintock et al. (1979:18) as
a deep soil on uplands. The surface layer is firm, neutral, black clay about 21 inches thick.
Pits (38) are described by McClintock et al. (1979:20) as being found on uplands. It
consists of excavation sites 3 to 75 feet deep, and areas range from 3 to 70 acres.
Material excavated from these pits is used for base material for roads, driveway topping,
and fill in major building construction. Some of the larger pits hold water and have high
potential for recreation use.
Redco clay, 0 to 2 percent slopes (39) is described by McClintock et al. (1979:20)
as a deep soil on uplands. The surface layer is firm, slightly acid, very dark grayish-brown
clay about 7 inches thick. This soil is poorly drained and has a high available water
capacity. Permeability and runoff are very slow.
Three of the above soil types are only marginally represented in the project area as
depicted on the topographic map by the client. These are Kaufman-Gowker complex,
frequently flooded (29); Kitteril-Rock outcrop complex, 1 to 10 percent slopes (31); and
Redco clay, 0 to 2 percent slopes (39).

7

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
General
Although several significant studies involving prehistoric and historic sites have
been conducted in Walker County, many investigations involved little or no subsurface
testing. In the 1970s, the largest number of sites recorded during one project was an
independent study by Bill Moore (1976) in 1974 and 1975 that recorded 34 sites. These
sites were identified based on the artifacts observed on the surface and private collections;
not one site was tested. In 1983, a proposed lignite mine was examined by Espey, Huston
& Associates along Bedias and Nelson creeks. In all, 39 sites were identified; however, the
project was terminated, and no report was produced. Until recently, most of the
information for Walker County was based on projects in surrounding areas such as Lake
Livingston in Polk and San Jacinto counties (McClurkan 1968; Ensor and Carlson 1988),
Lake Conroe in Montgomery County (McNatt 1978; Shafer 1968; Shafer and Stearns
1975), and the Gibbons Creek Mine in Grimes County (Rogers 1993, 1994).
Work at Lake Conroe is especially relevant to the project area because a preceramic site (41MQ41) in the area was tested by archaeologists from Texas A&M
University (Shafer and Stearns 1975). At the time this site was investigated, it represented
the oldest cultural remains recovered from the Lake Conroe Area. The findings were
significant in that they confirm an earlier hypothesis that prehistoric sites having
considerable antiquity are present on older landforms in the area. Earlier work in the area
tended to sample sites on more recent landforms; therefore, the materials from these sites
are relatively late. Formal tools found include a San Patrice point and other stemmed
biface forms not present in the Late Lithic and subsequent periods. Shafer and Stearns
(1975:39) describe 41MQ41 as a "lightly occupied, probably intermittent campsite used
during the Early and Middle Lithic periods." This dates the site to sometime between 8000
B.C. and 1000 B.C. Another probable pre-ceramic site in the area is 41WA99. It was
discovered during a survey by Moore Archeological Consulting (Moore et al. 1999). Shovel
testing revealed a large dart point, flakes, and no ceramics on a sandy hill high above the
nearest creek.
Several overviews of the area provide valuable data for Walker County and vicinity.
Some of the major works are discussed below.
In 1978 a file and literature search was conducted by TARL in an effort to prepare
an overview of the cultural resources within the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston, Angelina,
and Sabine National Forests of Texas. Information in the TARL files was compiled by
8

Ross Fields and Rosario Casarez. This report (Fields 1979) provides a good synthesis of
central East Texas prehistory and 17 sites in Walker County were assessed. These sites
are 41WA47 and 41WA48, 41WA50 and 41WA51, 41WA54, 41WA57 and 41WA58,
41WA63 and 41WA64, 41WA68, 41WA81 through 41WA86, and 41WA88.
John Ippolito (1983), Forest Service Archeologist for the National Forest, Southern
Region, compiled an overview of cultural resources present in the National Forests of
Texas that includes 53,490 acres of the Sam Houston National Forest in Walker County.
This volume presents a short history of Texas forests and discusses such topics as
environment and ecosystems, culture history, past archaeological activities relevant to the
National Forests in Texas, and direction for future cultural resource investigations. A map
depicting areas surveyed within the forest and a list of compliance projects with acreage,
date conducted, and sites found are included.
More recently, five studies have been published which are worthy of mention.
These are Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document
compiled by the Department of Antiquities Protection (Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993);
Roger G. Moore's (1995) Ph.D. dissertation entitled The Mossy Grove Model of Long-Term
Forager-Collector Adaptations in Inland Southeast Texas; Volume 66 of the Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society which reviews the current state of Archeology in Texas and
contains a chapter devoted to Southeast Texas (Patterson 1995); an archaeological study
by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department at the Huntsville Fish Hatchery (Davis et al.
1994:20-33); and a data base by Moore Archeological Consulting (Moore and Moore
1995). The database was created from encoding site data for all known sites in Walker
County at the time of this project. This database was an attempt to define settlement rules
specific to Walker County through the application of an empirical analysis cross-tabulating
site data with environmental variables and was based, as stated above, on the
computerization of data from all of the existing TARL site records for the county. A total of
181 sites was used for this study; however the analyses utilized only those sites with
prehistoric components since the sample size for historic sites is inadequate and the
settlement criteria for historic sites location are much different and currently more
ambiguous than for prehistoric sites.
This study revealed that prehistoric sites seem to be found throughout the county
where suitable landforms (sandy ridges and knolls) exist in close proximity to dependable
water sources. The only large concentrations of prehistoric sites are the result of large
area surveys. Single sites along major drainages should not be interpreted as sparse use
of an area; rather, these sites were probably recorded by individuals with restricted access
to larger areas.
Project Area
In the 1960s, archaeologists from the Texas Archeological Salvage Project (TASP)
9

conducted an archaeological survey of the area to be inundated by waters from the
proposed Lake Livingston Reservoir in Polk, San Jacinto, Trinity, and Walker counties.
They were assisted by members of the Houston Archeological Society (HAS) who
examined the Walker County portion. They recorded the first seven sites (41WA1 41WA7) in Walker County, including 41WA2 within the current project area.
Since no site form for 41WA2 exists from the original survey, it is not known what
level of work was performed by the HAS field survey crew. A black-and-white print of
artifacts from this site is on file at TARL. This plate (taken in 1965 by Harry J. Shafer)
shows contracting stem dart points and bifacial tools made from silicified wood and
probably local quartzite and chert. The owner of these artifacts is not stated, and Shafer
does not recall the events surrounding his participation at this site.
In 1984, archaeologists Wayne Klement and Gail L. Bailey, representing the Texas
Historical Commission, visited 41WA2 located on Texas Department of Corrections
property. According to the site form completed by Klement, this site was brought to the
attention of the archaeological community by a local informant (Thomas Anders) who
reported vandalism on state property. The recorders conducted an "informal walk" of the
site to examine the extent of disturbance. They dug no shovel tests, took no notes, and did
not collect any artifacts. Artifacts observed included bone, flakes, freshwater mussel
fragments, and a few prehistoric ceramics in the backdirt of potholes. The depth of the site
was estimated at one meter based on numerous potholes present. The recorders
composed an "Idealized Sketch" off site that depicts the relative position and number of
potholes present. They state that the site location is only an estimate taken from the
topographic map. In addition to a field inspection of the site, private artifact collections
were examined and photographed. According to Lillie Thompson at the Texas Historical
Commission, these photographs are not present in the THC files. The only other
documentation of this visit is a "Trip Report" authored by Wayne Klement (Appendix I). In
a recent conversation with Wayne Klement, he stated that he did not remember much
about his brief visit to the site in 1984.
At the time of their visit, the area was covered with a pine forest along with mixed
hardwoods. Except for the areas disturbed by looters, surface visibility was poor due to a
heavy ground cover such as pine needles and leaves. They noted two forms of
disturbance caused by a quarry where rock was being mined as well as numerous
excavated areas they describe as potholes. Three screens were observed. According to
them, 41WA2 is a prehistoric site approximately 150 x 500 meters in size on a sandy ridge
overlooking Harmon Creek to the north.
They make three assumptions regarding 41WA2. First, they refer to it as dating to
the Late Prehistoric period. This is a correct statement due to the presence of ceramics.
Second, they say it may be a multi-component site because the deep potholes (1 meter)
"suggest it must have been occupied for quite some time and may have several cultural
10

levels." Third, the site appears to them to be a "rather significant Caddoan site because of
the quantity of artifacts that have been collected from it" as well as the fact that the deposits
appear to be quite deep.

Further research was recommended by Klement and Bailey in order to determine
whether or not it is a single component or multiple component site. In their opinion, this site
is eligible for the National Register of Historic Places and is worthy of designation as a
State Archeological Landmark. This site became a State Archeological Landmark on
January 21, 1985 even though no professional work had been conducted at 41WA2. In
addition, no regular nomination form was submitted for this site. The nominee was the
Texas Department of Corrections.

11

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, the Principal Investigator requested a check of the site
records at TARL on the campus of The University of Texas at Austin for the presence of
previously recorded sites within the project area. The only known site in the project area at
the time was 41WA2 that had been designated a State Archeological Landmark. Several
state agencies were contacted as part of the archival research for this project. According
to Jim Wieferman, Map Room Librarian at the Perry Castañeda Library on the campus of
The University of Texas at Austin (wieferman@mail.utexas.edu), only two editions of the
Riverside topographic quadrangle exist, and both were checked for the presence of historic
sites or houses. A conversation with an employee of the office of the United States
Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service in Temple, Texas
revealed that the 1979 soil survey for Walker County is the only version that has been
published. Also, there are no earlier aerial photographs on file at that agency. Since the
oldest aerial coverage of Walker County on file at the Texas Natural Resource Information
Service (TNRIS) is 1958, it was not necessary to visit this agency. The 1940 edition of the
Walker County General Highway Map was checked for previous structures in the project
area. According to the map librarian at the General Land Office (GLO) in Austin, their
maps do not depict the location of structures. In addition, deed records at the Walker
County Courthouse were reviewed for ownership of the land and presence of the filing of a
homestead. Tax records at the Walker County Appraisal District were checked for any
information that might signal a marked increase in property value such as a house.
The Principal Investigator communicated with Harry J. Shafer, photographer of the
41WA2 artifacts in 1965, regarding his knowledge of this site. He also asked Timothy K.
Perttula about the possibility of a significant Caddo site in this part of Texas. A call was
made to Wayne Klement, one of the site recorders in 1984, who remembers little about his
visit. Other archaeological reports for the area and the soil survey for Walker County were
examined.
Due to a thick ground cover over much of the project area, it was impossible to
locate the presence of prehistoric sites without shovel testing. All exposed areas, however,
were subjected to a 100% pedestrian survey. A review of the topographic map revealed
21 areas (A-U) that appeared to be good settings for prehistoric sites, and each of these
areas were visited by the field survey crew. Some areas were quickly eliminated because
of extensive disturbance due to past quarrying activities, and others were discounted after
shovel probes revealed the presence of a very shallow sandy mantle overlying clay or rock.
12

The rest of the sites were shovel tested. All shovel tests were 30 x 50 cm in size and
excavated to basal clay when possible. In areas of deep sand, most tests were terminated
between 80 and 100 cm. All excavated earth was passed through quarter-inch hardware
cloth. A shovel test log was kept in the field (Appendix II). In all, 190 tests were excavated.
Site boundaries were defined by excavating two negative shovel tests in each
cardinal direction. All artifacts recovered from shovel tests were collected for analysis
(Appendix III). A GPS reading was taken at the approximate center of each site. Site
maps were created with a compass and tape. These maps were drafted for inclusion in
this report. All artifacts recovered during shovel testing were collected and returned to the
laboratory for analysis. Following analysis, the artifacts were placed in temporary storage
at BVRA. Diagnostic artifacts will be placed in permanent curation at TARL. Certain
artifacts were selected for illustration in this report. The rest have been sketched, and
these drawings will be part of the records curated at TARL.
The location of site 41WA2 was evaluated by a 100% Pedestrian Survey and shovel
testing. It was immediately obvious that most of the site area had been thoroughly
disturbed through quarrying for large sandstone boulders embedded in the sandy matrix.
Therefore, most of the shovel tests were excavated at the eastern (Area U) and western
boundaries (Area M) of the site area where disturbance seemed to be less. The northern
and southern boundaries are well defined by the landform, and limited shovel testing in
these areas was conducted. The disturbance at this site was documented by digital
photography, an updated site map was drafted, and a site revisit form was completed.

13

DISCUSSION OF AREAS SURVEYED
Area A (41WA273)
This area is located in the southeast corner of the project area in an upland setting
above the Trinity River approximately .37 km to the east. The elevation of Area A varies
between 150 and 170 feet above mean sea level. The area has been greatly disturbed
through the construction of a pavilion and 23 brick cabins in the 1970s by prison labor.
These buildings served as a recreational area for employees of the Texas Department of
Corrections. The structures do not meet the age criterion for National Register of Historic
Places eligibility. Eleven shovel tests (1-11) were excavated in this area in an effort to
locate the presence of a buried prehistoric site. One flake of palm wood (not collected)
was found in an earlier probe, and two flakes were found in shovel tests 7 and 8 at 0-10
cm. This landform appears to be a good setting for a prehistoric site; however, the recent
disturbance associated with the existing structures and roads has negatively affected the
area to the point that intact deposits are not likely. Deep sandy soils were not
encountered. Of the 11 shovel tests, only 4 encountered clay deeper than 20 cm. Based
on the paucity of artifacts and absence of diagnostic artifacts, the age and function of this
site is not known. The presence of small thinning flakes and absence of large primary and
secondary flakes is an indication that the major lithic activity was the reworking of tools.
After delineation, site 41WA273 is believed to be approximately 30 meters east west by 15
meters north south (Figure 3).
Due to the shallow deposits, paucity of artifacts, and evidence of disturbance, this
site does not meet any of the five criteria that would make it eligible for designation as a
State Archeological Landmark.

14

Figure 3. Area A

15

Area B (no site)
This area is in the approximate center of the project area on a trail that is depicted
on the topographic map (Figure 4). Two shovel tests (12-13) were excavated to determine
the soil type present in this area. Firm red clay was found between 10 and 15 cm, and no
additional tests were dug. No site was found in this area, and no artifacts were recovered.

Figure 4. Area B

16

Area C (41WA274)
This area is on a sandy hill in the uplands overlooking the Trinity River .53 km to the
east at the 170 foot contour. This area is wooded and does not appear to have been
affected by artificial means except for the small trail at its southeastern boundary. Nineteen
shovel tests in the site area (14-26; 159-164) revealed a fine sandy loam over yellow clay
at depths between 60 and 80 cm.
Evidence of a prehistoric occupation was found between 10 cm and 90 cm in three
shovel tests (16, 18, and 161). In all, 19 tests were dug in the site area. The prehistoric
artifacts consist of 8 flakes. Based on the paucity of artifacts, the age and function of the
prehistoric component of this site is not known. The presence of small thinning flakes and
absence of large primary and secondary flakes is an indication that the major lithic activity
was the reworking of tools. After delineation, the site is believed to be approximately 50
meters east west by 100 meters north south (Figure 5).
Due to the paucity of artifacts, consisting solely of debitage, the prehistoric
component at this site does not meet any of the five criteria that would make it eligible for
designation as a State Archeological Landmark.
Historic artifacts were found between the surface and 20 cm in shovel tests 14 and
17-19 near an existing trail. Several undecorated ceramic fragments were observed in the
trail, but they were not collected. Artifacts found in the shovel tests include undecorated
whiteware fragments, bottle glass fragments (clear and brown), and nails (machined and
cut). Although these kinds of artifacts are known to have been manufactured sometime
between the late 19th century and early 20th century, there are no specimens in this
sample that are temporally diagnostic. Therefore, it is not possible to associate them with
a definite time period. A thorough surface inspection did not recover brick or window glass,
artifacts typically associated with a house or features such as a well or cistern; and, no
evidence of a structure or residence was found through archival research. Therefore, it is
likely that these artifacts were probably discarded as trash, perhaps as a single dumping
episode. The historic component at this site does not exhibit evidence of intact, time
specific artifacts and contains no features typically associated with a residence. Therefore,
it does not meet any of the five criteria that would make it eligible for designation as a State
Archeological Landmark.

17

Figure 5. Area C

18

Area D (41WA275)
This area is on a sandy hill in the uplands overlooking the Trinity River .4 km to the
east and an unnamed tributary .16 km to the north. This landform is located at an elevation
ranging from 160 to 166 feet above mean sea level. Twenty-one shovel tests (27-42; 172176) in the site area (Figure 6) revealed a fine sandy loam over firm clay at depths between
40 and 80 cm.
Evidence of a prehistoric occupation was found between the surface and 60 cm in
nine shovel tests (28, 32-33, 36-40, 42) over an area of 60 meters north south by 75
meters east west. The prehistoric artifacts consist of 80 flakes, 1 Waco sinker, 1
Yarbrough dart point, and 1 distal tip of a projectile point. After delineation, the site is
believed to be approximately 75 meters east west by 60 meters north south. Based on the
paucity of artifacts, the age and function of the prehistoric component of this site is not
known. The presence of small thinning flakes and absence of large primary and secondary
flakes is an indication that the major lithic activity was the reworking of tools.

Figure 6. Area D
19

The presence of a Yarbrough point (Figure 7a) and a Waco sinker (Figure 7c) and
the absence of ceramics suggest the prehistoric component is an Archaic site that was
occupied prior to the use of pottery. This is the first recovery of a Waco sinker in Walker
County by a professional archaeologist under controlled conditions. Pre-ceramic sites in
the immediate area are scarce, as only two have been reported. Sites 41MQ41 on Lake
Conroe in Montgomery County and 41WA99 in Walker County are the only two other
recorded examples (see Archaeological Background above). At 41WA99, a feature
(possible hearth) was discovered during shovel testing but not formally investigated. If
features associated with this site are present, and if the site proves to be a single
component Archaic occupation, this would be very significant.
The prehistoric component at this site has the potential to contribute to a better
understanding of the prehistory of Texas by the addition of new and important information.
Therefore, it is may be eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.
Historic artifacts were found in two shovel tests (33 and 38) where ceramic
fragments and green glass were recovered between 0 and 30 cm, and ceramic fragments
were found on the surface of the road that bisects the site. Although these kinds of
artifacts are known to have been manufactured sometime between the late 19th century
and early 20th century, there are no specimens in this sample that are temporally
diagnostic. Therefore, it is not possible to associate them with a definite time period. A
thorough surface inspection did not recover brick or window glass, artifacts typically
associated with a house or features such as a well or cistern; and, no evidence of a
structure or residence was found through archival research. Therefore, it is likely that
these artifacts were probably discarded as trash, perhaps as a single dumping episode.
The historic component at this site contains a paucity of artifacts and does not
exhibit evidence of intact, time specific artifacts and contains no features typically
associated with a residence. Therefore, it does not meet any of the five criteria that would
make it eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.

20

21

Figure 7. Yarbrough point (a), distal tip (b), and Waco Sinker (c)
Area E (41WA276)
This area is on the slope of a sandy hill in the uplands overlooking the Trinity River
.28 km to the east and an unnamed tributary .14 km to the north. In all, 10 shovel tests
were dug in this area. Two (43 and 166) were contained cultural materials; five flakes
between the surface and 40 cm. In general, the soils consist of fine sandy loam over red
clay at depths between depths of 40 and 50 cm. Based on the paucity of artifacts, the age
and function of this site is not known. The presence of small thinning flakes and absence
of large primary and secondary flakes is an indication that the major lithic activity was the
reworking of tools. After delineation, the site is believed to be approximately 30 meters
east west by 30 meters north south (Figure 8).
Due to the paucity of artifacts, consisting solely of debitage, the prehistoric
component at this site does not meet any of the five criteria that would make it eligible for
designation as a State Archeological Landmark.

Figure 8. Area E

22

Area F (41WA277)
This area is on an upland remnant overlooking the Trinity River 1.01 km to the east
and Harmon Creek .97 km to the north. Twelve shovel tests in the site area (46-53; 154158) revealed red and yellow clays between 20 and 30 cm. Evidence of prehistoric
occupation was found between the surface and 20 cm in four tests (46, 48-49, 52). The
prehistoric artifacts consist of 18 flakes. Much of the area has been destroyed through
road construction and quarrying activities. Based on the paucity of artifacts, the age and
function of this site is not known. The presence of small thinning flakes and absence of
large primary and secondary flakes is an indication that the major lithic activity was the
reworking of tools. After delineation, the site is believed to be approximately 90 meters
east west by 60 meters north south (Figure 9).
Due to the paucity of artifacts, consisting solely of debitage, and evidence of
disturbance nature of the area, this site does not meet any of the five criteria that would
make it eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.

Figure 9. Area F

23

Area G (no site)
This area is on an upland ridge overlooking Harmon Creek to the northwest. This
area appeared in the field to be a good location for a prehistoric site. Three shovel tests
(151-153) and several probes, however, revealed the presence of firm clay at or near the
surface, and no additional tests were dug. No site was found in this area, and no artifacts
were recovered. This area is depicted in Figure 10.

Figure 10. Area G

24

Area H (no site)
This area is on an upland ridge overlooking Harmon Creek to the west. Five shovel
tests (58-62) revealed firm clay between 10 and 40 cm, and no additional tests were dug.
No site was found in this area, and no artifacts were recovered. This area is depicted in
Figure 11.

Figure 11. Area H

25

Area I (no site)
This area is on an upland ridge overlooking Harmon Creek to the west. Ten shovel
tests (64-72) revealed firm clay between 10 and 40 cm, and no additional tests were dug.
No site was found in this area, and no artifacts were recovered. This area is depicted in
Figure 12.

Figure 12. Area I

26

Area J (41WA278)
This area is on an upland ridge overlooking Harmon Creek approximately 120
meters to the north. Eleven shovel tests in the site area (73-75, 124-131) revealed a sandy
loam over firm clay at depths between 10 and 90 cm. One test was dug to 100 cm without
reaching clay. Evidence of prehistoric occupation was found between 10 and 100 cm in
four tests (73, 75, 127, 129). The prehistoric artifacts consist of 12 flakes, 1 proximal biface
fragment, 1 tested cobble, and 1 ceramic sherd. The presence of a single ceramic sherd
dates this site to sometime during the Late Prehistoric period. Based on the paucity of
artifacts, the function of this site is not known. The presence of small thinning flakes and
absence of large primary and secondary flakes is an indication that the major lithic activity
was the reworking of tools. After delineation, the site is believed to be approximately 25
meters east west by 15 meters north south (Figure 13).
Due to the paucity of artifacts and evidence of disturbance, this site does not meet
any of the five criteria that would make it eligible for designation as a State Archeological
Landmark.

Figure 13. Area J

27

Area K (41WA279)
This area is on an upland ridge overlooking Harmon Creek .26 km to the northeast
and an unnamed tributary .08 km to the north. Eighteen shovel tests in the site area (7693) revealed firm clay between 20 and 70 cm. Cultural materials (10 flakes, 1 core, 1
possible core, and 1 tested cobble) were found in the sandy mantle between 30 and 60 cm
in four shovel tests (78, 85-87). Artifacts recovered consist primarily of small thinning
flakes and a few cores. Based on the paucity of artifacts, the function of this site is not
known. The presence of small thinning flakes and the absence of large primary and
secondary flakes is an indication that the major lithic activity was the reworking of tools.
After delineation, site 41wWA279 is believed to be approximately 40 meters east west by
20 meters north south (Figure 14).
Due to the paucity of artifacts, this site does not meet any of the five criteria that
would make it eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.

Figure 14. Area K

28

Area L (41WA280)
This area is on an upland ridge overlooking Harmon Creek .32 km to the north.
Thirty shovel tests in the site area (94-123) revealed cultural materials buried in a sandy
mantle between 20 and 100 cm. Cultural materials (23 flakes) were found in 9 tests (99,
103-104, 106, 109-111, 118-119). Artifacts recovered consist primarily of small thinning
flakes. Based on the paucity of artifacts, the function of this site is not known. The
presence of small thinning flakes and the absence of large primary and secondary flakes is
an indication that the major lithic activity was the reworking of tools. After delineation,
site41WA280 is believed to be approximately 85 meters east west by 60 meters north
south (Figure 15).
Due to the paucity of artifacts, this site does not meet any of the five criteria that
would make it eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.

Figure 15. Area L

29

Area M (41WA2)
This area is on an upland ridge overlooking Harmon Creek approximately 100
meters to the north and is immediately west of the limits of previously recorded site 41WA2
as depicted on the site maps at TARL. Eleven shovel tests (53-57; 132-137) in the site
area revealed cultural materials buried in a sandy mantle between 40 and 100 cm and they
extended the western boundary of this site by 94 meters (Figure 16). Artifacts were
recovered from five shovel tests (55, 57, 132-134) and consist of 11 flakes, 2 pieces of
mussel shell, and a ground abraded cobble or hammerstone (Figure 17). Based on the
presence of mussel shell, pottery, a hammerstone, flakes, and numerous formal tools
observed by a previous researcher site 41WA2 area is believed to have functioned as a
campsite sometime during the Late Prehistoric period.
Due to amount of disturbance in this area, this site does not meet any of the five
criteria that would make it eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.

Figure 16. Area M
30

Figure 17. Hammerstone from Area M

31

Area N (41WA281)
This area is on an upland ridge overlooking the Trinity River .3 km to the east.
Thirteen shovel tests in the site area (138-150) revealed cultural materials buried in a
sandy mantle between 20 and 60 cm. Cultural materials (1 split cobble, 1 proximal biface
fragment, and 6 flakes) were found in five tests (138-140, 144 and 146). Based on the
paucity of artifacts, the function of this site is not known. The presence of small thinning
flakes and absence of large primary and secondary flakes is an indication that the major
lithic activity was the reworking of tools. After delineation, site 41WA28 is believed to be
approximately 55 meters east west by 25 meters north south (Figure 18). This site is a
good example of a small activity area that was utilized away from a major campsite,
possibly 41WA2 or 41WA275.
Due to the paucity of artifacts, this site does not meet any of the five criteria that
would make it eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.

Figure 18. Area N

Area O (no site)
32

This area was designated as high probability based on the topographic map
plotting. A field inspection revealed that the entire area had been disturbed through
quarrying activities. If an archaeological site was present in the past all evidence has
disappeared.
Area P (no site)
This was designated as a high probability area based on the topopgraphic map
plotting. A field inspection revealed that the entire area contained bedrock and gravel at
the surface. Very little soil is present, and no shovel testing was necessary.
Area Q (no site)
This was designated a high probability area based on the topographic map plotting.
A field inspection revealed that this is a prominent ridge with gravel and clay very close to
the surface (less than 5 cm of soil development).
Area R (no site)
This was designated as a high probability area based on the topographic map
plotting. A field inspection revealed that the entire area contains clay at or near the
surface.
Area S (no site)
This was designated as a high probability area based on the topographic map
plotting. A field inspection revealed that the entire area contains clay at or near the surface
as well as some rock outcrops. This area also contained steep slopes. It is possible that a
lower terrace, now under water, may have been a suitable location for a site.
Area T (no site)
This area was selected for survey because of its placement along the Upland
Margin overlooking the Trinity River to the east. A 100% pedestrian survey accompanied
by shovel probes revealed a steep slope with firm clay at 20 cm. The upper reaches of the
slope were destroyed by the septic system for the 23 cabins in Area A.

33

Area U (41WA2)
This area is on an upland ridge overlooking Harmon Creek approximately 100
meters to the north and is immediately east of the limits of previously recorded site 41WA2
as depicted on the site maps at TARL. Fourteen shovel tests in the site area (177-190)
revealed cultural materials buried in a sandy mantle between 20 and 60 cm. Some of the
tests were terminated when sandstone rock was encountered. Artifacts consist of 2 flakes,
1 biface, and 1 core. After delineation, this area extends the eastern boundary of 41WA2
by 30 meters (Figure 19).
Due to amount of disturbance in this area, this site does not meet any of the five
criteria that would make it eligible for designation as a State Archeological Landmark.

Figure 19. Area U

34

SITE 41WA2
The location of site 41WA2, as plotted on the maps at TARL, is in a very disturbed
setting (figures 20 and 21). This area has been the locus of a quarry where sandstone was
crushed and used for roads and other forms of construction for the local prison. This area
was selected for quarrying because of the abundance of subsurface sandstone boulders
and natural outcrops. In fact, it is referred to in the Soil Survey of Walker County, Texas
(McClintock et al. 1979) as "Pits." This is not a soil type. Rather, it is used to identify an
area containing numerous pits due to quarrying. If it were described as a soil type it would
probably be labeled the Kitteril-Rock outcrop complex, 1 to 10 percent slopes, which is
located nearby.
According to Rodney Conwell (personal communication, February 4, 2004), the
area was cleared of all vegetation except live oaks in the 1980s when the quarry was in
operation. Today, it is mainly forested with small diameter trees that have grown since the
quarry was closed. Some of these trees were observed growing within pits caused by
quarrying. Large stands of palmetto have invaded the disturbed areas. In most areas it is
impossible to determine the original land surface. The three areas of "potholes" described
by Klement and Bailey in 1984 are believed to be the result of the quarrying, not artifact
collectors. The sketch map drawn (not on site) by Wayne Klement and Gail L. Bailey
depicts a pattern of holes uniform in size. This is not what was observed in the field, as the
sketch map presents a much different picture than what is actually present. It is important
to state here that the sketch map was not made on site, and the location of quarry and
"potted areas" are an estimate. There were numerous areas where sandy soil was visible
due to rodent burrows, ant mounds, or other forms of disturbance associated with the
quarrying. However, no cultural materials were observed on the surface in this area during
a 100% pedestrian survey of the site area by a team of four persons. Klement and Bailey
also refer to 41WA2 as a multi-component site that may represent a significant Caddo
occupation. There is no hard evidence for these statements. They, for example, do not
describe specific artifacts that can be identified as Caddo. No description is given for the
ceramic sherd they observed in a "pothole." No ceramics are mentioned in the two
photographs they took of two local collections. On the site form they only mention
projectile points made from local material.
This project recovered artifacts at the eastern and western edges of 41WA2 as
plotted on the TARL maps. These materials provide the first account of artifacts collected
by shovel testing at this site.

35

Figure 20. Disturbance at 41WA2

36

Figure 21. Disturbance at 41WA2

No evidence was found to support the designation of this site as a State
Archeological Landmark. No formal investigations were conducted at this site prior to its
nomination. No features were observed by the previous researchers or during this study.
Only one photograph of artifacts from the site area exists, and it depicts projectile points
along with unifacial and bifacial tools made from local materials. These artifact types are
very common throughout Walker County and are typical of the many Late Prehistoric sites
in this part of Texas.

37

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The Minimum Survey Standards published by the THC, Archeology Division,
discuss levels of work for project areas of 200 acres or less. Larger project areas must be
reviewed by the THC prior to initiating a field survey. For this project, a Research Design
was submitted with the permit application, which outlined the methods to be followed.
In addition to previously recorded site 41WA2, nine prehistoric sites (41WA273 41WA281) were found within the boundaries of the project area as currently proposed.
The site inventory consists of two probable campsites (41WA2 and 41WA275) and eight
sites described here as special activity areas or short term use areas where tool reworking
was the major activity. Previous work in this part of Southeast Texas (Moore 1996) has
proven that upland margins overlooking major streams are very high probability areas for
the presence of prehistoric sites. This study supports this hypothesis in that most of the
nine sites found during this study were along or near the upland margin overlooking
Harmon Creek or the Trinity River, two of the most important drainages in the county.
Lithic artifacts and debitage from these sites consist solely of local materials. The gravels
were probably obtained from lag deposits in nearby streams. Although this study has
identified a number of sites in an upland setting, the majority of these areas are not worthy
of additional investigation. Site 41WA2 may have contained research potential prior to
being virtually destroyed by quarrying activities. Although no features were observed at
site 41WA275, the presence of a dart point and a Waco sinker suggest this area may
represent a campsite. Since this area appears to have been occupied during the Archaic
period and few of these sites have been investigated in this part of Texas, it is the only
prehistoric site within the project area believed to possess research potential and be worthy
of additional investigation.
Two sites (41WA274 and 41WA275) contain historic components. The artifact
return from each site is sparse and consists of nails (machined and cut), bottle glass
(machine made), and undecorated crockery fragments at or near the surface. These
artifacts have long production ranges and are not particularly temporally sensitive. The
bottle glass came from machine-made vessels, suggesting these items were discarded
after 1920. The presence of two cut nails may suggest a pre-twentieth date for these
specimens, but this inference was not confirmed by any of the other artifacts recovered onsite and is suspect due to the small sample size. Artifacts typically associated with a house
such as bricks and window glass were not recovered, and no above-ground features such
as a well or cistern were observed during a thorough surface inspection of the area.
All available maps were checked for evidence of a house or other type of structure
in the area of these sites (see Methods above). Nothing indicating the presence of a
structure in the vicinity of the historic trash was found.
38

The earliest reference to the project area on file at the Walker County Courthouse
revealed that the 345.58 acre tract containing sites 41WA274 and 41WA275 was part of a
2510.45 acre tract of land owned by Johnnie May Smither, the widow of Gabe Smither, in
1912 (Volume 110, pages 225-234; Abstract 322), the widow of Gabe Smither. According
to local informants, Mr. Smither always lived in town and never developed this tract for a
residence. Smither sold that portion of his property containing the current project area to
Johnny W. Allen and his wife, Lue Eller Allen, on October 16, 1937 (Volume 165, page
138). The Allens were also absentee owners who lived in Hillsborough, Florida. They sold
the tract to Albert and Julia Cunningham of Walker County, Texas in December of 1958
(Volume 165, page 138; Abstract 38). The fact that the Cunninghams lived in Huntsville
suggests that they were non-resident owners and that the land had not been substantially
improved. This statement is supported by an absence of structures on the topographic
maps, no marked increase in taxes in the tax records at the Walker County Appraisal
District, and no record of anyone filing for a homestead at the Walker County Courthouse.
On November of 1959 ownership of the 345.58 acre tract was transferred by donation from
the Cunninghams to the Texas Department of Corrections. The only structures known to
have been constructed by the prison are the brick houses and pavilion built by prison labor
in the 1970s. These buildings were still standing during the current survey.
Based on this information, it is hypothesized that these materials may represent an
area where trash was intentionally discarded. Based on the paucity of historic artifacts at
these two components and the lack of intact deposits, these components do not appear to
meet any of the five criteria that would make them eligible for designation as a State
Archeological Landmark.
Appendix III presents a thorough discussion of the artifacts found during this survey,
and Appendix IV depicts the location of the 21 areas surveyed and sites identified.

39

RECOMMENDATIONS
Evidence of a State Archeological Landmark site (41WA2) in the area depicted on
the topographic map at TARL was found during this survey. The vast majority of the site
has been disturbed through rock quarrying activities that has destroyed its research
potential; therefore, no further work in this area is recommended.
Only one of the nine newly recorded prehistoric sites (41WA275) is believed to
contain research potential and be eligible for designation as a State Archeological
Landmark. It is recommended that the prehistoric component of this site be tested for
significance if avoidance is not possible during construction of the SHSU Camp.
Evidence of historic utilization of the project area was found at sites 41WA274 and
41WA275 in the form of crockery fragments, nails, and bottle glass on the surface and in
the upper layers of certain shovel tests. The historic components at these sites do not
meet any of the five criteria for eligibility as a State Archeological Landmark, and additional
work is not deemed necessary.

40

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W. Frank
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
11(1):93-116.

Boyd, Douglas K., and Margaret A. Howard
Archeological Testing at 41WA97, Sam Houston National Forest,
1988
Walker County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Technical
Reports, Number 3.
Davis, Michael W., Jan Guy, Marybeth S. F. Tomka, and Daniel J. Crouch
Archeological Investigations at Huntsville Fish Hatchery, Walker
1994
County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Cultural
Resources Program. Austin.
Ensor, H. Blaine, and David L. Carlson
The Crawford Site, 41PK69, Central Trinity River Uplands, Polk
1988
County, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division, Contract Reports in
Archeology Number 4.
Fields, Ross C.
1979

Ippolito, John E.
1983

Cultural Resources of the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston, Angelina,
and Sabine National Forests of Texas. Report submitted under
Contract No. 53-432P-8-00219 to the United States Department of
Agriculture, United States Forest Service, by the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

A Cultural Resource Overview of the National Forests in Texas.
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Lufkin,
Texas.

Keller, John Esten
1974
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of
East Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of
Texas at Austin.

41

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula (editors)
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
1993
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.
McClintock, William R., Jr., Joseph J. Castille, Michael Stewart, and L. E. Andrew
1979
Soil Survey of Walker County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and Forest Service in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
McClurkan, Burney B.
Livingston Reservoir, 1965-66: Late Archaic and Neo-American
1968
Occupations. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
Number 12.
McNatt, Logan D.
1978

Moore, Roger G.
1995

1996

Archeological Investigations at the Kaygal Recreation Area Site
(41WA82), Walker County, Texas. Texas A&M University,
Anthropology Laboratory, Report 44.

The Mossy Grove Model of Long-Term Forager-Collector
Adaptation in Inland Southeast Texas. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Rice University, Houston,
Texas.
An Empirical Analysis of Elements of Prehistoric Site Location and
Formation in Harris County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Reports of Investigations 149.

Moore, William E., and Roger G. Moore
An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Trinity River Authority
1995
Waterline Project, Walker County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 171.
Patterson, Leland W.
1995
The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:239-264.

42

Rogers, Robert
1993

1994

Shafer, Harry J.
1968

Data Recovery of Three Prehistoric Sites at the Gibbons Creek
Third Five-Year Mine Permit Area, Grimes County, Texas. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc. Document Number 910529.
Excavations at Site 41GM224 in the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine
Permit 38A Area, Grimes County, Texas. Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc. Document Number 930476.

Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin,
Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Number 13.

Shafer, Harry J., and Thomas B. Stearns
Archeological Investigations at the Scott's Ridge Site (41MQ41),
1975
Montgomery County, Texas. Archeology Laboratory, Report
Number 17. Texas A&M University.
Thornthwaite, C. W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
Geography Review 38:55-94.

43

APPENDIX I

TRIP REPORT FOR 41WA2
(Transcribed from the original document by William E. Moore)

Trip Report
Wayne Klement
Office of the State Archeologist

Trip to Huntsville, Texas
September 27, 1984
________________________________________________________________
On Thursday, September 27, 1984, Gail Bailey and I made a trip to
Huntsville to follow up a report from Tom Anders that a site on state property
(prison land) was being vandalized. I phoned Tom Anders in advance and made
arrangements for him to show us the location of the site, and contacted the
Department of Corrections to inform them that we would be coming down to
evaluate the site.
We arrived at the entrance to the Ellis Unit of the state prison at 10:00
a.m. where we met Tom Anders and the Farm Manager of the prison, Jean
Roberts. Then we drove out to the site that is located along the south shore of
Lake Livingston in the Harmon Creek branch. Jean informed us that part of this
area was quarried for sand and gravel in previous years and that artifacts had
been found while removing the fill.
Upon inspection, we found that the eastern portion of the site had been
destroyed by the quarrying operations; also, there were quite a few potholes in
this area -- and several looked fairly recent. Cultural material was also observed,
mostly in backdirt piles from the potholes. West of the quarry area, a portion of
the site was found to be heavily potted, as there were numerous potholes and
backdirt piles observed along with three standing screens. Cultural material was
also present in this area, including a pottery sherd and shell tool that was
photographed. Photographs were taken of the heavily potted area, the
pothunters' screens, and the quarry area. The site appears to cover a fairly large
area, as determined by cultural material observed in the backdirt piles and
occasionally along the ground surface. And, in some areas that have not been
damaged, the ground cover was so heavy that cultural material could not be
observed on the surface, but these areas most likely also contain cultural
deposits. However, testing of the site needs to be done to actually determine
how much of the occupation areas remain intact. In a rough estimate, I would
say that probably 40%-50% of the site remains intact.
After visiting the site, Gail, Tom, and I talked with Warden Estes at the
Ellis Unit and informed him that the site was being vandalized and that such sites
should be protected in accordance with the Texas Antiquities Code. Warden
Estes stated that he would have the gate to the area kept locked when possible
to try and keep people away from the site. Apparently, the site is in the vicinity of
the prison employees' recreation area, so people do have access to the area.

Tom Anders also made arrangements for us to photograph a private
collection from the site owned by a Huntsville area resident, Bill Woods, as well
as allowing us to photograph his collection from the site.
This site appears to be a rather significant Caddoan site because of the
quantity of artifacts that have been collected from it as well as the fact that the
depth of the cultural material deposits suggest that the site must have been
occupied for quite some time and may have stratified cultural levels. At this time
it is unknown whether or not this is a single or multiple component site.
Recommendations: A more extensive survey of the entire area and mapping and
testing of this site.
Although the Warden said he would try to keep the gate to the area
locked, the site needs to be checked again in the near future to make sure that
the vandalism of the site has stopped. It may also be necessary to have the
screens on the site impounded, either by the prison officials or by the local law
enforcement agency, as the site is on state land that is being vandalized. "No
Trespassing" signs might also be posted in the site area.

Address & names of contacts in Huntsville:
Tom Anders
P.O. Box 4
Huntsville, Texas 77340
Warden Estes
Ellis Unit
Huntsville, Texas 77343
Bill Woods
(home address unknown)
Work location - Central Freight Lines; Huntsville, Texas

APPENDIX II: SHOVEL TEST LOG
________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth
Results
________________________________________________________________
Area A (41WA273)
01

40 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; negative

02

30 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; negative

03

20 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; negative

04

20 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; negative

05

20 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; negative

06

30 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; negative

07

30 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; 1 flake at 10 cm

08

25 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; 1 flake at 10 cm

09

20 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; negative

10

20 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; negative

11

20 cm

gray sandy clay over yellow clay; negative
Area B

12

15 cm

gray sandy clay over red clay; negative

13

10 cm

gray sandy clay over red clay; negative
Area C (41WA274)

14

80 cm

yellow fine sandy loam over yellow clay; 3 historic
ceramics at 0-10 cm

15

60 cm

yellow fine sandy loam over yellow clay; negative

16

65 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; yellow fine sandy
loam to 65 cm; dug through red clay to 65 cm; 3
flakes at 10-20 cm

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth
Results
________________________________________________________________
17

70 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; yellow fine sandy
loam to 60 cm; dug through red clay to 70 cm; glass
(n=5) and historic ceramics (n=2) at 10-20 cm

18

70 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; yellow fine sandy
loam to 60 cm; dug through red clay to 70 cm; glass
(n=3), nails (n=2), ceramics (n=1), and flakes (n=2) at
10-20 cm; 2 flakes at 30-40 cm

19

70 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 40 cm; yellow fine sandy
loam to 60 cm; dug through red clay to 70 cm; glass
(n=6) and nails (n=20) at 10-20 cm

20

30 cm

dark gray sandy clay over red clay; negative

21

40 cm

dark gray sandy clay over red clay; negative

22

60 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 50 cm; dug through red clay at to 60 cm;
negative

23

70 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 50 cm; dug through red clay to 70 cm;
negative

24

60 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 55 cm; dug through red clay to 60 cm;
negative

25

60 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 35 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 55 cm; dug through red clay to 60 cm;
negative

26

70 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 40 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 60 cm; dug through red clay to 70 cm;
negative

159

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

160

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth
Results
________________________________________________________________
161

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); 1 flake at 60-70 cm

162

60 cm

sand over clay; negative

163

60 cm

sand over clay; negative

164

50 cm

sand over clay; negative
Area D (41WA275)

27

70 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 65 cm; dug through red clay to 70 cm;
negative

28

80 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 70 cm; dug through red clay to 80 cm; 6
flakes at 20-30 cm

29

70 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 60 cm; dug through red clay to 70 cm;

30

70 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 60 cm; dug through red clay to 70 cm;
negative

31

70 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 35 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 60 cm; dug through red clay to 70 cm;
negative

32

50 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 20 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 50 cm; 2 flakes at 10-20 cm and 4
flakes and 1 dart point at 20-30 cm

33

50 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 20 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 50 cm; 1 historic ceramic at 0-10
cm and 4 flakes at 20-30 cm.

34

60 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 20 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 60 cm; negative

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth
Results
________________________________________________________________
35

50 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 50 cm; negative

36

55 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 25 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 55 cm; 6 flakes at 20-30 cm.

37

80 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 80 cm; 5 flakes at 30-40 cm.

38

50 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 20 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 50 cm; 13 flakes at 0-10 cm and 3
flakes at 20-30 cm.

39

50 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 50 cm; 5 flakes at 0-10 cm, 3
flakes at 10-20 cm, 1 Waco sinker at 20-30 cm, and
22 flakes at 40-50 cm.

40

50 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 50 cm; 3 flakes at 30-40 cm.

41

40 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 40 cm; negative.

42

50 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 30 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 50 cm; 3 flakes at 20-30 cm.

172

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

173

20 cm

sand over clay; negative

174

60 cm

sand over clay; negative

175

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

176

60 cm

sand over clay; negative

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth
Results
________________________________________________________________
Area E (41WA276)
43

40 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 20 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 40 cm; 4 flakes at 0-10 cm.

44

40 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 20 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 40 cm; negative

45

50 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 20 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to red clay at 50 cm; negative

165

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

166

60 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 30-40 cm

167

15 cm

sand over clay; negative

168

50 cm

sand over clay; negative

169

20 cm

sand over clay; negative

170

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

171

60 cm

sand over clay; negative
Area F (41WA277)

46

30 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 10 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 20 cm; dug through red clay to 30 cm; 6
flakes at 0-10 cm.

47

25 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam over a yellow clay at 25
cm; negative

48

30 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 10 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 30 cm where a yellow clay was encountered;
7 flakes at 10-20 cm.

49

30 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 10 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 30 cm where a yellow clay was encountered;
1 flake at 0-10 cm.

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth Results
________________________________________________________________
50

30 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 10 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 30 cm where a yellow clay was encountered;
negative

51

30 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 10 cm; tan fine sandy
loam to 30 cm where a yellow clay was encountered;
negative

52

25 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 10 cm; yellow fine sand
to 25 cm where a yellow clay was encountered; 4
flakes at 10-20 cm.

53

20 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 10 cm; yellow fine sand
to 20 cm where a yellow clay was encountered;
negative

155

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

156

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

157

20 cm

sand over clay; negative

158

50 cm

sand over clay; negative
Area G

151

20 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 10 cm; yellow fine sand
to 20 cm where a yellow clay was encountered;
negative

152

20 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 10 cm; yellow fine sand
to 20 cm where a yellow clay was encountered;
negative

153

25 cm

dark gray fine sandy loam to 10 cm; yellow fine sand
to 25 cm where a yellow clay was encountered;
negative

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth Results
________________________________________________________________
Area H
58

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

59

20 cm

clay; negative

60

20 cm

clay; negative

61

10 cm

clay; negative

62

10 cm

clay; negative
Area I

63

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

64

20 cm

clay; negative

65

20 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

66

20 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

67

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

68

40 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

69

30 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

70

30 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

71

20 cm

clay; negative

72

10 cm

clay; negative
Area J (41WA278)

73

50 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 10-20 cm

74

40 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth Results
________________________________________________________________
75

100 cm

sand (clay not encountered) to 100 cm; 1 flake at 3040 cm, 1 biface fragment at 70-80, and 1 ceramic
sherd at 90-100 cm.

124

50 cm

sand over clay; negative

125

30 cm

sandy loam over clay; negative

126

50 cm

sandy loam over clay; negative

127

90 cm

sandy over clay; 2 flakes at 40-50 cm, 2 flakes at 5060 cm, and 1 flake at 80-90 cm.

128

10 cm

clay; negative

129

60 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 30-40 cm and 3 flakes and 1
cobble at 40-50 cm

130

65 cm

sand over clay; negative

131

70 cm

sand over clay; negative
Area K (41WA279)

76

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

77

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

78

60 cm

sand (clay not encountered); 1 flake at 20-30 cm, 4
flakes and 1 core at 50-60 cm, and 1 tested
cobble/core at 70-80 cm.

79

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

80

20 cm

sand over clay; negative

81

20 cm

sand over clay; negative

82

20 cm

sand over clay; negative

83

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth Results
________________________________________________________________
84

20 cm

sand over clay; negative

85

70 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 40-50 cm and 1 flake and 1
tested cobble at 50-60 cm

86

50 cm

sand over clay; 2 flakes at 40-50 cm

87

40 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 30-40 cm

88

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

89

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

90

20 cm

sand over clay; negative

91

50 cm

sand over clay; negative

92

50 cm

sand over clay; negative

93

40 cm

sand over clay; negative
Area L (41WA280)

94

40 cm

sandy loam over clay; negative

95

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

96

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

97

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); negative

98

35 cm

sand over clay; negative

99

50 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 20-30 cm and 2 flakes at
40-50 cm

100

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

101

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

102

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth Results
_______________________________________________________________
103

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); 1 flake at 60-70 cm and 1
flake at 80-90 cm

104

80 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 50-60 cm

105

50 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

106

80 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 60-70 cm

107

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

108

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); negative

109

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); 1 flake at 50-60 cm, 1 f
lake at 70-80 cm, and 1 flake at 90-100 cm

110

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); 1 flake at 30-40 cm and 2
flakes at 80-90 cm

111

70 cm

sand over clay; 2 flakes at 60-70 cm

112

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

113

50 cm

sand over clay; negative

114

50 cm

sand over clay; negative

115

60 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

116

50 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

117

70 cm

sand over clay; negative

118

60 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 40-50 cm and 2 flakes at
50-60 cm

119

40 cm

sand over clay; 2 flakes at 30-40 cm

120

40 cm

sandy loam over clay; negative

121

30 cm

sandy loam over clay; negative

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth Results
_______________________________________________________________
122

30 cm

sandy loam over clay; negative

123

40 cm

sandy loam over clay; negative
Area M (41WA2)

53

50 cm

sand over clay; negative

54

100 cm

sand; negative

55

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); 2 flakes at 50-60 cm and
1 flake and 1 hammerstone at 80-90 cm

56

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); negative

57

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); 1 flake and 1 piece of
mussel shell at 50-60 cm, 1 flake and 1 piece of
mussel shell at 70-80 cm, and 1 flake and 1 piece of
shatter at 90-100 cm.

132

90 cm

sand (no clay encountered); 1 hammerstone at 60-70
cm; 1 flake at 60-70 cm, and 1 flake at 70-80 cm

133

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); 1 flake at 70-80 cm and 1
flake at 90-100 cm

134

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); 1 flake at 70-80 cm

135

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); negative

136

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); negative

137

100 cm

sand (no clay encountered); negative
Area N (41WA281)

138

70 cm

sand (no clay encountered); 1 split cobble and 1 flake
at 20-30 cm and 1 biface fragment at 50-60 cm

139

50 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 30-40 cm

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth Results
________________________________________________________________
140

30 cm

sand over clay; 2 flakes at 20-30 cm

141

20 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

142

30 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

143

50 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

144

60 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 20-30 cm

145

60 cm

sand over clay; negative

146

40 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake at 20-30 cm

147

20 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

148

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

149

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

150

50 cm

sand over clay; negative
Area U (41WA2)

177

60 cm

sand clay over rock; negative

178

20 cm

clay; negative

179

40 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

180

30 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

181

40 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

182

40 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

183

30 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

184

50 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

185

50 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake and 1 core at 30-40 cm

________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth Results
________________________________________________________________
186

40 cm

sand over clay; negative

187

30 cm

sand over clay; negative

188

40 cm

sand over clay; 1 flake and 1 biface at 30-40 cm

189

40 cm

sandy clay over clay; negative

190
20 cm
sandy clay over clay; negative
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________

APPENDIX III: LITHIC ANALYSIS
Introduction
The archaeological survey conducted on Sam Houston State University
(SHSU) property resulted in the recovery of 14 lithic artifacts and 177 pieces of
lithic debitage or waste flakes. These artifacts were collected from 47 shovel
tests that, when plotted on the topographic map at TARL, defined ten distinct
occupational areas or sites (41WA2, 41WA273 - 41WA281).
Analysis
The artifacts include 1 complete projectile point, 1 fragmented projectile
point (distal end), 3 biface fragments, 3 tested cobbles, 2 cores, 2
hammerstones, 1 Waco sinker, and 1 split cobble. These artifacts and the
debitage, composed of flakes discarded from various lithic manufacturing and
maintenance activities, are all made of local materials such as a variety of chert
types, silicified wood, silicified palm, opalized wood, and quartzite. All of these
materials, especially chert and quartzite, commonly occur within local gravels.
Silicified wood, palm, and opal are also found within these gravels, but may also
be found in more scattered deposits.
Most of these materials produce good identifiable artifacts and byproducts, but in some cases it can be difficult to determine whether the artifacts
they produced were made by cultural or natural mechanisms. Silicified wood, for
example, is a very common material found in a number of contexts over most of
the eastern half of Texas. This abundance and the fact that it often fractures in
linear planes that commonly terminates in squared edges or chunks, makes the
exact origin of some fragments difficult or impossible to determine. For this
reason, only those specimens having definable characteristics identifying them
as being culturally derived were analyzed.
As mentioned above, ten occupational areas are defined by the artifact
recovery. The artifacts from each of these areas were analyzed and interpreted
separately. However, the significance between these areas within the survey will
be discussed as a whole in the concluding remarks. Each artifact is identified as
to artifact type, material type, condition, and size. Flakes were categorized for
flake type (i.e., cortical, secondary or interior) along with noting platform type,
platform preparation, and ventral characteristics such as presence of platform
lipping and bulb of percussion. The evaluation of each of these individual
attributes will provide some information as to the type of activities performed at
each of these occupational areas. A list of artifacts and debitage recovered by
shovel test, level, and area is provided in Appendix II. The ten occupational
areas are discussed below.

41WA273 (Area A)
This area contains the smallest number of recovered materials by the
survey. Only two flakes were recovered, both from Level 1 (0 - 10 cm) of two
shovel tests. Both flakes are of local chert and are fragmented, consisting only of
the distal ends. Both are interior flakes (i.e., flakes without cortex) and are small,
categorized as size grades 5 (less than 3/4 inch, but greater than 1/2 inch) and 6
(less than 1/2 inch, but greater than 1/4 inch), respectively.
Since no other artifacts and only two flakes were recovered, little can be
derived from this area other than a minor cultural presence. Their presence in
Level 1 suggests either a very late presence or they are the result of some
disturbance. The small size and fragmented state of the flakes can only hint at
their purpose. For example, flakes often fragment during production, and the
smaller sizes usually indicate late stage tool manufacture or maintenance
activities. Therefore, based on the state of these flakes, not much more can be
concluded.
41WA274 (Area C)
Eight flakes were recovered from this area in four shovel tests. Five flakes
were recovered from Level 2 (10 - 20 cm), 2 from level 4 (30 - 40 cm), and 1 from
Level 9 (80 - 90 cm). The flakes from Level 2 consisted of silicified wood (n=3)
and chert (n=2). All of the silicified wood flakes are small distal fragments, 2
being size grade 6, and 1 size grade 7, (less than 3/8 inch, but greater than 1/4
inch). The chert flakes are a proximal and medial fragment, both size grade 7.
All of the Level 2 flakes are interior except one of the chert flakes that is
secondary (a flake having less than 90% of its surface covered in cortex). The
single proximal chert fragment has an unlipped plain platform combined with a
good bulb of percussion (an evident swelling near the striking platform) on its
ventral surface. Typical views of such flakes suggest its removal by the use of a
hard hammer, such as a quartzite hammerstone.
The two flakes from Level 4 consist of the distal end of a silicified wood
flake and a complete chert flake. The chert flake is a secondary flake, size grade
5 with a plain unlipped platform and a prominent bulb of percussion, while the
silicified wood flake is a smaller interior flake in size grade 7. The single Level 9
flake is an interior distal fragment, made of chert, and is size grade 7. The
overall small size of these flakes suggests that tool maintenance activities and
possibly expedient flake manufacturing activities utilizing hard hammer type
percussion were the primary activities at this area. The presence of small
secondary flakes would be expected in both biface and expedient flake
manufacture.

Typically, cortex removal occurs only during the initial bifacial reduction of
cobbles where the cortical covered surface is gradually removed during
reduction. Thus, in most cases, only the earlier biface stages will contain cortex,
although occasionally cortex may remain even on finished bifaces used as
projectile points or knives. However, if a cobble is used as a core for expedient
flake production where flakes are removed as needed, some cortex may remain
throughout the cobbles use as a core. Therefore, some secondary flakes may be
produced throughout the use-life of the core.
The flakes indicate that the heaviest occupation of this area is in levels 2
through 4, but with some occupation in Level 9. Since no diagnostic artifacts
were recovered it is difficult to determine what time periods are represented by
these flakes. In addition, the low number and density of flakes recovered
indicates only a minor occupation.
41WA275 (Area D)
This area had the largest number of artifacts and debitage recovered by
the survey. They include 1 complete projectile point, the distal tip of a projectile
point, a Waco sinker, and 80 pieces of debitage. They are discussed below.
The distal tip of a projectile point was recovered from Level 2 of Shovel
Test 40 (see Figure 3 in the report). This specimen comprises the distal half of a
dart point with no remnant of a haft element remaining. It is made of a dense
grade of silicified wood and measures 39.5 mm in length, 26.2 mm in width, and
11.5 mm in thickness. Since no portion of the haft element or stem remains it
cannot be identified to a definitive type. It's size, however, does classify it as a
dart point, which at least places it no later than the Transitional Archaic, circa 300
B.C. - A.D. 700 (Turner and Hester:1993:55-57).
The complete projectile point was recovered from Level 3 of Shovel Test
32 (see Figure 3 in the report). It has been identified as a Yarbrough point made
of a white, possibly patinated, chert that measures 35.5 mm in length, 23.2 mm in
width, and 9.1 mm in thickness. The tip has been shortened by re-sharpening or
as a result of breakage, but otherwise is not damaged. The Yarbrough type is
described as a slender point with convex lateral edges, slightly prominent
shoulders, and a rectangular stem with edges that have been smoothed. This
type dates to the Archaic 1000 B.C. to possibly later times, and it is commonly
found throughout East Texas and decreases toward the west in north and central
Texas (Perino 1985:400; Turner and Hester 1993:197).

An artifact described as a Waco sinker was recovered from Level 3 of
Shovel Test 39 (see Figure 3 in the report). This type of artifact was first
identified by H. G. Moore (1935:11) and later named by Frank H. Watt (1938:2169). It is described as a medium-sized artifact fashioned from quartz or quartzite
pebbles of varying colors ranging from clear, creamy white, greenish- brown,
gray, dense blue, purple, and reddish black. In addition, some examples are
known to have been made from hematite and sandstone. The ends of these
pebbles are notched or grooved with shapes that were often fashioned by
pecking and grinding into some elaborate shapes (Boyd and Shafer 1997:264265). Their exact function has not been determined, but many hypothesize they
were used as either bolas or sinker stones (Watt 1938:53-57; Turner and Hester
1993:316-317) or in some ritual or spiritual function (Boyd and Shafer 1997:266).
The earliest dates recorded for Waco sinkers are from the Wilson-Leonard
site at 9650-8000 B.C. (Boyd and Shafer 1997:266), but are more commonly
found on Archaic aged sites (Turner and Hester:1993:316). They are generally
found in central and north-central Texas, with the "core" area being in Ellis, Falls,
Hill, Johnson, Limestone, McLennan, Coryell, Milam, and Navarro counties (Boyd
and Shafer 1997:263).
As mentioned above, the current specimen was recovered from Level 3 at
a depth of 20-30 cm. This is slightly below the Yarbrough point which was found
at the 10-20 cm level. This places its date within the Archaic to Late Archaic
period. To date, no Waco sinkers have been recorded from this part of Texas in
general and from Walker County in particular (Charles Boyd: personal
communication 2004).
This specimen is made of a light brown, fine-grained quartzite and
measures 44.4 mm in length, 31.9 mm in width, and 22.2 mm in thickness. Only
one end is grooved. The other end is only slightly abraded. Although some
single grooved specimens are known (Watt 1938:31-31), this specimen appears
to be an unfinished form.
Eighty flakes were recovered from eight shovel tests in levels 1 - 5 (0-50
cm). Eighteen flakes were recovered in Level 1 from two shovel tests (38-39), 10
flakes in Level 2 from four shovel tests (32-33, 39-40), 22 flakes in Level 3 from
five shovel tests (28, 32, 36, 38, 40), 8 flakes in Level 4 from two shovel tests
(37, 40), and 22 flakes in Level 5 from one shovel test (39).
All Level 1 flakes are small, fragmented, less than 3/8 inch and fall within
size grades 6 (n=5), 7 (n=12), and 8 (n=1). Only 4 flakes are complete, and 3
are proximal fragments. The majority of the flakes are interior types with only two
that are secondary. Materials consist of silicified wood (n=12), quartzite (n=2),
and several varieties of chert (n=4). Plain platforms with little modification were
identified on five flakes, but some preparation in the form of faceting, is noted on
the others.

This type modification occurs when special attention is required on the
platform area to produce a proper angle and to strengthen and/or isolate the
striking point (platform). These modifications are often necessary to produce a
successful and/or specific flake removal. The ventral surfaces range from those
with bulbs of percussion and no platform lipping to those with diffuse (flat) bulbs
and some platform lipping. This suggests that, in addition to hard hammer
percussion, some soft hammer percussion has been introduced.
The Level 2 flakes mirror Level 1 flakes. They are all small, falling within
size grades 6 (n=4), 7 (n=5), and 8 (n=1), with only three complete flakes.
Materials include silicified wood (n=2) and several types of chert (n=8). One
flake of silicified wood is a primary flake (completely covered in cortex, or, in this
case, its natural surface), while the rest are interior flakes. The platforms and
platform preparation are the same as in level 1, except for the primary flake that
has a natural, or unaltered platform.
The Level 3 flakes are a continuation of those from the previous levels.
They include 8 complete flakes, 3 proximal, 9 medial, and 2 distal fragments and
fall within size grades 5 (n=3), 6 (n=7), 7 (n=9), and 8 (n=3). They are made of
silicified wood (n=6) and several varieties of chert (n=16). All are interior flakes
except for three primary and three secondary types. Two of the primary and all
of the secondary are of chert. In addition, both lipped platforms with diffuse
bulbs, and unlipped platforms with bulbs continue to be represented.
Level 4 contained eight flakes, the fewest number recovered. They are
small and fall within size grades 5 (n=1), 6 (n=4), and 7 (n=3). This sample
consists of 5 complete flakes, 2 medial fragments, and 1 distal fragment. Of
these 7 are interior, and 1 is secondary. Materials include silicified wood (n=3)
and several varieties of chert (n=5). These flakes, like those in the previous
levels, also reflect the same attributes and strategies employed as noted in the
others.
There is an increase in flakes within Level 5 with a total of 22 (the same
number as those from Level 3). Size grades range from 5 (n=3), 6 (n=6), 7
(n=7), and 8 (n=6). Eight are complete flakes, 3 are proximal, 9 are medial, and
2 are distal fragments, of which, 3 are primary, 3 are secondary, and the
remainder are interior types. The materials are like the previous levels that
include silicified wood (n=13), silicified palm wood (n=1), quartzite (n=1), and
chert (n=7). Platform preparation, in the form of faceting and some abrasion,
continues to occur on both the complete flakes and the proximal fragments along
with platform lipping combined with diffuse bulbs and un-lipped platforms with
strong bulbs on the ventral surfaces.

The debitage recovered from 41WA275 (Area D) indicates that tool refurbishing, such as re-shaping and sharpening activities were occurring. This is
noted in the Yarbrough point, for example, which has been re-sharpened to a
point where the tip has been significantly shortened. This, of course, may not
have occurred at this spot, but it is an example of the type of activities that are
indicated by the small debitage. In addition, the presence of some primary and
secondary flakes and the lack of bifaces suggest that some expedient flake
production may also have been performed as opposed to a formal tool
manufacturing site. The most significant artifact recovered from this area is the
Waco sinker, an artifact type that has not previously been reported from Walker
County. In addition to its occurrence in Walker County, it was found in close
association with a type of projectile point with a known approximate age that is
valuable in providing additional dating information for Waco sinkers.
41WA276 (Area E)
Five flakes were recovered at this site; 4 in Level 1 at ST 43 and 1 in Level
4 at ST 166. The Level 1 flakes are all interior flakes that are small [size grades
6 (n=1) and 7 (n=4)] and include two 2 distal fragments and 2 proximal fragments
made of silicified wood (n=2), quartzite (n=1), and chert (n=1). Both of the
proximal fragments have diffuse bulbs of percussion with one having a plain
platform with lipping while the other is crushed. The single flake from Level 4 is a
secondary proximal fragment (size grade 7) and is made of chert. The platform
is crushed, and the ventral surface is diffuse. Little can be deduced from these
flakes other than the point that there was some occupation of this area with
activities that centered on minor tool refurbishing or possible expedient tool
manufacturing.
41WA277 (Area F)
Eighteen flakes were recovered at this site in levels 1 and 2 from four
shovel tests (46, 48-49, 52). Seven flakes were recovered from Level 1 (six from
ST 46 and one from ST 49). These flakes are small and measure within size
grades 6 (n=3), 7 (n=2), and 8 (n=2). They consist of three complete flakes and
four medial fragments. One flake is primary, and the rest are interior. They
consist of 3 of silicified wood and 4 of chert. The complete flakes have platforms
that are plain, un-lipped with diffuse bulbs, indicating the use of hard hammer
percussion.Eleven flakes were recovered from Level 2. Like those from Level 1,
these are small and fall within size grades 6 (n=2), 7 (n=6), and 8 (n=3). All
flakes are interior and include 2 complete flakes, 6 medial, and 3 distal fragments
that are made of silicified wood (n=4), silicified palm wood (n=1), quartzite (n=1),
and several varieties of chert (n=5). Only one complete flake has an identifiable
platform that is dihedral or faceted, abraded, with no lipping and a diffuse bulb of
percussion.

The presence of a diffuse bulb without a platform lip is not surprising as
this condition often occurs in both soft and hard hammer types of percussion.
The presence and absence of a bulb and, to a lesser degree, a platform lip can
be altered depending upon the amount and direction of force as well as the type
of percussor employed. Although more flakes were recovered from this area than
from areas A and E, they reveal little information on the activities of the site. As
with the other areas, minor tool refurbishing and possible expedient flake/tool
manufacture appear to be predominant.
41WA278 (Area J)
Two artifacts and 12 pieces of debitage were recovered at this site. The
artifacts include the proximal half of a biface and a tested cobble.
The biface is the proximal half of an early stage biface that was found in
Level 8 of Shovel Test 75. It is made of silicified wood, and the remaining portion
is 35.6 mm in length, 40.0 mm in width, and 18.0 mm in thickness. It is an early
stage biface made on a rough blank that has had only minimal flaking around
one end and a portion of the remaining edge. Fracture probably occurred as a
result of an end snap due to the fragility of the material.
The tested cobble was found in Level 5 of ST 129 and is best described
as a rectangular chunk of silicified wood with squared edges. It measures 70.1
mm in length, 39.7 mm in width, and 27.6 mm in thickness. A single narrow flake
has been removed from across one of its ends, revealing a solid and fine-grained
interior. This procedure of removing one or two flakes from a piece of raw
material is typical in when testing the usefulness of that material. For example,
when looking for material to make stone tools, it is necessary to make an initial
determination of the quality of the material selected. The simplest method is to
remove a flake or two from the edge of the parent material (core) and evaluate
the interior for the presence of cracks and/or inclusions. This is especially
important when one considers the amount of energy expended carrying a piece
of material for some distance if that material is ultimately found to be of no value
for tool manufacture.
Twelve flakes were found between levels 2 to 9 from four shovel tests. A
single flake was recovered from Level 2 (ST 73), 0 in Level 3, 2 in Level 4 (75
and 129), 5 in Level 5 (127 and 129), 3 in Level 6 (75 and 127), and 1 in Level 9
(ST 127).
The single flake from Level 2 is an interior type, size grade 6 medial
fragment of silicified wood. The two flakes from Level 4 are small, grade 7,
secondary and distal fragments of chert. Level 5 flakes are also small and fall
within size grades 6 (n=1), 7 (n=3), and 8 (n=1) and consist of 2 complete flakes,
2 medial flakes, and 1 distal fragment. They are all interior flakes and are made
of silicified wood (n=1), quartzite (n=2), and chert (n=2).

Level 6 flakes include one complete secondary size grade 6 flake of chert
and one interior medial grade 8 flake made of silicified wood. The Level 9 flake
is a complete secondary, size grade 6 flake made of opalized wood. The
platforms on the complete flakes for all levels are plain, un-lipped, and have good
bulbs of percussion.
The biface and tested cobble recovered indicate that some artifacts were
bifacially reduced at this site. Both of these artifacts are small an indication that
other blanks of raw materials selected for this purpose may also have been
small. This assumption may account for the abundance of small flakes as
opposed to larger flakes that are usually associated with bifacial reduction
activities. Also, silicified wood does not have the normal cortical surface found
on chert and quartzite cobbles, but has a uniform surface throughout with an
outer surface that differs only in the amount of weathering it has been subjected
to.
41WA279 (Area K)
Three artifacts and 10 pieces of debitage were recovered at this site. The
artifacts include 1 core, 1 tested cobble/core, and 1 tested cobble.
The core was made from a small chert cobble, and it was found in Level 6
of Shovel Test 78. It measures 39.3 mm in length, 22.2 mm in width, and 16.1
mm in thickness. Flakes have been removed from both lateral edges; the dorsal
and ventral surfaces and one end. Cores are made from cobbles, chunks, or
tabs of various types of siliceous materials such as chert to produce a variety of
flakes or blades to be used as is or made into a desired type of tool. This
specimen was used to produce flakes. It was first prepared by the removal of
small flakes from the lateral edges. This lateral flaking enabled platforms to be
set up for the removal of larger flakes from the dorsal and ventral surfaces.
Materials such as chert cobbles have surfaces that are covered in cortex or are
irregular, both of which are unsuitable for usable flake removals. Therefore, the
edges are modified in order to establish a clear surface having a proper angle
that will enable the removal of usable flakes. The small size of this core
suggests that no further usable flakes could be produced, and it was abandoned.
The tested cobble/core was made from a squared chunk of silicified wood,
and it was found in Level 6 of Shovel Test 78. It measures 38.9 mm in length,
18.4 mm in width, and 15.9 mm in thickness. One end and one of its surfaces
have been flaked. Neither of the flakes removed were very large, and it is
unclear whether these removals were performed to test the material or to
produce usable flakes. Several cracks are apparent on its surface, but the
interior revealed by the two flake removals shows that it is solid and fine grained.
This suggests that it is still usable and that it may have been lost or cached.

The tested cobble was made from a small quartzite cobble, and it was
found in Level 6 of Shovel Test 85. It measures 46.1 mm in length, 28.7 mm in
width, and 24.0 mm in thickness. Two small flakes have been removed from one
end of the cobble, and the other end has been broken off. The surface contains
a number of cracks that appear to continue into the mass of the cobble and may
be the reason it was rejected. Cores, however, were often selected from poor
quality materials (i.e., those considered unsuitable for formal tool manufacture,
but contain enough mass to produce a number of usable flakes). Thus, these
would be used to remove several flakes and then discarded. This specimen
may have fallen into that category.
The ten flakes were found in levels 3 (n=1), 4 (n=1), 5 (n=3), and 6 (n=5).
The first flake encountered was in Level 3 (ST 78) and is a small (size grade 6)
secondary flake made of opal. It has a plain platform and contains a good bulb
of percussion. Interestingly, the cortex present occurs only on the proximal and
distal ends. This suggests that it was flaked from the vertical edge of a core and
may have been removed to enable a platform to be set up for subsequent flaking
from one of the core's surfaces. A single interior flake was found in Level 4 (ST
87). It is a very small, size grade 8, medial fragment made of chert. Three flakes
were found in Level 5 of two shovel tests (85 and 86). These are small interior
flakes, falling within size grades 6, 7, and 8, respectively. Two are proximal
fragments, and one is complete. Materials include silicified wood (n=1) and chert
(n=2). Both chert flakes have plain platforms and diffuse bulbs, while the silicified
wood flake has an abraded plain platform with a prominent bulb of percussion.
The five flakes from Level 6 were recovered from two shovel tests (78 and 85).
Two of these are size grade 5, and 3 are size grade 7. One is primary, 1 is
secondary, and 3 are interior. They include three complete specimens and two
distal fragments that are made of silicified wood (n=1), opal (n=1), and several
varieties of chert (n=3). The platform types and ventral surface characteristics
are similar to those from the other levels, indicating a continuation of the same
manufacturing techniques.
The recovery of the cores and tested cobbles and at least one flake
indicate that one of the primary activities on this site was the production of usable
flakes to be used as expedient tools. The small flakes also indicate that tool refurbishing was performed. Such activities are typical of sites occupied for short
periods of time where the principal tasks were centered on plant gathering and
hunting.
41WA280 (Area L)
Twenty-three flakes were found at this site. They were found in levels that
ranged 3 to 10 in nine shovel tests. One flake was recovered from Level 3 (ST
99), 3 from Level 4 (110 and 119), 3 from Level 5 (99 and 118), 6 from Level 6
(103, 104, 109, 118), 4 from Level 7 (103, 106, 111), 2 from Level 8 (ST 109), 3
from Level 9 (103 and 110), and 1 from Level 10 (ST 109).

The single flake from Level 3 is a small distal interior flake, size grade 7,
and is made of opal. The Level 4 flakes are all interior and size grade 7. Two
are distal fragments, and one is complete. They are made of silicified wood,
quartzite, and chert. The single complete flake (quartzite) has a natural platform
and a prominent bulb of percussion. The Level 5 flakes were size graded at 6, 7,
and 8 and consist of 1 complete flake, 1 medial, and 1 distal fragment. Materials
include opal (n=1), quartzite (n=1), and chert (n=1), with the opal specimen being
a primary flake and the others interior. The single complete flake (quartzite) has
a natural platform and a prominent bulb of percussion.
The Level 6 flakes include one secondary flake and five interior flakes. All
are small and fall within size grades 7 (n=3) and 8 (n=3). They consist of 3
complete flakes, 1 proximal flake, and 2 distal fragments. Materials include
silicified wood (n=2), quartzite (n=1), and several varieties of chert (n=3). Two of
the complete flakes have plain platforms. One is lipped with a diffuse bulb, and
one is un-lipped with a diffuse bulb of percussion. The proximal fragment also
has a plain platform but has a strong bulb, while the third complete flake has a
crushed platform and a strong bulb of percussion.
The flakes from Level 7 are interior and are size grade 7. They consist of
1 proximal and 3 distal fragments. Materials include silicified wood (n=1) and
several varieties of chert (n=3). The single proximal fragment has a plain
platform with a strong bulb of percussion. The two Level 8 flakes are also both
interior and were size graded at 7. One is complete, and the other is a distal
fragment. The complete flake has a plain platform that is lipped with a diffuse
bulb of percussion.
The Level 9 flakes are all interior and fall within size grades 7 (n=2) and 8
(n=1). They consist of 1 complete flake, 1 proximal fragment, and 1 distal
fragment. Materials include chert (n=2) and quartzite (n=1). The quartzite flake
has a natural platform and a strong bulb. The complete chert flake has a plain
platform with a diffuse bulb of percussion. The single Level 10 flake is a
complete interior flake (size grade 6) and is made of silicified wood. The platform
is natural combined with a prominent bulb of percussion.
Although no artifact types were recovered, the flakes continue to reflect
similar strategies and activities that have been determined from the flakes and
artifacts noted from the other areas. The combinations having presence/absence
of platform lipping and bulbs of percussion also continue to support the use of
both soft and hard hammer percussion in the flaking techniques employed.

41WA2 (Area M)
Two artifacts and 11 pieces of debitage were recovered at this site. The
artifacts are two hammerstones.
Hammerstone 1 is a specimen that was made from a small quartzite
cobble, and it was found in Level 7 of Shovel Test 132. It measures 47.9 mm in
length, 30.4 mm in width, and 22.0 mm in thickness. Quartzite is often used for
hammerstones. The interior structure of quartzite is composed of a large
granular type structure that tends to collapse upon being struck as opposed to a
sharp fracture that usually occurs in more fine-grained materials such as chert.
Of course, if struck with enough force and at the proper angle, quartzite can be
easily flaked and fashioned into various type tools. This specimen has only slight
abrasion on one end and has been split on the other end from impact. The
impacted end continued to be used as a hammerstone that, as evidenced by
abrasion, was abraded/battered on the fractured surface.
Hammerstone 2 is a specimen that was made from quartzite, and it was
found in Level 9 of Shovel Test 55. It measures 84.3 mm long, 52.4 mm wide
and 42.2 mm thick. This is a very unusual hammerstone because one end was
used as a hammerstone while the other narrower end has a well-defined groove
ground across it. The purpose of this groove is unclear, but it appears to have
been used in some form of abrading. Its position on the narrow end would
preclude its use in platform grinding, as it would be difficult to position on a sharp
edge, such as on a biface. Rather, it would be much easier to use one of the
more flattened sides for that purpose.
The eleven flakes were found in levels 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 from five shovel
tests. Two flakes were found in Level 2 (185 and 188), 3 from Level 6 (55 and
57), 1 from Level 7 (ST 132), 4 from Level 8 (57, 132, 133, and 134), 1 from
Level 9 (ST 55), and 2 from Level 10 (57 and 133).
The three Level 6 flakes are all complete with 2 made of chert and 1 of
silicified wood. They were size graded as 6 (n=2) and 7 (n=1). Both chert flakes
have natural platforms, one with a diffuse bulb and one with a strong bulb. The
silicified wood flake has a crushed platform with a diffuse bulb of percussion.
The single Level 7 flake is an interior distal fragment of silicified wood and was
size graded as 7. The four Level 8 flakes are small and fall within grades 6 (n=3)
and 7 (n=1). They consist of 1 complete flake, 2 medial fragments, and 1 distal
fragment. Materials are silicified wood (n=1), quartzite (n=1), and chert (n=2).
The only complete flake has a plain platform and a diffuse bulb. The single Level
9 flake is a small, size grade 6 distal secondary flake of silicified wood. The two
Level 10 flakes are both complete interior size grade 6 with one made of silicified
wood and the other of chert. The platform on the chert specimen is natural with a
bulb, and the platform on the silicified wood specimen is crushed with a diffuse
bulb.

The presence of the hammerstones indicate the use of hard hammer type
percussion, such as would be expected from the use of quartzite hammerstones.
The flakes are an indication of tool re-working.
41WA281 (Area N)
Two artifacts and 6 pieces of debitage were recovered from this area. The
artifacts include a biface fragment and a split cobble.
The biface is the proximal half of a biface recovered from Level 6 in
Shovel Test 138. It is made of silicified wood and measures 32.3 mm in length,
31.4 mm in width, and 11.5 mm in thickness. The material appears to be solid
and fine-grained with no internal cracking. It is an approximate Stage 2 biface
where both faces have been totally percussion flaked with the sides reduced to a
sharp edge. The biface failed in a bending fracture that probably occurred as a
result of an unsupported end snap.
The split cobble was found in Level 2 of Shovel test 138. It is a small
quartzite cobble that measures 32.6 mm in length, 19.4 mm in width, and 12.4
mm in thickness. The cobble has been split through a bi-polar type technique.
This is a technique where a small cobble was placed upon an anvil and struck
with a percussor (Crabtree 1972:42) such as a quartzite hammerstone.
Evidence for this technique is the presence of crushing on both ends that
resulted from pressure exerted by the percussor and contact with an anvil.
These attributes are exhibited on this specimen. This example has also had one
flake removed from the edge of the fractured surface.
The six flakes were found in Levels 2, 3, and 4 from five shovel tests. One
flake was found in Level 3 (ST 138), 1 flake was found in Level 4 (ST 139), 2
flakes were found in Level 3 (ST 140), and 2 flakes were found in Level 3 in
shovel tests 144 and 146.
The Level 2 flake a proximal interior flake (size grade 7) and made of
chert. A platform is present which is plain with a good bulb of percussion. Level
3 flakes are small and fall within size grades 7 (n=3) and 8 (n=1). They consist of
two complete flakes and two medial fragments. They are made of silicified wood
(n=2) and chert (n=2). Both of the complete bulbs have plain platforms, but one
contains a bulb of percussion, and the other is diffuse. The recovery of the
biface, and possibly the split cobble, indicate that biface reduction was one of the
activities that occurred on the site. The flakes add little to this activity other than
supporting the continued tool re-furbishing use of hard and soft hammer
percussion, both of which are noted in the other areas.

41WA2 (Area U)
Two artifacts and two flakes were found in this area. The artifacts are a
core and an early stage biface.
The core was made from a quartzite cobble, and it was found in Level 4 of
Shovel Test 185. It measures 60.5 mm long, 53.4 mm wide, and is 26. 5 mm
thick with approximately one-half of its mass flaked away. Two large flake scars
are evident on the fractured ventral surface, each having been flaked from
opposite sides of the cobble, and meeting approximately mid-line. These flakes,
and possibly more, successfully split the cobble in half.
The biface is an early stage biface made on a large flake of silicified wood.
It was recovered from Level 7 of Shovel Test 132. It measures 62.7 mm in
length, 29.1 mm in width, and 21.6 mm in thickness. The blank is a large flake
that spalled from a larger piece of silicified wood. The dorsal surface is strongly
convex, the ventral is flat, and the whole tapers rapidly towards the distal end. A
platform is present, which is natural with a large bulb of percussion. Several
flakes have been removed from the proximal, or platform end, on both the ventral
and dorsal surfaces. No apparent reason for its abandonment is noted other
than the rapid tapering toward the distal end. Since silicified wood is very brittle,
the thinness towards the end may not have been considered desirable, thus it
was rejected.
The two flakes from Level 4 include 1 complete secondary quartzite
specimen, size grade 4, and 1 complete interior silicified wood specimen, size
grade 5. The quartzite specimen has a crushed platform with a slight bulb, while
the silicified wood specimen has an un-lipped faceted platform with a prominent
bulb of percussion.
The artifacts found in this area demonstrate that flake production and the
making of bifaces were occurring on this site. Flake production is substantiated
by the presence of the two flakes. Hard hammer flaking is indicated by un-lipped
and crushed platforms on these flakes. These attributes also coincide with the
use of hard hammer type percussion, such as would be expected from the use of
quartzite hammerstones.
Conclusions
This survey resulted in isolating ten distinct areas (sites) of occupation.
These areas were defined by the results of 49 shovel tests that were positive for
prehistoric lithics. The total lithics recovered included 14 lithic artifacts and 177
pieces of debitage. A listing of each of these artifacts and pieces of debitage by
area, level, and shovel test are listed in Appendix I.

The previous analysis and brief discussion of the prehistoric materials
from each area has provided some insight into the activities that may have
occurred on each of the sites as well as the archaeological value that may be
gained from the artifacts. In summary, the low recovery of lithics from sites
41WA273 (Area A), 41WA274 (Area C), 41WA276 (Area E), 41WA277 (Area F),
and 41WA28 (Area L) provide little information as to the activities that occurred
on each of these sites. The only materials found in the shovel testing of these
sites were low numbers of small flakes with the highest number of flakes
recovered coming from 41WA277 (Area F) with 18 flakes and 41WA280 (Area L)
with 23 flakes. The deductions from the analysis of these individual
assemblages indicate that minor subsistence activities, such as hunting and plant
gathering, and small tool re-furbishing were the primary tasks performed on
these sites. The addition of a number of artifact types, along with debitage from
the remaining sites (i.e., 41WA275 (Area D), 41WA278 (Area J), 41WA279 (Area
K), Area M (site number not assigned), and 41WA281 (Area N) provided a
greater view of the activities occurring on each site, as well as possible dates of
occupation. Like the other sites, hunting and plant gathering were probably the
primary activities at these areas. However, the recovery of several projectile
points, bifaces, cores, hammerstones, tested cobbles, and the Waco sinker are
valuable additions to the knowledge and extent of these activities.
The fragmented bifaces, cores, tested cobbles, and hammerstones
indicate that some tool manufacture was performed. In addition, the re-worked
projectile point shows that worn points were either re-sharpened or broken ones
re-shaped. This is not surprising when one understands that stone tools often
break or are lost during the performance of these activities, requiring either a
replacement or the re-furbishing of broken or dull tools. In many regions, such as
the study area, available lithic materials are scant, and any materials
encountered during their movements would be evaluated and, if selected,
transported to the temporary campsite. Once at the campsite, tools needing reshaping or sharpening would be flaked and additional tools manufactured. In
addition, expedient tools, such as small flakes, may not have been part of the
primary tool kit brought from the home base but would be manufactured later at
the hunting camps on an as needed or task-directed basis. This would require
that raw materials would have to be brought along initially, picked up along the
way, or excavated from previous caches. The artifacts mentioned above support
the performance of these strategies within the project area.
The most significant find is the Waco sinker. Although, only partially
finished, its presence represents the first documented specimen from Walker
County. In addition, its close association with a Yarbrough point places its date
to the Late and/or Transitional Archaic. Its presence in a upland setting type
camp, probably used as a base for hunting or plant gathering activities, supports
the idea that it was intended for use as a form of hunting weapon, such as a bola,
rather than as a net sinker or in some ritual context.

The overall flake counts from all the sites areas shows that the highest
density of flakes occurs within the upper 60 cm. The number of flakes found
within the first six levels is relatively constant ranging between 10% and 19% of
the total flakes per level with three of the levels averaging 18%. This percentage
drops rapidly in the lower four levels where the totals average 3% or less.
A point not previously addressed concerns burned flakes. A large number
(n=39) of the lithics recovered from the shovel tests were burned shatter and potlids (small heat spalled fragments) and eliminated from the sample. In addition,
38% of the lithics analyzed were naturally burned. Only one flake appeared to
have been removed from raw material that had previously been heated. This
does not necessarily indicate purposeful heat alteration; rather it was probably a
piece of raw material that had been heated through natural means.
Many modern flintknappers and researchers accept the idea that lithics
were regularly heat altered to improve the materials "knapability." This is a valid
technique but it was not necessarily always used. The burned materials from this
survey are obviously the result of natural fires and not from a purposely
controlled heat alteration process. However, the idea of natural burns may not
be totally true. It is well known that Native Americans often started fires to clear
brush, open the forest, and as an aid in hunting. For example, Henri Joutel, the
personal aid and expedition journalist for Robert Cavelier de LaSalle's expedition
in Texas, recorded that Indians frequently burned the open areas within the Post
Oak region of east-central Texas as an aid in bison hunting (Bonnicksen
2000:170-171). It cannot be ascertained that this was the case in the project
area, but it should be considered as a causal factor for the presence of the
burned lithics.
In conclusion, the analysis of the lithics recovered from this survey has
revealed some very interesting views and data on the regional behavior of
Walker County's early inhabitants. Although small, the lithics provide an
additional insight into the activities that occur on small upland habitation sites that
are overlooked in our current understanding of broader regional archaeological
contexts.

References Cited
Bonnicksen, Thomas M.
2000
America's Ancient Forests. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. New York.
Boyd, Charles L., and Harry J. Shafer
1997
Another Look at the Distribution, Age, and Function of "Waco
Sinkers." Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:263-271,
Austin.
Crabtree, Don E.
1972
An Introduction to Flintknapping. Occasional Papers of the Idaho
State University Museum, Number 28, Pocatello, Idaho.
Moore, H. G.
1935
A Sinker Factory. Central Texas Archeologist 1:11-12, Waco.
Perino, Gregory
1985
Selected Preforms, Points and Knives of the North American
Indians, Volume 1. Idabel, Oklahoma.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1993
A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of the Texas Indians. Texas
Monthly Field Guide Series, Gulf Publishing Company, Houston,
Texas.
Watt, Frank H.
1938
The Waco Sinker. Central Texas Archeologist 4:21-70, Waco.

APPENDIX IV
AREAS SURVEYED AND SITE LOCATIONS

