ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT FOUR
INTERCEPTOR LINE CONSTRUCTION AREAS
THE GOVALLE DIVERSION PROJECT
Travis County, Texas
Technical Bulletin 96

Steve A. Tomka
Principal Investigator:

Solveig A. Turpin

Texas Antiquities Permit 571

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin

September 1986

ABSTRACT
During the week of August 18, 1986, the Texas Archeological
Survey (TAS) , The University of Texas at Austin, conducted an
intensive pedestrian surface survey and I imited subsurface testing of
four areas within the proposed Goval Ie Diversion Project. This work
was carried out at the request of Parsons, Brinckerhoff, Quade and
Douglas, Inc., agents for the City of Austin Water and Wastewater
Uti I ity, and authorized by Texas Antiquities Permit 571. The specific
investigative approach at each of the project areas was determined by
a combination of surface visibi lity, contemporary land use, results of
pedestrian survey and results of previous archeological research. No
cultural materials were observed within the actual project areas
although construction in Area 0 is immediately adjacent to sites
41TV455 and 41TV457. Vehicular traffic should be restricted to the
existing road and care taken to avoid these sites. The slight
possibi I ity remains that cultural deposits may be buried at depth in
The remaInIng two areas, A and C, yielded no cultural
Area B.
materials on the surface or in shovel probes and it is expected that
construction activities wi I I not affect cultural resources.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author would like to express appreciation to the following
individuals and agencies for their professionalism and support:
Michael W. Davis, staff archeologist for the Texas Archeological
Survey, for spending two very hot days excavating shovel tests in what
Mark Denton, archeologist for the Texas
seemed I ike concrete.
Antiquities Committee, for giving up an afternoon to visit the project
areas. Meg Sine of Parsons, Brinckerhoff, Quade and Douglas, Inc.
for processing the quantity of paperwork associated with this project.
Background research was carried out by Steve A. Tomka with
assistance from Dr. Solveig A. Turpin, the principal investigator for
this project, and Michael W. Davis. Michael Davis has carried out
previous investigations in the Onion Creek Watershed adjacent to the
project area, and his help was invaluable.
The cultural background
was written by David G. Robinson. Survey and shovel testing were
carried out by Steve Tomka and Michael Davis.

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract

ii

Acknowledgments

ill

Introduction

1

Environmental Background

2

Cultural Background . .

5

Methods and Techniques

8

Results and Recommendations .

9

References Cited

13

.....

LIST OF FIGURES

FIGURE 1.

Project Location Map. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

v

FIGURE 1.

PROJECT LOCATION MAP.

GOVALLE DIVERSION PROJECT
CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVJ::Y

AUSTIN

\

D
AREA D

Del Volle

AREA C

Bergstrom A.F. B.

oM

0.5

2miles

v

Mop Location

Page 1

INTRODUCTION
An archeological survey of four construction areas within the
Goval Ie
Diversion Project (Fig. 1) was conducted by the Texas
Archeological Survey} The University of Texas at Austin, for Parsons,
Brinckerhoff , Quade and Douglas} Inc.} agents for the City of Austin.
Antiquities permit 571 was issued to the sponsor by the Texas
Antiquities Committee. The goal of these investigations was twofold:
1) to determine the presence or absence of archeological resources in
the
proposed
project areas, and 2) to assess the effect of
construction activities associated with access shafts 1 lift stations}
diversion structures and sewer I ines on the cultural resources in} or
immediately adjacent to} the project areas.
The archeological investigations were divided into three stages.
Stage I consisted of a review of previous archeological work in the
vicinity of the construction areas. Stage II involved an intensive
pedestrian survey of the project areas. Stage III, contingent upon
the results of the first and second stages, was the excavation of
shovel probes to establish the presence or absence of subsurface
cultural resources.

Page 2

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
Figure 1 shows that the four project areas were located on
terraces
of
the
Colorado River and Onion Creek.
Given the
preponderance of previous archeological investigations
in
this
environmental context (Brown 1981;
Davis 1984j
Thurmond 1982j
Whitsett and Fox 1979), much of the environmental reconstruction IS
based on the conclusions of these authors.
CI imate
The present cl imate of the Colorado River Basin adjacent to the
Onion creek Basin is warm, humid and subtropical. With hot summers
and mild winters, below freezing temperatures occur on less than 25
days per year.
Mean annual temperature is 68.3 degrees F. Diurnal
temperature variation is not significant in the summer, ranging from
70 to 95 degrees F, and from 40 to 60 de9rees F in the winter (Texas
Water Development Board 1976).
Mean annual precipitation is 32.8 inches but mean monthly
precipitation
is
bimodally
distributed
with peaks In spring
(April-June) and the late summer (September-October).
The driest
month is July (Texas Water Development Board 1976).
Flora and Fauna
The headwaters of Onion Creek I ie on the Edwards Plateau In
eastern Blanco County, near the southeastern edge of the Great Plains
physiographic province (Fenneman 1931).
The drainage basin
is
characterized by two major vegetational communities: the juniper-oak
Hi I I Country and the Oak Savannah (Garner 1973).
Once across the
Balcones Fault zone, the stream flows through the Rol I ing Prairies
physiographic region (Garner 1973:34),
a
moderately
dissected
grassland area with live oaks and cedar.
The easternmost physiographic region along Onion Creek, the
Blackland Prairie, is composed of grasslands and scattered mesquites
(Garner 1973:39). The vegetational communities associated with the
Onion Creek river terrace and bottomlands are elm-mesquite and
oak-blackjack with thick growth of scrub, cottonwood, sycamore,
wi I low, pecan, ash, and bois d'arc trees (Garner 1973:39). Many of
these species and vegetational communities reflect the impact of
modern land use (Davis 1984), with prehistoric upland vegetation being
predominately grasslands, dominated
by
Indiangrass
(Sorgastrum

Page 3
avenaceum), Canada wi Idrye (Elymus canadensis), and Texas wintergrass
Sti a leuchotricia), and bottomland woodlands composed of American
elm Ulmus americana), bald cypress Taxodium distichum) and pecan
(Carya i I I Inoenis) (McEachern and Ralph 1980, W Itsett and Fox 1979).
Associated with these now-extinct vegetational communities would
have been numerous faunal species that are not present today (such as
antelope Anti loca ra americanus)} beaver (Castor canadenis) and bison
Whitsett and Fox 1979). Numerous species of mammals,
(Bison bison
birds, repti les and fish have been or are native to the lower Onion
Creek Basin.
These include cottontai I rabbit (Sylvi lagus~,
jackrabbit (Lepus cal ifornicus), fox squirrel (Scirurus
niger),
opossum (Didelphis marsupial is) and raccoon (Procyon lotor), as wei I
as large carnivores such as coyote (C)nis latrans), wolf (Cfni)
~), mountain I ion (Felix concolor
and bobcat (Lynx ru us
(Whitsett and Fox 1979).
Geology
The project areas are located on two types of alluvial terraces;
Project Areas A, Band C are on alluvial terraces deposited by the
Colorado River. Area D is an alluvial terrace deposited by Onion
The two types are
Creek, a tributary to the Colorado River.
distinguished by matrix color and the composition of the gravel
mixtures they contain.
The Colorado River alluvial terraces have
red-brown to yel low-brown matrices (Garner 1973:30) and contain a
gravel mixture of I imestone, chert, quartzite, metamorphic and igneous
rock (Urbanec 1963). The Onion Creek sediments display hues of gray
and brown (Urbanec 1963:40) with gravels composed exclusively of
I imestone and chert. The difference in lithic composition of the
terrace gravels is directly related to the area drained by the streams
and is reflected in the color of the cherts eroded from the Edwards
Formation (Skolasky 1978:3-4). The large range of colors found in the
Colorado River alluvial cherts (Thurmond 1982:16)
reflect
the
variabi I ity of the drainage basin lithology.
The trend in soi I development in the area IS for soil depth to
increase as one moves down from the Edwards Plateau onto the Blackland
Prairie (Brown 1981:7). The shal low Inceptisols and Entisols of the
plateau are replaced by deep Mol I isols and Vertisols on the lower
portions of the drainage basin (Thurmond 1982).
The soi Is of the
Colorado River and Onion Creek terraces within the project area, the
Bergstrom, Frio and Lewisvi I Ie series, are Haplustol Is in
the
classification of the Soi I Conservation Service (Werchan, Lowther and
Ramsey 1974:116).

Page 4
Current land use practices in the project areas varies from maize
cultivation and resultant plowing at Areas C and D to cleared,
unimproved pasture use (Area B) and vehicle traffic and parking, and
storage areas at Area A. Surface visibi lity ranged from excel lent on
the plowed fields (Areas C and D) to moderate on the pasture (Area B)
and poor on Area A.

Page 5

CULTURAL BACKGROUND
The project area I ies within the Central Texas archeological
region (Prewitt 1981, 1985), a zone with a cultural occupation of at
least 10,000 years. The region has been divided into a sequence of
four stages identified on the basis of the major economic strategies
employed by the prehistoric populations: Paleoindian (12,000-ca. 8500
BP), Archaic (ca. 8500-1250 BP), Late Prehistoric (1250-200 BP) and
Historic (200 BP-present). The dominant economic strategies of the
prehistoric stages have been inferred largely from stone artifacts and
stylistic studies. In recent years, research has cast doubt on any
significant differences between the dominant hunting and gathering
economic strategies of the Archaic and Late Prehistoric stages.
For
this
reason,
Prewitt (1981) renamed the Late Prehistoric the
"Neoarchaic". Both terms are used here interchangeably.
Prewitt
(1981, 1985) further divided the prehistoric period into recognizable
cultural phases based on artifact styles, and site and artifact
assemblages.
The chronology was established with radiocarbon dating.
The cultural stages and phases I ist as fol lows:
Paleoindian stage
Archaic stage
Circlevi I Ie phase
San Geronimo phase
Jarre II phase
Oaks I Ia phase
Clear Fork phase
Marshal I Ford phase
Round Rock phase
San Marcos phase
Uvalde phase
Twin Sisters phase
Driftwood phase

12,000 - 8500 BP
8500 - 1250 BP
8500
6800
6100
5100
4600
4100
3500
2600
2250
1800
1400

-

6800
6100
5100
4600
4100
3500
2600
2250
1800
1400
1250

BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP
BP

Neoarchaic stage

1250 -

200 BP

Austin phase
Toyah phase

1250 650 -

650 BP
200 BP

Historic stage

200 BP - present

Page 6
PALEOINDIAN STAGE (12,000 ca. 8500 BP)
The Paleoindian stage began with the arrival of North America's
first inhabitants, who spread rapidly to al I ice-free regions of the
continent.
These
people
practiced
non-specialized
gathering
strategies
and a degree of specialized hunting of Pleistocene
megafauna such as mammoth and mastodon.
Major time diagnostic
Paleoindian artifacts in Central and East Texas are stone tools,
notably Clovis, Folsom and Plainview projecti Ie point types.
Central
Texas Paleoindian sites have placed the region in the forefront of
Paleoindian research.
Publ ications are sti I I
awaited
on
the
Wi I son-Leonard Site (41WM235), which yielded the famous Leanderthal
Lady burial, and the stratified 41BX52 site near San Antonio.
ARCHAIC STAGE (8500 to 1250 BP)
The long Archaic stage is defined by hunting and gathering
economies.
Modern ethnographic studies suggest that these economies
yield greater proportions of gathered plant foods than meat, and they
usually require a nomadic lifestyle. Social differentiation is scant;
individuals accrue status according to their accomplishments and
neither inherit nor bequeath it.
The earliest Archaic phases in
Central Texas retain Paleoindian lithic traits -- basal edge grinding
and paral lei flaking on projecti Ie points -- but projecti Ie point
styles evolved into a variety of stemmed forms, notably the Gower,
Hoxie,
Wei Is,
Bel I
and
Martindale types.
The proportional
contribution of food gathering, evidenced by grinding stones and
freshwater mussel shel I, increased through the Early Archaic, and the
first burned rock middens were formed near the end of the period,
ca. 5000-4600 BP.
Population trends, inferred indirectly from the
ratios of phase components to phase duration, reflect increase to a
peak in the San Geronimo phase, then slight decline toward the end of
the period ·(Prewitt 1981:75-78; 1985:216-225).
-rhe Middle Archaic
saw the apex of burned rock midden formation and the emphasis on the
plant foods baked in these features. Continued hunting is shown by
the Nolan, Travis, Pedernales and Bulverde projecti Ie point styles.
Population reached a peak early, then apparently declined only to rise
to a stable plateau late in the period. The Late Archaic, beginning
ca. 2250 BP, witnessed the decline and disappearance of the burned
The proportions of gathering
rock midden subsistence strate9Y.
artifacts to hunting artifacts remain high, however, indicating a
shift in emphasis to another set of gathered plant foods. Diagnostic
projecti Ie point styles are Marcos, Mantel I, Castrovil Ie, Frio and
Fairland.
Population rose steadi Iy throughout the period to the
prehistoric population maximum in the Driftwood phase, 1400 to 1250
BP.

Page 7
LATE PREHISTORIC STAGE (1250 to 200 BP)
Technological
innovations
appl ied
to
continuing
Archaic
subsistence
strategies
define
the Late
Prehistoric
stage.
Principally, these innovations were the adoption of the bow and arrow
and the use of pottery. The stage is indicated by diagnostic arrow
points of the Granbury, Scal lorn, Perdiz and Cliffton types, by
pottery and by cemeteries. Central Texas pottery is the varied and
il I-defined Leon Plain ware. This pottery and formalized cemeteries
both have affinities with East and Coastal Texas. Gulf coastal shel I
in Central Texas indicates continuing, probably trade, connections
with the coast.
The development of agricultural societies in the
Caddo area of northeast Texas had effects in northern Central Texas.
A single cob of domesticated maize in the Kyle Site (41HI1) (Jelks
1962) and occasional finds of Caddoan pottery in the same Brazos River
area indicate at least some exchange and social relations between the
two zones. Population declined sharply and steadily through the Late
Prehistoric;
the subsistence emphasis may have shifted to hunting.
Bison remains make a notable reappearance in sites of the Toyah phase
(650-200
BP).
It is in the Toyah phase sites that artifact
assemblages bear resemblances to those of historically identified
Indian tribes.
HISTORIC STAGE (200 BP to present)
Technically, the Historic Stage began In A.D. 1528 with Cabeza de
Vaca's transit of coastal and southern Texas, but actual record
In
keeping on Central Texas did not commence for another 200 years.
that interval, indigenous groups suffered dislocations from the
advancing wavefronts of European diseases and other
dislocated
Indians.
The Tonkawas, recorded as in Central Texas in the early
nineteenth century, may actually have migrated from the southern
Plains. Intensive settlement of the Travis County region began in the
1820s with the founding of Stephen F. Austin's Little Colony. As the
history of Texas advanced, the aboriginal cultures retreated and
eventually vanished, so that now the native record I ies almost
entirely within the province of archeology.

Page 8

METHODS AND TECHNIQUES
The primary purpose of the investigations was to record and
evaluate any cultural resources in the four project areas. The Stage
I review of previous archeological works revealed two sites, 41TV455
and 41TV457 (Whitsett and Fox 1979), in Area D. The current goal was
to ascertain the impact of construction activities on these sites.
At each of the four project areas, the initial method of
investigation was accomplished by an intensive pedestrian survey.
Where
Survey consisted of walking 10-15 meter wide transects.
possible, a close inspection of rodent burrows was also conducted.
None of the areas provided road cuts for inspection of deeply buried
zones and the bank of the Colorado River at Area B was dangerously
precipitous, not al lowing inspection. Additional investigative steps
were deemed necessary based on the surface visibi lity and the results
of the survey.
The shovel probes excavated during Stage
II
were
45-50
centimeters In diameter and 100 centimeters deep, with the exception
of shovel test 3 at Area A and the single probe at Area D. Excavation
proceeded in arbitrary 20 centimeter levels and al I matrix was
screened through 1/4" hardware cloth.

-

Page 9

RESULTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
AREA A:

CANTERBURY

Located between Canterbury Street and the Hoi Iy Street Power
Plant (Fig. 1), the proposed project area has been heavi Iy affected by
the previous construction of a City of Austin sewage holding and
settl ing tank, pump house, and power plant. Visually assessable
disturbances consisted of soi I terracing, soil mounding, soil leveling
activities, and the deposition of a gravel fil lover the southern half
of the project area. Surface exposure in the northern half of the
area ranged between 40-100~, the southern half was grass covered,
inhibiting visibi lity.
Since the pedestrian survey located no cultural resources, three
shovel probes were excavated in the southern half to determine if
buried prehistoric materials were present and the effect of level ing
activities on soi I stratigraphy. The stratigraphy in shovel probes 1
and 2 consisted of a 1-2 centimeter root zone, fol lowed by 15-25
centimeters of limestone gravel fi I I, underlain by reddish-brown si Ity
clay. Both probes contained signs of disturbances to a depth of 45-50
centimeters in the form of modern window glass, round nails with
minimal rusting, concrete masonry fragments and a can, possibly
crushed by heavy machinery. No clear signs of disturbance were noted
In shovel
below 50 centimeters and no artifacts were encountered.
probe 3, the thin root zone was fol lowed by a 10 centimeter fill layer
containing fragments of plastic, aluminum, candy wrappings and blue
flagging tape.
Considering the disturbed character of the deposits,
excavation was halted at 70 centimeters below surface.
Summary of Results: 1) No surface resources.
2) Above and
surface disturbances associated with earth moving activities.
Recommendations:
resources.
AREA B:

Investigations show no adverse

effect on

below

cultural

MONTOPOLIS

Located on the southwest corner of the intersection of Highway
183 (South) with the Colorado River, Area B is part of the Colorado
River terrace (Fig. 1). In the recent past it was covered with
mesquite brush but is now cleared and used as cattle pasture covered

- - _....... _ - - ­

Page 10
by unimproved grasses and bul I nettle. Surface visibi lity varies from
30 to 100%, with a number of gopher burrows and ant mounds offering
some indication of shal low subsurface contents.
Fol lowing the pedestrian survey, which located no historic or
prehistoric artifacts, three shovel probes were excavated. With minor
variations, the stratigraphy of the three
pits
consisted
of
yellowish-brown si Ity loam alternating and/or interspersed with small
gravels. The upper 35 centimeters showed signs of root and rootlet
disturbance.
No plow zone was evident in the profi Ie. The zone
between 35 and 100 centimeters remained relatively compact with a
somewhat higher, fine sand content than the upper zone. No cultural
material were recovered in any of the three probes.
The potential for deeply buried archeological deposits
is
possible on terraces and floodplains of hydrologically active zones.
However, given the Early Holocene geomorphological data presented by
Baker and Penteado-Orel lana (1977:412), the presence of such buried
deposits is unlikely on this Colorado River terrace (Brown 1981:41).
Summary of Results:
1) No surface
subsurface archeological remains.

cultural

material.

2)

No

Recommendations: Given the limited possibi I ity of deeply buried
terrace sites at such locations, the sponsor should be aware that
excavation may encounter cultural materials at depth.
The Texas
Antiquities Committee should be immediately notified.
AREA C:

FARM

Area C is located on the southeast corner of the intersection of
Highway 71 and Fal lwei I Road. It consists of a rectangle measuring
300 by 500 feet. As a result of recent plowing, surface visibi lity is
very good.
An intensive survey was judged adequate to assess the
presence of historic and prehistoric cultural resources in the area.
The survey revealed the presence of refuse concentrated in a 15
meter wide band along Highway 71 and Fal lwei I Road. The materials
consisted of beverage cans and bottles, other container fragments and
tire fragments.
In addition, 3 whiteware fragments, a threaded jar
rim fragment, 2 bottle neck fragments and 3 photos~thesized bottle
body
fragments were encountered.
The temporal range of these
artifacts is late 1800s to the 1930s.
These
artifacts
were
distributed
in
a
I inear pattern along Highway 71, extending
approximately 20 meters into the field. The finds suggest the former

-------------~~------

...........

~.-------------

Page 11
presence of a structure at this location.
However, the survey
discovered no other indications of a structure. It is I ikely that the
repeated plowing of this field has destroyed any remains from a
possible structure.
Based on the meager surface indicators and their disturbed
character, no subsurface testing was warranted. This decision was
corroborated by Mark Denton, staff archeologist for the Texas
Antiquities Committee, who visited the location and examined the area.
Summary of Results: 1) Most of the cultural materials consisted of
2) There is some indication of a former structure,
highway refuse.
potentially dating between 1890-1930. 3) No intact portion of the
historic component remains.
Recommendation:
Given the lack of intact
material, work should proceed as planned.
AREA D:

historical

cultural

FIELD

This area, measuring 250 by 150 feet, is approximately 150 meters
south of Fallwel I Road and about 75 meters west of a fossil branch of
Onion Creek. Currently, the area is plowed and in use as a cornfield.
Previous archeological surveys in this portion of the Onion Creek
Basin by Whitsett and Fox (1979) located two sites, 41TV455 and
41TV457. 41TV455 is described as an occupation site of approximately
10,000 square meters with lithic debitage, burned rock and mussel
shel I fragments on the surface. The second site (41TV457), measuring
approximately 11,250 square meters, contains both a prehistoric and
historic component.
Artifacts are primari Iy whiteware fragments,
lithic debitage and shel Is. One Ensor dart point was recovered from
the surface. Whitsett and Fox (1979) recommended testing of the
prehistoric components of both sites and monitoring of the historic
component at 41TV457.
They evaluated both sites as potentially
el igible for the National Register of Historic Places.
The project area is located midway between 41TV455 and 41TV457 on
the southern side of a dirt road that crosses both sites. The
distance between the project area and 41TV455 is approximately 700
feet, and between it and 41TV457 is 575 feet. The existing dirt road
offers access to the project area without endangering the sites.
No
historic or prehistoric artifacts were found within or immediately
adjacent to the project area.

Page 12
The excavation of a shovel probe was attempted at 41TV457 to
determine the subsurface extent of the deposits. Three flakes and 1
mussel shel I fragment were encountered in the upper 20 centimeters of
plow zone. The excavation and screening of the next level, within the
hard si Ity clay, was extremely difficult and 1 tertiary flake was
recovered. The difficulties encountered indicated that shovel probing
was an inadequate strategy in this context.
Based on the limited
excavation, it appears that most of the cultural material is found
within the plow zone.
Summary of Results: 1) Two archeological sites in proximity to the
proposed construction area. 2) Pedestrian survey located no cultural
material within the actual proposed construction area.
Recommendations:
Provided there are no subsurface archeological
deposits,
and
vehicles
are restricted to the existing road,
construction should proceed as proposed.
If subsurface cultural
deposits are encountered, the Texas Antiquities Committee should be
notified immediately.
Summary of Recommendations
The intensive survey of four tracts to be affected by the Goval Ie
Diversion Project produced no evidence of significant prehistoric or
historic occupation within the impact areas. Two previously recorded
sites, 4ITV455 and 41TV457, are peripheral to Area D and should be
strictly avoided by construction activities and vehicle traffic.

- - - - - - - - - - - _....

_--­

Page 13

REFERENCES CITED
Baker, Victor R. and Margarida M. Penteado-Orel lana
1977 Adjustments to Quaternary Climatic Change by the Colorado
River in Central Texas. Journal of Geology 85:395:422.
Brown} David O.
1981
Archeological Testing along the Proposed Route of Wastewater
Pipelines for the Planned Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment
Plant, Travis County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin 50. The University of Texas at Austin.
Davis, Michael
A Site to be
1984 Archeological Investigations at 41TV285:
Affected by Construction of the Onion Creek Wastewater
Texas
Treatment Interceptor Line, Travis County, Texas.
Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 78. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Fenneman, Navin M.
1931
Physiography of Western
Company, Inc. New York

United

Garner, Lee Edwin
1973 Environmental
Geology
of
Unpublished Masters thesis,
Austin.

States.

McGraw-Hi I I

Book

Austin
Area,
Texas.
the
The University of Texas at

Jelks, Edward B.
1962 The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in
Hi I I County, Texas. Department of Anthropology Archaeology
Series 5. The University of Texas at Austin.
McEachern, Michael and Ronald W. Ralph
in
Historical
Archeology: Archeological
1980 An Experiment
Investigations at the Thomas F. McKinney Homestead, Travis
County, Texas. Bul let;n of the Texas Archeological Society
51.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas.
Society Bulletin 52:65-69. Austin.
1985

Texas

Archeological

From Circlevi I Ie to Toyah: Comments on
Central
Texas
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
Chronology.
54:201-238. Austin.

Page 14
Skolasky, Robert A.
1978 The Use of Color
Infrared and
Panchromatic
Aerial
Photography for Drainage Density Analysis and Soil Mottl ing
Studies of Onion Creek Terraces, Travis and Hays Counties,
Texas.
Unpubl ished Masters thesis, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Texas State Land Office
1936 Travis County Land Grant Map.

Austin.

Texas Water Development Board
1976 A Climatological Summary
Circular. Austin.

Austin,

of

Texas.

Information

Thurmond, Peter
1982 Archeological Testing and Assessment of 41TV461 and the
Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant Site, Travis County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin 49.
The University of Texas at Austin.
Urbanec Don Alan
1963 Stream Terraces and Related Deposits In the Austin Area,
Unpubl ished Masters thesis, The University of Texas
Texas.
at Austin.
i

Webb, Walter Prescott (editor)
1952 Handbook of
Texas Vol. 1.
Texas
Associatio~ University of Texas Press.

State Historical
Austin.

Werchan, Leroy E., A.C. Lowther and Robert N. Ramsey
1974 Soi I Survey of Travis County, Texas.
United States
Department of
Agriculture Soi I Conservation Service.
Wash i ngton 1 D. C.
l

Whitsett, Hayden and Daniel E. Fox
1979 Cultural Resources of Lower Onion Creek.
Texas Department
of Water Resources. Construction Grants and Water Qual ity
Planning Division. Austin.

