AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED GOFORTH WSC
WATER LINE PROJECT IN EASTERN HAYS COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 03-08

Author and Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Goforth Water Supply Corporation
8900 Niederwald Strasse
Niederwald, Texas 78640

ABSTRACT
An archaeological evaluation of a proposed 2400 foot (.826 acre) water supply
line and an elevated tank site (0.5 acre) in eastern Hays County, Texas was performed
by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) in March 2003 with William E. Moore the
Principal Investigator. This project falls under Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act of 1966 and the Antiquities Code of Texas. The Federal Agency
involved in this project is the United States Department of Agriculture, Rural
Development. Because the proposed water line will be placed on property viewed by
the State as a public land entity, the project is subject to the Antiquities Code of Texas.
Therefore, Antiquities Permit 3094 was issued by the Texas Historical Commission
(THC), Archeology Division for this project.
One prehistoric lithic procurement site (41HY367) evidenced by tested cobbles,
cores, and primary flakes were found within the proposed construction corridor. That
portion of the site within the construction corridor is sparse in terms of numbers of
artifacts, restricted to the surface, and has been disturbed by previous construction. No
diagnostic artifacts were found; therefore, the age of this site is not known. The size of
this site is unknown because the survey was restricted to the construction corridor and
elevated tank site. The portion of the site within the 10 foot corridor would not
contribute to the sites's eligibility for the National Register of Historic Places if it were
later found to be eligible. Therefore, construction should proceed with no further
consultation. If areas outside the construction corridor are later subjected to
construction additional investigations may be warranted. Copies of this report are on
file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), THC, Goforth WSC; and
BVRA. The artifacts were returned to the landowner who donated them to the Museum
of Archaeology and Material Culture in Cedar Crest, New Mexico.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
BVRA is appreciative of the assistance provided by the following. At the office of
Southwest Engineers in Gonzales, Texas, Clarence L. Littlefield, P.E.; Eric Schulze,
EIT; and John Littlefield (Manager) provided maps and other logistical support. Mario
Tobias, Manager of the Goforth WSC in Niederwald, Texas accompanied the field crew
to the project area to make sure all investigations were conducted in the project area
right-of-way. The records check was performed by Allegra Azulay, Records File Search
Assistant at TARL. The field survey was conducted by Edward P. Baxter, the Project
Archaeologist. Debra L. Beene at the THC served as the reviewer for this project. The
figures appearing in this report were prepared by Lili Lyddon of LL Technical Services in
North Zulch, Texas. Special thanks to Mel Mathis of Spicewood, Texas for allowing
shovel testing to be conducted on his property and to Bradley F. Bowman of the
Museum of Archaeology and Material Culture in Cedar Crest, New Mexico for analyzing
the artifacts found during this survey.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 4
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS....................................................................................... 6
METHODS ...................................................................................................................... 8
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 10
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 12
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 13
Appendix I: Location of Sites 41HY122 and 41HY367
Appendix II: Lithic Analysis
Figures
Figure 1. General Location Map...................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map.................................................................... 3
Figure 3. Project Area on Soils Map................................................................................ 5
Figure 4. Shovel Tests .................................................................................................... 9
Tables
Table 1. Surface-Collected Artifacts from 41HY367......................... 11

iv

INTRODUCTION
BVRA was retained by the Goforth WSC through Southwest Engineers, Inc. of
Gonzales, Texas to conduct an archaeological investigation of a proposed 2400 foot
water (.826 acre) supply line and a 500,000 gallon elevated tank (.05 acre) in eastern
Hays County (Figure 1). The line parallels the north side of County Road 127 on private
property. The proposed water line will involve a 12 inch pvc pipe placed in a trench
which will be covered with 36 inches of dirt. The construction easement will be 10 feet
wide. The project area is depicted on the USGS 7.5' topographic map Uhland dated
1964 (revised 1994) (map number 2997-334) (Figure 2).
Hays County is located in Central Texas, an area known to contain significant
archaeological sites. Because of this archaeological potential, a cultural resource study
by a professional archaeologist was warranted according to Section 106 of the National
Historic Preservation Act and the Antiquities Code of Texas. The Federal agency
involved in this project is the United States Department of Agriculture, Rural
Development. This project was conducted under Antiquities Permit Number 3094.
The project number assigned by BVRA is 03-08. The field survey was conducted
on March 26, 2003 by Edward P. Baxter with William E. Moore assuming the duties and
responsibilities of Principal Investigator.

1

Figure 1. General Location Map

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The following statements were taken from the published Soil Survey of Comal
and Hays Counties by Charles D. Batte (1984:1-4). Hays County is located in southcentral Texas. The Balcones Escarpment extends through the eastern part of the
county separating it into the Edwards Plateau Land Resource Area and the Blackland
Prairie Land Resource Area. The project area is located within the Blackland Prairie
portion of the county. In the Blackland Prairie, soils are mainly deep clays, and
elevation ranges from about 600 to 1600 feet. There has been a significant change in
land use in the Blackland Prairie since 1960. Much of the area once used for
agriculture has been converted to urban use because of the expansion of nearby urban
areas of Austin and San Marcos. Also, much of the formerly marginal cropland has
been converted to pasture. The soils in the Blackland Prairie are well suited to
improved pasture grasses, and many are used for field crops. Summers in Hays
County are hot, and winters are fairly warm. Cold spells are of short duration, and
snowfall is rare. Rainfall is usually the heaviest in late spring and early fall.
Three soil types are present within the area investigated for this project. They
are Heiden clay, 5 to 8 percent slopes, eroded (HeD3); Heiden gravelly clay, 3 to 8
percent slopes (HgD); and Houston Black gravelly clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes (HvD).
These soils are depicted on Sheet 47 of the soil survey (Batte 1984).
HeD3 soils are described by Batte (1984:26) as deep, sloping soils found on the
steeper side slopes of hills and ridges in the Blackland Prairie Land Resource Area.
The upper layer is dark grayish-brown clay about 28 inches thick. The next layer
extends to a depth of 57 inches, and is grayish-brown clay. The underlying material, to
a depth of 84 inches, is light olive gray and pale olive shale. It is well drained, surface
runoff is rapid, and permeability is very slow.
HgD soils are described by Batte (1984:26-27) as deep, gently sloping to sloping
soils on the side slopes of hills and ridges in the Blackland Prairie Land Resource Area.
Typically, the surface layer is 25 inches thick and contains dark gravelly clay over dark
grayish-brown gravelly clay. Between 48 and 80 inches is pale yellow clay. This soil is
well drained, surface runoff is rapid, and permeability is very slow.
HvD soils are described by Batte (1984:28-29) as deep, sloping soils on the
convex side slopes of ridges in the Blackland Prairie Land Resource Area. Typically,
the upper layer is black gravelly clay about 36 inches thick. Below that, to a depth of 48
inches, is dark gray clay. The underlying layer, to a depth of 60 inches, is shaly clay.
This soil is moderately well drained, surface runoff is medium to rapid, and permeability
is very slow.

4

Figure 3. Project Area on Soils Map

5

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Hays County is located in the Central Texas Archeological Study Region of the
Eastern Planning Region as defined by the Department of Antiquities Protection in
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document (Kenmotsu
and Perttula 1993). The county is located in the Central Texas cultural-geographical
region (Region 10) as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:96-98) in a statistical overview.
At the time the overview was published, Hays County was 5th in the region with 130
recorded archeological sites. The 130 sites comprised 3.71% of the region and .64% of
the state. As of March 24, 2003, there were 366 recorded prehistoric and historic sites
in Hays County (TARL site files). The Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region
of Texas (Simons and Moore 1997) cites 97 references for the county. Although many
of these investigations have been small area surveys, often resulting in no sites being
recorded, several projects involving larger areas have been conducted. A review of the
Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology series authored by William E. Moore and
published by the THC from 1988 through 1992 revealed sporadic small area surveys,
many resulting in negative findings.
The majority of Hays County is located in the Edwards Plateau geographic region
of Texas. In the southern part of the county, the geographic region changes to the
Blackland Prairie, and this is the locus of the current project area. It is in the northern
part of the county that most archaeological work has been conducted and most of the
significant sites have been found. Although a county-wide review of previous work was
not conducted, it appears that many of the larger archaeological sites in Hays County
are located along the San Marcos River with counterparts on the opposite side in
Caldwell County.
No large area surveys have been conducted in the immediate vicinity of the
current project area; only five recorded sites are depicted on the entire Uhland
topographic map (TARL site files). The nearest recorded site is 41HY221 about 1.4 km
southeast of the current project area. This site was recorded during a survey of the
proposed route of the All American Pipeline by archaeologists from the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (Turpin et al. 1992). This site was originally
recorded as an "Isolated Occurrence of Cultural Materials" and not as a site. Later, a
site number was assigned; however, no site form exists. This site is located on the
eastward slope of a small hill overlooking a small drainage and Brushy Creek several
hundred meters to the east. The surveyors found 14 lithic artifacts such as core
fragments, tested cobbles, and flakes in a cultivated field. They also noted numerous
chert cobbles.

6

That potentially significant sites are present in the Blackland Prairie portion of
Hays County is evidenced by 41HY166 approximately nine miles southwest of the
current project area. This site was recorded during a survey of the San Marcos Fish
Hatchery by the Texas Archeological Survey (Davis 1985). Monitoring and testing was
conducted at 41HY166 in 1987 (Boes 1994). Three hearths were found at this site.
Although no temporally diagnostic artifacts were recovered in association with the
hearths, a large amount of organic materials such as bone (some burned) and shell
were recovered.
Due to contamination of the organic materials reliable radiocarbon dates were
not possible. A broken Ensor point found at the site dates between (200 B.C. - A.D.
600) (Turner and Hester 1985:94).
The most comprehensive overview of Hays County archaeology is present in a
report by Ricklis and Collins (1994). Although this study was carried out in the Edwards
Plateau region of the county, it is the most definitive discussion of Hays County
prehistory found by the Principal Investigator during the literature search. A general
overview of Hays County archaeology was written by Dee Ann Story (1993) for the
younger audience.

7

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, a records check for previously recorded sites in or near
the project area was conducted by Allegra Azulay at TARL. The Project Archaeologist
visited the project area with Mario Tobias, Manager of the Goforth WSC, before
conducting the field survey to make sure that all shovel tests would be excavated within
the construction corridor and not outside the project area right-of-way. Prior to the field
survey, the client flagged the route of the water line. The entire construction corridor
traverses an open pasture on private property 200 meters north of a mobile home park.
Edward P. Baxter, Project Archaeologist, performed this study on March 26,
2003. In general, the surface visibility was estimated in the field as 30 percent with
certain areas as high as 50 percent. The area was examined by a 100 percent
pedestrian survey accompanied by shovel testing. The Project Archaeologist worked
from northwest to southeast and numbered the tests consecutively from 1-13. A digital
camera was used to document the field conditions present during the survey.
Thirteen shovel tests were excavated along the construction corridor, and all
tests were negative in terms of yielding cultural materials. The tests were dug through
clay and gravels. The depth of the tests varied between 19 and 40 cm. All earth
excavated through shovel testing was screened using 1/4" hardware cloth, and a shovel
test log was kept. The approximate location of each test is depicted on the topographic
map Uhland, Texas (Figure 4).
One archaeological site was identified in the project area. It was given the field
designation T-1. Later, an official trinomial (41HY367) was assigned by TARL. During
the survey, the Project Archaeologist observed unmodified cobbles, tested cobbles,
flakes, and cores on the exposed surface along the northeast slope of a hill and on top
of the hill. Nine shovel tests (5-13) were excavated in the site area. Not one of the
tests yielded cultural materials. The artifacts observed on the surface were collected for
analysis in the laboratory. Since they were found on private property, they have been
offered to the landowner.

8

Figure 4. Shovel Tests

9

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
A check of site records at TARL revealed there are no previously recorded sites
within the project area, and the nearest site (41HY221) is approximately 1.4 km distant.
Site 41HY221 is identified on the "Isolated Occurrences of Cultural Materials" form on
file at TARL as an area of "many cobbles of chert" on the surface of the slope of a small
hill overlooking a small drainage and Brushy Creek several hundred meters to the east.
No site form is available.
The survey of the current project area resulted in the identification of a prehistoric
site (41HY367) that is described in this report as a lithic procurement area. Artifacts
observed consist of 1 bifacial tool, 3 cores, 3 flakes, and 2 pieces of shatter on the
surface within the 10 foot wide construction corridor (Table 1). Nine shovel tests (5-13)
were excavated in the site area, and no subsurface evidence of the site was found.
This lithic procurement site is restricted to the surface. Since the current investigation
was restricted to a 10 foot construction corridor, the extent of this site is not known. It is
logical, however, to assume that anywhere exposed cobbles are present on this
landform modified cobbles and other forms of lithic debitage will be present. The known
extent of the site within the construction corridor measures 520 meters in length and 10
feet in width.
That portion of the site within the construction corridor yielded natural and altered
chert cobbles on the surface. These cobbles are part of the Edwards formation and are
Cretaceous in origin. The cobbles with original surface present are angular or blocky in
form and still retain the morphological traits consistent with ledge chert. Therefore, it is
assumed that they are still in close proximity to their original context vertically or
horizontally. This site is a lithic procurement area, and may have been a major source
for raw materials in the area. The surface investigation resulted in the collection of nine
artifacts that evidence utilization by the aboriginal groups. All of these specimens were
found on the eroded surface. No cultural materials were found in any of the shovel
tests. Since subsurface in situ materials are not present in the area examined, no
further work is warranted. It is not possible to determine the significance of this site
without additional work in those areas outside the current project area.
The area had been previously disturbed through past ranching activities such as
root plowing and terracing as well as construction associated with local utilities. The
locations of newly recorded site 41HY367 and nearby lithic procurement site 41HY221
are depicted on the topographic map Uhland as Appendix I to this report. Bradley F.
Bowman examined the artifacts in the laboratory. His findings appear as Appendix II to
this report.

10

Table 1. Surface-Collected Artifacts from 41HY367.
______________________________________________________________________
Lot Number
Location
Description
______________________________________________________________________
41HY367-01

slope

Class A core (burned)

41HY367-02

top of hill

Class A core (burned)

41HY367-03

top of hill

Class B core (burned)

41HY367-04

slope

Class B core/bifacial tool

41HY367-05

top of hill

Primary flake

41HY367-06

top of hill

Primary flake

41HY367-07

top of hill

Secondary flake

41HY367-08

slope

Shatter

41HY367-09
slope
Shatter
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________

11

RECOMMENDATIONS
One previously unrecorded archaeological site (41HY367) was found within the
construction corridor. The portion of the site within the construction corridor does not
warrant further work (see Results and Conclusions above). It is, therefore,
recommended that the Goforth WSC be allowed to proceed with construction as
planned with no additional archaeological investigations. It is always possible that
areas containing cultural resources are missed during any archaeological survey.
Should any evidence of an archaeological site not discussed in this report be
encountered during construction of the proposed water line, work in the area where the
find has been made should be temporarily suspended until the situation can be
evaluated by a professional archaeologist in consultation with the THC, BVRA and
Goforth WSC.

12

REFERENCES CITED
Batte, Charles D.
1984 Soil Survey of Comal and Hays Counties, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office of
the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical Commission.
Boes, Thomas C.
1994 Archeological Testing and Monitoring at San Marcos (A.E. Wood) Fish
Hatchery, Hays County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
Public Lands Division Cultural Resources Program, Austin, Texas.
Davis, Michael W.
1985 An Archeological Survey and Assessment of the San Marcos (Wood) Fish
Hatchery, Hays County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Technical
Bulletin 79. The University of Texas at Austin.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document.
Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resources Management
Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.
Ricklis, Robert A., and Michael E. Collins
1994 Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek
Valley, Hays County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 19, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Simons, Helen, and William E. Moore
1997 Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas. Office of the
State Archeologist, Special Report 36, Texas Historical Commission.
Story, Dee Ann
1993 Riddles of the Past: The Archeology of Hays County. Published by the
Hays County Historical Commission.
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press.
Turpin, Solveig A., Leland C. Bement, and David G. Robinson
1992 All American Pipeline Project: Final Status Report. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

13

APPENDIX I
LOCATION OF SITES 41HY221 AND 41HY367

APPENDIX II: LITHIC ANALYSIS
Lithic Reduction Strategies and the 41HY367 Assemblage
The production of lithic artifacts is a linear reductive process. Analysis of this
collection was conducted in a logical sequence beginning with the acquisition of raw
materials following through the production sequence as evidenced by the recovered
collection. In all, nine specimens were recovered during this project. An examination of
the 41HY367 assemblage documents the availability of the lithic resources at this site
and the utilization and acquisition of these raw materials by prehistoric peoples. The
small quantity of recovered debitage and a dearth of stone implements broken during
manufacture suggests that stone tool production was not conducted at this site, but that
easily transported material in the form of large flakes or blades was removed from the
site to be reduced into formal tool types at another location.
Raw Material
This assemblage is composed entirely of Edwards chert, cretaceous in origin,
which occurred at the site in the form of fractured, eroded, and displaced ledge chert
cobbles. These materials appear to have not moved a great distance from the parent
deposits, as they exhibit a pitted, iron-red rough cortex with chipped angular edges.
These cobbles lack the attributes of slick, rounded exterior surfaces associated with
river-transported Uvalde gravels (Turner and Hester 1993:15) common in many central,
south, and southeastern areas of Texas. The physical size reflected in this assemblage
and the quantity of this raw resource would have made this site valuable to the
aboriginal people of prehistoric Texas.
Cores
Raw materials from which flakes or blades are removed in a systematic manner
to be used for the manufacture of a variety of stone tool types are defined as cores. As
material is removed from a core, it eventually reaches a point not practical for continued
use. The result is what is referred to as an "exhausted core." Four cores were found
and collected during this project.
Three of the cores (specimen 41HY367-04 excepted) were discarded by the
prehistoric craftsman due to apparent natural flaws that debilitate the craftsman's ability
to achieve a desired end. These cores are nearly exhausted. As the life of the core
nears its end, evidence of the original intent of the craftsman may become obscured,
making interpretations by researchers concerning the craftsman's original intent difficult.
There is no evidence in the specimens in this collection to connect the activity of chert
reduction to any temporal period or cultural affiliation. For descriptive purposes, the
cores represented in the 41HY367 collection were separated into classes based on
morphological traits.

The documented attributes include weight (measured in grams); the other
dimensions were measured in millimeters (mm). They are length, width, thickness,
number of directions of flakes on each core, flake removal dimensions, and length of the
largest flake scar that produced a successful flake.
Class A Cores (n=2)
Class A cores in this collection are defined as cobbles with one end removed at a
right angle to the axis of the parent material producing a flat surface to be utilized as a
striking platform. The recovered examples in this collection reveal flake scars occurring
at right angles to this prepared platform. Raw chert of poor quality may be improved by
slow exposure to intense heat. This metamorphic process is known to alter the nature
of chert by producing a glassy or wax-like appearance (and often a pinkish hue)
producing a material that is easier to reduce (Hester and Collins 1974). Both examples
of Class A cores reveal evidence of this process. Metric data from the four recovered
cores appear in Table 1.
Specimen 41HY367-01 (found on top of the hill) reveals the exfoliation of cortical
material on one lateral surface observed as thermally induced potlids (Whitaker
1994:73). Recorded observation suggests this to be the result of the thermal alternation
process, not a secondary event from a hearth or other heat source. This core exhibits
possible bipolar reduction in the removal of its primary flake and many impact points
from a hammerstone documenting non-successful attempts at flake removal. Flakes, in
the form of naturally occurring fractures and cavities containing crystalline quartz,
possibly resulted in its abandonment by the prehistoric craftsman. The number of flake
directions is one. The size of the largest flake is 80 mm (length) x 87.5 mm (width).
Specimen 41HY367-02 (found on the slope) is different from specimen
41HY367-01 in that, in addition to the prepared striking surface, it shows evidence that it
is a bisected Class A core, broken in half in a proximal-distal direction, then used in the
same manner as specimen 41HY367-01. The number of flake directions is one. The
size of the largest flake is 61 mm (length) x 14 mm (width).
Class B Cores (n=2)
This type of core displays the utilization of the naturally occurring surfaces of the
cobble for its initial flake removal and proceeds from an opportunistic perspective.
Succeeding flakes are removed when the knapper selectively identifies the most
promising naturally occurring platform produced during the removal of the previous
flake. Type B cores exhibit little effort in what could be defined as the production of a
formal striking platform.

Specimen 41HY367-03 (found on top of the hill) retains flake scars that run in
five directions. It appears to have been either burned or was subjected to light thermal
alteration. The size of the largest flake is 61 mm (length) x 51 mm (width).
Specimen 41HY367-04 (found on the slope) surpasses the other artifacts in this
assemblage in terms of physical size (Figure 1). This very large cobble exhibits flake
scars from the removal of three large (macro) flakes (Shafer 1985:299). Two were
removed from the surface, and the third from an opposite side. This resulted in the
production of a beveled edge of approximately 40E. Smaller flakes were carefully
removed from both surfaces of this edge producing a 121 mm straight, sharp cutting
edge (Figure 2). Microscopic examination of this edge (10X and 120X) revealed the
lateral 72 mm of this edge to be battered, either from usage as a chopping implement or
by a failed attempt to remove another flake. Micro flakes are present on both surfaces
of a fragile razor-like portion of the bit that could indicate use wear, damage by natural
geological forces or human activities such as rough handling or dropping. The straight
bit-like edge appears to have been intentionally produced to be used as a functional
tool, but wear patterns were not positively identified that could reinforce this assumption.
The size of the largest flake is 109.5 mm (length) x 111 mm (width). This specimen has
not been thermally altered.
Debitage
Debitage can be defined as "the total lithic residue produced during stone tool
manufacture" (Crabtree 1972:58). The reduction of finished material into a finished tool
follows a sequence of events and is reduced by known methodologies.
Hard Hammer Percussion (n=3)
A technique of reducing raw material with the use of a hand-held stone of elastic
properties such as quartzite. Blows from the hammer stone often produce thick flakes
which exhibit a battered point of impact. Hard hammer percussion is often used in the
initial stages of biface reduction (Whittaker 1994). The flakes in this class are two single
primary flakes which exhibit cortex on their complete dorsal surface (specimens
41HY367-05 and 41HY367-06) and one secondary flake with cortical material on one
lateral surface (specimen 41HY367-07).

Figure 1. Bifacial Tool (41HY367-04)

Figure 2. Cutting Edge of Artifact 41HY367-04
Shatter
This term refers to small fragmented pieces of debitage that can be produced
during any stage of tool manufacture but are devoid of any evidence of a specific
reduction technique. Two angular or blocky fragments were recovered. The maximum
dimension of these specimens was measured. Specimen 41HY367-08 is 19 mm, and
Specimen 41HY367-09 is 12 mm.
Conclusions
Visitors to site 41HY367 during prehistoric times were involved in the exploitation
of a lithic resource in the form of large Edwards chert cobbles. Evidence suggests that
these cobbles were reduced by two different strategies as evidenced by the
morphologically different core types that was implemented by a hard hammer reduction
technique. Large flakes or blades were removed from the cores that were transported
from the site. The lack of finished tools and the scarcity of debitage imply that the site
was used as a quarry and that raw materials were collected and transported elsewhere
to be used for formal tool manufacture.

REFERENCES CITED
Crabtree, Don E.
1972 Introduction to Flintworking. Occasional Papers of the Idaho State
University Museum 28. Pocatello, Idaho.
Hester, Thomas R., and Michael B. Collins
1974 Evidence for Heat Treating of Southern Texas Projectile Points. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 45:219-224.
Shafer, Harry J.
1985 A Technical Study of Two Maya Lithic Workshops in Colha, Belize. In
Stone Tool Analysis: Essays in Honor of Don E. Crabtree, edited by Mark
G. Plew, James C. Woods, and Max G. Provesic, University of New
Mexico. Albuquerque.
Turner, Sue Ellen, and Thomas R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. (Second Edition) Texas
Monthly Field Guide Series. Gulf Publishing Company. Houston.
Whittaker, John C.
1994 Flintknapping: Making and Understanding Stone Tools. The University of
Texas Press. Austin.

