PREHISTORIC ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
AT PALMETTO BEND RESERVOIR: PHASE 1
Jackson County, Texas

Paul R. McGuff

With contributions by
Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr .•
Billy M. Davidson, William
B. Fawcett, Louise. Jones,
and Duford Skelton

Research Report No. 58
Palmetto Bend Reservoir Series/Volume 3
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
February 1978

This page intentionally left blank.

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

Texas Archeological Survey
BALCONES RESEARCH CENTER
10,1<:>0 BURNET ROAD,

AUSTIN,

TEXAS

787'11

PALMETTO BEND RESERVOIR SERIES

Volume 1:

TEXANA: Exaavations at a Nineteenth-Century
Inland Coastal Town~ JaakBon County~ Texas.
Marsha F. Jackson

Volume 2:

ARCHITECTURE OF TEXANA~ 1831 - 1883
Jaakson County~ Texas
H. Anthony Crosby

Volume 3:

PREHISTORIC ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT
PALMETTO BEND RESERVOIR: PHASE 1
Jaakson County~ Texas
Paul R. McGuff

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR
David S. Dibble
EDITOR

E. Suzanne Carter

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the terms of Contract
CX7000-4-0l95 between the National Park Service and the
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin, funds were provided by the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation.

iv

ABSTRACT
Available ethnographic and archeologic information suggest that,
1) prehistoric peoples inhabiting the Northwest Gulf Coast between
the Trinity and Nueces rivers were non-sedentary hunters and gather­
ers, 2) utilization of coastal marine resources before about 2000
years ago was by people with a basically inland adaptation, and 3)
after 2000 years ago an explicitly coastal marine adaptation was
developed by the indigenous peoples. The data also suggest that the
adaptive strategies employed were more stable during ~1ddle and late
Middle Prehistoric and Late Prehistoric periods but less stable dur­
ing the early Middle Prehistoric and Transitional to the Late Pre­
historic periods.
It seems likely that during the periods of more
stable adaptive strategies the peoples involved were unlike present
examples of hunting and gathering societies in temperate environ- .
ments: social stratification may have occurred during the middle
and late Middle Prehistoric and Late Prehistoric periods. Peoples
with similar backgrounds probably occupied the region from at least
the middle or early Middle Prehistoric times until late in the Late
Prehistoric period.
Late in the Late Prehistoric, groups from outside
the region began to include the coastal inland in their exploitive
range.
Excavation and investigation of natural localities indicate
that some erosional and depositional sequences may be correlated
over a wide area and that regionally and/or locally important en­
vironmental fluctuations have occurred in the area within the period
of human occupation.
Such fluctuations in past environments have
not been generally recognized.
Five sites are considered in the initial phase of intensive
excavation at Palmetto Bend Reservoir.
That investigation was
directed at: identifying variables which will not be available for
study in the ongoing project because of poor or-differential
preservation, collecting information on recent climatic history and
beginning to compile a record of cultural-economic differences and
similarities through time.
Future work in the reservoir will be
aimed more directly at identifying the mechanisms of observed change
in culture.

v

This page intentionally left blank.

CONTENTS

Abst-ract.
P-reface "

...

..

v

.
. . .. . ...
.

1

Introduction.
Research: P-ractical Conside-rations and Limitations

3
6

Social Environment • • • • • • • • . • . •
Ethnographic Considerations • •
Archeological Background • • • • .
Prehisto-ric Natu-ral Resou-rce Utilization • .

8
8
21
28

Physical Envi-ronment . • • • • .
P-resent Day Envi-ronment.

36
36

.

.......
....

Resea-rch: Objectives and Implementation
Long Term Resea-rch Objectives • • • • .
Short Term Resea-rch Ogjectives . •
• •...••
P-rocedu-res Adopted to Fulfill Sho-rt Term Objectives.

51
51
51
52

Site Description and Analysis .
Site 41 JK 16. •
• •.
Atkinson Site 41 JK 41 •
Site 41 JK 50 . . . . •
The Venom Hill Site 41 JK 91 • .
Hawk Pe-rch Site 41 JK 147 • .

55
55
65
76
82
144

Local and Regional Comparisons . .
Acknowledgements.
Refe-rences Cited • .

...

,

• 159

..

· 174
· 175

APPENDIX I: The A-rtifacts and A-rtifact Typology

W.B.

Fa~oett

184

APPENDIX II: Faunal Data f-rom Sites Excavated During the
1974 Season at Palmetto Bend

P. MoGu!! and B. Davidson

216

APPENDIX III: Biological Zones in the Area of Investigation

B. Davirison andP., MrHJuf!

234

J(mescanilP. MoGu!!

240

Cuneata Clam Collecting
D. Skelton

262

APBENDIX IV: Sediment Analysis
APPENDIX V: The Seasonal Factor of R.

vii

viii

APPENDIX VI: Pollen analysis of Recovered Samples from
Sediments at 41 JK 41 and 41 JK 91
V. M. Bryant

276

Figures
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Palmetto Bend Reservoir: Phase I Site
Locations, 1974 Season.
Biological Zones.
Navidad River Valley Geomorphology .
Generalized Geologic Cross Section of the
Western Valley Edge at 41 JK 91 .
Flake Dimensions, 41 JK 16 .
41 JK 41, Atkinson Site; Plan of Excavations
Geologist's Test Pit: East Wall, 41 JK 41.
Flake Dimensions, 41 JK 41 •
Flake Dimensions, 41 JK 50 .
41 JK 91, Venom Hill Site: Plan of Excavations.
41 JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit Profile.
Flake Dimensions, 41 JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit.
Artifacts from 41 JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit, Levell.
.
Artifacts from 41 JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit, Level 2 & 3 .
.
Artifacts from 41 JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit, Levels 3,4,5,6.
.
Artifacts from 41 JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit, Level 7 .
.
Artifacts from 41 JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit, Levels 8 & 9.
.
Flake Dimensions, 41 JK 91, 3 X 5 Unit.
Artifacts from 41 JK 91, 3X 5 Unit, Upper Cluster.
.
Lithic Tool Assemblages: 41 JK 91.
.
Predation Curves 41 JK 91.
41 JK 147, Hawk Perch Site; Plan of Excavations.
.
Flake Dimensions, 41 JK 147.
.
Change and Adaptation in the Coastal Inland.
.
Rangia ouneata Sample Locations.
.
Rangia ouneata Growth Stage Frequencies; Modern Samples.
Pal~etto Bend Res~rvoir-Rangia'ouneata Growth:h
Stage Frequencies; Archeological Samples.
.
41 JK 7, Rangia ouneata Growth Stage Frequencies;.
.
Calhoun, Jackson Counties Rangia Cuneata Growth
Stage Frequencies; Archeological Samples.
.
Jackson, Matagorda Counties Rangia ouneata Growth
Stage Frequencies; Archeological Samples .

5
37
42
45
61
66
10
73
80
84
88
94
101
105
109
113
117
129
133
143
145
147
154
167
264
266
267
268
269
270

ix

Tab'les
1.
2•
3.

4.
5.

6.
7•

8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
*19.
*20.
*21.
*22.
23.
24.

25.
26.

Fauna: Seasonality and Exploitative Potential • . . .
Effects of Vehicle Traffic on Whole Flake Dimensions .
Representation of Seasonal Species Other
t han Bangia (Juneata 3 X 3 Uni t .
••.•
Percent of Individuals in Species Restricted to
Freshwater Habitats • . • • • • • •
A. Debris Type: Order of Removal from Core.
·
B. Flake Platform Type . . . . • . • . .
·
Whole Flake Measurements . . . • . • • . . • .
Thermal Modification of Lithic Debris.
Lithic Tool Attribute List
·
. . • .
Lithic Tool Types . . • • . • • • • . •
A. Pearson's r Correlation of Levels Using Tool
Types from-4l JK 91, 3.X 3'Unit
·
B. Elementary Lihkage Analysis • .
• • •
Lithic Tool Inventory • . .
Pottery Type Description .
Shell Artifacts . . • . •
·
'.
Bone Artifacts. • . • . •
. •.••••
Faunal Species Recovered from 41 Jk 41, 41 JK 147.
Faunal Data: 41 JK 41 . . . • • • . • • . • . . • .
Faunal Data: 41 JK 91, 3 X 5 Unit, 0-30 centimeters . .
_Fau~al Speeies Recoveredrfro~ 4lJK 91 . .
. .•.
Faunal Data: 41 JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit, Levell & 2 .
Faunal Fata:4l JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit, Level 3 & 4 •
Faunal Data: 41 JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit, Levels 5, 6 & 7
·
Faunal Data: 41 JK 91, 3 X 3 Unit, Level 8 & 9
Faunal Data: 41 JK 147 • . . . . • • • . • •
Chemical Analysis Results: pH, Organic Matter
and Calcium Carbonate.
. ..•.•
Particle Size Analysis
.•.
·
Pollen Analysis..
. ...
•

.

;n

* Note Errata on page x for these tables.

39
63
· 124
· 141
• 188
. 188

· 192
. 193
. 196
• 198
198

• 200
· 207
• 209
211
· 219
· 220
221
• 222
· 223
· 225
• 227
229
231
246
. 249
• 277

ERRATA
Table 1.

Exploitive should be: Explotative

Tables 19, 20, 21 and 22 have an error in the column
headed:
Est. Total
Body Wt.
(kg. )

The decimal point in these figures is misplaced and
should be adjusted by the user one place to the left.
For example:
7. 43

should be

.743

PREFACE
The first volume, in a series of volumes, on prehistoric
archeology of a section of the Navidad River Basin is reported here.
Data has been retrieved as part of a general salvage program within
the Palmetto Bend Reservoir.
The volume serves three functions.
First, it reports information on excavations conducted during the
summer and fall of 1974.
Second, basic background information on
cultural and environmental relationships are presented to enable
predictions on the nature of prehistoric cultures. Finally, pro­
cedures are outlined for a continuing program of research at
Palmetto Bend.
Data which have resulted from excavations show an emphasis
upon selected areas of research.
The excavations were confined to
small areas which were related to the rest of the site and to non­
cultural deposits off the site by a continuous series of backhoe
trenches.
The small size of excavation units was required by a
time consuming though valuable methodology for collecting food and
artifact refuse of a minute size.
The excavations were planned to
set the stage for the satisfaction of long term objectives by begin­
ning to collect information on recent climatic history through
stratigraphic, faunal and ~ol~en studies; -and to compile-a record of
general cultural differences and similarities in a time perspective.
The background data on culture and environment is detailed.
It is hoped that only minor additions to that base will be necessary
in other volumes of this series.
I do agree with W. W. Taylor that
an analysis of the culture-environment relationship is an imperative
requirement for every report which deals with a region for the first
time (1948: 90).
By no means can this volume be considered as the
beginning of archeological research in the region, but its slightly
different approach does, in my mind, require a changed emphasis in
the analysis of background information.
The most significant role intended for the volume is that of
refining plans so they can better fulfill contractual and professional
responsibilities.
Contractual requirements are simply understood
but professional respons'ibilities often seem difficult to grasp.
I believe that under the special circumstances involved in "contract
archeology," two professional duties must be performed, 1) we must
attempt to solve general problems that(can be recognized at the time
of research, and 2) to collect data not necessarily related to the
solution of known problems.
Undoubtedly questions will be asked in
the future which we hava failed to anticipate and for which no
data have been collected.
Since the cultural resource base in the
area of Palmetto Bend Reservoir is about to be destroyed and will
be unavailable for study in the future, it is our responsibility
to try to minimize such a situation.
1

This page intentionally left blank.

INTRODUCTION
Phases of construction on the Palmetto Bend Project are the
responsibility of the U. S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of
Reclamation.
The project as planned will involve two stages of
construction with the first on the Naviaad River and the second on
the Lavaca River.
The Stage-One Dam and Reservoir on the Navidad
River is the present focal point of archeological investigations.
As plans for construction on the Lavaca River are finalized the
continuing archeological program within the reservoir will be ad­
justed to efficiently obtain information on cultural resources
that will be damaged or destroyed.
The reservoir at the completion of Stage-One will be a shallow
body of water extending for 18 miles up the Navidad River Valley
(Fig. 1).
The lower portions of two principal tributaries of that
river, Sandy and Mustang creeks, will also be inundated.
At maximum
flood pool, water will have a surface area of 12,500 acres and a
maximum depth of 61 feet.
The top of the conservation storage, 44
feet mean sea level (m.s.l.) is 3 feet below the maximum flood pool.
During construction phases an estimated 4,900 acres below 44
feet m.s.l. will be cleared of vegetation (U. S. Bureau of Reclama­
tion 1974: C-18); borrow material, amounting to 6,725,000 cubic
yards presumably tobe obtained from a number of proposed borrow
areas, will be used in building the dam and making relocations
(U. S. Bureau of Reclamation 1974: Table 4); and, excavation and
other alteration of the land surface is expected in areas of con­
struction and relocation.
These activities are predicted to im­
mediately affect certain prehistoric sites.
Once completed the reservoir will have long term effects which
over a period of time will alter the potential for the further study
of remaining cultural resources.
A simulated operation of the reser­
voir, with a demand of 75,000 acre-feet of water per year, indicated
that at least once each tea year period water level will fluctuate
to 4 feet below conservation pool.
On one occasion during the 30
year simulation the water level reached a low of 31 feet below the
44 feet m.s.l. conservation capacity (U. S. Bureau of Reclamation
1974: Chart 2).
The Bureau of Reclamation estimates that 315 acre­
feet of sediment will be deposited annually in the reservoir.
Over
a 100 year period, with compaction, these sediments will occupy
21,000 acre-feet of the reservoir's conservation capacity (U. S.
Bureau of Reclamation 1974: A-13).
Research subsequent to the inundation of two existing reservoirs
with fluctuating water levels indicates cultural resources in such
circumstances are in danger of destruction.
Skinner and Gallagher
have determined by test excavations at Lake Whitney that many sites
were eroded away by wave action (1974: iii).
In an earlier published
3

4

INTRODUCTION

....

-.~.--~.

---~----

reference from Lake Buchanan an important archeological site unrecord­
ed during preimpoundment surveys was found completely deflated by
wave action (Crawford 1965: 72).
The effects of the deposition of large quantities of silt upon
archeological sites have not been quantified.
From a safety stand­
point, the approval of removing tons of unconsolidated sediment from
archeological sites is questionable.
The possibility of excavat­
ing overburden is low because of economic factors.
Locating buried
sites and removing the non-cultural deposits without damaging the
cultural resources are additional problems.
Even assuming that an
abrupt change to an aqueous environment does not destroy too much
of the cultural record, and that the inability to study the sur­
rounding environment is not too great a hinderance to the investi­
gator's research design, it may not be worth the effort to remove
the overburden if the value of sites has been altered.
The documented effects of reservoir fluctuation elsewhere and
the stated reservations on the question of silting are clear. At
Palmetto Bend according to the Bureau of Reclamation's simulated
data (1974: Chart 2) the lake level will occasionally reach a low
of 13 feet m.s.l.
The variation in water level will, even at the
dam axis, expose portions of the primary flood plain and elevations
between 13 feet m.s.l. and 48 feet m.s.l. to erosion.
All known
prehistoric sites are found at elevations between 20 and 55 feet
m.s.!. (Mallouf et al. 1973: 50).
It is probable that no archeo­
logical sites within the confines of the proposed reservoir will
again be available for study.
There is in fact, a probability that
the sites will be destroyed.
The potential importance of archeological sites to be affected
by Palmetto Bend and the necessity for consideration of cultural
resources was recognized early by planning agencies.
In 1967 the
Texas Archeological Salvage Project (now the Texas Archeological
Survey) conducted an archeological reconnaissance of both stage
areas; 22 archeological sites were recorded (Wakefield 1968: 5-10).
The 1967 survey fulfilled the requirements for a "preliminary field
reconnaissance" (Scovill et al. 1972: 4).
In 1971, archeological
fieldwork and analysis to fulfill government guidelines for an
"intensive survey" was requested (Scovill et al. 1972: 4).
In early
1972 the Texas State Historical Survey Committee began investigation
for this purpose.
An August 1973 report published by that agency
and the Texas Water Development Board (Mallouf et al. 1973) inven­
tories a total of 82 sites, outlines environmental effects on these
resources and defines a number of research problems.
The Historical
Survey Committee report adequately fulfills the requirements for
an intensive survey.
In accordance with federal guidelines of responsibility for
cultural resources as stated in Executive Order 11593, "Protection
and Enhancement of the Cultural Environment", and as recommended in
the Historical Survey Committee report, the Bureau of Reclamation
is supporting archeological testing and excavation at Palmetto
Bend.
The agency contracted for ongoing archeological research

FIGURE 1

PALMETTO BEND RESERVOIR
Phase I Site Locations
(1974

SEASON)

JACKSON

COUNTY

_ _ _ _ S.H· _ _ _ _...!.---;~~~b111

• PREHISTORIC
• HISTORIC

SITE

SITE

All site numbers
preceded by 41 JK

o,

1

2

I

I

3,

MILE S
NORMAL WATER SURFACE ELEV. 44.0
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEYIMLFI75

INTRODUCTION

6

Under terms of a memorandum of agreement with the National Park
Service is the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
For five months in 1974 (June-October) Texas Archeological
Survey crews were on location conducting excavation within a number
of historic and prehistoric archeological sites to be affected by
construction of the dam and spillway.
This research will continue.
In the future, it will be necessary to concentrate on the archeo­
logical resources to be damaged by the long term effects of reser­
voir impoundment.
RESEARCH:

PRACTICAL LIMITATIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS

At Palmetto Bend, as is the situation with most archeo­
logical work in North America, academic interests have to be pur­
sued with a pragmatic respeot for construction schedules, re­
flection upon the extent of destruction that individual sites
will suffer and the recognition that a confined and arbitrarily
defined work area imposes a significant limitation in archeo­
logical interpretation.
In these circumstances research does not
often follow an ideal course of scientific inquiry.
That actu­
ality is the subject of both consideration and dissension within
the archeological discipline; nevertheless, the restraints
remain, and are to a large extent, unavoidable.
A well founded distress felt by scientists concerning "sal­
vage archeology" or "cultural resource mitigation" is not over
inherent limitations in the work but with a failure to develop
effective procedures to maximize a potential for understanding
cultural processes.
Contributions to this understanding are in­
evitably more valuable than other avenues of research because
they encompass an interest beyond the bounds of the archeolog­
ical field.
These scientists are worried over the fact that con­
cern has remained with understanding artifact typology, stylistic
chronological placement and the relationships between archeog­
ically defined units.
The methodology for investigationg the in­
dicated questions is inappropriate unless the answers to such are
tempered in light of, and considered as tools for, reaching solu­
tions to problems of greater importance.
Such problems are the
explanation and clarification of differences and similarities in
culture with an express emphasis on the processes involved in cul­
tural change.
The emphasis here would be placed on explaining
change and on isolating variables critical in
more than one instance of change.
In no way can
description in and of itself provide an answer to
the questions posed as the crux of the goal.
In
short, the goal is to explain change, not to de~
scribe it (Plog 1974: 10).

PRACTICAL LIMITATIONS AND CONSIDERATIONS

7

Two major varieties of limitations can inhibit the quality
of archeology--thoseexternally imposed and those self-imposed.
At rihe beginning of th±s~rep6tt pLacti~al limitations peculiar
to the work at Palmetto Bend are discussed.
Such factors alter
the course of scientific questioning and will remain a contin­
uing consideration in archeological planning.
A serious self­
imposed limitation has been identified:
thus far no effective
procedure has been developed to take significant advantage of a
potential for understanding cultural processes.
Whereas externally imposed limitations will be identified
immediately because they were considered in planning for the
field work last year, procedures for explaining cultural change
are discussed in a concluding section of this report and with
the input of the psst season's data.
It should be understood
from the beginning that, while such procedures for analyzing
cultural change are comparable, the data used are unique to the
area of study.
Knowledge gained from the use of these procedures
will require constant re-evaluation and refinement of hypotheses.
Use of this methodology is itself a limitation (perhaps of a more
likeable sort) because it requires selective data retrieval.
Sp~aking specifically'of'2fhe' eitcum-stances at·-Palmetto Bend
and the limitation of the confined work area, there is an urge
to fall back upon an over-used phrase in archeology:
there has
been very little research in this area (Fox et at. 1974: 19;
Ma 11 0 u f eta t. 19 7 3: 31; S tor y 19 68: 5).
But, it is t rue her e .
There is very little known about the region's prehistoric cul­
tures.
For that reason the limitations of the work area at Pal­
metto Bend are particularly severe.
Hypotheses on change and other aspects of cultural systems
will be the outcome of investigations into the prehistoric
archeology of that part of the Navidad River Basin to be inun­
dated by Palmetto Bend Reservoir, but how does one identify and
understand a cultural system when only a part of it is available
for study? Concern in this interim report will be to prevent
the fallacy'of the six blind men who went to see the elephant
(Saxe 1921: 306).
The first blind man happened to fall against
the elephant's broad side and was sure that elephants were exactly
like walls, the second, feeling of the tusk insisted that they
were shaped like spears, the third happened to take the squirmin~
trunk into his hands and asserted that elephants were very much
like snakes.
The remaining three men felt the knee (a tree),
the ear (a fan), and the tail (a rope).
The dispute between the
six men was loud and long but no one was wholly correct because
they had failed to account for the possible range of interpreta­
tion before making their assumptions.
No one attempted to qual­
ify the predictions they maie.
One way to qualify interpretations is to first consider cul­
tural systems on a large scale and then examine how the individual
parts of that system relate to the whole.
Predictions derived
from observations on cultural systems at the macro-level will be
tested and refined by knowledge accumulated on cultural systems
at the micro-level.

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
A comprehensive review of archeological and ethnographic
research would not only be needlessly repetitive when summaries
are available elsewhere (Newcomb 1961; Story 1968; Mallouf et at.
1973), it would complicate and confuse the objective of this sec­
tion.
This selective review is intended to provide relevant data
from previous research as an aid in the development of propos!­
tions on the human environment during prehistory.
When previous investigations are particularly relevant to a
topic, appropriate references have been made.
ETHNOGRAPHIC CONSIDERATIONS
INTRODUCTION
A section on ethnography can serve a variety of functions.
The particular purpose in this case is to set bounds for the
ethnographic data base used in planning archeological work and
to state, in detail, assu~ptions that have been made about ethno­
graphic implications for the prehistoric human environment. The
discussion will be restricted to satisfy these priorities; how~
ever, information on both a world and local scale are included.
The use of these ethnographic considerations depends upon
the acceptance of two basic assumptions, 1) prehistoric inhab­
itants of the Nortnwest Gulf-Coastal-Plain were, in this region,
hunting and gathering peoples and, 2) small scale societies like
those of the hunters and gatherers are comparable to an extent.
Archeological research on prehistoric peoples-,-although
not intensive in this area, supplies evidence for a hunting and
gathering lifeway. Remnants of material culture and subsistence
refuse in archeological sites indicate a lack of permanent struc~
tures, a small tool assemblage and a diverse subsistence base
(Story 1968: 42,62; Mallouf et at. 1973: 137; site survey forms
on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory). Pri­
marily the diverse resource base and secondarily non-sedentism
are characteristic of the hunter-gatherer lifeway in temperate
environments.
At the time of European contact natives were living by
hunting, food gathering and fishing in the coastal regions south­
west of Galveston Bay (Newcomb 1961: 30; Campbell 1960: 148).
Agriculture and a semi-sedentary way of life had been developed
by some coastal peoples in the area between the Sabine River and
8

ETHNOGRAPHIC CONSIDERATIONS

9

and Galveston Bay.
Surviving small scale societies although isolated from one
another may arrive independently at similar solutions to similar
problems (Helm 1968: 124-125; Birdsell 1968: 229-240). Compar­
isons between socially complex agricultural and industrial cul­
tures are more difficult than -between what have b~en called
"primitive societies".
WORLD HUNTERS AND GATHERERS
Similarities Among Known Hunter And Gatherer Societies
Most known hunters and gatherers have certain characteris­
tics in common they, 1) are non-sedentary, 2) have a small com­
munity size, 3) have no food surpluses, 4) have a non-continuity
of the exploitive group, and 5) have no specialized or formal­
ized institutions.
If surviving hunting and gathering societies
are similar to prehistoric groups at this level, the implications
of the similarities, in regard to the archeological record, are
important.
The foraging economy requires that people be on the move.
Peoples dependent primarily upon exploiting resources in their
natural state rather than controlling them must adjust to sea­
sonal availability or non-availability of resources. Archeolog­
ical manifestations of such groups would, if visible at all, be
relatively uncomplex living surfaces with simple, meager material
culture remains and, refuse indicative of seasonal or cyclical
exploitation of specific resources. Presence of attractive and
available resources would have influence on the placement of
habitation and specific activity localities.
The small community size maintained by hunter-gatherer
society probably reflects both dependence upon naturally avail­
able resources for survival and membership within the natural en­
vironmental system. Survival in such cases depended upon con­
scious or subconscious knowledge of the natural system. Know­
ledge of the environment implies placement of habitation sites
in relation to the available resources suitable for subsistence
maintenance of the group. Most available resources in a natural
environment are unable to sustain intensive exploitation by large
groups and retain their original level of reliability. Since
the means of survival is dependent upon natural availability of
resources and not facilities for controlling nature, exploitive
group size must remain small. The small population size may re­
flect Liebig's "extended law" (Broughly 1968: 2) which states
that population size is determined by maxima and minima of spe­
cific resources. A discussion of Liegig's extended law and its
implications is found in Brian Hayden's article, The Carrying

lO

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

Capacity Dilemma (1975: 11-21).
Food surpluses are not often found in hunter-gatherer soci­
eties in tropical and temperate environments because storage a­
gainst adversity in the future is not necessary.
The broad ex­
ploitive base provides a sufficient margin of safety and insures
survival. An example is provided by Richard Lee who in his stud­
ies of the !Kung Bushmen of Botswana has found that "The important
point (concerning Bushmen life pattern) is that food is a constant,
but distance required to reach food is a variable .•• " (1968: 33).
During the dry season the subsistence base diversified to " ••• pro­
vide an essential margin of safety •.. " for the !Kung Bushmen (Lee
1968: 35). The !Kung Bushmen are a group often referred to as
"marginal isolates ll •
Lee feels it is becoming clear that, with few exceptions
" .•. the hunter-gatherer subsistence base is at least routine and
reliable and at best suprisingly abundant" (1968: 30).
The band is usually an entity without definite boundaries.
"Variations in food supply from region to region and from year to
year create a fluid situation that can best be met by flexible or­
ganizations that allow people to move from one area to another."
(Service 1966: 12). As a result of the frequent visiting between
resource areas, groups do not become strongly attached to a ter­
ritory and do not maintain exclusive rights to resources (Lee and
DeVore 1968: 12). That implies that resource areas may have been
utilized by different groups at the same time or when necessity
required, without conflict. The distances necessary to reach a
food supply are so unpredictable in most existing hunter-gatherer
societies that the migration of the people cannot be confined to
consistent routes or within conventional territories. This " •••
flulcf' organiz ation o£~cen t hun tera has cere airi. advan tage~L, in~
cluding the adjustment of group size to resources, the leveling
out of demographic variance, and resolution of conflict by fis­
sion." (Lee and DeVore 1968: 12).
Present day hunter-gatherer societies, contain no specialized
or formalized groups which exist as institutions (for example:
political, economic, or religious) supported by the rest of society
(Lee and DeVore 1968: 12; Service 1966: 8). Within non-sedentary
groups that have a fluid exploitive pattern requiring their occupa­
tion of a large territory, members have a commonality of purpose.
That purpose is using the naturally available resources in envi­
ronments.
In this task all hunting-gathering peoples are partners.
Formal and specialized institutions serve a function of supplying
a bond between people who have lost a common purpose. Individual
specialization is associated with a change to a subsistence tech­
nique that requires division of responsibility on more than an
age or sex basis. In special cases within isolated, non-sedentary,
hunter-gatherer groups which had developed such well adapted sub­
sistence techniques that the exploitive group was more stable
(group specializat~on rather than individual) some institution may
have been necessary to hold the larger ethnic or cultural group to­
gether.

ETHNOGRAPHIC CONSIDERATIONS

11

Hunters Today And Hunters In The Past
The root of the successful strategy em~loyed by non-seden­
tary hunter-gatherers seems to be a dependence on a diverse re­
source base. Even though there are abundant and stable food re­
sources upon which these peoples primarily depend, they are still
willing to devote energy to less abundant and less stable re­
sources (Lee 1968: 41)
This has insured survival of hunter
groups during periods of environmental stress and reduced re­
source availability.
Portions of the world occupied by hunters and gatherers
have decreased until, with the exception of a few isolates living
in marginal areas, that way of life has disappeared. The present
understanding of the nature of hunter-gatherer society has been
drawn from peoples no longer living in preferred portions of their
traditional range (Lee and DeVore 1968: 5). It is probable, for
that reason, that past expressions were different from present
expressions of the society. One aspect of this possibility has
been recognized by ethnographers.
"Since a routine and reliable
food base appears to be a common feature among modern hunter­
gatherers, we suspect that the ancient hunters living in much
better environments would have enjoyed an even more substantial
food supply" (Lee and DeVore 1968: 6).
Fluidity of band composition, noted as a most characteristic
feature of modern hunters, may be a product of recent accultu­
ation (Lee and DeVore 1968: 7).
It is likely that this fluidity
of band composition is an adaptation for survival within the un­
attractive or marginally preferred territories now occupied.
Such a difference between present and past hunters could have
far-reaching implications. Although the proposition that such
differences have occurred has not been tested widely (or at all
to our knowledge), it should certainly be acknowledged as a
problem in ethnographic analogy.
What characteristics could be expected when spatial rela­
tionships in hunter-gatherer groups are stable and when they are
unstable? What are the causes for stability and instability and
the implications for archeology? Deetz has suggested that both
the Ge', (Australians) and the Californians at first European
contact may have been more typical of most pre-agriculture
hunter-gatherer groups because of their isolation from sedentary
cultures. Lack of contact with such cultures may have allowed
a formal and fixed spatial relationship between people and en­
vironment and the development and retention of a complex struc­
ture in the isolated societies. "Should frequent movement be­
come common with some environmental change (either social or
natural) such a delicate and complex institution might be ex­
pected to weaken and disappear." (Deetz 1968: 284)
Stable spatial relationships and the development of a re­
latively complex social institution are the result of a situa­

12

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

tion in which homeostasis has been reached.
In that case adap­
tations to a way of life have been refined without the burden of
adjustment in social patterns to situations affecting survival.
This is not to say that hunter-gatherer societies without complex
social institutions or stable spatial relationships (in contrast
to those hunter-gatherer societies with more ordered spatial ties)
are in a state of constant flux in life patterns, but, that for
such groups there has not been a refinement of cultural expres­
sion within the environment.
Alvin Toff1er (1970) speaks of a time event that arises from
the stacking of a new culture on an old one. The product of such
a sup:e-rimposition is a tremendous acceleration of the rate of
change in society. He calls the phenomenon "future shock". Con­
ceivably hunters and gatherers who came in contact with formative
society, and, living examples of those groups, have suffered and
are sutfering many symptoms of this disease described by Toffler
as "culture shock in one's own society" (1910: 13).
Given the information presented it appears contact with agri­
culturalists changed hunter-gatherer society. If this is true
than it can be hypothesized that:
1) hunting and gathering societies today are different

from foragers in the past and,
2) that their way of life is a remnant of a once suc­
cessful and complex adaptive pattern now in the
throes of a type of future shock common in prehis­
toric times after the advent of agriculture.
Under the conditions hypothesized it would be expected that
present day hunters and gatherers characterized by a lack of spe­
cialized or formalized institutions and a non-continuity of the
exp10itive group would produce diffuse patterns over time in their
assemblages.
Conversely hunter-gatherer groups with no social
stress from outside would, with a more stable 1ifeway, evidence
structured patterns in their assemblages expressed through time.
It can also be expected that present hunting and gathering groups
most isolated from other societies would retain the greatest a­
mount of structure. The last seems to be true of the Australians
and the native Californians at the time of first European contact
(Deetz 1968: 284).
Coastal And Inland Groups
Birdsell has determined that there is a functional rela­
tionship between rainfall and territory.
Thus, he has demon­
strated that hunter-gatherer populations exist in an equilibrium
system with the natural environment (1968: 230). Birdsell's

ETHNOGRAPHIC CONSIDERATIONS

13

functional relationship holds true for inland groups only. These
groups occupy territorial units where both food and water resources
are deriv.ed locally and related to the available amount of rain­
fall.
In coastal marine areas the functional relationship is
thrown off because water and food resources are not restricted
by the amount of rainfall available locally.
In coastal marine environments, once a technology has been
developed for explo i ting th-e resources, a higher human density
than would be expected from Birdsell's regression curve occurs.
It is inferred that cultures exploiting a marine environment have
the potential to subsist within a smaller area than is possible
for inland groups because food is more concentrated and that,
if the technology to exploit the concentrated resource is stipu­
lated, the environment may sustain a much looser system of equi­
librium for the groups.
These conditions permit a wide varia­
bility in the form of coastal marine hunter-gatherer society
(Birdsell 1968: 235).
In an inland circumstance resources are more disperse and
rely upon the amount of local rainfall. The range exploited
increases and groups may be maintained by a much tighter system
of equilibrium forces producing decreasing variability in the
form of hunter-gatherer society.
Availability of resources related to locally earned and
locally unearned water in the natural system does Qause signi­
ficant and predictable differences in the form of the groups in­
volved. Coastal marine groups in estuary areas will have a much
higher population density and conduct activities within a smaller
universe than will inland hunter-gatherer groups.
It is pre­
dicted that subsistence strategies of coastal marine people will
be more variable between societies at this level than that of
coastal inland people.
The predictability of coastal inland
groups should be higher because it is expected that a tighter
density equilibrium system operating on a successful adaptive
strategy would allow less diversity in the form of hunting and
gathering society. If inland hunters and gatherers are using the
natural environment not controlling it, then they must have a
complex adaptive system with many alternative strategies in order
to subsist.
The predictability of such a system existing is high.
the looser equilibrium system for coastal marine hunters and
gatherers enables more of the element of chance to be involved
in the expression of cultures. Food is plentiful and a group may
decide to eat only a few types or many_
It is assumed, given the
length of the Middle Prehistoric period on the Texas Coast, and
the possibility of what has been called "cultural lag" (Story
1968: 42), that peoples were slow to change subsistence systems:
evidence of a successful adaptation (Sanders and Price 1968).

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

14

LOCAL ETHNOHISTORY
Background
At the time of first European contact, peoples living along
this portion of the Gulf Coast were recognized as forming two
major groups. A people called the Karankawa made their living on
marine food resources along the shores of the Gulf and its estu­
aries.
To the inland and surviving on terrestrial rather than
marine food resources were the Coahuiltecans. Each of these major
groups had a number of subdivisions formed by individuals utilizing
common camps. The Coahuiltecan subdivisions were more closely knit
together than the Karankawan subdivisions. Both the Karankawa and
the Coahuiltecans are said to have spoken derivatives of the same
language group (Newcomb 1961: 30) and both major groups had a part i­
lineal descent system.
To the north and west of the coastal ter­
ritoxi~§ itlt1J;e-F;Clw-ard~Plate~u phys,iog".Caphic >zop.e.liy~e a,noth,En:
group called the Tonkawa.
That ~roup probably sp~ke a diiie~e~t
language and they were matrilineal (Newcomb 1961).
The local ethnohistoric picture is conservatively viewed. The
emphasis here is to derive data that will be useful for under­
standing prehistorY$ Primarily to satisfy that purpose the earli­
est records of European contact are examined. Although it is evi­
dent that Gulf-Coastal-Indian reaction to European contact is an
important category for the analysis of change, no archeological
record of the time period has been recognized within the confines
of the present work area, i.e., Palmetto Bend Reservoir.
The ethnographic accounts of rihange among the natives after
contact are confusing. By the time most accounts from the coastal
area were maie groups of non-indigenous Indians had moved into the
region (Krieger 1972: 63; Joutel 1962: 94). Some movements prob­
ably relate to European expansion into Indian territories but there
is evidence of pre-European contact territorial shifts (Hester and
Parker 1970); the Tonkawa of the Edwards Plateau were displaced
into the traditional territories of the Coahuiltecans. Bolton re­
ports a subgroup of the Tonkawa living with Karankawa Indians on
the coast in 1788 (1962: 283).
For purposes of this report the best chronicle, because ~t is
the earli~st and sh6ws the least evidence of territorial shifts, is
the narrative of Cabeza de Vaca. Cabeza de Vaca was sh~pwrecked
at the beginning of November ,1528; on a barrier' island somewhere
just to the south of present day Galveston. He was the first
European to record contact with Northwest Gulf Coastal Indians.
There is controversy over much of his route but the begin­
nings of Cabeza de Vaca's trek to the "land of the Christians"
are fairly clear. The report of contacts with natives likewise
becomes more garbled (or complex) as the narrative progresses.

ETHNOGRAPHIC CONSIDERATIONS

15

Most authorities agree, however, that the Capoques mentioned by
Cabeza de Vaca were a Karankawan group (Hodge 1971: fn 54;
Swanton 1952: 198; Newcomb 1961: 317).
The first natives encountered had a coastal marine adap­
tation; these, the Karankawas, are the people who can be most
satisfactorily interpreted.
The lifeways of Coahuiltecan groups
with a coastal inland adaptation are garbled by the text of the
narrative or these simply are more complex groups.
In any case
the Coahuiltecans are less satisfactorily understood than coastal
marine groups.
Coastal Marine Groups
,

No date is known fpr the be~inning of Karankawan occupation
of the Northwestern Gulf Coast but that occupation was long enough
for a language distinct from the inland Coahuiltecans to develpp.
Both groups apparently came from the same linguistic stock.
When Cabeza de Vaca was shipwrecked on a barrier island
wouth of present day Galveston, Texas, he was taken in and cared
for by a band of Karankawa, the Capoques.
That band is the one
referred to in this discussion of marine groups and it will be
~ssumed that the Capoques were representative of all Karankawans.
It is expected, in some ways at least, that both reactions to the
Kuropeans and the cultural patterns reported for the subgroup
would be similar to any other division of the Karankawan group.
When Cabeza de Vaca was wrecked in early November, he found
a number of huts on the island.
The camp containing these huts
was used as a base to obtain roots as well as fish and oysters
from the shoal waters presumably located on the inland side of
the barrier.
Although the number of dwellings is not mentioned
specifically, at least 100 Indian men were able to collect within
a short time (Hodge 1971: 45) and as Cabeza de Vaca gives no
evidence of any other camp nearby it is probable the men came
from the one group of huts.
These people, the Capoques, took in and cared for the cast­
aways.
Cabeza de Vaca reports after several years of living in
the vicinity that "The stay they make on the island is from
October to the end of February" (Hodge 1971: 50).
"At the end
of February they go into other parts to seek food:
for then the
root is begipning to grow and is not food l1 (Hodge 1971: 50). A
dependence upon shellfish is also mentioned, "For three months
in the year they eat nothing besides these and very bad water"
(Hodge 1971: 54).
Cabeza de Vaca's Narrative makes it clear that the Karanka­
wans were nomadic and followed a seasonal cycle of movement.
Reconstructing that seasonal cycle is difficult as it is compli­
cated by what must have been special circumstances.
The arrival

16

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

of the Europeans put stress en the exploitive system of the
Karankawa in a number of ways.
Initially the Spanish visitors
were supported by the Indians. A second stress was the arrival of
European diseases with the castaways.
The Karankawas must have
reacted immediately to the stress.
That the Indians were able to provide for between 15 and 80
Spaniards (Hodge 1971: 50) over the winter is a good indication
that the natives were suffering no food crisis. However~ support­
ing the Spaniards did mean that greater amounts of food had to
be collected; that perhaps affected the structure of t~e native
work force.
Such an apparently large number of Indians existing
in one camp is further evidence that food was plentiful.
The second and most disabling stress arose f~om diseases the
Spaniards brought with them.
The effects of that stress are in
part a result of the natives' own social system.
There was a cus­
tom that
••• when a son or brother dies at the house where
death takes place they do not go out after food
for three months, but sooner famish, their rela­
tives and neighbors provide what they eat. As in
the time we were there a great number of the na­
tives died, in most houses there was very great
hunger because of the keeping of this their cus­
tom and observance for although they who sought af­
ter food worked hard, yet from the severity of the
season they could get but little; in aoneequenae
the Indians who keep me~ left the Island, and
passed over on canoes to the main, into some bays
where are many oysters. (Hodge 1971:.52, italics.
added).
It appears that lithe Indians who kept me, left ••• 11 may indicate
segmentation of the group in "consequence" to stress conditions.
Th. customary three month mour~ing period would preclude group
survival if the high number of deaths Cabeza de Vaca records oc­
curred often.
The effects of such great pressure on a stable life­
way must have been consideraDle.
The usefulness of the repurted subsistence pattern for arche­
ological inference must be cautiously examined.
The one certain
part of the subsistence pattern, assuming that conditions in the
social and natural environment were "normal" before Spanish ar­
rival, is the winter root digging activity on the barrier islands.
The Indians were at this enterprise when the Spanish ships were
wrecked.
Points that lend credence to the existence of a seasonal
system for subsistence are that Cabeza de Vaca was familiar with
the Capoques for a number of years and apparently recognized a
pattern although he did not adequately describe it (Hodge 1971:
50-52), and that a different group was also following the pattern
of shellfish collection and seasonal migration to eat blackberries
(Hodge 1971: 54).
Among the customs of the Karankawa was a tabu between a man

ETHNOGRAPHIC CONSIDERATIONS

17

and his wife's parents.
That custom was part of a patrilineal
marriage system that extended, says ,de Vaca,,-for 561eagues inland
(ab'ou t 150 to 200 miles);. that is, probably to the Edwards
Plateau where natives did not speak Coahuiltecan.
The Karandawas lived in mat houses on oyster shell middens
(Hodge 1971: 52). They took fish in cane weirs and make use of
the bow and arrow (Hodge 1971: 49). Travel was by dugout canoe.
Possession of the skins of large animals was rare.
In conclusion, the Karankawa lived in an area where food
resources were both abundant and reliable. Despite a variety of
resources selectivity was shown for three, 1) roots (gathered
in shoal waters), 2) oysters, and 3) fish. Population density
was high and the exploitive range small. The size of the exploi­
tive group was probably large , at least during the root collect­
ing season.
Cabeza de Vaca gives no clear indication of varia­
tion in group size although it is likely that uhere was variation;
some of the other food resources mentioned, particularly black­
berries, probably could not have supported a large population
for the time length Capeza de Vaca reports. It is indicated that
possibly in times of stress the group would segment and move to
other areas for food leaving behind preferred resources and tap­
ping those that were less preferred. The composition of the
work force and the ratio of work to leisure time are hopelessly
upset in Cabeza de Vaca's account because he is specific about
these points only when it is in reference to the times of highest
stress upon the Indian procurement system.
Coastal Inland Groups
Cabeza de Vaca visited many subgroups of the Coahuiltecans.
Each occupied a well defined area which it .considered to be ex­
clusively its own and protected from all trespassers (Newcomb
1961: 39).
Seasonal rounds were made depending upon the available re­
sources in the territory. In the months of July through September,
when the prickly pear ripened, bands came together to gorge them­
selves and pursue a social life.
Vegetal foods comprised a major
portion of the diet.
Snare and traps are reported to have been facilities (an ob­
ject(s) which prevents the movement of energy), used by the.coast­
al inland peoples but communal hunts were also important. Com­
munal hunts used the surround technique. Cabeza de Vaca reports
that, "They are accustomed also to kill deer by encircllrig_th~m
with fires.
The pasturage is taken from the cattle by burning,
that necessity may drive them to seek it in places where it is
desired they should go." Also, they " ••• go with brands in the
hand firing the plains and forests within their reach, that the
mosquitoes may flyaway, and at the same time to drive out lizards

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

18

and other like things from the earth for them to eat" (Hodge 1971:
67). Bands situated near the large streams shot fish with the
bow and arrow and seined them from shallow streams.
Although comparatively little is kn~wn about the Coahuil­
tecans,an abundance and variety of natural food resources was
available to them within their territorial range. They practised
little diet selectivity. The range of the population was large
and the population density low in comparison to the coastal mari~e
groups. The size of the exploitive group was evidently smaller
than for the Karankawan. Vegetal foods apparently were the most
important aspect of their subsistence which was supplemented by
hUnting. Facilities, particularly fire, were used in control of
the environment. These peoples lived within established terri­
to ries.
Relationships
There were among the Indian groups Cabeza de Vaca met some
similarities and many differences. Likewise the hunting and gath­
ering groups reported on the Texas Coast are in some respects sim­
ilar and some different from the common characteristics of present
day hunters and gatherers. To place the local groups in perspec­
tive, an analysis of these relationships will be made.
Adaptive techniques in hunting and gathering societies show
a range of control over the environment. Environmental control
is related to the'use of what have been termed "implements" and
"facilities". Philip Wagner in The HU11Ian Use of the Earth (1960)
defines both terms. An impZement is a/tool for translating or
enhancing energy exchanges, examples are the bow and arrow,
spear (atlatl), knife, digging sticks and so on; a faciZity is an
object that prevents the movement and/or the transfer of energy,
examples are the fish weir, nets, pottery and so on. Wagner's
definitions are being followed in this text.
Implements and facilities defined above are tools and -objects
which can often be identified in archeological investigation.
Occasionally the use of implements or facilities must depend on
secondary evidence and a higher degree of inference. Man's use
of himself as a facility to prevent the flow of energy is as mean­
ingful as his use of a fish weir. The imp.lications of control
rather than simple exploitation of naturally available resources
remain the same. One illustration within Texas of where man's
use of himself to prevent the flow of energy has been inferred is
from cultural deposits at Bonfire Shelter. There prehistoric
peoples apparently directed bison to their deaths at a particul­
arly suitable cliff. That site was selected by both Early and
Middle Prehistoric peoplQs on several occasions (Dibble and Lor­
rain 1968: 69-70).
Tha coastal marine people on the Northwest Gulf Coast, the

ETHNOGRAPHIC CONSIDERATIONS

19

Karankawas, were residents in an environmental system where food
resources were diverse and concentrated. They selected a few re­
sources and upon these they depended for the majority of their
food supply. Other available resources were utilized only when
necessity required. Although cane weirs were used to gather fish,
implements were the primary means by which they made their live­
lihood.
Coastal inland people, the Coahuiltecans, who on the other
hand lived in regions where variety and concentration of potential
food resources was dependent solely upon local rainfall apparently
devised an adaptive system that made a greater use of facilities.
The use of these facilities made food resources more predictable
in an area where an assortment of resources was available put un­
concentrated.
The Coahuiltecans utilized a great variety of re­
sources; dependence upon one or a few for long was impossible.
The coastal inland groups used fire, the surround method in hunt­
ing and seins, snares and traps to manipulate their environment.
Use of facilities was presumably low for the coastal marine
groups and high for the coastal inland groups.
The gross differ­
ence seen in adaptive technology is found in other aspects of these
cultures.
The implications may not be clear unless it is under­
stood that to be afficient, facilities require precise placement
in space and that that obligates cooperation among individuals.
All cif this implies that the responsibility for
coordination of effort will be assumed and, more
_,im~ertantt

tliat:ste.ard~hip~

involving~ma~nte-

nance development of rules governing access to
t~e facility and the_distribution 6f its' yields.
Many other elements of role content would become
part of newly defined status positions arising
out of the use of facilities .•• (Binford 1968: 273).
Such appears to have been the case with the Coahuiltecans
who unlike the Karankawan groups had defined territorial bound­
aries which they guarded against the intrusion of other bands
or individuals. The division between the Karankawa and Coahuil­
tecans was so pronounced when Cabeza de Vaca arrived that the
Indians begged him to become a trader: n, •• for in consequence of
incessant hostilities, they cannot traverse the country nor make
many exchanges" (Hodge 1971).
How do the Coahuiltecans of the ethnographic record compare
to known inland hunting and gathering groups elsewhere? Given
what is known at present, functional relationships with the
natural environment seen elsewhere hold true. As would be ex­
pected, population density is low, exploitive group size is small
and a diverse resource base was used. Major differences are found
though in the social arena! The principal differences are that the
groups apparently had definite boundaries, organization was not
flexible, exclusive rights were maintained for territories and
seasonal movements may have been confined to consistent routes.
Under these conditions demographic variance was probably more

20

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

slowly rectified and conflict less often resolved by fission.
Another possible difference, if the stated implications of the use
of facilities are correct, is that a form of social stratification
may have existed in a non-sedentary hunter-gatherer society.
How do Karankawas compare with known coastal marine hunting
and gathering groups? Group size was large and density high. The
subsistence base selected was specialized as could be expected
from env1ronnrantal conditions.
The Karankawas differ greatly from
known coastal marine societies with facilities for controlling the
environment; coastal marine societies have developed facilities
and retained a hunting and gathering lifeway more often than in­
land groups.o Inland· groups with ;facilities rarely retain a hunt­
ing and gathering lifeway.
The Karankawa vary in only minor ways
from other coastal marine hunting and gathering societies who make
little use of facilities.
CAUTION IN THE USE OF ETHNOGRAPHIC DATA,
If all arche~logical deductions were based specifically on
ethnographic analogy the purpose of studying variability and
change through time would be defeated.
The time depth of arche­
ology is its most conspicuous asset. Present day hunting and gath­
ering cultures are greatly variable.
That, and the potential that
preagriculture societies were different from modern groups allow
for the possibility that at least some past life patterns are to­
tally unrepresented among modern societies.
For these reasons
analogy from modern behavior must be kept to a minimum lest the
researcher impose a totally unnecessary limitation in his thinking
that may prevent the discovery of previously unknown categories
of cultural expression.
It is frequently stated that one of the main
tasks of the archdologist is the interpreta­
tion of the past and that the primary means
available is reconstruction based on analo­
gies to living peoples.
Such a view presup­
poses that our knowledge of the past is only
as good as our knowledgd of the present and
that our reconstructions are valid only insofar
as we are justified in projecting knowledge of
living peopl~s into the past ••• some ph.nomena,
particularly those of a processual nature
covering considerable periods of time may be
unavailable for direct observation by the eth­
nologist (Binford 1968: 26a).
Broad generalizations have been make in these ethnographic

ETHNOGRAPHIC CONSIDERATIONS

21

considerations on hunter~gatherer societies existing throughout
the world and about the record of the peoples who at European
contact were living in the local region.
The generalizations
will, when combined with data on prehistoric material culture,
be used to make predictmmns of prehistoric natural resource
utilization.
Hopefully as work pregreases on the project, reg­
ular types of material associations will be isolated and equated
with activity types and the functional definition of those ac­
tivities make using material evidence (Freeman 1968: 262-267).
These conditions will enable refinement of predictions about the
nature of the culture(s) that are being investigated.
Following the descriptive and inferential sections of this
report propositions made on prehistoric natural resource util­
iaztion form data available on ethnology and in the reported
archeological record will be examined with respect to the new
evidence on p~ehistoric cultures obtained last year in field
work on a part of the Navidad River Basin.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
INTRODUCTION
The Northwestern Gulf Coast is a complex of environments.
They gradually intergrade along the coast as a result of change
by slow degree in the amount of annual rainfall.
From the coast,
inland environmental conditions change more abruptly as a result
of rainfall and physiographic differences.
The coastal aEeao6fT!exasi's~a~flatppl*in
which includes a series of very large bays and
lagoons, as well as long offshore islands, and
extends variable distances, usually 40-60 miles,
to where rock outcrops and slightly hilly coun­
try begin.
Toward the southern end, the veg­
etation is primarily tall grass and there are
hundreds of ponds as well as large fields of
sand dunes.
The central part is mixed grass­
land and forest with matts of oaks and other
hardwoods dotting the plains, and dense cor­
ridor forests along the streams.
The eastern
part grows increasingly more forest covered
containing large stands of southern pine on
open ground, jungle like tangles of hardwoods
and vines along the rivers, and open grassy r
plains near the ocean.
Most of the rivers
broaden and become sluggish on nearing the

22

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

coast or the bays into which they empty (Suhm,
Krieger and Jelks 1954: 118).
The expression of cultural complexes, controlled to a great degree
by the natural environment in these ares, follows similar gradual
and abrupt transitions.
Archeological work has traditionally concentrated on prehis­
toric sites which occur along the gulf and bay shore lines. Abrupt
cultural gradations from the littoral zone inland, while they are
known to exist, have been rarely studied.
Archeological investigations in littoral zones supply the
basis for present interpretations of coastal prehistory. The pos­
sibility that current ideas will change is high and will remain so
until areas immediately inland of the coast are better understood.
When prehistoric sites from the inland have been examined
investigators have attempted to relate associated material cultures
to archeological manifestations in either the littoral zones or
surrounding regions.
Between the coastal marine and coastal inland,
two possibilities exist for cultural origin at almost any point
in prehistory, 1) a single culture was moving between the coastal
marine and coastal inland areas and the associated artifact assem­
blages are simply the residue of different economic activities, or
2) two cultures distinct from each other existed, one in the lit­
toral zones and one immediately to the inland.
TIME PERSPECTIVES: GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
Archeological manifestations of cultures in the Central Texas
Gulf Coast region are complex and at the present state of knowledge
too little known for accurate identification. Yet, inferences a­
bout cultures in a time perspective are possible in the area if a
careful examination of general chronological units at important
localities are made.
Throughout most of the surrounding regions four major chron­
ological units have been found useful.
In some regions subsistence
developmental stages or characteristic life patterns may be implied
by the periods.
On the Northwest Gulf Coast the present applica­
bility of the scheme will be restricted to relative chronology and,
to emphasize that situation, the names given the periods in this
text have been changed to reflect only time differences.
In ex­
planation, the Early Prehistor!c has been referred to elsewhere as
"Big Game Hunter" or "Paleo Indian", the Middle Prehistoric cor­
responds with the "Archaic" period, and Late Prehistoric has been
called the "Neo-American" period.
Historic Aboriginal is a term
which closely approximates other designations consistently used
throughout North America for post-European contact archeological
remains of native peoples.
The very long Middle Prehistoric
period has been divided into five parts.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Subclasses of the Middle Prehistoric period have been
used in other areas under the same names and include a tran­
sitional period from the Early Prehistoric, a transitional per­
iod into the Late Prehistoric, and early, middle and late sub­
divisions of the Archaic or as it is termed here, the Middle
Prehistoric Period.
In archeologically recognized regions adjacent to the
coast, especially the area of the Edwards Plateau, time rela­
tionships are well understood.
Development of a chronology
has been a driving force in Central Texas with the result that
a well documented l~C sequence of projectile points are avail­
able as time markers there.
The Northwest Gulf Coast province
has in its archeological deposits many projectile points which
are typologically similar to the time markers from Central
Texas and other regions.
On the basis of such similarities
prehistoric sites can be placed within the outlined relative
chronology.
The few radiocarbon dates that have been processed gener­
ally agree with the absolute dating of adjacent;regi6ns~. Tti~~
temptation to assume such a relationship exists is great; how­
ever, there is evidence that some parts of the coast may be
out of phase with cultural development elsewhere.
Story, for
example, received a very late date for Middle Prehistoric
materials at the Ingleside Cove site near Corpus Christi Bay
(1968: 42).
Awareness of cultural similarities and differences in the
region are inadequate and vary for each time period.
The fore­
most reason for the lack of understanding is a past insuffi­
ciency of published reports on excavation.
Data has accrued
and an analysis of the presently available information does
enable a more detailed interpretation of cultural and environ­
mental relationships than has been available before.
Late Prehistoric sites are the commonly excavated sites
and hence, understanding of that period is best.
A majority
of the investigation in the cpastal zone has been along the
gulf and bay shores where sites of earlier periods are often
obscured by a lack of diagnostic artifacts, subsidence below
the water surface or burial beneath sediments or erosion.
Archeological sites dating to the Middle Prehistoric are more
often seen in the inland but, there too, Late Prehistoric sites
because they are more recent and have had less chance for ero­
sion or burial to affect them are more visible.
An additional
factor is that research simply has not concentrated in the
coastal inland.
Middle and late Micidle-Prehistoric, and Late Prehistoric
sites are commonly identified.
Sites from other periods may
be rare because they are few in number, have been obscured by
natural forces, or the life pattern followed by their occupants
did not often result in deposits visible archeologically.

23

24

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

CHARACTERIZATIONS OF SELECTED LOCALITIES
A few locations of prehistoric activity are reviewed below
to present background information for the development on pro­
positions on prehistoric natural resource utilization.
Evidence of the Early Prehistoric is rare in the coastal
areas of Texas.
When items are found that may be comparable
with the well defined tradition of that period in the central
part of North America, they are in a context with other arti­
facts that suggest a more recent age (Aten and Chandler 1971).
There are twa notable exceptions from ~xcavated. sites, the Buck­
ner Ranch site investigated by E. H. Sellards (1940) and the
Morhiss site examined by the Works Progress Administration
(notes on fi1e-TARL).
Unfortunately these studies have ob­
stacles which prevent their use in establishing any manner of
conjectural pattern of the eu1ture(s) involved.
The Buckner Ranch site is an anomaly among Early Prehis­
toric sites ·found in North America.
At that site E. H. Sellards
found Early Prehistoric projectile points below a variety of
Pleistocene species that presumably were extinct before such
tools were made.
Sellards, a geologist, unquestionable qual­
ified in stratigraphic interpretation, had no absolute conclu­
sion on zonal relationships in the site, but the articles ap­
peared to be in a primary context.
At the Morhiss site a PZainview point was found in apparent
good context (notes on fi1e-TARL).
No site report has been
published and associated materials have not been studied.
Early prehistoric artifacts are thinly spread over the re­
gion.
Most tools attributable to that time period are appar­
ently in a secondary context.
Two excavated sites with tools
in what may be primary context are confusing.
Despite these con­
ditions the possibility that the region was visited during these
early times is becoming more certain.
Isolated finds of time
diagnostic tools from the period continue to occur.
The Morhiss site spans a time period from at least the early
Middle Prehistoric through the Late Prehistoric.
The site is
situated inland from the coast on a rise, probably a terrace
remnant, in the flood plain of the Guadalupe River.
A1ghough
midden zones were present, the primary importance of the site
is that it served as a cemetery from the early part of the Mid­
dle Prehistoric through Late Prehistoric times.
About 200 bur­
ials were encountered and excavated by the Works Progress Ad­
ministration in the 1930's. Many of these burials had grave
goods.
Associations were usually shell, lithic and bone arti­
facts, but a number of rather exotic items including a fragment
of a "boatstone" were also found.
Method of interment and the orientation of buried indi~~
vidua1s was inconsistent throughout the vertical depth of the
site; however, on the horizontal plain the field derector, W. A.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

25

Duffen, noted a patterning.
A relative chronology of burial posi­
tion developed on that basis for the site has been contradicted
in other burial sites.
A projectile point type, the Morhiss Point,
with localized distribution during the late Middle Prehistoric
was first ident:i,fied';at the-site.·
The Albert George ~it.e reported by Raymond Walley in 1955 is
similar to the Morhiss locality.
It is on a tributary of the
Brazos River and is about the same distance inland from the coast
as the Morhiss site.
Only a few excavation units were opened
and these dug to a limited depth yet at least 15 individuals are
reported.
Engraved bone is associated with some burials and like
the Morhiss site, shell pendants and polished stone are present.
Subsistence refuse occurs at the site.
Although context is not
completely clear a late Middle Prehistoric or Transitional to
the Late Prehistoric age is probable.
Key information for the interpretation of the Middle Pre­
historic periods are currently being extracted at another inland
location-the vicinity of Allen's Creek, a small tributary of the
Brazos River.
There, in a 1972 survey, Dillehay recognized a
high density of archeological remains on the banks of the creek
and along the edge of a horseshoe-shaped bend in the Brazos
River flood plain (Dillehay et~a~L 1972).
Archeological excavations have been conducted recently in
the Allen's Creek area by Grant D. Hall.
The information re­
ported here on sites along Allen's Creek is a result of con­
versations with Mr. Hall.
While the data reported is Hall's,
the interpretations made here are not hecessa~il,~hi~.
A sequence that begins in the middle or early Middle Pre­
historic and extends to the Late Prehistoric has be~n recognized.
Preliminary analysis of fauna from excavated habitation
sites indicates that a wide range of species were exploited.
Very small fauna in the less than 40 kilogram range appear to
have supplied a significant percent of the animal food diet of
the prehistoric inhabitatants.
The site at Allen's Creek that will be accented here is
41 AU 36. That site like the Morhiss and Albert George sites
served as a burial locality.· Unlike the other sites mentioned
some burial levels evidently have no association with occupation
surfaces (Hall, manuscript in preparation).
41 AU 36 lies on the ~~Ie of a terrace overlooking the in­
cised Brazos River Valley.
At the base of cultural deposits is
a middle or early Middle Prehistoric midden.
Near the top of the
site is a Transitional to the Late Prehistoric midden.
The
middle or early Middle Prehistoric occupation zones have no asso­
ciated burials although Middle or early Middle Prehistoric burials
occur above that zone.
The Transitional midden has associated
burials.
Two burial levels separated by sterile zones have been
found between the old and young midden deposits.
Above the Tran­
sitional midden and its associated burials are a few Late Pre­
historic burials which again are not connected with a midden

26

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

deposit of that age.
It seems that the site was used strictly
for a cemetery for a significant portion of the time it was used.
The quantity, type and placement of grave goods in the four
burial zones differ significantly~ The lowest burial zone (middle
~r early Middle Prehistoric) has bone artifacts linked with some
individuals.
Raw· material for these grave goods are availab~:e
locally.
The late Middle Prehistoric zone has ground stone arti­
facts (boatstones), conch shell pendants and caches of bone and
shell artifacts associated with some individuals.
In the Transi­
tional to the Late Prehistoric zone a dog burial has been exca­
vated.
Many items appearing in context with the late Middle
Prehistoric burial zone are unavailable locally.
In a zone Tran­
sitional to the Late Prehistoric, lithic materials that would have
been locally accessible are found but these, as in the earlier
levels, appear selectively among the interments.
In the upper
zone of burials which is of Late Prehistoric age no grave goods
have yet been found.
Late Middle Prehistoric and Trafi~itional
zones have some individuals with projectile points in what are
apparently fatal positions (often wedged between vertebrae}.
In other 8h~dies concentratioils of sites dating to the Mid­
dle Prehistoric Period have been described.
Joe Ben Wheat found
several sites in a survey of the Addicks Dam Basin which date to
the Middle and late Middle Prehistoric as well as to the Late Pre­
historic (1953).
Resurvey of that area has increased the number
of sites recorded by Wheat (L. W. Patterson, notes on file TARL).
Sites with a late Middle Prehistoric age contain ground stone
artifacts similar to those found in burials from that age at
41 AU 36.
In addition the density of sites in the area of Ad­
dicks Dam Basin is high.
Unfortunately complete faunal data from
the excavations by Wheat is not available.
Many small streams, just inland from the coast appear to
have dense concentrations of sites.
On Clear Creek, again in the
vicinity of present day Houston, amateur archeologists report
a concentration of sites (C. Howard, L. Fullen: Notes on file-­
TARL).
McGuff briefly described the known sites and several more
he found in a formal survey (1973).
Middle Prehistoric artifacts
are abundant in this location and in the late Middle Prehistoric
artifacts of exotic materials occur.
Calvin Howard found frag­
ments of a quartz pipe bowl, in a late Middle Prehistoric or Tran­
sition to the Late Prehistoric context, in controlled excavations
at one site (notes on file--TARL).
Uncontrolled excavations made
by relic hunters have unearthed at least one polished stone arti­
fact in association with late Middle Prehistoric projectile
points (McGuff 1973: 52).
Recently Tom Dillehay has completed a study on prehistoric
subsistence in the Lower Trinity River Delta (1975).
The area
of Dillehay's concern is restricted to the littoral zone where
five prehistoric sites ranging in age from Middle to Late Pre­
historic were tested.
Exca~ation was biased tuward Late Pre­
historic age sites.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

27

The excavation of the five sites was to "identify limited
intersite processual regularities which can help interpret
organizational changes in the subsistence, technological, and
social patterns" (Dillehay 1975: 84).
In that endeavor a number
of IIgeneralizations" were examined.'
A considerable diversity of midden debris was recovered from
the five investigated sites.
Midden sites did not serve a single
function according to Dillehay (1975:85).
Differences in site
function over time are recorded.
The Late Prehistoric zones in sites, despite minor differences,
are rather predictably zones which contain evidence of an exclu­
sive and ~E!tleralized adaptation to resources available in the
immediate environs ~f the site.
In all cases the subsistence base
utilized during Late Prehistoric times becomes more diverse than
in preceding periods.
Material items located in the Late Pre­
historic middens can be anticipated to reflect a number of func­
tions relating to exploitation of resources in littoral zones
(Dillehay 1975).
Contrarily, zones dating to preceramic or Middle Prehistoric
periods (in 41 CH 33, 47, and 172) show a specific adaptation to
a few resources not necessarily restricted to the delta area.
The contents of preceramic sites at this point are less predict­
able.
The number of species exploited during preceramic periods
at Wallisville appears to have been generally lower than was
usual in the cenamic Late Prehistoric Period.
At 41 CH 33, zones from the preceramic period were Il re l a ­
tively abundant" in lithic refuse; and sufficient evidence was
found to suggest, with qualifications because of the eroded
nature of the site, "that the subsistence economy was not strongly
oriented toward shellfish gathering" but "that hunting activities
provided the main source of meat" (Dillehay 1975: 44).
The
preceramic zone at 41 CH 47 also had a concentration of lithic
debris (Dillehay 1975: 59) that was higher than would be expected
in Late Prehistoric zones in the area.
However, at CH 47 a
"very restricted range of aquatic animal types ll was utilized and
"in tet:ms of .usablemaat~we!i,ght"Rangia auneata completely domi­
nated the diet" (Dillehay 1975: 59).
Finally in preceramic
zones at 41 CH 172 a "wide range of lithic production wastage"
was found again; but, although the economy recorded was similar to
to that from Late Prehistoric sites, 1I1arge game hunting was a
more important procurement activity" (Dillehay 1975: 75).
Areas
outside of the delta were probably exploited for faunal resources.
Dillehay (1975: 90) notes that units at 41 CH 172 show a
gradual increase in the utilization of shellfish meat ~eight and
determines that "since 41 CH 172 is an 'early' site in the Wallis­
ville Reservoir, this gradual shift to a greater reliance on shell­
fish in the later deposits may indicate a subsistence pehnomenon
similar to that pointed out by Snow (1972) for the "'Archaic
Indians' along the Northeast Coast".
"They appear to have been

28

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

terrestrial hunters and fishermen that applied their skills in a
maritime setting when on the coast but overlooked the potential
productivity of unfamilar shellfish populations" (Snow 1972: 211l~
Excavated zones in 41 CH 47, the only other site tested by Dille'ffay
with an "early" compQ.nent still in place, contradict that argument
by documenting a high percentage of Rangia cuneata in the diet of
preceramic inhabitants (Dillehay and Davidson 1975: Table 10).
Thus knowledge of the productive potential of shellfish populations
is indicated at a time before the Late Prehistoric.
Other areas in the estuarine zones of the Northwest Gulf Coast
supply evidence that during the Middle Prehistoric, there is between­
site variability of function but specific exploitive functions with­
in sites suggest little variability.
Some sites G. E. Arnold re­
ported during the 1940 and 1941 survey of the Sabine Lake area are
probably preceramic and, functionally, the exploitation of Rangia
clam seems to .dominate (notes on file--TARL).
It is the author's
personal observation that the sites of the type described by Arnold
are now commonly located in areas where there~is no nearby water
suitable for the survival of Rangia cuneata.
Aten (1971) in exca­
vation of non-cermic zones at the Dow Cleaver Site near the mouth of
the Brazos River discovered very little evidence of lithic techno­
logy but a high utilization of Rangia cuneata.
In 1970 Hester and Parker reported the Berclair §ite.
That
site is different from most other Late Prehistoric sites recorded in
the coastal zone.
The artifacts from the Berclair site are mixed
in their origin; evidently a combination of cultural traits between
the coast and Central Texas occurred.
Dominating the artifact assem­
blage are artifacts that would seem to place the culture in the
Toyah Focus of Central Texas.
Contracted stem points, plain bone
tempered pottery, beveled~knives and small end scrapers were found
in association with faunal remains that apparently represented bison.
Hester and Parker note that Tonkawa bands whose ancestors are pre­
sumed to be the purveyors of the Toyah Focus, were in the area at
least as early as A. D. 1690 and conclude that "archeological re­
mains at Berclair appear to represent short term Late Prehistoric
occupation or occupations oriented toward bison hunting with ex­
ploitation of other food resources such as deer and river mussels
(1970: 21-22).
The possibility that the Berclair site may repre­
sent a local complex is mentioned and in a subsequent article Hes­
ter and Hill have plotted the wide range of traits similar to those
at Berclair throughout south and southwest Texas (1971).
PREHISTORIC NATURAL RESOURCE UTILIZATION ON THE TEXAS COAST
FACTORS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROPOSITIONS
Several propositions are developed from the data in the ethno­

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE UTILIZATION

29

graphic considerations and archeological background sections of
this chapter.
The purpose of that development is to establish a
foundation or direction for research within the confines of the
present work area.
Archeological sites to be affected by con­
struction of Palmetto Bend Reservoir represent only a part of the
remains of various prehistoric cultural patterns.
Research, if
done without recognizing the existence of the larger system be­
yond the present work area, would have little value.
By laying
this groundwork, questions about the entire cultural system may
be considered as well as hypotheses about how the archeological
sites fit into that wy~tem.
Time relationships and change have been given particular
attention in the development of the propositions on prehistoric
natural resource utilization on the Texas Coast. Those relation­
ships seem to hold the greatest promise for meaningful results in
archeological work.
The propositions on changes in local natural resource utili­
zation are dependent upon the basic assumption that variable con­
ditions in the social and physical environment are adapted to by
using cultural background and experience in new ways.
Based on
the above assumption these corollary statements can be made:
1.
Behavioral differences are a reflection of differences
in cultural background and/or experience, or, variations
in the social and/or physical environment.
2.
Change in a human adaptive system occurs as a result of
alterations in the social or physical environment of that
system.
3.
Bhhavioral differences occur within the same society as
it exploits different resources during a yearly adaptive
cycle or at a fiven point in time.
4.
Since tools are aids in behavior~ their assemblages would
vary directly in accordance with the task performed.
5.
Degree of organization may be inferred from patterns of
material culture association (Binford 1972: 265).
Considered also in the development of propositions were ob­
servations on the character of human behavior in hunting and
gathering society.
OBSERVATIONS, PROPOSIT]ONS AND PREDICTIONS
Proposition
Archeological data from the Northwest Gulf Coast between the
Trinity and Nueces rivers are lacking in evidence of t e
ements
and facilites necessary for long-term single locality control of
the environment.
The size of sites is generally small especially
when short berm occupations can be delineated.
A small site is

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

30

less than 100 X 100 meters and a short term occupation can only
be defined as occurring within 1,000 year periods.
In addition,
investigation reveals that cultural stratigraphy is relatively
uncomplex when compared with known sedentary sites.
These factors
indicate that

archeological localities on this part of the coast
are evidence of a simple hunting and gathering
pattern in which people were non~.~dentary.
If such a proposition is true, then within the work area at Pal­
metto Bend, a record left by non-sedentary hunter-gatherers could
be predicted throughout the span of prehistory.
It is expected that:
1.
Faunal remains will. indicate seasonal exploitation
of resources.
2.
The mean site area will be small because only a few
individuals made up the camp.
3.
Evidence in the form of pits or other containers for
storing food will be meager because storage against
adversity is usually unnecessary in hunting-gathering
society.
4.
Food refuse, facilities and implements at habitation
sites will reflect the exploitation of non-domesti­
cated species.
Proposition 2.
Prior to the Late Prehistoric period inland resources are more
commonly found in habitation sites in coastal marine areas.
Peo­
ple did not have a generalized adaptation to the coastal marine area
before Late Prehistoric times.
The few and specific functions of
coastal marine sites in preceramic periods are considerably vari­
able between sites.
The combined evidence leads to the proposi­
tion that

coastal adaptation was~ in the beginning (before
the Late Prehistoric)~ oriented to the exploi­
tation of inland resources but that periodic
excursions to exploit coastal marine resources
were made.
If that is true, then the present work area which is just inland
from the coastal marine zone may show evidence that coastal marine
areas were specifically scheduled stops in the cycle of exploita­
tion by inland groups.
In the work area it is expected that:
1.
Items with a coastal marine origin will appear more fre­
quently in samples dateing prior to the Late Prehistoric.
The
proposition could best be investigated by testing hypotheses in
the coastal marine zone.
If the proposition is correct, arche­
ological data from before the Late Prehistoric will exhibit that

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE UTILIZATION

31

the use of coastal marine resources were scheduled stops in the
cycle of exploitation by inland groups.
Under that condition it
would be expected that:
1.
Resources in the coastal marine zone fell within a
portion of a wide exploitive range (territory) utilized
by a few humans.
In other words there was a low popu­
lation density on the co~st.
2.
Early use of coastal marine resources was by a people
whose society was regulated by tight environmental
restrictions (equilibrium forces).
Proposition 3.
At the time of historic contact, two linguistically separate
groups lived on the Northwest Gulf Coast.
Linguistic relation­
ships between the two groups were still clear indicating the sep­
aration had occurred recently.
Late Prehistoric sites in coastal
marine zones have few material culture connections with coastal
inland sites.
Prior to the Late Prehistoric, material culture
could be related between the two areas: tools were similar and
inland resources were exploited at both places.
Late Prehistoric
sites, if the present data is representative, occur more fre­
quently in coastal marine zones than in coastal inland zones.
Transitional to the Late Prehistoric sites are rarely visible
at all in the Texas coast area.
These lines of evidence indi­
cate that,

during the Tran8itional to the Late Prehistoria,
an expliaitZy aoastal marine adaptation developed
out of asooiety with a coastdl in'tandadaptation.
If that proposition is true, all aspects of coastal culture in­
cluding the remains at Palmetto Bend could be predicted to show
evidence of the shift in adaptation.
It would be expected that:
1.
Following the late, Middle~ r~his tor ie the amount of
evidence for the exploitation of coastal marine re­
sources will abruptly drop off.
2•
The distribution of the data will indicate a pertur­
bation in the adaptive system and an increases rate of
change during the Transitional to the Late Prehistoric.
3.
A return to a more stable relationship with the envi­
ronment will occur during the Lat. Prehistoric.

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

32

Proposition 4.
Hunting and gathering people with an unstable adaptive stra­
tegy are difficult to detect archeologically.
Early Middle-Pre­
historic and Transitional to the Late Prehistoric period sites are
not as visible archeologically as middle and late Middle-Prehis­
toric, and, Late Prehistoric sites.
It is proposed, therefore,
that

early Middle-Prehistoria and Transitional to the
Late Prehistoria period soaieties praatiaed an ~
adaptive strategy whiah was not stable.

If that is true, then evidence of an unstable adaptive strategy dur­
ing those periods could be predicted to come from archeological in­
vestigations in the reservoir area.
It would be expected that:
1. Midden deposits from the early Middle-Prehistoric and
Transitional to the Late Prehistoric periods will have a
wide spatial destribution but will be thin because sites
would rarely be returned to for the same purpose.
2. When early Middle-Prehistoric and Transitional to the Late
Prehistoric period data are recognized, assemblages of
tools used and the seasonality of occupation will indi­
cate that the relationship between people and environment
will be less formal and less fixed spatially.
The season
of utilization of the specific environments will be more
random than in other time periods.
Proposition 5.
Middle and late Middle-Prehistoric as well as the Late Pre­
historic are the periods most frequently attributed to prehistoric
culture deposits on the Texas coast.
According to the local ethno­
historic record coastal marine and coastal inland groups at the
first European contact were practicing a subsistence system with
a set round of resource utilization.
The archeological record
shows that sites of the Late Prehistoric and middle and late Middle­
Prehistoric periods were returned to consistently for the same pur­
pose.
Seasonal data when it is available indicated that sites were
occupied during the same months year after year.
Given the data
it appears probable that

middle and late Middle-Prehistoria as well as
Late, Prehistoria aoastal inland soaieties praa­
tiaed a stable adaptive strategy.
If that is true, then it is predictable that sites from these periods

..

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE UTILIZATION

33

at Palmetto Bend are the remains left by people who had a fixed
adaptive strategy.
It is expected that:
1.
Sites of the ~iddle and late Middle-Prehistoric and
Late Prehistoric were occupied for specific purposes
which did not change or changed slowly through time.
2.
Sites were returned to for specific tasks on a seasonal
basis and that seasonal occupation was adhered to through
time with little variation.
Proposition 6.
At European contact inland groups apparently had defined
territorial boundaries.
The archeological and ethnological record
indicates that sites were consistently reoccupied for set purposes.
At burial sites in the coastal inland, items unavailable in the
region occur as grave goods with selected individuals. Projec­
tile points are often found in graves in positions apparently
fatal to the individual buried; that suggests that warfare or an
elaborate cult were part of prehistoric life.
The information
at hand leads to the proposition that

on the coastal inland~ duping the Late ppehis­
topic and middle and late~ Middle-ppehistopic
pepiods~ lived nomadic hunteps and gathepeps
who wepe significantly unlike ppesent examples
of that type of soaiety in tempepate climates.
~J:~hat

is true, then it can be prediC!te~ that cultural d
sits
dating to the Late Prehistoric and middle and late Middle-Prehis­
toric periods at Palmetto Bend will indicate a lifeway that does
not fit the typical pattern of present day non-sedentary hunters
and gatherers.
It is expected that:
1. Evidence will be found that suggests long term use by a
single group or closely related groups and that terri­
torial boundaries were not flexible.
2.
Assemblages of tools and faunal material in the sites
will in~1cate that facilities had a greater importance
in the lifeways of coastal inland peoples here than occurs
among modern non-sedentary buntets and gatherers in tem­
perate environments.
3.
Conflict was resolved by friction, not fusion.
Proposition 7.
Status positions may arise from the use of facilities because
facilities call for a group effort that requires cooperation and

SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT

34

acceptance of responsibility for coordination, maintenance and the
distribution of yields.
Burial localities of the middle and late.
Middle-Prehistoric and Late Prehistoric have grave goods which are
associated with some interments.
Before the late Middle-Prehis­
toric and during the Late Prehistoric, these grave goods are made
from materials which are available locally.
During the late Mid­
dle-Prehistoric grave goods occur in greater quantity with individ­
uals than has been noted for periods either before or after, and
they are often made from materials which are unavailable locally.
Existing non-sedentary hunter-gatherer societies usually leave no
offerings with burials or, when they do, differentiate on any but
a sex or age basis (Binford 1972: 230-31).
These conditions would
lead to the prediction that between the Trinity and Nueces rivers
on the Northwest Gulf Coast

during the middle and late. Middle-Prehistoric
and Late Prehistoric periods, but reaching a
climax in the Late Middle~Prehistorici, inland
hunters and gatherers developed a structure
that included social stratification.
It is expected that the site~ within the work areaw~ll:
1. Ouring the middle and late Middle-Prehistoric and Late
Prehistoric have status goods present in habitation and
particularly burial localities.
2.
Status goods will be more frequent during the late, Mid­
dle-Prehistoric Period.
3. Eviden~e of the use of facilities will be present and
be most in evidence during the late Middle-Prehistoric.
Proposition 8.
The archeological record shows that inland habitation sites of
the Late Prehistoric, middle and late! Middle-Prehistoric periods
were returned to conSistently for set purposes until late in the
Late Prehistoric period.
A few known archeological sites in the
inland were apparently used specifically as burial localities.
As
were the habitation sites, these cemetery sites were returned to
again and again for the same purpose.
In one documented case a site
whose only apparent function was that of a cemetery was returned
to at times when the site's presence was probably not observable
from its surface.
The lines of evidence lead to the prediction
that:
1.
Cultural deposits from these periods will evidence a
stable or slowly changing adaptation to the environment.
2.
New tools when accepted will be used as aids to perform
tasks which had been important in the past; that is, new
tools will not radically alter the exploitive system that

PREHISTORIC RESOURCE UTILIZATION

3.

was in existence before their acceptance.
Sites will evidence cultural continuity.

Proposition 9.
Artifact assemblages which resemble those of Plains type
hunters have been found on the Texas Coastal Plain.
They ~p­
pear to date late in the Late Prehistoric period.
The assem­
blage is conciderably different from others in the coastal
Middle and Late Prehistoric periods.
Activities performed
seem to be oriented to a greater degree t~ward the exploita­
tion of large game.
Sites with the assemblage that resembles
a Plains adaptation have a spatial range that exceeds that of
other identified assemblages on the coast and which extends
betond the coastal plain.
The Plains type assemblage recog­
nized on the coast is consistent in appearance with similar
types of sites outside the coastal area.
It is proposed that

late in the Late Prehistoric a group or
groups of peoples from outside the coastal
inland began to include portions of the
coaitat ihlandin-their exploitive range.
If the proposition is true then it would be expected that at
Palmetto Bend:
1.
Faunal resources will be utilized differently by the
people(s) who used the Plains type assemblage.
2.
Tools in the assemblages were used to perform tasks
in new ways; that is, the exploitive system will not
resemble the systems which preceded it.
3.
Recovered data will indicate that indigenous peoples
were unimportant factors in the distribution of the
Plains-type assemblage.
4.
Evidence of conflict between indigenous peoples and
northern intruders will be found.

35

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
An alteration in the social or physical environment may neces­
sitate a change in a human ecological system but what the change
will be is determined by the limitations and potentials of ~b~o~~
the natural and social environment.
The natural, or physical, en­
vironment then is a critical variable in the expression of human
culture.
It is particularly important in hunting and gathering
society.
Satisfactory inclusion of the variable of the natural
environment in considerations aimed at understanding the processes
of change in human ecological systems depends in part upon,
1) whether an accurate picture of the existing natural environment
is presented, and 2) whether past differences from the present
standard are recognized and accurately characterized.
Below an
attempt will be made to satisfy these requirements.
PRESENT DAY ENVIRONMENT
CLIMATE
The climate of Lower Navidad River Basin is humid-subtropical.
.
Amount of precipitation is variable; it ranges from 15-65 inches
a year during recorded history but averages between 35-40 inches
annually (Carr 1967: Fig. 2).
The average annual temperature is
about 70 degrees (Carr 1967: Fig. 8).
Summers are hot; winters
are mild.
The rainfall pattern on this part of the Navidad Basin is
characteristic of what Carr describes for his Lower Coast Region
of May and September Maximum climatic division (1967: 11, 14).
Despite the fact that rainfall amount is unpredictable in the area,
distribution graphs show two peaks; one in May and the other in
September.
The late spring peak corresponds with the most intense
thunderstorm activity.
In September thunderstorms and the hurri­
cane season combine to produce a secondary peak.
Graphs of fresh
water inflow into Lavaca Bay illustrate the two peaks in rainfall;
a high discharge occurs in May and September (Texas Water Develop­
ment Board 1974: Figure 13, 22, 23).
Southeasterly winds prevail
from March through November and northerly winds dominate from De­
cember through February.
The bed of the Navidad River at the proposed dam axis is well
below mean sea level and is tidally affected.
Some portions of the
land to be inundated by the reservoir have probably been affected
by occasional hurricane surge tides.
In the Matagorda Bay area
36

BIOLOGICAL ZONES
NAVIDAD RIVER WATERSHED - PALMETTO BEND RESERVOIR...
(SUMMER 1974 WORK AREA AND VICINITY)
BT ~
CL

0

BLUFF TOP FOREST

\

FP [ ]

FLOOD PLAIN FOREST

RF ~

RIPARIAN FOREST

SG

~

CULTIVATED LAND

m

SHORT GRASS PRAIRIE

A

PREHISTORIC SITE

"'\

1­

(all site numbers preceded by 41 JK)

Data: Billy Davidson

Adapted from USGS 7.5'
quadrangle: MANSON, TX

Drawn by Mike Foerster 1975
Redrawn by Peter Sprouse ~78

o

500

I-

(
~'"

\............ _...

1000

I

-

meters

..........
Texas Archeological Survey

PRESENT DAY ENVIRONMENT

38

surge tides have been reported as high as 15 feet ~.s.l.
The hurricane season lasts from August through September.
FLORA AND FAUNA
The 1974 work area is situated 16 river miles inland from
the head of Lavaca Bay.
Although the banks of the Navidad
River are well above sea level and the flood plain is normally
not inundated by salt water, the Navidad River is tidal at the
site of the proposed dam.
Occasionally salt and brackish
water fish are found in parts of the Navidad included in the
area of investigation (Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
1974).
Flora and fauna are otherwise more typical of an in­
land and freshwater environment.
Five generally defined biological zones have been identi­
fied in the 1974 work area (Fig. 2).
Eaah of the biological
zones is recognized by the presence of specific plant and animal
communities.
The five zones are described briefly in Appendix
III.
Plant remains are rarely evident in the archeological
sites sampled thus far.
The remains of fauna are occasion­
nally in excellent condition.
Table 1 presents seasonality
and habitat data for the species recovered, and in an effort
to make the fauna habitat data useful for interpretation,
the availability of the species for exploitation is cate­
gorized for the five environmental zones identified in the
work area.
Availability for exploitation is duduced from
species preferred and tolerated habitats and species season­
ality.
Categories of availability are "high", and "low" and
"not" or "rarely" available.
GEOLOGY
The structure and composition of underlying bedrock
plays an important role in geomorphology.
Bedrock has been
considered the dominant controlling factor in the evolution
of land forms (Thornbury 1969), and, it is believed that the
types of land forms accurateJyreflect geOlo~ic<aspects~6f
their makeup.
However, the most important underlying geologic
structure in the Palmetto Bend area is unconsolidated, geolog­
ically young and relatively homogeneous in character.
That
structure is the Beaumont formation; an emergent deltaic
plain dating to the Late Pleistocene, Sangamon Interglacial.
The surface of the Beaumont gently slopes seaward and, with
the exception of localities where delta lobes meet, it has a

FAUNA: SEASONALITY AND EXPLOITIVE POTENTIAL
speCIES

SEASONALrJ 'f
II J

EXPLOITIVE

l' M A M .1 .J

Als

S.el t

",,3 te

~

Table 1.

COMMENT!;

lONe
Brackb.b

0 W'

F. "nh "'>lI:.r

F1cof/ ['hi!)
For.Ht

---+-­
---+-­

B1uff l'op

Riparian
For.est

S11<>rr. Cra,;s
Prairie

CoUs1,,1
l'l4in:;

Shat1o" ...·al:.r~"'arm. d •• p-cb'lol vlll!al:h"'r.

31"d ,,,,.. bays duto.ng wintrtr.

to (Pu1t in .. inter sonths.

i

l'rsihwater m.r.hlt-s. 1lI0i~l- c>p"" "".. 45.

,,[d1s.
grassla!1ds

i,..l"...

deci<iuoulll f*r.et,.

savannah!prairi,; 9anoly 50ils •

..",1.1
H

R
L

R
Ii
L

lland togerher

W11>1; .. r;

dioperofl-eu/(lIllillr.

Oven Lard",..ods ",it.h e1earinSG.

==l

r-­

hebi"st.
hab::' tat.

'\lutf.!!, or

,.",>11.,

,iecfduoulil voodlend.s.

40

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

strikingly uniform surface expression.
Because the Beaumont de­
posits are fairly homogeneous in nature, other factors control
the evolution of a complicated geomorphology.
Depressions where
delta lobes met may, however, have influenced the drainage pattern.
Therefore, most of the geomorphological evolution of the Palmetto
Bend area reflects changing climatic factors which have resulted
in the erosion, redeposition and weathering of the emerged Beau­
mont formation's delta facies.
These alternating dominant pro­
cesses reflect changing environments from the S
Inter la­
cial period to the present.
The geologic structure 0
forms allow paleo-environmental reconstruction.
Within the 1974.work area the present valley floor of the
Navidad River averages 1500 meters in width and the edge of valley
erosion averages 1750 meters in width.
The river valley in this
part of the basin has an asymmetrical prof~le with the western
valley edge an undercut slope and the eastern valley edge a slip­
of f slope.
Jus t north of the work area, ye t still wi thi.rt-thiH::
reservoir bound~riest the valley becomes narrower and has a more
symmetrical shape.
Figure 3 illustrates the geomorphology of the western under­
cut slope of the valley.
It is typical of the land surfaces sur­
rounding tested sites 41 JK 41, 91, and 147.
Inter-riverine portions of the 1974 work area (Figure 3, item
1) and elsewhere adjacent to the reservoir are very slightly undu­
lating surfaces with a one to five percent seaward slope charac­
teristic of the Beaumont terrace.
There is no well-developed
drainage of the inter-riverine areas; they have remained relatively
stable.
As interpreted from a grouping of three sets of meander
radius size the valley of the Navidad exhibits evidence of three
significantly different phases of discharge.
Size of meander
radius is related to the amount of water carried in a channel
(Friedkin 1945).
The earliest meander scars and the largest radius set had the
greatest influence on the shape of the undercut valley wall.
The
stream responsible, judging from the width of the channel, prob­
ably had five times the total discharge of the present day Nav­
idad River.
Large meander scars are clearly evident on the valley
scarps (Fig. 3, item 2).
The only climatic events known at this
time which could have produced discharge five times greater than
the present are anyone of the pluvial periods associated with
advances of the last glaciation.
Deposits of the Deweyville Ter­
race (Bernard 1950) found elsewhere are here attributed to such
a pluvial period.
The second meander set with a radius size intermediate be­
tween the early large radius meanders and those in the present
channel of the Navidad is often superimposed over the first meander
set (Fig. 3, item 3).
The second group of meanders has not been
related to a known climatic event yet it evidences a period of
slightly greater discharge than the present.
Point bar and levee

PRESENT DAY ENVIRONMENT

41

deposits attributed to that period of discharge are easily recog­
nized on the valley floor (Fig. 3, item 4).
Today the channel of the Navidad river has a set of small
radius meanders which are entrenched well below mean sea level.
Frequent flooding has produced well developed levee and back­
swamp deposits (Fig. 3, items 5 and 6).
Point bar deposits re­
lated to the present river have been identified within the en­
trenched channel.
Erosional channels on the valley edge are of two distinct
ages.
One set of these has resulted in the development of ex­
tensive alluvial fans on the valley floor.
This first set has
large oak trees in its channel and is the older.
The second,
younger, set has very small alluvial fans in association.
The
only vegetation in its channel is mesquite.
The most recent set
of erosional channels is probably a result of Historic European
activity as these drainages are adjacent to roads or other historic
features.
The older set of erosional channels has a characteristically
dendritic drainage.
One complexity of those drainages is espe­
cially important: just below the 40-foot contour most of these
channels evidence a change in underlying geologic structure by
abruptly turning to run parallel to the valley wall for a short
distance (Fig. 3, Items 7 and 8).
It is believed that the change
in underlying structure may be attributed to a deposition post­
dating that of the Beaumont formation.
It is not a fault line.
The observed complexity in stream flow is parallel to the outline
of the set of meanders with the largest radius.
Regional History
The review of regional geologic history spans a time period
which exceeds that known for the human occupation of the area.
Past geologic events continue to affect the physical environment.
They are closely related to the configuration of landforms.
The
shape of landforms is important because topographic and sediment
texture differences account for variations in vegetation distr4­
bution at the micro-level.
In addition, the distribution of eco­
nomically important raw materials is often controlled by past geo­
logic events.
Geologic events preceeding the arrival of man are
archeologically significant because relict traits from past en­
vironments affected aboriginal lifeways.
The oldest land surfaces in the study area date to the San­
gamon Interglacial.
It was probably during the Sangamon high
stand of sea level that the deltas of major Northwest Gulf Coast
rivers prograded well out into the Gulf.
The sediments of thase
deltas have been classified as the Beaumont formation.
At the onset of the Wisconsin Glaciation the world water

FIGURE 3

fJ)·

GEOMORPHOLOGY OF 1H E
NAVIDAD RIVER VALLEY

",

A

"."".~

NO TE:

NUMBERED STATIONS
EXPLAINED IN T EXT,

~OO

.-----.-..

~-.

--

..

--~

•.-.--."-­

ALL UVIAL

BS

BACK

FC

FILLED

i'lL

NATURAL

PB

POINT

FAN

SWAMP

DEPOSIT

CHA NNEL

LEVEE

BAR

Figure 3.

Geomorphology of the Navidad River Valley

1.

Inter~riverine

2.

Large meander scars.

3.

Second meander set, superimposed over first meander
scars.

portions of the 1974 work area.

'l::I
::t::
h<:

VJ

~

4.

Point bar and levee deposits.

5..,.6.

Levee and backswamp deposits.

7....8.

Change in underlying geologic structure is evidenced by
channels running parallel to the valley wall.

~

t"'f

I:'tl

:.c:
-.:::
~

::0

C)

:.c:

~

:.c:
f..3

.t:­

v.>

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

44

supply began to concentrate as ice in glaciated areas and sea level
was lowered either 390 feet (Curray 196n) or 450 feet (Ie Blanc and
Hodgson 1959) below the present mean.
During the periods of lowered
sea level, streams became deeply entrenched in the then emerged
Beaumont delta deposits.
Surfaces which underwent little erosion
were deeply weathered.
Approximately 18,000 years ago glaciers began a final recession
and sea level began to rise.
It eventually reached the level of the
present still stand (Curray 1960, Frazier 1974, Nelson and Bray
1970) .
Fluctuations in eustatic sea level are primarily the result
of differences in the amount of water tied up in glaciers (Flint
1971: 316).
The sea level changes proposed by Curray (1960), Fra­
zier (1974) and Nelson and Bray (1970) for the Texas Coast prob­
ably are related to minor glacial advances and retreats as the Wis­
consin Period ended (about 10,000 years ago).
Curray's 1960s recon­
struction of sea level changes correlates particularly well with
compiled sequences of Late Wisconsin glacial events (Flint 1971:
Fig. 21-25).
Glacial advances are accompanied by periods of incFeased ef­
fective precipitation in unglaciated portions of North America.
Pluvial periods are recognized on the Gulf Coast by low river ter­
races and very large river meander scars.
This is the case with
the Deweyville terrace and associated meander set (Bernard 1950)
which indicate a river discharge on the order of five times greater
than the present.
These deposits represent a major contrast to the
climatic present.
The Deweyville terrace has been dated variously:
from 17,000 to over 30,000 ~ears before the present (Bernard and
LeBlanc 1965: 149), from 13,000 to 30,000 1ears before the present
(Saucier and Fleetwood 1970) and about 10,000 years before the pre­
sent (Aten 1975, personal communication).
This author finds the
10,000 year B.P. date the most tenable.
Sea level reached its present position between 3,000 and 2,500
tears before the present (Curray 1960, Nelson and Bray 1970, and
Frazier 1974).
Some time shortly after still stand the barrier
island formed across Matagorda Bay by spit accretion (McGowen and
Brewton 1975: 10).
Shorelines of the barrier islands have been in
an erosional phase for the last 100 years (McGowen and Brewton 1975:
24) .
Local Sediments
Introduction
. --...
~--,

~".-""~

Three prehistoric sites tested in 1974 were in good condition
(41 JK 41, 91cand 147), two (41 JK 16 and 50) were in poor condition
or destroyed.
Among the three sites that had been little disturbed,

FIGURE

G E N-E R A LIZ E 0
AT 41 J K 91

C R 0 S SSE C T ION S 0 F THE

WE S T ERN

V ALL EYE 0 G E
N

s

w

4

46

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

a number of stratigraphic relationships were similar and key strati­
graphic horizons in the sites could be traced in the non-cultural
sediments along the valley edge of the Navidad.
The correlation
of key zones between both cultural and non-cultural sediments sug­
gests that many Recent stratigraphic relationships are the result
not of the effects of human groups at individual sites but of al­
terations in climate either locally or regionally.
The sequence discussed here was recognized on the western un­
dercut valley edge of the Navidad in the 1974 work area (Fig. 1)
where most stratigraphic data have been collected.
Only there is
it possible to correlate individual localities to form the basis of
a local st~atigFaphic sequence.
Along the western valley edge bet'weell': the conrluence of Post
Oak Branch with the Navidad River and the archeological site 41 JK
41 seven stratigraphic localities (four culturally affected and
three natural) were examined and recoTded.
The sediments described
are topographically higher than sediments in the flood plain of the
river and topographically lower than the weathered surface of the
inter-riverine portion of the Beaumont formation.
All localities
are on the crest, waxing slope and debris slope of the valley edge.
However, at 41 JK 41, 41 JK 91 and 41 JK 147 the sediments are
traced to the flood plain of tributaries and/or the river itself.
Vegetation at the edge of the valley is mixed stands of oaks, elms
and small hackberry; shrubs and shrubs with numerous forbs, common
to the bluff top forest biological zone.
Five stratigraphic zones were correlated between localities
from the local sequence.
These are numbered from bottom to top
in order of their deposition (Fig. 4).
Description of Zones

Zone I
Underlies Recent sediments.
Interfingering and inter­
grading flood plain, channel, deltaic backswamp, lagoonal and near
shore marine deposits characteristic of the Beaumont formation.
Compactid and consolidated by gravity and ~e.thering.
Clay and silt
with silty clay, clay, clay loam and silty clay loam textures com­
mon.
Deeply weathered paleosol along erosional surface directly
beneath recent sediments.
Calcarious and ferrugineous nodules are
common in that paleosol.
Clay mineralogy of presently exposed bi·
sequal soil is dominated by montmorillonite; illite and kaolinite
are present.
Sand separate; approximately 90% quartz, 8% feldspar,
2% other silicates.
Iron and manganese concretions are found in
upper horizons of bisequal soil.
Sand size articles are
redomi­
nat~ly subangular and subround in
ape, appro
are
elongate.
Calcium carbonate concretions absent.
raw
material for ceramics occur in Zone I.
Historic Europeans used
kaolinitic clays from Zone I for pottery and bricks.

PRESENT DAY ENVIRONMENT

47

Zone II

Rests on erosional disconformity over Zone I.
Horizontally bedded and orossbedded deposits characteristic of
point bar accretion.
Deposits concentrate where cutting into
the valley edge has been minimal.
Bureau of Reclamation core and
auger logs describe sediments similar to Zone II's that are an
average of 5 meters thick: they have a lower boundary at about
3.75 meters mean sea level.
Zone II's upper boundary recorded at
a maximum 9 meters m.s.l.
Little evidence of weathering.
Slight
to violently effervescent reaction to HCL.
Texture is sand,
loamy sand and sandy loam.
Very fine sand, fine sand most common
grain sizes.
Sand separate mineralogy:
quartz 91.0%, f~ldspar
8.01~ hornblende 0.5%, other silicates 0.5%.
Average grain shape
subangular; but angular and subrounded sh~pes well represented.
Average 31% elongated grains.
Silt, clay balls present (Fig. 1).
Fossils of megafauna present in secondary position with signs of
stream rolling.
Cultural material and charcoal absent.
Cobble
size tabular sandstone present; formed in place by calcium car­
bonate and silica cementation.
Zone II is the only known local
source of cobble size material other than calcium carbonate con­
cretions in Zone I.
Sandstone used for prehistoric hearths at
41 JK 91.
Zone II is recognized as separate from the Beaumont
formation for these reasons, 1) Bureau of Reclamation core and
auger logs indicate sediments apparently analogous to Zone II are
confined between the valley scarp ,and the edge of valley erosion,
2) stream rolled fossils of land mammals are found in the zone,
3) variations in the structural characteristics of the deposit at
the different stratigraphic localities show a relationship to the
largest set of meander radius observed (or the earliest discharge
period inferred for the Navidad River in its present valley).
Zone II is similar to deposits described in other watersheds as the
Deweyville Terrace.
Therefore the correlation is made between
Zone II and the Deweyville Terrace.

Zone III Overlying Zone II. A highly calcareous loamy sand
and sandy loam; principal size is fine sand.
Horizontal bands of
angular and subangular granule and pebble size calcium carbonate
concretions are frequent and apparently precipitated in place.
Zone III evidences no sign of primary sedimentary structure.
It
has a weathering structure that is massive.
Color (10YR 5/4, 6/4
moist, light yellowish brown; 10YR 6/6 moist, brownish yellow) and
the in place development of calcium carbonate concretions suggest
that Zone III is the lower part of a B horizon of an eroded soil
profile.
Sand separate mineralogy: ~uartz 91.0%, feldspar 8.0%,
other silicates 1.0%. Most sand grains are subangular; 34% are
elongate.
Iron and manganese oxide concretions absent.
It is
possible that the characteristics which differentiate Zone III from
Zone II are simply the result of weathering.
Fossils have not been
observed.
No cultural material is present. Mineral grains are
occasionally agregated by calcium carbonate.

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

48

Zone IV Compact concretions lying disconformably over Zone III.
Concretions, subangular and subround in shape and of granule and
pebble size.
Gently sloping in most areas and to 30 cm. thick.
Elsewhere the zone is lower part of fill in an erosional feature
possibly related to the sequence of events that resulted in the
gently sloping and compacted concretion gravel.
The portion' of Zone
IV that is fill is less compacted, thicker and composed of angular
as well as subround and subangular concretions.
Zone loses inte­
grity on the ~qt slope but is easily traced to the bottom fill (Fig.
4). Matrix between concretions is fine and very fine sand. Fos­
sils, cultural material and charcoal are absent except when included
by biological activity.
Organic matter is low.
Iron and manganese
oxide concretions absent.
Zone VAll u\rj;:aL and,cc-l·luYiaL depos its·' on d:.lfe ~v--a.l1eY edge- aad
slope.
Cultural materials are limited to this zone.
As the im­
portance of Zone V is more immediate to aims of the research it
has been su'{)divicied for a detailed discussion.
The subdivisions
of Zone V begin,·with the most recently deposited sediments as do
the numerical designations for the natural levels excavated at the
individual archeological localities.
The subdiv~sions within the
zone have been recognized at the Atkinson (41 JK 41), Hawk Berch
(41 JK 147) and Venom Hill (41 JK 91) sites. Natural levels with­
in subdivisions of the zone at these sites have not been correlated
and are presented separately in context with the individual site
descriptions and interpretations.

Va
Colluvial deposit of reworked Vc and Yd.
Situated on
steep slopes the deposit is very dark grey, is massive
and has a loamy texture as a result of a high percent of
organic matter in various states of decomposition.
Av­
erage thickness 30 cm.
Land snails are very frequent.
Cultural materials observed were a few small flakes.
Calcium carbonate concretions are present and the matrix
has a strongly effervescent reaction to hydrochloric
acid.
It has a clear to abrupt lower boundary.

Vb
Alluvial fill in a shallow recent channel of the larger
tributaries (Fig. 4) which drain the inter-riverine Beau­
mont Terrace and the valley edge.
There is little or no
surface evidence of the filled channel.
It has a very
dark grey fill of silt, clay and sand size particles; a
loam to silt loam texture.
Average thickness 60 cm.
Weak fine granular weathering structure observed.

PRESENT DAY ENVIRONMENT

49

Lenses of concretions and other granule and pebble size
de~ris ouuur near the bottom of the fill (Fig. 4).
In­
cluded in the lenses observed near the Hawk Perch and
Venom Hill sites are charcoal, brick and glass fragments
that apparently date to the Historic Oldworlder Period.
Calcium carbonate and manganese oxide concretions are
included.
Soil development on the upper boundary is
very weak, krotovinas are few.
There is no cementaion
and the matrix has slightly effervescent reaction to
hydrochloric acid.
There is an abrupt wayy boundary
over Vc.

Vc
Alluvial and/or aeolian deposit consisting of fill in a
channel of major tributaries (Fig. 4) :draining the inter­
riverine Beaumont Terrace and the valley ~dge and de­
posits a~ove an erosional disconformity.
The discon­
formity reaches an elevation 18-20 feet higher than the
filled channel.
Primary structure is either massive or
obscured by biologic churning.
A weak, medtum-angular
blocky breaking to weak, fine-crumb weathering structure
has developed.
The sediment is composed primarily of
very fine sand and coarse silt and has a loam texture.
Average thickness 40 cm ~.,' raJ:l.ge ·.to' lS{)' em. ';Very :dark
grayish brown to dark yellowish brown color.
Artifacts
from late in the Late Prehistoric Period and subsist­
ence residue which indicate increased use of large mam­
mals occur within portions of the Zone affected by hab­
itation.
No concretions are present unless included by
biologic activity.
Krotovinas.ar.e ·commo·n.;;. Very,slight-­
ly effervescent reaction to hydrochloric acid.
Very
abrupt smooth boundary over Zone IV, abrupt to very a­
brupt wavy to smooth boundary over Vd.

vd
Alluvial and eolluvial sediments deposited as fill.
The
deposit has a wide range in thickness but a recorded
maximum of 3 m. thick and an average thickness of about
2.5 m.
Vd was deposited fairly rapidly in a time span
starting in the middle or late Middle-Prehistoric.
How­
ever, the buildup of sediments was not constant;
stable
surfaces and evidence of minor erosional phases are
found in the stratified deposits of the zone (Fig. 11).
Texture ranges from a sandy loam to a loamy sand that is
dark greyish brown to black in color.
Principal particle
sizes are fine and very fine sand.
Sand grain minerology

PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

50

is: quartz 89%, feldspar 10%, chert 1%.
Grains are pri­
marily subangular in ~hapQ but angular and sub round shapes
are well represented.
An average of 35% of the grains are
elongate.
The range of color in the zone is within the
10YR hue and has a low value and low chroma.
Krotovinas are
very common to infrequent.
Calcium carbonate concretions are
present.
The matrix has a slight to violently effervescent
reaction to hydrochloric acid.
It has a clear to gradual
wavy to irregular boundary over Zone IV, a clear, wavy bound­
ary over Zone II and a gradual, wavy boundary over Ve and Vf.
Ve~

f,

g

Alluvial sediments.
Highly variable in nature including well
sorted sands, silts and clays.
Cultural material not observed.
Exposure of sediments in these subdivisions too infrequent for
accurate understanding of the characteristics of each.

RESEARCH: OBJECTIVES AND IMPLEMENTATION
LONG TERM RESEARCH OBJECTIVES
Data are to be collected on prehistoric cultural systems
in this portion of the Gulf Coast to fulfill two principal
research objectives.
One aim is to test h,potheseS concerning
the ways in which patterns of subsistence systems were mani­
fested and to identify similarities and differences between
patterns in a time perspective.
Having identified differences
and similarities in cultural expressions through time, the
second objective is to isolate variables critical in the di­
versity.
Within the frame required by the practical limita­
tions of contract research, suggestions on how these variables
relate to the processes of change will be made.
The accomplishment of the second goal of explaining processes
is dependent upon available information and the satisfaction of the
first goal.
In truth both objectives are interrelated parts of a
whole theo~etical area of inquiry.
The success of the second ob­
jective is accessory to the quality of results related to the first
objective.
The planned inquiry is a multistage one.
The first fieldwork
in the reservoir will be aimed at gathering a general, descriptive
data base from which propositions on the nature of cultural pro­
cesses can be derived and hypotheses refined.
As field and lab­
oratory work progress collection of specific ~ategories of data to
test hypotheses will have an increasingly greater emphasis.
General problems to be solved are the development of, 1) a
cultural sequence or chronology, 2) knowledge on the relationships
between coastal marine and coastal inland display of material cul­
ture, 3) data on relationships between culture and environment
and, 4) information on the mechanism of observed changes.
The
above problems are arranged in processual order of consideration
but these are, as are the principal long term objectives, part
of a whole.
~SHORT

TERM RESEARCH OBJECTIVES:

1974 FIELD SEASON

The purpose of the fieldwork reported here was to, 1) famil­
iarize the researcher with variables that would not be available
for study because of poor or differential preservation*, 2) collect
*It is recognized that the range of subjects for study is probably
unlimited and certainly not fully understood at present.

51

52

RESEARCH; OBJECTIVES AND LIMITATIONS

information on recent climatic history through stratigraphic, faunal
and palynological studies and, 3) begin compiling a record of cul­
tural differences and similarities in time perspective.
Although
techniques adopted for recovering data to satisfy these objectives
were defined and rigidly implemented in the field, analysis has
followed a number of paths.
This has been a conscious effort to
determine which may be the most fruitful lines of research in addi­
tional work within the reservoir and especially what need not be
done in the future.
It is probably necessary to mention that if
the project was not a continuing one and the past season was to be
the only season, the routine would have been different.
Seven prehistoric sites had been tested by the Historical Sur­
vey Committee during the intensive survey of the reservoir (Mal­
louf et al. 1973); These excavations revealed a variability in
assemblages and the possibility of differential preservation, but
little stratigraphic data was provided for the sites (Mallouf et al.
1973: 101-130).
Investigation during the intensive survey was
confined to a single hand dug test pit of variable size (ranging
from 1.5 x 2 m. to 2 x 3 m.) in each site tested; that is, with
the exception of investigations at 41 JK 91 where a series of
shovel tests were made.
It is difficult to picture the internal makeup of the archeo­
logical sites from such localized tests.
The necessity of relating
test excavations with other areaS of a site seemed important to
satisfy the objective of familiarization with the range of absent
variables that could restrict areas of research and, to identify
the influence of climatic variables on cultural deposits.
No area chronology had been developed in past field work.
The
development of one was recognized as an area for immediate concern
as having a well defined and specific chronology of events is one
of the most important tools in studying variability in culture(s)
in the time perspective (one of the major goals of the research).
The development of a chronology that will be the best tool
for interpreting human culture is an important requirement because
it is the basis for what ideally will be far-reaching conclusions
on cultural processes.
The development of such a chronology will
be a primary consideration but not an end point.
To satisfy long
range objectives it must be constructed upon cultural rather than
typological or technological successions.
The reliability of a
history of cultural succession can be upset by failure to take into
account some obvious hazards.
Thomas and Ehrich itemize some po­
tential mistakes in their article, Some ProbZems ~n Chronology

(1969:

149-150).
PROCEDURES. ADOPTED

TO~UL¥ILLSHORT~TERM:OBJECTtVES~_

As crews entered the field at the beginning of the 1974
season they were faced with a dilemma of how best to accomplish
short term and further long term objectives for research within

RESEARCH: OBJECTIVES AND LIMITATIONS

53

the reservoir.
Practical factors to be taken into consideration
were, 1) restriction to areas of primary construction impact, 2)
restriction to sites recommended by the 1nte~~ive survey report
for testing or excavation (Mallouf et aL 19i3:Table i7) , - - ­
3) a prescribed amount of time for the work, and.4) the expected
ultimate destrution of the sites involved.
An unusual but ad­
vantageous methodology was constructed.
Archeological sites were exposed by extensive and continuous
backhoe trenches (Fig. 6, 10, 22) which not only entered cultural
strata but extended beneath and beyond them to connect with a
nearby stream or the river flood plain.
Such a tactic was de·
structive to cultural deposits but it was useful in that it al­
lowed immediate examination of the relationships between cultural
and non-cultural strata and definition of site area.
The continuous trenches enabled less subjective correlation
between cultural and non-cultural sediments.
Data on past environ­
ments revealed in both sediment categories could be combined with
a minimum of trouble into a more complete picture.
The technique
also had the advantage of exposing long sections of the cultural
sediments •
• chief aim of this research is the establishment of a basis
for a local chronology of cultural expression.
It was reasoned
that the best means to satisfy that purpose .~s to take a non­
random testing approach.
The long sections of cultural sediments
enabled distinction of areas within each site that exhibited the
least disturbance from either a cultural or non-cultural agent.
Parts of the sites with the most clear stratigraphic breaks were
selected for excavation by natural level.
Thus the problem of
large stratigraphically complex sites (the only sample that was
at the time available for study) was reduced.
The excavation was either in single or grouped one-meter
squares placed, for control, adjacent to the ~dge of the backhoe
trenches.
In one case, a three-meter block was isolated on three
sides by trenches and excavated.
In every instance detailed
stratigraphic diagrams of expo~ed sediments (usually at a scale
of one inch to 40 centimeters) were drawn prior to excavation.
Cultural sediments were then excavated by natural level or ar­
bitrary divisions of natural levels.
No effort was made to record artifacts in place unless they
were obvious!y associated with such occupational features as
hearths or storage pits.
Excavation by natural level and ar­
bitrary subdivisions of natural levels relegated artifacts to
assemblages for analysis.
In the small area of the excavation
units, detailed mapping of artifacts and time consuming trewling
would have been a waste of effort and of little value in solving
the problems at hand.
Excavation was carefully confined to natural levels. Matrix
from a zone or arbitrary division of a level was excavated through
the use of a shovel.
The boundaries between levels were trowled
to cheek for features and to permit taking elevations for contours.

54

RESEARCH: OBJECTIVES AND LIMITATIONS

Once a feature was located it too was carefully cleaned and record­
ed by written description, photography and drawing.
The matrix as it was removed was double screened in an attempt
to secure as complete a sample 0f cultural refuse as practical.
In the adopted method excavated soil was washed by water through
1/4-inch hardware cloth, then through 1/16-inch mesh screen.
The
bulkiness of the sample was thus reduced while still collecting a
large sample of matrix residue.
Refuse larger than 1/16-inch can
be recovered in this manner.
The technique has now become a common
practice in archeological site excavation on the Texas coast (Aten
N.d. a and b; Dillehay 1975).
No method has been employed to insure a "representative H sample'
of the complete site.
In most instances the amount of a cultural
zone excavated was well below 10% of the whole.
The sampling pre­
cedure was adapted to the research objective of identifying cul­
tural differences and similarities within a time perspective and
collecting information on recent climatic history through strati­
graphic, faunal and palynological studies.
Data recovered from small excavation units at Wallisville
Reservoir H • • • has proven to be a valid representation of the pre­
historic economic pattern in the lower Trinity River Delta area Uf
(Dillehay 1975: 21).
An alternative method is provided by Tre­
ganza and Cook who have found after analysis of a completely ex­
cavated shell midden in California that a small but well distrib­
uted sample can be representative of the material nature of shell
middens (1948: 287-297).
The sampling units used at Palmetto Bend
were aggregated as in the method used at Wallisville.

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS
S I:'f E 4 1 JK 16
-DES CRIPT ION

Site 41 JK 16 was ~n extensive earth midden situated on the
edge of a terrace.
That terrace is on the outside edge of a bend
in the Navidad River and is about 25 or 30 feet above water level.
By present day geography the site is located 8 miles southeast of
Edna.
The Navidad is undercutting the terrace and that may even­
tually cause further erosion of the site area.
The site probably
was cove red with bl uf f top fo res t vege tat ion,. a few oaks do remain,
but i~ has been cleared and is now in pasture'lartd.
Previous researchers at the site include members of both the
preliminary reconnaissance and intensive survey teams.
The site
was recorded by Wakefield and Riskind in 1967 and re-evaluated by
Mallouf and Ray in 1972.
Wakef1eld and Riskind tested the site.
The estimates given by previous researchers vary consider
concerning the area of occupation.
Riskind and Wakefield in 1967
estimated that the area of the site was 9,144 square meters.
Mal­
louf and Ray in 1972 believed the area of the site to be 1,000
square meters.
Surface examination and backhoe trenching last summer by the
Texas Archeological Survey suggest that both previous eatimates
are too small.
It appeared to the Texas Archeological Survey
crew that the distribution of cultural material measured 275
meters on the long axis (east-west) and 60 meters on the short
axis.
If that distribution corresponds with the area of prehis­
toric occupation,then the site was 16,500 square meters in size.
The a~ount of disturbance at the site may have been a factor in
the present wide distribution of cultural material.
Nevertheless,
the site probably was large.
Several types of activity have adversely affected the condi­
tion of cultural deposits, 1) there was clearing and earth
to install an oil field structure on a level surface and a
was dug for sump, 2) there was c ear g 0
rus
or pasture
3) much fill has been removed in excavations for top soil, 4) a
shell road to the oil facility was constructed, and 5) portions
of the site are presently being eroded as a result of pollution
fDom oil-field-related activites and ~attl. paths.
The condition
of the site is poor.
--~~~-~~~0~~

55

56

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

EXCAVATION: CONTROL AND METHODOLOGY
Both Wakefield (1968) and Mallouf, Fox and Briggs (1973) had
highly recommended 41 JK 16 as an important locality for investi­
gation; yet, it could not supply a significant role in research as
it is now planned (see: Research: Objectives and Implementation).
The procedures adopted in the 1974 season required that the sites
investigated b~ in a condition suitable for observing change through
time.
Since the intactness of the recommended site was question­
able, documentation of its condition was required.
That necessi­
tated a methodology different from the one set up as the season's
quidelines for excavation.
Backhoe trenches were excavated into the site at various
places.
The exposed stratigraphy was examined and described care­
fully.
Stratigraphic evidence indicated that both historic and
prehistoric cultural levels were disturbed.
Onc.e the poor condition of the site had been determined it
seemed reasonable to expect surface collections would be nearly as
useful as subsurface collections.
Surface collection would be less
time consuming than excavation.
No controlled manual excavation
took place at 41 JK 16.
Control over artifact placement was minimal.
A surface col­
lection of the site sampled 6% of the total area and was derived
from a single portion of the site.
STRATIGRAPHY
Three backhoe trenches were excavated parallel to the long
axis of the site.
The stratigraphy revealed was similar between
all the excavations at the site.
These levels are described below
starting with the most recently deposited.
Level la: 0-2 cm. depth, 2 cm. thickness, 0-4 cm. range;
abrupt, smooth boundary over Zone lb on the basis
of texture and structure.
Very dark grayish brown,
dry (lOYR 3/2); very dark brown, moist (lOYR 2/2);
no mottling.
Loam: fine strong platey structure,
sticky when wet, plastic, friable when moist,
slightly hard when dry.
Non-cemented, no reaction
to hydrochloric acid.
Undecomposed organic matter
at the lower boundary of the zone.
Level lb: 2-20 cm. depth, 18 cm. thickness, 14-24 cm. range;
clear, smooth boundary over Zone 2 on the basis of
structure.
Dark yellowish brown, dry (lOYR 3/5);
very dark brown. moist (lOYR 2/2); no mottling.
Clay loam: medium strong angular blocky structure
breaking to fine strong angular blocky structure in

SITE 41 JK 16

57

clods, sticky when wet, plastic when wet, firm
when moist, hard when dry.
Non-cemented, no
reaction to hydrochloric acid.
Cultural material
from the Historic European period are present but
in a disturbed context.
Level 2;

20-32 cm. depth, 12 cm. thickness, 2-18 cm. range;
abrupt, smooth boundary over Zone 3 on the basis
of color, structure, calcium carbonate concretions
and reaction to hydrochloric acid.
Very dark gray­
ish brown, dry (lOYR 3/2); very dark brown, moist
(lOYR 2/3).
Mottling as a result of biologic ac­
tivity: dark yellowish brown, dry (lOYR 2 4/4); dark
yellowish brown, moist (lOYR 3/4).
Silty clay loam;
medium moderate angular blocky structure breaking
to fine strong angular blocky structure: sticky
when wet, plastic when wet, firm when moist, hard
when dry.
Non~cemented; strongly effervescent
with hydrochloric acid.
Numerous worm casts have
moved lighter colored matrix up from underlying
soil horizons.
No cultural material was observed
in this zone.

Level 3: 32 cm. plus depth; brown, dry (7.5YR 5/4X; dark
brown, moist (7.5YR 4/4).
Silty clay loam; me­
dium moderate angular blocky structure breaking to
fine strong angular blocky structure; sticky when
wet, plastic when wet, friable when moist, hard
when dry.
May be weakly cemented with calcium
carbonates; violently effervescent with hydro­
chloric acid.
Calcium carbonate concretions are
present but in limited quantity (5% of the total
matrix) and ranging in size from 1 mm. to 2 cm.,
sub-round in shape.
No cultural material was
observed.
Level 4: Same as Zone 3 except it has lower percentage of
calcium carbonate concretions.
ARTIFACT DISCUSSION
Selective sampling of the site's surface made by ~arrowhead
collectors" (A. A. Rakowitz, statement to Historical Surv~y Com­
mitt~e) and professional investigators (Wakefield 1968, Mallouf
et aZ. 1973) probably damaged the condition of the site.
It is
expected that the tool-debris ratio has been affected in favor of
a greater amount of debris and that the relative percent of some
aftifact types (notably the biface categories) have been lowered.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

58

For these reasons it is unlikely that the assemblage of tools
could be compared with confidence with collections from excavated
of items with indications of use is
star c per 0 s an
items for the historic
periods.
however that general statements on the age and
purpose of the site can be made using these artifacts.
In the area sampled, cultural material was easily observed
and an effort was made to collect all of it that was visible.
It
was hoped that careful collection would result in a sample of
lithic debris which could be used for comparison with excavated
samples.
Large items are easy to see and therefore a£e"mG~e_lik.ly to
be collected than small items if care is not tak~n.
Comparison of
the surface collection from 41 JK 16 with excavated collections
from other sites with similar functions should indicate the reli­
ability of the sample from JK 16.
If the sample is invalid then
it could be expected that the dimensions of whole flakes at 41 JK
16 would be larger.
Unfortunately the function of JK 16 was ap­
parently different from that at any of the other sites tested.
Information derived from lithic debris at 41 JK 16 is in any
case better suited for comparison between sites than that from
tools, because:
1. selective collection prior to the 1974 fieldwork rarely
included materials in the debris categories
2. the sample size of these items (191) is much larger than
the sample size of items with use implications.
His
A few artifacts of European origin have been found.
These
(a clear glass bottle vase with a pontil mark, a flown blue por­
celain sherd and a salt glazed crockery rim sherd) are dated to
the middle or late nineteenth century.
The historic occupation at
or near the site was probably comtemporary with that at the Texana
Townsite (Jackson 1977).
Prehistoric
Prehistoric aultural refuse included only lithic and ceramic
artifacts.
The percent breakdown of artifacts with indications of
use is:
Cores
9%
n=40
Bifaces
14%
Retouched pieces 34%
Ceramics
42%

SITE 41 JK 16

59

Artifacts date 41 JK 16 to a span within the Late Pre­
historic period.
All projectile points known to originate
from the site fill the criterion for the Perdiz type as
defined by Suhm and Jelks (1962: 283).
That projectile was
used toward the end of the Late Prehistoric period; perhaps
as early as A.D. 1200 until as late as the Historic Aborig­
inal period (Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967: Fig. 72).
Bone
tempered, grog tempered and sandy paste sherds were collected.
On the Trinity River Delta, paste and temper have chrono10gic
significance; sandy paste ceramics are early, grog and bone
tempered ceramics are late in the Late Prehistoric period.
The ~ajority of other tested sites have a lower fre­
guenc,of bifaces than 41 JK 16.
If the expected reduction in the
relative percent of that artifact type in the assemblage is assumed
to have occurred, then bifaces must have made up a larger percent
of the site's artifact assemblage than is presently apparent.
Only the 3 X 5 Unit at 41 JK 91 has a higher percentage of pottery.
In other areas at JK 91 and at other sites tested within the res­
ervoir ceramics are less common.
All 191 articles of lithic debris were sorted into categories
which reflect the sequence of their removal from cores.
These
categories are: Primary (cortex covers 100% of the exterior sur­
face), secondary (cortex covers less than 100% of the exterior
surface) and interior (no cortex present on the exterior surface).
At this site 3.1% of all flakes and chips were primary, 24.6% were
secondary and 72.3% were interior.
Skinner has argued that percent of primary, secondary and
interior lithic debris have significance in recognizing site
function and the distance of the site from lithic raw material
resource (1971: 158-162).
It is proposed that data on the se­
quence of flake removal from cores is a stable and universally
applicable source for comparison between sites with lithic debris.
The artifacts from which such data are derived usually constitute
the largest artifact sample group at prehistoric sites, breakage
affects the percent distribution of primary, secondary and inte­
rior debris minimally and the debris has little appeal for the
casual investigator.
An additional source of reliable data is analysis of striking
platform type.
The facts that breakage affects percent of each
category minimally and that flakes are not desired by most casual
collectors remain effective.
The total sample size hawever~< is
reduced from that comsidered in the debris removal sequence be­
cause in the striking platform analysis 9~lx flakes can be con­
sidered.
At 41 JK 16,'564 item.s were analyzed for strikil}g platform.
The breakdown of platform types at the site is:
natural platform
20.3%
n=64
single facet platform
31.3%
multiple facet platform 35.9%
crushed platform
12/5%
It had originally been thought that flake dimensions (Fig. 5)

60

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

would be useful for comparing 41 JK 16 with other sites in the res­
ervoir to determine differences and similarities of a cultural
nature.
The sample size in this analysis is generally small be­
cause analysis can be conducted on whole flakes only.
Flakes at 41 JK 16 have a mean length (x = 2.566) larger than
other samples in the reservoir, and a standard deviation (sd =
1.2502) higher.
The shape of flakes is predominately divergent
(69%) and that category at 41 JK 16 exceeds by 26% it~~Qc~
currence at the tested site with !the most similar distribution
of flake shape types.
Mean thickness (x = 0.5870) of collected
whole flakes at the site is greater than elsewhere among the
tested sites; standard deviation (sd = 0.3895) is higher.
41 JK
16 was occupied within the same time span as other sites which
have been tested.
It is observed that despite the fact 41 JK 16 was occup.ied
during the same'. ~enet:'al time span as other tested sites, flake di­
mensions are skewed.
Three possible explanations are that:
1)
the lithic reauction technology at 41 JK 16 was different
from that at other sites
2)
the sample coll~~tion method at 41 JK 16 created a bias
toward certain categories of dimension
3)
post-depositional disturbance altered the characteristic
dimensions of flakes at the site.
The sequence of flake removal and the type of platform prep­
aration are directly related to lithic reduction technology (Skinner
1971: 158-160).
If different reduction technologies or stages in
a single reduction te:chnology are represented by individual samples,
then it could be expected that the sequence of flake removal and
the type of platform preparation would be different between the
samples.
The percents of primary, secondary and interior flakes
at 41 JK 16 are quite similar to other tested areas where deposits
are attributed to the Late Prehistoric period (data: Appendix I).
The percent distribution of platform types at 41 JK 16 is also
similar to the distribution in tested Late Prehistoric sites else­
where in the reservoir (data: ~ppendix I).
It must be concluded
that the reduction technology at 41 JK 16 is similar to that at
other sites in the reservoir and therefore that the first explana­
tion is incorrect.
If collection bias resulted in a distorted picture of flake
dimensions at the site then it would be expected that the re­
covered debris would be generally larger than samples recovered
by using the 1/4-inch mesh screen.
In the samples from this pro­
ject flakes with short lengths are predominately divergent in
shape.
That shape becomes less common as length increases.
It
would be expected that parallel, sub-parallel, and convergent
shape categories would be significantly higher in a sample biased
toward large flakes than is common at the excavated sites analyzed.
At 41 JK 16 flakes are generally slightly longer and slightly
thicker than are flakes in excav$ted samples but divergent is the
most common shape and dominates more in that sample than in any

FIGURE 5
0/0

50

Length
40

FLAKE
41

n= 30
x= 2.5066
sd= 1.2502

DIMENSIONS
JK 16

30

20

10

%

o

.4

.8

1.2

1.6

2.0

2.4

2.8

3.2

3.6

4.0

4.4

4.8

5.2 em

70

Shope·
n=29
60

%

50

50

Thickness
40

40

30

30

n= 29
x=O.5870
sd=O.3895

o

.. Plot mode continuous OS a visual aid
change. the curve shope.

derived

.15

.30

.45

.60

.75

.90

1.05

1.20

1.35

1.50 em

from histogram of discrete types. Reordering of typu would

62

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

other examined.
No whole sub-parallel or convergent and very few
parallel flakes were found at JK 16 (Fig. 5).
Since one of the
expectations based upon the explanatory hypothesis is contradicted
by what has been observed the hypothesis as stated is inadequate.
Heavy machinery undoubtedly crossej the surface of 41 JK 16
many times during construction of the oil storage facility and
removal of top soil in the site area.
If that disturbance altered
the characteristic dimensions of flakes at the site, it could be
expected that flakes which could withstand pressure because of
thickness, as well as short, wide flakes which could distribute
pressure evenly would be selected for.
Thin flakes and long nar­
row flakes would be selected against.
It is expected that chips
would make up a greater portion of the lithic debris at the af­
fected site than at sites which have been unaffected by heavy ma­
chinery.
At 41 JK 16 length and thickness have bimodal distributions
(Fig. 5).
Length has a peak at 1.2 centimeters and one at 3.2 cen­
timeters.
Thickness has a peak at 1.5 and one at 1.05 centimeters.
These peaks would seem to indicate selection for large thick
flakes and short wide flakes although this can not be definitely
stated because the analysis of dimension recorded variables inde­
pendently.
Corraborative evidence that short, wide flakes were
~elect~d for is found in the distribution of shape types.
At 41
JK 16 the divergent form which is characteristically at least as
wide as it is long is predominate over parallel, sub-parallel and
convergent flakes which are characteristically longer than at
JK 16.
At other sites (41 JK 91, 41 JK 147) where no heavy machin­
ery has affected deposita the flake to chip ratio is nearly even.
Of the explanations given, post-depositional alteration is the
one that best account.s Trir':the" difterencei,41 JK 16 shows in flake
dimensions when compared with other sites in the reservoir.
Some amount of uncertainty was felt over the degree that ex­
pected factors of post-depostional disturbance could change dimen­
sionand whether that alone could account for the characteristic
dimensions of flakes at 41 JK 16.
For this raason 129 experimen­
tally produced flakes whose lengths, widths and shapes approxi­
mated the dimensions of whole flakes in Level One of the 3 x 3 Unit
at 41 JK 91 Mere subjected to pressure on a clay loam (the texture
of the sediments at the site) surface under the tire of a truck.
By that means the number of whole flakes was reduced to 73, or 56%,
of the original sample.
Data from the experiment are provided in
Table 2.
The'most obvious change in flake dimensions occurred in the
flake shape category where the number of divergent flakes increased
17.1%.
The percents of parallel, intermediate and convergent
shaped decreased.
The broken flakes were compared with whole
flakes through the use of a chi-square test (X 2 = 20 .68, degrees of
freedom = 4, probabili ty ~ .001) which indicated the change in
shape was significant.
Increases and d.erea~e~ were-o~: the .alki~:
tude anticipated after co~paring'the:$hape distribUtion of whole
flakes at 41 JK 16 with other Late Prehistoric age samples.

SITE 41 JK 16

Table 2. Effects of

Vehi~le

63

Traffic on Whole Flake Dimensions.

LENGTH DIMENSION:
Length (em.)

0.0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4

-

0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
2.4
2.8

% Before

% After

14.7
38.7
27.1
8.5
6.2
3.9
0.8

12.0
37.3
34.7
5.3
6.7
2.7
1.3

Length Before

129
.8697
.5179

n

x
sd

Length After

73
.8826
.4964

THICKNESS DIMENSION:
Thickness (em.)

0.00
0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1. 20

-

0.15
0.30
0.45
0.60
0.75
0.90
1.05
1.20
1. 35

% Before

% After

19.4
45.5
19.4
8.2
3.0
3.0
0.7
0.0

19.2
46.6
20.5
6.8
2.7
1.4
1.4
0.0
11.4

O. 7

Thickness Before

..

n
x

sd

129
.2809
.2076·

Thickness After

73
.3034
.2158

SHAPE DIMENSION:
Shape
Sub-Parallel
Parallel
Divergent
Intermediate
Convergent

% Before

6.8
13.5
45.9
15.8
18.0

% After

6.8
9.6
63.0
11.0
9.6

64

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

Change in length and thickness was not as could be expected
if only this type of post-depositional disturbance had been the
causal factor.
When subjected to a chi-square test between broken
and unbroRen flakes, change in length (X 2 = 8.89, degrees of free­
dom = 6, probability ~ 0.15) was insignificant.
The ehi-square
2
test between broken and unbroken flakes for thickness (X = 3.6066,
degrees of freedom = 8, probab11{ty=-0~85} was alao2i~significant~
The input of data from the experiment suggests that the possi­
bility of collection bias should be reevaluated.
possibly another
type of post-depositional disturbance occurred and/or in conjunc­
tion with the disturbance already considered.
The likely explana­
tion for the skewed dimension of the JK 16 sample is that it was
the result of a combination of three separate factors, 1) post­
depositional disturbance by heavy machinery which selected for
shape, 2) post-depositional disturbance by erosion which selected
for longer and thicker flakes, and 3) collection bias which select­
ed for largeness.
Some idea has been gained o.f the processes affecting the sam­
ple.
From that knowledge it can be proposed with reasonable sup­
port that the dimensions of flakes at 41 JK 16 were originally
similar to those at other sampled Late Prehistoric localities.
INTERPRETATIONS
Site 41 JK 16 was apparently occupied as a habitation site
during the Late Prehistoric period and possibly, the sample is
very small, during the Historic European period.
Evidence derived
from artifacts which are datable by typological comparision and,
from the assemblage of flake tools clearly indicate that the pre­
historic occupation of the site is restricted to the Late Prehis­
toric period and probably the latter part of the period.
The Historic European occupation is recognized by artifacts
which are of that period.
The sample of Historic European mate­
rial can all be considered domestic artifactsi perhaps a middle
nineteenth-century house was located ,on or near the site.
The
four items included in the 1975 collection and others reportedly
located by previous professional crews are too few for refined
interpretation.
The prehistoric materials from 41 JK 16 are suf­
ficient in number for more specific evaluation.
The assemblage of tools at the site is dif£erent from other
tested Late Prehistoric sites not in type but in the percent cer­
tain categories make up of the total.
Despite the e~pected reduc­
tion in the percents of ceramics and bifaces as a result of pre­
vious selective collections of the site's surface, these types of
artifacts make up higher than normal portions of the total sample.
The lithic reduction used at 41 JK 16 is like that known from test­
ed Late Prehistoric levels elsewhere in the reservoir area.
No
faunal naterial was found and therefore no specific statements can
be made on the subsistence economy of the site or i~snsea30nllity.

SITE 41 JK 16

65

Tool types at JK 16 are similar to those usually encountered
in other Late Prehistoric sites.
The lithic technology and phys­
ical and/or social distance from lithic raw material resources is
the same as at other Late Prehistoric sites.
For these reasons it
is probable that peoples occupying 41 JK 16 were culturally related
to the occupants of other Late Prehistoric sites tested 'in the
reservoir.
The size of the site is larger than others known in the re­
servoir and the percents of ceramics and bifaces in the assem­
blage are greater than is common in other known assemblages.
For these reasons it is suggested that certain activities at JK 16,
although they may have been the same as at other sites, were em­
phasized more and took up greater area.
It is proposed that because 41 JK 16 is· probably technolog­
ically related to other Late Prehistoric sites tested, because
there appears to be a different emphasis on activities and be­
cause of the large area of the site, that 41 JK 16 is functionally
different from other tested sites.
The function which fits the
o~served pattern best is that of a base camp.
The hypothesis that the lithic technology at 41 JK 16 was
like that at other sites of the same time period was confirmed
only by attempting to understand what had affected the arche­
ological sample after cultural deposition.
The success in this
one instance of an effort to understand processes which change an
archeological sample after is deposition logically lead to the
proposition that damaged sites are not useless sites; that the
original characteristics of disturbed cultural debris may be ap­
proximated after careful consideration.
ATKINSON SITE 41 JK 41
DESCRIPTION
The Atkinson Site, named after the former property owner,
lies southeast of Edna and atop a Terminal-Wisconsin age, point
bar of the Navidad River.
The point ~~r now forms a portion of the
valley edge and borders the older inter-riverine portions of the
Beaumont formation, a Pleistocene terrace upon which the prairie
grasslands have formed.
The Navidad River at present flows nearly
1/2 mile to the south.
However, evidence in the flood plain in
the form of low depressions may indicate the presence of recently
filled channels.
The site is on the edge of the bluff top forest biological
zone.
It is adjacent to the flood plain forest and to an area of
riparian forest surrounding a pond too ~mall for inclusion on the
Biological Zones Map (Fig. 2).
The Atkinson Site was located by the Historical Survey Commit­
tee during the 1972 intensive survey.
It was described then as on

41 JK 41

ATKI NSON SITE
Plan Of Excavations

,

?

1?

2,0

METERS

~"
"

Note: Contours in meters

lli1l
9,13-15

1,
N

I
?

10;00
FE,,"

!

Note,' Contours in feet.

SITE 41 JK 41

67

a large knoll 200 yards by 75 yards.
It was reported that the area
, on top of the knoll had been cultivated and was clear of trees. No
evidence of farming has been found atop the terrace remnant where
the site is located.
However, rodent activity is quite evident in
the midden zone.
Erosion is another factor which has affected the
condition of the site; at least two erosional phases can be docu­
mented.
Human activity had affected the site's condition before arch­
eological excavation.
Various artifacts were found during excava­
tion which indicated that Historic Europeans may have altered the
condition of cultural deposits.
Bureau of Reclamation geologists
excavated a test pit (Fig. 6) to aid in examining positive and
negative properties of the sedimants for use as barrow material in
dam and spillway construction.
As a result of the Bureau!~~exaa~
vation, the Historical Survey committee revised their assessment
of the site placing it in a more important category. Excavation
of the test pit by Bureau of Reclamation Geologists allowed easy
a~cess to a deep section of stratigraphy that was helpful in ~den­
tifying key zones for the interpretation of geological events in
the history of the area.
EXCAVATION: CONTROL AND METHODOLOGY
The control and methodology of excavation at the Atkinson
Site followed that outlined in the section Procedures Adopted
~ Fulfill Short Term Objectives.
A few exceptions in procedure
were made for scheduling considerations and for the individual
nature of the site. Departures from the outlined methodology are
itemized below.
The stratigraphy of one portion of the site had been made vis­
ible by the excavation of a pit by Bureau of Reclamation Geolo­
gists.
The Geologist's test pit revealed a thin (30 cm. thick)
layer of cultural deposits.
An area 2-1/2 meters wide was cleared
on the east wall of the Bureau excavation.
A profile of that sec­
tion was drawn (Fig.') as would have been done with excavated
backhoe trenches prior to manual excavation of test pits.
Strati­
graphic relationships were clear; the thin zone 6f cultural mate­
rial had a lower boundary which could be recognized by its contact
with a layer of calcium carbonate concretion gravel.
On bhat
basis four test pits were laid out adjacent to the east wall of
the G*ologist's test pit and excavated in 10 cm. arbitrary divi­
sions of the single cultural zone before the excavation of backhoe
trenches.
When the backhoe became available excavation proceeded accord­
ing to original plans.
It was seen that, as at 41 JK 91 and 41 JK
147, several cut and fill sequences could be identified.
Contacts
between natural levels were less clear than at the two sites

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

68

mentioned;, For· that reason.':excavation .at tbELAtkins0tl:Site was in
arbitrary ~ribdi.isi~ns~ofhfhlekerldna:less~dt~tinct natutal~le~els
than at 41 JK 91 a~d 41 JK 147.
Only two natural levels could be
recognized in the cultural sediments: these, separated by an ero­
sional break may correspond with Zone Vc and Vd.
As the erosional
break separating the two cultural zones usually occurred in test
pits at approximately 80 cm. depth the sample from the lower level
is much smaller than that from the more recent cultural deposits.
STRATIGRAPHY
Below the profile illustrated'in Figure 7 is described.
That
description is typical of the sediments found in Test Pits 1-4 and
10-12.
Zone Vc, Levell: Depth 0-30 cm., thickness 30 cm., range
18-34 cm.; very dark grayish brown (10YR
3/2) very fine sandy loam, dark grayish
brown (10YR 3.5/2 dry; no mottles; mod­
erate coarse granular structure; slightly
hard, very friable, slightly sticky, non­
plastic; no, or very slightly effervescent
reaction with HCl; no concretions; non­
cemented.
Level 1 is continuous and of
fairly uniform thickness atop the terrace
edge; on the terrace slope it is continuous
and becomes progressively thicker as it
nears the river flood plain.
Cultural
debris from the Late Prehistoric period and
less frequently from the Historic European
period are included in the level.
It has
an abrupt, smooth boundary to:
Zone IV, Level 2: Depth 30-40 cm., thickness 10ccm.,riange
6-12 cm.; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2)
sandy loam; grayish brown (10YR 5/2) sandy;
no mottles; structureless; soft, very
friable, non.sticky, non-plastic; violently
effervescent reaction to HCl; non-cemented.
Subround and subangular granule size, white
(10YR 8/1) calcium carbonate conc~etions
are abundant, greater than 20 per~'10( c:m.
square of surface area.
No cultural mate­
rial is present.
Level 2 covers the ter­
race tip and edge continu~usly as a flat
lying uniformly thick surface but that sur­
face slopes downward and loses its integrity
on the terrace slope to the flood plain of

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

Level 2 has an abrupt
the Navidad River.
to clear, smooth boundary to:
Zone III, Level 3: Depth 40-150 cm., thickness 110 cm., range
100-112 cm.; yellowish brown (IOYR 5/6)
very fine sandy loam, brownish yellow (IOYR
6/6) dry; no mottles; weak medium angular
blocky to structureless; slightly hard,
friable, non-sticky, non-plastic; violently
effervescent reaction with HCI; some portions
of the level are weakly cemented by calcium
carbonate; angular and subangular calcium
carbonate concretions are common, less than
20 per 10tem.~,quare cif"surface.
A number-6f
lenses of angular granule size calcium car­
bonate concretions occur within the level.
Concretions in these lenses are abundant,
greater than 20 per 10 cm. square of surface
and the color of the lenses increases in
value and chroma from the top lens (dark
brown, 10YR 4/3 m) to the bottom lens (yel­
low, 10YR 7/8 m).
The level is continuous
on the terrace top and truncated at the
slope.
No cultural material is present.
There is an abrupt, smooth boundary to:
Zone II, Level 4: Depth 150-275+ cm.; brownish yellow (IOYR
6/5) fine sand, yellow (10YR 7/6) dry; no
mottles structureless; loose, non-sticky,
non-plastic; no reaction with HCI; non­
cemented; no cultural material is present
but the fossils of extinct megafauna are
present.
The deposit is thinly laminated
and crossbedded.
Contained within the
level is a lens of light grey (10YR 7/2)
silt loam, (40% sand, 50% silt, 10% clay),
yellowish brown (IOYR 5/4) dry.
This
material occasionally occurs 8~ ba11§ 2~1
em." in diameter ,in the sand matfix.1of'~':-·-.i.c:
Level 4.
ARTIFACT DISCUSSION
The largest sample of cultural debris is derived ftom the up­
per levels which ranged in thickness from 20~~0 80 cm.
The amount
of cultural material recovered from the lower levels is very small.
Tools in particular have a low frequency in the lower levels.

69

GEOLOGIST'S TEST PIT:

FIGURE 7

East wall, 41 JK 41

ZONE

'll'

-.j
ZONE

I_~£...,n!;;

nl

III

m

ZONE

m
n

EAST

ZONE

o
I

ImCulturally affected
L -_____________________________
em.
eous sand
20

I

40

I

60

I

IIRolied concretions
IliSedded sand

~In-place concretions
IillIT!Silt & silt balls

WALL

IT

WEST

WALL-weathered exposure

SITE 41 JK 41

71

The lithic-tool/lithic-debris ratio for the upper levels is 0.0989,
and, for the lower levels is 0.0442.
The sample of 5 lithic tools
from the lower levels is much too small for separate discussion
and is included in this text with the sample of 106 lithic tools
from the upper levels.
The sample of lithic debris from the lower~levels is of suf­
ficient size for comparative analysis with the upper levels and
will be treated separately here.
Tables 5, 6 and 11 provide the
locational data for lithic debris and tools at the Atkinson site.
Historic
Five wire nails, a fence staple, barb wire, fra~ments of a
tin can and 2 glass sherds were recovered in excavation of the
upper 30 cm. at the site.
These artifacts document Historic
European activity or activities near the site certainly after
A.D. 1900 and probably after A.D. 1920.
Prehistoric
Prehistoric cultural refuse included no bone or shell tools
and no cores.
The percent breakdown of artifacts with indications
of use is:
Bifaces
12.2%
n c 90
Retouched pieces
62.2%
Ceramics
25.6%
Projectile points recovered date 41 JK 41 to a span that
probably is within the Late Prehistoric period.
All projectile
points collected from the site but one are of the Perdiz and
&callorn types as defined by Suhm and Jelks (1962: 3). A single
large square base of a projectile point with a resemblance to the
Plainview type was found in the upper level and in association
with a Late Prehistoric assemblage.
Twenty-three bone-tempered,
and plain sandy-paste sherds excavated seem to represent 4 sandy
paste and 4 bone tempered vessels.
Retouched pieces constitute a
large portion of the assemblage.
These conditions; the favorable
typological comparison of projectile point types at the site with
points of known Late Prehistoric age, the presence of pottery and
the high percent of retouched pieces are found elsewhere in Late
Prehistoric sites of age substaitiated by radiocarbon dating.
The retouched pieces collected of 41 JK 41 are predominately
small secondary and interior pieces with worn distal and lateral,
and distal retouch.
The most common type of biface is small, with
plano-convex cross section and wear.
The assemblage of lithic tools apparently relates favorably
with Late Prehistoric assemblages in other tested sites.
The

72

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

assemblage may however be a mixture of the earlier Late Prehistoric
assemblages recognized in the 3 x 3 Unit and the later Late Prehis­
toric assemblage recognized in the 3 x 5 Unit at 41 JK 91.
The
lithic artifact type distribution for 41 JK 41 (Appendix I) indi­
cates similarities with both identified assemblages at 41 JK 91.
Before definite conclusions may be drawn the existence of the
two assemblages recognized for the Late Prehistoric at the Venom
Hill site must be verified elsewhere.
The amount of pottery recovered in test excavations at 41 JK
41 (23 sherds) is si.ilar in percent to the amount found with the
Late Prehistoric tool assemblage in the 3 x 3 Unit at the Venom
Hill §ita, 41 JK 91,~bQ; it is much lower in percent when compared
to the amount of pottery in the 3 x 5 Unit at that same site.
In the upper levels at the site 637 articles of lithic debris
were sorted into categories which reflect their sequence of removal
from cores.
It was found that 3.5% of the debris is primary, 19.2%
is secondary and 77.4% is interior.
One hundred thirteen articles
of debris from the lower levels proved to be 1.8% primary, 9.7%
secondary and 88.5% interior removal.
In this respect of lithic
technology the upper levels at the Atkinson Site are similar to
other tested sites in the reservoir~
The lower levels, however,
have a higher than normal percent of interior flakes.
From the upper levels, 340 items of lithic debris retaining
a striking platform and bulb of percussion were analyzed for plat­
form preparation.
The breakdown of platform types in the upper
levels is:
natural platform
12.6%
n = 340
single facet platform
32.4%
multiple facet platform 50.0%
. 5:.0%
crushed platform
Sixty one pieces of debris from the lower level retained a
striking platform.
The breakdown of platform types in the lower
levels is:
natural platform
16.4%
n = 61
single facet platform
23.0%
multiple facet platform 57.4%
crushed platform
3.3%
From the upper levels at the site a minimum of 212 flakes
were complete enough for analysis of their dimension (Fig. 8).
These have a mean length (X = 1.3547) shorter than other samples
from the reservoir and a standard deviation (sd = 0.6205) which is
approximately the same as at other sites.
Length mean and standard
deviation compares most favorably with that at the Hawk Perch Site
but also with early, middle and late levels of the 3 x 3 Unit and
the lower levels of the 3 x 5 Unit at 41 JK 91.
As elsewhere in
the reservoir flake shape is dominated by the divergent category
:
as is the situation at tested locali t i~lsewhere. Mean thick~-;;-~­
(x = 0.2650) and standard deviation T;d = 0.2988) is similar to
that found commonly at other sites.
It compares most favorably
with the late levels in the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 and with the
collection of whole flakes at 41 JK 147.

FIGURE 8
%

50

Lengt h

FLAKE

40

Upper Levels
n=212
x=1.3547
sd=0.6205
30

41

DIMENSIONS

JK

41

Lower Levels
n= 41
i=1.3365
sd=0.5581

20

10

o

.4

.8

1.6

1.2

2.0

2.4

2.8

3.2

3.6

4.0

4.4

4.B

5.2 em

%

70

Shope

*'

Upper Levels
n=2.20

60

Lower Levels
n=37
%
50

50

Thickness
Upper Levels
40

40

aO

30

20

20

n=221
1(=0.2650
sd=0.2.988
Lower Levels
n=35
x=0.2607
sd=0.2260

\
\

,I'

I

/

10

10

,
I

o

*" Plot
mode continuous
chonge the curve shope.

OS 0

vlsuol oid

.15

.30

.45

.60

.75

.90

1.05

1.20

1.35

1.50 em

derived from histogrom of discrete types. Reordering of types would

74

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

The dimensions of whole flakes from the lower levels at the
Atkinson site (Fig. 8) are very nearly the same as from the upper
levels.
Such small differences as occur may be the result of a
small sample size from the lower levels ( a minimum of 35 items).
SUBSISTENCE ECONOMY
Faunal preservation at the site is poor.
The valves of shell­
fish, otoliths of fish and thick walled bones of larger animals are
the most common remains.
The thick bones are aften pitted and are
fragile.
One individual sw~mp rabbit, (SyZviZagus aquatiaus) and
one individual of an unidentified species of turtle are the only
exceptions to this rule at the Atkinson Site where excavations
were often over a meter in depth.
Both the rabbit and turtle were
from the levels near the surface of the site.
It is suspected
that natural processes have selectively reduced the faunal assem­
blage at the site and that the amount of microfauna that was pre­
sent there upon initial cultural deposition is misrepresented in
the present archeological record.
It is expected that the number
of individuals recorded for the fauna of the site in the Appendix
on faunal data (Appendix II) is more than usually inaccurate re­
cord of the cultural deposition.
That tabulation is believed an
accurate approximation of the remaining archeological record and
from that certain inferences may be drawn.
The percentage of bifaces in the assemblage at 41 JK 41 is low.
The bifaces found with shapes that are similar to artifacts defined
elsewhere as projectile points (Suhm and Jelks 1962) commonly show
wear on their lateral edges.
It is suggested that the use of these
'bifaces at tne Atkinson Site was not always that of projectile
points.
If that is true then the large terrestrial fauna in the
archeological sample may not have been the main focus of hunting
activity.
Levels 6ne, Two and Three of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91
(where faunal preservation is excellent and a similar lithic tool
assemblage was found), indicate .that in this unit more effort was
spent collecting small animals than large animals (Fig. 21).
If
other sites with a similar tool assemblage and good faunal preser­
vation are found to have a low percentage of large terrestrial
fauna, then in all likelihood the subsistence base at 41 JK 41 could
be reconstructed as similar.
With the presently available data it
seems at least possible that the subsistence economy at the Atkin­
son Site was comparable to that recorded in the upper levels in
the 3 x 3 Unit at the Venom Hill Site.
The condition of shellfish remains of the Atkinson Site is
good.
The total number of shellfish individuals was 391.
Shell­
fish species from a freshwater habitat make up 2.3% of the total
individuals and 97.7% of the shellfish individuals inhabited brack~
ish and salt-water environments.
Six of eight individual fish recovered at the site are

SITE 41 JK 41

75

restricte in habitat to fres -water environments.
Examination
of the meat
t of the fish r
s h~~.2% of the~.c~~.~~.
fish weight is erived from a fresh-water environment and 50.8%
is derived from a brackish or salt water environment.
The
only type of identified fish remains at the Atkinson ~ite was
otoliths, and in that sample freshwater fish otoliths evidence
more weathering than salt and brackish water fish otoliths from
the same context.
If fresh and salt or brackish water fish re­
mains had been equally represented in the original cultural de­
posits then subjected to post-depositional selection for salt and
brackish water fish otoliths, the freshwater fish otoliths would
be expected to make up a smaller percentage of the archeological
sample at 41 JK 41 so it must be concluded that the original, un­
altered cultural deposit contained at least as great a percent of
freshwater fish remains.
SEASON OF OCCUPATION
One hundred fifty nine Rangia cuneata valves selected from
all levels of the excavation units were studied for information on
the season of aboriginal collection.
Analysis of the valves indi­
cated that rangia clams were collected in all periods of site QC­
cupation during the spring (Appendix V).
The aboriginal collection
was apparently restricted to the months of April and May and with­
in a 45 day period.
Other fauna in the archeological assemblage from the site
were available on a year round basis. With the exception of black
drum (Pogonias cpomis) , represented by one individual no member
of the assemblage except Rangia cuneata has seasonal importance.
Black drum while it could occur in environs near the site on a
year round basis is expected to be more common there during the
fall months (Table 1).
If black drum individuals were more common in the fauna, oc­
cupation of the site during the fall months could be indicated.
The overwhelmingly consistent Rangia collection in the spring
months, and not other seasons when that species would be as avail­
able, suggests that the site was unoccupied during the fall.
It
is concluded that aboriginal occupation at the Atkinson Site, 41
JK 41, was restricted to the period of shellfish collection, the
spring months of April and May.
INTERPRETATIONS
The Atkinson s1~e was apparently occupied as a habitation site
during the Late Prehistoric period.
The presence of a few Historic
artifacts in the site indicate that non-domestic type European ac­
tivities took place on or near the site after A.D. 1900.

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

76

Although badly disturbed by the activities of burrowing ro­
dents cultural deposits were divided into two groups of levels.
Unfortunately, because of a lower lithic tool/lithic debris ratio
little can be said about the cultural deposits in the bottom levels.
The lithic debris sample from the lower levels is of a reliable
size fo~ comparison .ith the upper levels.
The lithic debris from
all levels of th~ site are closely related.
It is suggested that
most aspects of lithic technology remained the same throughout the
occupation documented by the debris.
Characteristics of the lithic
debris are most like the debris recovered from the Upper Cluster
of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91.
Although the faunal preservation of the Atkinson site is poor
consideration of the effects of natural processes and the fact that
the lithic tool assemblage relates well with that in the upper
levels of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 indicate that the animal por­
tion of the subsistence base at the site was possibly oriented to­
wards exploitation of aquatic and small terrestrial aquatic species
in the riverine areas of the Navidad River valley.
Scheduling for use of the site during prehistoric times ap­
pears to have been rigorous.
Analysis of Rangia cuneata valves
from all levels of the site indicate that collection of that re­
source was restricted thoughout the occupation of the site to the
months of April and May and, each year occupied within a 45 day
period.
Other seasonal species found in the site could have been
collected during that occupation of the site in April and May.
Oc­
cupation of the site was probably restricted to those months during
which Rangia were collected.
SITE 41 JK 50
DESCRIPTION
The site is 5 miles southeast of Edna on property previously
owned by R. Alluch of that city.
It lies on the edge of the valley
overlooking the Navidad River flood plain.
It is on the west bank
of that river.
In the vicinity and directly affecting the prehis­
toric cultural deposits is an oil storage facility and 200 meters
to the south, a historic site, 41 JK 48.
Site 41 JK 50 was an open earth midden dating to the Late Pre­
historic and possibly Middle Prehistoric periods.
The condition
of the site has been altered by Historic European influence.
Pre­
sently the site is in a parkland type of area, a remnant of the
bluff top forest biological zone (Fig. 2), overlooking the heavily
vegetated flood plain forest of the Navidad River.
Immediately
over the terrace edge a creek flows through an abandoned channel
of the river.
Recently, as a result of pollution from the oil­

SITE 41 JK 50

77

storage facility IDcated on the site, amall, well-developed,
erosional channels have cut into the dege of the terrace.
This
erosion has had severe repercussions on the prehistoric deposits.
Site 41 JK 50 was reported on 9 March 1972 by Robert Mallouf
of the Historical Survey committee.
The site was characterized
then as eroded.
Subsequent testing by the Historical Survey
Committee on 6 June 1972 and by the Texas Archeologi~al Survey
in July 1974 confirm that no portions of the site remain intact.
Prehistoric cultural debris is presently found destributed
over an area 100 meters north-south by 75 meters east-west or
7500 square meters.
It is possible that the east-west erosional
trend may have made the apparent width of the site greater than
it had been originally.
More confidence may be given the suggested
north-south dimension of the site.
The site is apparently destroyed.
Most damage probably
occurred before construction of oil storage facilities on the
locality and the erosion related to their presence.
In areas not
affected by that recent erosion, cultural material is at a shallow
depth and the evidence suggests that it is out of place.
The prin­
cipal damaging effect on the site besides erosion is the mineral­
ogical character of the matrix itself.
A high percentage of that
matrix is made up of expanding lattice clays which shrink and
swell as a result of moisture conditions in the soils allowing a
mixing of sediments, including archeological stratigraphy.
EXCAVATION: CONTROL AND METHODOLOGY
Site 41 JK 50 was not recommended in the intensive survey
report for excavation (Mallouf et aZ. 1911: Table 17).
It sup­
plied only a minor role in research plans for the 1974 season of
excavations.
Unlike sites which were utilized for information in satisfying
the short term goals for last season, 41 JK 50 was tested to deter­
mine whether any cultu~al deposits remained intact.
For the reason
that a solution to different questions were sought, investigations
at 41 JK 50 followed a methodology unique from that imposed on
other sites in the reservoir.
A contour map was made of the site to document the erosional
area and location of features associated with the oil facility and
of test excavations.
That contour map is not published here for
the reason that the site has little advantage in supplementing the
current short and long term aims of research in the reservoir work
area.
The map as well as other notes are on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Center.
Additional surface collections of the site were made to ful­
fill the recommendations of the intensive survey.
A single one­
meter-square test pit was excavated in what was thought to be a
possibly undisturbed portion of the site, and in addition a series

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

78

of 10 shovel test excavation were made.
Thus the stratigraphic
description for the site was made possible.
Such a description
documenting the disturbance of the site had not been previously
made and was needed to document its condition.
STRATIGRAPHY
Exca~ation of a single, one-meter square exposed the profile
recorded here.
The profile from the excavated unit was found to
be similar over the site area as documented by a series of shovel
tests.
Levels encountered in the one square-meter unit and found
to be similarly represented in shovel excavations are described
below beginning with the highest level in the profile.

Level 1: 0-5 cm. depth, 5 cm. thickness; smooth, clear bound­
ary over Zone 2 on the basis of color.
Gray, dry
(10YR 5/1); dark gray, moist, (10YR 4/1); no mottling.
Clay loam; massive structure; sticky when wet, firm
when moist, hard when dry; non-cemented; violent re­
action to hydrochloric acid; calcium carbonate con­
cretions and manganese oxide concretions are present.
No cultural material was observed.
Level 2: 0.05-0.04+ meters thickness.
Gray, dry (10YR 6/1);
gray, moist (10YR 5/~).
Clay loam; massive struc­
ture; sticky when wet, plastic when wet, firm when
moist, hard when dry; non-cemented; violent reaction
to hydrochloric acid; calcium carbonate and manganese
oxide concretions are present.
Cultural material is
present but in very low frequency; three items were
encountered in excavation of the one square-meter
unit.
The stratigraphy of the site documents disturbance.
Areas
off the site are represented by a genetic soil profile which is a
member of the Vertisol Order.
Deep cracks and a deep, organic,
horizon in that soil are evidence of a condition in which natural
churning or enversion of soil material takes place.
The churning
of the profile is a result of the swelling and shrinking of clays
which react to wetting and drying.
The light colored level record­
ed on the site is comparable in color and texture with a lower,
genetic soil horizon in the Vertisols off the site. The slightly
darker Level 1 is apparently organic staining atop a disturbed pro­
file rather than a prehistoric cultural horizon.

SITE 41 JK 50

79

ARTIFACT DISCUSSION
The number of surface collected artifacts at 41 JK 50 was
low.
There were 59 items of tools and debris and one aboriginal
ceramic sherd.
Lithic tools recovered included two small cores
and 11 retouched pieces.
None of these artifacts are time diag­
nostic as separate types.
Lithic tools found are listed in Table
11.
The one collected aboriginal sherd is bone tempered with a
fine sandy paste.
The temper probably indicates a time toward the
end of the Late Prehistoric or in the Historic Aboriginal period.
Fifty-nine flakes and chips were sorted into categories that
reflect the sequence of th&ir removal from cores.
Primary flakes
and chips constituted 1.8%, secondary 21.0% and interior 77.2% of
the sample.
The percent distribution is similar to that in the
other four sites examined.
Thirty six, or 63%, of the lithic debris were flakes.
The
36 flakes were analyzed for type of striking platform.
At 41
JK 50 the percent distribution of platform types was:
natural platform
11.1%
n = 36
single facet platform
41.7%
multiple facet platform 41.7%
crushed platform
5.6%
It is observed that while the percent of primary, secondary
and interior flakes remain similar to those in other sites tested,
the percent distribution of platform types at 41 JK 50 is different
from that in levels of the 3 x 3 Unit assigned to the Late Prehis­
toric period where multiple facet platforms predominated (data:
Appendix I).
Two possible explanations are that the function of
tools on the site and therefore the method of platform preparation
was different or that the sample from JK 50 is a mixture of debris
from two Or more separate periods.
Only 23 of the 36 flakes were complete enough for flake dimen­
sion analysis.
That is a small sample but since the standard de­
viation for length and thickness is low (Fig. 9) it is believed
that the analysis has value.
Flakes at 41 JK 50 have a mean
length (x - 1.7607) that is only smaller than that at 41 JK 16.
It has a standard deviation (sd = 0.5552) which is comparable with
excavated samples except that from 1-20~cm. in the 3 x 5 Unit at
41 JK 91.
The shape of the flakes is predominately divergent (44%).
Mean thickness (x = 0.4858) is greater than any of the four other
sites examined although the standard deviation (sd = 0.2481) is
comparable with excavated samples from 41 JK 41, 41 JK 91 and 41
JK 147.
Despite the fact that a base Qf a projectile point was
found which may be Early Prehistoric in age (Mallouf et al. 1973:
50) and that the 1974 collection contained a single bone tempered
sherd indicating the Late Prehistoric period, it is felt thai no
time span can be confidently assigned the lithic debris collected.
At 41 JK 91 in the 3 x 3 Unit a difference in tool type was

FIGURE 9
50

Length
40

FLAKE

n 21
i= 1.7607
sd= 0.5552

41

DIMENSIONS

JK 50

30

o

.4

.S

1.2

I.S

2.0

2.4

2.8

3,2

3.S

4,0

4,4

4.8

5.2 em

0/0

70

Shape •
n=21

so

0/0

50

50

Thickness
40

n=23
i=0.4858

40

sd=O.2481

30

30

20

20

10

10

o
o

'*

Plot mode continuous as 0 visual aid
Change Ihe curve shope.

derived
I'

.15

.30

.45

.SO

.75

.90

1.05

1.20

1.35

1.50 cm

from histogram 01 discrete types. Reordering of types ....ould

SITE 41 JK 50

81

noted between the Late Prehistoric and Middle Prehistoric periods.
In the Middle and Transitional to the Late Prehistoric it was noted
that in those levels retouched pieces generally made up a smaller
percent of the total assemblage than in the Late Prehistoric
levels.
During the Late Prehistoric, distal edge retouch was
dominate among the retouched pi~ces, and retouched pieces made
up a greater percent of the total assemblages.
At 41 JK 50 re­
touched pieces other than distal retouch make up the largest por­
tion of the assemblage.
For that reason the site would appear to
date prior to the Late Prehistoric period.
INTERPRETATIONS
The data available from 41 JK 50 suggests that there are few
similarities between it and the other four sites examined during
the past season.
Only the percents of primary, secondary and in­
terior flakes are alike.
The location of retou~h on tools, the
percent distribution of platform types and variables in flake
dimension are not comparable.
These differences could be the re­
sult of collection bias, mixing of time periods, a different site
function or of a cultural period not recognized as yet at a more
intact site.
The number of flakes and the number of chips col­
lected is approximately the same, therefore, it is believed that
post-depositional disturbance at least in the form of vehicle
traffic has not occurred.
Experimentation has indicated that type
of disturbance as expected increases the percent of chips and de­
creases the percent of flakes.
Any definite conclusion as to why
most examined variables at 41 JK 50 are characteristically dif­
ferent from other sites would be weakly supported by the data at
hand.
Information from which a date for the site could be inferred
is ambiguous.
What possible function the site had is unknown.
Data from which subsistence economy and seasonality could be in­
terpreted are missing.
The one item of similarity between this and other sites (the
percent distribution of primary, secondary and interior flakes)
does enable a comparative statement. Whether 41 JK 50 was occupied
during Early, Middle or Late Prehistoric, the physical and/or
social distance from lithic raw materials remained similar to,
if not the same as, that for the other examined sites.

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

82

THE VENOM HILL SITE

Al JK 91

DESCRIPTION
The Venom Hill ~ite ±s 7 miles southeast of Edna on~the western
valley edge of the Navidad River.
It is situated atop a Termina1­
Wisconsin age point-bar of the river which presently overlooks
the Navidad flood plain forest.
The site itself is on the edge of
the bluff top forest biological zone (Fig. 2).
The site is located on a projection of the valley wall which
rises a9~ve the alluvial fan of a small intermittent drainage.
That trt~utary passes to the west of the site between it and the
Hawk Perch site, 41 JK: 147 (Fig. 10).
Soils on the site support a mott of anaqua (Ehretia anacua)
and live oak (Qu8rous virginiana).
Cattle have used the mott dur­
ing recent years for shade and as a result of their use of the site
its surface is undergoing erosion.
The cattle have prevented the
growth of understory.
Site 41 JK 91 is an cpen, earth~midden which dates to the
Late and Middle Prehistoric periods.
Some features and artifacts
attributable to Historic European use of the site were also en­
countered.
The size of the site is 45 meters north/south by 45
meters east/west or about 2025 square meters.
Although at present
the channel of the Navidad River is 1000 feet to the east, a filled
channel of that river follows a wide radius curve in the valley
wall.
Topographic evidence suggests that during some time in the
past the width of the river was at least five times larger than its
present channel.
Four factors have altered the condition of cultural deposits,
1) biological churning, 2) soil chemical properties, 3) erosion,
and 4) less drastically, the activities of Historic 01dwor1ders.
These four processes have combined to partially obscure most strati­
graphic relationships at the site.
The Venom Hill site was first recognized as an archeological
locality by the Texas State Historical Survey Committee during the
intensive survey of the reservoir area.
At that time a small sur­
face collection was made and the site tested.
Examination of the
evidence from 41 JK 91 indicated that the midden was unconcentrated
and shallow, yet cu1tura1mater~a1 was present and apparently in
place (Ma110uf et al. 1913: Table 17).
The Venom Hill site was
one of five prehistoric localities considered for testing or exca­
vation within the 1974 field season.
The Venom Hill site was considerably more significant than
the assessment by the Historical Survey Committee stated.
Test
excavations this past summer revealed the site to be 2.75 meters
deep instead of 30 cm. and rather than 50 square meters in area,
nearly 2025 square meters.
The error in judgment indicates the
fallacy of limited testing for assessment surveys rather than poor
reporting by the Historical Survey Committee.

Note: BHT 6 through 10- begin 50 meters,
end 170 meters from Nl0at45°NW

41 JK 91
VENOM HILL SITE
Plan Of Excavations
oI

5
l

10
!

15
I

t
N

METERS
Note: Contours in meters,
Notlil' Contours In feet.

I

SITE 41 JK 91

84

In this area, a key site is 41 JK 91.
Of the five sites thus
far tested, it contains the clearest relationships and greatest
concentration of midden debris.
EXCAVATION: CONTROL AND METHODOLOGY
The procedures adopted last season to fulfill short term re­
search objectives were followed without exception at 41 JK 91.
Mapping control was establish~d by using two reference points
related to the United States Coastal and Geodedic Survey Control
System (Fig. 10).
Reference Point A is N 39l,426.29/E 2,773,753.86
and Reference Point B is N 39l,327,40/E 2,773,796.81 on that grid.
Backhoe Trenches (BHT) 1, 2, 3, and 4 were the first excava­
tions at the Venom Hill site.
These trenches exposed cultural
stratigraphy and allowed easy correlation between cultural sedi­
ments and the river flood plain (BHT 2) and cultural sediments and
the flood plain of an intermittent stream (BHT 3).
Before any
manual excavation began, continuous stratigraphic profiles of
these four trenches were made at a scale of 1 inch - 40 cm.
Stratigraphic levels at the site were most commonly recognized
by small differences in sediment color, texture or the amount of car­
bonate present.
These relationships were rarely clear as a result
not only of their subtle nature but also of rodent and root activity.
The procedures necessary to satisfy the short term goals of
last season required that the most intact portions of sites should
be excavated.
A 3-meter-square area where rodent activity was min­
imal and where cultural features seemed confined within definable
levels was chosen for excavation.
This, labeled the 3 x 3 Unit
(Fig. 10), was at the southwest corner of the intersection of Back­
hoe Trenches 1 and 2.
A fifth backhoe trench (BHT 5) was excavated
to enable stratigraphic control for a third side of the 3 x 3 Unit.
Excavation of the 3 x 3 Unit at the Venom Hill site was pri­
marily an attempt to collect a sample which would indicate change.
if any, in subsistence economy through time.
Faunal preservation
was excellent.
All matrix from the 3 x 3 Unit was water screened
through both 1/4-inch and 1/16-inch mesh.
Sediments excavated from
the 3 x 3 Unit are entirely within Zone Vd.
A second, shallow excavation of a 3 x 5 meter area labeled the
3 x 5 Unit (Fig. 10) was investigated to sample the more recent sed­
iments of Zone Vc and collect subsistence and technological informa­
tion.
Because Zone Vc appeared to be a single stratigraphic unit
(no divisions were observed within it) and unlike the sediments in
the 3 x 3 Unit was flat lying, no elaborate stratigraphic control
was maintained.
The 3 x 5 Unit was excavated in arbitrary 10 cm.
levels to the contact with Zone Vd at 20 cm.
A limited portion of
the unit was excavated to a depth of 50 cm.
Several occupational features exposed by the backhoe trenching
were excavated.
These, the F Units, were investigated to help in
understanding the variation in cultural features over the site and
are secondary in importance to the 3 x 3 and 3 x 5 Units.
Five

SITE 41 JK 91

85

backhoe trenches (BHT #'s 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10) were placed in non­
cultunal sediments northwest of the site area.
These aided in in­
terpreting the depositional sequence and origin of sediments at
the site.
THE 3 X 3 UNIT
Stratigraphy
Zone Vd, Levell: Depth 1~22 cm .• thickness 22 cm., range 15-32 cm.;
very dark brown (lOYR 2/1.5) fine sandy loam, dark
grayish brown (lOYR 4/2) dry; no mottles; weak,
medium-angular, blocky breaking to weak, medium~
crumb structure; soft, very friable, non-sticky,
non-plastic; strongly effervescent reaction with
HCl; non-cemented; angular, subangular and sub­
rounded granule and pebble size calcium carbonate
concretions are few, less than 5 per 10 cm. square
of surface; few fine and very fine, plentiful me­
dium and very few coarse roots; neutral pH, 7.1;
average of 1.71% organic matter; well sorted.
The
level contains a very few rounded and subrounded
quartz, feldspar and chert granules.
Cultural
material is of a Late Prehistoric age and concen­
trated in the lower narelofsthe level.
In the
3 x 3 Unit the level is relatively flat lying al­
though it gently slopes tmtthe southeast and has
clear smooth boundary to:

aone Vd, Level 2: Depth 22-46 cm., thickness 24 cm., range 20-26 cm.;
dark brown (lOYR 3/2.5) fine sandy loam, dark
brown (lOYR 4/3) dry; no mottles; very weak me­
dium angular blocky structure; soft, very friable,
non-sticky, non-plastic; violently effervescent
reaction with HCl; non-cemented; angular, suban­
gular and subrounded granule and pebble size cal­
cium carbonate concretions are few, less than 5
per 10 cm. square of surface; very few coarse
roots; neutral pH, 7.2; average of 1.07% organic
matter; well sorted and slightly higher percent of
the sand separate in Level 2 as compared with Level
1.
The level contains a very few subrounded
quartz, feldspar and chert granules.
Cultural
material is of a Late Prehistoric age and concen­
trated in the upper half of the level.
In the
3 x 3 Unit the level is relatively flat lying and
gradually slopes to the southeast.
It has a
clear smooth boundary to:

86

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

Zone Vd, Level 3: Depth 46~64 cm.) thickness 16 cm., range
11-40 cm.; very dark grayish brown (10YR
3.5/2) fine sandy loam, dark brown (lOYR
4/3) dry; no mottles; weak coarse to medium
angular blocky structure; soft, very friable,
non-sticky, non-plastic; violently efferves­
cent reaction with HCl; non-cemented; angu~
lar, subangular and subrounded granule and
pebble size calcium carbonate concretions
are few, less than 5 per 10 cm. square of
surface; very few fine and very fine, few
medium and very few coarse roots; neutral
to mildly alkaline pH, 7.35; average of
1.07% organic matter; well sorted, although
the clay separate increases from 6lYata~
the top of level to 11% at the bottom.
The
silt separate decreases in percent at the
bottom of the level, the sand separate re­
mains constant at 73%.
The level contai~
a very few subrounded and rounded quartz,
feldspar and chert granules.­ Cultural mate­
rials of a Late Prehistoric age and are con­
centrated in the upper portion of the level.
In the excavation Qnit the level is rela­
tively flat lying but slopes gently to the
southeast.
It has a clear, wavy boundary to:
Zone Vd, Level 4: Depth 64-82 cm., thickness 18 cm., range
0-28 cm.; dark brown (10YR 3.5/3) fine sandy
loam, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; no mottling;
massive; soft, very friable, non-sticky, non­
plastic; violently effervescent reaction
with HCl; non-cemented; angular, subangular
and subrounded granule and pebble size cal­
cium carbonate concretions are few, less
than 5 per 10 cm. square of surface; very
few fine and very coarse roots; mildly alka­
line pH, 7.50; average of 0.87% organic mat­
ter; well sorted; not graded.
The level ~
contains a very few subrounded and subangular
quartz, feldspar and chert granules.
Zone Vd, LevelS: Depth 82-86 cm., thickness 4 em., range
0-8 cm.; dark mrown (10YR 3.5/3) fine sandy
loam, brown (10YR 5/3) dty~ no mottling;
massive; soft, very friable, non-sticky,
non-plastic; violently effervescent reac­
tion to HCl; non-cemented; and angular,
subangular and subrounded granule and pebble
size calcium carbonate concretions are few,
less than 5 per 10 cm. square of surface;

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

87

very few roots; neutral pH, 7.3; average of
0.94% organic matter; well sorted; a very
few subrounded and subangular qnartz, feld­
spar and chert granules occur.
The level
was recognized in the field on the ~asis of
an increased amount of snail shells and
turtle bone.
It also had a slightly finer
texture than either Level 4 or Level 6.
Level 5 and Level 6 were combined for exca­
vation.
Tool artifacts collected are not
time diagnostic but the deposit is between
Late Prehistoric age sediments above and
late Middle Prehistoric sediments below.
Level 5 is apparently discontinuous in the
excavation unit (Fig. 11); however, the
possibility exists that it continues atop
Level 7 and simply was unrecognized.
A
concentration of turtle bone labeled Feature
12 is associated with both Level 5 and Level
7.
Level 5 has a clear, wayy boundary to:
Zone Vd, Level 6: Depth 86-94 cm., thickness 14 cm., range
0-18 cm.; dark brown (10YR 3.5/3) fine sandy
loam, brown (10YR 5/3) d~y; no mottling;
massive; ~oft, very friable, non-sticky,
non-plastic; violently effervescent reaction
with Hel; non-cemented; angular; subangular
and subrounded granules and pebble size cal­
cium carbonate concretions are few, less
than 5 per 10 cm. square of surface area;
very few roots; mildly alkaline pE, 7.5;
average of 0.94% organic matter; well sorted;
very few subrounded and sub angular quartz,
feldspar and chert granules occur; Level 5
and 6 were combined in excavation.
Tool
artifacts collected are not time diagnostic
but they occur between Late Prehistoric sed­
iments above and late Middle Prehistoric
sediments below.
Level 6 is discontinuous
in the excavation unit (Fig. 11). A fossil­
ized bone from a large mammal was collected
from the Level 6 fill.
Level 6 has an
abrupt, smooth boundary to:
Zone Vd, Level 7: Depth 94-112 cm., thickness 34 cm., range
15-45 cm.; very dark brown (10YR 2/2) fine
sandy loam, dark brown (10YR 3/3) dry; no
mottling; weak medium angular blocky breaking

FIGURE 11

41 JK 91

3x3 UNIT

PROFILE

EAST WALL

NORTH WALL
northeast corner

ZONE

e"..

ROCK

., ,'

BONE

(i)

BIFACE

EROSION A L FIL L

A

EROSIONAL

8

®

KROTOVINA
1

:~,.,.

SHELL

."'. SNAIL

® SHERD

'\C'::,

FILL

M

E

T

E

R

"J

89

SITE 41 JK 91

tOI,weakmea..iurm':'.C1:.u.mb,su~t'u(;ture;

so~t,

friable, slightly sticky, non-plastic;
strong to violently effervescent reaction
to HCl; non-cemented; angular, subangular
and suhrounded granule and pebble size cal­
cium carbonate concretions are few, less
than 5 per 10 cm. square of surface area;
very few roots; mildly alkaline pH, 7.45;
average of 1.17% organic matter; well sort­
ed; a very few subrounded and subangular
quartz, feldspar and chert granules occur.
Level 7 has a slightly finer texture than
other levels in the 3 x 3 Unit except Level
1.
Cultural material apparently dates the
accumulation of the level to the late Middle
Prehistoric period.
The level is continuous
in the excavation unit and slopes to the
southeast.
Cultural debris is concentrated.
Level 7 has an abrupt, wavy boundary to:
~0n2

Id~eTVdi]L@vel

8: Depth 112-162 cm., thickness 50 cm., range
40-58 cm.; dark brown (10YR 4/3) fine sandy
loam, brown (10YR 5/3) dry; no mottles,
massive structure; soft, very friable, non­
sticky, non-plastic; violently effervescent
reaction with HCl; non-cemented; angular,
subangular and subrounded granule and pebble
size calcium carbonate concretions are few,
less than 5 per 10 cm. square of surface -.
area) very few roots are present but the
level is disturbed as though in the past
roots were common; mildly alkaline pH, 7.8
(the level increases in alkalinity from top-­
mildly al~aline 7.6--to bottom--moderately
alRaliner,8.0); average of .966% organic mat­
ter {dearea~e ~nOpe*ien~ b£~organlcnmifi6ir
from top at 0.14% to bottom at 0.846%);
well sorted, but less well sorted than the
overlying levels.
The level contains a
very few rounded and subrounded quartz,
feldspar and chert granules.
Cultural mate­
rial occurring in the level is apparently
of a Middle Prehistoric age.
The long axis
of pelecypod shells are usually oriented on
a horizontal plane.
Level 8 is relatively
flat lying in the 3 x 3 Unit but slopes
gently to the northeast.
It has a gradual,
wavy boundary to Level 9.
Level 8 was cut
by two minor erosional sequences.
Filled

90

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

channels are labeled "Erosional Fill A" and
"Erosional Fill B" on the 3 x 3 Unit profile
(Fig. 11).
Level 8: Erosional Fill A.
Thickness 15 cm., range
0-25 cm.; dark grayish brown (10YR 4/2)
sandy loam, grayish brown (10YR 5/2.5) dry;
massive; soft, loose, non-sticky, n6n-plas­
tic, stron~1y effervescent reaction to HCl~
Erosional fill A is small in extent and is
often superimposed over the mo~e extensive
erosional Fill B.
Fill A has a greater or­
ganic matter content than Fill B and con­
tains more cultural debris.
Level 8: Erosional Fill B.
Thickness 50 cm.; range
0-60 cm.; dark brown (10YR 3.5/3) sandy loam,
brown(10YR 4.5/3) dry; massive; soft, loose,
non-sticky, non-plastic; strongly efferves­
cent reaction to HCl.
Erosional Fill B has
filled channels which cut into and removed
as much as 20% of Level 8 and cut beneath
Level 8 to Level 9 occasionally.
The B fill
i~L~lightly coarser in texture than intact
portions of Level 8.
In intact portions of
Level 8 pelecypod valves are generally orient­
ed on a horizontal surface.
In this fill
the long axis are more frequently oriented
in other directions.
Zone Vd, Level 9: Depth 162-210+ cm.; thickness about 40 cm.,
range O-about 60 cm.; dark brown (10YR 3/3)
fine sandy loam, dark brown (10YR 4/3) dry;
no mottles; massive; soft. loose or very
friable, non-sticky, non-plastic; violently
effervescent reaction with HCl; non-cemented
angular, subangular and subrounded granule
and pebble size calcium carbonate concre­
tions are common, less than 26 per 10 cm.
square of surface area; moderately alkaline
pH, 8.15 (the sediments in the level increase
in alUalinity from the top--moderately alka­
line, 8.05--to the bottom--moderately alka­
line, 8.25); average of 0.797% organic mat­
ter; well sorted, but less well sorted than
overlying levels.
The level contains a very
few rounded and subrounded quartz, feldspar
and chert granules.
Cultural material occur­
ring in the level is apparently of a Middle
Prehistoric age.
The long axis of pelecypod

SITE 41 JK 91

91

valves are not consistently oriented on a
horizontal surface.
Level 9 follows the un­
dulating contact of Zone V with Zone IV.
Cultural material is probably displace~. The
level has an irregular, abrupt to clear
boundary to:
Depth 242-?? cm.; light gray (5YR 7/1) fine
sandy loam, white (5YR 8/1) dry; few, fine,
faint light brown (7.5YR 6/4) mottles, pink­
ish gray (7. 5YR 7/2) dry; massive; soft,
very friable, non-sticky, non-plastic; vio­
lently effervescent reaction with HCl; a
few granule size aggregations of sand, silt
and clay are weakly cemented with calcium
carbonate; angular, subanular and subrounded
granule and pebble size calcium carbonate
concretions are abundant, greater than 20
per 10 cm. square of surface, and small
cobble size concretions are present; very
few roots; mildly alkaline pH, 8.3; 0.402%
organi c "tli",a t to et' ; ;well s att e4; ,~no cul tural
debris is present.

Zone IV:

Artif

t Discussion

The 3 x 3 Unit was excavated in hopes of collecting, from
natural levels visible there, samples of various types of cultural
debris that would be of an adequate size for examining variability
through time.
Unfortunately, the materials collected from most
natural levels proved too few for reliable inference.
Below, as
an example of the problem, the volume of the natural levels in the
3 x 3 Unit is compared with the amount of lithic debris.
Lithic
debris as a rule was one of the best represented categories of
Natural
Level
1
')2
33
44
:5~6

.7
8
\1

TOTAL

Volume of
Level (M 3 )
1.829
1.530
2.219
0.749
0.509
2.624
2.970
3.749
16.179

Lithic
Deb ris
408
401
336
45
5
166
82
70
1513

Density of
Lithic Debris/M 3
223
262
151
60
10
64
28

92

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

cultural material at the site.
The lithic-tool/lithic-debris rat~o
averaged 0.1064 in the 3 x 3 and ranged from 0.0000 in levels 5 and
6 to 0.2560 in Level 8.
Regrouping the data was necessary because artifact sample sizes
were small.
Independent statistical tests (Appendix I) on the
lithic debris and on the lithic tools were used to combine arti­
fact samples into larger clusters.
The tests succeeded in a re­
grouping that minimized within group variability and maximized be­
tween group differences.
The independent regrouping of lithic de­
bris and lithic tools resulted in three major clusters.
Cluster
One is the combined Levels.l, 2~and 3.
Cluster Two is the combined
Levels 4, 5; 6 and 7.
Cluster Three is the combined levels 8 and 9.
The discussion which follows will examine the archeology rep­
resented in the 3 x 3 Unit through the use of the clustered natural
levels.
A level by level summary of the tools and lithic debris
is provided in Appendix I.
Faunal debris~ which was well repre­
sented in most levels, is summarized by level in Appendix II.
Upper Cluster: Levels 1-3
The upper and most recently deposited levels in the 3 x 3 Unit
contained a total of 141 items which are believed to have been uti­
lized.
The percent breakdown of these artifacts combined into one
assemblage is:
Cores
2.1%
n = 141
Bifaces
14.9%
Retouched pieces
59.6%
Ceramic
8.5%
Shell tools
12.1%
Bone tools
2.8%
By typological comparison artifacts from the Upper Cluster in
the 3 x 3 Unit date the levels to the Late Prehistoric period.
Bi­
faces that resemble artifacts recognized generally as projectile
points seem to fill the criterion for the Perdiz, CZiffton and
Grandbury types.
Both bone tempered and sandy paste ceramics aEe present in
small quantities.
The presence of artifact types that elsewhere
are restricted solely to the Late Prehistoric period and the ab­
sence of artifacts that could designate an earlier date indicates
that Levels 1, 2 and 3 are the accumulation of a relatively short
time period and that little mixing with earlier zones has occurred.
The levels were not dominated by a particular type of biface
(Fig. 20).
The majority (65%) show no wear and bifaces are pri­
marily (65%) plano-convex in cross section.
Retouched pieces collected in the Upper Cluster levels are
predominately one type (Fig. 20).
They are thin, interior flakes
and show retouch and wear on their distal ends.
Retouched pieces
of secondary inportance are thick, interior flakes with wear and
retouch present on lateral edges.

SITE 41 JK 91

93

Shell tools found are commonly from Rangia cuneata valves
which have retouch and wear on their distal edges. Oyster
(Crassostrea virginica) , Carolina Marsh Clam (PoZymesoda caroZ­
iniana) , Sunray Venus (MacrocaZZista nimbosa) and fresh water mus­
sel valves appear also to have been modified (Appendix I).
The assemblage from the upper levels of the 3 x 3 Unit ap­
pears to relate favorably with that encountered in excavation at
the Atkinson §ite, 41 JK 41, and the Hawk Perch @ite, 41 JK 147.
The lithic debris and lithic tool assemblages which are considered
more stable representatives of the prehistoric cultural record are
the bases for the correlation.
Bone and shell artifact assemblages,
considered less stable in the Gultural record, do not correspond
between the-sites.
It is believed that much of~~e .•isexepancy
between site assemblages is a result of the natural processes
which have operated differentially, resulting in a changed arche­
ological record.
It is not believed that major differences in
culture or activity occurred between the sites.
The preservation
of bone and shell of 41 JK 91 is excellent.
The preservation of
bone at the other two sites is poor.
There were 1145 flakes and chips from the Upper Cluster ana­
lyzed to determine their sequence of removal from cores. Lithic
debris in these levels is 5.2% primary, 27.1% secondary and 67.8%
interior removal.
In this respect of technology the Upper Cluster
of natural levels 1-3 is similar to other levels in the Venom Hill
site and to the rest of the sites tested in the 1974 season.
There were 541 flakes retaining a striking platform and bulb
of percussion analyzed for type of platform preparation.
The per­
cent breakdown of platform type is;
Natural platform
12.9%
n = 541
Single facet platform
28.1%
Multiple facet pla~f0rm 52.9%
Crushed platform
6.1%
A minimum of 333 flakes were complete and have been analyzed
in order to determine the characteristics and variation in certain
dimension categories (length, shape and thickness) for the Upper
Cluster (Fig. 12). The dimensions of flakes from the upper three
levels in the 3 x 3 Unit is well within the narrow range of varia­
tion recognized at most other tested sites.
The flakes from the
Upper Cluster have a mean length (x = 1.5444) and standard devia­
tion (sd = 0.7655) similar to that found in all other tested areas
except for the disturbed site, 41 JK 16 and in the upper portions
of the 3 x 5 Unit of 41 JK 91.
Shape is dominated by the diver­
gent category (45%) as it is at all other sites in the reservoir.
The flakes from the Upper Cluster have a mean thickness (~ =
0.27004) which is quite similar to that dimension characteristic in
flakes from excavations at 41 JK 41 and 41 JK 147.
The standard
deviation for length measurements on whole flakes from the Levels
1, 2 and 3 (sd = 0.17496) is comparable with that found at all
sites except 41 JK 16 and the 3 x 5 Unit at 41 JK 91.

FIGURE 12
"/0
50

Length

FLAKE

40

Late: Levels 1,2,3
n= 333
x:: 1.5444
sd = 0.7655
Middle:Levels 4,5,6,7
n:: 119
x=1.4212
sd =0.6588

30

20

41

DIMENSIONS

JK 91

3 x 3 M. UNIT

Early: Levels 8,9
n=44
x 1.5125
sd 0.7538

10

0
0

.4

.8

1.2

2.0

1.6

2.4

2.8

3.2

3.6

4.0

4.4

4.8

5.2 cm

0/0

70

Shape .­
Late
n=346
Middle
n= 114
Early
n=44

60

50

%

50

Thickness
40

40

30

30

0,.
\

\
\

20

, ,"­
,, \

Late
n=343
x= 0.27004
sd= 0.17496
Middle
n= 117
'X= 0.2908
sd=0.190e
Early
n=44
X=0.29659
sd:: 0.17097

20

10

10

o

.. Plot mode continuous as a visuol oid
change the curve shope.

derived

.15

.30

,45

.60

.75

.90

1.05

1.20

1.35

1.50 em

from histo9,om of discrete types. Reordering of types would

SITE 41 JK 91

95

Middle Cluster: Levels 4, 5, 6 and 7
Artifacts from the Middle Cluster with indications of use had
a lower total number (n = 84) than that found in the Upper or Late
Cluster of the unit.
The Percent breakdown of artifact types in
the Middle Cluster is:
Cores
2.4%
n = 84
Bifaces
13.1%
Retouched pieces
17.9%
Ceramics
0.0%
Shell tools
61.9%
Bone tools
4.8Z~
Projectile points recovered from Levels 4, 5, 6 and 7 date
the Middle Cluster to both the Late Prehistoric and late Middle
Prehistoric periods.
An expanding stem projectile point prdbably
related to the Seallorn type (Suhm and Jelks 1962) was found in
Level 4 (Fig. 15; m and m') and biconvex bifaces of a size compa­
rable with dart point were found in Level 7 (Fig. 16; e, f).
The
single radiocarbon sample processed from the site originates from
the lower portion of the Middle Bluster, in Level 7, and compares
favorably with the dart point size bifaces found there.
That sam­
ple collected from Feature 2, a hearth, was assayed at 2400 ±90 B.P.
using a 5568 half life (TX-2124, Valastro--manuscript in prepara­
tion).
No ceramics have been located in the levels. Shell tools
constiture the greatest portion of the assemblage.
These factors
suggest that the Middle Cluster in the 3 x 3 Unit may date to the
very late Middle Prehistoric, the early Late Prehistoric and pos­
sibly (although there is not direct evidence) to the Transitional
to the Late Prehistoric periods.
Bifaces are primarily biconvex in cross section and with wear.
However, no one type of biface is clearly dominate over the others.
Retouched pieces show, as do the bifaces, no distinct peak in a
particular category.
In fact, nearly 50% of the retouched pieces
are distributed among the miscellaneous type categories for which
no wear was observed.
In addition, artifacts with retouch and
wear on their distal edges appear to be about equally represented.
Shell tools found are commonly Rangia euneata with retouch
and wear on their distal edges (61%).
Si88ificant percents of
Crassostrea virginiea and Maeroeallista nimbosa are present (about
15% each).
Modified Polymesoda earoliniana, Modiolus demissus
granosissmus and freshwater mussel valves are also present in
small quantities.
Two bone artifacts were recovered from~the Middle Cluster.
Both artifacts originated from the late Middle Prehistoric age,
Level 7.
One artifact has an incised design (Fig. 16; u), the
other is shaped to a point (Fig. 16; v).
The assemblage from the middle levels of the 3 x 3 Unit cor­
relate less well with other excavated assemblages than the assem~
blages from the upper levels did.
Lithic debris and lithic tools,
the basis of correlation between site with poor preservation of

96

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

faunal material, do not have a very high frequency in the Middle
Cluster.
The lithic tools present are not clustered in any partic­
ular type category.
This may indicate changing or shifting empha­
sis on the ~ype of activity during the periods of midden accumula­
tion in the levels.
More effective use was made in the Middle Cluster of the lithic
resources; lithic debris decreased in percent.
In all, 216 flakes
and chips were analyzed to determine their sequence of removal from
cores.
Lithic debris in these levels is 6.0% primary, 25.9% sec­
ondary and 68.1% interior removal.
In this respect of technology
the Middle Cluster of natural levels 4, 5, 6 and 7 is similar to
other natural lev.i. at the Venom Hill aite and with other tested
localities.
There were 115 flakes retaining a striking platform and bulb
of percussion analyzed for type of platform preparation.
The per­
cent breakdown ~f platform type is:
Natural platform
36.5%
n = 115
Single facet platform
27.0%
Multiple facet platform 30.4%
Crushed platform
6.1%
A minimum of 114 flakes were of suitable intactness for anal­
ysis of dimension (Fig. 12).
Flakes from the Middle Cluster have
a mean length (x = 1.4212) and standard deviation (sd = 0.6588)
that is similar to that found in most other intact sites tested.
The only deposits that are dissimilar and considered intact are
from the 3 x 5 Unit at the Venom Hill Site.
41 JK 16 and 41 JK 50
which are disturbed sites have a higher mean length.
41 JK 16 has
a significantly higher standard deviation.
Shape, as elsewhere in
the reservoir, is dominated by the divergent category (37%).
The
flakes from the Middle Cluster have a mean thickness (x = 0.2908)
and standard deviation (sd = 0.1908) that is similar to that found
in most other intact areas tested.
The 3 x 5 Unit is again the
exception with a greater mean thickness and higher standard devia­
tion.
The disturbed sites, 41 JK 16 and 41 JK 50, as might be ex­
pected have a greater mean thickness and standard deviation.
Lower Cluster: Levels 8 and 9
Prehistoric cultural refuse from the Lower or Early Cluster
contained no cores, ceramics, or bone.
The percent breakdown of
artifacts with indications of functional use is:
Cores
0.0%
n = 77
Eifaces
18.2%
Retouched pieces
13.0%
Ceramics
0.0%
Shell tools
68.8%
Bone tools
0.0%
Projectile points from the Lower or Early Cluster were both
expanding and contracting stem dart points datable by typological

SITE 41 JK 91

97

comparision to the Middle and the late Middle Prehistoric per­
iod (Fig. 17; a, a', band k).
All bifaces but one have a bi­
convex cross section.
The most frequent type is thick, with
wear present (Fig. 17; a, a', band k).
A type of secondary
importance is bifaces that are thick and without wear (Fig. 17;
1 and I').
Artifacts with flakes removed on lateral edges and which
exhibit wear very clearly dominate the retouched piece category
(60%).
Twenty percent of the pieces are in miscellaneous cat­
egor~es and svidence no wear.
Shell tools are commonly Rangia cuneata valves with retouch
and wear on their distal edges (78%).
Significant numbers of
Cras80strea virginica, MacrocaZZista numbosa, and PoZymesoda
caroZiniana are modified.
One Dinocardium robustum valve was
found modified and containing a red pigment.
The assemblage from the Early Cluster of the 3 x 3 Unit cor­
relates less with other excavated assemblages than did assemblages
from either the Late or Middle Clusters.
The lithic tools present,
unlike those in the Middle Cluster of Levels 4, 5, 6 and 7, are
clustered in particular type categories.
There were 107 flakes and chips analyzed to determine their
sequence of removal from COEes.
Lithic debris in Level 8 and 9
was 5.6% primary, 19.6% secondary, and 74.8% interior removal.
In this respect of technology the Early Cluster is similar to
that represented in other natural levels at the Venom Hill site
and in other tested localities.
Fifty six flakes which retained a striking platform and bulb
of percussion were analyzed for type of platform preparation.
The
percent breakdown on platform types is:
Natural platform
25.0%
n = 56
Single facet platform
41.1%
Multiple facet platform 30.4%
Crushed platform
3.6%
Forty four flakes were suitable for flake dimension analysis
(Fig. 12).
The flakes from the Early Cluster have a mean length
(x = 1.5125) and standard deviation (sd = 0.7538) that is similar
to that found in most other intact sites tested.
The only deposits
that are sissimilar and considered intact are from the upper levels
of the 3 x 5 Unit at the Venom Hill site.
Disturbed sites 41 JK 16
and 41 JK 50 have a higher mean length.
41 JK 16 has a higher
standard deviation. '2Shape as elsewhere in the reservoir is domi­
nated. by the divergent category (35%).
The whole flakes from the
Lower Unit have a mean thickness (x = 0.29659) and standard devia­
tion (sd = 0.17097) that is similar to that found in most other
intact areas tested.
Again the 3 x 5 Unit is the exception with a
larger mean thickness and higher standard deviation.
41 JK 16 and
41 JK 50, disturbed sites, have a larger mean thickness and higher
standard deviation.

98

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

Artifact Descriptions

41 JK 91, 3 X 3 UNIT, NATURAL LEVEL 1
Thin biface, Type 4 (Fig. 13a,:1.9').';
Length 2.0 cm., width 1.8 cm., thickness 0.4 em., length of
base 0.7 cm., and width of base 0.8 cm.
Manufactured from a single facet platform interior flake.
In­
terior surface has been more extensively worked than exterior
surface.
Thin biface, projectile-~rrow (Bonham), Type 5 (Fig. 13b)~
Length 2.3 cm., width 1.5 cm., thickness 0.3 cm., length of
base 0.6 cm., width of base 0.55 cm.
Many small hinge scars.
Bi-convex cross section.
Thin biface, projectile-arrow, Type 7 (Fig. 13~)c;
Thickness 0.2 cm., length of base 1.15 cm., width of base 0.7
cm.
Parallel sides square base.
Reminiscent of Bonham or AZba
projectile types.
Bi-convex cross section.
Retouched piece, distal and lateral, Type 15 (Fig. 134),:'.:
Length 1.65 cm., width 1.45 cm., thickness 0.25 cm.
Secondary multi-facet platform flake.
Arched interior sur­
face.
Angle of retouch, 82°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 18 (Fig. 13~)
Lengch 1.45 cm., width 1.2 cm., thickness 0.25 c~.
In t er1iar'.'£1ingie -f ace t platform f lake. with a divergent shape.
Retouch occurs on the external surface along the entire distal
edge.
Arched interior sufface.
Angle of retouch 65°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 18 (Fig. 13f)
Length 1.75 ~m., width 1.35 cm., thickness 0.15 cm.
Interior multi-facet platform flake.
Interior surface planular.
Angle of retouch, 30°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 19 (Fig. 13g)
Length 1.45 em., width 1.45 cm., thickness 0.25cm.
Interior chip.
Arched interior surface.
Angle of retouch, 90°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 19 (Fig. 13h)
Length 1.25 cm., width 1.1:-cm. ,t·th1!eknes O~25n::'lIl.
Interior multi-facet platform flake.
The interior surface is
arched.
The lateral edges and proximal edges have been
smoothed subsequent to flake removal.
Angle of ~~touch, 78°.

SITE 41 JK 91

99

Re touched piece, dis t aI, Typ e 19 (Fig. 13i)
Length 1.3 cm., width 1.0 cm., thickness 0.15 cm.
Interior crushed platform flake.
Slightly arched inte­
rior surface.
Broken, apparently in use.
A flake origi­
nating at the distal end of the mother flake has been removed
reducing the area of retouch by half.
Use continued after
the break as evidenced by wear at the break.
Angle of re­
touch, 80 ° .
Retouched piece, distal, Type 19 (Fig. 13j)
Length 1.6 cm., width 1.5 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
Interior multi-facet platform flake.
Slightly arched inte­
rior surface.
Angle of retouch, 76°.
Re t 0 u c h e d pie c e, dis tal, T y pel 9 ( Fig . 13k)
Length 1.55 cm., width 1.40 cm., thickness 0.25 cm.
IRt~rlor multi-facet platform flake.
Arched interior surface.
Angle of retouch, 95°.
Retouched piece, distal, Typ"e 19 (Fig. 131)
Length 1.3 cm., width 1.65 cm., thickness 0.1 cm.
Interior multi-facet platform flake.
Planular interior sur­
face.
Angle of retouch, 65°.
Retouched piece, distal and lateral, Type 21 (Fig. 13m)
Length 1.1 cm., width 0.8 cm., thickness 0.35 cm.
Interior crushed platform flake.
Retouch on exterior sur­
face.
Base of triangle is its thickest part.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 22 (Fig. 13n)
Length 4.45 cm., width 2.2'cm., thickness 0.45 cm.
Sub-parallel interior chip with retouch on the exte~nal sur­
face.
Grinding removed negative bulbs of percussion on edge
of this retouch.
No visible wear on flake scars perhaps in­
dicating platform preparation.
Re touched pie ce, proximal, smapp ed, Type 22 (Fig. 130)
Length 4.0 cm., width 3.9 cm., thickness 1.05 cm.
Primary chip with trimmed bulb of percussion.
Trimming prob­
ably used as a means of flattening arched internal surface.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 22 (Fig. 13p)
Length 2.0 cm., width 2.1 cm., thickness 3.5 cm.
Secondary chip.
Retouch on external surface.
Angle of re­
touch, 50° average.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 24 (Fig. 13q)
Length 1.8 cm., width 1.9 cm., ~hickness 0.5 cm.
Secondary flake with ~ulti-facet platform.
Arched interior
surface.
Angle of retouch, 81°.

100

SI'l'E DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

FIGURE 13.

a
b
c
d
e

-

a

-

g

-

f
1

m
n

-

p

q
r

s
t
v

& u

I

Artifacts from

4i

JK 91, 3 x 3 Unit, Levell

Thin biface, Type 4
Thin biface, (Bonham), Type 5
Thin?biface.7Type 7
Re.tlouched piece, Type 15
Reeouched,pieoe.~'ype 18
Retouched piece. Type 19
Retouched piece, Type 21
Retouched piece, Type 22
Retouched piece, Type 24
Retouched piece, Type 26
Retouched piece, Type 27
Retouched piece, Type 26
Retouched piece, Type 31

FIGURE 13

a

a'

e

b

9

f

e

d

h

j

m

k

n

p

o

r

q

t

s
3x3 Unit

41 JK 91
Level 1

retouch
- - - wear
u

v

0

3

I

I
em

102

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

Retouched piece, distal, Type 26 (Fig. 13r)
Length 2.0 cm., width 1.3 cm., thickness 0.45 cm.
Chip with slightly arched interior surface.
Angle of retouch, 65°.
Retouched piece, distal~ Type 27 (Fig. 13s)
Length 3.9 cmi~~~iath 2.15 cm., thickness 0.45 cm.
Interior flake with a multi-facet platform.
Angle of retouch, 58°,
on worn surface.
Retouc,hed piece,. lateral, Type 26 (Fig. 13t)
Length 1.35 cm., width 1.9 cm., ghickness 0.4 cm.
Broken, interior, multi-facet platform flake.
Lat eral retouch
possible preparation of platform.
Retouched piece, lateral beak-like projection, Type 27 (Fig. 13u)
Length 2.0 cm., width 1.4 cm., thickness 0.45 cm.
Hinged interior flake with cortex platform.
Small projection on
one lateral edge shows many hinged scars.
Other areas of retouch
show little or no evidence of hinging.
Angle of retouch greater
than 90° in area of hinged retouch.
Retouched piece, lateral, distal, Type 31 (Fig. 13v)
Length 2.7 cm., width 3.35 cm., thickness 0.4 cm.
Interior piece, broken.
Negative bulbs have been ground possibly
for platform preparation.
Fire popped.

41 JK 91, 0 X 0 UNIT, LEVEL 2
Thin biface, projectile-arrow, (CZiffton) , Type 7 (Fig. l4a)
Length 1.95 cm., width 2.I5 cm., thickness 0.35 cm., width of
base 0.9 cm., length of base, 0.3 cm.
Broken; bi-convex cross section.
Retouched piece,. distal, Type 18 (Fig. ~4b)
Length ~.2 cm., width 0.75 cm., thickness 0.15 cm.
Single-facet platform interior flake.
Very slightly arched in­
terior surface.
Striations are on the interior surface perpen­
dicular to the line of distal retouch.
Angle of retouch, 74~.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 18 (Fig. 14c)
Length 1.55 cm., width 1.0 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
Multi-facet platform interior flake.
Possibility of striations
on planular interior sufface but could be features left from the
time of flake removal.
Angle of retouch, 58°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 18 (Fig. 14d)
Length 1.5 cm., width 1.5 cm., thickness 0.15 cm.
Interior multi-facet platform flake with p1anular interior surface.
striations on interior surface extend at right angles to the line
of retouch not the axis of flake removal.
These scratches occur

SITE 41 ilK 91

103

one-third total length of flake from its distal end on inte­
rior surface.
Angle of retouch, 57°.
Retouched piece, sh€ l ped, Type 20 (Fig. 14e, e ' )
Length 1.5 cm., width 0.9 cm., thickness.0.15 cm., length of
base 0.2 cm., width of base 0.35 cm.
Interior chip with very sli~htly arched interior surface.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 21 (Fig. 14f)
Length 1.2 cm., width 1.25 cm., thickness 0.25 cm.
Interior multi-facet platform flake with an arched interior
surface.
Angle of retouch, 69°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 21 (Fig. 14g)
Length 1.45 cm., width 1.85 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
Interior multi-facet platform flake.
Planular interior sur­
face.
Angle of retouch, 57°.
Retouched piece, shaped, Type 21 (Fig. 14h)
Length 0.75 cm., width 7.0 cm., thickness 0.15 cm.
Interior chip.
Bone,T-1ype 2 (Fig. 14i)
Length 2.5 cm., width 0.9 em., thickness 0.4 cm.
Cut bone with beveled point.
Broken; ground and polished
edges.
Oval cross section.
Possible fish hook.
41,. ilK

91~

3 X 3

UNIT~

LEVEL 3

Core, multi-facet, Type 2 (Fig. 14~)
Length 4.3 cm., width 3.55 cm., thickness 2.2 cm.
Fine grained coreoon angular cobble with thin hydration rind.
Thin biface, projectile-arrow, Type 4 (
. k - k')
Length 1.8 cm., width 0.9 cm., thickness 0.3 cm., length of
base 0.5 cm., width of base 0.5 cm.
Stem has asphaltum adhering to its surface and has a wedge
shaped cross section. Possible small impact fracture on
distal end.
Thin biface, Type 6 (Fig. 1 - 1')
Length 4.5 cm., width 2.5 rim., thickness 0.55 cm., width
at base 1.85 cm.
Plano-convex cross section.
Thin biface, projectile-arrow, Type 7 (Fig. 14m)
Length 3.4 cm., width 1.45 em., thickness 0.4 cm., width at
base 1.45 cm.
Slight twist to tip.
Bi-convex cross section.

104

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

FIGURE 14. Artifacts from 41 JK 91,

a
b
e
f
i

-

-

d
e
h

I

j

k - k'
1 - 1I

m
0

s
u

- n

-

r

- t

3 x 3 Unit, Levels 2 & 3

Thin biface, (Cliff ton) .) Type 7
Retouched piece, Type 18
Retoul:::hed piece, Type 20
Retouc.hed piece, Type 21
Bone, Type 2
Core, Type 2
Thin biface, Type 4
Thin biface, Type 6
Thin biface, Type 7
Retouched piece, Type 18
Retouched piece, Type 19
Retouched piece, Type 21

FIGURE 14

c

b

a

41 JK 91

3x3 Unit

Level 2

~
f

el

e

d

h

9

kl

k

II

j

I
p

0

q

Level 3

m

n
-retouch

----wear

0

s

it

u

I

3

I
cm

r

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

106

Thin biface, pr~jectile-arrow (Grandbury) , Type 7 (Fig. 14n)
Length 4.3 cm., width 1.55 cm., thickness 0.45 cm.
Bi-convex cross section.
Serration on one edge near the base
may be preparation of a platform to chip a notch, in which
case this would be a preform for an expanding stem point.
Retouched piece, distal, Type l8 (Fig. 140)
Lengbh 1.75 cm., width 1.35 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
Multi-facet platform interior flake with planular interior
surface.
Angle of retouch, 76°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 18 (Fig. 14p)
Length 2.05 cm., width 1.5 cm., thickness 0.3 cm.
Interior multi-facet platform flake with planular interior
surface.
Angle of retouch, 70°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 18 (Fig. 14q)
Length 1.3 cm., width 1.2 cm., thickness 0.1 cm.
Multi-facet platform interior flake with planular interior
surface.
Scratches occur on interior surface.
Angle of re­
touch, 67°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 18 (Fig. 14r)
Length 1.3 c~., width 1.4 cm!, thickness 0.3 cm.
Multi-facet platform interior flake with slightly arched
interior surface. Angle of retouch, 75°.
Retouched piece, distal, lateral, Type 19 (Fig. 14s)
Length 1.2 cm., width 1.0 cm., thickness 0.1 cm.
Interior multi-facet platform flake with planular interior
surface.
Angle of retouch, 82°.
Retouched p'ece~ lateral, Type 19 (Fig. 14t)
Length 1.95 cm., width 0.7 cm., thickness 0.15 cm.
Interior single facet platform flake with planular interior
sufface.
Angle of retouch, 75°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 21 (Fig. 14u)
Length 1.25 cm., width 1.45 cm., thickness 0.15 cm.
Single facet platform interior flake with planular interior
surface.
Angle of retouch, 56°.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 23 (Fig. l5a)
Length 1.8 cm., width 2.2 cm., thickness 0.7 cm.
Secondary flake with multi-facet platform.
Angle of retouch,

70°.
Retouched piece, Type 24 (Fig. 15b)
Length 2.75 cm., width 1.7 cm., thickness 0.35 cm.
Hinged secondary flake with multi~iacet platform.

SITE 41 JK 91

107

Retouched piece, lateral, distal, proximal, Type 27 (Fig. 15c)
Length 3.71 cm., width 2.9 cm., thickness 0.85 cm.
Interior chip.
Angle of retouch, varies greatly.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 27 (Fig. 15d)
Length 3.6 cm., width 1.8 cm., thickness 0.4 cm.
Interior flake with crushed platform. Angle of smoothed
lateral edge, 59°.
Angle of retouch, 50°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 31 (Fig. 15e)
Length 1.7 cm., width 2.55 cm., thickness 0.6 cm.
Cortex platform interior flake.
Angle of retouch, 65°.
Shell, Type 18 (Fig. ISf)
Length 4.75 cm., width 3.05 cm., thickness 0.35 cm.
MaaroaaZZista nimbosa. Retouch on interior surface.
Shell, Type 18 (Fig. 15g)
Lengbh 3.2 cm., width 1.8 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
MaaroaaZZista nimbosa. Retouched on interior edges.
Shell, Type 11 (Fig. ISh)
Length 2.2 cm., width 1.2 cm., thickness 0.3 cm.
Maaroaallista nimbosa shell snapped, ground, and recouched.
Shell, Type 14 (Fig. lSi)
Length 1.55 cm., width 0.7 cm., thickness 0.05 cm.
Freshwater mussel cut and ground.
Holes drilled into shell.
Bone, Type 3 (Fig. 15j)
Length 4.3 cm., width 0.55 cm., thickness 0.35 cm.
Oval cross section.
Bone, Type 3 (Fig. 15k)
Length 2.55 cm., width 0.5 cm., thickness 0.4 cm.
Round cross section.
Bone, Type 3 (Fig. 151)
Length 4.75, cm., width 1.2 cm., thickness 0.9 cm.
Oval cross section.
41 JK

91~

3.,.'X 3

UNIT~

LEVEL 4

Thin biface, projectile-arrow, (SaaIZorn) , Type 7 (Fig. 15m, m')
Length 4.2 cm., width 1.45 cm., thickness 0.3 cm., width of
shoulders 1.45 cm.
Base broken.
Bi-convex cross section.

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

108

FIGURE 15. Artifacts from 41 JK 91, 3 x 3 Unit
Levels 3, 4, 5, 6.
a
B

c - d
e
f
g
h
i

-

j

-

1

m - mt
n
0

p
q

Retouched p iec e, Type 23
Retouched piece, Type 24
Retouched piece, Type 27
Retouched piece, Type 31
Shell, Type 18
Shell, Type 11
Shell, Type 14
Bone, Type 3
Thin biface, (Seallorn)" Type 7
Retouched piece, Type 18
Retouched piece, Type 22
Sh ell, Type 8
Shell, Type 12

FIGURE 15

c

e
d

h

9

f

41 JK 91

3 x3 Unit

Level 3

-retouch
--wear

o
I

k

j

3

I

cm

n

m

m'

p

Level 4

o

Levels 5&6

q

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

110

Retouched piece, distal, Type 18 (Fig. 15n)
Length 1.25cm., width 1.15 cm., thickness 0.25 em.
Interior flake with mu1t~-facet platform.
P1anular interior
surface.
Angle of retouch, 80°.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 22 (Fig. 150)
Length 1.7 cm., width 2.2 cm., thickness 0.8 cm.
Broken, secendary flake.
Rebouched side shows much hinging
and little wear.
Angle of retouch, 58°.

41 JK 91,

J

X

J

UNIT, LEVELS 5 AND 6

..shell, Type 8 (Fig. 15p)
Length 4.9 cm., width 3.15 cm., thickness 0.6 cm.
Macrocallista nimbosa shell cutting, retouch and battering of
the edges.
Most extensive retouch on interior surface.
Shell, Type 12 (Fig. 15q)
Length 2.9 cm., width 2.7 cm., thickness 0.25 cm.
Macroaallista nimbosa.
External retouch.

#-1 ~JK 91,

i::»

J

X

J

UNIT, LEVEL l

bi-polav, nat'u.ralalld cll1ulti-faeet platform, Type 1

Length 3.3 cm., width 2.7 cm., thickness 1.7 cm.
Three or four buried percussion cones, battered edges and
deep hinges.

(1

ig .

!

Core, bi-polar, Type 3 (Fig. 16b)
Length 3.7 cm., width 3.2 cm., thickness 2.3 cm.
Utilization of sub-round cobble.
Buried cones of percussion
on one edge; battering located on other.
Unsuccessful flake
removal.
Core, multi-facet platform, Type 3 (Fig. 16c)
Length 3.05 cm., width 4.5 cm., thickness 2.35 cm.
Flaw within structure of core.
Derived from small sub-angular
cobble.
Thin biface, projectile-dart, Type 5 (Fig. 16d)
Length 1.5 cm., width 2.2 cm., thickness 0.55 cm.
Bi-convex cross section.
Thin biface, projectile-dart (Abasalo), Type 8 (Fig. 16el
Length 6.4 cm., width 2.7 cm., thickness 0.7 cm.
Slightly twisted tip.
Bi-convex cross section.

SITE 41 JK91

111

Thin biface-tip, Type 8 (Fig. 16f)
Length 5.1,~m~,.width 1.8 cm., thickness 0.8 cm.
Bi-convex cross section.
Alternate beveled tip.
Thin biface, irregular shape, Type 10 (Fig. 16g, g')
Length 4.2 cm., width 3.35 cm., thickness 1.3 cm.
Single face platform interior flake.
Bi-convex section.
Angle of retouch, 35°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 17 (Fig. 16h)
Length 1.5 cm., width 1.15 cm., thickness 0.15 cm.
Interior multi-facet platform flake with planular interior
surfac:e.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 19 (Fig. 16i)
Length 1.1 cm., width 0.95 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
Interior flake, crushed platform, and planular in terior
surface.
Angle of retouch, 70°.
Retouched piece, proximal, lateral, distal, Type 19 (Fig. 16j)
Length 2.75 cm., width 1.85 cm., thickness 0.3 cm.
Interior chip with planular interior surface.
Retouched piece, lateral (Fig. 16K)
Length 2:1 cm., width 0.85 cm.~ thickness 0.4 em.
Secondary flake with crushed platform.
Angle of retouch, 66°.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 26 (Fig. 161, 1')
Length 4.3 cm., width 3.6 cm., thickness 0.85 cm.
Secondary flake with multi-facet platform. Most of bulb of
percussion removed by two flakes on interior surface.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 28 (Fig. 16m)
Length 2.2 cm., width 1.5 cm., thickness 0.6 cm.
Interior natural platform flake.
Angle of retouch, 55°.
Shell, Type 4 (Fig. 16n)
Length 9.9 cm., width 5.95 cm., thickness 1.1 cm.
Cpassostpea vipginica, with lateral and distal smoothing.
Shell, Type 6 (Fig. 160)
Length 9~15 cm., width 5.6 cm., thickness 0.5 cm.
Striations at right angle to the disEal edge or parallel to
the long axis occur on the interior surface.
Shell, Type 9 (Fig. 16p)
Length 2.9;cm~;=.idt'~2.4 cm., thickness 0.25 cm.
Macpoca~~ista nimbosa.
Two edges ground and retouched.
present on exterior surface.

Wear

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

112

FIGURE 16. Artifacts from 41 JK 91, 3 x 3 Unit, Level 7

a
b
d
e

'C
L

f

g
h
i
k
1
m
n

a
p
q
r

s
t

u

v

c

­

g,

-

j

l'

Core, Type 1
Core, Type 3
Thin biface, Type 5
Thin biface, (Aba8aZo)~ Type 8
Thin biface, Type 8
Thin biface, Type 10
Retouched piece, Type 17
Retouched piece, Type 19
Retouched piece
Retouched piece, Type 26
Retouched piece, Type 28
Shell, Type 4
Shell, Type 6
Shell, Type 9
Shell, Type 10
Shell, Type 12
Shell, Type 14
Shell, Type 17
Bone, Type 1
Bone, Type 3

FIGURE 16

d

a

b

c

,
h

e

gl

9

f

t'
k

.

m

II

J

p

n

s

r

0

t
u v

41 JK 91 3x3 Unit
Level 7
-retouch
0
I
--wear

3
I

I

cm

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

114

Shell, Type 10 (Fig. 16q)
Length 2.7 cm., width 2.45 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
Macpocallista nimbosa, with ground bit or graver like pro­
jection.
Shell, Type 12 (Fig. 16r)
Length 3.45 cm., width 2.85 em., thickness 0.25 cm.

Macpocallista nimbosa.
Shell, 'fype 14 (Fig. 16s)
Length 2.7 cm., width 1.95 em., thickness 0.15 cm.
Freshwater mussel.
Two drilled holes; drilled from the ex­
terior to interior.
She 11, Ty pel 7 ( Fig. 16 t )
Length 1.8 em., width 1.1 cm., thickness 0.1 cm.
Ribbed mussel shell with a hole punched near the hinge from
interior to exterior.
Bone, Type 1 (Fig. 16u)
Length 8.1 cm., width 0.7 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
Bone splinter with ground edges.
A series of lines are incised
into the exterior surface of the bone, at a right angle to the
long axis.
Oval cross section.
Bone, Type 3 (Fig. 16v)
Length 9.9 cm., width 0.5 cm., thickness 0.5 cm.
Long bone splinter ground into round cross section.
awl or bone pin.

41 JK
Leve

91~

3 X 3

UNIT~

Possible

LEVELS 8 AND 9

l 8

Thin biface, projectile-dart (Abasolo) , Type 8 (Fig. 17a, aT)
Length 5.0 em., width 2.5 cm., thickness 0.8 em.
Fire popped.
Alternate beveled tip.
Bi-convex cross section.
Thin biface, projectile-dart, (Mapcos) , Type 8 (Fig. 17b)
Length 3.9 cm., width 2.6 em., thickness 0.7 em., length of
base 1.0 em., width at base 2.25 cm., width of shoulders 2.6 cm.
Interior piece.
Bi-convex cross section.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 22 (Fig. 17c)
Length 3.1 cm., width 2.8 em., th~ckness 0.5 'cm.
Secondary multi-facet platform flake.
Flake is hinged.
of retouch, 56°,

Angle

115

SITE 41 JK 91

,t

~

Retouched piece, lateral, Type 27 (Fig. 17d)
Length 2.6 cm., width 2.1 cm., thickness O.~ cm.
Interior chip~
Angle of retouch, 60°.
c·

Retouched piece, lateral, Type 27 (Fig. 17e)
Length 2.5 cm., width 2.5 cm., thickness 0.4 cm.
Hinged interior flake with multi-facet platform.
retouch, 59°.

Angle of

Retouched piece, distal, lateral, Type 29 (Fig. 17f)
Length 2.65.~m., width 2.15 cm., thickness 0.70 cm.
Interior single facet platform flake.
Angle of retouch, 60°.
Shell, Type 3 (Fig. 17g)
Lepgt:h 3.9 cm., width 4.4 cm., thickness 2.5 cm.
Rdngi'cl dunfifita.Exterior retouch.
Shell, Type 5 (Fig. 17h)
Length 10.95 cm., width 5.5 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
Cra8808trea virginiaa.
Exterior retouch.
Shell, Type 7 (Fig. 17i)
Length 7.85 cm., width 5.75 cm., thickness 0.6 cm.
Cra8808trea virginiaa.
Retouch is on the exterior surface.
Shell, Type 16 (Fig. 17j, jt)
Length 4.25 cm., width 2.8 cm., thickness 0.15 cm.
Dinoaarduim robuBtum.
Interior surface is covered with red
pigment.

Level 9
Thin bi f ace dart ,"type 8 (Fig. 17k)
Length 5.4 cm., width 2.45 cm., thickness 0.75 cm., length
of base 1.55 cm., width of base 1.7 cm., width of shoulders
2.4 cm.
Thin biface.
Bi-convex cross section.
Thin biface, Type 10 (Fig. 171,1')
Length 3.05 cm., width 3.9 cm., thickness 0.9 cm.
Bi-convex cross section.
Subsistence Economy
,

Ethnographically, plant food collecting is the primary means
of subsistence ~or hunters and gatherers in temperate environments.
Animal resources typically contribute less than 50% of the total
diet (Lee 1968: 43).
Within the 3 x 3 Unit, faunal debris was

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

116

FIGURE 17. Artifacts from 41 JK 91, 3 x 3 Unit
Levels 8, 9.

a-- a'
b
c
d - e
f
g
h
i
j
k

1

-

j ,

-

l'

Thin biface,(Aba80lo)~ Type 8
Thin biface, (MaY'(J08)~ Type 8
Retouched piece, Type 22
Retouched piece, Type 27
Retouched piece, Type 29
Shell, Type 3
Shell, Type 5
Shell, Type 7
Shell, Type 16
Thin biface dart, Type 8
Thin biface, Type 10

FIGURE 17

a

d

f

c

b

e

9
h

41JK91 3x3 Unit
Level 8
J

.I

J

Level 9

--retouch
--wear

o
I

k

3
I

I

I

em

118

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

preserved in excellent condition, but no plant remains were re­
covere~.
The effect of alteration of the cultural debris is that
probably one half or more of the subsistence base can not be view­
ed directly.
This is typical for most archeological sites.
If subsistence refuse in the 3 x 3 Unit represents the animal
portion of diet accurately the potential for understanding the
subsistence economy of the people(s) who created the eultu~al de­
posits would be greater than normal.
Factors which should be con­
sidered in assessing how reliably the archelolgical sample repre­
sents the original cultural deposit include, 1) the excavation and
analytic techniques, 2) the possibility of differential preserva­
tion, and 3) the natural deaths of animals living on the site.
The collection of fauna for non-subsistence purposes such as for
tool source material probably occurred but an examination of the
tool assemblage indicates it was probably insignificant as far as
raw number of individuals collected.
Excavation and analytical techniques have clearly created a
bias in the collected faunal sample.
Only small portions of natural
levels were exposed and excavated in the 3 x 3 Unit.
The excavated
portion of the natural levels is in one area, rather than dispersed
across the site.
Thus
the collected s
Ie of fauna could be in­
fluenced by spatIa vaT
i
ty w t
e site.
Types of faunal
debris remain fairly uniform throughout the time span represented
in the Unit.
The potential for such similarities to occur in a
small excavation unit at a site with weparate activity areas for
different aspects of faunal processing either through time or in
space is very low.
For these reasons it is concluded that faunal
debTis recovered in excavation is probably representative of the
entire sample of faunal debris in the deposits.
That, of course,
assumes the archeological collection method resulted in a sample
that was representative of the faunal material in the test area;
it did not •.
The archeological collection techniques resulted in a sample
which was comparable, but not totally representative. The collec­
tion technique involves two screens of 1/4-inch and 1/16-inch mesh,
which effectively divided the sample into two parts.
All soil
from the e~cavation was passed through both screens, with the
coarser material being recovered in the upper screen, and the finer
material in the lower.
The total collected sample from the upper
screen was analyzed before the present i~possibility of processing
the entire sample of matrix residue in the lower SCTeen was real­
ized (Appendix II).
Only a 10% sample of the fine matrix residue
was analyzed.
In preparing the charts of meat weight and minimum
number of individuals, the maximum value for either the fine or
coarse screen samples was utilized.
A bias created by the unequal
samples resulted in an underestimation of the importance of smaller
faunaLid~t~tmsaof total number and meat weight.
Differential preservation of faunal de~ris appears to be an
unimportant factor.
All bones recovered, including the fragile
parts of skulls, are in excellent condition.

.~

.

SITE 41 JK 91

119

The natural death of animals living on the site is a necessary
consideration.
Many of the rodent species are burrowing animals
and indeed some portion of the faunal debris recovered may have
resulted from the natUEa1 deaths of these animals in their bur­
rows.
It is believed, however, that the majority of the small
animal remains are present as a result of human subsistence activ­
ity.
In the 3 x 5 Unit, where faunal preservation is equally as
good as in the 3 x 3 Unit,· small burrowing animals make up a small­
er part of the assemblage and are less dens.ly distributed.
Billy
M. Davidson (Notes on file--Texas Archeological Research Labora­
tory) records a high incidence of rodent skulls but few long Dones
and there are more long bones and vertebrae than skulls per ii:uli'Ctfd­
ual; it was expected that rod~nt skulls would be less frequent.Nb
known natural process selects for skulls (in excellent condition)
over other rodent bones.
It is concluded that cultural activities
were the mechanism repoBsible for the deposition of rodent remains.
Upper Cluster: Levels 1, 2, and 3
In 75 species categories 791 individuals are recored (Appendix
II) Tab~es 18, 19).
A very diverse resource base is indicated.
Among the identified s~edies, Bangia clam (n = 252), ribbed mus­
sel (n = 25) and cotton rat tn = 29)
contibute the most individ­
uals per single species in the collected assemblage.
Gar and rat
snake each contribute 16 individuals.
The other species are re­
presented by less than 15 individuals (or less than 2% of the
total individuals).
As far as number of individuals collected the most inten­
sivelyexploited were the flood plain forest, riparian forest and
aquatic environments (Table 1).
It was in these three environ­
ments that it is presumed the most energy in col~ecting animal
food was expended because there the number of collected individ­
uals was greatest.
The bluff top forest also yielded quite a few
individuals.
Many of the recovered species h~d preferredJhabitat sw~ich~
crosscut defined biological zones.
Wht:le-,;..lu'1maay instances the
bluff top forest is a pren~rred habitat, along with riparian and/
or fi0~d plain forest, the bluff top forest was more often only
a tolerated habitat for the species reuovered.
Four hundred and ninety individuals are derived from aquatic
habitats.
Interestingly, brackish or saltwater environments are
better represented in the shellfish categories than expected.
Among the shellfish ten in4ividual~ with a freshwater habitat and
304 individuals with a brackish water or saltwater habitat were
observed.
Even if the individuals from Bangia aun~ata and P6lyme­
soda aaroliniana species (these CJ~n tolerate freshwater for short
periods) are re~oved fre~hwater shellfish still occur less fre­
quently than brackish or saltwater shellfish (10:38).
Fish species

120

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

that can be clearly assigned to a fresh or salt and brackish water
habitat again indicate a surprisingly high number of non-freshwater
species: 18 individuals ate from freshwater environments and 17 in­
dividuals are from salt or brackish water environments.
Small
terrestrial aquatic species (e~cept slider turtle, soft-shell tur­
tle and garter snake) have no tolerance or low tolerance for brack­
ish and saltwater environments.
A predominately freshwater habitat
is suggested by the small terrestrial aquatic species.
The split brackish and freshwater habitat indicated by the
fish and shellfish and the predominately freshwater habitats in­
dicated by small terrestrial aquatic species suggest that aquatic
environments near the site fluctuated from fresh to brackish water.
Rangia auneata and P8lymesoda aaroliniana which are brackish water
bivalves that tolerate very low salinity environments and that
when mature can exist in freshwater (Hopkins et al. 1973) are
represented by many individuals.
These species after implantation
shortly following bi~th, could be expected to remain in one location
year round.
Saltwater fish are less well represented in the sample
but could only be expected in habitats near the site when a saline
cobditien existed.
The upper levels of the 3 x 3 Unit indicate that during the
time of that midden deposition the percent breakdown of animal
weight in rough environmental categories was:
Aquatic
6.2%
n = 991.33 kl~
Small Terrestrial Aquatic
9.3%
Large Terrestrial Aquatic
.0.1%
Bmall Terrestrial
11.9%
Large Terrestrial
70.0%
Arboreal
C022%
Avian
2.2%
The estimated total animal weight in these categories indi­
cates that while most energy was apparently expended in collecting
smaller species, large terrestrial animals supplied the greatest
energy yield.
White tail deer, represented by six individuals, is
the common large terrestrial animal encountered.
The frequency of
deer possibly indicates exploitation of the prairie grassland en­
vironments.
The inter-riverine areas where prairie grassland once
stood contain many shrubs and for that reason are at present a pre­
ferred habitat for deer.
Historic evidence, however, indicates
that shrubs are a recent occurrence and that before Historic Euro­
pean times only grasses grew on the inter-riverine plains (Inglis
1964).
Deer prefer shrubs and forbs over grass (Davis and Winkley
1968: 329).
In prehistoric times the prairie grassland is expect­
ed to have been tolerated by deer populations which then would have
preferred forest areas (primarily bluff top forest).
The energy yield of species from the sample was dominated by
the single bison or cow individual which acicounted for 41.2% of
the total weight and by six deer individuals whose weight made up
27% of the total.
Other species with a high body weight contri­
bution were slider turtle, soft-shell turtle, and unidentified
turtle.

SITE 41 JK 91

121

In conclusion the animal resource base utilized for subsist­
ence was a diverse one.
Only five of the 75 identified species
contributed more than 15 to a total of 791 recognized animal in­
dividuals.
Most energy was apparently spent collecting small re­
sources in the flood plain and reparian forests.
A significant
amount of energy was spent exploiting the small fauna of the bluff
top forests and aquatic habitats.
The aquatic habitats evidently
fluctuated from fresh to brackish water environments.
Despite the
fact that most energy was expended collecting small fauna, large
terrestrial animals provided the highest energy yeild by body
weight (70.0%).
Turtle also was an important source of energy
yield.
Middle Cluster: Levels 4,5,6 and 7
The number of species represented decreased in the Middle
Clus t er to 67 (Appendi~II; _,!al'les 19 20.
The number of indi­
viduals increased to 1895.
The species best represented by num­
ber of individuals are: Rangia clam (n = 996), ribbed mussel (n =
204), carolina marsh clam (n = 46), maple leaf mussel (n = 31),
and sea trout (n = 6~).
The 62 additional species recognized in
these levels have less than 30 individuals (or less than two per­
cent of the total individuals).
The Middle Cluster contains fewer
recognized species than the Upper Cluster and in five species
categories fall 70% of the total individuals collected.
A less
diverse resource base than that recorded in the Upper Cluster is
indicated.
If the number of individuals represented is related to energy
expended in aboriginal collection then the most intensively ex­
ploited environment was the aquatic; there, 84.2% of" the total
number of individuals is derived.
The riparian forest biological
zone is pr<?pably the second most intensively exploited area.
A total of 1595 individuals are derived from aquatic habitats.
Brackish and saltwater environments are better represented in the
shellfish and fish categories than was expected.
Among the shell­
fish are 32 individuals with a freshwater habitat.
From a salt or
brackish water habitat 1275 individuals are recognized.
If brack­
ish shellfish individuals (Rangia auneata and PoZymesoda aa~oZini­
ana) which can tolerate a freshwater environment are removed from
the total then· freshwater shellfish still occur in the sample less
frequently than brackish or saltwater shellfish (32:233).
Fish
species which can be assigned without question to a fresh or saline
environment also indicate a high number of salt and brackish water
species:
13 individuals are from freshwater environments and 97
individuals are from salt or brackish water environments.
All
recovered small terrestrial aquatic species (143 individuals)
prefer freshwater and tolerate or prefer brackish water habitats.
The percent of turtle remains in the faunal assemblage increases
in the Middle Cluster over the assemblage from Levels I, 2 and 3.

122

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

A predominately brackish or freshwater environment is suggested by
the small terrestrial aquatic species.
Saline habitats are best represented by shellfish and fish re­
mains.
Fresh or brackish environments are indicated by small ter­
restrial aquatic species.
Freshwater havitats are indicated by the
presence of species restricted to that havitat.
It is suggested
that aquatic habitats at the time of midden accumulation in Levels
4, 5, 6 and 7 were brackish and occasionally, probably during per­
iods of high river discharge, freshwater.
During the time period represented by the middle levels of
the 3 x 3 Unit the percent breakdown, in rough environmental cate­
gories, for the body weight of animals exploited was:
Aquatic
15.6%
n==;7~31'.li kg.
Small Terrestrial Aquatic 37.2%
Large Terrestrial Aquatic
9.9%
Small Terrestrial
7.7%
Large Terrestrial
28.0%
Arboreal
0.1%
Avian
1.5%
The estimated total animal weight indicates that most energy
was expended collecting species from aquatic and small terrestrial
aquatic categories. 'Those species supplied the greatest energy
yield.
Large terrestrial species represented by four deer were im­
portant also but obviously less important than in the Upper Level1
of the site.
Aquatic related species account for 62.7% of the es­
timated total body weight of animals in the Middle Cluster.
No single species dominated the energy yield.
Species with a
high body weight contribution were: slider turtle, alligator, white
tail deer, Rangia clam, flounder, sea trout and eastern cottontail.
The animal resource base utilized for subsistence was one which
concentrated in the aquatic and riparian biological zones.
Despite
the fact that 67 species were identified, use of animal resources
was not as diverse as in the overlying levels; in the Middle Cluster
only five species had more than 30 individuals.
The five species
contrIbuted 1895 of the recognized individuals in the fauna.
Most
energy was apparently spent collecting small animals.
Small
fauna provided the highest energy yield by Hody weight.
Lower Clusters: Levels 8 and 9
The number of species decreased and the number of indivi uals
.
51 s p e c i esc at ego r i e s ,
individuals are recorded (Appendix II; Table 22).
The species
best represented by number of individuals are: Rangia clam (n =
1713), ribbed mussel (n = 79), carolina marsh clam (n = 79), and
sea trout (n = 50).
The additional 263 individuals identified in
these levels have less than 30 individuals (about 2% of the total
number).
A less diverse resource base than that recorded in either
the Upper or Middle Clusters is indicated.
In the lower levels

Trier e as e d i n t h e ~L ower c1 u s t e r

123

SITE 41JK 91

88% of the total number of individuals collected are in four species
categories.
If the number of individuals represented in species categories
is related to energy expended by man collecting animal resources
then the most intensively exploited environment was aquatic.
Water environments produced 94.6% of the tothl number of individ­
uals identified.
Aquatic habitats contribute 2Ob5 individuals.
Brackisn~a~
s~ltwater environments are w~ll represented in the shellfish and
fish categories.
Twenty one of the recovered shellfish are from
a freshwater habitat.
Salt or brackish water habitats are repre-_
sented by 1895 individuals . I f the Rangia auneataand Po Zymesoda
aaroliniana brackish water species which can tolerate a freshwater
environment, are removed from the total, freshwater shellfish
still occur less frequently than brackish or saltwater shellfish
(21:100).
Fish species which can be clearly attributed to a fresh
or saline aquatic environment also indicate a high number of salt
and brackish water species: 8 individuals are from freshwater
environments and 87 individuals from salt or brackish water en­
vironments.
Small terrestrial aquatic species recovered total 43
individuals all of which prefer freshwater environments and tol­
erate or prefer brackish water environments.
Predominately saline habitats are indicated by shellfish and
fish.
A fresh or brackish environment is indicated by small ter­
restrial aquatic species.
The freshwater hahitats are indicated
by the presence of species restricted to that environment.
It is
suggested that the aquatic environment near the site at the time
of midden accretion in levels 8 and 9 was brackish and occasion­
ally, probably during periods of high river discharge, freshwater.
The lower levels of the 3 x 3 Unit indicated that during that
period of midden deposition the percent breakdown of the body
weight of animals exploited in rough environmental categories was:
Aquatic
15.6%
n = 796;82 kg.
Small Terrestrial Aquatic
7.8%
Large Terrestrial Aquatic ~O.O%
Small Terrestrial
~3~4%
Large Terrestrial
72.3%
Arboreal
0.0%
Avian
0.9%
The estimated total animal weight indicates that while the
most energy was expended in collecting aquatic and small terrest­
rial aquatic species the greatest energy yield was derived from
the large terrestrial species.
Five individuals (including one
coyote, three white tail deer and one bison) accounted for 72.3%
of the total estimated body weight of recovered individuals in
the clustered Levels 8 and 9.
The animal resource base utilized for subsistence was one
which concentrated in the aquatic and riparian biological zones.
Fifty one species were identified but only four types of animals
contributed the greatest number of individuals to the total.
The
m

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

124

use of animal resources is not considered as diverse as that repre­
sented in overlying levels.
Most energy was apparently spent col­
lecting small animals from water related environments.
The great­
est energy yield was however derived from large terrestrial species .

.;;;....:c..;;.;...;:--,-",,-

of Occupation

Seasonal data indicates that occupation during periods repre­
sented by levels in the 3 x 3 Unit consistently occurred at the
same times of the year.
As the clustered and individual levels
show a relatively uniform seasonality they are generally, rather
than specifically, discussed in this text.
Information by level
on seasonal species may be found in Appendix II and Appendix V.
Periods of the year that species are present, absent or rarely
present are indicated in Table 1.
Analysis of Rangia clam valves (Appendix V) indicates that a
spring collection season for that shellfish prevailed throughout
the period represented by levels in the 3 x 3 Unit.
The aboriginal
collection of this clam was apparently restricted to the months of
April and May and within a 45 day period.
Seasonal species other than Rangia auneata indicate that the
season of occupation at the site was predominately during the
spring, summer and fall months.
Table 3. Representation of Seasonal Species Other Than Rangia
auneata; 3 x 3 Unit
SEASON(S)
Fall, Winter,
Spring
Winter
Spring, Summer
Spring, Summer,
Fall
Fall
Total Number
Individuals

v_

UPPER CLUSTER

MIDDLE CLUSTER

LOWER CLUSTER

1. 3%
0.4
1. 3'

2.4%
0.5
1.0

2.3%
',OOO/c
C' OOO~'

"

c:

-'

86.6
10.5
238

59.5'
36. 7 .
210

"

59.5'
38.2.
173

A significant difference in seasonal fauna other than Rangia
clam occurs between the Upper Cluster and Middle and Lower Clusters.
The Middle and Lower Clusters show a higher percentage of fall
seasonal indiyidu~l~ than the Upper Cluster.
That difference is
unquestionably the result of increased numbers of sea trout (Ap­
pendix II; Tables 20, 21).
Sea trout are present infrequently in
the Upper levels.
In the levels below the Upper Cluster sea trout

SITE 41 JK 91

125

individuals increase to such numbers that it is difficult to ex­
plain their collection in any season but the fall when schools of
that fish migrate to the heads of bays.
The season for collecting Rangia clam remains consistent
through time.
There are many individuals of sea trout in lower
levels of the 3 x 3 Unit and few individuals of sea trout from the
upper levels.
About 90% of the fish species in the Middle and
Lower Clusters are from salt and brackish water habitats.
In the
Upper Cluster only about 70% of the fish species are from salt­
water environments.
Under these conditions it seems possible that
the low frequency of sea trout in the Upper Cluster is related to
a change to less saline aquatic conditions in the vicinity of the
site, rather than alterations in the aboriginal seasonal use of
the locality.
The season of occupation during the deposition of levels with­
in the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 was, without detected change, during
the spring and fall months.
Seasonality studies of Rangia cuneata
valves indicate a collecting season in late April and early May.
A high number of sea trout individuals indicate a fall seasonality.
Rangia, which would be accessible on a year round basis were
not exploited other than the spring months.
At present no expla­
nation is suggested.
Probably, until more information is collected,
attempts at explaining why Rangia were collected only during the
spring would be useless.
THE 3 X 5 UNIT
Stratigraphy
Zone Vc: Depth 0-20 cm., thickness 20 cm., range 18-25 cm.;
very dark grayish brown (lOYR 3/2) loam, dark gray
(lOYR 4/1) dry; no mottling; weak medium angular
blocky structure breaking to weak fine crumb struc­
ture; slightly hard, friable, slightly sticky, ~~,
slightly piastic; very slightly effervescent reaction
with HCl; non-cemented; no concretions except as a
result of biological activity; few very fine and
fine roots, plentiful medium and few coarse roots;
pH undetermined; organic matter not assessed; cul­
tural material from late in the Late Prehistoric
period (~one Vc deposits post-date the cultural
material in Levell of the 3 x 3 Unit) occurs in the
Zone.
Zone Vc is continuous in the 3 x 5 Unit and
has an abrupt, wavy boundary to:
Zone Vd: Depth 20-50+ cm.; dark brown (lOYR 3.2/5) fine sandy
loam, dark brown (lOYR 4/3) dry; no mottles; very

126

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

weak medium angular blocky to massive structure; saft,
very friable, non-sticky, non-plastic; strongly to
violently effervescent reaction with HCl; non-cement­
ed; angular, subangular, and subrounded granule and
~ebble size calcium carbonate concretions a~e few,
less than 5 per 10 cm 2 • of surface area; few fine
and very fine, plentiful medium and few coarse roots;
pH not assessed.
The zone contains a very few round­
ed and subangular quartz l feldspar and chert granules.
Cultural material is of a Late Prehistoric age.
In
the 3 x 5 Unit this zone is badly disturbed by rodent
activity.
Artifact Discussion
f

Excavation of the 3 x 3 Unit sampled Zone Vd.
In place cul­
tural deposits also occurred in Zone Vc.
That zone is above an
erosion dis conformity associated with a filled channel in the val­
ley of an ephemeral stream to the east of the site (Fig. 4).
The
3 x 5 Unit was excavated to collect cultural material from Zone Vc.
Excavation in the 3 x 5 Unit extended into Zone Vd.
Zone Vd in
the area beneath the 3 x 5 Unit has been much disturbed by rodent
activity and cultural relationships are unclear.
Zone Vc deposits
occurred in the upper 20 cm. of excavation and had been less severe­
ly affected by biological churning.
The discussion which follows examines the excavated materials
from the 3 x 5 Unit through grouping of levels.
The upper portion,
including from 0 to 20 cm. below the surface and confined to Zone
Vd, is the first division.
The lower portion of excavation, in­
cluding the levels from 20 to 50 cm. and confined with Zone Vd, is
the second~divimion.
Though the lower portion of the 3 x 5 Unit will be discussed,
the small sample of cultural debris derived from those levels en­
ables little inference concerning them.
In addition and as stated
earlier, the ~ntactness of the Zone Vd deposits in the 3 x 5 Unit
was poor; much mixing has occurred.
Upper Levels: 0-20 Centimeters
Artifacts from Zone Vc that apparently had been used for func­
tional purposes included no bone or shell tools.
The percentage
breakdown of artifacts with indications of use is:

SITE 41 JK 91

127

n
67
1.5%
Cores
16.5%
Bifaces
28.4%
Retouched pieces
53.7%
Ceramics
0.0%
Shell tools
Bone tools
-O~O%
The upper levels in the 3 x 5 Unit are stratigraphically high­
er than sediments of recognized Late Prehistoric age in the 3 x 3
Unit.
~o artifacts or materials which could be attributed to
either the Historic European or Historic Aboriginal periods were
found.
Bifaces that resemble artifacts generally recognized as
projectile p~ints are all fragmentary (Fig. 19; ~, d~ e, f, g, h,
and hi) but their plano-convex cross section, size, and sh~pe lend
credibility to the possibility that they are of the Pepdiz or AZba
types (Sdhm and Jelks 1962).
Cultural debris from the upper levels
of the 3 x 5 Unit probably post-date European contact and, although
they are later in age than manifestations in the 3 x 3 Unit, they
probably date to the Late Prehistoric period.
The most common variety of biface (60%) is thin, has a plano­
convex cross section, and no evidence of wear. ~Seventy ~erfent of
the bifaces have wear present. in the form of smoothing and polish­
ing.
Retouched pieces collected in the upper levels are usually
chipped on their lateral edges.
The most common types are: 1) lat­
eral retouch on thin interior piece with wear present, 2) lateral
retouch on a thick secondary piece with wear present, and 3) thick
interior pieces with combined lateral and distal retouch, also
with wear.
All sherds recovered from the upper levels of the 3 x 5 Unit
(n = 36) are bone tempered and have fine and medium size sandy
paste.
A minimum of five vessels are represented by the collected
sherds (Appendix I).
The assemblage of tools recovered in the upper portions of
the 3 x 5 Unit relate poorly with excavated assemblages elsewhere
in the reservoir.
It is believed that the differences between
these assemblages is the result of a difference in cultural pro­
cesses and not post-depositional alteration of the eultural de­
posits.
Many durable aspects of the archeological deposits are
distinctly differnt from tested areas elsewhere.
Six hundred and thirty-seven flakes and chips from the upper
levtls were analyzed to determine their sequence of removal from
cores.
Lithic debris from these levels is 3.5% primary, 19.2%
secondary, and 77.4% interior.
In this respect the upper levels
of the 3 x 5 Unit are similar to other areas tested during the
1974 season.
Flakes which retained a striking platform and bulb of per­
cussion were analyzed for type of platform preparation.
The per­
centage breakdown for platform type is:

128

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

natural platform
18.1%
n = 155
single facet platform
38.8%
multiple facet platform 36.1%
crushed platform
7.1%
A minimum of 117 flakes were complete enough to be analyzed
for metric characteristics (length, shape, and thickness).
The
length and thickness dimensions of flakes from the upper levels of
the 3 x 5 Unit are unlike those found in other intact tested areas.
The flakes have a mean length of 1.8008 cm., similar to that at the
disturbed site 41 JK 50; and a standard deviation (sd = 1.0204)
that is similar to that at the disturbed site 41 JK 16.
Shape is
dominabed by the divergent category (46%), as is usual for assem­
blages elsewhere in the reservoir.
Flakes have a mean thickness
(x = 0.3504) that is unlike that found in any other tested area.
41 JK 50 and 41 JK 16 have a mean thickness which is quite ahbit
longer than that observed in the upper levels of the 3 x 5 Unit.
The standard deviation for thickness (sd = 0.2261) is similar to
the lower levels at the Atkinson I£te, 41 JK 41.
Lower Levels: 20-50 Centimeters
The Lower levels (20-50 em.) of the 3 x 5 Unit contained a
total of 19 items which are believed to have been utilized.
Lithic
tools recovered ipcluded two cores, one biface, and 13 retouched
pieces.
Three sherds from a single sandy paste vessel were also
found.
Retouched pieces are often flaked on their distal edges.
The
most common type is: thick, on a secondary flake or chip, and has
distal retouch with wear.
The 120 flakes and chips from the Zone Vd portion of the 3 x 5
Unit excavations are 8.3% primary, 32.5% secondary, and 59.2% in­
erior.
Forty-five pieces of lithic debris retained striking platforms
and bulbs of percussion.
These were analyzed for type of platform
preparation.
The percentage breakdown of platform type is:
natural platform
24.4%
n = 45
single facet platform
37.8%
multiple facet platform 37.8%
crushed platform
0.0%

FIGURE 18

%
50

Length
40

FLAKE

0-20 em.
n=120
x=1.8008
sd=1.0204

{\

\

I

JK 91

3x 5 M. UNIT

20-50 em.
n;; 38
ii.=1.6223
sd=0.6501

30
I

41

DIMENSIONS

\

\
\
\

20

10

0
0

.4

.8

1.2

1.6

2.0

2.4

2.8

3.2

4.4

4.0

3.6

4.8

5.2 em

%

70

Shope"
60

0- 20 em.
n 117
20 - 50 em.
n=43
%

50

50

Thickness
0-20cm.
n= 122
x=0.3504
sd=0.2261
20-50 em.
n=44
R=0.33IS
sd=O.IS97

40

40

\
f

\
\

I

30

30

\

I

I

I

\

I
I

\

20

20

o

.. Plot mode continuous os a visual oid

change the curve shope.

.15

.30

.45

.60

.75

.90

1.05

1.20

1.35

1.50 em

derived from histogram of discrete types. RearderinIJ of types would

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

130

Artifact Descriptions

41 JK 91, 3 X 5 UNIT, UPPER CLUSTER
Core, mu1ti~faeetr~latform, tool, Type 2 (Fig. 19a)
Length 4.8 cm., width 5.2 cm., thickness 4.1 cm.
Many hinged flake scars at utilized edge on round cobble.
Th~n

biface, Type 4 (Fig. 19b, b l )
Length 3.2 cm., width 2.1 cm., thickness 0.4 cm.
Plano-convex cross~Bec~ion.
Thin biface, projectile-arrow, (Perdiz .or Scallorn) , Type 4
(Fig. 19c)
Length 2.5 cm., width 1.95 cm., thickness 0.2 cm., width at
shoulders 1.95 cm.
Plano-convex cross section.
Thin biface, projectile-arrow, Type 6 (Fig. 19d)
Length 2.2cm., sidth 1.8 cm., thickness 0.25 cm.,width at
shoulders 1.B cm.
Plano-convex cross section.
Serrated edges.
S~em may have
been contracting.
Thin biface, projectile-arrow, Type 6 (Fig. 1ge)
Length 1.5 cm., width 1.6 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
Plano-convex cross section.
Thin biface, projectile-arrow, Type 6 (Fig. 19f)
Length 0.95 cm., width 1.7 cm., thickness 0.2 cm.
Plano-convex cross section.
Retouched piece, projectile-arrow, Type 6 (Fig. 199)
Length 1.4 cm., width 0.7 cm., thickness 0.35 cm., length
of base 0.6 cm., width of base 0.6 cm., width of shoulders
0.6 cm.
Wedge shaped base.
Plano-convex cross section.
Thin biface, projectile-arrow, Type 6 (Fig. 19h, hI)
Length 2.0 cm., width 1.55 cm., thickness 0.25 cm.
Plano-convex cross section.
Preform?
Thin biface, projectileTarrowi Type 6 (Fig. 19i, ill
Length 3.4 cm., width 1.7 cm., thickness 0.5 cm.
Plano-convex cross section.
Preform?
Thin biface, Type 7(Fig~ 19j)
Length 2.8 cm., width 2.9 cm., thickness 0.4 cm.
Broken; bi-convex cross section.

SITE 41 JK 91

131

Retouched piece, laterai, Type 17 (Fig. 19k)
Length 2.0 cm., width 2.6 cm., thickness 0.3 cm.
Interior chip.
Angle of retouch, 48°.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 17 (Fig. 191, 11)
Length 3.5 cm., width L.O cm., thickness 0.25 cm.
Interior chip.
Angle of retouch, 45°.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 22 (Fig. 19m)
Length 3.6 cm., width 1.4 cm., thickness 0.5 cm.
Secondary natural platform flake, arched interior surface.
Angle of retouch 49°.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 22 (Fig. 19n)
Length 6.9 cm., width 3.1 cm., thickness 0.85cm.
Secondary chip with arched interior surface near distal end
of mother flake.
Generally planular elsewhere.
Angle of
retouch, 50°.
Retouched piece, lateral, distal, Type 29 (Fig. 190)
Length 3.3 cm., width 2.55 cm., thickness 0.35 cm.
Interior flake with single facet platform.
Angle of
retouch, 36°.
Retouched piece, distal, Type 31 (Fig. 19p)
Length 2.7 cm., width 2.4 cm., thickness 0.5 cm.
Interior flake with natural platform.
Planular interior
surface.
Angle of retouch, 72°.
Retouched piece, lateral, distal, Type 31 (Fig. 19q, q')
Length 4.75 cm., width 2.1 cm., thickness 0.65 cm.
Interior flake with single facet platform. Angle of retouch,
43-50°.
Retouched piece, lateral, Type 26 (Fig. 19r)
Length 6.0 cm., width 2.9 cm., thickness 0.8 cm.
Secondary single facet platform flake.
Angle of retouch, 25°.
Retouched piece, lateral, distal, Type 29 (Fig. 198)
Length 4.8 cm., width 2.3 cm., thickness O.65cm.
Interior chip, angle of retouch, distal 66°, lateral 40°.
Subsistence,Economy~

The upper portion of the 3 x 5 Unit has faunal de~ris well
preserved and, as in the 3 x 3 Unit, no identified plant remains.
The lower levels of the 3 x 5 Unit contained no plant or animal
remains and are not included in this discussion.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

132

FIGURE 19.

a
b - c
d
f

-

g

h - i '
j
k

1
m

-

l'
n

-

q'

0

p
r
s

Artifacts from 41 JK 91, 3 x 5 Unit
Upper Cluster.
Core, Type 2
Thin biface, Type 4
Thin biface, Type 6
Retouched piece, Type
Thin biface, Type 6
Thin biface, Type 7
Retouched piece, Type
Retouched piece, Type
Retouched piece, Type
Retouched piece, Type
Retouched piece, Type
Retouched piece, Type
Retouched piece, Type

6
17
17
22
29
31
26
29

FIGURE

a

•

Ae

c

b

t9

f

d

h

.
I

J

k

,

m

p

0

q

41 JK 91 3x5 Unit
Upper Cluster
retouch
---wear
0
3

I

s

r

s'

I

I

I

cm

19

134

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

As the animal portion of the diet is apparently equally repre­
sented in the upper levels of the 3 x 5 Unit and in the 3 x 3 Unit
it is possible to compare faunal data from the two units on the
same basis.
Faunal debris from the unit is derived from the top 30 cm.
There, 19 species and 76 individual~ are record~d{~AppeddixLll,
Table 17).
The least diverse resource base represented by exca-'­
vated levels in the site is indicated.
Among the identified species
Rangia clam (n = 31), gar (n - 3), slider turtle (n = 3), soft­
shell turtle (n = 3), rat snake (n = 4), cotton rat (n = 3), and
white tail deer (n = 4) contribute the most individuals per species
in the collected assemblage.
The other 12 species identified are
represented by less than two individuals (or less than 2% of the
total individuals).
By number of individuals collected the most intensively ex­
ploited environments were the aquatic and riparian forest biolog­
ical zones (Table 1).
If the number of individuals represented is
related to energy expended by aboriginals in collecting then these
zones were very important in the aboriginal subsistence pattern re­
presented by the deposits.
Large and small terrestrial animals
from the bluff top forest and prairie grassland seem also to re­
present a significant energy investment.
The percentage of large
terrestrial animals (6.6% of the total individuals) is consider­
ably higher than in the 3 x 3 Unit cluster.
Forty-four individuals are derived from aquatic habitats.
Out of 34 shellfish individuals only one is from a freshwater hab­
itat.
However, if Rangia auneata, a species which tolerates a
freshwater environment, is removed, the difference in percentage
between fresh and salt water shellfish becomes unimportant (one
freshwater individual, two salt water individuals).
Fish species
which can be assigned without question to a fresh or a saline en­
vironment indicate a higher number of fre~hwater individuals (S:l).
A slightly brackish water environment near the site is indicated by
the types and number of individuals from the 3 x 5 Unit.
During the time of that midden deposition in the upper levels
of the 3 x 5 Unit the use of meat weight from animals in rough en­
vironmental categories was:
Aquatic
0.98% n =6679.15 kg.
Small Terrestrial Aquatic
4.65%
Large Terrestrial Aquatic
0.00%
Small Terrestrial
1.33%
Large Terrestrial
93.04%
Arboreal
0.00%
Avian
0.00%
The estimated total animal weight in these categories indi­
cates that while a good deal of energy was expended in collecting
smaller species from aquatic and riparian forest environments,
large terrestrial animals from the prairie grassland and bluff top
forest supplied the greatest energy yield.
In conclusion the animal resource base utilized for subsistence

135

SITE 41 JK 91

was considerably less diverse than that used during the earlier
times represented by midden deposits of the 3 x 3 Unit.
In the
3 x 5 Unit six of twelve identified species contributed 67% of
the total recoved individuals.
Energy spent exploiting animal re­
sources was apparently divided between aquatic and terrestrial en­
vironments.
The highest energy yield by body weight was derived
from large terrestrial species (93.04%) .

. c;

Season of

-

Many of the 31 individuals of Rangia2clam had been burned so
their valves were fragmentary.
The sample of ~alves amenable for
the examination of growth rings was insufficient.
The season of
aboriginal collection of Rangia auneata could not be assessed.
Seasonal species other than Rangia auneata allow the inference
that the season of occupation at the site was probably sometime
duting the spring, summer or fall months.
A winter occupation is
not clearly indicated.

Occupational features are of minor importance in satisfying
the goals for the 1974 season because they complicate natural
stratigraphy.
When encountered however, features were carefully
described.
It apparently will be impossible to return to the Venom Hill
Site for future research in which analysis of features will take
on a greater importance.
In the interest of future research
problems and to supply a more firm basis for understanin~ the
character of this particlular site brief descriptions of occupa­
tional features are provided below.
Feature 1
The burial of a single individual encountered during the ex­
cavation of Backhoe Trench Number One and at 1.4 m. below the pre­
sent surface was labeled Feature 1.
Two 1 x 1 square meter areas,
The F-l Unit (Fig. 10), were excavated to expose the burial.
The
burial pit was recognized immediately beneath the interment, but
rodent disturbance prevented recognition of the surface of pit
origin.
The burial is tightly ~lexed, oriented north-south and
facing east.
Associated with the burial in the chest region are
one yellow sand shell mussel (LampsiZis anodontoides anodontoides)
and two eastern oyster (Cpassostpea vipginiaa) valves.
All valves
are from different individuals and exhibit wear on their distal

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

136

Biological activity had
edges.
The bones were friable when dry.
disturbed the positioning of the smaller pieces: teeth presumably
originating from Feature 1 were found in rodent burrows 30 cm. above
the bottom of the pit.
Feature 2
Feature 2 is a hearth disturbed by the excavation of Backhoe
Trenches One and Two.
What remains of the feature is in the north­
east corner of the 3 x 3 Unit (Figs. 10, 11).
It occurs near the
bottom of Level 7~Jn that unit.
Hearth stones ar~ subangular and
subrounded medium size cobbles (4 to l8~m. in diametei}that appar­
ently had been arraigned as a lining in a circular basin.
Burned
bone, shell and clay were found in the hearth; a small incised
bone was in association (Fig. ~6u).
There was no visible color
difference between the hearth fill and the matrix in Level 7.
Lump
charcoal collected from Feature 2 was assayed at 2,300± 90 B.P.
with a 5568 half life (TX-2124, Valastro Manuscript in prepara­
tion) .
Feature 3
Faunal debris was concentrated in an estimated 60 cm. diam­
eter, 8 cm. deep pit.
Fill in the pit included fragments of tur­
tle carapace, white tail deer long bones (Odoeoileous virginiea)
and bison/cow long bones (Bison bison/Bos tarus).
The feature was
recorded on the east wall of Backhoe Trench Two.
There was no ex­
cavation to expose the feature but it is apparently associated
with Levell as described for the 3 x 3 Unit.
It is intrusive into
Level 2 as described for the 3 x 3 Unit.
Feature 4
In the west wall of Backhoe Trench Two about 5 meters south
of the 3 x 3 Unit (Fig. 10) is a feature consisting of sandstone
spalls, Rangia, turtle bone and snail shells.
It was identified
upon cleaning the backhoe trench wall.
The orientation of the
sandstone spalls was suggestive of a hearth or pit although no
charcoal was found nor could the bottom of the feature be traced.
The fill in the feature has a clear boundary over the underlying
stratum on the basis of color.
The fill is a silt loam or very
fine sandy loam, lOYR 2/2.
Sediments below the pit are lighter in
color.
The origin and purpose of the feature were undetermined.
There was no excavation beyond the initial exposure by the backhoe.

SITE 41 JK 91

137

Feature 5
Located in the north wall and at the west end of Backhoe
Trench Three is a basin shaped, sandstone slab lined hearth.
The sandstone utilized for hearth stones is apparently derived
locally from Zone II deposits; they are of medium to large cobble
size.
The pit!fill contains about 30% burned clay.
The fill sur­
rounding the feature exhibits little evidence of occupation.
The
feature was left intact as a tree was growing directly over it.
Feature 5 appears to be related in type and style with Feature 7.
It apparently originates at the top of Zone Vd.
Feature 6
A line of rocks and other cultural debris was identified
resting on a nearly flat surface.
The feature is exposed in the
south wall and at the west end of Backhoe Trench Three (Fig. 10)
and at an elevation of 7.66 m.s.l.
Large rodent burrows occur
both above and below the feature.
There is no color change obse~v­
able and no charcoal in association.
Fea ure 7
Feature 7 is a hearth encountered during the excavation of
Backhoe Trench Three.
What remained was in the north wall of that
trench.
Two 1 x 1 meter squares labeled the F-7 Unit were exca­
vated to expose the feature which was basin shaped and sandstone
slab lined.
The sandstone utilized for hearth stones is apparently
derived from Zone II deposits; they are of medium to large cobble
size.
Pit fill is composed of about 25% burned clay nodules and
is distinctly darker in color than surrounding sediments.
Excavat
tion of the F-7 Unit revealed that the feature had been bisected by
the backhoe trench.
It was a basin shaped hearth approximately 75
cm. in diameter and 25 cm. deep.
It apparently 0~iginates at the
tOp of Zone Vd.
{

Feature 8
A dark lens identified in the north wall of Backhoe Trench
Number Three was thought to be an occupational feature.
However,
excavation of two 1 x 1 meter squares, the F-8 Unit, located no
cu~tural material and indicated that the feature had a non-human
origin.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

138

Feature 9
An Historic European period trench which contains artifacts
contemporary with the Texana occupation has~baeBntraced.
It pass­
es through the south end of Backhoe Trench Number Five, directly
over Feature Three in Backhoe Trench Number Two, through the F-l
Unit and finally through Backhoe Trenches Three and Four (Fig. 10).
The trench is 88 cm.or approximately 3 feet wide and it seems to
follow a contour around the site area.
The vase of the trench is
rather consistently between 7.95 and 8.0 meters m.s.l. over the 45
meters it was traced.
Where it is best preserved the trench is 50
cm. deep.
Charcoal seemS to be a major constituent in the lower f
fill of the trench and a second layer of fill has a high plaster
content.
Feature 9 may be related to a similar trench observed in
the profile of the north-south backhoe trench at the Hawk Perch
Site, 41 JK 147.
Feature 10
A circular hearth encountered during the excavation of the
3 x 3 Unit at the top of Level Two.
The diameter of the hearth is
50 cm. and it is a shallow 15 cm. deep basin.
A burned flake, Ran­
gia (Rangia euneata) valve and biface were found in the pit fill
with small amounts of charcoal.
Hearth stones are angular calcium
carbonate concretions which are primarily pebble (1-6 cm. in dia­
meter size).
There are also a few hearth stones that are small
cobble in size (6-10 cm. in diameter).
Charcoal was collected
when the feature was ~xcavated but the sample was too small for
radio-carbon dating.
Feature 11
Near the bottom of Level Seven in the 3 x 3 Unit and damaged
by the excavation of Backhoe Trench Number Five is a possible
hearth.
A circular concentration of small cobble size (6-10 cm.
in diameter) calcium carbonate concretions resting on a flat sur­
face was encountered.
A few flecks of charcoal and some burned
turtle bone were found within the feature.
The approximate dia­
meter of the feature is 80 cm.
Disturbance resulting from tree
roots was severe.
Feature 12
During the excavation of the 3 x 3 Unit
of faunal material was noted in LevelS and,
out, following the top of Level 7.
Included
several crushed turtle carapaces; because of

a dense concentration
when LevelS wedged
in the debris were
the great smount of

SITE 41 JK :91

139

turtle bone and in particular the crushed carapaces, a feature num­
ber was assigned.
There was the possibility that the concentration
represented a single event.
Three nearly complete carapace~ weTe
recognized.

Feature 13
The f e at u r e .. was.: f i1:'s t re cogllliz ed" as' at: d:ark;: !3t a;inc. 1:1 ti,th ee cnn ta c t
between Zone V and Zone IV.
The stain intruded into Zone IVcsedi­
ments.
The feature resembles tree root disturbance observed else­
where on the site.
No indication that it was a cultural feature
could be found.
Feature 14
Feature 14 is a possible hearth.
A single layer of cobble
size (6-10 cm. in diameter) calcium carbonate concretions was en­
countered at the bottom of Level 8 during the excavation of the
3 x 3 Unit.
Charcoal was present in the matrix surround~ng the
feature but in such small quantities that the sample was insuffi­
cient for radiocarbon"dating.
The concretions delineate a cir­
cular area 55 cm. in diameter.

Feature 15

Rangia cuneata valves occurred on what appeared to be an
erosional surface near the top of Level 9 in the 3 x 3 Unit.
The
shells were on a slope that dropped 25 cm. in elevation over a
meter distance.
Most shells were accumulated at the bottom of the
slope.
Valve position, as far as what side is up, was apparently
random.
Feature 16
A circular hearth encounaered~ddri.ggth~ eKeawat16n~of:th~~
3 x 5 Unit.
The level the feature is located in is in Zone Vd and
probably can be related to Level 2 in the 3 x 3 Unit.
Feature 10
is 50 cm. in diameter.
Observed depth of the basin is a shallow
5 cm.
Two bone fragments and a flint flake were in association.
Charcoal is absent.
Hearth stones are angular, calcium carbonate
con c re t i on s 1:;wlid: h ha al; e,' p tima t'i;ty ppab Dil.; e, s i Ii!! e (1~6 ,:cm. in d iame t et) .
One cobble size stone was included (10 cm. in diameter).

140

SITE DESCRIPTION AND ANALYSIS

INTERPRETATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
Two zones, Vd and Vc, with in place prehistoric cultural ref­
use were tested to discern what changes, if any, had occurred in
the activities of inhabitants at the site during the periods of
occupation.
It was hoped that observed differences and similar­
ities at the Venom Hill Site could eventually, via a complex of
likenesses with other localities, contribute to a chronology of
cultural vaLiation.
Initially, however, data recovered from exca­
vations at 41 JK 91 will be used to test the propositions developed
in this text from the ethnographic and ar~heologic backgrounds.
The 3 x 3 Unit at the site sampled Zone Vd deposits.
A cul­
tural sequence from the middle or late, Middle-Prehistoric (Lower
Cluster) to the Late Prehistoric (Upper Cluster) periods is docu­
mented by artifacts which are comparable typologically with tools
of known time significance in other areas.
Tools were sorted by a non-functional typology (Appendix I).
The differences which defined the three clusters of levels in the
unit probably represent technological rather than cultural changes.
The subsistence economy and seasonality of occupation remain con­
sistently similar throughout the time represented.
Changes in
economy and activity that are observed apparently are, in part,
the result of environmental change.
Based upon the percent of in­
dividuals in species restricted to freshwater habitats (Table 4)
the Upper Cluster levels were deposited during a period when aquatic
environments in the area near the site were less saline than during
the deposition of levels in the Middle and Lower Clusters.
Appar­
ently in conjunction with a shift ot a fresher water environment,
a flake-blade technology replaced a core-biface technology.
The
changes observed in technology and in tool type occurred slowly
rather than abruptly.
With only the information from the clustered levels it is dif­
ficult to determine the nature of observed differences in the arch­
eological deposits.
The differences may be the result of changes
in the technology used by groups or simply of a shift in the lo­
cation of adaptive technique as a result of the movement downstream
of environmental boundaries.
Evidence from elsewhere in the coast­
al area (see archeological background) suggest that a change in
technology rather than a shift in the location of adaptive tech­
niques occurred.
The Middle Cluster has no clearly dominate tool types.
The
Upper and Lower Clusters each have distinctively high percents of
particular tool types.
In the Upper Cluster the most common tool
type is small interior lithic piece with distal retouch and wear.
In the Lower Cluster bi-convex bifaces with wear present and, dis­
tally retouched Bangia ~alves have distinctively high percentages.
One half ot more of the subsistence base (plant food) is un­
represented in the archeological deposits of the 3 x 3 Unit.
The
animal portion of the diet remains visible and is excellently pre­

SITE 41 JK 91

141

Table 4. Percent of Individuals in Species Restricted to
Freshwater Habitats.
(",

-""

ALL SHELLFISH

SHELLFISH WITHOUT RANGIA
AND CAROEINAiMARSH CLIiMS

'

,j.,I

'.-t! "

I::!

.

::;. S

tJ
If"'l
Q
~<n

.-,

,

Fresh
Harine

mo Total n
~

75.0%
25/0
4

2.9%
97.11:
34

~33:~3%

66.6%
3

'-,

"

'"'

Q)

"

i-l

,j.,I

til

-rl :;

I::!r-I
::;'U

"

M

'"

Q)

~

("')13

u

Fresh
Harine

3.2%
96.8%

Total n

35

Fresh
Harine

11.8%
88.2,

314

20.8%
79.2 ,
48

ILl
Ql

,

-Ill
,j.,I

III
$:l

~~

I::!U

::;.

2.5%
97.5!u

!Ill
Mr"ll

12.1%
87.9;;

-­

"t:I

t4"1D
,~

m~

",

110

1275

265

'QI"'
,j.,I

,j.,I

Total n

til

'l'!,;::1

I::!r-I

'Fresh
'Marine

8.4%
91. 6'{,

1.1%
98.9/;'

17.4%
82.6:~,

::;'u

M

j..I
Q)

~

)

0
M...:l

Total n

95

1895

121

142

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

served.
Utilization of animal resources was similar throughout the
time represented by cultural deposits.
The three clusters of levels
indicate a very diverse subsistence base and a focus of attention
on the riverine environments.
The resource base becomes slightly
more diverse and the use of riverine environments shows increased
concentration on the flood plain forest through time.
The minor
changes observed could result either from shifting environmental
boundaries or from a change in the total subsistence economy em­
ployed by prehistoric groups.
In any event little difference in
the use of the animal resource base occurs and the season of oc­
cupation remains consistent.
The 3 x 5 Unit sampled deposits in Zone Vc.
Deposits of that
zone are stratigraphically higher and thus more recent in age than
the deposits examined in the 3 x 3 Unit.
Cultural materials de­
rived from the 3 x 5 Unit show no indication of contact with His~
toric Europeans.
Deposits from the 3 x 5 Unit are assigned both
by stratigraphic inference and typological comparison to a time
late in the Late Prehistoric period.
Cultural materials recovered from Zone Vc deposits in the 3 x 5
Unit are different from those recovered in ~ested localities else­
where at the Venom Hill Site and in other archeological localities.
In the Upper Levels of the 3 x 5 Unit there is a high percent of
small bifaces without wear.
Lateral retouched pieces with wear
take on a much greater importance than had been observed in the
Late Prehistoric Age Upper Cluster of the 3 x 3 Unit where distal
retouched pieces with wear predominate.
The variation between the
upper levels of the 3 x 5 Unit and the Upper Cluster of the 3 x 3
Unit is more significant in many respects than between any of the
time periods represented in the 3 x 3 Unit.
The differences ob­
served in the 3 x 3 Unit appear to represent a gradual change in
technology.
The differences between Late Prehistoric period ref­
use in Zone Vd and Zone Vc signify either an abrupt change in in­
digenous peoples' adaptation or are the remains of two ethnically
distinct groups.
The materials from the upper levels of the 3 x 5 Unit repre­
sent more than a change in technology, they indicate a shift in
the subsistence base employed.
It is felt there was a greater em­
phasis on hunting, less emphasis on gathering and that large ter­
restrial fauna were more successfully exploited.
In the 3 x 3 Unit
a gradual change in subsistence economy is evidenced by an increas­
ingly more diverse utilization of animal resources.
The 3 x 5 Unit
deposits are inconsistent with the trend recognized in deposits of
the 3 x 3 Unit.
In the 3 x 5 Unit the total number of identified
species is low and the average number of individuals per species
is high.
The mean body weight of animals recovered from the 3 x 5
Unit is considerably greater than in the 3 x 3 Unit (Appendix II
and Fig. 21).
The percent of small thin bifaces without wear (Fig.
20) is high; this likely represents a high percent of projectile
points in the assemblage, if ethnographic accounts and the present
consensus of archeologists are correct.
Large terrestrial animals

FIGURE 20

LITHIC TOOL ASSEMBLAGES: 41 JK 91
25~

-+-------------r-------------.-------------r------------,----­

3x5 unit,

0 - 20cm,

n=25
20~_r----------~------~----+_----------_r------~--~----

3"3 Unit, levels 1- 4

n = 111

3x3 Unit, levi>ls 6 - 9

n= 50

15~-+------------+_~~~-7--_1----····~--~---~----_,--~--~----------_+------------+_-

10~-r----------_4~--~~~~~~--------~----~--~-1_.~~------t_----------4_-

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13 14

15

16

17

16

19 20

21

22 23 24 25 26

27

28

29 30 31

"VI"
~r~o'

Position

Present Absent Present Absent

V

<'\j'
Known Unknown

y

Thickness

l

Present

Position

Absen1

V

wr

1~

present~bsent

<ov·
Known

Absent

V

V
Wear

Wear

l

Present

Position

l

Present

Position

Absent

V

l

Present

V
J

Absent

Wear

WeC

present~Absent

Cortex"-".

/Co!1ex

<O~_
Unknown

V

Thickness

unknown~Known
ThickneSs

UNIFACE/RETOUCH PIECE

L-~aI

D-Di<II/IJ
"'-Multiple

LITHIC TOOLS

p --.. Plano eonvGX

B-BICmveK

144

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

contribute a much greater percent of the total individuals than in
other deposits at the site.
Use of the site by peoples whose midden was tested by the 3 x
5 Unit probably was during the spring, summer or fall months.
If
that is correctly,~ssessed then the occupation during the time falls
within the range observed in other midden deposits at the site. A
winter occupation is not indicated in the 3 x 5 Unit.
The archeological deposits at, the Venom Hill Site imply a sta­
ble adaptive pattern within the long time span of Zone Vd deposi­
tion.
Late in the Late Prehistoric but before contact with His­
toric Europeans the adaptive pattern changed abruptly.
Figure 21
illustrates the similarity of predation curves for all clusters of
levels in the 3 x 3 Unit and the upper levels of the 3 x 5 Unit.
Although mean animal size increases slightly over time, no distinct
change occurs until late in the Late Prehistoric period (as record­
ed in the 3 x 5 Unit) large terrestrial animals take on added im­
portance in the subsistence economy and smaller animals are used
less.
Technological changes occur but only one is clearly associated
with a change in economy.
The technologic change significantly
associated with an alteration in subsistence economy is in the
upper portion of the 3 x 5 Unit within Zone Vc deposits.
In the 3 x 3 Unit a change from a core-biface to a flake­
blade technology apparently occurred slowly over time.
Tool types
changed (Fig. 20) but function may not have.
For example, it is
observed that in the lithic tool assemblage a high percent of bi­
faces with wear present in the lower levels is replaced by a high
percentage of distal retouched pieces with wear in the upper levels
(Fig. 20).
There are, however, a large number of Rangia and caro­
lina marsh clam valves with distal retouch in the lower levels and
very few in the upper levels (Appendix I).
If the distal retouched
shell is combined with distal retouched lithics then the percent
of distal retouched materials through time is similar and only the
raw material for the tools has changed.
The lithic tool assemblage from the upper portion of the 3 x 5
Unit has a high percent of bifaces without wear (Fig. 20).
That
corresponds with a high number of large terrestrial animals.
Later­
al retouched pieces present have steep retouched angles (Fig. 19).
Such changes in tool types would be expected if hunting had a great­
er importance than gathering.
The predation curve developed from
deposits of the 3 x 5 Unit seems to indicate that hunting animals
had become more important than gathering animals.(Fig. 21).
HAWK ~ERCa SITE 41 JR 147
The Hawk Perch Site is 7 miles southeast of Edna on the western
valley edge of the Navidad River.
It is situated atop a point bar
which is well above the present f}Qod plain of the river.
The area

FIGURE 21

41 JK 91

CURVES

PREDATION

3x5 M, Unit - 0-30cm.
n=45

0/0

80
".

.

....

-'-

3x3 M. Unit
Lote: Levels 1,2,3
n=475

--_ -

3 x3 M. Unit
Middle: Levels 4,5,6,7
n= 551

1:
I:

,:,:

70

I:

......

I:

f

rI!:

60

'I'

.....

~

.. to . . .

'I:

II:
'I:
\I:.1:
I':I:
'I:
\i:

50

3 x3 M.Unit
Eorly:Levels 8,9
n=258

.1'

,~

40

l~
30

o

1.0

2.0

"3.0

4.0

5.0

Animal

6.0

7.0

Size

ao

9.0

10.0

00

k9.

146

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

of the site is within the b~uff top forest biological zone.
Below
the site, at the foot of the terrace, the flood plain forest of the
Navidad begins (Fig. 2).
The sites have been affected by both historic Europeans and
burrowing animals.
Historic artifacts are confined to the upper
levels, while disturbance from burrowing animals is found in all
zones and has obscured cultural stratigraphy.
The Hawk Perch Site is an open earth midden which dates to the
Late Prehistoric and Historic European periods.
The size of the
site is 40 meters north-south by 30 meters east-west or, about
1,200 meters square.
The present channel of the Navidad courses 200 meters to the
east.
A filled channel of that river follows a wide radius curve
in the valley wall and passes near the foot of the site.
That
depression, because of its width, may represent the channel of the
river during the last pluvial period; however, the Navidad has
been known to change its course during historic times and the pos­
sibility exists that the river flowed at the base of the terrace
during the aboriginal occupation also.
The Hawk Perch Site was located in 1974 by the Texas Archeo­
logical Survey crew.
Rodent burrowing had brought to the surface
a few Rangia clam shells and flint flakes.
Excavation of a backhoe
trench into the site revealed that cultural levels existed in a
condition that warranted further investigation.
EXCAVATION: CONTROL AND METHODOLOGY
The procedures adopted to fulfill the short term objectives
of last season were followed without exception at 41 JK 147.
Mapping control was established by using two reference points
related to the United States Coastal and Geodedic Survey control
system (Fig. 22).
Reference Point A is N39l,850.69/E2,774,306.28
and Reference Point B is N39l,900.35/E2,774,312.07 on that grid.
The United States Bureau of Reclamation has placed brass capped
datum markers on the points.
Five 1 x 1 meter square test pits were excavated by natural
levels to the bottom of, and occasionally below, cultural deposits.
A north-south backhoe trench was excavated to correlate cultural
sediments with alluvial deposition in the Navidad River flood plain.
The extent of cultural deposits on a northeast-southwest axis
was determined through the excavation of a second backhoe trench.
STRATIGRAPHY
At the Hawk Perch Site, 40 natural levels were identified and
described in the field.
The numerical designations for these were
arbitrarily assigned, as the natural levels were distributed over

FIGURE

22

9

41 JK 147
HAWK PERCH SITE

Plan Of Excavations

/
FEET
Note: Contours in feeL

Note: Contours in meters.

METERS
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEYIMLFf75

148

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

the area reported,nnot superimposed in a single profile.
A descrip­
tion of an idealized profile is provided below.
In that description
certain natural levels have been combined and many others unimpor­
tant to the discussion in this text are omitted.
Stratigraphic
sections and complete descriptions are on file at the Texas Arche­
ological~Research Center.
Zone Vb; Levell: Depth 0-6 cm., thickness~6 cm., 1-12 cm.
range, very dark grayish brown (lOYR 3/2)
very fine sandy loam, dark grayish brown
(lOYR 4/2) dry; no mottles; strong, medium
crumb structure; slightly hard, very friable,
slightly sticky, non-plastic; violently ef­
fervescent reaction to HCl; non-cemented.
Level is discontinuous on terrace edge and
continuous in terrace slope; artifacts from
the Historic European period are present,
apparently o~iginating from the occupation
of the Texana Townsite in the middle nine­
teenth century; abrupt, smooth boundary
over Level 2 and Level 10.
Zone Va,
Levels ~ and·,l€)::· Depthr~6-16?c:W';' th.ickn~ss' 10;,cm.·,
,~,
range 2~24 cm.; yellowish brown (lOYR 5/4)
fine sandy loam, very pale brown (lOYR 7/4)~
Level 2 has many, medium, distinct mottles
of very dark grayish brown (lOYR 3/2); mas­
sive structure; soft, very friable, non­
sticky, non-plastic; strongly effervescent
(Level 10) to violently effervescent (Level
2) reaction to HCl; non-cemented.
Both
Level 2 and Level 10 directly overlie Level
3, and are considered to have resulted from
biological activity which brought sediments
from below and deposited them on a stable
surface (Level 3).
Sand from Level 2 fills
cracks between peds in Level 3.
Level.2,
thin and restricted in area (1 meter where
viewed), is interpreted as resulting from
the activity of ants whose burrowing created
the mottling in that level.
Excavation into
modern ant hills supports that hypothesis.
Level 10 is thicker, and with greater ex­
posure is more hummocky than Level 3 and is
interpreted to be the result of rodent ac­
tivity.
The levels are approximately con­
temporaneous, contain little cultural mate­
rial and are restricted to the terrace edge.
Levels 2 and 10 have abrupt, wavy boundaries
over Level 3.

SITE 41 JK 147

149

Zone Vd, Level 3: Depth 16-40 cm., thickness 24 cm.; very
dark brown (lOYR 2/2) very fine sandy loam,
very dark grayish brown (lOYR 3/2) dry; not
mottled, however, a few fine cracks between
ped surfaces are filled with a light yellow­
ish brown (lOYR ~/4) matrix apparently from
Level 2 and light yellowish brown (lOYR 6/4)
matrix apparently from Level 10, both fill~
ings have distinct contrast; moderate, coarse
breaking to fine, weak angular blocky struc­
ture but tends toward massiveness in areas
of highest cultural impact; slightly hard,
friable, slightly sticky, slightly plastic;
stronly effervescent reaction to HCl; non­
cemented.
The level covers the terrace edge
and slope continuously to the flood plain
of the river.
A Late Prehistoric midden
accumulation is concentrated on the terrace
edge and unconcentrated in the slope and
flood plain portions of the level.
Histor­
ic European cultural material is present at
the level's top.
Abrupt smooth boundary
over Levels 5, 8, and 9.
Zone Vd, Level 8: Depth 40-46 cm., thickness 6 cm., range
4-10 cm.; very dark grayish brown (lOYR 3/2),
loam, dark grayish brown ( 10 YR 4/2), dry;
not mottled; moderate, medium angular blocky;
hard, firm, slightly sticky, slightly plas­
tic; strongly effervescent reaction to HCl;
non-cemented.
The level occurs discontin­
uously atop the terrace and contains uncon­
centrated Late Prehistoric cultural debris.
The differences between Level 8 and Level 3
could be the result of a combination of a
varying intensity of eultu~al occupation and
the genetic process of soil development.
Level 8 has a clear wavy boundary over
Levels 4 and 9 and an abrupt, wavy boundary
over LevelS.
Zone Vd,
Levels 4 and 9:

46-50 cm., thickness 4 cm., range 4-12 cm.;
very dark grayish brown (lOYR 3/2) fine
sandy loam, dark grayish brown (lOYR 4/2)
dry; no mottling; moderate, medium angular
blocky breaking into weak, fine granules;
slightly hard, very friable, slightly

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

150

sticky, non~plastic; violently effervescent re­
action to HCl; non-cemented; granule and pebble
size, white (lOYR 8/1) calcium carbonate concre­
tions occur but are few, less than 5 per 10:cm.
square of surface.
Sna2l shells are plentiful
and Late Prehistoric cultural material present
but rare except where concentrated in rodent
burrows.
Concretions are present as a result of
mixing with Level 5 or of slope wash.
Levels
4 and 9 are restricted to a small area away from
the edge and slope of the terrace.
Clear, smooth
boundary over Levels 5 and 6.
Zane

IV,'L~Vel

5: Depth 50-62 cm., thickness 12 cm., range 8-16 cm.;
very dark grayish brown (10YR 3/2) f~ne sandy
loam, dark grayish brown (lOYR 4/2) dry; no mot­
tling; weak, fine angular blocky structure; soft,
very friable, slightly sticky, non-plastic; vio­
lently effervescent reaction to HC1; non-cemented.
Sub round and subangu1ar granule and pebble size,
white (lOYR 8/1), calcium carbonate concretions
are abundant, greater than 20 per 10 cm. square
of surface.
No cultural material is present.
Level 5 covers the terrace top and edge as a
flat lying surface, but that surface begins to
dip and the level rapidly leses its integrity
on the slope to the primary flood plain.
Level
5 has an abrupt, smooth boundary to Level 6.

Zone III: Level 6: Depth 62-80 cm., thickness 18 cm., range 12-34
cm.; yellowish brown (lOYR 5/5) loam, brown
(lOYR 5/3) dry; no mottles; moderate, medium an­
gular blocky structure; slightly hard, friable,
slightly sticky, slightly plastic; strongly ef­
fervescent reaction to HCl; non-cemented; sub­
angular and angular granule and pebble size, cal­
cium carbonate concretions are few, less than 5
per 10 cm. square of surface; no cultural mate­
rial is present.
The level is continuous on
the terrace edge and slope but could not be traced
to the river flood plain.
It becomes thicker on
the terrace slope.
The characteristics of the
zone evidently represent a soils phenomenon.
Ap­
parently Level 6 is a portion of a B horizon in
a truncated so~l profile.
Abrupt, smooth bound­
ary over Level 7.

SITE 41 JK 147

151

Zone III, Level 7: Depth 80-145 cm., thickness 65 cm., range
40-80 cm.; light yellowish brown (lOYR 6/4)
very fine sandy loam, very pale brown (lOYR
7/4) dry; no mottles; moderate, medium an­
gular blocky breaking to weak, fine angular
blocky structure; slightly hard, very friable­
slightly sticky, non-plastic;~stronly effer­
vescent reaction with Hel; non-cemented;
angular and subangular granule and pebble
size calcium carbonate concretions are COm­
mon, less than 20 per 10 cm. square of ~ur­
face; no cultural material present.
The
level is continuous.
Calcium carbonate
concretions are apparently developed in
place.
The in place development of concre­
tions, the structure and the color of the
level may indicate that the level is the
lower portion of a weathering profile.
Level 7 has an abrupt, wavy boundary over
Level 12.
Zone III,
Levels L3 and 14: These are lenses contained in Level 7. Thick­
ness 16 cm., range 4-22 cm.; very pale brown
(lOYR 7/3) very fine sandy loam, light yel­
lowish brown (lOYR 6/4) dry; no mottles;
massive; slightly bard, friable, slightly
sticky, non-plastic; violently effervescent
reaction with Hel; some portions of these
lenses are weakly cemented by calcium car­
bonate; angular granule and pebble size cal­
cium carbonate concretions are abundant,
greater than 20 per 10 cm. square of surface.
The lenses are discontinuous within Level 7
and are considered to be part of Level 7.
They have abrupt smooth, boundaries with
Level 7.
Zone II, Level 12: Depth 145-180+ cm.; yellowish brown (lOYR
5/8), fine sand, brownish yellow (lOYR 6/8)
dry; common, large, faint, light gray (lOYR
7/1) dry and bruwnish yellow (lOYR 6/6) dry
mottles; weak, medium angular blocky to ~
structureless; soft, loose, non-sticky, non­
plastic; no to vety.l sl~ghfly,eeEeFvescent
reaction to Hel; non-cemented; finely lami­
nated to laminated beds with platey parting;
no cultural material.
Sands in Level 12 are
probably cross bedded; the exposure of Level
12 was limited.

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

152

ARTIFACT DISCUSSION
Portions of the site where test pits were located had both
historic and prehistoric cultural debris concentrated in Aone Vd,
Levell.
Zones Va, Vb and Vd above and below Level 3 contain both
historic and prehistoric du1tura1 material but the density of that
debris is low and it appears probable that the most intense occu­
pation at the Hawk Perch Site was within Level 3.
Most artifacts
found in other levels are probably in a secondary position as a
result of rodent burrowing or cultural activity on or below what
appears to have been the relatively stable surface of Zone Vd~
Level 3.
For the reason that most cultural material recovered ap­
pears to have originated from a single concentrated occupation
level the artifact discussion below will consider all historic
debris a single assemblage and all prehistoric debris a single as­
semblage.
Tables 5-7 and 11-14 provide prehistoric artifact loca­
tion by level.
Historic
One molded and one blown bottle with a ponti1 mark, 2 thick­
headed, cut nails, brick fragments and a lead bullet with a 1.4 cm.
diameter base were collected in excavation on the site.
All arti­
facts probably are contemporary with the Historic European occupa­
tion at the Texana Townsite (41 JK 36).
Prehistoric
The five 1 x 1 meter test pfts excavated at the site produced
a total of 121 prehistoric artifacts which are believed to have
been used as tools or containers.
The percent breakdown of these
comoined in~o one assemblage is:
Cores
0.8%
n = 121
Bifaces
4.1%
Retouched Pieces 53.7%
Ceramics
40.5%
Shell Tools
0.8%
These artifacts apparently place pre-European contact occupa­
tion at 41 JK 147 in the Late Prehistoric period.
There is no evi­
dense for an earlier date during prehistory.
Projectile points
originating from the site are of the Perdiz and Saallorn types (Suhm
and Jelks 1962), recovered sherds are made with an untempered sandy
paste and retouched pieces make up a large percentage of the assem­
blage.
These conditions are elsewhere restricted in occurrence to

SITE 41 JK 147

153

the Late Prehistoric period.
The retouched pieces collected at 41 JK 147 are predominantly
small flakes modified at their distal end.
The most common type of
distal retouched piece is thin and shows evidence of use either in
the form of smoothing or polish on the retouched surface.
The assemblage of lithic tools relates most favorably with
that encountered in the upper levels of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91
(Fig. 20).
That is the older of two Late Prehistoric tool assem­
blages observed at the Venom Hill Site.
The amount of pottery recovered in test excavations at 41 JK
147 (49 sherds) exceeds that found with the similar tool assemblage
at JK 91.
The number of sherds is high but perhaps more signifi­
cantly a minimum of 14 individual vessels have been identified
(Appendix I).
That is also a comparatively high number.
Six hundred thirty six flakes and chips from the Hawk Perch
Site were examined to determine their sequence of removal from
cores.
Lithic debris at the site is 1.9% primary removal, 34.0%
secondary removal and 64.2% interior removal.
41 JK 147 was simi­
lar in this respect of lithic technology with other tested sites in
the reservoir.
Three hundred and twenty eight items of lithic debris retain­
ed a striking platform and bulb of percussion.
The type of prepa­
ration for removal of flakes is a good indicator of lithic tech­
nology and may supply information on the types of tools being manu­
factured on site at 41 JK 147.
The breakdown of platform types is:
natural platform
17.4%
n = 328
single facet platform
36.3%
multiple facet platform 38.1%
crushed platform
8.2%
Over 183 whole flakes were suitable for flake dimension anal­
ysis (Fig. 23).
The sample has a mean length (x = 1.4058) similar
to that from many other tested localities in the reservoir.
The
standard deviation (sd = 0.5427) for length is the lowest encoun­
tered in this tested locality.
Length of flakes at 41 JK 147 is
similar to that in the early, middle and late clusters of the 3 x
It is unlike that
3 Unit at 41 JK 91 and to that at 41 JK 41.
dimension in the 3 x 5 Unit at 41 JK 91 where the mean length is
larger and standard deviation higher.
As elsewhere in the reser­
voir flake shape is dominated by the divergent category (32%).
However, at the Hawk Perch Site that is only weakly dominate.
Sub­
parallel, parallel, intermediate and convergent shapes are all im­
portant categories at the site.
At other sites these categories
are overshadowed by the divergent shape.
The mean (x
0.2733)
and standard deviation (sd = 0.1641) of thickness is common for
sites in the reservoir.
Thickness, mean and standard deviation,
at the Hawk Perch Site matches the upper levels of the 3-x 3 Unit
at 41 JK 91 closely and approximates that at 41 JK 41 and other
levels in the 3 x 3 Unit.

FI GURE 23
%

50

Lengfh
40

FLAKE
41

n =188
'K=1.4058
sd =0.5427

DIMENSIONS
JK 147

30

20

10

%

o

.4

.8

1.2

1.6

2.0

2.4

2.8

3.2

3.6

4.0

4.4

4.8

5.2 em

70

Shope ,.
n= 187
60

%

50

50

Thickness
n=183
40

~=0.2733

40

sd=0.1641

30

30

20

20

10

10

o

'I- Plot mode continuous as 0 visual aid
Change the curve shope.

derived

.15

.30

.45

.60

.75

.90

1.05

1.20

1.35

1.50 em

from histogram of discrete types. Reordering of types would

SITE 41 JK 147

155

OCCUPATIONAL FEATURE
A single occupational feature was encountered in excavation
at the Hawk Perch Site.
A pit or a trench was recognized in both
the east and west walls of the north/south backhoe excavation (Fig.
22).
There was no excavation of the feature except by the backhoe
and cleaning of the profile.
The origin of the feature, located
2 meters south of the southernmost test pit (Fig. 22), is assigned
no definite time period.
The dimensions of the feature are 80 cm.
or approximately 2.5 feet wide.
The elevation of its lowest por­
tion is about 8.10 meters m.s.l.
The depth of the trench or pit
is approximately 42 cm.
The feature may be related to Feature 9 at the Venom Hill
Site.
Feature 9 is a Historic European trench that is at least
45 meters long.
It is 88 cm. wide and 50 cm. deep.
The Feature
at the Venom Hi~l Site varies between 7.95 and 8.0 meters m.s.l. in
depth.
The occupational feature at the Hawk Perch Site has much
the same dimensions and, being upstream from 41 JK 91, has a basal
elevation slightly higher than that of the trench at JK 91.
The
function of the trench or pit is unknown, but likely can be related
to occupation of the Teaana Townsite.
SUBSISTENCE ECONOMY
Faunal preservation at the site is poor.
It is expected that
faunal debris collected in excavation was that left after the nat
nnal processes affecting the site had selected for large, thick
remains.
If that is true, the remains of the larger animals and
shellfish are more greatly dominate now after the selective effects
of natural processes th~n they were in the original unaffected cul­
tural deposits.
In fact, with the exception of a single small ter­
restrial species (SyZviiaguB aquatioas) found in the uppermost
level, the larger mammals and shellfish are dominan~.
As a result
of the expected impact of natural selective processes numbers of
individuals (Appendix II) and meat weight of individuals in the
various species categories can be utilized in a limited sense only.
The lithic tool assemblage whlch is low in percent of bifaces
(particularly in that type of biface believed to have been used as
projectile points) suggests that large animals were not the main
focus of hunting activities if traps or other less direct means
were not used for the kill.
Levels 1, 2, and 3 of the 3 x 3 Unit
at the Venom Hill Site, where faunal preservation is excellent and
a similar lithic tool assemblage was found, indicate that at that
station more effort was spent collecting small animals than large
animals (Fgg. 20).
If other sites with a similar tool assemblage
and good faunal preservation are found to have a low percentage of
individuals in the large terrestrial category, then probably the

156

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

subsistence base at 41 JK 147 could be reconstructed as similar.
At the present it seems at least possible that the subsistence
economy at the Hawk Perch Site was similar to that recorded for
the upper levels of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91.
While other categories of faunal debris are poorly preserved,
the condition of shellfish remains is good.
Certainly not all
shellfish species encountered were used for a food resource but
the high number of individuals in some species and the observed 0 '
lack of modification on most valves does indicate that shellfish
probably were a food resource for the occupants of the site.
The
total of shellfish individuals was 189, of these 2.6% inhabited
fresh-water environments and 97.4% inhabited brackish and salt­
water environments.
In contrast to the habitat information derived from the shell­
fish, 9 out of every 14 fish individuals are restricted to fresh­
water environments.
Examination of the meat weight of the fish in­
dividuals at the Hawk Perch Site reveals that 74.1% of the total
weight is derived from a fresh-water environmentsand 25.9% from a
brackish or salt-water environment.
It should be noted that the
fish individuals at this site were identified by their otoliths
and that fresh-water fish otoliths generally are less well pre­
served in archeological samples from ~almetto Bend than are salt­
water fish otoliths.
Shellfish remains indicate that there was predominately brack­
ish water environment near the site.
Fish remains indicate the op­
posite.
Two possible explanations for the contradiction are:
1) Inhabitants of the site collected either fish or shellfish
at a distance away from the area and carried the remains
back to the site.
2) The environment of the river near the site fluctuated be­
tween fresh and brackish water.
Neither of the explanations can be tested for the site at
present.
The collection of Rangia cuneata occurred during the
spring (Appendix V).
That is a period when, because of increased
rainfall, the river discharge is high and the fresh-water/brackish
water interface shifts down river.
Mature Rangia euneata, the
shellfish species with the highest number of individuals represent­
ed (153), are able to survive in a fresh water environment (Hopkins,
Anderson and Horvath 1973: 3).
They are stationary as adults. The
channel catfish (IctaZurus punctatus) , while its habitat is re­
stricted to fresh water, is mobile and could be expected to follow
the fresh water downstream during periods of high discharge.
En­
vironmental shifts between brackish and fresh water are possible in
the immediate area of the Hawk Perch Site.
Faunal material concentrates, as does other cultural debris,
in Zone Vd, Level 3.
In that level and the underlying Level 8, 76%
of the total faunal assemblage occurs.

SITE 41 JK 147

157

SEASON OF OCCUPATION
One hundred and fifty four valves, eaehrEepresenting individ­
ual Rangia auneata, recovered in the five 1 x 1 meter excavation
units were stodiad for seasonality.
Analysis of the valves indi­
cates a spring collection period for that shellfish resource (Ap­
pendix V).
The aboriginal collection of clams was apparently the
months of April and May within a 45 day period.
Other fauna were available in the vicinity on a year round
basis.
However, sea trout (Cynoscion sp.) is less common during
the winter, spring and summer months than in the fall months.
A
significant percent of the fish represented at the site are sea
trout (4 of 14 individuals).
This high percent of sea trout indi­
viduals may indicate that the site was inhabited during the fall.
Rangia are relatively easy to collect and are a stable, if
minor, resource in the environments near the site.
Rangia auneata
are less available for exploitation in the spring than other sea~o
sons because at that time the river is more often in flood.
If 41
JK 147 was occupied during the fall and the spripg months by the
same people then the use of shellfish would be expected to be
greater during the fall when that resource was as available or
more available than in the spring and when other food resources
were less abundant.
Rangia seem to have been collected only during
the spr~ng.
Sea trout (Cynosaion sp.) were available during the
spring, although rare.
Rangia auneata were available on a year round basis although
more available in the fall than in the spring.
Sea trout occur in
the Hawk Perch Site fauna; however, Rangia clam present in that
fauna were collected only in the spring.
These conditions indi­
cate that aboriginal occupation was restricted to the period of
shellfish colll!ction, the spring months of April and May.
INTERPRETATIONS
Cultural deposits at the Hawk Perch Site are primarily the
result of a Late Prehistoric habitation.
Historic European arti­
facts which have been related to the period of occupation at the
Texana Townsite are principally indicative of domestic type activ­
ity, but the lack of significant disturbance of the prehistoric
midden and the small number of Historic European age artifacts sug­
gest~that the located artifacts are the result of activities which
for the most part occurred off the area of the site.
Although associations are badly disturbed by biological churn­
ing, ariq prehistoric cultural debris occurs in all levels of Zone
V, the greatest concentration of cultural material occurs in Levels
3 and 8 of Zone Vd.
It is probably that most if not all of the
original deposition of prehistoric cultural material was in these

158

SITE DESCRIPTIONS AND ANALYSIS

levels.
Little variance was noted in the cultural deposit.
The
very low standard deviation observed discrete dimensional charac­
tBEistics on flakes (Fig. 23) exemplifies the homogeneity of the
deposit and indicates that most aspects of lithic technology re­
mained the same throughout the prehistoric occupation documented by
the debris.
Characteristics of the lithic debris are most like!
that of debris recovered from the Upper Cluster of the 3 x 3 Unit
at 41 JK 91 and that of 41 JK 41.
Faunal preservatiqn of the Hawk Perch Site is poor.
The lith­
ic tool assemblage, however, relates very well with that recovered
in the Upper Cluster of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 where faunal
preservation was excellent.
If natural processes and their effects
on cultural deposits at the Hawk Perch Site are taken into account
it seems plausible that the animal portion of the subsistence base
at 41 JK 147 was the same as that inferred from deposits in the
Upper Cluster of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91.
There it is believed
that a diverse subsistence base was employed which concentrated in
the riparian and flood plain forests and secondarily in the bluff
top forest and aquatic habitats.
The scheduling for use of the site during prehistoric times
was apparently rigorous.
Analysis of Rangia auneata valves from
all areas of the site suggests that collection of that shellfish
was restricted thoughout the period of occupation to the months of
April and May and within a 45 day period each time.
Other seasonal
species found in the site could have been collected during April
and May.
Occupation of the site was probably restricted to those
months during which Rangia were collected.
Judging from the size of the site, the uniformity of the total
assemblage, the low diversity of lithic debris and the apparently
short period of occupation, activites at the Hawk Perch Site were
few and consistently the same.
The similarity of season of occu­
pation and tool kit between the Hawk Perch Site and other tested
occupational levels elsewhere in the reservoir is suggestive of
equilibrium forces which allowed little variability in the form of
the prehistoric society.
These equilibrium forces may be in either
cultural or natural environment.

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS
The 1974 field season involved the limited testing of five
prehistoric sites.
A11 tested sites are atop the valley edge over­
looking the flood plain of the Navidad River,.arld at this time,
all are located in the bluff-top forest, biological zone. The arch­
eological record at each of the sites had at least a few charac­
teristics in common with other sites tested.
The nature of the
cultural deposits prior to post-depositional desturbance by natu­
ral processes and Historic Old Worlders, was apparently more simi­
lar than the present archeological record suggests at face value.
As all sites tested are in the same biological zone (one of
five zones identif~ed in the area) and in similar geographic local­
ities, it is recognized that the areas investigated are probably
representative of only one portion of the range of archeological
variability within the work area.
The sites tested do represent
the range of known archeological localities in the 1974 work area.
Prehistoric sites recorded in the work area are consistently lo­
cated in the bluff-top forest biological zone and on the valley
edge overlooking the flood plain of the Navidad River.
The archeological data base is limited by the particular sites
studied.
Such a limitation is surmountable, however, if it is
recognized that the localities tested are the remains of people
who participated in a wide range of activites peculiar to their
culture and that the use make of the activity localities was a
point or points in a connected sequence of cultural activities.
When that is realized explanation oI the culttire rat~e~,than the
atti~ities ~f peapie: at~a single locality may be made.
Three stratified sites; the Venom Hill Site (41 JK 91), the
Atkinson Site (41 JK 41) and the Hawk Perch Site (41 JK 147), are
in deposits which are correlated to a geologic sequence recognized
on the western valley slope of the Navidad River.
The fact that
periods of deposition and erosion can be equated between the three
sites and non-cultural deposits of the valley edge is suggestive
of regionally and/or locally important environmental fluctuations.
It is clear that most geological zones described in the "Local
Sediments ll section are the result of factors independent of the
effects of occupation at single localities.
Several erosional phases dating after 10,000 years B.P. were
recognized.
The erosional environment with the highest energy oc­
curred sometime before the middle Middle Prehistoric period and
after a period of stability.
During the stable period a soil (Zone
III) developed atop very fine quartz sand (Zone II) deposited
lO~OOO years ago during the pluvial period associated with the last
advance of the Wisconsin Glaciation.
The erosion truncated the
soil profile.
In some exposures a B3ca (Zone III) horizon remains
with rolled concretion gravel (Zone IV) resting disconformably at
159

160

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

its upper boundary., In most cases the erosion has cut deeper,
truncating Zone II (Fig. 4).
The cultural material from the bottom
of Zone V dates to the Middle Prehistoric period; presumably cul­
tural deposits of greater antiquity were displaced during the ero­
sional phase.
Although all deposits of Zone Vd (Zones Vd and Vd are the only
known to contain in place cultural deposits) are relatively homo­
geneous, a' number of levels have been recognized on the basis of
subtle differences.
These levels evidence a second important en
vironmental change.
Natural Levels 7, 8, and 9 contain faunal ma­
terials that indicate a more saline aquatic environment than exists
in the vicinity of the site at present.
Although the species re­
covered in archeological deposits are different, the percents of
brackish, fresh and salt-water types are similar to the species
represented at the mouth of the Lavaca River today.
There, salin­
ity is about six parts per thousand (Texas Water Development Board
1974: Fig. 12 and 27).
Levels 1 through 6 of Zone Vd contain fewer marine species and
have an assemblage more like that found in the present day environ­
ment near the site.
Levels 7, 8 and 9 evidence a number of minor
erosional phases (Fig. 11) and particle separates are less well
sorted than in Levels 1 through 6.
Levels 1 through 6 were not
subjected to the same fluctuations in depositional environment.
The better sorting and lack of erosional evidence in those levels
may indicate a period of increased or at least more consistent
average annual rainfall during the Late Prehistoric period.
It is proposed that the abrupt drop in marine species in the
Upper Cluster of the 3 x 3 Unit (Table 4), beginning in Lev~ls 5
and 6, and the change to a slightly less variable depositional en~
vironment are evidence for the formation of the barrier island a­
cross the mouth of Matagorda Bay.
A single radiocarbon sample
from near the bottom of Level 7 provides a date that is supported
by typological comparison of prehistoric tools; 2,400±90 years be­
fore the present (Tx-2124, Valastro, personal communication).
The
change in environment equated with the formation of the barrier
island across Matagorda Bay occurred sometime after that date but
before the early part of the Late Prehistoric period.
Alluvial and/or aeolean deposits consisting of channel fill
in the valleys of major tributaries draining the inter-riverine
portions of the Beaumont terrace and the valley edge have been
traced above an erosional disconformity which reaches an elevation
of 18 to 20 feet higher than the filled channel.
At their higher
elevation these deposits (Zone Vc) topographically as well as
stratigraphically overlie Zone Vd (Fig. 4).
The number of matine
species are less frequent in Zone Vc deposits than they had been
in the upper portion of Zone Yd.
Greater numbers of large ter­
restrial animals, particularly bison, were utilized for food.
The
subsistence base of prehistoric peoples of the time was considerably
less diverse than at any period recorded previously.
By compari­
son of known tool types found above and below the lower boundary of

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

161

Zone Vd the Zone dates late in the Late Prehistoric period (prob­
ably after 1000 or 1100 years ago).
A modern period of erosion is documented by Zone Vb; alluvial
fill in a shallow recent channel of some larger tributaries (Fig.
4),
In the tributary near the Hawk Perch (41 JK 147) and Venom
Hill (41 JK 91) Sites, Zone Vf contained charcoal, brick and glass
fragments which apparently date to the nineteenth century occupa­
tion of Texana.
The filled channel may correspond with the young­
er set of erosional channels discussed under "Geomorphology".
These are regularly associated with Historic Old Woild~r peridd
features.
At the single tested archiological site where prehistoric cul­
tural material was distinctly stratified (the Venom Hill Site)
three lithic tool assemblages were recognized (Fig. 20).
The
first and earliest assemblage is associated with the Middle Pre­
historic and has a high percent of thick, biconvex bifaces with
wear and of lateral retouched pieces.
The second assemblage dating
to the first portion of the Late Prehistoric period has a low num­
ber of both plano and biconvex, thin bifaces, and an extremely
high percent of thin, distal re.touched pieces with wear present.
The third assemblage, which dates to a more recent portion of the
Late Prehistoric period, has a high percent of thin, plano-convex
bifaces with no wear present and, a high percent of laterally re­
touched pieces.
The second assemblage only is represented at other sites.
Both the Hawk Perch Site and the Atkinson Site have lithic tool
groups with the high percent of distal retouched pieces character­
istic of the assemblage recognized as a early Late Prehistoric
component at the Venom Hill Site.
Both 41 JK 16 and 41 JK 50 have
been disturbed and it is felt that clear assignation to a known
assemblage is impossible given the small sample of artifacts from
those sites.
41 JK 50 has more distal retouched pieces than lat­
eral retouched pieces; 41 JK 16 has more lateral retouched pieces
than distal.
Technologically, as far as the percent distribution categories
related to the order of flake removal from cores, all tested site~
and levels in sites examined separately are similar.
All areas
have a high percent of interior lithic debris (Table 5A).
Skinner has argued that percent of primary, secondary and i~­
terior debris have significance in recognizing site function and
the distance of the site from the lithic raw material resource
(1971: 158 162).
If Skinner is correct then both the function and
distance of activity areas (either physical or social) from the
lithic raw material resource must have remained similar during the
periods represented.
In the type of platform preparation on cores before flake re­
moval, minor differences have been identified.
Types of striking
platform preparation recognized were: natural, single facet, mul­
tiple facet and crushed.
Both single and multiple facet types are well represented in

162

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

the areas examined.
41 JK 16, 41 JK 41, 41 JK 147 and the Upper
Cluster of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 each had lithic debris that
is dominated first by multiple facet platforms and second by single
facet platforms.
As a whole these sites have the high percent of
distal retouched pieces and low percent of bifaces associated with
the assemblage from the upper portion of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91.
The Lower Cluster of the 3 x 3 Unit and the upper levels of
the 3 x 5 Unit at 41 JK 91 have lithic debris whose platform types
are dominated first by single facet and second by mUltiple facet
platforms.
Two assemblages recognized at 41 JK 91 are represented
by this group.
The assemblages although separated by a long time
span and an unrelated assemblage of tool types have in common a
high percent Df bifaces and lateral retouched pieces.
The Middle Cluster of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 represents
the only instance in which a platform type besides single or multi­
ple facet is donimant.
In that cluster a high percent of natural
platforms and secondarily, multiple facet platforms occu~s.
At
41 JK 50 both single and multiple facet platform have the same
percentages.
Multiple facet platform preparation prevails in conjunction
with lithic tool assemblages that generally have a low percent of
bifaces.
Single facet platforms prevail in conjunction with lithic
tool assemblages that have a high percent of bifaces.
Biface pro­
duction would be expected to result in multifacet platform flakes.
If biface manufacture was the main tool production activity at a
locality it would be expected that multifacet platforms would dom­
inate over other types of platform preparation on recovered flakes.
That expectation is unfulfilled.
The recovered debris then may in­
dicate that, 1) biface production was less important than the pro­
duction of non-bifacial tools (Cores and primary flakes have a low
frequency in all areas so cobble reduction seems an unimportant
activity at the sites) in the late part of the Late Prehistoric and
during the Middle Prehistoric periods at 41 JK 91 and, 2) biface .
production was more important than the production of non-bifacial
tools during the earlier portion of the Late Prehistoric represent­
ed at 41 JK 16, and 41 JK 41, 41 JK 147 and the Upper Cluster of
the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91.
On the other hand, lithic tool assemblages from the areas in­
dicate the opposite of what the debris does.
Two possible explana­
tions are that, 1) the sampled areas with a ~igh percent of multi­
ple facet platform preparation were stations of limited activities
that did not include much biface production or a great deal of
maintenance on bifaces, and 2) wider facets on larger bifaces in
deposits resulted in a greater number of single facet platform
flakes.
Since the bifaces from the upper portion of the 3 x 5
Unit at 41 JK 91 are small (Fig. 20), the second explanation seems
less likely than the first.
It is tenatively accepted that peoples
who left remains not dominated by the multiple facet type of plat­
form preparation but with a high percent of biface tools produced
a majority of their bifacial tools elsewhere.
On whole flakes from excavated areas, the dimensional cate­
L

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

163

gories of length, shape and thickness were considered as an aid in
the identification of between site differences.
All clusters of
the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91, but particularly the Upper Cluster,
were very similar in length, shape and thickness of whole flakes
to 41 JK 41 and 41 JK 147.
41 JK 16 and 41 JK 50 flakes had dif­
ferent dimensions but deposits at these sites had been disturbed.
It has been shown in the body of this report that at 41 JK 16 (see:
Table 2 and the dicussion of artifacts recovered brom JK 16) the
dimensions of whole flakes prior to post-depositional disturbance
was probably similar to that of flakes at 41 JK 41, 41 JK 147 and
the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91.
The single area where flake dimensions were clearly different
at the time of cultural deposition is that sampled by the 3 x 5
Unit at 41 JK 91.
Those flakes are larger than in assemblages
from tested localities elsewhere, but are dominated still by the
divergent shape category.
As previously stated the Venom Hill Site (41 JK 91) is the
only tested locality with distinctly separated cultural strati­
graphy.
There a slow trend toward increasing length and decreasing
thickness of flakes is revealed from older to younger deposits in
the 3 x 3 Unit (Fig. 12).
Whole flakes from the 3 x 5 Unit con­
trarily are much longer and thicker than those found in the e x 3
Unit.
Archeological deposits at 41 JK 41, 41 JK 91 and 41 JK 147 re­
tained direct evidence of the animal food portion~of prehistoric
peoples subsistence.
In the deposits of the Venom Hill Site that
record was preserved in excellent condition.
The Atkinson Site
and the Hawk Perch Site deposits contained animal food refuse
which apparently had been altered significantly.
The effects of
natural processes are assumed to be the cause of the disturbance.
Faunal preservation at 41 JK 41 and 41 JK 147 was poor.
Throughout most of the period of occupation at the Venom Hill
Site (that is, from middle or early Middle to Late Prehistoric
times) the subsistence economy remained similar.
Three clusters
of levels in the 3 x 3 Unit each indicate a very diverse utili­
zation of animal resources and a focus of attention on the river­
ine environments.
Utilization of the resource base becomes slight­
ly more diverse and the utilization of biological zones becomes
slightly less focused in more recent deposits.
These changes, how­
ever, are visualized as having occurred slowly possibly the result
of a gradual change in the local natural environment.
The changes in the 3 x 3 Unit are insubstantial when compared
with the differences in subsistence refuse between the Late Prehis­
toric Upper Cluster in the 3 x 3 Unit and the Late Prehistoric up­
per levels of the 3 x 5 Unit indicate a greatly reduced diversity
of utilized species, an,-increased dependence on bluff top forest
and prairie grassland species and a significant increase in mean
body weight per individual animal exploited.
Mean body weight per
individual was; 3:x 3 ,Unit Lower Cluster, .296 kg.; 3 x 3 Unit Mid­
dle Cluster, .568 kg.; 3 x 3 Unit Upper Cluster, 1.528 kg.; 3 x 5

164

LOCAL AND BEGIONAL COMPABISONS

Unit Upper Levels, 10.949 kg.
As stated faunal preservation at 41 JK 41 and 41 JK 147 was
poor.
At these sites natural processes have probably selected for
the more durable items.
The animal tefuse at both sites was domi­
nated by the remains of large fauna, of shellfish and, the resist­
ant fish bones--otoliths.
In contrast, the recovered lithic assem­
blages from the sites are most similar to that found in the Upper
Cluster of levels in the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91.
There, animal re­
mains in excellent condition indicated a subsistence economy in
which a wide range of animal types from the riverine environments
were exploited and the mean animal size was small (Fig. 21).
Be­
cause the faunal debris recovered from 41 JK 91 found in associa­
tion with well preserved faunal debris it suggested that at 41 JK
41 and 41 JK 147, 1) less durable faunal debris was destroyed by
natural process following cultural deposition, 2) faunal assemblages
and thus the subsistence economy at the sites may be reconstructed
as similar to that recovered and in the Upper Cluster of the 3 x 3
Unit at 41 JK 91.
Analysis of Bangia cuneata valves indicates a rigorous sched­
uling for the collection of shellfish throughout the periods 41 JK
91, 41 JK 41 and 41 JK 147 were occupied.
In all cases Bangia were
collected during the spring months of April and May (Fig. 27).
Bangia would be equally as available during other times of the year
but were not collected.
The three sites with faunal refuse in archeological deposits
often contained a high percent of sea trout individuals which may
be indicative of a fall occupation.
If the sites were occupied
during the f~ll, and it is reasonably certain that they were, it
is possible that Bangia clams were left uncollected then as a re­
sult of the fact that other more preferred resources were avail­
able.
Most woody plant species available come into season during
the fall.
Despite the question of why Bangia were collected when they
were, one thing was made clear by the analysis of Bangia valves.
Scheduling for the exploitation of at least one resource was con­
stant for several thousand years.
In summation, the examined variables document what, given the
thousands of years time span represented, can only be characterized
as an amazing adaptive stavility through time.* With little visible
aberration and regardless of technological change, the orientation,
scheduling and probably even techniques of living remained similar.
In only one instance is a change in technology associated with a
clear change in subsistence economy.
That shift is observed to
have occurred late in the Late Prehistoric period.
It apparently
indicates an increase in the hunting of large terrestrial animals
by local peoples or an expansion of another group!s territory.
*Differences of a fine-grained nature undoubtably occur.
Some
could not be brought. ottt~by the partictilar'techniques employed here.

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

165

The significance of the data collected through excavations in
1974 at Palmetto Bend will be explored by using them to test pro­
positions developed for the coastal region from available arche­
ologic. and ethnographic information.
In the section "Prehistoric'
Natural Resource Utilization on the Texas Coast", observations are
reported which led to the propositions on regional cultural his­
tory.
Also predictions based on the propositions were stated.
By testing hypotheses that are regionally important with the
data derived from this very localized collection of information it
is hoped that some of the problems associated with the limitations
of a small study area (a study area defined for its usefulness as
a reservoir site, rather than for the interpretation of prehis­
tory) will be eliminated.
This approach is the reverse of the
method in which data from a restricted study area are utilized to
answer questions of a local nature.
The author feels that attempts to solve regionally important
problems from a local base will in the end be more advantageous
than attempts to solve a variety of local p~ob1ems from that same
local base.
The cultural record is simply too complex and the
potential avenues of local research too many to hope that the
scattered fruits of an archeological labor that concentrates on
undefined problems will ever fall in a single basket.
What is more,
the probab1i1ity of identifying mistaken conclusions befo~e they
sour the results of additional work on the Northwest Gulf Coast
is greater if regional rather than local problems are pursued and
solved.
Nine proposit~ons, primarily of regional importance, are re­
stated below and discussed utilizing the information collected
during the 1974 testing program.
These are modeled in Figure 24.

ApoheoZogioaZ ZooaZities on this papt of the ooast
ape the pemains Zeft by a non-sedentapy hunting and
gatheping peopZe.
a) Faunal remains, when preserved at sites, indicate a seasonal
exploitation of resources.
That exploitation occurred during the
spring and during the fall.
Different resources were exploited
during the two seasons of occupation.
Rangia clams were consist­
ently exploited only during the spring.
Large numbers of sea
trout which occur in some levels could probably have been collect­
ed only during the fall.
At that time sea trout migrate up streams
to spawn.
Presumably other species not as season1y specific as
Rangia or sea trout were collected selectively during the two sea­
sonal periods of occupation at the sites.
b) The average area of five sites tested during 1974 was 68q5
square meters.
One site exceeded the area established in the "Ob­
servations, Propositions and Predictions!! section of the text for
a small site: that was 41 JK 16 which possibly was as large as
16,500 square meters in size.
The other four sites in the sample
were well under 10,000 square meters in area.

166

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

c) No features were isolated that could have functioned as
food storage containers.
Indeed, prehistoric occupational features
of any sort were uncommon except at the Venom Hill Site, 41 JK 91,
where a number of fire pits, a single burial and other functionally
obscure features were found.
The lack of storage pits at excavated si~esdoes not preclude
the use of pottery (which is arc eo og ca
- visible) and plant
material containers (which usually are invisible archeo10gica11y)
for storage of food.
Pottery is present in very small quantities
during the early part of the Late Prehistoric period and is of
greater importance during the latter portion of the Late Prehis­
toric period.
Vessel forms from tested sites at Palmetto Bend
Reservoir do not include jar types (Appendix I).
Therefore, it is
suggested that food storage could only have been a minor function
of the recovered ~esse1s during prehistoric use.
Excavation tech­
niques used during the 1974 season probably would have prevented
the identification of woven baskets but several lines of indirect
evidence indicate that form of storage container was unimportant.
First, the ethnographic record makes little mention of basketry
for the two major groups involved.
Second, the short term occupa­
tions and seasonal nature of the tested sites are characteristics
uncommon among groups which do make use of storage facilities.
Evidently, the storage of food against adversity was unneces­
sary for the prehistoric peoples involved during the periods of
occupation at the tested localities.
d) Food refuse and artifactua1 evidence at the tested local­
ities indicate that prehistoric peoples used non-domesticated
rather than domesticated species.
All expectations stated at the time the above proposition~was
set forth are fulfilled by the data collected through tests at the
five archeological sites.
No data was found to contradict the ex­
pectations with one possible exception: that exception is a site
that was larger than the anticipated 10,000 square meter maximum
expected.

Before the Late Prehistoric, coastaL adaptation
concentrated principaLly on inLand type resources.
However, in that adaptation coastal marine re­
sources were occasionally taken advantage of as
part of
seasonaL rounds.
During the Transitional to the Late Prehistoric
an explicitLy coastal marine adaptation developed
out of a society with a coastal inland adaptation.
It was expected that in the coastal inland and at sites with­
in the area of the proposed Palmetto Bend Reservoir, a) Items with
a coastal marine origin would appear more frequently in cultural
deposits dating prior to the Late Prehistoric.
b) Following the
late Middle Prehistoric the amount of evidence for the exp1oita­

FIGURE
CHANGE AND ADAPTATION IN THE COASTAL INLAND

I

HI 9 h

r,
I

\

I

\

I
I
I
I
I

Change
Rat e

\

\
\

I
I

\

I
/

\

I

Low

-'

,,­

I

Ear Iy

Middle

Late

~,

Hi~storic

A

More
Special i zed

-'\
\

Adaptation

\
\

/

/

/

\

1/
\

I

\
Less
Spec ialized

\.;

;

L

I

'j
~Transitional~

Early

Early

Middle

Late

La te

Middle

B

~,

Historic

24

168

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

tion of coastal marine resources would abruptly drop off.
c) There
would be a perturbation in the adaptive system and an increased
rate of change during the Transitional to the Late Prehistoric.
d) A return to a more stable relationship with the environment
would occur during the Late Pr~historic.
All that was expected appears to be evidences by the nature
of the tested archeological deposits.
The location of the tested
sites, however, while it may prove useful in identifying the mech~
anisms for such changes should they exist, is unsuitable for deter­
mining whether the predicted changes occurred.
That could,.as
mentioned in "Observation, Propositions, and Predictions", best
be tested in the coastal marine zone.
The extent to which testing propositions (2) and (3) was in­
appropriate was not realized until after' analysis of the data col­
lected during the past field season.
It is clear, nevertheless,
both cultural and environmental data, collected during the testing
program supports rather than refutes the proposit~ons.
At the single site tested where both Middle and Late Prehis­
toric deposits were found distinctly stratified (41 JK 91) both
faunal debris and tools indicate a more frequent appearance of
items with a coastal marine origin prior to the Late Prehistoric
(Tables 4 and 13).
These data indicate, also as expected, an abrupt
drop of evidence for the exploitation of coastal marine resources
after the Middle Prehistoric.
The possibility of a perturbation in the adaptive system and
increased rate of change indicated by Levels 4, ~~ .and 6 in the
3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91.
Those levels are sandwiched between de­
posits which below clearly date to the late Middle Prehistoric and
above date to the Late Prehistoric.
It is possible that the levels
date to the Transitional period, they apparently are transitional
in nature.
Although the levels both above and below have predominate
tool types, Levels 4, 5, 6, and 7 do not.
Rather, the tools from
the middle levels of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 seem to fall in
miscellaneous categories (Appen~ix I).
On a technological basis
the levels appear to represent a pivot point between a core-biface
technology (below) and a flake-blade technology (above).
In Levels
4, 5, and 6 use of lithic resources is the least efficient encount­
ered at the site.
The lithic tool:lithic debris ratio for those
levels is 0.060 compared with an average ratio for all levels in
the excavation unit of 0.1064.
The density of cultural refuse for
the period between the late Middle Prehistoric and Late Prehistoric
is low.
Unfortunately~f6r testingothe~statedclpropositionsf the expec­
tations which turned out to be true in the area examined could be
the result of a fluctuation in the physical environment near the
sites.
About 2000 years ago the aquatic environments in the vicin­
ity became less saline, possibly as a result of the formation of
the barrier islands across Matagorda Bay.
Such a fluctuation in ~
the physical environment produced conditions in the cultural de­

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

169

posits similar to those expected it the propositions indeed were
true.
The proposals under these circumstances cannot be tested:
neither can they be refuted.
Should the proposed circumstances be
correct the sites in the Palmetto Bend area may, by virtue of their
transitional position between coastal inland and coastal marine
environments, be a key to understanding why an exclusively coastal
marine society had not developed pri6r to 2000 years ago and why
after that date it did.

Transitional to the Late Prehistoric and early
Middle Prehistoric period societies practiced
an adaptive strategy which was variable.
Late Prehistoric as well as middle and late Mid­
dle Prehistoric coastal inland societies practiced
a<stable adapt!ye strategy.
It was expected that during the early Middle Prehistoric and
Transitional to the Late Prehistoric, a) midden deposits would
have been placed in a wide variety of situations but that their
archeological visibility would be low.
Their midden deposits
would then be a result of the condition that archeological local­
ities were rarely returned to for the same purpose, b) assemblages
of tools used and seasonality of occupation in visible deposits
would be less formal and less fixed spatially.
For the middle and late Middle Prehistoric and Late Prehis­
toric periods it was expected that, c) arcbeological localities
would be occupied for specific purposes which did not change or
changed slowly over time, d) site§ were used on a scheduled sea­
sonal basis which varied little through time.
It is reasoned that in an unstable adaptation cultural activ­
ities will be placed more randomly because those activities are
less ordered.
In an unstable adaptation localities would be re­
turned to less often for the same purpose and thus archeological
visibility, which depends upon the concentration of cultural ma­
terial, would be less.
Refined excavation techniques and little
post~depositional disturbance are necessary prerequisites for the
separate identification, in long occupied localities, of cultural
debris resulting from an unstable adaptation.
In these circum­
stances that debris is overshadowed by the remnants of more stable
adaptations which have resulted in the buildup of materials from
many occupations for specific purposes rather than few occupations
for v~rious purposes.
The facts are, that of the five sites tested one had little
post-depositional disturbance (at the Venom Hill Site) and there
the excavation techniques were too little refined for a clear pic­
ture of what may be a Transitional to the Late Prehistoric midden
deposit.
In the reservoir area deposits from the early Middle Pre­
historic have not been identified.

170

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

Portions of the 3 x 3 Unit Middle Cluster at 41 JK 91 may
date Transitional to the Late Prehistoric period.
The clusters of
levels above and below the Middle Cluster have indi.idual tool
types which clearly predominate over others.
Artifacts believed to
be tools from the Middle Cluster are not dominated by any partic­
ular type category.
This condition may indicate a changing or
shifting emphasis in activity type during the periods of midden
accumulation.
Levels 5 and 6 of the 3 x 3 Unit are particularly interesting.
Level 4 contained an expanding stem projectile point that may be
classified as an early Late Prehistoric type (Fig. 15m and mt).
Level 7 has been dated to the late Middle Prehistoric period (Fig.
16).
Levels 5 and 6 contain no time diagnostic artifact types, in
fact, they contain no lithic artifacts.
Artifacts included in the
deposit are two m6dified pieces of Macrocallista nimbosa shell "(Fig.
l5q and ~) and a single, distally modified Crassostrea virginica
valve.
Various forms of turtle make up 81.37% of the combined
total body weight of 362.33 kg. for the levels.
Although these
statistics are swallowed up by the two more dense midden deposits,
Levels 4 and 7, in the cluster, Level 5 and 6 represent a departure
from the usual adaptation represented by deposits of the 3 x 3 Unit.
The other levels of the ~luster are more typical of deposits else­
where in the 3 x 3 Unit.
Although data from additional testing will be necessary to test
Proposition 4, it is believed that Levels 5 and 6 of the M~ddle·
Cluster, 3 x 3 Unit, 41 JK 91 are datable to a period Transitional
to the Late Prehistoric.
Characteristics of that midden deposit
are clearly and significantly different from a long standing adap­
tation recognized in both the deposits above and below Levels 5
and 6.
Deposits from the middle or late Middle Prehistoric and the
Late Prehistoric evidence occupation for specific purposes that
changed only slowly over time.
Archeological localities were occu­
pied on a rigidly soheduled seasonal basis that apparently remained
the same from Middle Prehistoric to the Late Prehistoric periods.
These conclusions are considered a positive test of the proposition
that societies during these time periods practiced a stable adap~
tive strategy.

On the coastal inland during the Late Prehistoric
and middle and late Middle Prehistoric periods
lived nomadic hunters and gatherers who were
significantly unlike present examples of that type
of society in temperate climates.
a) The rigorous and consistent through time scheduling for the
use of the archeological localities tested; the similarity of the
subsistence economy, lithic raw material and artifact types (with
slow and mQnor changes) probably signify the use of the area by a
single group or at least closely related groups.
Territorial bound­

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

171

aries if flexible were not obviously so from the data recovered
from these sites.
No innovation in adaptive strategy that could
possibly be associated with a new group of people occurred until
late in the Late Prehistoric period.
From at least the middle or
late, Middle Prehistoric until late in the Late Prehistoric the
tested sites were apparently occupied by similar groups.
b) The percent of very small terrestrial fauna in the assem­
blage of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 and in the reconstructed faunal
assemblages of 41 JK 41 and 41 JK 147 is probably a result of the
existence during prehistory of snares, traps or other facilities*
for collecting small fauna.
The presence in the faunal debris of
the remains of fish too small to be caught by hook is interpreted
as ~vidence for the existence (Tables 18-21) of facilities, perhaps
s~ines.
Such small fish are not found in assemblages from the
Trinity River Delta area of the coastal marine Zone (Dillehay and
Davidson 1975: Tables 8-11).
Ethnographically known non-sedentary
hunters and gatherers in non-marine temperate environments make
extensive use of implements which enhance energy but very little
use of facilities (see: Ethnographic Considerations).
No information is available at present from the study area
concerning the question of whether conflict was resolved by fric­
tion of fission.
Evidence was found that strongly suggests signif­
icant differences between the prehistoric society of the coastal
inland during the middle and late Middle Prehistoric and Late Pre­
historic times and known examples of non-sedentary hunters and
gatherers in temperate environments.

During the middle and late Middle Prehistoric and
Late Prehistoric periods but reaching a climax in
the late Middle Prehistoric inland hunters and
gatherers developed a structure that included
social stratification.
a) What may be identified as status goods have been found in
the late Middle Prehistoric deposits but not in middle Middle Pre­
historic deposits and Late Prehistoric deposits.
Just one burial
has been located, however, and during the periods involved site
function and season of occupation appear to have been limited.
b) The one item believed to be a possible status good (Fig.
l6u) occurred in late Middle Prehistoric deposits.
Thus status
goods may have been more frequent during the late Middle Prehis­
toric period as expected.
c) Evidence for the use of facilities was present in deposits
for the time period in question but did not concentrate in late
Middle Prehistoric.
*A facility is in this text defined as: an object(s) which prevents
.I
the movement of energy rather than enhances it.
~

172

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

It is felt that too little data is available to adequately
test Proposition 7.
However, it seems a possibility that either
the proposition will eventually have to be restated differently or
the expectations for the local expressions of the culture(s) under
the proposed circumstances modified.
It may be that the function
of archeological localities was too limited and/or their distance
from status centers too far for the' stated local expectations to
be verified.
Under ~ither or both of these conditions Proposition
7 could be legitimate but the existence of social stratification
would have to be identified as existing (or not) elsewhere or as
existing (or not) locally by a differnt means than was attempted
in this study.
In any event any restatement of the proposition
or of the local expectations would be premature before further ex­
amination of additional localities within the s~udy area has been
accomplished.

From the middle or early Middle Prehistoric periods
until late in the Lat~ Prehistoric period the same
peoples occupied the Central Texas Gulf Coastal in­
land.
Outside groups did not make that area part of
their territories.
a) Cultural deposits for these periods evidence a very stable
although slowly changing adaptation to the environment.
b) The animal portion of the subsistence economy for the middle
and late Middle Prehistoric as well as in the early portion of the
Late Prehistoric periods were extremely similar and remained similar
despite a change in basic lithic technology and a shift in prefer­
ence for the type of raw material used in manufacturing tools.
Tool types as recognized in this text changed but the percentage of
tools with like functions may not have.
It was noted that in the
3 x 3 Unit at the Venom Hill Site, distally modified Rangia valves
are important artifacts when a core-biface technology was in use
and that distally modified lithic pieces are important w~en a
~
flake-blade technology was in use.
If retouched shells and retouch­
edllibniss are combined the percentage of retouched pieces remains
fairly constant over time.
The input of Il new ll tool 'bypes made no
alteration in the archeologically visible exploitive system that
was in existence before their acceptance.
c) Cultural continuity is evidenced by what appears to have
been rigid scheduling for use of the sites.
That scheduling re­
mained constant thoughout the time periods in question.
These fulfilled expectations are a positive test of the pro­
position that the same peoples occupied the Central Texas Gulf
Coastal inland from middle or early Middle Prehistoric periods un­
til late in the Late Prehistoric period.
The stability recognized
in deposits from those time periods is porbably an indicator that
outside groups did not make the area part of their territories .

.
'

LOCAL AND REGIONAL COMPARISONS

173

A group or groups of peoples from outside the
coastal inland began late in the Late Prehistoric
period to include portions of ~he coastal inland
in their exploitive range.
a) An artifact assemblage was isolated by excavation of tbe
3 x 5 Unit at 41 JK 91 which in some traits resembled Plains type
assemblage from the north (Fig. 19).
Faunal material associated
with the assemblage in the upper levels of the 3 x 5 Unit refer­
enced a subsistence economy altered from that which had existed
for thousands of years previously.
b) Since the subsistence economy had changed in conjunction
with the tool assemblage, tools were probably used to perform
tasks in new ways.
c) It is unknown whether indigenous peoples were or were not
agents in the distribution of the Plains type assembl
The
change in subsistence economy occurred within a short
span an
replaced what could only have been a very successful lifeway.
Un­
der these conditions the likelihood that peoples from outside the
coastal plain rabher than indigenous peoples were involved is
great.
d) Evidence of conflict between indigenous peoples and north­
ern intruders is missing from the study area; it may be found in
the future.
Although Proposition 9 as stated has not been substantiated
by the fulfillment of all the expectations connected with it, it
is clear that late in the Late Prehistoric a new type of economy
came into use.
Whether the new pattern was accepted or rejected
by local peoples is as yet not understood.

174

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Roald Fryxell taught me a way to think on my own, I acknow­
ledge him as a great teacher and as a scientist.
Regretfully, the
first chance I have had to pay public tribute to this man occurs
after his death.
Two friends, Louise Jones and Bill Fawcett, have spent most of
their time these past months with me, working often late at night.
Each has contributed significantly by authoring a portion of the
manuscript but beyond that they have always been there to help.
Dave Dibble, Director of the Archeological Survey but also a
friend, has allowed me room to learn for myself.
He has gone
along with most of my schemes and supported me throughout.
I now
can contemplate many mistakes and plan to avoid them in the future.
I was fortunate to have a field crew composed of Nancy Clayton,
Mike Foerster, Louise Jones, Steve Kotter, Colleen Lamb. James Mc­
Michael, Gary Rutenburg, Lee Sappington, Duford Skelton, Deanna
Stevenson, Bob Stiba and Catherine Yates.
Persons, many as volunteers, who spent hours in the laboratory
over piles of very small matter deserve gratitude and my respect.
These include: Dan Brookshire, Darrell Creel, Donna Dickerson,
Colleen Lamb, Jane Laurens, Lynn Johnson, Joan Me1asky, Robert
Scott, Deanna Stevenson, Jim Wiggins, and again, Catherine Yates.
Members of the faculty at the University of Texas at Austin,
Dr. E. Mott Davis and particularly Dr. Dee Ann Story, have con­
tributed ideas and resources to the project.
In Edna, our home during the field season, the field office
of the Bureau of Reclamation and the Chamber of Commerce have been
friendly and helpful whenever possible.
Marsha Jackson was the field director during the last portion
9f the season.
This was at a time when I had to return to my
studies at Washington State University, and when the project could
not have been completed otherwise.
I reserve especial thanks for Mr. Harold Beall and Mrs. Melinda
Giles.
Mark Henderson, Bill Fawcett, James Goss, Hallett Hammatt,
Mark Fleisher, and Dave Dibble have kindly taken the time to read
over either part or all of this manuscript.
I ~incere1y appreciate
their comments.
There are few acts of friendship more difficult
than pointing out flaws in manuscript which are often an extension
of someone's ego.

175

REFERENCES CITED
Arnold, G. E.
1940"",
Notes on file at Texas Archeological Research
1941
Laboratories, The University of Texa~ at Austin.
Ba1cones Research Center.
Aten, Lawrence E.
N.d.a

A Chronological Framework for the Upper Galveston
Bay Area: Stratigraphic Testing at Wallisville
Reservoir, Texas.
Manuscript in preparation.

N.d.b

Aboriginal Cultural Ecology of the Upper Texas
Coast.
Ph.D. dissertation in preparation.

1971

Archeological Excavations at the Dow-Cleaver Site,
Brazoria, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
Teahniaal Bulletin No.1. The University of Texas at
Austin.

Aten, Lawrence E., and C. K. Chandler
1971
Archeological Investigations at the Harris County
Boy's School Cemetery, Harris County, Texas.
Report
submitted to the Texas Antiquities Committee.
Bernard, H. A.
1950
Quaternary Geology of Southeast Texas. Unpublished
Ph.D. Dissertation. Lousiana State University,
Baton Rouge.
Bernard, H. A., and R. J. LeBlanc
Resume of the Quaternary Geology of the Northwestern
1965
Gulf of Mexico. In: The Quaternary of the united states.
H.E. Wright, Jr .• aad~D. G. Frey (editors). Princeton
University Press, Princeton.
Binford, L. R.
1968
Methodological Consideration-the Archeological Use of
Ethnographic Data. In: Man the Hunter. R. B. Lee and
I. DeVore (editors). Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago.
1972

An Araheologiaal Perspeative. Seminar Press, New York.

Birdsell, J. B.
1968
Some Predictions for the Pleistocene Based upon
Equilibrium Systems among Recent Hunters. In: Man
the Hunter. R. B. Lee and I. DeVore (editors). Aldine
Publishing Co., Chicago.

176

REFERENCES CITED

Bolton, Herbert E.
1962
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century.
Russell, Inc., New York.

Russell and

Campbell, Thomas N.
Archeology of Central and Southern Sections of the Texas
1960
Coast. Bulletin ~f the Texas Archeological Society 29:
145-175.
Carr, John T., Jr.
1967
The Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water Devel­
opment Board. Report No. 53. Austin.
Crawford, Daymond D.
1965
The Granite Beach Site, Llano County, Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 36: 71-98.
Curry, J. R.
1960
Sediments and History of Holocene Transgression, Con­
tinental Shelf, Northwest Gulf of Mexico.
In~ Recent
Sediments, Northwest Gulf of Mexico. F. P. Shepard,
F. B. Ph1eger and T. H. van Andel (editors). American
Association of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa.
Deetz, James
1968
Hunters in Archeological Perspective. In: Man the Hunter.
R. B. Lee and I. DeVore,(editors). Aldine Publishing Co.,
Chicago.
Dibble, David S., and Dessamae Lorrain
1968
Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill Site, Val Verde
County, Texas. Texas Memorial Museum. Miscellaneous
Papers No.1. The University of Texas at Austin.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1975
Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity
River Delta, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey. Research
Report No. 51. The University of Texas at Austin.
Dillehay, Tom D., and Billy M Davidson
1975
Appendix IV: Statistical Data on Faunal Remains from
Excavated Sites in the Wallisville Reservoir. In: Pre­
historic Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity
River Delta, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey. Research
Report No. 51. The University of Texas at Austin.

177

REFERENCES CITED

Dillehay, Tom D., M. J. O'Brien, M. G. Mallouf and D. S.
An Archeological Reconnaissance of Areas to be
1972
ed by the Proposed Nuclear Power Plant, Austin
Texas, and Associated Power Transmission Lines
Austin, Waller, Fort Bend and Harris Counties,
Texas Archeological Survey. Research Report No.
The University of Texas at Austin.

Dibble
Affect­
County,
in
Texas.

16.

Flint, R. F.

1971

GZaciaZ and Quaternary GeoZogy. John Wiley and Sons,
Inc., New York.

Fox, Daniel E., R. J. Mallouf, N. O'Malley~and W. M. Sorrow
1974
Archeological Resources of the Proposed Cuero I
Reservoir, DeWitt and Gonzales Counties, Texas.
Texas Historical'CCmmig8idft and Texas Water Develop­
ment Board. ArcheoZogicaZ Survey Report No. 1~.
Austin.
Frazier, D. E.
1974
Depositional Episodes: Their Relationship to the
Quaternary Stratigraphic Framework in the Northwest­
ern Portion of the Gulf Basin. Bureau of Economic
GeoZogy CircuZar 74-1. The University of Texas at
Austin.
Freeman, L. G., Jr.
1968
A Theoretical Framework for Interpreting Archeological
Remains. In: Man the Hunter. R. B. Lee and I. DeVore
(editors). Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago.
Friedkin, J. F.

1945

A Laboratory Study of the Meandering of AZZuviaZ
Rivers. U. S. Waterways Experiment Station.

Fullen, W. L.
1968
Notes on Site 41HR84 on file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory. The University of Texas at Austin.
Balcones Research Center.
Hall, Grant D.
in
Archeological Investigations at the Allen's Creek
press
Nuclear Generating Station; Austin County, Texas.
Manuscript in Prepration. Texas Archeological
Survey. The University of Texas at Austin.
Hayden, B.
1975
The Carrying Capacity Delemma. In: PopuZation Studies
in ArcheoZogy and BioZogicaZ AnthropoZogy. A. C. Swed­
land (editor). A Symposium Memoirs of the Society for
American Archeology #30.

178

Helm, J.
1968

REFERENCES CITED

The Nature of Dogrib Socio-Territorial Groups. In:
Man the Hunter. R. B. Lee and I. DeVore (editors).
Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago.

Hester, T. R., and T. C. Hill
1971
An Initial Study of a Prehistoric Ceramic Tradition
in Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist 16: 195-203.
Hester, T. R., and R. C. Parker
The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in
1970
Goliad County, Southern Texas. Bulletin of Texas
Aroheologioal Sooiety 41: 1-24.
Hodge, F. W.
1971
Spanish Explorers in the Southern United
1543. Barnes and No~el
Inc., New York.

States~

1528­

Hopkins, S. H., J. W. Anderson and K. Horvath
The Brackish Water Clam Rangia ouneata as Indicator of
1973
Ecological Effects of Salinity Changes in Coastal Waters.
Report submitted to the U. S. Army Waterways Experiment
Station, Vicksburg, Mississippi.
Howard, C.
1971
Site survey form and notes on file, Harris County file.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Inglis, T. M.
1964
A History of Vegetation of the Rio Grande Plain.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Bulletin No. 45. Austin.
Jackson, Marsha F.
1977
TEXANA: Excavations at a 19th Century Inland Coastal
Town, Jackson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey.
Researoh Resport No. 56; Palmetto Bend Reservoir Series/
Volume 1. The University of Texas at Austin.
Joutel, Henri
1962
Joutel's Journal of La Salle's Last Voyage.
Books, New York.

Corinth

Krieger, Alex D.
1972
The Travels of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca in Texas and
Mexico, 1534-1536. In: An Ethnohistorical Survey of Texas
Indians, Lyndia Maury Skeels. Texas Historical Survey
Committee, Archeological Report No. 22. Austin.

REFERENCES CITED

179

LeBlanc, H. A., and W. D. Hodgson
Origin and Development of the Texas Shoreline; Gulf
1959
Coast Association of Geological Societies. Transaations
9: 197-220.
Lee, R. B., and I. DeVore (editors)
Man the Hunter. Aldine Publishing Company, Chicago.
1968
Lee, R.
1968

B.
What Hunters Do for a Living, or, How to Make Out on
Scarce Resources. In: Man The Hunter~ ~. B. Lee and
I. DeVore (editors). Aldine Publishing Co., Chicago.

Mallouf, R. J., Daniel E. Fox and A. K. Briggs
An Assessment of the Cultural Resources of Palmetto
1973
Bend Reservoir. Texas Historical Survey Committee and
Texas Water Development Board. Araheologiaal Survey
Report No. 11. Austin.
Mallouf, R. J., and T. Ray
1972
Notes on file at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory. Balcones Research Center. The University
of Texas at Austin.
McGowen, J. H., and J. L. Brewton
1975
Historiaal Changes and Related Coastal Proaesses; Gulf
and Maihtenanae Shoreline~ Matagorda Bay Area~ Texas.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas
at Austin.
McGuff, P. R., and Cox, Walley N.
A Survey of the Archeological and Historical Resources
1973
of the Areas to be Affected by the Clear Creek Flood
Control Project, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey.
Researah Report No. 28. The University of T~xas at
Austin.
Nelson, H. F., and E. E. Bray
Stratigraphy and History of the Holocene Sediments in
1970
the Sabine-High Island Area, Gulf of Mexico, In: Deltaic
Sedimentation, Modern and Ancient, J. P. Morgan and R.
·H. Shover (editors). Society of Economic Paleontologists
and Mineralogists, Speaial Publiaation No. 15: 48-77.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas from Prehistoria to Modern Times.
The University of Texas Press, Austin.

REFERENCES CITED

180

Patterson, L. W.
1971
Site Survey forms and notes on file at the Texas Archeo­
logical Research Laboratory, Harris County File. The
University of Texas at Austin.
P10g, Fred
1974
The Study of Prehistoric Change. Academic Press, New
York.
Sanders, W. T., and B. J. Price
1968
Mesoamerica, The Evolution of a Civilization. Random House
Press, New York.
Soucier, R. T., and A. R. Fleetwood
Origin and Chrono10gic Significance of Late Quaternary
1970
Terraces, Ouachita River, Arkansas and Louisiana.
Geological Society of America, Bulletin 81:869-890.
Saxe, J.
1921

Six Men of Indostan. In: An Argosy of Fables; A Represen­
tative Selection from the Fable Literature of Every Age
and Land, Frederick T. Cooper (editor). Frederick A.
Stokes Company, New York.

Scovill, D. H., G. J. Gordon, and K. M. Anderson
Guidelines for the Preparation of Statements of Environ­
1972
mental Impact of Archeological Resources. A mimeographed
report prepared by the National Park Service, Arizona
Archeological Center, Tucson.
Sellards, E. H.
1940
Pleistocene Artifacts and Associated Fossils from Bee
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of
America 51: 1627-1658.
Service, E. R.
1966
The Hunters.
Jersey.

Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New

Skinner, S. A., And J. Gallagher
1974
An Evaluation of the Archeological Resources at Lake
Whitney, Texas. Institute for the Study of Earth and
Man, Souther Methodist University, Dallas, Texas.
Snow, D. R.
1972
Rising Sea Level and Prehistoric Cultural Ecology in
Northern New England. American Antiquity 37 (2): 211-221.

/

REFERENCES CITED

181

Sorrow, W. M., H. J. Shafer and R. E. Ross
Excavations"at Stillhouse HGllow Reservoir. Papers
1967

of the Texas Archeological Salvage

ProJect~

No. 11.

The University of Texas at Austin.
Story, Dee Ann
Archeological Investigation at Two Central Texas Gulf
1968
Coast Sites. State Building Commission, Archeological
Program, Report No. 13, Austin, Texas.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and E. B. Jelks
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
1962
Texas Memorial Museum, Bulletin No.4. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, A. D. Krieger and E. B. Jelks
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
1954

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society No.
25.

Swanton, J. R.
1952
The Indian Tribes of North America, Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 145. Washington D. C.
Taylor, W. W.
1948
A Study of Archeology. Memoirs of the American
Anthropological Association J No. 69. Menasha.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
1974
A Preimpoundment Study of Palmetto Bend Reservoir and
a Basic Survey of the Lavaca River Basin. Appendix in
U. S. Bureau of Reclamation, Palmetto Bend Project Texas J

Final Environmental Impact Statement.
Texas Water Development Board
1974
Additional Considerations Relative to the Environmental
Impact of the Palmetto Bend Reservoir Project, Texas.
Appendix in U. S. Bureau of Reclamation, Palmetto Bend
ProJect~

Texas~

Final Environmental Impact Statement.

Thomas, H. L., and R. W. Ehrich
1969
Some Problems in Chronology. World Archeology 1 (2):
143-156.
Thornbury, W. D.

1969

Principles of Geomorphology, Second Edition. John
Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York.

Toffler, A.

1970

Future Shock. Random House, New York.

182

REFERENCES CITED

Treganza, A. E., and S. F. Cook
1948
Quantitative Investigation of Aboriginal Sites.
American Antiquity 13: 287-297.
U. S. Bureau of Reclamation (Southwest region)
1974
Palmetto Bend Project~ TexaB~ Final Environmental Impact
Statement. Prepared by the Bureau of Reclamation, Depart­
ment of Interior.
Wagner, P. L.
1960
Human UBe of the Earth.

Free Press, Glencoe, Illinois.

Wakefield, W. H.
1968
Archeological Surveys of Palmetto Bend and Choke Canyon
Reservoirs, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project
Survey Reports3 No.5. The University of Texas at Austin.
Wakefield, W. and D. H. Riskind
1967
Survey notes on file at Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory. Ba1cones Research Center, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Walley, R.
1955
A Preliminary Report on the Albert George Site in Fort
Bend County. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
26: 218-234.
Wheat, J. B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bureau of American Ethono1ogy,
Bulletin 154: 143-252.
Works Progress Administration
1938
Excavation of the Morhiss Site. Field notes filed at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. Ba1cones Research
Center, The University of Texas at Austin.

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX

I

THE ARTIFACTS AND ARTIFACT TYPOLOGY

William B. Fawcett, Jp.

LITHIC DEBRIS ANALYSIS
Archeological research, during the 1974 field season, at Pal­
metto Bend Reservoir resulted in the recovery of 3986 lithic arti­
facts, of which 3569 are debris and 417 are tools.
Lithic debris
consists of all lithic material that does not exhibit wear (as
revealed under lOX magnification, and consisting of striations,
polish, smoothing, and/or hi~ge fractures), or any form of retouch
(removal of small flakes from the edge of the chip or flake).
Lithic debris were subjected to a number of sortings.
Indi­
vidual attributes were measured in each sorting.
Independent~
measurement of debris attributes places restrictions on the types
of analyses that can be performed; under thes~ conditions state­
ments can only be made on the internal variation of each attribute.
For non-dtsc~ete variables the mean and standard deviation
(the square root of the variance) were computed for each excava­
tion unit and level.
Comparison between sample means and variances
were made through the use of t tests and F tests respectively.
For discrete variables Chi-square tests were utilized ot examine
patterning within and between sites.
The statistical tests were used to combine small artifact
samples into larger clusters.
The procedure used in regrouping
minimized the within group variability and maximized the between
group differences.
Regrouping the data was necessary because of
the small sample size~~
I~~g~neral;,w±thi*0al11$ites at Palmetto
Bend, the number of artifacts devreased as depth increased.
How­
ever, significant differences did occur between the artifact as­
semblages in the upper and lower portions of most of the sites,
so variation in artifact density is interpreted as the result of
differences in cultural activity rather than differences caused
by natural disturbance.
It has been shown that variability in
sample size can account for much of the variation in statistical
tests (Hays 1973: 380-382, 419-422; Mosteller et al. 1961: 262-267).
Combination of units equalized sample sizes, and permitted more
accurate assessment of changes in lithic artifacts over time.
The statistical tests that were used (Chi-square, t test, and
F test) are parametric; their correct use requires accepting the
assumption that the varibles are normally distributed and that
samples have been drawn randomly from their universe.
In every
case, where the parametric tests were calculated on all possible
pairs of excavation units, interpretation of the statistical sig­
nificance is difficult due to the lack of independence betw~en
tests (Hays 1973: 478).
Even though significance may be difficult
to measure in such situations consistency of results can be used
to argue for statistical significance.
In most cases where the
tests were employed the results show consistent and therefore
tr s ignificant" clusterings.
185

186

APPENDIX I

Chi-square tests presented similar problems, particularly in
relation to sample size variation and changes in the magnitude of
the expected values.
Recombination of samples increased the uni­
formity in sample size.
Where Chi-square tests were used expected
values were required to be greater than 5 in any cell of the con­
tingency table.
If expected values in any table were less than 5,
then cells would be recombined to permit an increase in these values.
However, recombination of cells creates, 1) a problem of statistical
independence, and 2) questions about the randomness of the sample
(see Hays 1973: 727).
For all of the continuous variables (examples: flake length,
and flake thickness) histograms were plotted.
Since interval size
or number of cells can affect the shape of the curve, a standard­
ized number of cells was used for each variable.
The number of
cells required was determined through the use of Sturgis' rule

K = 1 + {D.DD (log. re)}
l~

where re equals the number of cases, and K is the number of cells)
(Freund and Williams 1958: 21, 42).
The value of K was computed
for each large sample (n~$C50) of a continuous variable.
The mean
was then computed.
Mean values for each continuous variable were
then truncated to an interger form, and this number was used as the
standard number of cells for a given variable.
Histograms were used for examining the variables for bimodal
distributions or severe skewing th~t would
stort t e
mean
or contradict the assumption of a normal distribution.
RESULTS OF THE ANALYSIS
In the debris sorting process, flakes were separated from
chips.
Flakes are pieces removed from cores or tools which retain
a striking platform.
Chips are pieces removed from cores and tools
which have no striking platform.
The relative frequency of chips­
to-flakes per level (based on analysis of the 3 x 3 Unit and 3 x 5
Unit pits at 41 JK 91) had a positive correlation so the two cate­
gories were combined.
Lithic debris was also sorted into primary
(cortex on 100% of the exterior surface), secondary (less than
100%), and interior (no~cortex on the exterior surface) chips and
flakes.
Skinner (1971: 158-162) has argued that the percentages of
these flakes and chip types indicate the stage or position of a
site in the tool manufacture process; as percentage of interior
flakes and chips increases the physical and/or social distance
from the iithic raw material increases.
Throughout the units ex­
cavated during the 1974 season interior flakes' predominate.
In the
3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 secondary flakes and chips increase in rela­
tive frequency over time.
Cobble size, ~hape, and quality will aifect the size of the

LITHIC DEBRIS ANALYSIS

187

lithic debris as well as the flake and chip type percentages. No
modern chert resource study is yet available for the Lavaca-Navidad
drainage, therefore very little is known about the ranges in size
and shape of cobbles.
This necessitates, for this report at least,
the assumption that chert cobbles are normally distributed in terms
of size and shapeJaround some unknown mean, and that variation in
cobbles and their availability changes minimally over time.
F1ake~ were sorted by striking platform type.
Four types are
recognized: 1) natural (also called cortex)*, 2) single facet (also
called simple prepared, simple facet, and unfacet), 3)·mult~pile
facet (also called facet), and 4) crushed.
Results from this sort­
ing are presented in Table 5B (Platform Type).
A Chi-square test performed on the distribution of flakes by
fplatform type for the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 was significant (Xi .=
141.14, d.f. = 35, p = 0.0001).
Examination of the contingency
table and of percentages for each platform type per level suggests
a break between natural Levels 3 and 4 at 41 JK 91.
In the upper
portion of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 (natural Levels 1 to 3) mul­
tiple facet platforms predominate, while in the lower portion (nat­
ural Levels 4 to 9) single facet and cortex platforms predominate.
All whole flakes were sorted according to five flake shapes:
subparallel, parallel, divergent, convergent, and intermediate
(Stiles, Hay and OfNel111974).
In all sites the divergent flake
shape presominates.
The second most prominent type varies, as
well as the kurtosis and variance of the sample distribution.
Maximum length and thickness was measured on whole flakes
(Table 6A and C).
The mean and standard deviation were calculated
for each excavation unit for both of ~hese flake dimensions.
Re­
grouping of the samples was done through the use of F tests (t
tests on the means were insigificant in general, = 0.10) .indicating
that significant changes in variance occurred over time.
Three
clusters were formulated on the basis of the F tests on flake and
chip thickness for the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91: cluster 1 (natural
Levels 1 to 3), cluster 2 (natural Levels 4 to 7), and cluster 3
(natural Levels 8-to 9).
The three clusters probably represent a
gradual long-term change in flake and chip length that has been
partitioned where variance between samples became statistically
significant (a = 0.10).
Variance in thickness and lengflh increases over time while the
mean thickness remains constant.
Average length also increases
over time.
If this general trend of increasing flake length over
time is "real", then cultural material in the 3 x 5 Unit should be
later than the material in the upper levels of the 3 x 3 Unit at
41 JK 91 due to the increase in average flake length.
This hypo­
thesis is supported by the correlational and cluster analysis on
*McCormick 1974: 122, Shafer 1969: 3-5, and Hester 1971: 106
provide discussion, definition, and illustration of these platform
types.

I-'

ex>
ex>

TABLE

5A. DEBRIS TYPE: Order of Removal frnm Core

CHIP
and
41JK16
41JK51O
41JK41
41JK91
41JK147
FLAKE
3 x 5 m. Unit
3 x 3 m. Unit, Natural Levels
TYPES
UPPER LOWER
0-20 cm. >20 em.
2
8
1
4 5~66 ; 7
3
9
II"
6
22
2
Primary.
1
10
11 20 28
5
0
8
6
12
0
47
122
11
12
Secondary
76
90 104 116 11
39
1 44 17
216
4
Interior
138
493
100
44
259
71
307 277 192 29
4 114 59 21
408
191
637
113
TOTAL
57
346
120
408 401 336 45
5 166 82 25
636

:t>.
'I::J
'I::J
t:tj

<:
t:::l

hj
~

TABLE 5B. FtAKE PLATFORM TYPE
41JK16
PLATFORM
TYPE
Natural
Single
Multiple
Crushed
TOTAL

13
20
23
8
64

41JK41
UPPER LOWER
10
43
14
110
170
35
17
2
61
340

hj

41JK50
4
15
15
2
36

41JK147
41JK91
3 x 5 m. Unit
3 x 3 .m. Unit, Natural Levels
8
1
0-20 cm. >20 cm.
7
2
4 5-6
9
3
15 28 27
28
2 31 14
11
0
9
57
1 20 14
43 10
60
52 57
119
17
9
125
126 95 65
6
7
17
0 29 10
56
2
6
1
11
15 12
6
0
27
0
0
4 86 40 16
155
208 192 141 25
328
45

LITHIC DEBRIS ANALYSIS

189

lithic tool frequencies presented later in this appendix.
Finally, examination of the lithic debris for "fire popping"
was done (see Table 7).
A Chi-square test performed on the fre~
quency of burned debris within the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 demon­
strated that the variation in numbers of burned lithic debris be­
tween levels are significant (j2= 74.153, d.f. = 7, P = 0.05).
Interpretation of the contingency table suggests a break betwli!en
natural Levels 3 and 4, with the lower portion of 41 JK 91 having
much greater anounts of burned debris than one would expect at
random.
The excavators noted a higher density of burned rock in
natural Level 7 or the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91.
As yet this has
not been verified by quantitiative analysis of burned rock residue.
INTERPRETATION OF LITHIC DEBRIS PATTERNING
Analysis concentrated on the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91.
This
Unit, selected because it exhibited a minimal amount of disturbance,
was isolated and excavated by natural levels.
Other units in the
reservoir were more disturbed.
Interpretations of cultural mate­
rial from the 3 x 3 Unit have been used as a key which mixed as­
semblages may be referenced to.
It must be emphasized that the
3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 is a small portion of a much larger site
which is only one of many sites in the reservoir.
Yet, by neces­
sity a great many interpretations are based on that single unit.
Observations (Based On 3 x 3 Unit, 41 JK 91)
1. The percentage of secondary flakes increases over time.
2. The percentage of interior flakes decreases slightly over
time but remains dominate.
3. There is a shift from single and cortex platforms to
multiple facet platforms over time.
4. Divergent shaped flakes consistently make up the majority
of the flakes by shape.
5. Debris density increases over time.
6. Fire popped lithic materials are more abundant in earlier
periods.
7. The proportion of flake to chips is relatively constant
over time.
8. Flake length and variance in length increases over time.

APPENDIX I

190

Covering Explanations
1. The observed trends are the result of an increase in sample
size over time.
2. The observed trends represent a change from a core-biface
technology to a flake-blade tool manufacture technology
over time.
3. The observed trends represent fluctuation in the availa­
bility and morphology of lithic raw material.
Discussion
If all the observations are the result of sample variability,
then one would expect, a) inconsistency in the alternative expla­
nations in relation to expected versus observed patterning, and
b) that samples of greater size (n~100) will show greater similar­
ity in terms of means and variances than smaller samples.
Examina­
tion of Ta~le 6A (Flake Thickness), and 6C (Flake Length) suggests
that indeed the second test implication is present.
Examipation
of the first tesi implication must await examination of other ex­
planations.
If all of the observed trends are the result of a change in
the structure of the tool manufacturing process, then one would
expect:
1. An increase in the frequency of para~le1 fa1kes (as a re­
sult of blade manufacture;
2. an increase in the frequency of single and multiple facet
platforms (retouching flake tools, and core preparation);
3. and, probably, an increase in flake length (but decrease in
variance, due to blade manufacturing).
Parallel flakes have not been observed to have increased over time
(observation 4).
Multiple facet platforms do increase (observation
3).
Flake variance in size does not decrease over time (observa~
tion 8).
Some of the predictions based on this explanatory hypo­
thesis are in direct contradiction to what has been observed.
The
hypothesis must therefore, be rejecte9 as an inadequate explanation.
Another explanation, would require evaluation of one of the
original assumptions made about lithic raw material availability
and variations in size and shape.
Since no information is avail­
able about present lithic resources, there is no basis for evalu­
ating the explanation.
The only available explanation that fits the data is the first
one.
It has been observed that many of the observations are in di­
rect contradiction to one another.
Neither of the other explana­
tions fully cover all the observations.
This may be in part due

Table 6.
FLAKE DIMENSIONS

A.

WHOLE FLAKE THICKNESS
Flake
41 JK 16

Thickness
(em)
0.00-0.15
0.15-0.30
0,30-0.45
0.45-0.60
0.60-0.75
0.75-0.90
0" 90-1. 05
1.05-1.20
1.20
Total
Mean
s. d.

B.

1

7
6
3

4
3
7

1
32

0.59
0.39

Sub paraliel

C.

74
94
34
7

5

41 JK 50

Lower

16

1
3
9
5
1

11

2
2
3

2

WHOLE FLAKE SHAPE
Flake
41 JK 16
Shape

Parallel
Divergent
convergent
Interrned ia te
Total

41 JK 41
Upper

6
20
3

29

WHOLE FI--AKE LENGTH
Flake
41 JK 16

1
1
3

221
0.27
0.30

1
35

41 JK 41

Upper
6
36
85
40

53
220

2

1
1

3
1

0.49
0.25

4
8
15
6
4

41 JK 41

122
0.35
0.23

2 Oem
4
13

14
4
1
2

2
26
61
27
10
4
5
1

3

62
15

21
47
24

6
3

11
7

38

4
5
5
2
1

5&6
2
2

7
21
39
21
10

37

4
6
1
1

10
1
4

1
3

1
1

<)

8
4
13

93

31
17
2

1

38
0.33
0.20

2

o

1
135

110
126
0.26
0.21
0.27
0.19
0.17
0.15

14
0.30
0.25

4
0.27
0.91

96
0.26
0.18

32
0.32
0.17

12
0.21
0.13

41 JK 50

Lower

37

D-20em
12
56
26
16
5

2

23

0.26
0.23

____________~------------------~~~~--------------~----------------- 41 JK 147

4
3
9
2

3
2

41 JK 147

(3x5 Unit)
0-20em
20em
6
3
17
7
::'0
20
19
25
10
117
43

1

2

16

6

20
56
24
22
133

13

15
39
16
17
93

51
15
15
120

4

3

11

5&6

1
4

'>

2

2
3

15

4

7

10
10
39
16
21
96

9

8

26

2

3
12

7
8
32

33
4
3
4

12

1

4.00
Tota
Mean

s. d.

2':>
2.::'
1. 25

222
1. 35

0.62

41
1. 34
0.'>6

21
1. 76
.56

2
5
120

1.80
1. 02

38
1.62
0.65

2
3
2.
2
124
118
1. '>2
1. 36
0.7'>
0.72

0.77

IS

67
54
31
7
8
5
1

2

4
93
1.69

58
40
30
187

41 JK 147

41 JK 91

41 JK 50

~~~--~--------------~~~--~~~------------~~~~--~~~----~~----~----~~----~~~~~----~----~------g
0.00-0.40
7
1
2
1
2
1S
5
5
0.40-0.80
17
1
2
38
4
11
39
41
23
5
15
18
2
38
0.80-1. 2 I)
96
3
5
29
25
7
38
22
5
1.20-1.50
7
60
13
5
31
17
14
15
1
14
2
28
6
17
11
6
1.60-2.00
3
'>
17
4
11
8
11
1
2
2
2.00-2.40
15
4
3
2
6
2
6
3
8
1
2
3
2.40-2.80
2
2
2
3
3
2
2.80-3.20
3
1
2
2
2
1
6
3.20- 3.60
3
3.i)O-4.00

183
0.27
0.16

14
1. 34

0.47

4
1. 32
0.39

9"
1.41
0.69

32
1. 53
0.')9

12
1.5'·)
O. ')6

188

.40
O. A

APPENDIX I

192

TABLE 7. THERMAL MODIFICATION OF LITHIC DEBRIS

r

Natural
Level

41 JK 91
m; Unit
- :Number of Thermally Modified Flakes
Absent
Present
~

~

.~;

1
2
3
4
5-6
7
8
9
TOTAL (n)

:·3~x·3

390
377
310
41
4
143
65
48
1378

~

~

J

18
24
26
4
1
23
17
22
135

to the fact that the obseryations a~diGr test implications are in­
correct.
Variations resulting from small sample size and differ­
ences in sample size can only be corrected through further excava­
tion work.
An attempt must be made to obtain a larger sample of
deeper portions of the sites.
At present, sample variation does appear to be the most justi­
fiable explanation; however, such an explanation is anthropologir~
cally inadequate.
In terms of an anthropological explanation, the
explanation of Observed trends as being the result of a change in
tool manufacture process appears to be the most strongly supported.
Furthermore, the tool analyais suggests that this explanation is
indeed correct.

LITHIC TOOL ANALYSIS
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
A number of errors in analytic procedure for lithic debris
were not made in the tool analysis.
Of primary importance, obser­
vations for a series of attributes (see Table 8 for list) were made
on each artifact and placed on individual artifact cards. This
procedure made possible the examination of co-variance of attri­
butes and the portential application of multivariate statistics.
The first step in the tool analysis was the formulation of a
typological system.
Three altennative statistical techniques ap­
peared to be applicable: numerical taxonomy (Sakal and Sneath
1963), Spaulding's statistical approach to Krieger's typological
method (Spaulding 1953, 1960), or a tree-classification system

LITHIC DEBRIS ANALYSIS

193

Table 8. tithic'Tool:Attribute Lists.
Variab les

States of the Variables

CORES:

Length (em.)
Width (em.)
Thickness (em.)
Striking platform
Bipolar

> or < mean
4.1
? or < mean = 3.0
> or. < mean = 2.1 _~
single and natural, or multiple
present or absent

BIFACES:

> or < mean = 3.38
Length (em.)
> or < mean = 1.99
Width (em.)
O.O-O.S, 0.51-1.0, 1.01-1.5
Thickness (em.)
Edge angle (degree) .. 0-45, 46-90
interior or secondary
Flake type
present or absent
Wear
lateral, distal, proximal, all
Wear position
edges, lateral/distal
> or < mean = 1.S9
Stem width (em.)
Stem length (em.)
> or < mean = 0.969
> or < mean = 1.51
Shoulder width
plano/convex, or biconvex
Cross section
ovate, triangular, or stemmed
Shape
Edge shape
straight or curved

RETOUCH
PIECES:

Length (em.)
Width (em.)
Thickness (em.)
Edge angle (degree)
Flake type
Flake platform
Flake shape
Polish
Striations
Smoothing
Use fractures
Position of wear
Surface of retouch
Flake curvature
Edge shape
Bit
Retouch position

0-1.4, 1.41-2.8, 2.81-4.2, 4.21-5.6,
5.61-7.0
0-1.0, 1.01-2.0, 2.01-3.0, 3.01-4.0,
4.0l-S.0
0-0.24, 0.2S-0.48, 0.49-0.72, 0.73­
0.96, 0.97-1.2
.
0-20, 20.1-40, 40.1-60, 60.1-80,
80.1-90
primary, secondary, interior
natural/cortex, single, or multiple
divergent, parallel, sub-parallel,
convergent, intermediate
present or absent
present or absent
present or absent
present or absent
distal, lateral, distal/lateral, or
all edges
arched or planular
straight or curved
straight or curved
present or absent
distal, lateral, lateral/distal, or
all edges

194

APPENDIX I

(Whallon 1972).
Whallon has discussed the relative merit of each
of these approaches to artifact classification, and con~ludes by
supporting the tree-type classification scheme.
Whallon's argu­
ments appear to be sound and justifiable; a tree-classification
scheme was adopted for use in analysis of lithic tools from Pal-'
metto Bend.
A number of problems became immediately apparent in the ap­
plication of the tree-classification scheme.
The first of these
is that artifacts are often in fragmentary condition making it
impossible to consistently observe all of the original attributes
on each.
Attributes that are present even on fragmentary imple­
ments must ~e selected for creating the hierarchy.
Second, attributes must be selected that can be directly ob­
served in the field.
It would, for example, be very difficult to
base a typology on wear position and then to observe this variable
in the field.
Statistical tests performed on artifacts from Pal­
metto Bend demonstrated that wear position is highly associated
with retouch position (X 2 = 37.35, d.f. = 9, p = 0.005), and there­
fore retouch could be substituted for wear position.
Retouch posi-~
tion is much more observable than wear position in the field.
Thirdly, independence of attributes is also necessary when
selecting attributes for use in a tree-typology.
When a flake is
removed from a core, flake width and thickness will largely be a
function of flake length or vice versa.
Relationships such as this
result in problems of attribute independence.
An attempt was made
to select attributes from distinct clusters ~f non-independent at­
tributes, such as size (thickness, length, and shape) and function
(edge angle, wear type, wear position, use edge position~edge
shape, etc.).
Finally, a tremendous number of calculations was required for
the development of a tree-type classification.
Chi-square tests
must be performed between each pair of attributes in order to es­
tablish the hierarchy.
Computer facilities are presently unavail­
able, and therefore, the number of Chi-square tests calculated at
each level of the tree were reduced to a mmnimum.
Formation of a tree-type classification necessitated the de­
velopment of an attribute hierarchy.
Such a hierarchy is based on
the sum of the Chi-square values for each attribute and at each
branch of the hierarchy (Whallon 1972: 24, 28).
In order to find
the attribute for the first branch of the tree, 153 Chi-square
tests were necessary for retouched pieces alone!
The attribute
with the highest sum of the Chi-squares became the first branch of
the hierarchy (for retouched pieces this attribute is thickness).
This attribute was then used to split the artifacts into sub-g~otlps.
The calculations were repeated for each of the sub-groups in order
to find the next step in the hierarchy, and so forth.
In order to reduce the number of calculations, a 10% random
sample of lists of attribute pairs was made at each step of the
hierarchy and the selected pairs were sued in the sum of the Chi­
square computations.
This procedure is based on the assumption

LITHIC DEBRIS ANALYSIS

195

that significant attributes would be repeatedly significant, and
therefore have a higher probability of being selected through ran­
dom sampling.
Separate tree-classifcations were developed for
cores, retouched pieces, and bifaces.
Corrections were made to take into account the variation in
the number of degrees of freedom between different Chi-square cal­
culations.
In the development of the classification scheme for
Palmetto Bend the number'of divisions'or states of a given vari­
able was allowed to be non-binary, and therefore variation in the
number of degrees of freedom resulted.
The number of degrees of
freedom influences or is associated with the size of the Chi-square
value and levels of significance.
In order to standardize the
Chi~square values, the value of each Chi-square test was divided
by the number of degrees of freedom and these values were summed
to determine ranking in the hierarchy

n

8

= .r
x

1­

where k equals the number of degrees of freedom, s the sum of the
Chi-squares, and n equals the number of pairs in the sample.
This
correction is not totally satisfactory, but little else could be
done without recalculating all of, the Chi-square tests and recoding
the tool data into binary code.
Cal~ulations resulted in the development of 31 lithic tool
types.
Each type is discrete and clearl~ replicable.
Table 11 (Lithic Tool Inventory) presents the frequency'of
each tool type by level and site.
Examination of the table reveals
that there are clusters of tool types present.
These clusters
within the table are pri~arily the result of making continuous
variables discrete.
The 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 was used to examine the variability
in tools over time.
Percentages of each tool type per level were
calculated.
Pearson's r correlation coefficient was utilized to
measure the variability-between levels.
Elementary linkage anal­
ysis (Dollar and Jensen 1971: 223-224) performed on the correlation
matrix (see Table 10,. correlation matrix) revealed three major
clusters that were identical to those derived from the lithic de­
bris analysis (cluster 1, Levels 1 to 3; cluster 2,~tev~ls-4 to 7;
and cluster 3, natural Levels 8 to 9).
Correlations were also made with the material from the 3 x 5
Unit on the same site.
In all cases large negative correlations
were obtained (r>-0.40) with the magnitude of the negative corre­
lations increasing with increased depth into the 3 x 3 Unit.
Of the clusters, the fourth (3 x 5 Unit) is the most different
from all the others.
The middle cluster, cluster two, due to the
correlation values, should be split so that Level 4 would be com­
bined with Levels 1 to 3, and Level 7 with Levels 8 and 9.

APPENDIX

196

r

Table 9 • Lithic Tool Types.
General
Type

Thickness
( cm. )

Length
(em. )

1

core

<2.1

<4.1

2

core

>2.1

>4.1

3

core

4

biface

~

Wear

Cross
Section

Gorirments

core fragments
<0.6

present

plano!
convex

includes: Per­

diz., Plainview
projectile
points

5

biface

<0.6

present

biconvex

includes: Mar­
aos., Ellis.,
Perdiz., Alba
projectile
points

6

biface

<0.6

absent

plano!
convex

includes: Per­
diz., Saallorn
projectile
points

7

biface

<0.6

absent

biconvex

includes:

Clifton, Saal­
lorn., Gran­
bury., Perdiz.,
Alba., Darl
projectile
points
8

biface

>0.6

present

biconvex

includes: Mor­
hiss., Abaso lo,

Maraos, Kent
proj ecti1e
points
9

biface

>0.6

absent

plano!
convex

10

biface

>0.6

absent

biconvex

11

biface

miscellaneous

197

LITHIC DEBRIS ANALYSIS

Table 9 . Continued.
~

General Type

Thickness

Cor

x

Wear Position

12

retouched piece

unknown

13

retouched piece

<0.3484

present

lateral

14

retouched piece

<0.3484

present

distal

15

retouched piece

<0.3484

present

lal:e ral / dis tal

16

retouched piece

<0.3484

present

absent

17

retouched piece

<0.3484

absent

lateral

18

retouched piece_,

<0.3484

absent

distal

19

retouched piece

<0.3484

absent

lai~eral/ dis

20

retouched piece

<0.3484

absent

all edges

21

retouched piece

<0.3484

absent

absent

22

retouched piece

>0.3484

present

lateral

23

retouched piece

>0.3484

present

distal

24

retouched piece

>0.3484

present

lateral/distal

25

retouched piece

>0.3484

present

all edges

26

retouched piece

>0.3484

present

absent

27

retouched piece

>0.3484

absent

lateral

28

retouched piece

> 0 . 3484

absent

di:3tal

29

retouched piece

>0.3484

absent

lateral/distal

30

retouched piece

>0.3484

absent

all edges

31

retouched piece

>0.3484

absent

absent

tal

198

APPENDIX I

TABLE

10. PEARSON'S r CORRELATION OF LEVELS USING TOOL TYPES
41 JK 91, 3 x 3 UNIT

A. Natural
Level
1

2
3
4
7
8
9

1
1.000

2
0.463
1.000

3
0.623
0,889
1. 000

4
0.668
0,371
0.301
1.000

7
0.224
0.310
0.091
0.435
1.000

B. ELEMENTARY LINKAGE ANALYSIS

Cluster 1

lCo..uster 2

Cluster 3

high negative correlation
low positive correlation
high positive correlation
low negative correlation

8
0.051
0.112
0.148
0.438
0.392
1.000

9
0.044
0.078
0.329
0.894
0.134
0.459
1. 000

LITHIC DEBRIS ANALYSIS

199

INTERPRETATION OF LITHIC TOOLS
By examining the tool types and frequencies for each tool
cluster, a number of observations about changes over time can be
made.
Observation
1. There is a shift from thick to thin bifaces over time.
2. A decrease occurs in the presence of cortex on tools over
time.
3. Frequency of wear on bifaces d~creases over time.
4. There is an increase in retouch piece usage and speciali­
zation over time.
5. A shift from bi-convex to plano-convex biface cross sec­
tions occurs over time.
Covering Explanation
1. The variability observed is the result of the increase in
sample size over time.
2. The variability observed is the result of change from a
biface-core tool manufacture process to a flake-blade
technology.
Discussion
If the second explanation is correct, then one would expect
to find, 1) increase in pereentage of retouch and flake tools over
time, 2) shift from bi-convex to plano-convex in biface cross sec­
tion (reflecting the use of flakes or blades versus cores), and
3) an increase in specialized retouch or flake tools over time,
and diversification in order to replace functional categories of
earlier biface types.
All of these test implications have been
observed at 41 JK 91.
As earlier discussed in the lithic debris analysis section,
one of the primary criteria for accepting the proposition that
variability was a result of -variation in sample size was consist­
ency.
Was the observed patterning between different attributes co
consistent? As stated in the previous paragr~ph, the observed ma­
terial can be explained in terms of a shi"ft from core-bifaces to
flake and blade tool manufacture and use.
This observed patterning
appears to be consistent.

N

0
0

TABLE 11 •.Lithic ':tool Inventory
Type
Number
1
2
.' 3
4
5
6
7
·8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
Total

41JK41
41JK16

.£E.,£er

Lower

1
2
3
1

41JK50
1
1

5
2

1

3
2

1
~

1

'lj
'lj

I:t.:I

2

~

t:::J

1

I-j

><i

2

1
3
1
4
2
2

1
5
9
8
1
8
4

I-j

1
1
1

1
1
1
1
4
2
1

1
1
3
2

1
1
25

1
1

2
60

5

15

Table 1I. Continued.
41JK91
Type
Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

lL

Total

41JK47
(3 x 5
m. Unit)
0-20
'-20
em.
em.

(3 x 3 m. Unit, Natural Levels)
2 -1
1
4 5-6 -2
8 -2.

1
1
2
3

1.

1
1
1
·2

2

1

""

1

S11/
W3-4
2
1

1

1
;­

1

1
1
1

1
3

1

2

1

4

6

2
1

3
1

(Natural Levels)
2 -1 i
L

1

2

1

Other
Pits

2
2

6
2

2
1

1

t;

1

I-f
f-3

1
1
2
3

2

2
1

:::r:

1

I-f

1

2

1

I;:j

1

t:tj

1
1
2

2
1

1

1

3
2

2
1
3

1
1
1
11
9
4
4
1
1
2
2
1
1

()

1

1
7
1
5
2

7
2
6
1
1
1

1

1
1

1
2
1

4
1

2
4
1

1

1

2
1
1

2

1
1
3

1
2

3

1
1

1

3

1
21

2
31

1
1
1
1
1
1

1
1

1
1

1
4
3
1

2
2

1
2
1
2
4
7
4
3
2
2
1

\:x:!

:0

..;.

I-f

Ci}

~

1

'%:.

1

2
1
2
1
3
1

~

t;

h::

Ci}

I-f

Ci}

1

2
2

1
1

1
2

3

2

54 TI "IT

3"

0

1
2S

7;

1

16

28

3

1

18

34

1

2

17

N

0

......

202

APPENDIX I

GENERAL INTERPRE1ATION OF LITHIC ARTIFACTS
The interpretation and explanation of lithic debris patterning
argues that variability may be accounted for by a change in sample
size.
Results from analysis of the lithic tools suggests that an
alte~native explanation is true; that there was change from a biface­
core tool manufacturing process to one centered around the use of
blades and flakes over time.
Obviously there is a contradiction in interpretation between
the results of the debris analy&is versus the results from the tool
analysis.
This suggests that there is a third and as yet unknown
explanation which would cover all of the observations.
Sampling
difficulties may account for some of the variation in observed pat­
terning and may affect the correctness of observations.
For the
present, the tool manufacturing explanation will be accepted.
CONCLUSION
The statistical analysis of the artifacts have raised number of
questions, which hopefully will be resolved through further research.
The major problem encountered resulted from an inadequate sample ~.
size in many of the levels excavated.
In most sites artifact den­
sity decreased with depth and only small samples were collected from
earlier occupations.
Excavation was limited to a few small test
pits, therefore restricting collection of spatial data on tool kits
and activity areas.
Disturbance of deposits by rodent activity
created further difficulties.
The interpretation of the artifact analysis results is based
on the assumption that the sample is both adequate and representa­
tive of the general processes occurring throughout the Palmetto
Bend Reservoir area.
It is proposed that the changes observed in
lithic technology are the result of change in artifact manufacturing
process.
This change is characterized by a shift f~om a core re­
duction technology to one in which flakes or blades were used in
the primary stages of tool production.
Explanation for this change
can ouly be made by referring this hypothesis to other changes oc­
curring within the local cultural groups.
Chronologically this
change in·technoleg¥"~ppeJrs~fo-hAve coincided with the appearance
of arrow points and pottery.
It should be pointed out, however,
that these three events (pottery, arrow point, and blade-flake
technology appearance) may not have been interrelated, and their
appearances in Late Prehistoric material culture may not be simul­
taneous.

POTTERY ARTIFACTS
INTRODU1.:!'rION
Pottery utilization on the Northwest Gulf Coast dates from
A.D. 500 (Aten 1971: 53).
It continued into the Historic Aborig­
inal period.
PTeviouB archeological research along the Texas
Coast has resulted in the recognition of two pottery series: Goose
Cpeek and Roakpopt. Within Central Texas a single local pottery
type, Leon Plain, is recognized.
Goose Creek ceramics are concentrated along the upper portion
of the Texas Coast, although this is probably less a function of
its true distribution and more a function of research location.
Vessels from this series have an untempered sandy paste, are us­
ually thin (they become increasingly so over time, Atem 1971: 23),
and if decoration is present it is usually in the form of incising.
For a more detailed discussion of the Goose Creek series and its
chrono10gic placement refer to: Aten (1971, 1967), Aten and Bo1­
1ich (1969), Aten and Chandler (1971) and Dillehay (1975).
The Roakport series ceramics are common from A.D. 1200 to
1700 (Corbin 1974: 47, Story 1968: 41); and therefo~e occur ~fter
the advent of the Goose Creek series. Roakport ceramics are
distinguished from Goose Creek ceramics on the basis of asphalt
designs.
They are, as presently defined, otherwise indistin­
guishable from the Goose Creek pottery series.
Roakport series
ceramics are distributed along the Gulf Coast between the Colorado
and Nueces Rivers (Corbin 1974: 38).
Ceramics manufactured in Central Texas have traditionally
been lumped intb~the Leon Plain pottery type which dates from A.D.
1200 to 1700, (Suhm and Jelks 1962; 95-96).
Recent studies have
divided the type into a series of sub-types (Hester and Hill 1971).
The sherds are usually bone tempered and fairly thin.
Decoration
is uncommon.
Based on the known distribution of ceramic types proir to
recent work at the Anaqua site, near the mouth of the Lavaca River
(Story 1968) pottery in the Palmetto Bend area would have been pre­
dicted to consist of the Roakport series, with a few sherds of the
Leon Plain type. Recent work at the Anaqua site uncovered an early
untempered sandy paste pottery similar to the Goose Cpeek series
(Story 1968: 65-66).
The Anaqua site excavation has provided us
with data that contradicts the long held belief that Roakport
series pottery was the only pottery series found on the middle
Texas Coast.
Sherds were sorted on the basis of temper (bone, shell, grog,
or none), paste size (fine, medium, and/or large), fracture pattern
(straight or blocky), and thickness (see Table 12).
Sherds identi­
fied as not possessing <t'~mper may in fact contain sand temper.
All such sherds have sand grains in,the paste.
However, sand is
203

APPENDIX I

204

present in the paste of bone tempered sherds also, and that suggests
it was not intentionally added.
The questi6n of~i~t~nti6nal~sand~
temper versus unintentional inclusion of sand in the paste remains
unresolved on the Texas Gulf Coast (Aten and Bollich 1969).
In all, 159 sherds were recovered during the 1974 season, re­
presenting a minimum of 47 different vessels.
The minimum number
of vessels was determined through the sorting of sherds on the
basis of attributes.
The resulting groups were then broken down
by excavation unit and level, and the minimum number of vessels
estima£ed.
Analysis of the sherds resulted in the recognition of nine
pottery types on the basis of temper, paste size, and fracture pat­
tern.
Further division of these types on the basis of thickness is
believed to have resulted in the recognition of individual vessels.
Types should consist of more than single vessels, and for that rea­
son thickness was not included in type formulation.
If the minimum number of vessels estimate is correct, then
decoration only occurred on 4% of the vessels, and in the Eorm of
brushing and/or asphalt designs.
All decorated sherds came from
the surface or upper most levels of the sites.
Most of the vessels are either bone tempered or untempered.
By plotting the vertical distribution of these two temper types a
change from untempered sandy paste vessels to bone tempered vessels
was demonstrated over time.
That same trend has been noted for ~I
sites at Lake Whitney in Central Texas (Stephenson 1970: 129-130).
At Palmetto Bend the only recognizable vessel forms are bowls.
Elsewhere on the Texas Coast cylindrical round based vessels have
been recognized (Hester and Parker 1970, Fig. 4; Ambler 1967: Fig.
14). The bowl, however has been recognized as the predominate
form fOT most of the Texas Coast (Aten 1971: 21).
DISCUSSION
Pottery vessels can be viewed as being utilized in the per­
formance of three basic functions: cooking, storage, and status
differentiation (Hill 1970, Longacre 1970, and Anderson et aZ.
1974: 7-11).
Interior smudging or fi£e blackening is present on some of the
vessels; predominately on the interior of the rim.
Smudging and
food residue from cooking would be expected to occur most on the
interior base of vessels.
Since such smudging was not observed,
it is proposed that: the primary function of pottery vessels was
not to serve as cooking vessels.
Anderson et aZ. (1974: 10) have proposed that plain unsmudged
bowls served primarily for serving food.
The excavation and anal­
ysis of various sites at Lake Palestine appears to confirm that
proposition (Anderson et aZ. 1974: 173).
The absence of jars from
sites at Palmetto Bend suggests that storage of food was minimal.

POTTERY ARTIFACTS

205

But food storage and the usage of pottery in general is always
minor at temporary camps (Anderson et al. 1974: 10).
The low frequency of decorated sherds at the tested sites can
be interpreted as indicating that little status differentiation
was present within groups inhabiting sites at Palmetto Bend.
This
low frequency is probably also related to group movement or mobil­
it,~ with base camps or more sedentary villages having greater
frequencies of pottery with designs.
Even though social differentiation is minimal on the micro
level J this does not mean that differentiaion, in terms of status,
is absent from the society as a whole.
Social differentiation is
apparent at Archaic cemetery sites, such as the Morhiss site
(Texas Archiological Research Lab~ site notes and files) and
Allen's Cr.~k (Prewitt 1974: 54, 66; Grant Hall, personal communi­
cation), which are inland from the coast.
Social differentiation
at these siies crosscuts sex and age groups, and takes the form of
quantities of exotic gra~e goods: boatsones and carved shell orna­
ments) and grave preparation (presence or absence of red ochre).
If such differentiation does occur in Late Prehistoric sites it
is proposed that, 1) the frequency of decorated sherds will in­
crease with decreasing distance (either social or physical)!f~.m
base camps and/or cemeteries (Hill 1970: 44-45), 2) differentia­
tion will be present between burials in terms of age, sex, and
burial position (Binford 1972), and 3) that status symbols will
be uniform betw~en sites of similar function.
Based on information recovered from the Harris County Boys
School site and other Late Prehistoric cemeteries around Galveston
Bay, the evidence suggests that no more status differentiation
existed than might be expected among non-sedentary hunters and
gatherers (Aten and Chandler 1971: 61-62).
SHELL ARTIFACTS
Shell artifacts consist of modified rangia clams (Rangia
cuneata) , Sun-ray venus (Macrocallista nimbosa) , oysters (Crasso­
strea virginia), ribbed mussel (Dinoaardium robustum), Carolina
Marsh clam (Polymesoda aaroliniana) , and freshwater mussel shells.
Modification was in the form of nicks, cuts, ground areas, smoothed
edges, striations, and crushed edges.
A number of decorative arti­
facts have been manufactured by drilling, cutting, and/or painting
the shells.
Analysis of the shells was on the basis of species
and type of modification.
The resulting types are presented in
Table 13.
In general, shell artifacts OCcur in deeper portions of the
various sites dating from the Archaic periods.

206

APPENDIX I

BONE ARTIFACTS
Bone Artifacts were predominately manufactured on large mammal
bones (probably deer).
Bone artifacts were used with minimal modi­
fication or consisted of split and polished bone.
These artifacts
occur throughout the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91, in relatively small
frequenceies.
Bone artifacts similar to type 1 (cut incised bone)
appear infrequently in coastal site, and may have served as status
indicators.
If this proposition is correct then incised bone arti­
facts should occur with greater frequency as burial grave offerings,
and less frequently in midden fill.
The fact that incised bone
artifacts were found as grave goods at the Harris County Boys ~
School Cemetery (Aten and Chandler 1971: 31-32) and at the Albert
George Site (Walley 1955) suggests that this proposition may be
correct.
If the proposition is correct then the incised bones will be
associated with burials in a pattern that indicates more than an
age or sex basis for their placement.

207

TABLE 12

Table

12.P~ttery'TypeDesctiptions.

No. of
Sherds

No. of
Vessels

1

12

4

Bone tempered sherds with fine, sandy
paste, straight fractur~, smoothed
surfaces, and thickness: 0.30-0.90
cm., one sherd with asphalt decora­
tion.
Location of vessels: 41JK16: 1
(surface), 41JK41: 1 (upper). 41JK50:
1 (surface), 41JK91: 1 (3 x 3 m. unit,
level 1).
References: Hester and Hill
1971:197, Hester and Parker 1970:4,
Suhm and Jelks 1962:95-96, Ross 1966:
38.

2

23

2

Bone tempered sherds with fine sandy
paste, blocky fracture. smoothed sur­
face, and thickness: 0.55-0.95 cm.
Location of vessels: 41JK91: 2 (3~x-3
m. unit, level 3). References: 'Hester
and Hill 1971:197, Suhm and Jelks
1962:95-96.

3

54

9

Bone tempered sherds with a fine and
medium size sandy paste, straight
fracture, smoothed surface. thickness:
0.20-0.90 cm.
Location of vessels:
41JK16: 1 (surface), 41JK41: 3 (upper
levels), 41JK91: 5 (3 x'5 m. unit, 0­
20 cm.).
A red slip is present along
with polishing on all of these sherds.
References: Hester and Hill 1971:197,
Green and Hester 1973:81-89.

4

2

2

Type
No.

Description

Shell tempered sherds, m~dium size sandy
with blocky fracture. smoothed
surfaces, thickness: 0.66-0.80 cm.
Location of vessels: 41JK91: 2 (sur­
face).
References: Sorrow 1966:46,
Ross 1966:12,38~

pa~t~

5

1

1

Grog temper, fine sandy paste, ;­
straight fracture,"thickness: 0.60 em.
Location of vessel: 41JK16: 1 (sur­
face).
References: Aten and Bo11ich
1969:243-245, Sorrow 1966:47, Aten and
Chandler 1971:11-13, Webb et al. 1969:
17-44.

APPENDIX I

208

Table
Type

12.~Oontinu~d.

No. of
Sherds

No. of
Vessels

Description

6

5

2

No temper, fine sandy paste, straight
fracture, thickness: 0.3-0.4 cm.
Lo­
cation of vessels: 41JK41: 1 (upper
levels), 41JK91: 1 (3 x 3 m. unit,
level 3). References: Suhm and Jelks
1962:131,57; Story 1968:13,46.

7

45

15

No temper, medium size sandy paste,
straight fracture, smoothed surface,
thickness: 0.40-0.65 cm. Location of
vessels: 41JK91: 1 (3 x 3 m. unit,
level 3), 41JK147: 11 (level 3), 1
(level 5), 2 (level 8).
References:
Aten and Bo11ich 1969:246-248; Dil­
lehay 1975:111-112; Aten and Chandler
1971:12.

8

31

9

No temper, medium and fine sandy ~~~~~
paste, straight fracture, smoothed
surfaces, thickness: 0.20-0.95 cm.
Asphalt and brushing are present on
two sherds.
One reconstructed bowl:
10 cm. height, 16 cm. rim diameter,
and 0.60-0.95 em. thick. Location of
vessels: 41JK16: 1 (surface), 41JK41:
3 (upper levels), 41JK91: 2 (F-1
unit), 1 (3 x 5 m. unit, level 5),
41JK147: 1 (level 3), 1 (3 x 3 m.
unit, level 8).
References: Aten and
Chandler 1971:12; Suhm and Jelks 1962:
131-136; Story 1968:13.

9

6

1

No temper, medium and fine sandy
paste, blocky fracture, smoothed sur­
faces, thickness: 0.49-0.65 cm. Lo­
cation of vessels: 41JK91: 2 (3 x 3 m.
unit, level 2).
References: Story
1968:13; Suhm and Jelks 1962:131-136.

TABLE 13

Table 13.
Type
No.

9h~11

209

Artifacts.

No. of
Specimens

Description

1

40

Shells with nicked edges. Nicks are usually
located on the distal edge opposite the
hinge. PoZymesoda aaroZiniana, 41JK9l: (3 x
3 unit), 1 (level 3),1 (7), 4 (8), 1 (9).
Rangia auneata, 41JK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 3 ~
(level 4), 12 (7), 12 (8), 6 (9).

2

40

Rangia auneata shells with jagged, notched,
and/or crushed edges. Location: 41JK9l: (3
x 3 unit), 1 (level 1), 1 (2), 6 (3), 16
(7),12 (8),2 (9),2 (surface).

3

9

Shells with ground, cut, and smoothed edges.
Rangia auneata, 41JK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 1
(level 8), 6 (9). PoZymesoda aaroZiniana,
4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 2 (level 7).

4

1

Crassostrea virginiaa shell with triangular
shape and wear on the distal edge. Loca­
tion: 41JK9l (3 x 3 unit), 1 (level 3).
Reference: Story 1968:29-30, gouge or adz.

5

3

Crassostrea virginiaa shells with lateral
wear or retouch.
Location: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3
unit), 1 (level 7),2 (8).

6

4

Crassostrea virginiaa shells with lateral
and distal wear or retouch.
Location:
4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 3 (level 7), 1 (9).

7

5

Crassostrea virginiaa shells with distal
wear or retouch (opposite the hinge). Loca­
tion: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 1 (level 5-6),
3 (7), 1 (8),

8

3

MaaroaaZZista nimbosa shells with heavy
crushing, large nicks, and cutting of the
shell edge. Location: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit),
1 (level 2), 1 (5-6), 1 (8).

9

5

MaaroaaZZista nimbosa shells with circular
shape, multiple edges, exterior retouch,
notches, and bits. Location: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3
unit), 2 (level 7),3 (8).

APPENDIX I

210

Table 13. C(7).tinued.
Type
No.

No. of
Specimens

10

1

Description

Maaroaallista nimbosa shell cut into trian­
gular shape with a worn bit (ngraver").
Lo­
cation: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 1 (level 7).

11

1

Maaroaallista nimbosa shell cut and ground
into shape.
Location: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit),
(level 3). Reference: HeSter 1969;42,
shell projectile point.

1

12

4

Maaroaallista nimbosa shell cut into a tri­
angular shape, external retouch.
Location:
4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 3 (level 7),1 (5-6).
Reference: Hester 1969:43, shell scraper.

13

1

Cut and ground freshwater mussel shell. Lo­
cation: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 1 (level 3).

14

2

Shell (freshwater mussel) with square shape
and two drill holes.
Edges are ground.
Lo­
cation: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 1 (level 3),
1

(7).

15

1

Oyster shell cut and ground into a trian­
gular shape.
Crassostrea virginiaa. One
hole is drilled into the shell. Location:
4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 1 (level 3). Refer­
ence: Wheat 1953:233, pendants.

16

1

Dinoaardium robustum shell with red pigment
on the interior surface.
Shell has been
cut.
Location: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 1
(level 8),

17

1

Ribbed mussel (Modiolus demissus granosiss­
mus) with a hole punched from the interior
to the exterior just below the hinge.
Lo­
cation: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 1 (level 7),
Reference: Hester 1969: Figure 17, per­
forated shell.

18

2

Maaroaallista nimbosa shell with internal
retouch.
Cut into triangular shape. Loca­
tion: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), 2 (level 3);
4lJK147: 1.
Reference: Hester 1969:43,
shell scraper.

211

TABLE 14

Table 14. 'Bu:r;1e. Artifacts.
Type
No.

No. of
Specimens

Description

1

1

Cut bone splinter with long rectangular
shape.
Edges are ground, and a series of
lines are incised into the exterior surface.
Location: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), level 7.
Reference~ Story 1968:31, Fi~ure 34,c.
In­
cised bone.

2

1

Cut bone with beveled point, and ground and
polished edges. Oval cross section. Loca­
tion: 4lJK9l: (3 x 3 unit), level 2.
Refer­
ences: Ambler 1967:56; Story 1968: 57-58,
fish hook.

3

4

Ground split bone with round or oval cross
section, and one end ground to a point. Lo­
cation: 41JK9l: 3 (3 x 3 unit, level 3), 3
(3 x 3 unit, level 7).
References: Ambler
1967:55; He~ter1969l38; Wheat 1953: SEtiry
1968:59y5borieawlsi fl~k~fs.

212

APPENDIX I

REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. R.
1967
Three Prehistoric Sites near Cedar Bayou~ Galveston Bay
Area.
State Building Commission Archeological Report

No.

8,.A~stin;.Texas~.

Anderson, K. M., K. Gilmore, O. F. McCormick III, and E. P. Morenon
1974
Archeological Investigations at Lake Palestine, Texas.

Southern Methodist University Contributions in Anthro­
pology No. 11, Dallas~ Texas.
Aten, L. E.
1967
Excavations at the Jamison Site (4lLB2), Liberty County,
Texas.
Houston Archeological Society Report No.1.
1971

Archeological Excavations at the Dow-Cleaver Site, Brazoria
County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Tech­
nical Bulletin No.1, The University of Texas at Austin.

Aten, L. E. and C. N. Bollich
A Preliminary Report on the Development of a Ceramic Chro­
1969
nology for the Sabine Lake Area of Texas and Louisiana.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40;

2~~-.

258.
Aten, L.
1971

E. and C. K. Chandler
Archeological Investigations at the Harris County Boys
School Cemetary, Harris County, Texas.
Report submitted
to the Texas Antiquities Committee, Austin.

Binford, L. R.
1972
Mortuary Practices: Their Study and Their Potential.
In:
An Archeological Perspective, L. R. Binford (editor),
Seminar Press, New York.
Corbin, J. E.
1974
A Model for Cultural Succession for the Coastal Bend Area
of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society

45:

29~54~

Dillehay, T. D.
1975
Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity
River Delta, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research
Report No. 51, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dollar, C. M.

1971

and R. J. Jensen

Historian's Guide to Stati8tics.
Winston, Inc., New York.

Holt, Rinehart, and

REFERENCES CITED

Freund, J.

1958

213

E. and F. Williams

Modern Business Statistics.

Prentice-Hall, Inc.,

Englewood Cliffs.
Green, L. M. and T. R. Hester
1973
The Finis Frost Site: A Toyah Phase Occupation in San
Saba County, Central Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Arche­

ological Society 44:

69~881

~

Hays, W. L.
1973
Statistics for the Social Sciences.
and Winston, Inc., New York.

Holt, Rinehart,

Hester, T. R.
Archeological Investigations in Kleberg and Kenedy
1969
Counties, Texas.
State Building Commission Archeological
program Report No, 16. Austin, Texas.
1971

Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site,
Uvalde County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeologi­
cal Society :ill:' 51'::;148, .,::i.

Hester, T. R. and M. B. Collins
1969
Burials from the Frisch Auf! Site: 41FY42.
of Science 20: 261-272.

Texas Journal

Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1971
An Initial Study of a Prehistoric Ceramic Tradition in
Southern Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 16: 195-203.
Hester, T. R., and R. lcr, Parker
1970
The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in
Goliad County, Southern Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 41: 1-23.
Hill, J. N.
1970
Broken K Pueblo: Prehistoric Social Organization in the
American Southwest. University of Arizona, Anthropological

Paper No. 18.
Jelks, E. B.
1962
The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site
in Hill County, Texas. Department of Anthropology,
Archeology Series No.6, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Longacre, W. A.
1970
Archeology as Anthropology. UniVersity of Arizona,

Anthropological Papers No. 17.

214

APPENDIX I

McCormick, O. F., III
1974
Archeological Investigations at Lake Monticello. Southern
Methodist University Archeological Research Program,
Dallas, Texas.
Mosteller, F., R. E. K. Rourke and G. B. Thomas, Jr.
1961
Probability and Statistics. Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts.
Prewitt, E. R.
1974
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site:
Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report No. 19, The University of Texas at Austin.
Ross, R. E.
The Upper Rockwall and Glen Hill Sites, Forney Reservoir,
1966
Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project
No.9, The University of Texas at Austin.
Shafer, H. J.
1969
Archeological Investigations in the Robert Lee Reservoir
Basin, West Central Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project No. 17, The University of Texas at Austin.
Skinner, S. A.
1971
Prehistoric Settlement of the DeCordova Bend Reservoir,
Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
42: 149-270.
Sokal, R., and R. H. A. Sneath
1963
Principles of Numerical Taxonomy.
Francisco.

Freeman Company, San

Sorrow, W.
1966
The Pecan Spring Site, Bardwell Reservoir, Texas. Papers
of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project No. 10. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Spaulding, A. C.
1953
Statistical Techniques for the Discovery of Artifact Types.
American Antiquity 18: 305-313.
Stephenson, R. S.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area,
Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
40: 37-286.
Stiles, D. N., R. L. Hay and J. R. O'Neil
1974
The MNK Chert Factory Site, Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania.
World Archeology 5(3).

REFERENCES CITED

215

Story. D. A.
Arr::heologica1 Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf
1968
Coast Sites. State Building Commission Archeological
Program Report No. 13. Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, and E. B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions. Texas
Memorial Museum Bulletin No.4. The University of Texas
at Austin.
Walley, R.
1955
A Preliminary Report on the Albert George Site in Fort
Bend County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 26: 218-234.
Webb, C. H., F. E. Murphy, W. G. Ellis and H. R. Green
1969
The Resch Site 41HS16, Harrison County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40: 3-106.
Wha11on. R., Jr.
1972
A New Approach to Pottery Typology. American Antiquity
37: 13-33.
Wheat. J. B.
1953
An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam Basin,
Southeast Texas. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin No. 154. River Basin
Surveys.

APPENDIX II:
FAUNAL DATA FROM SITES EXCAVATED DURING
THE 1974;SEASON AT PALMETTO BEND

Paul R. MeGuff
'M.,~ lJavias on

. Bi tZy

FAUNAL DATA

217

The tables which follow summarize the faunal data collected
during excavations at 41 JK 41, 41 JK 91, and 41 JK 147.
Two
other sites tested in 1974 (41 JK 16 and 41 JK 50) had little or
no faunal material.
For the sites which did have faunal debris
there are two systems of data presentation which depend upon the
condition of the collected faunal assemblage.
At the Hawk Perch Site (41 JK 147) and the Atkinson Site
(41 JK 41) faunal pres~rvation is poor.
Tables with data on
these sites include only a list of the species identified and the
number of individuals represented.
The Venom Hill Site (41 JK 91) had excellent faunal preser­
vation.
There, in addition to a species and number of individuals
present, tabulation estimates of the total body weight of indi­
viduals in a species category and the percent total sample weight
are provided.
Body weight of individuals was calculated by esti­
mating the size of an individual and comparing that with the re­
cored range of weights for individuals of various sizes in modern
samples of a species (Davis 1966, Eddy 1957, Peterson 1963, and
comparative collections housed at the University of Texas at Austin).
A tabulation, by scientific notation, appears before each set
of data tables of species present in a site.
The basic data tables
are organized by an environmental classificatory scheme that dif-_
fers only in minor respeclts from that utilized by Dillehay on the
Trinity River~D~lta (1975a).
The organizing categories used are:
aquatic, small terrestrial aquatic, large terrestrial aquatic, small
terrestrial, large terrestrial, arboreal and avian.
Table 1 i~h
the section entitled 1IFlora and Fauna H provides more specific
habitat data along with seasonality information on the individual
species.
Faunai de~ris was collected by a double screen process.
The
upper 1/4-inch screen 'Caught m()s-t,~deb'fis:,fro:nr,:lat'gespecies· and­
j3ome-debris 'from the smallet" species ~'The~lower 1/16":'inch'mesh
pr~~arily ckugbi:6h~r~sidue from the smaller species.
The entire sample of faunal material collected in the upper,
1/4-inch screen was analyzed before examination of the sample col­
lected in the lower screen.
The sample of matrix residue caught
in the 1/16-inch screen had to be carefully picked for faunal de­
bris before analysis of its faunal portion could be pursn~di Un­
fortunately, the picking process proved to be more time consuming
than expected and as a result only a 10% sample of the total matrix
residue caught in the lower screen from each level was p~ocessed.
The result was a problem in justifying differences between
the 100% sample from the upper screen and the 10% sample from the
lower screen.
It was decided that the best means of representing
the fauna was to tabulate the data from the screen with the maxi­
m~m number of individuals per species.
In that way the whole
fauna was represented.
If that representation is incorrect only
the amount of small fauna is underestimated.
Where a sufficient amount of faunal debris was found in exca­
vation at a site the presentation has been by natural levels within

APPENDIX II

218

the site.
In all cases these are discussed in order of latest (up­
permost) to earliest (lowest) occurence through time.
Estimated total body weight and percent total sample weight
was not calculated for gastropods or pelecypods (except Rangia
auneata) as information of the body weight of these were unavail­
able. Rangia auneata was by far the most represented species.
Meat weight for that species was calculated by multiplying the
average total body weight of modern rangia clams on the Trinity
River Delta (Dillehay 1975b) times the number of individuals in
the archeological samples in tested sites.
The meat weight of
other shellfish species would be insignificant judging from the
number of individuals represented.
In the tables those faunal species that contributed a statis~
tically insignificant percent of the total meat weight or were ab­
sent in a level are symbolized in the appropriate place by a dash (-).
Billy M. Davidson identified the species and estimated the
total body weight of individuals in the fauna.

ERRATA:

Tables 19, 20, 21 and 22 have an error in the
column headed:
Est. Total
Body Wt.
(kg. )

The decimal point in these figures is misplaced and
should be adjusted by the user one place to the left.
For example:
7. 43
0.85
16.44

should be
should be
should be

.743
.085
1.644

FAUNAL DATA

219

Table 15. Faunal Species Recovered from Sites 4lJK4l and 41JK147.
4lJK41:
QuadruZa quadruZa (maple~leaf mussel)
MQdioZus demissus granosissumus (ribbed mussel)
Crassostrea virginiaa (eastern oyster)
Dinoaardium robustum (Atlantic cockle)
Rangia auneata (rangia)
PoZymesoda aaroZiniana (Carolina marsh clam)
IataZurus punatatus (channel catfish)
Pogonias aromis (black drum)
SteZZifer ZanaeoZatus (star drum)
Unidentified turtle
SyZviZagus aquatiaus (swamp rabbit)
OdoaoiZeus vir~inia.Us (white tail deer)
Bison bison!Bostaurus (bison/cow}
41JK147:
QuadruZa quadruZa (maple-leaf mussel)
ModioZus demissus granosissumus (ribbed mussel)
BTaahidontes recurvus (hooked mussel)
Crassostrea virginiaa (eastern oyster)
Dinoaardium robustum (Atlantic cockle)
Rangia auneata (rangia)
PoZymesoda aaroZiniana (Carolina marsh clam)
MaaroaaZZista nimbosa (sunray venus)
Chione aanaeZZata (cross-barred venus)
IataZurus punatatus (channel catfish)
SteZZifer ZanaeoZatus (star drum)
Cynosaion sp. (sea trout)
SyZviZagus aquaticus (swamp rabbit)
OdoaoiZeus virginianus (white tail deer)

APPENDIX II

220

Table 16. Faunal Data. 41JK41.
SPECIES
Aquatic:
Maple-leaf mussel (Quadrula quadrula)
Ribbed mussel (Modiolus demissus granosissumus)
Eastern oyster (Crassostrea virginiaa)
Atlantic cockle (Dinoaardium robustum)
Rangia (Rangia auneata)
Carolina marsh clam (Polymesoda aaroliniana)
Channel catfish (Iatalurus punatatus)
Black drum (Pogonias aromis)
Star drum (Stellifer lanaeolatus)

NUMBER OF
INDIVIDUALS
9
7
4
I

352

18
6
I
I

399
Small Terrestrial/Aquatic:
Unidentified turtle
Large Terrestrial/Aquatic:
Small Terrestrial:
Swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquatiaus)

I
I

o
1
I

Large Terrestrial:
White tail deer (Odoaoileus virginianus)
Bison/Cow (Bison bison/Bos taurus)

.3
3

6"
Arboreal:

o

Avian:

o

FAUNAL DATA

Table 17. Faunal Data, 4lJK9l

t

221

3 x 5 Unit, 0 - 30cm.

SPECIES
Aquatic:
Maple-leaf mussel CquadruZa quadruZa}
Ribbed mussel CModioZus demissus
granossisumus}
Sunray venus CMaaroaaZZista nimbosa}
Rangia (Rangia auneata)
Unidentified fish
Gar (Lepisosteus sp.)
Sheepshead (Arahosargus
probatoaephaZus)
Sea trout (Cynosaion sp.)
Small Terrestrial/Aquatic:
Turtle
Slider turtle (Pseudemys sp.)
Softshell turtle (Trionyx sp.)
Water snake (Natrix sp.)
Copperhead (Agkistrodon sp.)

NUMBER or
INDIVIDUALS
1
1
1

31
5
3
1
1

t;4

Small Terrestrial:
Box turtle (Terrapene sp.)
Snake
Rat snake (Elaphe sp.)
Prairie pocket gopher (Geomys
bursarius)
Cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus)
Eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus
fZoridanus)
Swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquatiaus)
Large Terrestrial:
White tail deer (Odoaoileus
virginianus)
Bison/Cow (Bison bison/Bos taurus)

1. 096
1. 304
3.175
.085
• 907.:
6.567 "
--~

7

3
3
1
_l_

IS
Large Terrestrial/Aquatic:

MIAT WEIGHT
Ot")

15.876
9.525
5.443
.113
.085
31. 042

o
1
1
4

1
3

1. 361
.085
3.600
.110"
.330
1.134
2.268
8.888

4
_I_
S

Arboreal:

o

Avian:

o

16.7828
45.3590
62.1418

FAUNAL

SPECIES

RECOVERED

FROM

41 JK 91

Busycon contrarium (lightning whelk)
Quadrula quadrula (maple-leaf mussel)
Propteria purpurata
(purple shell mussel)
Legumia subrostrata (common pond mussel)
Lampsilis anodontoides anodontoides
(yellow-sand sherI mussel)
Modiolus demissus granosissumus
(ribbed mussel)
Brachidontes recurvus (hooked mussel)
Aequipecten ~. (scallop)
Crassostrea virginica (eastern oyster)
Dinocardium rob us tum (Atlantic cockle)
Rangia cuneatd (rangia)
Polymesod~ caroliniana
(Carolina marsh clam)
Macrocallista nimbosa
(Sunray venus)
Unidentified crustacean (crab/crayfish)
Unidentified fish
Amia calva (bowfin)
I:ePIs~s ~. (gar)
Galeichthys felis (hardhead catfish)
Pylodictis olivaris (flathead catfish)
Paralichthys~.
(flounder)
Family Sciaenidae (drum)
Archosargus probatocephalus (sheep shead)
Pogonias cromis (black drum)
Stellifer lanceolatus (star drum)
Leiostomus xanthurus (banded drum)
Sciaenops ocellata (redfish)
Micropogon undulatus (Atlantic croaker)
Menticirrhus ~. (whiting)
Cynoscion~. (sea trout)
Anguilla ~. (eel)
Unidentified salamander
Unidentified frog
RaIia ~. (f rog)
Rana cf. pipiens (leopard frog)
Rana cf. catesbeiana (bull frog)
Bufo ~. (toad)
Alligator mississippiensis (alligator)
Unidentified turtle
Pseudemys~.
(slider turtle)
Terraperie~.
(box turtle)
Trionyx~. (softshell turtle)
Unidentified lizard
Anolis carolinensis (green anole)

Sceloporus cf. olivaceous (spiny lizard)
Cf. Holbrookia~.
(zebra lizard)
Cnemidophorus ~. (whip tail lizard)
Unidentified snake
Natrix~. (water snake)
Thamnonhis ~. (garter snake)
Elaphe~. (rat snake)
Coluber~.
(racer snake)
Pithuophis ~. (bull snake)
Heterodon~. (hognose snake)
Agkistrodon ~. (cottonmouth/copperhead snake)
Crotalus ~. (rattlesnake)
Unidentified bird
Ardea~. (heron)
Anas~.
(duck)
Branta~.
(goose)
Meleagris gallopavo (turkey)
Mimus polyglottos (mockingbird)
Richmondena cardinalis (cardinal)
Didelphis marsupialis (opossum)
Scalopus aquaticus (eastern mole)
Blarina brevicauda (short tail shrew)
Cryptotis parva (least shrew)
Myotls ~. (bat)
Procyon lotor (raccoon)
Canis cf. latrans (coyote)
urocyon cinereoargenteus (gray fox)
Lynx rufus (bobcat)
Mephitis mephitis (striped skunk)
Sciurus niger (fox squirrel)
Citellus cf. mexicanus
(Mexican ground squirrel)
Geomys bursarius (prairie pocket gopher)
Perognathus hispidus (plains pocket mouse)
Oryzomys palustris (rice rat)
peromyscus ~. (white footed mouse)
Reithrodontomys~. (harvester mouse)
Biaomys taylori (pygmy mouse)
Neotoma ~. (packrat)
Sigmodon hispidus (cotton rat)
Microtus cf. ochrogaster (prairie vole)
Sylvilagus cf. floridanus (eastern cottontail)
Sylvilagus aquaticus (swamp rabbit)
Le£us californicus (blacktail jackrabbit)
Odocoileus virginianus (white tail deer)
Bison bison/Bos taurus (bison/cow)

t-3

>

bj

t-I
t<:I
I-'
r:1J

FAUNAL DATA

41 JK

91

NATURAL

Aquatic
Lightning whelk (Buaycon contrarium)
Maple-leaf mU8sel-(Quadrula quadrula)
Purple shell mussel (Propteria purpurata)
Common pond mussel (Leaumis subrostrata)
Yellow-sand shell mussel
(Lamps ilia anodontoides anodontoides)
Ribbed mussel (Modiolus demissus granosissmus)
Hooked mussel (Brachidontes recurvus)
Scallop (Aequipecten sp.)
Eastern oyater (Crassoetrea virainica)
Atlantic cockle (Dinocardium robustum)
Rangia (Rsugia cuneata)
Carolina marsh clam (Polymesoda caroliniana)
Sunray venus (Macrocallista nimhosa)
Unidentified crustacean
Unidentified fish
Bowfin (Amia calva)
Gar (Lep1SOSteue-ap .)
Hardhead catfiah (Galeichthys felis)
Flathead catfish (Pylodictia olivaria)
Flounder (Paralichthys sp.)
Drum (Fam. Sciaen1dae)
Sheepahead (Archosargus probatocephalus)
Black drum (Poaonias ~)
Star drum (Stellifer lanceolatus)
Banded drum (Leiostomus xanthurua)
Redfish (Sciaenops ocellata)
Atlantic croaker (Micropogon undulatus)
Whiting (Menticirrhus sp.)
Sea trout (Cynoscion sp.)
Eel (Anguilla sp.)

LEVEL

Number of
Individuals

METER

UNIT

Table 19.

1

NATURAL

Est. Total
Wt.

.)

% Total
Sample Wt.

Number of
Individuals

3

Est. Total
Body Wt.

(kg.)

% Total
Sample Wt.

3
1

1
2

21

7.43

0.13

0.12
0.16
1. 24
0.03
1.17
0.12
0.23
0.16

14.85

0.91

*

1
42
3
1
1
38

14.74

0.90

'"

4

13.61

0.83

'"

1

'"

1

4.54
1.13

0.28
0.07

1
1

32.29
1. 70

1. 98
0.10

1
1

1. 98
0.57

0.12
0.03

3

8
29
1
5

*
*

3
1

6.80
9.07
72.57
1.98
68.04
6.80
13.61
9.07

*

1
1
1
1

2.27
.85
1.13
3.40

0.04
0.01
0.02
0.06

1

5.67

0.10

1

1. 70

0.10

86

208.09

3.59

106

87.11

5.32

5
3

.85
1.13

0.01
0.02

1
2
1

131.54

2.25

2
1
3

.57
.28
1. 98
2.55
122.4}
63.50
70.31
1. 56
1.13
3.40

0.03
0.02
0.12
0.16
7.51
3.89
4.31
0.10
0.07
0.21

21

267.75

16.42

1

9.07
9.07

'"
'"
>It

'"

"

1

1

2

*
'"

*

'"

1
5

1
3
3
6

45.36
3.97
3.40
2.55

0.78
0.07
0.06
0.04

29

188•• 80

3.23

o

0.00

0.00

2
¥

"

Large Terrestrial Aquatic
Alligator (Alligator mississippiensis)
SUBTOTAL
At apec1es level is in two subheadings.

2

1
1

¥

SUBTOTAL

+

LEVEL

3

SUBTOTAL
Small terrestrial Aquatic
Unidentified salsmander
Unidentified frog
Frog (Rana sp.)
Leopard frog (~ cf. pipiens)
Bull frog (Rsna cf. catesbeiana)
Unidentified turtle
Slider turtle (Fseudemys sp.)
Softshell turtle (Triouyx ap.)
Water snake (Natrix sp.)
Garter snake (Th8iiophis sp.)
+Cottonmouth snake (Agkiatrodou sp.)

3x3

'"

4

*

'"

1

Maximum number of individuals occur.red in the 1/16 mesh screen.

~

0.55

Small Terrestrial
Toad (Bufo sp.)
Box turtle (Terrapene sp.)
Unidentified lizard
Spiny lizard (Sceloporus cf. olivaceous)
Zebra lizard (Cf. Holbrookia sp.)
Whiptail lizard (Cnemidophorus sp.)
Unidentified snake
Rat snake (Elaphe sp.)
Racer snake (Coluber sp.)
Bull snake (Pithuophis sp.)
Hognose snake (Heterodon sp.)
+Copperhead snake (Agkistrodon sp.)
Rattlesnake (Crotalus sp.)
Opossum (Didelphis marsupialis)
Eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus)
Short tail shrew (Blarina brevicauda)
Least shrew (Cryptotis parva)
Raccoon (Procyon lotor)
Gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus)
Bobcat (Lynx rufus)
Striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis)
Mexican ground squirrel (Citellus cf. mexicanuB)
Prairie pocket gopher (Geomys bursar ius)
Plains pocket mouse (Perognathus hispidus)
Rice rat (Oryzomys palustris)
White footed mouse (Peromyscus sp.)
Harvester mouse (Reithrodontomys sp.)
Pygmy mouse (Biaomys taylori)
Packrat (Neotoma sp.)
Cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus)
Prairie vole (Microtus cf. ochrogastor)
Eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus cf. floridanus)
Swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus cf. floridanus)
Blacktail jackrabbit (Lepus californicus)

Table 19

*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

*

*
*
*
*
*

SUBTOTAL

SUBTOTAL

"
"
SUBTOTAl

Avian
--unidentified bird
Heron (Ardea sp.)
Duck (Anas sp.)
Goose (Branta sp.)
Turkey (MeleQgris gallopavo)
Mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos)
Cardinal (Richmondena cardinal is)
Bat (Myotis sp.)

0.93
0.01
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.10
0.13
0.03

2
6
2
1
1
1

1. 42
2.55
.57
27.22
.90
.18

0.02
0.04
0.01
0.47
0.02
0.00

1

90.72

1. 56

10

3

*
*
*
*
*
*

*

Large Terrestrial
Coyote (Canis cf. latrans)
White tail deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
Bison/cow (Bison bison/Bos taurus)
Arboreal
Green an ole (Anolis carolinensis)
Fox squirrel (SC1UruB niger)

3
2

54.43
.43
.28
.06
.28
5.95
7.37
1. 70

4
2
1
1
1

Continuted

40.82
.18
.01
.15

2.50
0.01
0.00
0.01

5.67
11.34
1. 70

0.35
0.69
0.10

1

1.13
3.40
9.07

0.07
0.21
0.55

1
1

90.72
54.43

5.55
3.33

1

1. 30

0.08

3
1
2

9
4
2
1

3

1
2

l.5U
3.00

0.04
0.05

1
2

.15
.15

0.00
0.00

*
*

1
1

.10
.08

0.01
0.00

10

11. 00
.40
22.68
27.22

0.19
0.01
0.39
0.47

9

1
2
1

*

2
2
3
1

9.90
.80
22.68
81. 65
31.75

0.61
0.05
1. 39
5.00
1. 94

58

261.16

4.47

51

366.88

22.45

1
2
1

181.44
748.42
4082.31

3.11
12.83
69.98

2

884.50

54.23

4

5012.17

85.92

884.50

54.23

3
2

.64
20.00

0.01
0.34

2

.20

0.01

5

20.64

0.35

2

0.20

0.01

1. 42

*

0.02

*

2.27

0.14

1

13.61

0.83

*

1
1

27.22
113.40

0.47
1. 94

1

.28

0.00

SUBTOTAL

5

142.32

2.43

3

15.88

0.97

TOTAL
X Body Weight/Individual

187

5833.78
31. 20

99.99

186

1631.39

99.95

8.77

FAUNAL DATA

41 JK 91

3x 3 METER UNIT

NATURAL

Number of
Individuals
whelk (Ausycon contrarium)
mussel (Quadrula quadrula)
Purple shell mussel (Propteria purpurata)
Common pond mussel (Legumia aubroatrata)
Yellow-sand ahell mussel
(Lamps~ anodontoides anodontoides)
Ribbed mussel (Modiolus demisaug granosissmus)
Hooked mussel (Arachidontes recurvus)
Scallop (Aequipecten sp.)
Eastern oyster (Crassostrea
Atlantic cockle (Dinocardlum
Rangia (Rangia cuneata)
Carolina marsh clam (Polymesoda carolinians)
Sunray venus (Macrocallista nimbosa)
Unidentified crustacean
Unidentified fish
Bowfin (Amia calva)
Gar (LepiSOBteu;-;p.)
Hardhead catfish (Calelchthys
Flathead catfish (Pylodictis
Flounder (Paral1chthys sp.)
Drum (F.am. Sclaenldae)
(Archos.rgus probatocephelus)
drum (Pogonias cromis)
Star drum (Stellifer lanceolatus)
Banded drum (Leiostomus xanthurue)
Redfish (Sclaenops ocelleta)
Atlantic croaker (Micropogon unduletus)
Whiting (Menticlrrhus sp.)
Sea trout (Cynoscion sp.)
Eel (Anguilla sp.)

Est. Total
11 ody lit.
(kg.)

% Total
Sample lit.

Est. Total
Body lit.
(kg.)

% Total
Sample ;.Jt.

22.63

1. 36

3
34

22.22

1. 33

2

9.07

0.54

4
1

20.41
1. 70

1. 22
0.10

2

4.54

0.27

1

4.54

0.27

Individuals

19

"

1
2
1
189
8
3
3
35
7
2

1
66.83

2.73

43.09

1. 76

72.57
18.14

2.96
0.74

45.36
13.61
13.61

1. 85
0.56
0.56

64
3

"

"
"

6
1

"

2

"
"

3
3

1

4.54
9.07
13.61

0.19
0.37
0.56

"

1
6

2.55
20.41

0.10
0.83

3

20.41

1. 22

298

323.39

13.21

126

105.52

6.31

¥

1

0.04

0,00
1

0.04

0.00

¥

4

1. 56

0.06

1

0.28
10.19
6.30
1. 67
0.28
0.05
0.37

1

4.54
167.83
63.50
40.82
4.54
0.02

4

6.80
249.47
154.22
40.82
6.80
1.13
9.07

4.54

0.27
10.07
3.81
2. 45
0.27
0.00
0.27

34

469.91

19.20

15

285.83

17.14

1

725.74

43.54

0.00

1

725.74

43.54

12

.
SUBTOTAL

3
2

4
3

o

SUBTOTAL
At species level is in two subheadings.

4

1

Large Terrestrial Aquatic
Alligator (Alligator m1ssissippiensis)

+

LEVEL

Number of

5

SUBTOTAL
Small Terrestrial Aquatic
Unidentified salamander
Unidentified frog
Frog (Rana sp.)
Leopard frog (Rana cf. pipiena)
Aull Frog (Rana cf. catesbelana)
Unidentified turtle
Slider turtle (Pseudemys sp.)
Softshell turtle (Trionyx sp.)
Water snake (~ sp.)
Gerter snake (Thamnophis sp.)
+Cottonmouth snake (Agkistrodon sp.)

Table 20,
NATURAL

LEVEL 3

"

0.00

'"
"

"

5
2
2
2

"'"

1
1

Maximum number of individuals occurred in the 1/16 inch mesh screen.

FAUNAL DATA

41 JK 91

3x3 METER UN1T

NATURAL

Aquatic
Lightning whelk (Busycon contrarium)
Maple-leaf mussel (Quadrula guadrula)
Purple shell mussel (Propteria purpurata)
Common pond mussel (Legumia subrostrata)
Yellow-sand shell mussel

Table 20.
NATURAL

LEVEL 3

Number of

Est. Total
Body Wt.

% Total

Individuals

(kg. )

Sample Wt.

LEVEL

Number of
Individuals

5

4

Est. Total
Body Wt.
(kg.)

% Total
Sample ';o/t.

1

19
1
2
I

Rang1a
Carolina
Sunray venus
Uniden tified
Unidentified fish
Bowfin
Gar

"

Drum
Sheepshead
Black drum
Star drum
Banded drum

1. 76

72.57
18.14

2.96
0.74
1.85
0.56
0.56

22.22

1.33

2

9.07

0.54

4
1

20.41
1. 70

1. 22
0.10

2

4.54

0.27

1

4.54

0.27

45.36

2

13.61

3
3
1

4.54
9.07
13.61

1
6

2.55
20.41

0.10

0.83

3

20.41

1. 22

298

323.39

13.21

126

105.52

6.31

"

1

0.04

0,00
0.04

0.00

"

4

1.56

0.06

1

0.28
10.19
6.30
1.67
0.28
0.05
0.37

1

4.54

5
2

167.83
63.50

2

40.82
4.54

3
4

6.80
249.47
154.22
40.82
6.80
1.13
9.07

4.54

0.27
10.07
3.81
2.45
0.27
0.00
0.27

34

469.91

19.20

285.83

17.14

undulatus)

*

12
3

..
SUBTOTAL

2
4

o

SUBTOTAL
level is in two subheadings.

34

:I

'"

13.61

11<

sp. )

1. 36

1

11<

Unidentif1ed frog
Frog (Rana sp.
Leopard frog
Bull Frog (Ran a
Unidentified turtle

speci~s

43.09

U.6.l

04
3

6

SUBTOTAL

At

Z.H

11<

Redf1ah

+

66.83

11<

*

Atlantic
Whiting
Sea
Eel

189
8
3
3
35

*

0.00

'"

*

0.19
0.37
0.56

0.00

'"

'"

'"

2
1

0.02

1

15

1

725.74

43.54

725.74

43.54

Maximum number of individuals occurred in the 1/16 inch mesh screen.

FAUNAL

DATA

NATURAL

AquSotic
Lightning whelk (Busycon contrSoriua)
KSople-Ie.f .u8sel-r
Purple shsll mussel
Common pond mussel
Yellow-a.nd ahell
(L.mpsilis
Ribbed mussel
Hooked mussel
Scallop
Eastern
Atlantic
aSongia (R.ngia ~B!~~~~:=
Carolina marsh
Sunray venus
Unidentified
Unidentified fiah
Bowfin (Amia calva)
Gar (Lep18OSteus-sp.)
Rardhe.d c.tfish (Galeichthys
Flathead catfish (Pylodictis
Flounder (Paralichthys sp.)
Drum (Fam. Sciaenidae)
Sheep shead (ArchosarguB probatocephalua)
Black drum (PogoniaB cromis)
Star drum (Stellifer l.nceolatus)
Banded drum (Leiostomus xanthurus)
Redfish (Sciaenops ocellat.)
Atlantic croaker (MicroPoRon undulatus)
Whiting (Menticirrbus sp.)
Sea trout (Cynoscion sp.)
Eel (Anguill. Bp.)

Number of
Individuals

Est. Total
Body Wt.
(kg.)

NATURAL

LEVEL

7
Est. Total

% Total
Sample Wt.

Number of
Individuals

Wt,
.)

% Total
Sample Vt.

1
29
1

8
1
27

9.55

2.64

1

...

2

,.,

10

4.25

1.17

,.,

,.,

2

6.80

1.88

*

*

3

9.07

*

1

1. 98

2.50

0.55

,.,

*

*
*
1

*,.,

*
*

sp.J

LEVELS 5-6

I

SUBTOTAL

Small Terrestrial Aquatic
Unidentified salamander
Unidentified frog
Frog (Ran. sp.)
Leopard frog (Raus cf.
Bull frog (~ cf.
Unidentified turtle
Slider turtle
Softshell
Water snake
GSorter snske'(~~~~~~
+Cottonmouth

Table 21.

8x8 METER UNIT

41 JK 91

6.80

1. 88

57

38.45

10.62.

2
1

0.28
0.06

0.08

6
3

158.76
104.33

63.8~

28.79

1

4.54
0.03

1. 25
0.01

1

0.01

*
*
*
*
*

*

189
5
1
15
1
905
43
4
31
78
1

320.01

6.00

54 43
9.0,

a

86.18
6.80

1. 02
0.17
1. 62
0.13

1

16
2
3
2
5

54.43

1.02
0.34
0.38
0.19
0.44
0.17
0.51
0.34
0.05

2

18.14
20.13
10.21
23.53
9.07
27.22.
18.14
2.55
327.72
13.61

1412

1001.24

18.79

7
3
1

4. 25
3.12

4
4
2
2

57

6.15
0.26

1.13

0.08
0.06
0.02

5

1496.85
612. 35
49.89
1. 94
0.99
9.07

28.07
11. 48
0.94
0.15
0.02
0.17

75
13
2
4

4

SUBTOTAL

14

267.98

73.96

114

2185.59

40.99

SUBTOTAL

o

0.00

0.00

o

0.00

0.00

+ At species level is in two subheadings.

...

Maximum number of individuals occurred in the 1/16 inch mesh screen.

Small Terrestrial
Toad (Bulo sp.)
Box turtle (Terrapene sp.)
Unidentified lizard
Spiny lizard (Sceloporus cf.
Zebra lizard (Cf. Holbrookia sp.
Whiptai1 lizard (Cnemidophorus sp.)
Unidentified snake
Rat snake (Elaphe sp.)
Racer snake (Coluber sp.)
Bull snake (Pithuophis sp.)
Rognose snake (Heterodon sp.)
+Copperhead snake (Agkistrodon sp.)
Rattlesnake (Crotalus sp.)
Opossum (Didelphis marsupialis)
Eastern mole (Scalopus sguaticus)
Short tail shrew (Blarina brevicauda)
Least shrew (Cryptotis parva)
Raccoon (Procyon lotor)
Gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus)
Bobcat (Lynx ~)
Striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis)
Mexican ground squirrel (Cltellus cf. mexicanus)
Prairie pocket gopher (Geo~~ bursarius)
Plains pocket mouse (Perognathus hispidus)
Rice rat (Oryzomys palustris)
White footed mouse (PeromyscuB sp.)
Harvester mouse (Reithrodontomys sp.)
Pygmy mouse (Biao~ taylori)
Packrat (Neotoma-sp.)
Cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus)
Prairie vole (Microtus cf. ochrogaator)
Eastern cottontail (Sy1vilaguB cf. f1oridanua)
Swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquaticus)
Blacktsil jackrabbit (Lepus californicus)

Table 21. Continued
2

#<

4
2

'31.75

4.54
3.40

8.76

1. 25
0.94

0.60
0.02

1..42
18.14
13.61
0.85
7.09
1. 70
9.07
11. 34
58.97
0.75
0.20
0.10

0.03
0.34
0.26
0.02
0.13
0.03
0.17
0.21
1.11
0.01
0.00
0.00

1
1

45.36

6B.04

0.85
1. 28

4

2

5.00
0.40
0.50
0.15
0.40
0.18
2.50
23.10
1.20
45.36
54.43

0.09
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.05
0.43
0.02
0.85
1.02

94

402.46

7.54

1632.92

30.62

1632.92

30.62

1.13
8.00
9.13

0.02
0.15
0.17

10.21
72.57
13 .61

0.19
1. 36
0.26
0.09

2
22

5
1

2
2

*

1

0.05

0.01

*
*

*

*

"

*

*

1

0.10

3

3.30

0.91

1

11.34

3.13

SUBTOTAL

o

54.48

0.00

0.03

*
*
*
*
*

15.03

J.
1

2

1
1
1

2

2
1
21
3

4

0.00

Arboreal
Green anole (Anolia carolinensis)
Fox squirrel (SCIUrus niger)

*
SUBTOTAL

31. 75
0.85

:;

14

X

*

*

2

2

1
2

SUBTOTAL
Large Terrestrial
Coyote (Canis cf. latrans)
White tail deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
Bison/cow (!:l:.!!.!!.!!. bison/Bos ~)

Avian
--unIdentified bird
Reron (~ sp.)
Duck (Anas sp.)
Goose (Branta sp.)
Turkey (Meleagris ga1lopavo)
Mockingbird (~ polyg1ottos)
Cardinal (Richmondena cardina1is)
Bat (Myotie sp.)

*

a

0.00

0.00

2

1.42

0.39

*

)

1

4

*

3
2

*

1

1

4.54

*

1

0.10

0.00

SUBTOTAL

2

1. 42

0.39

8

101.02

1. 90

TOTAL
Body Weight/Individual

87

362.33
4.16

100.00

1635

5332.36
3.26

100.01

FAUNAL DATA

41 JK 91
NATURAL

Aquatic
Lightning whelk (Busycon contrarium)
Maple-leaf mussel (Quadrula quadrula)
Purple shell mussel (Propteria purpurata)
Common pond musael (Legumia subrostrata)
Yellow-sand shell mussel
(Lampailia anodontoidea anodontoides)
Ribbed mussel (Modiolus demissus granoaissmus)
Hooked musael (Brachidontes recurvus)
Scallop (Aequipecten sp.)
Eastern oyster (Crassostrea virginica)
Atlantic cockle (Dinocardium robustum)
Rangia (Rangia cuneata)
Carolina marsh clam (PolYmesoda caroliniana)
Sunray venus (Kacrocallista nimbosa)
Unidentified crustacean
Unidentified fish
Bowfin (Amia calva)
Gar (LepIS;Bteus-8p.)
Hardhead catfish (Galeichthys felis)
Flathead catfish (Pylodictis olivaria)
Flounder (Parslichthys sp.)
Drum (Fam. ~"nidae)
Sheepshead (Archosargus probatocephalus)
Black drum (Pogonias cromis)
Star drum (Stellifer lanceolatus)
Banded drum (Leiostomus xanthurus)
Redfish (Sciaenops ocellata)
Atlantic croaker (Micropogon undulatus)
Whiting (Henticirrhus sP.)
Sea trout (Cynoscion sp.)
Eel (Anguilla sp.)

Table 22.

LEVEL B

Number of
Individuals

NATURAL

Est. Totsl
Body Wt.
(kg. )

% Total
Sample Wt.

LEVEL 9

Number of
Indi vid uals

16
2

2

68

11

1
15
2
1019
57
2
8
33
,.

360.32

4.78

47.63

0.63

..

5

72.57

0.96

..

16

,.
,.

2
2
3
3
3
3
4

68.04
13.61
13.61
13.61
10.77
4.54
17.01
4.25

0.90
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.14
0.06
0.23
0.06

48

294.83

1313

Est. Total
Body Wt.
(kg .)

% Total
Sample W~.

4

245.40

56.10

10

2.27

0.52

..

3

36.29

8.30

,.

I

1.42

0.32

9.07

2.07

1

13.91

3.18

3.92

2

15.88

3.63

920.79

12.22

752

324.24

74.12

4
1

2.27
0.85

0.03
0.01

16
3
3
3
3

385.55
99.79
54.43
1. 98
1.13
2.84

5.12
1.33
0.72
0.03
0.02
0.04

SUBTOTAL

35

548.84

7.30

SUBTOTAL

o

0.00

0.00

,.
,.
..

SUBTOTAL
Small Terrestrial Aguati~
Unidentified salamander
Unidentified frog
Frog (Rana sp.)
Leopard frog (Rana cf. pipiens)
Bull frog (Rana cf. catesbeiana)

.

..

Unidentifie~r~le

Slider turtle (PsBudemys sp.)
Softshell turtle (Trionyx sp.)
Water snake (Natrix sp.)
Garter snake ~ophis sp.)
+ Cottonmouth snake (Agkistrodon sp.)

.,.
,.

Large Terrestrial AquatiC
Alligator (Alligator mississippiensis)

+

3)(3 UNIT

At specie. level is in two subheadings.

..

2

694
22
1

.
,.

,.

.

.

o

10
0.85

0.02
0.19

2
I

40.82
24.95

9.33
5.70

1

0.28

0.06

4.54

1.04

8

71.54

16.34

o

0.00

0.00

1
2

,.

Maximum number of individuals occurred in the 1/16 inch mesh screen.

Small Terrestrial
Toad (Bufo ap.)
Box turtle (Tarrapene sp.)
Unidentified lizard
Spiny lizard (Sceloporus cf. olivaceoue)
Zebra lizard (Cf. Holbrookia sp.)
Whiptail lizard (Cnemidophorua sp.)
Unidentified snake
Rat suake (Elaphe sp.)
Racer snake (Coluber sp.)
Bull snake (Pithuophis sp.)
Bognose snake (Heterodon sp.)
+Copperhead snake (Agkistrodon sp.)
Rattlesnake (Crotalus sp.)
Opossum (Didelphis marsupialis)
Eastern mole (Scalopus aquatieus)
Short tail shrew (Blarina brevi cauda)
Least shrew (Cryptotis parva)
Raccoon (Procyon lotor)
Gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus)
Bobcat (Lynx rufus)
Striped skunk (Mephitia mephitis)
Mexican ground squirrel (Citellus cf. mexieanus)
Prairie pocket gopher (Geomys bursariua)
Plains pocket mouse (Perognathus hispidus)
Rice rat (Oryzomys palustris)
White footed mouse (Peroayscus sp.)
Harvester mouse (Reithrodontomys sp.)
Pygmy mOuse (Biaomys taylori)
Packrat (Neotoma sp.)
Cotton rat (Sigmodon hiapidus)
Prairie vola (Microtus cf. ochrogastor)
Eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus cf. floridanua)
Swamp rabbit (SYIVila~us aguaticus)
Blacktai1 jackrabbit Lepus californicus)

Table 22. Continued

"
"

"

1
2
1

0.57
31.75
o 28

0.01
0.42
0.00

1

0.71
6.80
14.74
1.13

0.01
0.09
0.20
0.02

1
1

1.13
2.64
4.54
29.48
0.90

0.02
0.05
0.06
0.39
0.01

1

54.43

0.72

2

3.00

0.04

1
1

0.40
0.15

0.01
0.00

11
2

22.00
0.80
22 .68
31. 75

0.29
0.01
0.30
0.42

"

12
4
1

'"

1
3

"

"
*

1

2

1

SUBTOTAL
Large Terrestrial
Coyote (Canis cf. letrans)
White tail deer (Odocoileus virginianus)
Bison/cow (Bison ~/Boa ~)

50

230.08

3.08

1
3
1

158.76
1519.53
4082.31

2 .11
20.18
54.21

SUBTOTAL

5

5760.60

76.50

3

0.85

0.01

3

0.85

0.01

"

2
1

1.42
63.04

0.02
0.90

"

1

0.10

0.00

Arboreal
Green anole (Anolia carolinensis)
Fox squirrel (SCIUrus niger)

"
SUBTOTAL

Avian
--unidentified bird
Heron (Ardea sp.)
Duck (Anas sp.)
Goose (Branta sp.)
Turkey (Meleaaris gallopavo)
Mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos)
Cardinal (Richmondeua cardinalis)
Bat (Myoth sp.)

x

SUBTOTAL
TOTAL
ht/Individual

_ _4_
1411

1

13.61

3.11

*

4

2

5.10
3.40

1.17
0.78

"

1

4.54

1. 04

3

"
"

1
1

3.30
0.40
11. 34

0.75
0.09
2.59

13

41. 69

9.53

o

0.00

0.00

o

0.00

0.00

~

~

0.92

o

0.00

7530.72
5.34

100.03

773

437.47
0.57

99.99

APPENDIX II

231

Table 23. Faunal Data, 4lJK147.
SPECIES
Aquatic:
Maple-leaf mussel (Quadrula quadrula)
Ribbed mussel (Modiolus demissus granosissumus)
Hooked mussel (Braahidontes reaurvus)
Eastern oyster (Crassostrea virginiaa)
Atlantic cockle (Dinoaardium robustum)
Rangia (Rangia auneata)
Carolina marsh clam (Polymesoda aaroliniana)
Sunray venus (Maaroaallista nimbosa)
Cross-barred venus (Chione aanaellata)
Channel catfish (Iatalurus punatatus)
Star drum (Stellifer lanaeolatus)
Sea trout (Cynosaion sp.)

NUMBER OF
INDIVIDUALS
5
10
2

4
I

153
12
I
I
9
1

4
203

Small Terrestrial/Aquatic:

o

Large Terrestrial/Aquatic:

o

Small Terrestrial:
Swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus aquatiaus)

I
1

Large Terrestrial:
White tail deer (Odoaoileus virginianus)

~

4

Arboreal:

o

Avian:

o

APPENDIX II

232

REFERENCES CITED
Davis~

1966

William B.
The Mammals of Texas.
Bulletin No.
Wildlife Department, Austin, Texas.

41, Texas Parks and

Dillehay, Tom D.
1975a Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity
River Delta, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research
Report No. 51, The University of Texas at Austin.
1975b

Appendix III: Shellfish Refuse Analysis for the 1973
Wallisville Reservoir Archeological Project, Chambers
County, Texas.
In: Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation
in the Lower Trinity River Delta, Texas, Tom D. Dillehay.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report No. 51, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Eddy, Samuel
1957
How to Know the Freshwater Fishes.
Dubuque, Iowa.

Wm.

C. Brown Co.,

Peterson, R. T.
1963
A Pield Guid~ to the Birds of Texas and Adjacent States.
Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston.

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX III
BIOLOGICAL ZONES IN THE AREA OF INVESTIGATION

Billy M. Davidson
Paul R. McGuff

BIOLOGICAL ZONES

235

Fieldwork in conjunction with a pilot survey of Matagorda Bay
(Fritz 1975) and examination of aerial photographs make available
by the Bureau of Reclamation has resb1ted in preliminary delinea­
tion and description of biological zones in the confines of the
1974 work area at Palmetto Bend.
The primary objective of this
work is to provide an environmental perspective for the analysis
of cultural materials recovered in archeological 1ie1d investi­
gations.
Such a perspective was unawai1ab1e otherwise but tre­
mendously desirable.
It is believed that although the boundaries of present day
biological zones are continually shifting, as a result of a number
of environmental factors, the number and diversity of the zones
has remained reasonable constant in the recent past (post"2,OOO
B.P.).
Mr. Davidson is responsible for the data in this appendix. He
has drawn from long experience in analyzing coastal environments
(Davidson 1975, Fritz 1975, Aten N.d.b).
Davidson's methods in this case are unsuitable as an in-depth
study of the environment. Yet it is believed that mapping of zones
and descriptions while general, do provide a footing for a greater
understanding of prehistoric cultural integration with the natural
environment.
In 1973 Davidson conducted a survey which combined both boat
and automobile aided examination to identify environmental zones
in the area (Fritz 1975).
At that time the researcher became
familiar with th~ reservoir area and in fact examined portions of
the 1974 work area at Palmetto Bend.
Early in 1975 at the request
of the Texas Archeological Survey, Davidson examined available
aerial photographs and proir knowledge of the vicinity, produced
the biological zones map included in the body of the report(Fig.
2) and the following descriptions of five biological zones.
BLUFF TOP FOREST
The bluff top forests are composed of mixed stands of oaks

(Quercus sp.), elms (Ulmus-spj) , and small Hackberry (Celtis tenui­
folia).
Invader species of Mesquite (Pposopis juliflora) and
prick1ey pear (Opuntia sp.) are also present.
A heavy ground
cover of shrubs and shrubs with numerous forbs exists.
These for­
ests are usually set between the flood plain forests and coastal
grasslands; they occur along the bluff tops of the river valleys.
Numerous birds, 1iza~ds and snakes occur along .ith small animals,
but, few larger mammals utilize the habitat.

APPENDIX III

236

CULTIVATED LAND
Most of the level land surrounding the river and river related
forests has been under cultivation at one time or another.
Deter­
mination of the original state of the disturbed areas is almost im­
possible.
That problem has been compounded by invasions of mesquite
(Prosopis juliflora) on old pasturelands and abandoned fields. His­
toric accounts and the inferences based on the developed genetic
horizons in the dominate soils (a deep A horizon with a high organ­
ic matter content) suggest that most of the inter-riverine areas
beyond the bluff top forest were probably short and middle length
grass prairies.
FLOOD PLAIN FOREST
The flood plain forests are composed of mixed stands of cotton­
(Populus sp.), hickory (Carya sp.), elm (Ulmus sp.), sycamore
(Platanus occidentalis) , pecan (Carya illinoensis), oak (Quercus sp.)
and ash (Fraxinus sp.) with a very dense ground cover of mixed
shrubs and forbes.
Occasionally thick beds of palmetto (Sabal sp.)
occur.
The environment is usually developed on low terraces and in
old meander scars.
It supports very large populations of birds,
lizards, snakes, and rodents but very few large mammals.

woods

RIPARIAN FOREST
Riparian forests are dense stands of cypress (Taxodium disti­
chum) or willows (Salix sp.) replaced on higher ground by sycamore
(Platanus occidentalis) and cottonwood (Populus deZtoides). The
forests are sometimes developed in standing water or on low areas
in:old. meander-scarsandsomefime.on natural levees.
Little
ground cover is associated with this environment.
Turtles, water­
bugs, snakes, alligators and var~QQs rodents utilize this environment.
The zone lis subject tOp fre"qlllent innlitndation.
SHORT GRASS PRAIRIE
The short grass prairie is composed of short and mid-length
prairie grasses.
Scattered stands of live oak (Quercus virginiana)
occasionally are present, and less commonly elms (Ulmus sp.) and
other hardwoods.
The environment is developed on well drained
soils usually above 20 feet in elevation on the high terraces.
Poorly drained areas develop numerous "wet weather marshes" and

BIOLOGICAL ZONES

237

bogs during the spring and fall,
Such an environment supports a
large population of deer, lagomorphs, plains rodents, upland birds,
and geese, as well as various snakes and lizards.

238

IlPPENDIX I I I

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
A Chronological Framework for the Upper Galveston Bay
N.d.
Area: Stratigraphic Testing at Wallisville Reservoir,
Texas.
Manuscript in preparation.
Davidson, B. M.
1975
Appendix II: Environment of the Wallisville Area.
In:
Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower Trinity
River Delta, Texas, Tom D. Dillehay.
Texas Archeological
Survey, Research Report No. 51, The University bf Texas
at Austin.
Fritz, Gayle
1975
Matagorda Bay Area, Texas: A Survey of the Archeological
and Historical Resources.
Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report No. 45, The University of Texas at Austin.

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX,IV
SEDIMENT ANALYSIS'

Louise Jones
Paul R. MaGuff

SEDIMENT ANALYSIS
INTRODUCTION
Archeologists speak frequently of the importance of recog­
nizing artifact context.
An excavated bone or projectile point
is usually recorded precisely in a researcher's field records,
but, notes on the soil matrix, also a part of context, are often
absent.
Sediments are the environment of an artifact; sediments
also comprise most of the contents of an archeological site (Wi1de­
sen 1973: xi).
Understanding the properties of sediments in as­
sociation with the artifacts and refuse of occupation may enable
a broader and more reliable understanding of cultural processes.
During June through October 1974 archeological investigations
were conducted within the confines of the proposed Palmetto Bend
Reservoir, During that time soil samples were collected at sev­
eral prehistoric sites and from various geomorphic units.
Two techniques were used for collecting soil sample.
In one
technique a continuous column divided into consecutively numbered
10 cm. blocks was taken.
Whenever the arbitrary blocks in the
continuous sampling crossed a natural boundary they were divided
at that boundary and given an alphabetical as well as numerical
designation.
Another methodology which may simply be called "grab
sampling" was used.
A grab sample may be collected from any loca­
tion but is not contiguous with other soil, samples.
Only a few of the many samples taken were analyzed.
A sample
of 25 ten cm. units was taken in a continuous column (Column #1),
from the east side of the 3 x 3 Unit at 41 JK 91 (Fig. 10, 11) and,
grab samples from backhoe trenches 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 at 41 JK 91
were examined as well. Two samples not directly connected with
cultural deposits at archeological site, from the Beaumont forma­
tion and historically deposited sand from the bank of the Navidad
River, were processed.
~.
,~s
i~~i.
,~
Laso t af" ryi ailui1y s is, for " thad et ermmBati ;iOB dofnplb., 1 e rgani c stha t­
ter/cill:,bon, carbonates and parhl£cletaillle.werer:performed.
Particle
size was analyzed for each of the samples.
Organic matter/carbon,
pH, and carbonate analyses were conducted on the continuous column
and five grab samples from backhoe trenches north of 41 UK 91.
Procedures for the specific analyses are determined by the
information desired.
Soil scientists, engineers and geochemists
each may have different ways for examining similar soil properties.
A careful decision between methods must be made to give the arche­
ologist data that will be useful for interpretation.
Discussions
with Paul McGuff on the archeological needs were considered in
combination with library research and the helpful advice of many
experts (C. L. Girdner, soi1~scientist for the Soil Conservation
Service, Don Benight, engineer in the Texas Highway "Department,
Curtis J. Sorenson, soils professor and Gene Amarra1, geochemical
241

APPENDIX IV

242

student at the University of Texas at Austin) before a decision on
technique was made.
The procedures chosen in the analysis are the author's own
decision and responsibility.
The methodology used is often a com­
bination of techniques from several disciplines and for that reason
a detailed explanation of them is necessary.
Hopefully, a relation
of methods that yield the most information, and, of the difficulties
encountered, will be desirable for both archeologists and sediment
analysts who work together in the future.
METHODOLOGY
The soils must be free of moisture before analysis begins; if
present it would affect the accuracy of weighing.
Samples were
placed on trays for several days to allow them to air dry.
When
the sediments had dried uniformly each was mixed 'and a 25 gram sub­
sample obtained before portions were selected for the different
analyses.
It was desirable to get a somewhat rep~esentative sub­
sample for these are used as reference and comparison in the future.
Representative subsamples sould give an accurate picture of the
whole sample.
They underwent no treatment, sieving or grinding.
Each portion of the sample taken for the tests was selected
to insure that the whole of the sample was represented.
For tests,
except pH, soil~aggregates were ground and afterwards passed through
a U~S. Standard Number 10 sieve thus removing material larger than
2.00 mm.
Notes on the coarse material removed by sieving were
only made during the particle size analysis.
Each soil analytical procedure required various pieces of
equipment.
However, several items remained standard in all tests.
Grinding of soil aggregates was done with a rubber tipped pestle,
and deionized water was used consistently.
Fine measurements were
taken to the nearest 100th of a mg. on an analytical balance and w
weights of larger portions were obtained on a triple beam balance.
The other equipment: glassware, pipettes and beakers, can be found
in any geochemical, chemical laboratory or chemical supply house;
they are standard fare.
INDIVIDUAL ANALYSES
Soil pH
The pH factor may be drfined as hydr08en ion activity (Buol,
Hole and McCracken 1973: 30).
As the concentration of hydrogen ions
increases, the pH value decreases; a lessening of the positively

SEDIMENT ANALYSIS

243

charged particles, increases the pH.
The degree of active hydro­
gen+ in the soil solution can be measured through chemical reac
tion or direct measurement of ion activity.
The pH value is the
negative logarithm of hydrogen ion activity.
Use of a negative
logarithm avoids exponents and decimals in statements of pH value.
Acidic soils are high in exchangeable hydrogen; basis ones
are high in exchangeable bases.
A scale which quan~itatively
illustrates the pH of a soil suspension has been devised where
neutral is seven.
Any values below that to 1.0 are acidic, values
above 7 and to 10.0 are basic soils.
Analysis of this soil property informs the archeologist or
geologist working at a site of the kinds of chemical processes
that have occurred during soil genesis or of the original nature
or parent material.
The pH results may enable inferences on the
extent to which matrix has allowed preservation of cultural or
faunal remains.
Acidic soils are often detrimental to faunal
preservation.
.
Active hydrogen ions can only exist in solution and conse­
quently must be measttred in this form.
A mixture consisting of a
ratio of one p~rt de-ionized water to one part raw soil sample was
used in this analysis.
Twenty mI. of water were adaed to 20 g. of
soil and stirred intermittently for thirty minutes.
That suspen­
e hour and then bef re testin
it was a ain
stirred well.
The electrodes were immediate
owere
nto t e
solution and the reading record.ed as "soil pH measured in water".
The pH meter records movements of electrons and is more accu­
rate than the treated paper or powder available which indicates
that value through color variations.
A Corning Model 5 pH meter
was employed.
To insure the instrument's accuracy, it was cali­
brated with two solutions of known pH.
Soil pH is a relative measurement and results received through
testing should be viewed as such.
Problems confront most sediment
analysts because of that and when speaking of measuring the hydro­
gen ion activity it must be realized that despite active hydrogen+
in the soil solution, there exist positively charged particles in
the organic matter and mineral structure as well.
For that reason,
hydrogen+ "activity" rather than "concentration" is referred to.
Most soil scientists censulted for this project offered several
methods, but emphasized that different procedures vary the result;
therefore the method of testing should be consistent for all samples.
The soil must be in suspension to measure pH yet, unfortunately,
references did not state which soil to water ratio yielded the
most reliable values; some suggestions were ratios of 1:5, 1:2.5,
and 1:1. Ultimately the 1:1 ratio was employed because it added a
minimum amount of water and kept thesoilsam~p Ie nearest to naturaI­
field conditions.
Adding de-ionized water to the sample when the water itself
possessed an acidic pH, posed the problem of altering··the true
reading. C. L. Girdner (soil scientist, Soil Conservation Service)
suggested that because the samples to be tested were basic in pH,

APPENDIX IV

244

and, calcium carbonate nodules were present in the matrix, the
acidity of the water would be cancelled, removing the effects that
can cause alteration in reading.
Peech (1965: 917) added further
support to that argument.
To avoid the possibility of error that results from placing
soil samples in water solution it is recommended that pH measure­
ments be taken in the field by using the special metal electrodes
manufactured for that purpose.
Or

ic

Matter/Ca~~on

Organic matter includes fresh plant and animal residues, humus
(resistant plant and animal residues), and inert forms of carbon ~
such as charcoal.
Each constituent of organic matter exists in
various forms and amounts, and these act asscontributing factors
in soil genesis.
Organic matter influences development of soil
structure and aids in the breakdown of parent material.
The carbonic acid and humic acid present in organic matter
have cementing abilities which unite the soil particles into aggre­
gates or structural units (Robinson 1936: 148). Organic matter ex­
isting in this form is small in size and behaves as a clay would.
Hence, it contributei to the structure in the soil.
Alteration of
rock or parent material to form soil is partially the result of
microorganisms and roots physically breaking the parent material
into smaller units and partially a result of organic matter caus­
ing chemical changes in the mineralogy of parent material.
A general decrease,in organic matter from the surface down,
through the genetic horizons is common in soil profiles because
biological activity is most intense in the upper part of a profile.
The requirements for organic matter buildup are ~iological activity,
time, and ground surface stability.
Deposition and erosion are
processes under which organic matter may be removed or buried.
As
a result of removal or burial of organic matter horizons, areas
which have not had a continually stable surface through time may
show evidence of variable organic matter distribuiion in the pro
file.
Archeologists often use organic matter concentrations as
basis to discern refuse layers and hearths at habitation sites.
Human activity contributes significantly to the deposition of
organic matter.
In occupation areas, human activities result in a
more£rapid accumplation of organic matter than is usual under non­
cultural conditions.
The use of fire in particular contributes a
significantly greater amount of inert carbon in the organic matter
body than is usual under natural conditions.
Climate influences the concentration and form of organic mat­
ter.
As temperature increases percentage of organic matter de­
creases.
When vegetation growth is rapid and ~oils are wet (in
high rainfall areas) accumulation of organic matter is encouraged;
inadequate aeration slows down decomposition.
Grasslands are more

SEDIMENT ANALYSIS

245

favorable to accumulation of residue because in that situation
organic matter is easily replaced by the extensive root system
characteristic of g~asses.
Analysis of organic matter is often determined by reckoning the
percentage of car~oni Carbon, it is assumed, makes up 58% of
organic matter.
Carbon percent is either determined by wet or '
dry combusion methods.
Dry combustion involves special and ex­
pensive equipment.
Wet combustion was used in this analysis
because equipment necessary for that technique are more easily
gathered.
The percent of organic matter in a sample is usually
determined indirectly by measuring percentage of carbon because
the total extraction of organic matter necessary for measuring its
percentage is difficult.
F. E. Broadbent (1965: 1397-1407) has
discussed a technique for direct measurement of this percentage of
organic matter. :In that alternative technique organic mattei in a
sample is destroyed by solvents and the difference in weight meas~
u~edi.

In the analysis of samples from Palmetto Bend the relative
percentage of organic matter, was determined by multiplying the
amount of carbon by a constant (1.724) which reflected the assump­
tion that carbon makes up 58% of organic matter.
Each sample was
treated with an excess of an oxidizing agent (chromic acid). Pre­
cent age of carbon in a sample was interpreted through beck-titra­
tion with a standard ferrous solution (Fe fNH4] 2 [S04] 2 . 8H 2 0,
and sulfuric acid) until reaction with the chromic acid was neutral.
Calculations as to the quantities of carbon and thus organic matter
were based on the quantity of ferrous solution requi~ed for a neu­
tral reaction.
The procedure used in this analysis was most similar to the
one described by Allison in Methods of Soil Analysis (Allison 1965:
1374-75). This analysis used a one gram sample; Allison states
12-25
A larger s
Ie reduces error.
e ra 0 0
organic matter to
tural deposits (Broadbent 1953) and apparently extremely
in cultural deposits.
Discussion with McGuff
cultural use of fire may increase the percent of inert carbon in
samples derived from archeological sites.
It seems possible that
the greater amount of inert carbon in archeological sites may in­
crease the total percent of carbon in cultural deposi~s to a degree
which is beyond that found in naturally deposited organic matter
(58%).
If total percent of carbon is higher in cultural deposits,
and percentage of organic matter is determined by the constant de­
rived from percent of carbon in natural deposits, then estimates
of the percent of organic matter in archeological sediments may be
higher than is actual.
The results reported here are derived by indirectly measuring
organic matter through determination of carbon percent.
It is
felt that analysis of organic matter in clutural sediments will be
more useful if in the future the method suggested by Broadbent is
used.
Broadbent's method measures organic matter directly with
only a 2% range of error (1965: 1399).

~~!LE

Sample
Number

24. Chemical Analysis, Re!~JFs}.v~,9rgaric ~atter apd Calcium.
Zone

Level

Depth
(~m.:)

pH l'1easured
In Water

,c,

Organic
Matter/Carbon
,>:08%

C%

4~ 4"

1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9A
9B
9C&10A

1,OB
11
12
13
14
15
16
17A

17B
18
19
20
21
22

BHTlf6
(M...2)

BHTII7
eM.... 1)

* (M.,..4)

Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
Vd
IV

1

0.,.,10
10..,.20

2
2

,; 30 ",,('0

1

3
3
4

4
4
5
6
7

7
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9

1,710
ID.858
O.!H'l
0.}07
0.663
0.585
0.585
0.988

CaCO)
Equivalent
%

40-50
50 .. 60
60 ... 70
-:z,0-80
80.,..84
84-88
88.".95
95-100
100 .... 110
110-120
120..,.130
130"",140
140-150
150-169
160-165
165-170
170-180
180-190
190-200
210-220
242-252

7.10
7.10
7.10
7.25
7.30
7.40
7.40
7.60
7.50
7.30
7.50
7.80
7.35
7.60
7.70
7.85
7.80
8.00
7.95
8.05
8.00
8.20
8.25
8.25
8.30

2.950
1.'470
1. 270
0.870
1.140
1. 000
LOOO
0.804
0.870
0.940
0.940
1.070
1.270
1.140
1.000
0.846
1. 000
0.838
0.846
0.804
0.804
0.536
0.769
1. 070
0.402

10-20

7.90

1.600

0.936

11.80

10-20

7.80
7.90

2.616
1. 070

1. 521
0.624

5.60
16.05

20~30

0.S61
0.54,6
0.546
0.624
O. vza
0.~63

0 • .685
0.4~9

0.58.5
0.68'[.
0.429
0.468
0.468

o •[HIS

0.4413
0.62G
0.la34

15.90
24.40
23.97
24.72
24.70
21.62
23.30
22.97
21. 75
24.32
24.59
13.80
24.40
24.50
21. 57
21. 90
21. 95
17.80
16.13
19.68
19.69
21.75
19.45
17.17
24.82

.f

*(M-4): recently deposited sand on bank of Navidad River.

N
~
(jI

~

'1::1
'1::1
t:t;J

~
\;:j

'-i
~

'-i

~

SEDIMENT ANALYSIS

247

Galcium carbonate (CaC03) frequently exists as concretions
interspersed through the soil matrix.
The presence of concretions
was noted in the retrieved samples.
Hydrochloric acid revealed
also that CaC0 3 existed throughout the sediments retrieved .for
study.
The archeologist desi~ed an accurate determination of the
relative frequency of carbonates in each of the natrual levels he
excavated.
The methodology employed was Allison's acid-neutralization
method Allison 1965: .......1387-88.
In that
ground
gm. samp e
s treate
hydrochloric acid, then filtered through
with water to remove excess ac~d.
Phenolpthalein, an indicator,
was added.
With a 25% normal solution of sodium hydroxide in a
burette the contents are titrated to the phenolpthalein endpoint
(or Neutralization).
Using Allisonts equations an estimate of the
amount of carbonate was made.
Such estimates supply an index of
cargonate percentage that is often somewhat higher than reality
because portions of the sediment besides calcium carbonate react
with hydrochloric acid.
Allison further notes that lithe method is
useful chiefly to demonstrate difference in the amount of carbonates
present in soils which are otherwise similar in mineralogy" (Alli­
son 1965: 1388).
The soil samples taken at Palmetto Bend do have
a similar mineralogy (Gene Amarral, personal communication, notes
on file at TARL).
The 5 gm. sample for carbonates was ground and passed through
a number 10 sieve.
A few calcium carbonate concretions were re­
jected by the sieve but most were ground enough to pass through and
it is believed that the,rejected concretions would have changed the
percent of carbonates inthhe samples little.
Bone and shell both
react with hydrochloric acid; their existence in the run soil
samples could have some effect on the carbonate percentages.
Some
shell and bone was caught in the 2,00 mm. screen, but that which
had been ground may alter results of the analysis slightly.
It is
believed that the two problems mentioned above may have a cancel­
ling effect upon each other.
~~~~~

..

~~ ............,-~~~~ .. ~--~~,~-.~~~~~~~-,

Particle Size Analysis
A vital property for consideration in interpretation~ of geo­
logic history and soil genesis is the distribution of particle sep­
arates (sand, silt and clay) within a profile.
Pareiclessize dis~
tribution is one of the most stable of properties (Day 1965: 546);
it is altered only by deposition in a new medium or by chemical or
mechanical erosion of the particle-separates themselves.
The deter­
mination of particle size distribution is extremely helpful to the
archeologist because of its properties of stability.
Archeologists
work to discover the complex interaction of cultural and natural
factors which have through time resulted in the unique archeologi­

248

APPENDIX IV

cal properties at a site and particle size retains evidence of
natural factors more easily than a majority of other sediment char­
acteristics.
Particle~separate distribution is on~y on those particles less
than 2 mm. in size.
To study this range of particle sizes two
methods were used; one procedure involved sieving of coarse mate­
rial, the other identified the percentage of fine fractions by
gravitational sedimentation as measured by hydrometer.
Samples of 100 to 150 gm. were used.
These samples were
ground and passed through a number 10 sieve.
The 150 gr. samples
were necessary to control for large quantities of carbonate or or­
ganic matter when present.
That assured that after~pretreatment a
sufficient amount of sediment sample would remain for analysis.
Material caught in the sieve included calcium carbonate con­
cretions; plant material, bone fragments, shell, coarse sand and
flint flakes; few mineral grains of a type normally recorded in
particles size analysis were caught.
In particle size analysis
the proportion of sand, silt and clay is measured, any substance
other than these particles can alter the true reading.
Pretreatment of samples for particle size analysis is planned
so as to remove all organic and secondarily deposited minerals.
This involves two steps: removal of carbonates with hydrochloric
acid followed by elimination of organic matter with hydrogen per­
oxide.
A 25% hydroch~oric acid solution effectively removes the
carbonates.
When that solution is added to a sample containing
carbonates.a reaction (effervescence) occurs and CO 2 is released.
Addition of the acid continued until no effervescence was apparent.
The acid was diluted to guard against alteration of particles by
chemical erosion.
As an added precaution against damaging the
separates the samples were diluted with water several times after
application of hydrochloric acid.
A centrifuge was used to remove
the dilute acid from the sample.
A 30% solution of hydrogen peroxide removes organic matter
but sometimes requires heating to produce a reaction.
Manganese
dioxide also reacts with H202 and occasionally a continued slight
reaction to H202 may be attributed to that rather than organic
matter.
After organic matter removal the sample must be flushed
with de-ionized water and centrifuged.
Particles, particularly small ones, tend to aggregate.
Aggre­
gates must be dispersed for an accurate particle size analysis.
To accomplish that, each sample was placed in a beaker with a 50 mI.
solution of sodium metaphosate.
This was stirred and allowed to
stand overnight.
Final dispersion using a mechanical mixer is
done before adding the samples to hydrometer jars (Day 1965: 565).
Actually, two methods are available to determine percentage of
fine particles: hydrometer and pipette.
The hydrometer method was
chosen because it accomodated the time, money and equipment avail­
able.
The pipette technique is more accurate but also more t~me
consuming, costly and difficult to provide for.
The hydrometer test is based on the principle that given a

PARTICLE SIZE

SAHi'l.E

Table 25.

ANALYSIS

AmOLlltt in SU6-p41tnsion Measured by Hydrometer (%:)

AIiOUDt Passing thnnlQh U,S. Standard sieves (%)
2. DOmm

.41mm

1. DOmm

o .0880rn

(},71mm

O.5ilmm

O.35mm

O.25mm

o .177mm

v.125Jl1Jll

99.95

99.76

98.17

90.92

75.53

52.38

~H}.

0.0625[1111

~

1

.90

95

30.73

{).03~mm

O.OlSzun

o ,lIOlmm

o .OO,3lJlJll,

O.OOlSlIllll

20

15.25

11.:2 .5

7.5D

5.00

16.00

15 00

11. 75

5.00

".50

99.90

99.89

99.64

97.96

95.22

80.37

55.12

37.98

31. 75

20.25

16,25

12 .25

8.25

5.00

99.98

9: 9.93

99.70

9B .9S

97.28

90.37

74.62

49.99

'1.3.91

16 .09

19.00

15,00

10.00

6.00

2.50

99.96

99.9.5

99.90

99.64

97.93

91,0:3

14.74

49. 57

33,48

27.05

15.50

12

6.00

3.75

2. 50

99.97

99.90

99.64

97,16

9l.00

7Y. l'i

SO 11

3).86

21.44

17.00

11.7'5­

11 .25

6. ,5

1. 75

99.98

99.90

99.66

97.63

90.78

74.66

49,91

34,11

28.36­

20.00

17.GO

11.25

7.5£1

~9

.92

99.85

99.62

98,00

90 64

75.71

51 :2 3

32 .56

2. 7.09

17.25

13.75

9,00

6.25

J. 75

99.96

99.88

99.63

97.

a7

90.11

73.09

1\.8.96

33.50

2'J ,14

17.00

1).75

9' ,50

6,25

4 75

99.97

99.90

99,71

98.05

91. 6)

77.30

53.02

36.82

)Q.19

18.00

1 !l.Do

9.50

6 . .2 5

3. 75

fi9.98

99.96

99.7:,

98.15

'11.

~O

75.31

50, Ii 9

32,33

26,15

14.00

13.50

12.50

3.75

L 75

99.91

99.96

99.90

99.71

98.20

91,70

76.18

51. 58

35.22

2S .G2

19.25

14 .00

12,00

8.75

6.2:5

99.96

99.89

99.69

98,21

9; • .55

75.03

50.

'i6.07

31.

18.00

16 .25

1 J .25

8.75

! .00

99.98

99.95

99. e9

99,60

97.79

90.59

74.74

49.41

33.46

27.79

15, /5

13.

!)

.25

6.2:5

,5

99.99

9t:f.96

9;;,n

')~

.2'l

91. 50S

76.31

'";1

q,o

.7Q

2~

20.50

15.25

.75

8.75

6 . .2 .5

99.97

99.9j

99.75

98.U

90.77

75,

51 80

34.30

27,22

16.75

14.75

11.00

6.25

4,5,C

99.99

99.96

99.77

98.14

93. 39

76.09

51. 18

36.62

31. 24

IS.7S

12.75

If} .00

7.50

lJ ,2'5­

99.98

99.94

99.76

98.11

91,10

75.99

52.,15

36.09

JO ,14

19.75

10.75

S. 7 5

5.75

9<},9'{

99.36

99.60

97.37

8S.70

74.69

45.78

J3 .00

26

16.75

12.00

8.00

5.00

2. 50

1m

99.98

99.94

99,74

97.92

89.94

12.0'j

46.94

31.41

25.74

2C .00

15.00

9.00

.5.00

1.80

18

99.96

99.91

99,67

97.69

B'1.63

70,86

45 ..1 0

30,92

26,21

15,50

13.75

.00

8.7')

!l.00

99.96

99.89

99.61

97.60

90.19

73.33

48.41

32 .62

27.14

17,00

13.00

99.1J8

99.93

99.64

9 7.

~H,)

89.61

71.08

46.10

30.24

30.51

14.00

10.25

99,98

99. <}S

9A
9B

99.99:

SC & lOA
lOB
11
12
13

14

99.98

15
16

l1A

19

99.99

99.98

20

91

i ,75

,DO

8.75

5,7'::1

5.00

1,6£1

99.95

99,7b

97.99

90, /; 1

12.86

46.

a7

19,45

22.79

14.2S

11. 25

7.50

2.50

2. £1£1

99.96

99.88

99.08

95.37

B4 ,24

60.25

60. !O

41.46

34.44

20.7S

10.50

15, !l0

9.00

7. DO

:bUT 6

99.99

99.97

99.89

99.5/;

9/.81

91. 3D

16.44

60.20

SO.

BliT 7

99.91

99. 9'~

99.

99.15

9·.61

89,20

76.73

64.40

BRT 8

99.98

99.97

99,96

99.83

9:

.08

96.86

91. 75

H5.21

99'.95

99,87

99.57

98.36

95.24

91. 91

9;; .94

99.76

99.15

97.48

93.96

9 97

99.89

99, ')/'1

98.61

9'1,96

99.32

89,7V

47.64

21

22

99.98

Bll! 9

BHT 10

99.99

99.99

99.99

99.99

99" 98

99.93

Residual

M-4

I)

.. Data. lest after analysiB

n

j

.79

33.75
42.00

16 .50

1l.25

7.00

29 00

16.00

12. SO

5.50
9.50

"

19, It!

54,50

34.00

12,75

12.50

I:lO,8lJ

6 ~. 15

48.00

24 .25

6.25

4.00

89.22

84.37

66.25

54.00

4J .00

30.00

21. 75

96.11

93.80

91,11

59

38.00

76.25

12 • .50

8. Z5

16.1.l4

1i.88

7. 15

1,25

1. 25

1.25

1. 25

1.25

APPENDIX IV

250

particle of known density and parameter it will fall at a certain
velocity when in suspension.
Thus careful record~ng of the finer
breakdown in particle size is determined by the density reading of
the h~drometer.
From the hydrometer reading calculations can be
made on size distribution.
After gravitational sedimentation procedure had been completed,
the entire soil was passed through a .0625 mm. screen.
That which
remained in the sieve was weighed on the analytical balance and
placed in a vial.
The fine-grained material that passed through
the sieve was discarded.
Those portions retained in vials were
used for an accurate determination of the coarse particle size
fractions which were imprecisely recorded by the hydrometer; their
weight allowed them to fall from suspension too rapidly.
A total
of 11 sieve sizes were used and these were arranged in two sets to
accomodate the limitations of the shaker.
Each Il nes t" of sieves
remained a total of five minutes on the shaker.
Particles caught
in the individual sieves were weighed.
For each sample, utilizing data from both hydrometer and sieve
analysis characteristic summation curves were developed and plotted
on semi-logarithmic paper.
Problems encountered by this analyst centered around finding
a room free from drafts and one that could maintain constant tem­
perature.
These two factors are extremely important for the suc­
cess of the hydrometric anajysis.
Air currents will stir the sedi­
ments keeping them in suspension, and cause high readings for clay
content.
Unless a temperature-controlled sedimentation cabinet is
available, a room in which the air temperature can be controlled
will suffice for the experiment.
The ideal is 68° F.; it is best
to stay at or very close to this reading, otherwise a correction
factor will have to be applied.
A dummy or blank is run to make
up for temperature effects and the density of the sodium metaphos­
phate solution.
The hydrometer used in the analysis was an ASTM
l52H (American Society for Testing and Materials).
OnOs everal" 6c c as ions .. th er,hyii rdmet:.e t readirigs_ s emmed un 1 ikely
and were checked by running the test over until accuracy could be
assured.
On sample number four from the continuous column weight
of material caught in the .0625 mm. screen was not recorded and so
that weight was estimated by summing the portions caught in the
two nest of screens after the analysis.
The coarse accumulation
of sample number one from the continuous column was run through the
sieves and recorded, but notes on this breakdown have b~en lost.
CONCLUSIONS
It is clear from field and lab analysis that the sediments
found at the Venom Hill Site or 41 JK 91, and in the immediate
vicinity have undergone very little pedogenesis (soil formation).

SEDIMENT ANALYSIS

251

There are no A, B horizons to speak of; but in natural levels 1,
2, 3, and 7 there is evidence for some weak genetic development
(structure),
Instead the sediments are cumulative; their nature
is a result largely, of alluvial and colluvial deposition or of
geologic factors rather than genetic development of a weathering
profile.
The profile in which the continuous column samples were
taken, is characterized by nine natural levels, collectively known
as Zone V.
Sediment samples 21 and 22 were retrieved from the
upper portion of Zone IV.
These zones, are fill in erosional
channels.
They overl~e other geologic zones.
Zone 1, the oldest
zone recognized, is part of an emerged deltaic plain deposited
during the Sangamon interglacial.
Zone II is'coarsely crossbedded
sands attributed to point bars developed during the last pluvial
period.
Zone III probably represents a truncated soil profile
developed on Zone II between 10,000 and 4,500 years before the
present.
These have been recognized at all sites in the Palmetto
Bend area explored in the 1974 field season.
The samples from
41 JK 91 that are analysed here were only from Zone V and Zone IV.
Zone V consists of alluvial and colluvial deposits, felt to have
accumulated rapidly in terms of geologic time because of the arch­
eological refuse found in the levels.
Cultural material dating
from the Middle Pr.historic to Late Prehistoric archeological peri­
ods is found in this zone.
Zone IV is devoid of any cultural mate­
rial; rolled calcium carbonate concretions are abundant.
For a clearer understanding of the sediment properties, the
focus of this discussion centers on the influencing factors of the
environment, which have a direct relation to the sediments.
H.
Jenny (1941) comprised an equation involving the soil influencing
factors-- S~= f (cl, 0, r, p, t .•. ); soil development is a function
of climate, organisms, relief, parent material, time, human activity
and other regional influences.
The function is a good observation­
al tool to construct the succession of events occurring at the site.
IlThe initial analyses involves but one hypothesis namely, assump­
tion that variables cl, 0, r, p, t plus some accesory factors such
as seasonal variations in climate and groundwater table, suffice
to define any soil" (Jenny 1941: 262).
Although Jenny used this approach largely for sediments in
which genetic processes were well advanced and the samples studied
here indicate little such development, his function is still use­
ful for interpreting the sediments at Palmetto Bend.
Therefore,
the factors influencing the nature of our soil system at the site
will be looked at independently.
Two thoughts are emphasized.
One, although the factors are viewed independently of each other,
this does not mean they affected soil development in such a way.
In fact, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to delineate
which factors influenced which soil properties.
Secondly, as
Birkeland states, "Processes form the soil.
The factors, in con­
trast define the state of the soil system ll (Birkeland 1974: 125).

APPENDIX IV

252

limate
Rainfall and temperature are important variables; each can
have profound effects in altering the soil system.
Vegetation and
surface stability are reflections of the climatic factor.
Drier
periods with less rainfall inhibit vegetative growth thus increas­
ing the soil surface's susceptibility to erosion.
Alternately,
humid, wetter periods induce the growth of vegetation and narrow
the possibilities for runoff.
In addition as rainfall becomes
greater, chemical weathering is intensified and accoriing to data
of Jenny, clay formation is increased (Jenny 1941: 132).
"Climate
influences are manifested sither in form of reduced or increased
infiltrat~~n capacities (Baver 1956: 451).
When heavy rainfall d.
does occur at a time when the soil is not adequately protected,
surface compaction and clogging of pores begins; infiltration rate
is reduced, runoff increased.
Also, changes in climate can produee
a succession of plant types.
Climabe is not constant with time.
Variations in the climatic
factor, periods of stability and instability are reflected in the
soil profile where the continuous column I samples were extracted.
It is believed that climate is the overriding influencing factor
at Palmetto Bend.
Its influences can be traced back to the Pleis­
tocene roughly around the Sangamon interglacial when the Beaumont
formation was created by the river deltas prograding out into the
Gulf of Mexico.
Due to glacial melting during the interglacial,
there was a net fise to high standing sea levels,
When the ocean
water was locked up once again during the Wisconsin Glaciation; sea
level was ldwered approximately 400 feet (Curray 1960).
This cli­
matic change initiated heavy erosion; streams heading toward the
Gulf began downcutting in to the emerged Sangoman delta deposits.
Sea level began once again to rise around 18,000 years ago
(Frazier 1974).
As the glaciers receded, but this gradual rise
was an erratic one culminating eventually in the present sea level
stand.
The navidad River is now approximately 1000 m. from 41 JK 91.
Probably during the last pluvial period of the Wisconsin Glaciation
the Navidad was five times larger than its present width.
During
glacial advances there is increased effective precipitation in un­
glaciated portions of the continent, resulting discharge in the
rivers.
The Deweyville terrace and alluvium (10,000 B.P;) was de­
posited near the end of the Wisconsin glaciation in such a pluvial
period.
Zone II at 41 JK 91 can be attributed to the increased
discharge of the Navidad during this time.
Similar deposits have
elsewhere been designated the Deweyville Terrace (Bernard 1950).
Overlying the Deweyville are modern ~ediments of alluvial and col­
luvial nature, as well as certain erosional periods are documented.

SEDIMENT ANALYSIS

253

Organisms
,
Underneath a forest canopy, there are more acid leaching wa­
ters.
Forested sites often show greater leaching of cations, low­
er pH's, and greater clay translocation as opposed to grassland
sites (Birkeland 1974: 199).
In addition the soil organic matter
buildup is thin underlying forests; grassland organic matter dis­
tribution is high and more homogenious (Birkeland 1974: 198).
Soil fauna is most abundant where there is ample vegetative
cover (Baver 1956).
These organisms help break down -the organic
mat t er in the so il.
Burrows of small rodent s,'Reep the soil body
aerated and often mix the soil layers making it difficult at times
to pick out bhe distinctive soil features and stratum.
At 41 JK
91 during the 1974 field season the burrowing animals were clearly
evident; each morning the crew found the profile walls of the back­
hoe trenches pockmarked with rodent activity with cones of fill
under each hole (Fig. 3).
At the archeological site, the focus of research centers on
the human occupation and its ability to influence the state of the
soil system.
It is felt that it may affect the organic matter
content of the soil, increasing the existing percentage.
In read­
ying the samples for particle size analysis, they were first pass­
ed through a 2.00 mm. sieve.
The residue recorded was material
not or&inarily found in non-cult rally affected sediments: flint
flakes, bone fragments, Rangia shell and pieces of charcoal.
One way human occupation can affect the nature of the depos­
its is through a change in economic specialization.
"For example,
if increased economic specialization is represented by a gradual
shift from generalized hunting-gathering to an emphasis on riverine
resources, decay products from plants and mammals should contrib­
ute proportionately less through time and decay produ'cts of fish
and mollusks should contribute proportionately more through time,
to site sediment properties" (Wildesen 1973: 55).
The existing vegetation on the Venom Hill Site are anaqua
(Ehretia anaauq) and live oak (Queraus virginiana), with no under­
story due to cattle grazing.
Upslope from JK 91 is grassland type
vegetation, which cuts down on the possible downslope erosion.
In
addition, it i~ probable that with the changes in climate at Pal­
metto Bend from Pleistocene to present, there has been successions
and variations in plant communities as well.
This relationship
had an overbearing effect in past periods.
Undoubtedly the Recent
and modern sediments have been caught by the growth of vegetation,
allowing the buildup of continous soil levels, stabilizing this
accumulation, reducing its susceptibility to erosion.

APPENDIX IV

254

Relief
Relief varies with time; at Palmetto Bend, particularly asso­
ciated with 41 JK 91, there is evidence for a buildup of sediments,
somewhat erratic episodes of stability and inshability (depostion/
erosion).
As mentioned earlier, at one period when the Navidad was
five times its present size, there was a corresponding increase in
the carrying capacity of the stream's bed and suspended load.
Dur­
ing the pluvial period the Deweyville terrace was deposited, sand
upstream from Jk 91 in these natural levees composed the crests of
these banks, and was much more susceptible to erosion (Buol, Hole,
and McCracken 1973, Morisawa 1968).
Entrained in the river flow,
the coarser material was also the first to be deposited.
Finer ma­
terial would be deposited in the backswamps behind the natural
buildup of sediments.
JK 91 was ideally situated probably in a
zone in which there was less turbulence resulting in deposition.
Through its evolution, JR 91 experienced periods of erosion and
deposition until finaliy when the river changed its course and the
climatic factors reached somewhat stable conditions, the site un­
derwent no drastic changes.
The 8$tablishment of vegetation, par~
ticularly grassland type, on the Venom Hill Site and the upper ter­
races undoubtedly helped lessen the impact of erosion.
During
flood times, deposition would be the rule due to plant growth.
A
study done in the Cimarron River in southwest Kansas by Schumann
and Lichy attributes floodplain growth to the establishment of
vegetation, which not only prevented erosion but stabilized the
floodplain and aided deposition (Morisawa 1968: 87).
It is difficult to separate relief from the other factors of
vegetation and climate.
Nevertheless, it was an influencing factor;
the oldest deposition sequence dating back to the pleistocene as
well as the close proximity of the river, lriitiafed .. and.eahanced;ithe
buildup at 41 JK 91.
A word must be said about the location of M-4 (sediments which
were deposited as a result of a recent Navidad River flood). -This
sample was retrieved from a levee.
Parent Material
Because the sediments at the Venom Hill Site are alluvial and
colluvial in nature, it is difficult to pinpoint the original par­
ent material.
A safe assumption is that these sediments are derived
from area upstream or upslope from the sample locality and were ~­
eroded and carried in the river or in the immediate vicinity by sur--'
face runoff.

SEDIMENT ANALYSIS

255

Overall Analysis of pH
A review of the final results in the pH analysis indicates an
overall increase from neutral (7.1) to basic (8.3) from the surface
to the bottom of the exposed profile (Fig. 11).
As mentioned
earlier pH must be looked upon as a relative measurement.
The
basic pH in Levels 8 and 9 can be attributed to the abundance of
calcarious concretions.
In fact, there is a noticeable rise in
number of concretions as one reaches the older depths of the pro­
file; this rise undoubtedly has its effect in the pH data for the
samples used in H+ concentration testing were not treated or sieved.
It is believed that the acid leaching waters characteristic under
a forest canopy have removed the calcareous nature of the soils in
the upper part of the p~oel1~.
Birkeland (1974: 242) notes "that
there is a rapid decrease in water movement with depth"!
Also,
the organic matter litter from the trees has helped contribute a
cancelling effect.
Overall Analysis 6£ Organic Matter/Carbon
Table 24 gives the percentages of carbon and the organic mat­
ter percentages derived from the former.
The higher percentage of
organic matter in Levell is due to the tree litter accumulation
on the surface.
It should be noted in addition that the cattle
which frequent JK 91 contributed their own organic matter.
There
is a gradual decrease in organic matter down through Level 2 but
a slight increase in Level 3 and 4.
This upsurge can be attributed
to several factors: rodent activity concentration, cultural con­
centrations (see Fig. 11) or a change in climatic factor where
temperature was lower than usual.
Level 3 may signify a period of
grassland expansion because of the somewhat higher reading in the
middle of the profile.
Following Level 3, there is once again a
decrease in organic matter content, until Level 7 and the upper
part of Level 8 are reached.
It is strongly felt that this rise
in carbon and organic matter can be pinpointed to the dense con­
centrations of cultural material occurring in Level 7.
Notice a
hearth, Feature 2, is located in this same level (Fig. 11) and may
have influenced the organic matter test's validity.
Following
Level 7, there is a decrease in percentages.
The sharp rise in
Sample 21 is difficult to interpret but perhaps rodent or isolated
root activity is a factor.
M-2 or BHT#6 and M-l or BHT#7 (see positions in Fig. 3), both
have been taken 10-20 cm. below the surface, are somewhat high in
percent organic matter/carbon:
They are derived from the Prairie
grassland biological zone and this higher percentage was expected.

256

APPENDIX IV

Overall Analysis of CaC03 Equivalent
The final column on Ta~le 24, lists the calcium carbonate per­
centages in the Palmetto Bend samples.
The semiquantitative method
used often yields high results because other constituents react
somewhat with the acid.
The method, as used, gives a rough index
of the amount of carbonates present in samples (Allison, Moodie
1969: 1388).
The percentages are erratic as one proceeds down the
continuous column.
In the field it was noticed that the amount of
calcium carbonate concretions increased as depth increased.
Paricularly in arid regions a process uf calcification or~CaC03
accumulation is prevalent.
In the Palmetto Bend area there is
enough rain to leach the upper layers of the profile causing tb~~€~
carbonate to undergo solution and rpprecipitate.
Thus a wetter
climate could possibly drive calcium carbonate to greater depths.
Perhaps our carbonate equivalent is a rough estimate of the wet
apd dry periods which occurred through the evolution of the present
profile.
Because very little pedogenesis has occurred at 41 JK 91 and
the capillary rise in coarse alluvium is nil (Birkeland 1974: 117),
the possibility of the carbonate being derived from lower strata
is somewhat remote.
It is more likely that over the course of time
carbonates were carried and deposited along with alluvium.
Later
it was reprecipitated in the solum.
"Carbonate translocat:Lon is
possible with sediment deposition ll (Buol, Hole, and McCracken 1974:
Chapt!er 5).
This pr~cess could be the result of alternations between wet
and dry periods of climate.
In addition, the concretions found in
the profile are simply "accretionaryll indicating a buildup over
time.
The likelihood that the calcareous nature of the soils was
being derived from upslope is unlikely.
McGuff has found that
upslope a high percentage of Mn02 as well as CaC0 3 concretions occur.
It seems that Mn02 concretations would be present along with the
CaC03 concretions in the site proper if the concretions were derived
from upslope but such is not the case in the continuQus(cO!umn.
Particle Size Analysis
Plotting the results of the particle size analysis on semi­
logarithmic paper revealed similar textural qualities between the
samples.
In this instance, the sieve analysis was a better indi­
cator of the type of sediments existing at the site.
When hydro­
metric results were plotted the clay fraction was difficult to
represent on the semi-logarithmic paper.
The data received from particle size reinforced the textural
classification (fine sandy loam) designated for the continuous
column samples.
There was little difference between samples in
each of the levels.
When these deviations were noted within a

SEDIMENT ANALYSIS

257

level, the tendency for the samples was to gradate from a finer
fraction at the top of the level to a more coarse fraction at the
bottom.
Above Level 7 this sorting appears to be much better than be­
low this level.
In addition, below this line there is evidence
for possible instabilities in the lower part of the profile se­
quence (Fig. 11).
Note the irregular stratigraphy as well as the
existence of erosional fills.
Possible Future

Approach~s

liThe actual course of events within an undisturbed soil will
probably be never fully known.1l (Buo1, Hole and McCracken 1973: 90).
Some soil features are ephemeral, others enduring.
Although many
features of the site and its sediments might be obscured or lost,
it is nevertheless extremely advantageous for the archeologist to
discover what partic~lar properties a~e characteristic of the soil
which he excavates along with the artifacts.
The pedologist or
soil analyst should be put into action before the excavation of the
archeological site.
He will be able to offer the archeologist
ideas, help and criticisms as well as aqquire a basic knowledge of
the context of the sediment samples he is to analyze later.
The choice of soil properties, as Jenny fie1s, will depend
upon practical considerations.
The archeologist does not need the
kind of results the soil engineer or farmer needs.
Unfortunately,
the pedologist with samples from'an archeological site will be
harldicapped due to a shortage of literature and studys dealing
with quantitative analyses of sediments and archeological deposits
within a site.
It is hoped in the future that emphasis will be placed on
Jenny's factorial approach.
Wi1desen, recognizing its importance
in archeology and soils adds another inf1uenclng factor to the
equation, ~u1ture; s = f (c1, 0, r, p, t, C, etc ••• ),
Because both soils and sites can be viewed as open s ,~
systems whose development processes can be inferred c
y
only from knowledge of their present outputs, but
whose development it is important to describe and
explain, the functional, factorial approach is appli­
cable to both soils and archeological sites
(Wi1desen
1973: 17).
In this diseussion-efcsediilleac ,aaalysislQf:i.some samples
tom
Pa1mettomBend Reservoir some insight has, hopefully, been given
about the sediments and the archeological midden.
In addition,
perhaps the difficulties encountered and solved by this analyst
will help future investigators with similar problems.
More impor­
tant is the necessity to stimulate archeologists to include the
i,

) -.

.,) t:: -

f-.

-

"

',~.

'

258

APPENDIX IV

analysis of soil properites as they investigate cultural habita­
tion at their sites.
Only when more studies are done on soils in
an archeological context can the analysts make concrete compari­
sons on what has happened archeologically and sedimentologically.

SEDIMENT ANALYSIS

259

REFERENCES CITED
Allison, R. E.
1965
Organic Carbon.
In: Methods of Soil Analysis, Part 2,
C. A. Black, E. D. Evans, J. L. White, L. E. Ensminger
and F. E. Clark (editors).
American Society of Agronomy
Inc., Madison, Wisconsin.
Baver, L. D.
Soil Physics; Third Edition.
1956
New York.

John Wiley and Sons, Inc.,

Bernard, H. A.
1950
Quaternary Geology of Southeast Texas. Unpublished
Ph.D. Thesis, Lousiana State University, Baton Rouge.
Birkeland, P. W.
1974
Pedology~ Weathering and Geomorphological Research.
Oxford University Press, Inc., New York.
Broadb~nt,

1965

F. E.
Organic Matter.
In: Methods of Soil Analysis, Part 2,
E. A. Black, E. C. Evans, J. L. White, L. E. Ensminger
and F. E. Clark (editors).
Amercan Society of Agronomy,
Inc., Madison, Wisconsin.

Buol, W. W., R. D. Hole and R. J. McCracken
1973
Soil Genesis and Classifioation.
The Iowa-State Univer­
sity Press, Ames.
Curray, T. R.
1960
Sediments and History of Holocene Transgression, Conti­
nental Shelf, Northwest Gulf of Mexico.
In: Reoent Sed­
iments; Northwest Gulf of Mexioo, F. P. Shepard, F. B.
Phlegler and T. H. van Andel (editors).
American Asso­
ciation of Petroleum Geologists, Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Day, P. R.
1965
Particle Fractionation and Particle Size Analysis.
In: Methods of Soil Analysis, Part 1, C. A. Black, D. D.
Evans, J. L. White, L. E. Ensminger and F. E. Clark
(editors).
American Society of Agronomy, Inc., Madison,
Wisconsin.
Frazier, D. E.
1974
Depositional Episodes: Their Relationships to the
Quaternary Stratigraphic Framework in the Northwestern
Portion of the Gulf Basin.
Bureau of Eoonomio Geology
Ciroular 74-1-.
The University of Texas at Austin.

A??ENDIX IV

260

Jenny,
1941

Factors of Soil Formation.
New York.

McGraw-Hill Book Co., Inc.,

Morisawa, M.
1968
Streams: Their Dynamics and Morphology.
New York.
Peech, M.
1965

MeGraw-Hill Inc.,

Hydrogen Ion Activity.
In: Methods of Soil Analysis,
Part 2, C. A. Black, D. D. Evans, J. L. White, L. E.
Ensminger and F. E. Clark (editors).
American Society
Agronomy, Inc., Madison, Wisconsin.

o~

W. i
Soils-Their Origin~ Constitution and Classification (An
Introduction to Pedology). Thomas Murky and Co., London.!

Robinson,G~

1~3~

Wildesen, L, E.
1973
A Quantitative Model of Archeological Site Development. '
Unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Washington State University,
Pullman.

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX V
THE SEASONAL FACTOR OF RANGIA CUNEATA CLAM COLLECTING

Duford Skelton

INTRODUCTION
Research to determine site seasonality has a high potential
for aiding interpretation of the patterns of subsistence exploita­
tion among hunters and collectors.
The resource procurement sys­
tem prehistoric hunter-gatherers adopt is usually related to sea­
sonal differences in the availability of plants and animals (Ser­
vice 1966: 12).
A seasonal and regional variation in food supply
made non-sedentism profitable for most hunters and gatherers.
Periodic movement to exploit seasonally abundant resources is gen­
erally characteristic of hunting and gathering peoples in temper­
ate zones.
Few techniques for procuring seasonal data are available.
A
new technique was recently developed by Lawrence E. Aten while
working for the Texas Archeological Survey.
BACKGROUND
Studies in the analysis of marine shellfish from archeological
sites along the Upper Texas Gulf Coast have defined a technique of
obtaining seasonal data from the bivalve Rangia cuneata.
Research
was initially confined to the Trinity Bay area but soon expanded
to cover numerous archeological sites along the Texas Gulf Coast
(Aten 1972a, 1972b; Dillehay 1974, 1975a, 1975b).
Archeological
evidence for the exploitation of Rangia cuneata is commonly recov­
ered in coastal sites in brackish areas.
Rangia was one of the
most frequently utilized resources exploited by prehistoric popu­
lations in this area.
Concentric lines on the valves of discarded
clams were interpreted as reflecting seasonal variation in growth
during a yearly cycle.
Rings sculptured on the surface of the
valves evidenced by a terminous or cessation line were thought to
be a direct result of winter growth recession.
Living clams were
systematically collected at known dates, (usually monthly or bi­
monthly intervals). from stations within the Trinity River Delta.
Analysis of the collections revealed that seasonal variations in
growth ring development existed and as expected cessation rings
could be related to winter growth recession.
Patterned intervals of development are represented by concen­
tric growth lines or rings on the surface of the clam shells.
Rings result from discrete seasonal growth cycles which may be cor­
related with specific seasons of the year.
Reproduceable description of the growth pattern of Rangia
shells enables reproduceable results on seasonality.
In addition,
the technique Aten developed is applicable for both young and old
clams.
The duration of the prehistoric collecting season can be esti­
mated by measuring the amount of growth from the last annual ring
263

y...­
'",

)

'\(/

I,
(

~ ..J

[~'

f

d

:;.,

f

'"'

,

"

\~

S

('-,,*MG29­

(' '''' J'

Ill,,";;

,

:::I
I,,'
0,'
c) ...1

<

\..S'

. GO
~ E. ~\
N

Of

G

U\,..f

**

Rangia cune t
SAMPLE LOCATIONS

r
LIVE

SAMPLE

-,
i

COLLECTIONS

ARCHEOLOGICAL

__ . ' - .. __ J.~_

SAM PLE

1

-_._-j

5

0

5

10

MILES

All .ite numbe,.
MLFITEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY/1974

preceded by

ADAPTED FROM' USGS 1;250,000 QUADS
BEEVILLE and BAY CITY, TEXAS

" ' \ T ..

~

\.

X

A~S!

41:/\"\,'
".

STUDY

AREA

RANGIA CUNEATA

265

to the shell margin.
For the purposes of this analysis data pre­
viously compiled on the mean annual growth rate for Rangia auneata
a~e used.
These studies were conducted on clams in the Trinity
Bay area of Texas (Hopkins, Anderson and Horvath 1973).
To extrapolate precise data on the aboriginal collecting sea­
son the growth rate of the clams was reconstructed using the data
obtained from modern samples.
Five gr9~th stage categories were
established for each year (Aten 1972a).
They are presented below
with a brief discussion as to their significance.
Seasonal infer­
ences are from year-long collections of living clams.
Modern col­
lections of Bangia do show a high seasonal correlation.
_EarE,"early' *PT~pg~ tberinitiAl~gto*tb~in~rem~nt following
1:::.:::: the iast:,>wihter growth: t;ing>o ,;}jJireh tbrotighcMay.
,
Mid: . a lat: e _sp r ing:~ t ~t oug.h ·-mi d-s umme r c period.; f1 Jun e" 'C.
;::.- -thrcHlgh laten;I,uiV,,"C'llgl- ~"i
.'"'
1e-:-iod.
,,_ 'Lata: -lil.neos ummar in to~ jaIl <'I.0Aligus t tJ h !;ough t Oceob er .
~Interruptdd:~winter growth recession, represented by a distinct
ring or line on the surface of the shell.
November
through February.
Indeterminate: this category was established for clams that could
~:~J:~: not be sorted into one of the above growth stages,
for instance, when irregular growth profiles have
resulted from environmental perturbations,
'Co

"

e

ARCHEOLOGICAL ANALYSIS
The techniques described provide a refined method which allows
estimates of the season of site occupation,
The primary intent of
thid study is to not only assess the season and duration of occu­
pation or occupations at selected prehistoric sites, but to corre­
late that data with seasonal studies for other portions of the
Navidad and Lavaca River Basin.
To establish~precise growth characteristics of Bangia auneata
in the study area, extant populations were collected at morithly in­
tervals (Fig. 25).
Cold weather and prolonged high water precluded
sampling in January and December.
However, because of the appar­
ent similar results between Aten's collections and those secured
for this study, Trinity Bay samples and/or Aten's projections are
utilized for these months.
Modern shells were sorted into the
growth stage categories and histograms of the relative frequency
of each stage present were drawn (Fig. 26).
During the 1974 field season at Palmetto Bend adequate samples
of Bangia auneata were collected from three prehistoric sites: 41
JK 41, 41 JK 91, and 41 JK 147.
Generally 50 complete valves were
selected for analysis from each sample.
Usually only one side of
the valves was used in the study to ensure 50 separate individuals
were sorted.
In some instances the sample size was small and both

FIGURE

Freq ue n c i e s

Stage

Rangia cuneata Growth
MODERN

26

SAMPLES

50 ­

%

%

o

o
Inl.

E, M.

L.

Ind,

Int.

n=24
Prov:Jan.2,1974

50-

E.

M.

L. indO'

n=50
Prov:Feb.19,1975

50-

%

M,

L.

50-

Int E.

Ind.

n=50
Prov:Mar. 23,1975

M.

L,

Ind,

n=50
Prov.April 26,1975

50 ­

o

0

Inl. E.

Ind.

n=50
Prov:May 6,1975

L,

%

0

Int. E.

M,

50-

%

o

Inl. E.

M.

L.

Inl. E,

Ind.

n=50
Prov:June 29,1975

50-

M,

Int, E,

Lind,

n=50
Prov:July 26,1974

M.

L.

Ind.

n=50
Prov:Aug. 27,1974

50­

%

o
Inl. E,

M.

L, Ind,

n=45
Prov: Sept. 25,1974

Wallisville

Inl. E,

M,

L.

n=50
Prov:Oct.22,1974

Area

Inl.

Ind.

E:~:~:iii1~13

E.

M,

L.

n=50
Prov:Nov. 27, 1974

Palmetto

Bend

Area

Int. E. M.

Ind.

L.

Ind.

n=O
Prov:Dec.(projected)

~&\~

Pro j e c t ed

FI G U R E 27

PALMETTO

Rangia

cuneata

BEND RESERVOI R
Growth Stage Frequencies
Samples

Archeological

%

%

o

o
Int. E.

M.

L.

Prov: All

Int.

Ind.

E. M.

L.

Inl. E. M.

Ind.

o

o

o
Int. E.

M. L.

Int.

Ind.

E.

M.

L.

Int. E. M.

Ind.

L.

Ind.

Prov:Level 7

Prov: Levels 5,6

Prov: Level 3

Ind.

Prov:Level 2

Prov: Level

lots

L.

%

%

o

o
Int.

E. M.

L.

Ind.

Prov: Level 8

Inl. E.

M.

L.

Ind.

Int. E. M.

9

Prov: All

Prov:Levei
Season: Spring

41

L.

Ind.

lots

for all samples.

JK 91

41

JK 147

FIGURE 28

41 JK 7

Rangia

cIJneata Growth Stage Frequencies
Samples

Archeolo g i ca I

50 ­

%

%

o

%

0
Int.

E.

M.

L

Ind.

0
Int.

Prov: NIOOWI50
1
1
0.0 -0.5

E.

M.

L.

Ind.

Int E.

Prov: NI00WI50
1
0.5 -1.0'

Season: Spring

for

all

M.

L.

Ind.

Prov: NI25WI30
1
0.0'- 0.5

samples.

50 -

%

%

0
Int. E.

M.

0

L. Ind.

Prov: NI00WI45
1

0.0 -0.5

~

1

Int. E.

0
L.

M.

Ind.

Prov: NI00WI45
1

0.5 -1.0

1

Int. E.

M.

L.

Ind.

Prov: NI05WI45
1

0.0 -0.5'

FIGURE 29

Counties

Calhoun, Jackson

Rongio

Stage

cuneoto Growth

Frequencies

Samples

Archeologica I

50 ­

50 ­

0/0

o

o

o
Int. E.

Int. E.

l. Ind.

M.

M.

o
M.

0
Inl.

L. Ind.

E.

M. L.

Ind.

Int.

Prov:41 JK 113
Season: Late spring

Prov:41 JK 110
Season:Lote spring

E.

o

o
M.

L.

Ind.

Prov:41 JK 114{b)
Season: Summer

Int. E.

M.

l. Ind.

Prov:41 JK 114{a}
Season:Late springearly summer

50 ­

50 -

Int. E.

Ind.

50 -

50 -

o

M. L.

Prov:41 CL 37(b)
Season:Late summer

Prov:41 CL 37(a)
Season: Summer

Prov:41 CL 35
Season: Late summer

Int. E.

Int. E.

l. Ind.

M. L.

Ind.

Prov:41 JK 118
Season: Mid summer

All samples are from ground surface.

FIGURE 30

Counties

Jackson, Matagorda
cuneataGrowth

Rangia

Stage

Samples

Archeological

50 ­

50 -

50 -

Frequencies

%

o

o

o
Int. E.

M.

l.

Int.

Ind.

E.

M.

l.

Int. E. M.

Ind.

Prov:41 JK 120
Season: Spring

lind.

Prov:41 JK 125(b)
Season: Late spri ng

Prov:41 JK 125(0)
Season: Summer

50 ­

o

o

0
Int. E.

M.

l. Ind.

Int.

Prov: 41 JK 128
Season: Late spring

E.

M.

l.

Int. E.

Ind.

Prov; 41 JK 129
Season: Mid-tote
summer

50

50 -

o

0
Int.

E.

M.

L.

Ind,

Prov:41 M G 2.5
Season: Early summer

Inl.

M.

l. Ind.

Prov: 41 MG 19
Season:Early summer

E,

M.

lind,

Prov: 41 M G 29
Season: Spring

All samples are from ground

su~face.

BANGIA CUNEATA

271

right and left valves were used.
Care was exercised to assure
that the left and right valve of the same clam was not used in a
given sample.
Shells sorted from areas outside the reservoir were not col­
lected during the Palmetto Bend Project and therefore no control
could be maintained over the numbers of shells in a sample or
which valves were collected for analytical purposes.
Data obtain­
ed from these collections are suitable to yield gross estimates of
seasonality and although the estimates of seasonality are not as
reliable as those from the samples sites in the reservoir they
are of benefit.
Examination of the archeological samples from Palmetto Bend
reservoir revealed that the shells were highly patterned.
Inspec­
tions of the outer periphery of valves disclosed characteristics
of shell growth that reflected seasonal variation in development.
The vast majority of the valves showed the beginning of new growth
represented by a narrow band of shell along the outer edge follow­
ing a distinct annual ring.
That suggested that shell collecting
by prehistoric human groups was indeed seasonal.
Further, the
time of year corresponds with the initiation of new growth follow~
ing a distinct growth recession (winter).
Other growth stages
were.:also' repreSen1:2Eid~_in the s3¥1ples, therefoEe,;hlst'll;p:rams of the
relative frequency of each stage present were plotted (Fig. 27).
By comparing histograms of prehistoric samples with graphs com­
piled on modern samples the collecting season is inferred.
The results of this analysis indicate that prehistoric groups
occupying the archeological sites sampled were collecting clams
primarily during the spring months.
In spite of individual sample
size ranging from 20 to 300 specimens there is a consistent value
of from 50% to 78% of the shells that fall into the early growth
stage category.
At 41 JK 91 the spring collecting season was con­
sistent throughout the temporal sequence of site utilization.
The
combined circumstances are suggestive of an aboriginal awareness
or seasons relative to site location and the availability of 8hell­
fish resources.
Estimating the length of occupation also required reconstruct­
ingnthe yearly developmental cycle.
To this end, growth increments
since the last growth cessation line were measured for each shell
and the results analyzed.
The measurements were compared with
growth rates previously established for Bangia cuneata (Hopkins,
Anderson and Horvath 1973).
This prodedure allowed predictions
concerning the annual growth rate.
By analogy with the modern
clams the spring collecting season is estimated to have lasted ap­
proximately 30 to 45 days probably during the months of April and
May.
In hopes of gaining some insight into the aboriginals' seasonal
migrations, assessments of Bangia seasonality in area outside the
reservoir are presented.
Shell samples collected by Fritz (1973)
and Story (1968) were analyzed.
Although the shells collected by
Fritz had been previously analyzed (Dillehay 1975b), a different

272

APPENDIX V

technique was used.
To assure that the data presented here is com­
parable the samples were resorted.
Archeological sites used for comparative purposes in area out­
side the reservoir were first marked on a regional map (Fig. 25).
Shell samples were sorted into growth stage categories and histo­
grams of relative frequencies compiled (Figs. 28, 29 and 30). The
results imply that shellfish utilization was primarily a spring­
summer activity.
Portions of estuaries most affected by freshwater
were particularly favored during the spring months while the open
bays seem to have been frequented most during the warmer summer
months.
Winter clam collecting was shunned in these areas.
CONCLUSIONS
Assessments at four prehistoric sites (41 JK 7, 41 JK 41, 41
JK 91 and 41 JK 147) where shell samples were analyzed from natural
or arbitrary levels revealed a spring collecting season through the
temporal sequences of site utilization. The months postulated for
Rangia clam collecting at these sites are April and May in a maxi­
mum exp10itive season of approximately 45 days.
Shells analyzed from sites in the Matagorda Bay area also in­
dicate that Rangia auneata were collected during a limited season
of the year.
Interpretation of the Matagorda samples are stated
with caution; archeological sampling was from the surface rather
than controlled excavations.
It is suggested that the prehistoric
shell collection in the bay area was primarily a late apring through
summer activity.
It now seems clear that in this region of the Texas Coast Ran­
gia auneata were exploited seasonally. The season of shellfish
collecting was early spring through the summer, with archeological
samples corresponding with the modern specimens gathered during
the months of April through August.
It is proposed that site oc­
cupation is directly related to clam collecting.
If so, groups
were not usually in this area on a year-round basis.
Northern
portions of estuaries were particularly favored during the early
gpring months, while bay areas closer to the coast seem to have
been frequented most during the warmer summer months.
Winter and
fall clam exploitation was shunned.
It is postulated that prehis­
toric groups living along the Texas coast were moving out to the
islands during the winter, (Aten 1972a: 5).
At first European
contact these circumstances were reported for the native inhabi­
tants of the Northwest Gulf Coast (Hodge 1971: 30).

273

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1972a An Assessment of the Archeological Resources to be Af­
fected by the Taylors Bayou Drainage and Flood Control
Project, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
Research Report No. ?~ The University of Texas at Austin.
1972b

An Assessment
fected by the
Texas.
Texas
Report No. 8~
University of

of the Archeological Resources to be Af­
Highland Bayou Flood Control Project,
Archeological Salvage Project, Research
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
Texas at Austin.

N.d.

Aboriginal Cultural Ecology of the Upper Texas Coast.
Ph.D. dissertation in preparation, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Dillehay, T. D.
1974
Appendix III: Seasonality Assessment of Rangia cuneata
from 41 CH 110.
In: Cultural Variation on the Texas
Coast: Analysis of an Aboriginal Shell Midden, Wallis­
ville Reservoir, Texas, Kathleen Gilmore.
Texas Arch­
eological Survey, Research Report No. 44~
The Univer­
sity of Texas at Austin.
1975a

Appendix III: Shellfish Refuse Analysis for the 1973
Wallisville Reservoir Archeological Project, Chambers
County, Texas.
In: Prehistoric Subsistence Exploita­
tion in the Lower Trinity River Delta, Texas, Tom D.
Dillehay.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report
No. 51~ The University of Texas at Austin.

1975b

Appendix I: Seasonality of Rangia cuneata Shellfish Col­
lection.
In: Matagorda Bay Area, Texas: A Sur~ey of the
Archeologica1~and Hi§totical Resou~ces"Gayle~FEitz.
Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report No. 45, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Fritz, Gayle
1975
Matagorda Bay Area, Texas: A Survey of the Archeological
and Historical Resources.
Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report No. 45, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hodge, F. W. (editor)
1971
Spanish ExpZorers in the Southern United
1543.
Barnes and Nobel, Inc., New York.

States~

1528­

274

APPENDIX V

Hopkins, S. H., J. W. Anderson and K. Horvath
1973
The Brackish Water Clam Rangia cuneata as Indicator of
Ecological Effects of Salinity Changes in Coastal Waters.
Report Submitted to U. S. Army Waterways Experiment Sta­
tion Vi~ksburg, Mississippi.
Story, D. A.
1968
Archeological Investigations at Two Central Texas Gulf
Coast Sites.
Sbate Building Commission Archeological
Program, Report No. 13, Austin.

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX VI
POLLEN ANALYSIS OF RECOVERED SAMPLES
FROM SEDIMENTS AT 41 JK 41 AND 41 JK 91

Vaughn M. Bryant

Table 26. Pollen Analysis of
Pollen Sample If

lfI

Sampl~s

Reuovered From Sediments at 41 JK 41 and 41 JK 91.

Provenience

Results

1 - 41 JK 91

Sample A - Above erosion

Few fungal spores, no pollen.

2 - 41 JK 91

Sample B - Below crossing

One grass pollen grain and
two composites.

3-- 41 JK 41

P - 1 '(7 5 c m• down)

Fungal spores, but no pollen.

4 - 41 JK 41

P - 2 (1.48 m. down)
East-West Backhoe Trench

No pollen, rio fungal spores.

5 - 41 JK 91

SS - 9 West Wall BHT #2/3M

2 grass pollen grains,
1 Cheno-Am.

~

'1:::l
'1:::l

6 - 41 JK 91

SS - 11 West Wall BHT #2/3M

Nothing.

7 - 41 JK 91

SS - 12 East Wall Profile BHT #5

Fungal spores and a few Com­
posite pollen grains.

t:::t
'-i

8"- 41 JK 91

SS

Negative.

'-i

9 - 41 JK 91

SS - 10 West Wall BHT H2/3M

2 oak pollen grains, and
3 grass pollen grains.

10 - 41 JK 91

SS - 6 West Wall BHT H2/3M

Nothing.

11 - 41 JK 91

SS - 8 West Wall BHT H2/3M

Many fungal spores, buu
no pollen.

12 - 41 JK 91

SS - 7 West Wall BHTL#2/JM

5 grass pollen grains, and
1 Composite.

13 - 41 JK 91

SS - 1 West Wall BHT H2/3M

Negative.

14 - 41 JK 91

SS - 3 West Wall BHT H2/3M

1 oak, 1 Cheno-Am., 1 Composite.

t:tj
~

><
~

13 East Wall Profile BHT #5

.....,

•

'.,J'

N
""-l
""-l

tv

Table 26. Continued

"""
(X)

.Ft'ovenience

Pollen Sample II

Results

15 - 41 JK 91

SS - 5 West Wall BRT HZ/3M

Negative

16 - 41 JK 91

SS - 4 West Wall BHT H2/3M

3 Composite pollen grains,
many fungal spores.

17 - 41 JK 91

SS -

2 West Wall BRT H2/3M

Many fungal spores.

;t..

'1:1
'1:1

~

t::l

~
~

hj

