THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
l'EXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcom!s Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

Federal Aviation Administration
FAA-ASW-441.2
P.O. Box 1689
Fort Worth, Texas 76101
Attention:
Re:

Mr. Christian Callahan

An Archeological Survey of th~ Proposed Mehrens
Air Route Surveillance Radar Site, Rogers, Texas

Gentlemen:
The attached statement provides the results of our on-site
archeological/historical survey of the proposed Mehrens Site.
As you will note, this survey and associated literature search
failed to find any significant sites or features which would
conflict with the proposed construction.
If further information is needed, please advise me. We
enjoyed cooperating with your need for archeological services.

David S. Dibble, Director
Attachment
xc:

Mr. A.J. Dusek
Office of Sponsored Projects
UT,Austin

JEXAS ARCHEOU1GICAI. RESEARCH l..ABORATOBt

July 7, 1978

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL $URVEY OF THE PROPOSED
MEHRENS AIR ROUTE SURVEILLANCE RADAR SITE,
ROGERS, TEXAS
A Report to the Southwest .Region
.Federal Aviation Administration
David .8. Dibble, Director
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at
Austi.n

This reports the results of an on-site ins pection of
the above identified proposed construction site which was
carried out by the author on July 7, 1918. Examination of
the area included the 250' by 250' radar facility site plus
the location of the proposed access road beginning from its
juncture with Knob Hill Road.
..
Inspection of the site consisted of making a number of
walking transects of the are~s apecified. Ad~itionally,
three small test pits were excavated to depths of about one
foot within the proposed site limits.
Locational controls
we~e considered exceLlent and included on-site survey
markers and a proj~ct plan map at a scale of 1"=100'. Sur­
face visibility was considered moderately good; vegetation
cover was primarily grass and scattered trees (dominately
small mesquite).
Present land use is for stock grazing. A small stock
feeder is the only structure of historic age present on the
area to be affected by the project.
Some limited degree of
prior surface modification was noted near the northern end
of the site - apparently related to the removal of trees.

:0

Topsoils characteristic of the project. area are a dark
gray.
Clay loam, characteristically stony tchert and lime­
stone fragments).
The Soil Conservation Service has mapped
the area as "Hous ton Black·· Clay" and·· "Heiden-Ferris complex".;<

*

*So1I~ ·S\l-ffli-oriel·l· 'c~o;tiiiti,' 'Texas

Service, USDA.

March, 1977.

.Soi.'!

Coens e·rv-ation~.

2

Chert fragments as large as cobble size are a natural
constituent of the soil in the site area and, because of
the possibility th~t they might exhibit evidence of aborigi­
nal human use, were examined with particular care.
In only
one case (a crude bifacia11y flaked implement found just
east of the project are~)dd.d che~t fragments show signs of
human modifieation.
Examination of .pertinent published literature and the
.Be11 County fi.1es at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin; indicated
that no p.rehis to ric or his toric sites h~ve been previously
reported from the pro.jectarea.
Based on the negative results of the field inspection
and 1i~erature/arch~val review it is concluded that no
significant cultural resources are present in areas to be
affected by con~tructionof the Mehrens Site. It is
cautioned, however, that buried features may possibly exist
in th~ project area. Therefore it is strongly recommended
that if recognizable archeological features are encountered
during construction that this be .repo rted immediately to
the office of the Texas Historical Commission.

