ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT SITE 41CW58
IN CALDWELL COUNTY, TEXAS

Antiquities Permit 3130

by
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 116

2003

ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT SITE 41CW58 IN
CALDWELL COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 03-01

Author and Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Canyon Regional Water Authority
850 Lakeside Pass
New Braunfels, Texas 78130-8232

ABSTRACT
Archaeological investigations at State Archeological Landmark site 41CW58 in
Caldwell County, Texas was performed by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA)
in May 2003 under Texas Antiquities Permit 3130 with William E. Moore the Principal
Investigator. Seven backhoe trenches and two 1 x 1 meter hand-excavated test units
were employed to examine this site. The test units were excavated in arbitrary 10 cm
levels beginning at 60.9 cm below the existing ground surface.
No features were observed in any of the backhoe trenches. A concentration of
thermally altered limestone rock, chert debitage, a unifacial tool, and a core were
encountered in Test Unit A at Level 3 (80.9 cm). This may be the remnants of a hearth
that has been disturbed, possibly through a previous flooding episode. Also present at
this site were concentrations of shell identified as Rabdotus sp. (not counted), Helicina
oriculata (n=10), and a fragment of freshwater mussel hinge. Rabdotus shell was
observed in the backhoe trenches and the test units, while the Helicina oriculata
specimens were only found in Test Unit A, Level 3.
Since no diagnostic artifacts were recovered, the age of the areas investigated is
not known. Based on the proximity of the site to a major stream, the presence of
thermally altered limestone rock, and the various activities associated with the lithic
debitage, it is assumed that site 41CW58 was more than an area utilized on a
temporary basis. It is classified in this report as a campsite. The artifacts recovered
from the occupation level in Test Unit A compare favorably to Component II identified by
Paul Price Associates, Inc. during their work at this site. Based on a possible Bulverde
dart point found in the backdirt pile of Backhoe Trench 7, they believe this component
dates to the Late Archaic period, 4000 B.C. - 3500 B.C. based on research conducted
by Collins (1995).
No intact features were present in any of the excavated areas. Therefore, no
additional work is recommended. The artifacts and records have been placed in
permanent curation at the Texas Archeologcial Research Laboratory (TARL) on The
University of Texas campus in Austin, Texas.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am appreciative of the assistance provided by Canyon Regional Water Authority
throughout this project. David J. Davenport, General Manager, and Walter A. Scott,
Assistant General Manager, provided copies of previous reports and logistical support.
Other employees of the Canyon Regional Water Authority present at the site during this
project were Craig Hines and Administrative Assistant Paul Taggart. Patrick A. Lackey,
P.E. was the lead agent at River City Engineering and was assisted by Bryan S.
Kucinski, EIT who attended the meetings at the Texas Historical Commission and
visited the site to help interpret the maps on the ground. Jerry Henderson, Staff
Archaeologist at the Texas Water Development Board, discussed her observations at
the site with the Principal Investigator and offered suggestions regarding the methods to
be employed. The field crew consisted of James E. Warren (Project Archaeologist),
Bobby Jemison, and Arthur F. Romine. Mark H. Denton at the Texas Historical
Commission, Archeology Division, served as the reviewer for this project. Bradley F.
Bowman of the Museum of Archaeology and Material Culture in Cedar Crest, New
Mexico analyzed the artifacts and shell. The figures appearing in this report were
prepared by Lili Lyddon of LL Technical Services in North Zulch, Texas.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS....................................................................................... 4
METHODS ...................................................................................................................... 6
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 13
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 15
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 16
Appendix I: Backhoe Trench Profiles
Appendix II: Backhoe Trench Notes
Appendix III: Lithic Analysis
Figures
Figure 1. General Location Map...................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map.................................................................... 3
Figure 3. Backhoe Trench 4 ............................................................................................ 7
Figure 4. Test Units A and B (Level 1) ............................................................................ 9
Figure 5. Test Units A and B (Level 5) .......................................................................... 10
Figure 6. Project Area Map ........................................................................................... 12

iv

INTRODUCTION
BVRA was retained by Canyon Regional Water Authority to conduct testing in
areas of proposed construction at State Archeological Landmark site 41CW58 in
western Caldwell County, Texas (Figure 1). Canyon Regional Water Authority proposes
to upgrade its existing water treatment plant facility by constructing new water treatment
lines, pre-treatment structures, a sump pit, ground storage tank and associated piping,
and a sludge drying bed. Overall, construction will affect the subsurface to depths
between three and eight feet. Prior to entering the field, the depth of the sump pit was
reported by the client to be 14 feet. Engineer Bryan S. Kucinski, EIT later informed the
crew in the field that the actual depth would not exceed eight feet.
The Federal agency involved in this project is the United States Department of
Agriculture, Rural Development office. Since the project area is considered a political
subdivision of the State of Texas, an Antiquities Permit was required, and permit 3130
was issued to BVRA by the Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division. The
project number assigned by BVRA is 03-01. The testing was conducted on May 19-21
and 25, 2003. The Principal Investigator was William E. Moore. The project area is
depicted on the USGS 7.5' topographic quadrangle San Marcos South dated 1964
(revised 1973) (map number 29097-G8) (Figure 2).

1

Figure 1. General Location Map

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map

3

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
A detailed discussion of previous archaeological investigations in Caldwell
County, especially in the immediate area, is presented by Schroeder et al. (2000) and is
not duplicated in this report.
Site 41CW58 was brought to the attention of the archaeological community when
it was recorded by Paul Price Associates, Inc. during a cultural resources survey of the
Canyon Regional Water Authority Systems Improvement project in Caldwell and Hays
counties in 1999 and 2000 (Schroeder et al. 2000). The site was found when a 10 acre
tract, the location of the proposed water treatment plant, was investigated through use
of a mechanical auger and backhoe. Seven backhoe trenches and 22 auger tests were
dug at this site. The main concentration of artifacts was found in the eastern portion of
the project area. Artifacts were found in the upper level (0-30 cm) and as deep as 185
to 200 cm. Backhoe trench profiles revealed at least two occupation surfaces, one at
approximately 80 to 100 cm and another from about 180 to at least 200 cm. Categories
of artifacts recovered include burned rock, interior chert flakes, core fragments, a heavy
bifacial tool, a thinned bifacial tool, and a projectile point fragment. Burned caliche and
limestone rock observed between 80 and 90 cm in two of the trenches are believed to
be the remnants of cooking and heating features. The projectile point fragment
resembles the Bulverde type that, according to Collins (1995), dates to the Late Archaic
period of Texas prehistory. The exact provenience of this specimen is not known.
According to Schroeder et al. (2000:77), the "absolute" size of the site was not
determined. Based on three Screening Criteria and five Evaluation Criteria created by
Paul Price Associates, Inc. (Schroeder et al. 2000:95-97), site 41CW58 received a
score of 3 and contains cultural deposits that may be preserved and intact. Based on
these data, the site was believed to warrant official designation as a State Archeological
Landmark. It was recommended that significance testing be conducted if avoidance is
not possible. A very thorough discussion of the geomorphology of the landform on
which 41CW58 is situated is presented in the survey report by Schroeder et al. (2000).
Formal testing at site 41CW58 was conducted by Paul Price Associates, Inc. in
January and February 2000 to determine the site's eligibility for designation as a State
Archeological Landmark (Schroeder et al. 2002). Even though only two artifacts were
found in the western half of the project area during the initial survey (a chert flake at 40
cm in Backhoe Trench 4 and a chert chunk at 70-100 cm in Auger Test 18), an
additional 11 auger tests and 3 backhoe trenches were excavated in this area during
the testing phase at this site. Not one of these excavated areas yielded artifacts which
confirmed the fact that site 41CW58 is concentrated in the eastern half of the project
area.
According to the authors, auger tests, backhoe trenches, and geotechnical
boreholes were mechanically excavated in order to determine site boundaries, depth of
cultural deposits, and stratigraphic nature of the site. Based on this information it was
determined that the site is concentrated in the eastern half of the project area.

4

The investigators then excavated four test units to a depth of two meters. The
hand excavations identified three cultural components. These are Late Paleoindian
(based on a single Angostura point), Middle Archaic (based on a radiocarbon date
associated with cultural material), and Middle/Late Archaic (based on a Bulverde-like
projectile point).* Because of spatial and temporal isolation of archaeological deposits,
the site was recommended to be designated a State Archeological Landmark
(Schroeder et al. 2002:ii).
Monitoring of construction activities at site 41CW58 was conducted by DLS
Associates during three periods in 2002 (DLS Associates 2002). The three phases of
construction consisted of directional boring beneath the San Marcos River; directional
boring of a 24 inch water intake line terminating at the San Marcos River; and
construction of a raw water tank, membrane building, plate separator, sludge drying
beds, aerobic waste treatment tank, high service pump station, and process waste lift
station. Areas excavated were screened for buried cultural materials. No prehistoric
artifacts or features were observed. This work was not carried out by a professional
archaeologist, and a permit from the Texas Historical Commission was not issued.
____
*Bulverde points are viewed by Turner and Hester (1985) as Early Archaic, circa 3000
B.C. - 2500 B.C.

5

METHODS
Prior to conducting the fieldwork, a meeting was held between the various parties
involved in this project. Present were Mark H. Denton (project reviewer at the Texas
Historical Commission), William E. Moore (Principal Investigator), James E. Warren
(Project Archaeologist), Walter A. Scott (Canyon Regional Water Authority), and Bryan
S. Kucinski (River City Engineering). The purpose of this meeting was to plan the
methods for conducting testing at site 41CW58. A composite map depicting all previous
subsurface investigations and planned construction was presented to Mr. Denton in
order to depict the amount of disturbance to date. Mr. Denton requested that six
backhoe trenches be excavated in the area where the sump pit and accompanying pipe
lines will be constructed. Only if features or other significant finds are documented in
this area are hand-excavated test units to be dug. The area where the sludge drying
bed will be constructed is viewed by Mr. Denton as a more sensitive part of the site.
Therefore, he requested a 1 x 2 meter area be excavated by hand in order to obtain a
controlled collection of artifacts from this area. Based on a prior agreement between
the Texas Historical Commission and the Canyon Regional Water Authority, the upper
two feet of the site (60.9 cm) was removed with a backhoe prior to excavation and
would not be subjected to hand excavation or screening of dirt unearthed through
backhoe trenching. The hand-excavated units were to begin at 60.9 cm feet below the
existing ground surface and extend to a depth of 50 cm (110.9 cm).
The field crew commenced work on May 19, 2003. Paul Taggart and Craig
Hines, employees of Canyon Regional Water Authority, were present to witness the
progress of this project. Bryan S. Kucinski, EIT was on site to make sure that no buried
utilities were damaged by the backhoe excavation. One backhoe trench was excavated
in the area where the sump pit will be constructed, and additional trenches were dug
within the footprint of the proposed pipelines. The upper two feet of soil was removed,
and the lower strata were examined for cultural materials. Each trench was 120 cm in
width, but the length varied from 4.4 to 7 meters. This variation was determined by the
presence of existing facilities such as buried lines and standing structures. Excavated
soil from the trenches was screened through 1/4 inch hardware cloth. The trenches
were dug in natural levels until the deep, homogeneous soil was reached. At that point
the excavation proceeded in arbitrary 30 cm levels. Twenty shovels full of dirt per level
was screened. All artifacts recovered during excavation were collected and bagged for
analysis in the laboratory. A profile of each trench was sketched in the field, and a
Munsell soil color reading was taken. These profiles appear as Appendix I, and a
discussion of each backhoe trench taken from the field notes appears as Appendix II.
Backhoe trenching at the site is illustrated in Figure 3. Not one of the backhoe trenches
produced features, diagnostic artifacts, or other significant finds. Therefore, all work in
this area was terminated.

6

Figure 3. Backhoe Trench 4

7

The second phase of testing consisted of the two hand-excavated 1 x 1 meter
test units in the area where the sludge drying bed will be constructed. Figure 4 depicts
the test units at Level 1, and Figure 5 depicts the test units at Level 5. As stated above,
the location of these units was pre-determined during the meeting at the Texas
Historical Commission. First, the upper two feet of earth were removed with a backhoe,
and the 1 x 1 meter excavation units were established in an approximate east-west
orientation (280 degrees). The test units were labeled as areas A and B with Area A at
the west end. An elevation marking the top of the unit was established with a transit,
and all excavation proceeded in arbitrary 10 cm levels. In all, five levels were dug. Due
to the lack of features in four of the level excavation was done with a shovel; digging
with a trowel was not necessary.
Level 2 in Area A produced pieces of chert and limestone rock that had been
partially altered by heat at approximately the same elevation. Although the specimens
were too widely separated horizontally to be categorized as a feature, they were drawn
on a feature form in order to be able to describe this concentration of artifacts better in
the report. The majority of this level was excavated with a trowel in order to isolate the
artifacts for mapping. A soil sample was taken from beneath a large limestone fragment
in the concentration for future analysis if required. A level form was completed for each
level excavated, and all photos were keyed to a photographic log. A Munsell reading
was taken of the soil color at each level, and the completed units were photographed
(Figure 5). During the pre-excavation meeting at the Texas Historical Commission, it
was decided that a backhoe trench would be dug in this area if no features or significant
finds were made. Again, the upper two feet were removed prior to screening the lower
strata. This trench was dug to three feet, the depth of proposed disturbance or "Area of
Potential Effect." All artifacts recovered were collected and bagged for analysis in the
laboratory by Bradley F. Bowman at the Museum of Archaeology and Material Culture in
Cedar Crest, New Mexico. The results of this analysis appears as Appendix III to this
report. The backhoe trenches and excavation units were backfilled following the
completion of the testing.
All backhoe trenches and excavation units were mapped using a transit and tape.
The project area map, which also illustrates previous subsurface investigations and
existing facilities, is depicted in Figure 6. The transit was also used to establish
elevations of each area excavated. A primary datum was established off site. This
point is the corner post of the perimeter fence at the northeast corner of the project
area. Existing structures on the site prevented obtaining a direct line of sight from the
primary datum to some of the backhoe trenches. Therefore, a secondary datum was
established to resolve this problem. Distances from the primary datum to all backhoe
trenches and the hand-excavated units were connected at the southwest corner of each
unit. All bearings are magnetic. The transit was also used to determine the elevations
(metric) at ground level of the backhoe trenches and hand-excavated units. The
elevation datum at the primary datum was arbitrarily set at 100 feet and was measured
from the top of a 1/2" iron rod ±6 inches southwest of the primary datum. The elevation
was determined by subtracting the transit reading from the height of the instrument.
The raw data collected during the mapping process are curated with the project notes.

8

Figure 4. Test Units A and B (Level 1)

9

Figure 5. Test Units A and B (Level 5)

10

All backhoe trenches and excavation units were mapped using a transit and tape.
The project area map, which also illustrates previous subsurface investigations and
existing facilities, is depicted in Figure 6. The transit was also used to establish
elevations of each area excavated. A primary datum was established off site. This
point is the corner post of the perimeter fence at the northeast corner of the project
area. Existing structures on the site prevented obtaining a direct line of sight from the
primary datum to some of the backhoe trenches. Therefore, a secondary datum was
established to resolve this problem. Distances from the primary datum to all backhoe
trenches and the hand-excavated units were connected at the southwest corner of each
unit. All bearings are magnetic. The transit was also used to determine the elevations
(metric) at ground level of the backhoe trenches and hand-excavated units. The
elevation datum at the primary datum was arbitrarily set at 100 feet and was measured
from the top of a 1/2" iron rod ±6 inches southwest of the primary datum. The elevation
was determined by subtracting the transit reading from the height of the instrument.
The raw data collected during the mapping process are curated with the project notes.

11

Figure 6. Project Area Map

12

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
A review of previous work conducted at this site located a prehistoric site located
on a high bluff overlooking the north bank of the San Marcos River. The
geomorphology of the project area is discussed in the survey report by Schroeder et al.
(2000). Generally speaking, however, the site is situated in "deep Holocene aged
alluvium between the San Marcos River and a calcrete indurated gravel formation, that
possibly correlates to the Q4 terrace of the San Marcos River" (Schroeder et al.
2000:70). Examination of the site during the survey and testing revealed a site that
contains three cultural components (Schroeder et al. 2002). The earliest component is
believed to be Late Paleoindian based on the presence of an Angostura point. The
middle component dates from the latter part of the Middle Archaic based on a
radiocarbon date "associated with cultural material" (Schroeder et al. 2002:ii). The
latest component is Middle to Late Archaic based on a radiocarbon date associated with
a "thermal feature" and the presence of a Bulverde-like point. According to Schroeder
et al. (2002:ii), "Primary utilization as a campsite is evidenced in all three components
by the predominance of small decorticate soft hammer flakes, indicative of late-stage
biface thinning."
Two areas of site 41CW58 were tested by BVRA. First, six backhoe trenches
were dug in the vicinity of a proposed pre-treatment structure and a proposed sump pit
with associated water lines. These trenches did not locate any buried, intact features,
and very little cultural material was found in this area. Only one formal tool, a uniface
(Appendix III:Figure 1e), was found in the entire area (Backhoe Trench 5). Of the six
trenches in this area, three produced artifacts. Backhoe Trench 1 produced 2 flakes,
Backhoe Trench 5 produced 7 flakes, and Backhoe Trench 6 produced 0 flakes and 1
piece of thermally altered rock. This area has been greatly disturbed through three
previous testing episodes by archaeologists and a biologist as well as construction of
the existing above ground facilities and buried water lines (see Figure 6 and Previous
Investigations above).
Next, two 1 x 1 meter hand-excavated units were dug in the area where a sludge
drying bed is proposed, and they were labeled Test Unit A and Test Unit B. This effort
produced 146 pieces of debitage, 3 cores, and 5 unifacial tools (see Lithic Analysis
below). A concentration of thermally altered rock, chert debitage, a unifacial tool, and a
core were encountered in Test Unit A at Level 3 (80.9 cm below the existing ground
surface). Based on the presence of burned rock, this concentration is viewed by BVRA
as a possible hearth or living surface that has been disturbed, possibly due to a flooding
episode. It is important to note here that the thermally altered rock appeared to be
scattered and was not present in large numbers.
Backhoe Trench 7 was excavated adjacent to the test units in order to search for
evidence of intact features. It yielded 11 flakes and no thermally altered rock.
Therefore, the possible feature found in Test Unit A does not appear to continue in this
direction.

13

According to Schroeder et al. (2002:ii), "Primary utilization as a campsite is
evidenced in all three components by the predominance of small decorticate soft
hammer flakes, indicative of late-stage biface thinning." BVRA agrees with the previous
investigators that site 41CW58 represents more than a short-term activity area.
However, this belief is based on a combination of four factors: (1) the presence of
thermally altered rock (a possible hearth), (2) proximity to a major water source (San
Marcos River), (3) the presence of formal tools, (4) and evidence of various stages of
lithic reduction. The presence of soft hammer flakes indicate a single activity that was
conducted at this site and do not by themselves offer proof that the area served as a
campsite.
Overall, the site area has been greatly disturbed through previous archaeological
investigations and construction of the water treatment plant. It is possible that
significant deposits exist; however, all previous subsurface testing has revealed a very
ephemeral site in terms of features and numbers of artifacts present.

14

RECOMMENDATIONS
No diagnostic artifacts or intact features were found in the backhoe trenches or
hand-excavated units. Therefore, no further work is recommended in the areas planned
for construction. Should, however, significant finds such as human remains be
uncovered during construction all work in the area of the find must be temporarily
suspended until the situation is evaluated by the Texas Historical Commission in
consultation with Brazos Valley Research Associates and Canyon Regional Water
Authority.

15

REFERENCES CITED
Collins, Michael B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:361-400.
DLS Associates
2002 Monitoring During Construction at Archeological Site 41CW58, HaysCaldwell Regional Project, San Marcos Water Treatment Plant, Caldwell
County, Texas. Unnumbered report prepared for Canyon Regional Water
Authority by DLS Associates. Austin.
Lowther, A. C., and Leroy E. Werchan
1978 Soil Survey of Caldwell County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.
Schroeder, Eric A., Eric Oksanen, Terry Jones, and Alton K. Briggs
2000 Cultural Resources Survey of the Canyon Regional Water Authority
Systems Improvement, Hays and Caldwell Counties, Texas. Unnumbered
report prepared by Paul Price Associates, Inc. Austin.
Schroeder, Eric A., Craig A. Weaver, and Richard W. Walter
2002 State Archeological Landmark Evaluation of Site 41CW58 at the Canyon
Regional Water Authority Treatment Facility, Caldwell County, Texas. PPA
Cultural Resources Report Number 301. Paul Price Associates, Inc.
Austin.
Turner, Sue Ellen, and Thomas R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. (Second Edition) Texas
Monthly Field Guide Series. Gulf Publishing Company. Houston.

16

APPENDIX I
BACKHOE TRENCH PROFILES

Backhoe Trench 1

Backhoe Trench 2

Backhoe Trench 3

Backhoe Trench 4

Backhoe Trench 5

Backhoe Trench 6

Backhoe Trench 7

APPENDIX II: BACKHOE TRENCH NOTES
Backhoe Trench 1
This trench was excavated in the area of a proposed sump pit on May 19,
2003. Excavators present were James E. Warren, Arthur F. Romine, and Bobby
Jemison. Its measurements are 1.2 meters by 6.5 meters. It was excavated
through a clay surface (10YR 3/2) and loamy clay subsoil (7.5YR 5/3.5). The
heavy clay surface soil may not be natural. It had a sewage-like odor, and it is
believed it may have been hauled in from another area. The surface has been
leveled, compacted, and covered with crushed limestone for parking. Artifacts
observed included chert debitage and burned limestone. Rabdotus shells were
scattered throughout the subsoil.
Backhoe Trench 2
This trench was excavated in the area of a proposed water pipeline on
May 19, 2003. Excavators present were James E. Warren, Arthur F. Romine,
and Bobby Jemison. Its measurements are 1.2 meters by 6.1 meters. It was
excavated through a clay surface (10YR 3/2) and loamy clay subsoil (7.5YR
5/3.5). The heavy clay surface soil may not be natural. It had a sewage-like
odor, and it is believed it may have been hauled in from another area. No
artifacts were observed or collected. Rabdotus shells were scattered throughout
the subsoil.
Backhoe Trench 3
This trench was excavated in the area of a proposed pre-treatment
structure on May 20, 2003. Excavators present were James E. Warren, Arthur F.
Romine, and Bobby Jemison. Its measurements are 1.2 meters by 6.8 meters.
It was excavated through a clay surface (10YR 3/2) and loamy clay subsoil
(7.5YR 5/3.5). The heavy clay surface soil may not be natural. It had a sewagelike odor, and it is believed it may have been hauled in from another area. No
artifacts were observed or collected. Natural limestone pebbles and Rabdotus
shells were scattered throughout the subsoil.
Backhoe Trench 4
This trench was excavated in the area of a proposed pre-treatment
structure on May 20, 2003. Excavators present were James E. Warren, Arthur F.
Romine, and Bobby Jemison. Its measurements are 1.2 meters by 7 meters. It
was excavated through a clay surface (10YR 3/2) and loamy clay subsoil (7.5YR
5/3.5). The heavy clay surface soil may not be natural. It had a sewage-like
odor, and it is believed it may have been hauled in from another area. No
artifacts were observed or collected. Natural limestone pebbles and Rabdotus
shells were scattered throughout the subsoil.

Backhoe Trench 5
This trench was excavated in the area of a proposed water pipeline on
May 20, 2003. Excavators present were James E. Warren, William E. Moore,
Arthur F. Romine, and Bobby Jemison. Its measurements are 1.2 meters by 6.3
meters. It was excavated through a clay surface (10YR 3/2) and loamy clay
subsoil (7.5YR 5/3.5). The heavy clay surface soil may not be natural. It had a
sewage-like odor, and it is believed it may have been hauled in from another
area. Artifacts observed or collected include chert debitage and a unifacial tool.
Natural limestone pebbles and Rabdotus shells were scattered throughout the
subsoil.
Backhoe Trench 6
This trench was excavated in the area of a proposed water pipeline on
May 20, 2003. Excavators present were James E. Warren, William E. Moore,
Arthur F. Romine, and Bobby Jemison. Its measurements are 1.2 meters by 4.4
meters. It was excavated through a clay surface (10YR 3/2) and loamy clay
subsoil (7.5YR 5/3.5). The heavy clay surface soil may not be natural. It had a
sewage-like odor, and it is believed it may have been hauled in from another
area. Artifacts observed or collected include burned limestone rock and chert
debitage. Natural limestone pebbles and Rabdotus shells were scattered
throughout the subsoil.
Backhoe Trench 7
This trench was excavated in the area of a proposed sludge drying bed on
May 25, 2003. Excavators present were James E. Warren, William E. Moore,
Arthur F. Romine, and Bobby Jemison. Its measurements are 1.2 meters by 4.2
meters. It was excavated through a clay surface (10YR 3/2) and loamy clay
subsoil (7.5YR 5/3.5). The heavy clay surface soil may not be natural. It had a
sewage-like odor, and it is believed it may have been hauled in from another
area. Artifacts observed or collected include burned limestone rock and chert
debitage. Natural limestone pebbles and Rabdotus shells were scattered
throughout the subsoil.

APPENDIX III: LITHIC ANALYSIS
The excavation of two test units and seven backhoe trenches at site 41CW58,
conducted by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) during May 2003 produced a
total of 146 pieces of debitage, 3 cores, and 5 unifacial artifacts. Test Unit A (Level 2)
yielded a unifacial scraper and a core in association with burned rock thought by the
investigators to be a disturbed feature. Thermally altered rock was found throughout
the areas excavated. An examination of the culturally modified lithic debitage from this
excavation suggests that these materials are Edwards chert and were probably
collected locally. However, morphological attributes indicative of a specific locality or
deposit are not represented in this assemblage. Seventeen specimens, or 11.46% of
the recovered debitage, display traits of thermal alteration. It is assumed by this
researcher that the thermal alteration of these specimens was intentional and intended
to make lithic reduction easier. This material is a dark gray chert, exhibits a white to
grayish-white patina, and is present in most specimens. This patina is the result of a
chemical reaction to water and the absorption of chemical stains that begins
immediately when a fragment is detached from its parent material and is exposed to the
elements (Whitaker 1994:70). The rate at which this process occurs is not known and is
of little value as a dating technique. The assemblage described here was recovered
from soils containing high levels of calcium carbonates. The recovered material exhibits
differential degrees of calcium carbonate build-up on exterior surfaces. This could be
interpreted as a relative indicator of time, although there appears to be only slight
differences in degree of build-up from level to level at this site.

METHODS
Every attempt was made to present recovered data from this collection in a
manner that could be compared to that of previous investigations at the site by
Schroeder et al. (2002). This author's analytical techniques differ in some degree to
that of these earlier researchers, and, when appropriate, the data are presented in
multiple formats. This analysis was approached from this perspective, separating and
quantifying materials from each stage of reduction. Interpretations of methods
employed in the reductive sequence and an evaluation of the residual material can be
used to define human activities at the site level. The materials recovered by BVRA
were sorted, analyzed, and presented in tabular form with statistical interpretations of
reduction techniques and flake morphology.

DEFINITIONS
The following terms are used throughout this section. They are defined below.
Biface Reduction: The production of bifacial stone implements follows three
defined stages that can be determined from an archaeological assemblage (Dickens
1993:118).
Stage 1 Reduction: The initial step in the reductive process produces a crude
biface that usually retains some of its original cortex. Debitage or flakes produced
during this stage are referred to as primary flakes and can be defined by their retention
of cortex on at least half of their dorsal surface.
Stage 2 Reduction: The object of further reduction is designed to reduce
thickness while retaining width and length. Stage 2 bifaces exhibit very little or no
cortical material and take the shape of the desired final tool. Flakes from this stage can
be defined by their faceted dorsal surface and the retention of cortex on only a single
facet.
Stage 3 Reduction: The biface is now trimmed to its final shape, and any hafting
elements such as notches are completed.
Hard Hammer Percussion: A technique of reducing raw material with the use of a
hand-held stone of elastic properties such as quartzite. Blows from the hammer stone
often produce thick flakes that exhibit a battered point of impact. Hard hammer
percussion is often used during the initial stages of biface reduction (Whittaker 1994).
Soft Hammer Percussion: The removal of flakes with the use of an antler billet
produces a flake that is thin, often curved ventrally, and exhibits a lip at the point of
impact. The use of soft hammer percussive techniques is effective in the intermediate
stages in reducing bifacial thickness (Whittaker 1994).
Pressure Flaking: Pressure is applied with an antler tine or other pointed object
against the edge of a tool, removing a flake. This technique is commonly employed in
the finishing of a projectile point. Pressure flakes exhibit a small cone at the point of
applied pressure and are rarely recovered from an archaeological assemblage due to
their small size (Whittaker 1994).

ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS
Unifacial Tools (n=5)
EXAMPLE 1: (Figure 1a)
This unifacial tool was recovered from Test Unit A, Level 2. It was produced from
a thick, hard hammer primary flake or an exhausted core. Its lateral surface retains a
brown, Uvalde gravel-like cortex and exhibits a reddish hue possibly from intentional
thermal alteration of the material. It is 57.5 mm at its maximum length, 42 mm at its
maximum width, and 27 mm at its maximum thickness. It weighs 46.9 grams and has a
bit length of 16 mm located along a lateral edge.
EXAMPLE 2: (Figure 1b)
This unifacial tool was recovered from Test Unit A, Level 3, in a concentration of
burned rock and debitage. It was produced from a hard hammer flake. The flake's
dorsal, distal, and proximal surfaces are completely covered with a thick calcium
carbonate build-up that hides any evidence of the original cortex. It has a sharp calcium
carbonate-free surface on both of its lateral edges. One edge exhibits fine alterations in
the form of micro-flake removal and evidence of use damage for a length of 52 mm. It
is 73.5 mm at its maximum length, 50.5 mm at its maximum width, and 14.4 mm at its
maximum thickness. It weighs 64.5 grams.
EXAMPLE 3: (Figure 1c)
This thick unifacial tool was recovered from Test Unit B, Level 2. It displays both
concave and convex bit attributes on its lateral edge. This uninterrupted working edge
is 35 mm in length. The body of the tool is produced from a large, hard hammer flake
with brown, Uvalde gravel-like cortex. This cortex is covered with a thick calcium
carbonate build-up with only a small area of cortex exposed. It is 70.5 mm at its
maximum length, 50.8 mm at its maximum width, and 22.4 mm at its maximum
thickness. It weighs 66.9 grams.
EXAMPLE 4: (Figure 1d)
This unifacial tool was recovered from Test Unit B, Level 5. It exhibits a thick
calcium carbonate encrustation that covers most of the dorsal surface's original cortex.
One lateral edge exhibits the culturally motivated removal of surface cortical
accumulations through the detachment of a flake. This sharp edge has been retouched
by a pressure flaking technique producing a bit or tool edge 29 mm in length. It is 53
mm at its maximum length, 32 mm at its maximum width, and 11 mm at its maximum
thickness. It weighs 19.5 grams.

Figure 1. Unifacial Tools (Actual Size)

EXAMPLE 5: (Figure 1e)
This unifacial tool was recovered from Backhoe Trench 5 at 150-180 cm below
the existing ground surface. It was produced from a hard hammer secondary flake that
retains remnants of a brown cortex covered with a thick calcium carbonate build-up.
The material exhibits an almost imperceptible pink hue indicative of thermal alteration.
It exhibits use on one complete lateral edge and continues around a significant portion
of its distal edge for an aggregate length of 87 mm. It is 81 mm at its maximum length,
44.8 mm at its maximum width, and 13.8 mm at its maximum thickness. It weighs 45.9
grams.
Cores (n=3)
EXAMPLE 1: (Figure 2a)
This specimen was recovered from Test Unit A, Level 3, in a concentration of
burned rock and debitage. This core has had flakes removed from both its dorsal and
ventral surfaces and does not display evidence of thermal alteration. The majority of
the ventral surface and the proximal end are heavily encrusted with a deposit of calcium
carbonate. The scar left by the removal of the largest successful flake measures 27 x
27 mm. It is 79 mm at its maximum length, 79 mm at its maximum width, and 31.5 mm
at its maximum thickness. It weighs 158.8 grams.
EXAMPLE 2: (Figure 2b)
This specimen was recovered from Test Unit B, Level 2. The material from
which the core is manufactured is a deep maroon color and exhibits heavy potlid scars,
a reaction of direct contact to intense heat. The lateral, ventral, and proximal surfaces
are heavily encrusted with calcium carbonate. A large flake has been removed from the
dorsal surface with maximum dimensions of 46 x 50 mm. It is 56 mm at its maximum
length, 52.5 mm at its maximum width, and 35.5 mm at its maximum thickness. It
weighs 143.3 grams.
EXAMPLE 3: (Figure 2c)
This specimen was recovered from Test Unit B, Level 3. This type of core was
produced by removing the end of a cobble at a right angle to the material's axis,
producing a flat, formalized striking platform. The desired material (flakes or blades)
was removed at a right angle to the platform leaving a series of parallel flake scars.
This example has exhausted its use as a core, but was recycled and exhibits a
retouched lateral edge which produced a concave, convex tool bit 32 mm in length. It is
50 mm at its maximum length, 56 mm at its maximum width, and 27 mm at its maximum
thickness. It weighs 57.2 grams.

Figure 2. Cores (Actual Size)

DISCUSSION
Backhoe Trenches
Assigning provenience to artifacts collected in this manner (arbitrary 30 cm
levels) is problematic, and it is reasonable to assume that a margin of error of ± 30 cm
exists in determining original context of any specific specimen. Conclusions drawn from
this material is speculative as its temporal context is only approximate. Artifacts were
examined in the laboratory, and formal tools were identified and described in this report.
Specific data regarding raw numbers of the other artifacts from the backhoe trenches
are found in the field notes placed in permanent curation at TARL.
Artifact Concentration
In Test Unit A (Level 3) a concentration of burned rock, lithic debitage, a unifacial
tool (Figure 1b), and a core (Figure 2a) was exposed by the excavators. This
concentration may represent a disturbed feature. Additional artifact concentrations
containing burned rock were not noted in Backhoe Trench 7 which was excavated north
of, and in close proximity to, the Test Unit.
Test Units
The upper 60.9 cm (2 feet) of soil was removed from the surface of the
excavated units (A and B) mechanically by a backhoe as predetermined by BVRA in
consultation with Staff Archeologist Mark H. Denton of the Texas Historical
Commission, Archeology Division. Excavation proceeded in arbitrary 10 cm levels.
Level 1 (60.9 cm - 70.9 cm below the existing ground surface) was treated in the field
(and in this report) as 0-10 cm. Excavation of five levels (50 cm) was conducted to a
depth of 120.9 cm below the original ground surface. At this depth, excavation was
terminated as it is below the maximum limits to be impacted by future construction
activities (Personal communication from William E. Moore to Bradley F. Bowman on
June 4, 2003).
Test Unit A (Level 3) produced five micro-flakes (smaller than 1/4 inch), and
Level 4 produced nine micro-flakes. Test Unit B (Level 2) produced two micro-flakes,
and Level 7 produced seven micro-flakes. This material was recovered when
excavated soils were passed through 1/4 inch hardware cloth. Recovery of materials
less than 1/4 inch in size without the use of a fine screen is by chance and does not
reflect total quantities of micro-flakes in the deposits. The recovered micro-flakes are
not included in this analysis, as (from a statistical point-of-view) any numerical data
implied by this material would be inaccurate. Two of these flakes retain evidence that
they were created as a result of pressure flaking, while the remainder is incomplete
fragments that could have been produced by any of the various methods of reduction
employed at the site.

In the report by Schroeder et al. (2002), multiple levels from units excavated at
41CW58 are attributed as a single component and, therefore, analyzed as a single
sample. These excavations were executed in areas of the site not in close proximity to
the BVRA test units. An examination of the BVRA collection does not reveal any
evidence that can be utilized in the identification of any cultural affiliation, spatially or
temporally. The quantity of information required to combine levels from this excavation
does not exist in this assemblage, and each level was analyzed independently from
those higher or lower in the deposits. Figures 3 and 4 display the numerical frequencies
of both lithic debitage and thermally altered rock (in grams) from each excavated level.
The thermally altered stone in this assemblage may be deceptive as its frequency
increases to a maximum in Level 4 of test units A and B. It is unclear if the mechanism
responsible for the evidence of thermal alternation is cultural or natural. It is known that
wild fires can alter material in a way that makes it difficult to differentiate between
materials that have been in close contact with a burned structure or a short distance
from a hearth. An examination of figures 3 and 4 demonstrates that in both test units
levels 2 and 3 exhibit the greatest amount of lithic modification. This suggests a longer
occupation, greater population, or an increase in lithic reduction during this time period
at the site.
Reduction methods employed in the production of an archaeological assemblage
is a reflection of those activities occurring at a given time and location. The sample
recovered from a single level from test units A and B is too small for the production of
reliable quantitative data. In order to increase the sample size for the mathematical
manipulation of the recovered cultural materials, levels of identical depth from both
adjoining test units were combined. In the analysis of debitage from 41CW58 by
Schroeder et al. (2002), only flakes that exhibit a complete bulb of percussion were
assigned to a specific reduction method. This analytical technique reduces the
possibility of error, but it also reduces the actual number of identifiable flakes that can
be attributed to a specific reduction technique, in this case decreasing the number of
specimens by 58%. This investigator includes morphological diagnostic traits of the
flake body as defined in the Methods and Definitions sections of this report and as
defined by Shafer (1973) and Turner and Hester (1993) in conjunction with the
identification of bulbs of percussion traits in the analytical process. Tables 1 and 2
present methods of reduction and flake morphology for test units A and B in both
researchers' formats.
An examination of tables 1 and 2 (by level) demonstrates slight changes in
reduction strategies (i.e., behavior by the prehistoric people at 41CW58). Samples from
levels 1 and 5 are too small to be mathematically significant, but the recovery of a few
specimens can be an indicator of a minor occupation or possibly material removed from
its original context. The nature of arbitrary 10 cm excavation levels tends to disguise
occupational levels by lumping them together or artificially separating them at the predetermined depth assigned to the level. Many soils known to contain cultural materials
also evidence turbation through various processes such as biological, geological, and
cultural (Waters 1992). Level 1, with six specimens overlying Level 2 with 41
specimens, could be explained by any of these hypotheses.

Figure 3. Quantity of Rock and Debitage from Test Unit A

Figure 4. Quantity of Rock and Debitage from Test Unit B

Table 1. Methods of Reduction and Flake Morphology.
(After Schroeder et al. 2002)

Table 2. Methods of Reduction and Flake Morphology.
(After Bowman)

Levels 2 through 4 contain cultural material of a quantity sufficient for the
interpretation of cultural behavior. Analysis of this material using the author's approach
(Table 1) reveals that Level 2 has a hard hammer reduction occurrence of 36.58%,
while Level 3 has a hard hammer reduction occurrence of 40.00%, a difference of
3.42%. The incidence of soft hammer debitage for these levels is 41.46% and 37.14%,
respectively, a difference of 4.32%. Considering sample size, this dissimilarity is
statistically insignificant and may indicate that Stage 1 or Stage 2 bifaces were being
reduced at the site. A look at the occurrence of primary flakes (2.43%) and secondary
flakes (34.14%) from Level 2 and primary flakes (8.57%) and secondary flakes (5.71%)
from Level 3 suggests a different activity. The high frequency of secondary flake
production in Level 2 (34.14%) as compared to Level 3 (5.71%) suggests that the
knappers at Level 3 were not reducing early stage bifaces as is suggested in Level 2
and that the larger percentage of tertiary material in Level 3 (85.71%) compared to
Level 2 (63.41%) may represent an increase in tool re-sharpening from levels 2 to 3.
Level 4 shows a significant reduction in the usage of hard hammer as a reduction
technique and an increase in soft hammer reduction. Hard hammer flakes are
represented by 13.333% of the collection, while soft hammer flakes are represented by
26.66% of the collection. This is a ratio of 2:1 of soft hammer over hard hammer usage.
Tertiary flakes in this assemblage are represented by 93.33% of the total. This
indicates re-sharpening or re-working pre-existing tools with little or no evidence to
support the reduction of bifaces into finished tool types during the time Level 4 was a
living surface. A look at the same assemblage as analyzed by Schroeder et al. (2002)
produces almost identical data in the identification of flake types (tables 2 and 3), but
differences in the frequencies of reduction methods. These differences are discussed
below by level. Level 2, hard hammer (21.95%); Level 2, soft hammer (29.26%), a
difference of 7.3%; Level 3, hard hammer (20.00%); Level 3, soft hammer (14.28%), a
difference of 5.72%; Level 4, hard hammer (13.33%); Level 4, soft hammer (20.00%), a
difference of 6.67%.

Flake Size
It has been suggested that flake size can be used as an indicator to determine
reduction techniques and stages of reduction that is true in some cases. This author
contracted with William A. Dickens, a lithics specialist at Texas A&M University, to
produce a museum exhibit designed to demonstrate to the public the reduction of a
chert nodule into a finished dart point. During each stage of reduction all debitage was
collected and sorted by size then displayed in petri dishes along with the appropriate
biface and an explanation of each stage. When this material was sorted and displayed
in this manner, it became obvious that there is a gradual decrease in large flakes after
the initial formation of a Stage 1 biface and a gradual increase in smaller flakes as the
reduction process progresses. It was noted that flakes as large as 25 mm and smaller
are represented in all stages of reduction from Stage 1 of the reduction process to a
finished projectile point.

The determination of reduction methods and implications of activities at a site
gleaned from archaeologically recovered debitage can be thoroughly assessed by the
determination of flake morphology and attributes such as the identification of bulbs of
percussion, flake shapes, and the presence or absence of cortical material. This line of
inquiry is far more useful to the researcher than flake size.
Table 3 is a compilation of sizes of all recovered material from Test Unit A, while
Table 4 is a compilation of sizes of all recovered material from Test Unit B. The
arbitrary size categories were adopted from Schroeder et al. (2002) to facilitate the
comparison of data collected from the earlier investigation and the current study by
BVRA. Levels 2 through 4, those with sufficient quantity to be of statistical value,
contain from 50% to 100% of the total assemblage in the 11-25 mm category. Flakes
that fall in the 26-50 mm category in these same levels represent 25% to 27.27% of the
recovered assemblage. Flakes between 1 and 10 mm and over 51 mm in size occur in
lesser quantities in all recorded levels.
Table 5 represents the combined samples of test units A and B, was analyzed
using the techniques employed by Schroeder et al. (2002), and is included to aid
possible future researchers who may want to review both data sets. Since the previous
investigators discarded all flakes lacking a bulb of percussion, the total number of
artifacts for the two units is much less than the results obtained using the current
method. An examination of these data demonstrates that Level 2 contains 60% of 1125 mm flakes and 0% of the 26-50 mm flakes. Level 3 has a reduced level of flakes in
the 11-25 mm category, being 33.33% with an increase in the 25-50 mm class to
44.4%. Level 3 also produced 22.2% of all flakes over 51 mm in size.

Table 3. Size of Flakes, Test Unit A.

Table 4. Size of Flakes, Test Unit B.

Table 5. Size of Flakes, Combined Units.

INTERPRETATIONS
This excavation produced evidence that aboriginal activities at site 41CW58
climaxed during the time levels 2 and 3 served as living surfaces. No temporally
diagnostic artifacts were recovered during the BVRA investigation; therefore, the age of
these cultural deposits is not known. It appears that spatial occupational boundaries
have not been defined at the site, although levels 2 and 3 in the test units produced
quantifiable peaks that are similar to Component II, a Middle/Late Archaic occupation as
identified by Schroeder et al. (2002). Any connection of these levels excavated by
BVRA to those of the previous researchers (Schroeder et al. 2002) is tenuous and
should only be considered as a possibility. The assemblage from the BVRA excavation
does not contain bifaces that were broken during manufacture. These bifaces are
known to occur at high frequencies at sites where quantities of artifacts were
manufactured on site (Bowman 1985; Roemer and Carlson 1985).
Analysis of the debitage from the test units demonstrates that the lithic reduction
strategy, as evidenced by the artifacts in Level 4, was that of re-touching and re-working
existing tools. This strategy begins to change in Level 3 with an increase in secondary
flake debitage, suggestive of broader reduction strategies. Level 2 produces significant
evidence to suggest early stage biface reduction in addition to activities associated with
the repair or alteration of existing tools. The recovered core from Level 2 (Figure 2b)
was burned so badly that it was of no value for its intended purpose and would have
been discarded at the site. Level 3 produced two cores (Figure 2a and Figure 2b) and a
specimen, which was re-worked into a unifacial tool (Figure 2c). This artifact may have
been used in that capacity at the site. The recovery of five unifacial tools and an
expedient core tool (Figure 2c) suggests the occupants of site 41CW58 were focused
on plant or animal processing and food preparation.

REFERENCES CITED
Bowman, Bradley F.
1985 Winnie's Mound (41BU17): A Study in the Prehistory of Burleson County,
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 56:39-74.
Dickens, William A.
1993 Tool Types, Reduction Strategies, and Local Gravels: Analysis of Lithic
Artifacts. In The Brazos Valley Slopes Archaeological Project: Cultural
Resources Assessments for Texas A&M University Animal Science and
Research Complex, Brazos County, Texas, edited by Alston V. Thoms,
pp. 113-114. Archaeological Research Laboratory, Reports of
Investigations Number 14. Texas A&M University. College Station.
Roemer, Erwin, and Shawn Bonath Carlson
1985 Excavations at 41BU16: State Highway 21 at the Brazos River, Burleson
County, Texas. State Department of Highways and Public Transportation,
Contract Reports in Archaeology Report Number 1. Austin.
Schroeder, Eric A., Craig A. Weaver, and Richard W. Walter
2002 State Archeological Landmark Evaluation of Site 41CW58 at the Canyon
Regional Water Authority Treatment Facility, Caldwell County, Texas. PPA
Cultural Resources Report Number 301. Paul Price Associates, Inc.
Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1973 Lithic Technology at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Turner, Sue Ellen, and Thomas R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. (Second Edition) Texas
Monthly Field Guide Series. Gulf Publishing Company. Houston.
Waters, Michael R.
1992 Principles of Geoarchaeology, a North American Perspective. The
University of Arizona Press. Tucson.
Whittaker, John C.
1994 Flintknapping: Making and Understanding Stone Tools. The University of
Texas Press. Austin.

