Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks,
Hutto, Williamson County, Texas
By:
Jahleen E. Sefton and Jeffrey D. Owens

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8909
H438-190095

Prepared for:

Prepared by:

City of Hutto, Texas

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
Austin, Texas

May 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks,
Hutto, Williamson County, Texas
By:
Jahleen E. Sefton and Jeffrey D. Owens

Prepared for:

City of Hutto
500 West Live Oak Street
Hutto, Texas 78634

Prepared by:

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc.
1507 S. Interstate 35
Austin, Texas 78741

Jahleen Sefton, Principal Investigator
H438-190095

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 8909

May 2019

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by Burditt Consultants, LLC
on behalf of the City of Hutto, to conduct an intensive cultural resources inventory and assessment
for the Creekside and Fritz Park Improvements Project. Creekside Park is located south of US
Highway (US) 79 and east of Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 1660 and runs along the western side
of Cottonwood Creek, covering an area of approximately 22.4 acres. Fritz Park is located north
of US 79 alongside and at the end of Park Avenue and abuts Cottonwood Creek to the east,
covering an area of approximately 33.2 acres. For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the
project area is assumed to consist of the entire area of both Creekside and Fritz parks, covering
22.2 and 33.2 acres, respectively, for a total of 55.6 acres.
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City of Hutto, a political subdivision
of the state of Texas, and would utilize grant funding provided by the Texas Parks & Wildlife
Department (TPWD). As both the city of Hutto and TPWD are political subdivisions of the state
of Texas, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Natural
Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this time, no federal permits, licenses, or funds have
been identified for the project. As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the
project sponsor is required to provide the Texas Historical Commission (THC), which serves as
the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an opportunity to review
and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties considered eligible
for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL).
On May 7, 2019, Horizon archeologists Jahleen Sefton and Rachel Naasz conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted under the
overall direction of Jahleen Sefton, Principal Investigator, under Texas Antiquities Permit
no. 8909. The purpose of the survey was to locate any significant cultural resources that
potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking. Horizon’s archeologists traversed
the parks and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface for aboriginal and historic-age
cultural resources. The project area runs along the upper stream terraces of Cottonwood Creek.
Both Fritz and Creekside parks are within fields of freshly mowed grass which produced a ground
surface visibility of less than 5%. Fritz Park holds three baseball diamonds, a basketball court,
volleyball courts, and a football field along with a water garden and several pavilions. The park
has several concrete walkways, including a hike-and-bike trail that runs north to south along
Cottonwood Creek through both parks. Creekside Park runs between Cottonwood Creek and a

H438-190095

v

Management Summary

residential area and has a baseball diamond and soccer field on the property along with two
pavilions. Three man-made drainage ditches dissect Creekside Park, including two in the
northern portion of the park and one at the southern end. The southern end of Creekside Park
was extensively disturbed by a man-made reservoir and small levee as well as an existing pipeline
corridor that that runs from northwest to southeast north of the reservoir and levee.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of one shovel test per 2.0 acres for project areas
between 11.0 and 100.0 acres in size. As such, a minimum of 28 shovel tests would be required
within the combined 55.6-acre project area. Horizon excavated a total of 30 shovel tests during
the survey, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this size. Shovel testing typically
revealed dense, gravely, dark grayish-brown to black clay extending from the modern ground
surface to the bottom of all excavated shovel tests. It is Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the
potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits were fully penetrated and that the project
area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
No cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.
Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends
a finding of “no historic properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended
in connection with the proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and
historic, are protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human
remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or
ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should
cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery, and the THC should be notified
immediately.

vi

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page
MANAGEMENT SUMMARY ...................................................................................... v

1.0

INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... 1

2.0

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING................................................................................... 7
2.1
Physiography and Hydrology......................................................................... 7
2.2
Geology and Geomorphology........................................................................ 7
2.3
Climate .......................................................................................................... 9
2.4
Flora and Fauna ...........................................................................................10

3.0

CULTURAL BACKGROUND ...................................................................................13
3.1
PaleoIndian Period (ca. 12,000 to 8500 B.P.) ...............................................13
3.2
Archaic Period (ca. 8500 to 1200 B.P.) ........................................................14
3.3
Late Prehistoric Period (ca. 1200 to 350 B.P.) ..............................................14
3.4
Historic Period (ca. 350 B.P to Present) .......................................................14

4.0

ARCHIVAL RESEARCH ..........................................................................................21

5.0

SURVEY METHODOLOGY .....................................................................................25

6.0

RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS ...........................................................................31

7.0

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................33
7.1
Conceptual Framework ................................................................................33
7.2
Eligibility Criteria for Listing as a State Antiquities Landmark........................34
7.3
Summary of Inventory Results .....................................................................35
7.4
Management Recommendations ..................................................................36

8.0

REFERENCES CITED ............................................................................................37
APPENDIX A: Shovel Test Data

H438-190095

vii

Table of Contents

LIST OF FIGURES
Page
Figure 1.
Figure 2.
Figure 3.
Figure 4.
Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.
Figure 8.
Figure 9.
Figure 10.
Figure 11.
Figure 12.

Vicinity Map of Project Area ...................................................................................... 2
Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle .................................... 3
Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph ......................................................... 4
Soils Mapped within Project Area ............................................................................. 8
Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area .......................................22
Overview of Fritz Park (Facing East) .......................................................................26
Football Field and Baseball Diamonds at Fritz Park (Facing Southwest) .................26
Overview of Cottonwood Creek (Facing North) ........................................................27
Overview of Baseball Diamond at Creekside Park (Facing North) ...........................27
Overview of Creekside Park (Facing Northwest) ......................................................28
Reservoir and Existing Pipeline Corridor within Creekside Park (Facing West) ........28
Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area ........................................29

LIST OF TABLES
Page
Table 1.
Table 2.

viii

Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area ......................................................... 9
Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area ...................23

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Horizon Environmental Services, Inc. (Horizon) was selected by Burditt Consultants, LLC
on behalf of the City of Hutto, to conduct an intensive cultural resources inventory and assessment
for the Creekside and Fritz Park Improvements Project. Creekside Park is located south of US
Highway (US) 79 and east of Farm-to-Market Road (FM) 1660 and runs along the western side
of Cottonwood Creek, covering an area of approximately 22.4 acres. Fritz Park is located north
of US 79 alongside and at the end of Park Avenue and abuts Cottonwood Creek to the east,
covering an area of approximately 33.2 acres. For purposes of the cultural resources survey, the
project area is assumed to consist of the entire area of both Creekside and Fritz parks, covering
22.2 and 33.2 acres, respectively, for a total of 55.6 acres (Figures 1 to 3).
The proposed undertaking is being sponsored by the City of Hutto, a political subdivision
of the state of Texas, and would utilize grant funding provided by the Texas Parks & Wildlife
Department (TPWD). As both the city of Hutto and TPWD are political subdivisions of the state
of Texas, the project would fall under the jurisdiction of the Antiquities Code of Texas (Natural
Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). At this time, no federal permits, licenses, or funds have
been identified for the project. As the project represents a publicly sponsored undertaking, the
project sponsor is required to provide the Texas Historical Commission (THC), which serves as
the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) for the state of Texas, with an opportunity to review
and comment on the project’s potential to adversely affect historic properties considered eligible
for designation as State Antiquities Landmarks (SAL).
On May 7, 2019, Horizon archeologists Jahleen Sefton and Rachel Naasz conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The survey was conducted under the
overall direction of Jahleen Sefton, Principal Investigator, under Texas Antiquities Permit
no. 8909. The cultural resources investigation consisted of an archival review, an intensive
pedestrian survey of the project area, and the production of a report suitable for review by the
State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) in accordance with the THC’s Rules of Practice and
Procedure, Chapter 26, Section 27, and the Council of Texas Archeologists (CTA) Guidelines for
Cultural Resources Management Reports.
Following this introductory chapter, Chapters 2.0 and 3.0 present the environmental and
cultural backgrounds, respectively, of the project area. Chapter 4.0 describes the results of
background archival research, and Chapter 5.0 discusses cultural resources survey methods

H438-190095

1

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Figure 1. Vicinity Map of Project Area

2

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

Figure 2. Location of Project Area on USGS Topographic Quadrangle

H438-190095

3

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Figure 3. Location of Project Area on Aerial Photograph

4

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

Chapter 6.0 presents the results of the cultural resources survey, and Chapter 7.0
presents cultural resources management recommendations for the project. Chapter 8.0 lists the
references cited in the report, and Appendix A summarizes shovel test data.

H438-190095

5

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

2.0 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

2.1

PHYSIOGRAPHY AND HYDROLOGY

The project area is located in south-central Williamson County, Texas, just east of the
boundary of three significant physiographic provinces—the Blackland Prairie, the Edwards
Plateau, and the Gulf Coastal Plain. The Blackland Prairie, within which the project area is
situated, is a narrow physiographic zone between the Edwards Plateau to the west and the Gulf
Coastal Plain to the east. It is a low, rolling land that extends in a narrow band along the eastern
edge of the Balcones Fault Zone from the Red River Valley in northeastern Texas to the southern
edge of the Edwards Plateau. This is an area of low topographic relief and poor drainage in which
water often ponds after rainstorms and streams flow at very gentle gradients. The Edwards
Plateau and Balcones Escarpment are associated with a great fault system that arcs across
Texas to form a distinct boundary between uplands composed primarily of limestone bedrock and
lower plains composed mostly of softer rocks. In places, this boundary is marked by an abrupt
scarp (the Balcones Escarpment) and in others by a more gradational ramp, but the entire length
of this transition zone is a major ecotone in terms of topography, bedrock, hydrology, soil,
vegetation, and animal life. The project area is situated on the western upper terraces of
Cottonwood Creek. Elevations throughout the project area slope down gently to the east toward
the creek, ranging from approximately 630.0 to 640.0 feet above mean sea level (amsl).
Hydrologically, the project area is situated within the Brazos River basin. Drainage within
the project area is to the east toward Cottonwood Creek. Cottonwood Creek flows southeastward
into Brushy Creek. Brushy Creek, in turn, flows generally northeastward to the San Gabriel River.
The San Gabriel River flows eastward to its confluence with the Little River in Milam County,
which in turn flows a short distance eastward and empties into the Brazos River. The Brazos
River flows southeastwards across the Blackland Prairie and Gulf Coastal Plain, ultimately
discharging into the Gulf of Mexico a short distance northeast of East Matagorda Bay.

2.2

GEOLOGY AND GEOMORPHOLOGY

Geomorphologically, the project area is on the Navarro Group and Marlbrook Marl (Knt)
of the Upper Cretaceous (Barnes 1974). Soils within the project area are primarily composed of
black calcareous clayey alluvium derived of shales, marls, and or chalks of Late Pleistocene or
Cretaceous age (Figure 4; Table 1) (NRCS 2019). Soils of Holocene age are present within the
floodplain of Cottonwood Creek and are derived of Tinn clay (NRCS 2019).

H438-190095

7

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Figure 4. Soils Mapped within Project Area

8

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

Table 1. Summary of Mapped Soils within Project Area
NRCS
Soil Code

Soil Name

Parent Material

Typical Profile
(centimeters)

Tn

Tinn clay,
0 to 1% slopes

Calcareous clayey alluvium of the
Holocene Age

0-15: Clay (Ap)
15-46: Clay (A)
46-71: Clay (Bss)

BrB

Branyon clay,
0 to 3% slopes

Calcareous clayey alluvium derived from
mudstone of Pleistocene age

0-10: Clay (Ap)
10-31: Clay (Bk)
31-112: Clay (Bkss1)

QuC

Queeny clay loam,
1 to 5% slopes

Calcareous loamy alluvium over gravelly
alluvium derived from shale, claystone,
siltstone, or chalk of Cretaceous Age

0-23: Gravelly Loam (A)
23-43: Caliche (Bkkm)
43-94: Caliche (Ck)

Source: NRCS 2019
NRCS = Natural Resources Conservation Service

In Central Texas, aboriginal cultural resources are commonly encountered adjacent to
streams and springs as well as in upland settings. Historic-era resources may occur in virtually
any physiographic setting but are most common in urban settings and in rural areas suitable for
agriculture. The relative antiquity of the pre-Holocene-age uplands that primarily characterize the
project area suggests that any cultural resources present would be constrained to the modern
ground surface and/or in shallowly buried contexts in erosional settings lacking integrity and
depth. An effort was made to penetrate the Holocene-age soils during survey, which produced
negative results for cultural material.

2.3

CLIMATE

Evidence for climatic change from the Pleistocene to the present is most often obtained
through studies of pollen and faunal sequences (Bryant and Holloway 1985; Collins 1995). Bryant
and Holloway (1985) present a sequence of climatic change for nearby east-central Texas from
the Wisconsin Full Glacial period (22,500 to 14,000 B.P.) through the Late Glacial period
(14,000 to 10,000 B.P.) to the Post-Glacial period (10,000 B.P. to present). Evidence from the
Wisconsin Full Glacial period suggests that the climate in east-central Texas was considerably
cooler and more humid than at present. Pollen data indicate that the region was more heavily
forested in deciduous woodlands than during later periods (Bryant and Holloway 1985). The Late
Glacial period was characterized by slow climatic deterioration and a slow warming and/or drying
trend (Collins 1995). In east-central Texas, the deciduous woodlands were gradually replaced by
grasslands and post oak savannas (Bryant and Holloway 1985). During the Post-Glacial period,
the east-central Texas environment appears to have been more stable. The deciduous forests
had long since been replaced by prairies and post oak savannas. The drying and/or warming
trend that began in the Late Glacial period continued into the mid-Holocene, at which point there
appears to have been a brief amelioration to more mesic conditions lasting from roughly 6000 to
5000 B.P. Recent studies by Bryant and Holloway (1985) indicate that modern environmental
conditions in east-central Texas were probably achieved by 1,500 years ago.

H438-190095

9

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

Williamson County is located within the south-central climatic division. The modern
climate is typically dry to subhumid with long, hot summers and short, mild winters. The climate
is influenced primarily by tropical maritime air masses from the Gulf of Mexico, but it is modified
by polar air masses. Tropical maritime air masses predominate throughout spring, summer, and
fall. Modified polar air masses are dominant in winter and provide a continental climate
characterized by considerable variations in temperature.
On average throughout the past century, precipitation and temperature in Texas manifest
regional clines with mean annual precipitation totals declining regularly from east to west and
mean annual temperature declining equally evenly from northwest to southeast (Larkin and
Bomar 1983). In Central Texas, climate has fluctuated from subtropical humid to subtropical
subhumid. Average annual precipitation totals 32.0 inches and temperature averages 67°F
annually, ranging from 96°F in August (the warmest month) to 59°F in January (the coldest
month). During this time, however, drier periods lasting from three to seven years, when total
annual rainfall ranged from 12.0 to 25.0 inches, were followed by abnormally wet years with
45.0 to 50.0 inches of rainfall.
Two annual precipitation peaks, which typically occur in May and September, are
associated with frontal storms that form when southward-moving cool air masses collide with
warm, moist air masses moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico (Bomar 1983; Carr 1967). The
topographic discontinuity along the Balcones Escarpment lies directly in the path of the Gulf storm
trace and increases the lift in convective storms to produce extreme amounts of rainfall. Two
extreme examples are the excess of 36.0 inches of rain that fell within an 18-hour period in the
vicinity of Thrall, Texas, in September 1921, and the 22.0-inch) deluge that fell in less than three
hours near O’Harris, Texas, in May 1935. Lower rainfall amounts are characteristic of winter and
late summer. In winter, frontal storms pass so frequently that there is little time for moisture to
increase, and prevailing upper-level winds from west to east often dominate over meridional flow,
meaning that much of the available moisture is derived from the Pacific rather than from the Gulf
of Mexico. In summer, cool fronts rarely penetrate the region, and rainfall occurs primarily as
localized, thermal convective storms.

2.4

FLORA AND FAUNA

The project area is situated in the southwestern portion of the Texan biotic province (Blair
1950), an intermediate zone between the forests of the Austroriparian and Carolinian provinces
and the grasslands of the Kansan, Balconian, and Tamaulipan provinces (Dice 1943). Some
species reach the limits of their ecological range within the Texan province. The boundary,
characterized as “approximate,” between Blair’s (1950) Texan and Balconian provinces passes
through western Williamson County, west of the project area. Rainfall in the Texan province is
barely in excess of water need, and the region is classified by Thornwaite (1948) as a C 2 (moist
subhumid) climate with a moisture surplus index of from 0 to 20%.
Edaphic controls on vegetation types are important in the Texan biotic province, which is
located near the border between moisture surplus and moisture deficiency. Sandy soils support
oak-hickory forests dominated by post oak (Quercus stellata), blackjack oak (Q. marilandica), and
hickory (Carya buckleyi). Clay soils originally supported a tall-grass prairie, but much of this soil

10

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

type has been placed under cultivation. Dominant tall-grass prairie species include western
wheatgrass (Agropyron smithii), silver beardgrass (Andropogon saccharoides), little bluestem
(Andropogon scoparius), and Texas wintergrass (Stipa leucotricha). Major areas of oak-hickory
forest include the Eastern and Western Cross Timbers, and major tall-grass prairie areas include
the Blackland, Grand, and Coastal prairies.
Some characteristic associations of the
Austroriparian province occur locally in the Texan province, such as a mixed stand of loblolly pine
(Pinus taeda), blackjack oak, and post oak in Bastrop County, and a series of peat and bog
marshes distributed in a line extending from Leon to Gonzales counties.
The fauna associated with this region are represented by a mixture of species from the
Austroriparian, Tamaulipan, Chihuahuan, Kansan, Balconian, and Texan biotic provinces. At
least 49 species of mammals occur in the Texan province, including Virginia opossum (Didelphis
virginiana), eastern mole (Scalopus aquaticus), fox squirrel (Sciurus niger), desert pocket gopher
(Geomys breviceps), fulvous harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys fulvescens), white-footed mouse
(Peromyscus leucopus), hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), eastern cottontail rabbit
(Sylvilagus floridanus), raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis), white-footed
mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), black-tailed jackrabbit (Sylvilagus californicus), ground squirrel
(Citellus tridecemlineatus), white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginiana), hispid pocket mouse
(Perognathus hispidus), deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus), pygmy mouse (Baiomys taylori),
9-banded armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus), and jaguar (Felis onca).
Both species of Terrapene known from the Austroriparian province—eastern box turtle (T.
Carolina) and desert box turtle (T. ornata)—occur in the Texan biotic province. Sixteen species
of lizards, including seven grassland and nine forest species, are also found, including green
anole (Anolis carolinensis), eastern fence lizard (Sceloporus undulates), common ground skink
(Leiolopisma laterale), glass snake (Ophisaurus ventralis [grassland species]), collared lizard
(Crotaphytus collaris), Texas spiny lizard (Sceloporus olivaceus), Texas horned lizard
(Phrynosoma cornutum), and Great Plains skink (Eumeces obsoletus [forest species]). Only
5 species of urodele fauna are known from this area, including small-mouthed salamander
(Ambystoma texanum), tiger salamander (Ambystoma tigrinum), and eastern lesser siren (Siren
intermedia), and the Texan province acts as a barrier to urodele distribution between the endemic
Balconian province fauna to the west and the Austroriparian fauna to the east.
Anuran fauna is composed primarily of Austroriparian or otherwise widely distributed
species, including eastern spadefoot toad (Scaphiopus holbrookii), Gulf Coast toad (Bufo
valliceps), Woodhouse’s toad (Bufo woodhousii), southern cricket frog (Acris gryllus), southern
chorus frog (Pseudacris nigrita), gray tree frog (Hyla versicolor), green tree frog (Hyla cinerea),
North American bullfrog (Rana catesbeiana), northern leopard frog (Rana pipiens), and narrowmouthed toad (Microhyla carolinensis). Additional anuran species that fail to cross from the Texan
into the Austroriparian province include pacific tree frog (Pseudacris clarkia), Strecker’s chorus
frog (Pseudacris streckeri), and striped whipsnake (Microhyla olivacea).
Other reptile and amphibian species common to this biotic zone include six-lined
racerunner (Aspidoscelis sexlineata), rat snake (Ptyas mucosus), eastern hognose snake
(Heterodon platirhinos), rough green snake (Opheodrys aestivus), copperhead (Agkistrodon
contortrix), western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox), Blanchard’s cricket frog (Acris

H438-190095

11

Chapter 2.0: Environmental Setting

crepitans), diamondback water snake (Nerodia rhombifer rhombifer), and Houston toad (Bufo
houstonensis). Common bird species include northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), eastern
meadowlark (Sturnella magna), mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), killdeer (Charadrius
vociferus), field sparrow (Spizella pusilla), red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis), turkey vulture
(Cathartes aura), belted kingfisher (Ceryle alcyon), and mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos). Small
herds of bison and antelope were common during the late prehistoric and early historic periods,
but these species are no longer native to this region (Jurney et al. 1989:13-14).

12

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

3.0 CULTURAL BACKGROUND

The project area is located within Prewitt’s (1981, 1985) Central Texas Archeological
Region. Prewitt demarcated the southeastern boundary of the Central Texas Archeological
Region at the town of Bastrop in Bastrop County, which borders Travis County on the southeast.
The indigenous human inhabitants of Central Texas practiced a generally nomadic hunting and
gathering lifestyle throughout all of prehistory, and, in contrast to much of the rest of North
America, mobility and settlement patterns do not appear to have changed markedly through time
in this region.

3.1

PALEOINDIAN PERIOD (CA. 12,000 TO 8500 B.P.)

The initial human occupations in the New World can now be confidently extended back
before 12,000 B.P. (Dincauze 1984; Haynes et al. 1984; Kelly and Todd 1988; Lynch 1990;
Meltzer 1989). Evidence from Meadowcroft Rockshelter in Pennsylvania suggests that humans
were present in Eastern North America as early as 14,000 to 16,000 years ago (Adovasio et al.
1990), while more recent discoveries at Monte Verde in Chile provide unequivocal evidence for
human occupation in South America by at least 12,500 years ago (Dillehay 1989, 1997; Meltzer
et al. 1997). Most archeologists presently discount claims of much earlier human occupation
during the Pleistocene glacial period.
The earliest generalized evidence for human activities in Central Texas is represented by
the PaleoIndian period (12,000 to 8500 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This stage coincided with
ameliorating climatic conditions following the close of the Pleistocene epoch that witnessed the
extinction of herds of mammoth, horse, camel, and bison. Cultures representing various periods
within this stage are characterized by series of distinctive, relatively large, often fluted, lanceolate
projectile points. These points are frequently associated with spurred end scrapers, gravers, and
bone foreshafts. PaleoIndian groups are often inferred to have been organized into egalitarian
bands consisting of a few dozen individuals that practiced a fully nomadic subsistence and
settlement pattern. Due to poor preservation of floral materials, subsistence patterns in Central
Texas are known primarily through the study of faunal remains. Subsistence focused on the
exploitation of plants, small animals, fish, and shellfish, even during the PaleoIndian period. There
is little evidence in this region for hunting of extinct megafauna, as has been documented
elsewhere in North America. Rather, a broad-based subsistence pattern appears to have been
practiced throughout all prehistoric time periods. In Central Texas, the PaleoIndian stage is
divided into two periods based on recognizable differences in projectile point styles. These

H438-190095

13

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

include the Early PaleoIndian period, which is recognized based on large, fluted projectile points
(i.e., Clovis, Folsom, Dalton, San Patrice, and Big Sandy), and the Late PaleoIndian period, which
is characterized by unfluted lanceolate points (i.e., Plainview, Scottsbluff, Meserve, and
Angostura).

3.2

ARCHAIC PERIOD (CA. 8500 TO 1200 B.P.)

The onset of the Hypsithermal drying trend marks the beginning of the Archaic period
(8500 to 1200 B.P.) (Collins 1995). This climatic trend marked the beginning of a significant
reorientation of lifestyle throughout most of North America, but this change was far less
pronounced in Central Texas. Elsewhere, the changing climatic conditions and corresponding
decrease in the big game populations forced people to rely more heavily upon a diversified
resource base composed of smaller game and wild plants. In Central Texas, however, this
hunting and gathering pattern is characteristic of most of prehistory. The appearance of a more
diversified tool kit, the development of an expanded groundstone assemblage, and a general
decrease in the size of projectile points are hallmarks of this cultural stage. Material culture shows
greater diversity during this broad cultural period, especially in the application of groundstone
technology.
Traditionally, the Archaic period is subdivided into Early, Middle, and Late subperiods.
Changes in projectile point morphology are often used as markers differentiating these three
subperiods, though other changes in material culture occurred as well. Perhaps most markedly,
burned rock middens appear during the Middle Archaic subperiod, continuing into the Late
Archaic subperiod, and large cemeteries appear during the Late Archaic subperiod. In addition,
the increasing density of prehistoric sites through time is often considered to constitute evidence
of population growth, though differential preservation probably at least partially accounts for the
lower numbers of older sites.

3.3

LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 1200 TO 350 B.P.)

The onset of the Late Prehistoric period (1200 to 350 B.P.) (Collins 1995) is defined by
the appearance of the bow and arrow. In Central Texas, pottery also appears during the Late
Prehistoric period (though ceramics appear earlier in Southeast Texas). Use of the atlatl (i.e.,
spearthrower) and spear was generally discontinued during the Late Prehistoric period, though
they continued to be used in the inland subregion of Southeast Texas along with the bow and
arrow through the Late Prehistoric period (Patterson 1980, 1995; Wheat 1953). In Texas, unifacial
arrow points appear to be associated with a small prismatic blade technology. The Late
Prehistoric period is generally divided into two phases, the Austin and Toyah phases. Austin
phase sites occur earliest to the north, which has led some researchers (e.g., Prewitt 1985) to
suggest that the Austin-phase populations of Central Texas were migrants from the north, and
lack the ceramic industry of the later Toyah phase.

3.4

HISTORIC PERIOD (CA. 350 B.P TO PRESENT)

The first European incursion into what is now known as Texas was in 1519, when Alonso
Álvarez de Pineda explored the northern shores of the Gulf of Mexico. In 1528, Álvar Núñez

14

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

Cabeza de Vaca crossed South Texas after being shipwrecked along the Texas Coast near
Galveston Bay. However, European settlement did not seriously disrupt native ways of life until
after 1700. The first half of the 18th century was the period in which the fur trade and mission
system, as well as the first effects of epidemic diseases, began to seriously disrupt the native
culture and social systems. This process is clearly discernable at the Mitchell Ridge site, where
burial data suggest population declines and group mergers (Ricklis 1994) as well as increased
participation on the part of the Native American population in the fur trade. By the time that heavy
settlement of Texas began in the early 1800s by Anglo-Americans, the indigenous Indian
population was greatly diminished.
The earliest known historical occupants of Williamson County were the Tonkawa Indians1.
The Tonkawa traditionally followed buffalo herds on foot and periodically set fire to the prairie to
aid them in their hunts. During the 18th century, however, they made the transition to a horsebased culture and used firearms to a limited extent. Decimated by European diseases and by
warfare with the Cherokee and Comanche, the Tonkawa were generally friendly toward the early
settlers of Williamson County, but were nevertheless removed from Central Texas by the 1850s.
Lipan Apaches and Comanches were also associated with the area that would become
Williamson County. Before the arrival of Europeans in the area, the Lipan Apaches ranged
through the western part of present Williamson County, and, after Spanish missions were
established on the San Gabriel River in the 18th century, the Indians frequently raided the
missions for horses. Their enemies, the Comanches, arrived in the area in the 18th century and
lived in parts of the territory of Williamson County until as late as 1838. After they were crowded
out by Anglo settlers, the Comanches continued to raid settlements in the county until the 1860s.
There also appear to have been small numbers of Kiowa, Yojuane, Tawakoni, and Mayeye
Indians living in the county at the time of the earliest Anglo settlements.
While Álvar Núñez Cabeza de Vaca may have traveled through the area in the 16th
century, it was probably first explored by Europeans in the late 17th century, when Capt. Alonso
De León sought a route between San Antonio and the Spanish missions in East Texas that would
serve as a drier alternative to the more southerly Camino Real. The new route passed through
the area of Williamson County along Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel River and was called
Camino de Arriba. In 1716, two explorers in the Spanish service, Louis Juchereau de St. Denis
and Domingo Ramón, led an expedition that passed through the area and camped on Brushy
Creek and the San Gabriel River, naming them respectively Arroyo de las Bendítas Ánimas and
Rio de San Xavier. The San Xavier missions, which were founded in the mid-18th century and
occupied a series of sites along the San Gabriel River, were just across the eastern border of
Williamson County in present-day Milam County, and the area was extensively explored by the
Spanish. During the Mexican period, parts of the county were awarded as land grants, first to
several Mexican families, then as part of Robertson’s colony, but no settlement resulted from
these grants.

1

Much of the following historical summary is adapted from TSHA (2019).

H438-190095

15

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

Anglo settlement began during the Texas Revolution and the early days of the Republic
of Texas, when the area was part of Milam County. In 1835, in an attempt to strengthen the
frontier against Indian attack, a military post was built near the headwaters of Brushy Creek in
what would become southwestern Williamson County and was named for Capt. John J.
Tumlinson, Jr., the commander of the company of Texas Rangers who garrisoned the post. The
post was abandoned in February of 1836, when its garrison was withdrawn to deal with the
Mexican invasion. In 1838, the first civilian settlement was established by Dr. Thomas Kenney
and a party of settlers who built a fort, named Kenney’s Fort, on Brushy Creek near the site of the
present-day crossing of the Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad. Several other sites on Brushy
Creek were settled soon after, but Indian raids kept Anglo settlement in check, and a number of
the early pioneers, including Kenney, were killed by Indians over the next few years.
In 1842, many of the early farms were abandoned when Governor Sam Houston advised
settlers to pull back from the frontier. The Indian threat eased after 1846, and part of the influx of
settlers who came to Texas after its annexation traveled to the frontier along Brushy Creek and
the San Gabriel River. By 1848, there were at least 250 settlers in what was then western Milam
County, and in the early months of that year 107 of them signed a petition to organize a new
county. Recognizing that the petitioners needed a seat of local government that was considerably
closer to them than Milam County, the Texas legislature established Williamson County on 13
March 1848, naming it for prominent judge and soldier Robert M. Williamson. Georgetown, the
county seat, was laid out during the summer of that year, and the district court was in session by
October. According to the census of 1850, Williamson County had a population of 1379 Anglos
and 155 slaves living in agricultural communities on Brushy Creek and the San Gabriel. As was
common in other frontier counties, most of the improved acreage was used to grow corn. Three
families owned 15 or more slaves in 1850, but family farms and subsistence agriculture remained
the norm prior to the Civil War. While most of the settlers had moved to Texas from other southern
states, particularly Tennessee, a substantial contingent came from Vermilion County, Illinois, and
this latter group remained pro-Union and Republican in its political orientation during the
secession crisis.
On the eve of the Civil War, Williamson County had moved beyond the frontier stage and
was a populous, agriculturally diverse county. The Anglo population tripled between 1850 and
1860 to 3,638, while the slave population grew even more dramatically to 891, six times the
number of slaves in 1850. Agricultural pursuits were quite varied and reflected the county’s
geographical diversity. Farmers used the rich blackland soils in the eastern half of the county to
grow wheat and corn. Cotton was introduced in the 1850s, but only 271 bales were grown in
1860, and it was not an important cash crop for most farmers. The early settlers had found large
herds of wild cattle in the 1840s, and cattle ranching for both home consumption and the market
was widespread throughout the county by 1860. The number of cattle on county ranches had
more than tripled from 11,973 head in 1850 to 38,114 head in 1860. Similarly, the number of
sheep grew from 2937 producing 3499 pounds of wool in 1850 to 16,952 sheep and
32,994 pounds of wool in 1860.
Williamson County was marked by political divisions during the secession crisis, divisions
that were carried over into the Civil War and Reconstruction. Unionist sentiment was strong in

16

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

the county, and a resolution denouncing secession was adopted by a Texas Constitutional Union
party meeting in Round Rock in 1860. One of the county’s delegates to the secession convention,
Thomas Proctor Hughes, was among the eight who voted against the ordinance of secession.
When the ordinance was referred to a statewide election, Williamson County was one of
19 counties to oppose it, rejecting secession by 480 to 349 votes. When the war came, most of
the citizens of Williamson County supported the Confederate cause, and at least five companies
were raised in the county: an independent “spy” company under James O. Rice, a company of
Texas Rangers for border defense under William C. Dalrymple, and companies in the Fourth,
Seventh, and Sixteenth Texas Cavalry regiments. While some of those who had opposed
secession became active Confederate supporters, others remained loyal to the Union and fled to
Mexico or the North, and a number enlisted in the Union army. In July 1863, 8 Williamson County
men were caught by Confederate troops while traveling to Mexico and were hanged near
Bandera, Texas, and other Unionists were persecuted during the war. The pattern of violence
within the community continued into the summer following the end of the war, when several men
were arrested for “flagrant crimes” and “illegal persecution of Union men.” In September 1865, a
mass meeting of the citizens of Williamson County was held on the San Gabriel River near
Georgetown, and the gathering set a general tone of reconciliation, which seems to have
characterized the Reconstruction period in Williamson County, a period that ended with the return
of county government to conservative Democratic control in 1869. Freed slaves formed several
new communities, and the county seems to have been free of much of the political and racial
strife that occurred in other Texas counties during Reconstruction. On the other hand, there was
a great deal of crime, much of it violent, in the latter 19th century. Horse and cattle thieves and
some of the more famous outlaws of the day, such as Sam Bass and John Wesley Hardin, preyed
on the property of citizens, and long-term family feuds and drunken brawls at the various saloons
in the towns added to the toll of homicides.
Though the Civil War had caused little material damage in the area, the county was a
much poorer place in 1870 than it had been in 1860. The total value of farms had fallen from
$833,418 to $389,239 and the value of livestock from $823,653 to $341,794. The economic
recovery in the 1870s was aided by the growth of the cattle and sheep industries and a dramatic
expansion of cotton farming. Various feeder routes to the Chisholm Trail passed through
Williamson County, and many cattle drives passed through or originated in the county from the
1860s through the early 1880s. With the coming of the railroads to the county in the 1870s,
Taylor, in the eastern part of the county, became an important rail center for the cattle trade.
Cattle-raising, after declining somewhat in importance in the early 20th century, was again a major
part of the agricultural economy by 1950, and in 1969, ranchers owned a record 65,093 cattle.
Sheep- and goat-raising followed a similar pattern. Sheep ranching recovered its pre-war level
by 1880 and peaked at 39,961 sheep and 171,752 pounds of wool in 1890, then declined in the
late 19th and early 20th centuries to 13,397 sheep and 39,458 pounds in 1920. The industry
revived in the 1930s and reached a new high of 59,919 sheep and 336,494 pounds of wool in
1959. Mohair became a significant agricultural product by 1930 and reached a peak in 1959,
when 44,668 goats produced 209,098 pounds of mohair. Cotton, the second boom industry in
Williamson County, developed at about the same time as the cattle industry. As early as 1869,
the editor of the Georgetown Watchman was advising farmers to “make cotton, but do not, by any

H438-190095

17

Chapter 3.0: Cultural Background

means, neglect the grain crop-diversity.” Cotton production, which had been insignificant before
the war, rose to successive heights of 4217 bales in 1880; 33,945 bales in 1890; and 80,514 bales
in 1900. In 1900 to 1901, Williamson County ginned more cotton than any county in Texas except
Ellis County. The number of improved acres increased almost tenfold from 1870 to 1880 and
doubled again to 306,881 acres by 1890. The proportion of cropland used for cotton production
moved from about 1/3 of the total in 1880 to a high of 77% in 1910, and cotton was grown on 73%
of the cropland as late as 1930. Dramatic changes in land tenure attended the shift to cotton
production. As late as 1880, 1183 of the 1538 farms, or 77%, were still worked by owners. By
1890, only 43% of the farms were operated by owners, and the percentage of owner-operators
remained at 40% until the 1920s, when it dropped still further to 29% in 1930. Farm tenancy rates
began to decline during the Great Depression with the shift away from cotton and other staple
crops and by 1959 had dropped to 36% of the county’s farmers.
Both the cattle and the cotton booms were aided by the improved communications
available in the county in the later 19th century. The International-Great Northern Railroad, which
later was consolidated with the Missouri Pacific, was built across the eastern part of the county in
1876 and led to the founding of Taylor (now Williamson County’s third largest city) and Hutto and
to the relocation of Round Rock. It also opened up large areas in eastern Williamson County to
commercial farming. The Taylor, Bastrop, and Houston Railway, which was eventually
consolidated with the Missouri, Kansas, and Texas Railway, was built in the 1880s and aided in
the development of Taylor, Granger, and Bartlett. Roads were generally poor throughout the
county in the early 20th century. There were 11,882 automobiles in the county by 1930, and
extensive improvements, including blacktopping, of all major roads took place in the 1930s.
The county also became more ethnically diverse in the later 19th and early 20th centuries.
While there were only 111 inhabitants of foreign birth out of a population of 6368 in Williamson
County in 1870, significant numbers of Scandinavians, Germans, Czechs, Wends, and Austrians
moved to the county in the 1880s and 1890s. The proportion of foreign-born in the county
population remained at about 10% from 1890 to the 1930s. Mexican immigration reached a
significant level by about 1910, just as Europeans stopped arriving in the county. There were
294 Hispanics in 1900, 732 in 1910, and 4967, or 11% of the population, in 1930. In 1980,
9693 residents, or again 11%, were of Hispanic origin. The immigrants added their distinctive
customs and architectural styles to the mix of county life and introduced new religious
denominations. By the time of the Civil War, Williamson County had a number of Baptist and
Methodist churches and several different factions of the Presbyterian Church. Churches of other
denominations were built after the war, and the new immigrants established Lutheran, Catholic,
and Czech Moravian congregations. By 1930, Williamson County had a culturally diverse
population of 44,146 inhabitants. The economy was still overwhelmingly agricultural; only
29 manufacturing establishments employed 347 workers that year. While cotton production was
near its peak in terms of percentage of cropland, the cotton industry was already undergoing a
rapid transformation.
The combined effects of soil depletion, overproduction, and the influx of the boll weevil
had already injured the profitability of the industry by the late 1920s, and the situation of cotton
growers was further worsened by the depression. The black population seems to have been

18

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

particularly hard hit by the depression. Of the 944 county families on relief in 1933, 442, almost
half, were black, though blacks constituted only 16% of the population. Various federal relief
programs benefited farmers with farm loans and subsidies, and in 1936, a total of $204,000 in
subsidy checks were issued. The Depression encouraged diversification among farmers and a
shift away from staple crops to livestock. Between 1930 and 1940, the number of acres used for
cotton-growing fell by almost half, and cotton production went from 68,266 to 36,890 bales.
Cropland acreage used for corn production increased over the same period by about half, and
wool and mohair production more than doubled to 342,983 and 102,517 pounds, respectively.
While cotton continued to be an important crop in eastern Williamson County, farmers increasingly
turned to other crops like sorghum and wheat and to livestock-raising in the latter 20th century.
Along with such traditional livestock as sheep and cattle, poultry farming played a significant role
in the economy by 1950, when the county was fifth in the state in the production of eggs and
chickens. In 1980, it was 10th in the state in the production of turkeys.
The agricultural diversification of the middle decades of the 20th century was followed by
significant social and economic changes in the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s. The black population,
which had remained at between 15 and 18% of the total in the early and mid-20th century, began
to decline, both proportionately and in real numbers, from the 1940s on and had fallen to 4111,
or about 5%, by 1980. As in other areas of Texas, blacks were relegated to segregated and
inferior housing and educational facilities until the 1960s, when some improvements were brought
about by federal desegregation policies. Along with changes in racial composition, Williamson
County experienced a dramatic increase in population during this period, growing from 37,305
inhabitants in 1970 to an estimated 85,700 inhabitants in 1982, making it 34th in population growth
among counties in the US in the 1970s.

H438-190095

19

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

4.0 ARCHIVAL RESEARCH

Prior to initiating fieldwork, Horizon personnel reviewed the THC’s online Texas
Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA), the National Park Service’s (NPS) online National Register
Information System (NRIS), and the Texas Department of Transportation’s (TxDOT) Historic
Districts & Properties of Texas and Historic Bridges of Texas online databases for information on
previously recorded archeological sites and previous archeological investigations conducted
within a 1.0-mile radius of the project area. Based on this archival research, eight previously
recorded archeological sites, one cemetery (the Hutto Cemetery), and one historic district listed
on the NRHP (the Hutto Commercial Historic District) are located within a 1.0-mile radius of the
project area (Figure 5; Table 2) (NPS 2019; THC 2019; TxDOT 2019a, 2019b). The Hutto
Cemetery has also been recorded as an archeological site (41WM813) but was not counted as
an archeological site. The eight known archeological sites, cemetery, and historic district are
located well outside of the project area and would not be disturbed as a result of the proposed
undertaking. Only one previous cultural resources survey has been conducted within the project
area. In 2004, aci Consulting performed a linear survey in advance of a drainage ditch that
crosses the northern portion of Creekside Park. On the same project, aci Consulting also
surveyed the area north of Fritz Park, around Hutto Elementary School (THC 2019).
A review of historical aerial photographs dating from 1954 to the present and US
Geological Survey (USGS) topographic maps dating from 1893 to the present indicates that no
historic-age structures have stood within the project area except for a baseball diamond that has
stood at the southeast corner of Fritz Park since the mid-20th century (NETR 2019).

H438-190095

21

Chapter 4.0: Archival Research

Figure 5. Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

22

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

Table 2. Summary of Known Cultural Resources within 1.0 Mile of Project Area

Site No./Name

Site Type

NRHP/SAL
Eligibility
Status

Distance/Direction
from Project Area

Potential to be
Impacted by
Project?

Archeological Sites
41WM457

Aboriginal lithic scatter
(undetermined prehistoric)

Ineligible

<0.1 mile south/north
(located between
Creekside and Fritz
parks)

No

41WM770

Historic-age commercial
building (ca. 1880)

Undetermined

0.4 mile west

No

41WM1032

Historic-age feature
(undetermined, possibly
20th-century)

Ineligible

0.8 mile south

No

41WM1133

Historic-age trash scatter
(late 19th to early 20th
century)

Ineligible

0.5 mile east

No

41WM1223

Aboriginal campsite
(undetermined prehistoric)

Ineligible

0.8 mile northwest

No

41WM1224

Historic-age drainage
feature (20th-century)

Ineligible

0.8 mile northwest

No

41WM1229

Historic-age house site
(early to mid-20th century)

Undetermined

0.9 mile northeast

No

41WM1391

Historic-age farmstead
(mid-20th century)

Undetermined

0.9 mile west

No

Historic Commercial
District (ca. 1875 to 1949)

Listed on NRHP

0.4 mile west

No

Cemetery
(19th century to present)

Historic Texas
Cemetery

0.8 mile southwest

No

Listed Historic Properties
Hutto
Commercial
Historic District

Cemeteries
Hutto Cemetery
(WM-C107)
(41WM813)
Source: THC (2019)

H438-190095

23

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

5.0 SURVEY METHODOLOGY

On May 7, 2019, Horizon archeologists Jahleen Sefton and Rachel Naasz conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The purpose of the survey was to locate
any significant cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the parks and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface
for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The project area runs along the upper stream
terraces of Cottonwood Creek. Both Fritz and Creekside parks are within fields of freshly mowed
grass which produced a ground surface visibility of less than 5%. Fritz Park holds three baseball
diamonds, a basketball court, volleyball courts, and a football field along with a water garden and
several pavilions. The park has several concrete walkways, including a hike-and-bike trail that
runs north to south along Cottonwood Creek through both parks. Creekside Park runs between
Cottonwood Creek and a residential area and has a baseball diamond and soccer field on the
property along with two pavilions. Three man-made drainage ditches dissect Creekside Park,
including two in the northern portion of the park and one at the southern end. The southern end
of Creekside Park was extensively disturbed by a man-made reservoir and small levee as well as
an existing pipeline corridor that that runs from northwest to southeast north of the reservoir and
levee (Figures 6 to 11).
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the Texas State Minimum Archeological Survey
Standards (TSMASS) require a minimum of one shovel test per 2.0 acres for project areas
between 11.0 and 100.0 acres in size. As such, a minimum of 28 shovel tests would be required
within the 55.6-acre project area. Horizon excavated a total of 30 shovel tests during the survey,
thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of this size (Figure 12). Shovel tests generally
measured 30.0 centimeters in diameter and were excavated to a target depth of 1.0 meter below
surface, to the top of pre-Holocene deposits, or to the maximum depth practicable. In practice,
shovel tests were terminated at depths ranging from 10.0 to 50.0 centimeters below surface due
to the presence of dense, gravelly clay sediments. All sediments were screened through 6.35millimeter (mm) hardware cloth. Standard shovel test logs were completed for each shovel test
describing the location, strata, soil texture and color, archeological materials (if present), and any
unusual characteristics of the surrounding landscape. All sediments excavated from shovel tests
were replaced in the shovel test hole upon completion of recording. The Universal Transverse
Mercator (UTM) coordinates of each shovel test were determined using hand-held Garmin
Foretrex or eTrex Global Positioning System (GPS) devices using the North American Datum of
1983 (NAD 83). Shovel testing typically revealed dense, gravelly, dark grayish-brown to black
clay extending from the modern ground surface to the bottom of all excavated shovel tests. It is

H438-190095

25

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 6. Overview of Fritz Park (Facing East)

Figure 7. Football Field and Baseball Diamonds at Fritz Park (Facing Southwest)

26

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

Figure 8. Overview of Cottonwood Creek (Facing North)

Figure 9. Overview of Baseball Diamond at Creekside Park (Facing North)

H438-190095

27

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Figure 10. Overview of Creekside Park (Facing Northwest)

Figure 11. Reservoir and Existing Pipeline Corridor within Creekside Park (Facing West)

28

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

Figure 12. Locations of Shovel Tests Excavated within Project Area

H438-190095

29

Chapter 5.0: Survey Methodology

Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits
were fully penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
Specific shovel test data are summarized in Appendix A.
During the survey, field notes were maintained on terrain, vegetation, soils, landforms,
survey methods, and shovel testing and backhoe trenching results. Digital photographs were
taken, and a photographic log was maintained. Horizon employed a non-collection policy for
cultural resources. Diagnostic artifacts (e.g., projectile points, ceramics, historic materials with
maker’s marks) and non-diagnostic artifacts (e.g., lithic debitage, burned rock, historic glass, and
metal scrap) were to be described, sketched, and/or photo-documented in the field and replaced
in the same location in which they were found. As no cultural materials were observed during the
survey, the collection policy was not brought into play.
The survey methods employed during the survey represented a “reasonable and goodfaith effort” to locate significant archeological sites within the project area as defined in 36 CFR
800.3.

30

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

6.0 RESULTS OF INVESTIGATIONS

On May 7, 2019, Horizon archeologists Jahleen Sefton and Rachel Naasz conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The purpose of the survey was to locate
any significant cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the parks and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface
for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The project area runs along the upper stream
terraces of Cottonwood Creek. Both Fritz and Creekside parks are within fields of freshly mowed
grass which produced a ground surface visibility of less than 5%. Fritz Park holds three baseball
diamonds, a basketball court, volleyball courts, and a football field along with a water garden and
several pavilions. The park has several concrete walkways, including a hike-and-bike trail that
runs north to south along Cottonwood Creek through both parks. Creekside Park runs between
Cottonwood Creek and a residential area and has a baseball diamond and soccer field on the
property along with two pavilions. Three man-made drainage ditches dissect Creekside Park,
including two in the northern portion of the park and one at the southern end. The southern end
of Creekside Park was extensively disturbed by a man-made reservoir and small levee as well as
an existing pipeline corridor that that runs from northwest to southeast north of the reservoir and
levee.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of one shovel test per
2.0 acres for project areas between 11.0 and 100.0 acres in size. As such, a minimum of
28 shovel tests would be required within the combined 55.6-acre project area. Horizon excavated
a total of 30 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of
this size. Shovel testing typically revealed dense, gravely, dark grayish-brown to black clay
extending from the modern ground surface to the bottom of all excavated shovel tests. It is
Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits
were fully penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.
No cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.

H438-190095

31

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

7.0 SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

7.1

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

The archeological investigations documented in this report were undertaken with three
primary management goals in mind:

•

Locate all historic and prehistoric archeological resources that occur within the
designated project area.

•

Evaluate the significance of these resources regarding their potential for designation
as SALs.

•

Formulate recommendations for the treatment of these resources based on their SAL
evaluations.

At the survey level of investigation, the principal research objective is to inventory the
cultural resources within the project area and to make preliminary determinations of whether or
not the resources meet one or more of the pre-defined eligibility criteria set forth in the state and/or
federal codes, as appropriate. Usually, management decisions regarding archeological
properties are a function of the potential importance of the sites in addressing defined research
needs, though historic-age sites may also be evaluated in terms of their association with important
historic events and/or personages. Under the Antiquities Code of Texas, archeological resources
are evaluated according to criteria established to determine the significance of archeological
resources for designation as SALs.
Analyses of the limited data obtained at the survey level are rarely sufficient to contribute
in a meaningful manner to defined research issues. The objective is rather to determine which
archeological sites could be most profitably investigated further in pursuance of regional,
methodological, or theoretical research questions. Therefore, adequate information on site
function, context, and chronological placement from archeological and, if appropriate, historical
perspectives is essential for archeological evaluations. Because research questions vary as a
function of geography and temporal period, determination of the site context and chronological
placement of cultural properties is a particularly important objective during the inventory process.

H438-190095

33

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

7.2

ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR LISTING AS A STATE ANTIQUITIES LANDMARK

The criteria for determining the eligibility of a prehistoric or historic cultural property for
designation as an SAL are presented in Chapter 191, Subchapter D, Section 191.092 of the
Antiquities Code of Texas, which states that SALs include:
Sites, objects, buildings, artifacts, implements, and locations of historical, archeological,
scientific, or educational interest including those pertaining to prehistoric and historical
American Indians or aboriginal campsites, dwellings, and habitation sites, their artifacts
and implements of culture, as well as archeological sites of every character that are located
in, on, or under the surface of any land belonging to the State of Texas or to any county,
city, or political subdivision of the state are state antiquities landmarks and are eligible for
designation.

For the purposes of assessing the eligibility of a historic property for designation as an
SAL, a historic site, structure, or building has historical interest if the site, structure, or building:
1. [W]as the site of an event that has significance in the history of the United States or
the State of Texas;
2. [W]as significantly associated with the life of a famous person;
3. [W]as significantly associated with an event that symbolizes an important principle or
ideal;
4. [R]epresents a distinctive architectural type and has value as an example of a period,
style, or construction technique; or,
5. [I]s important as part of the heritage of a religious organization, ethic group, or local
society.

The Antiquities Code of Texas establishes the THC as the legal custodian of all cultural
resources, historic and prehistoric, within the public domain of the State of Texas. Under Part II
of Title 13 of the Texas Administrative Code (13 TAC 26), the THC may designate a historic
building, structure, cultural landscape, or non-archeological site, object, or district as an SAL if it
meets at least on one of following criteria:
A. [T]he property is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to
the broad patterns of our history, including importance to a particular cultural or ethnic
group;
B. [T]he property is associated with the lives of persons significant in our past;
C. [T]he property embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
construction, represents the work of a master, possesses high artistic values, or
represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack
individual distinction;
D. [T]he property has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in Texas
culture or history.

34

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

Furthermore, the THC may designate an archeological site as an SAL if the site meets
one or more of the following criteria:
1. [T]he site has the potential to contribute to a better understanding of the prehistory
and/or history of Texas by the addition of new and important information;
2. [T]he site’s archeological deposits and the artifacts within the site are preserved and
intact, thereby supporting the research potential or preservation interests of the site;
3. [T]he site possesses unique or rare attributes concerning Texas prehistory and/or
history;
4. [T]he study of the site offers the opportunity to test theories and methods of
preservation, thereby contributing to new scientific knowledge; or,
5. [T]he high likelihood that vandalism and relic collecting has occurred or could occur,
and official landmark designation is needed to ensure maximum legal protection, or
alternatively further investigations are needed to mitigate the effects of vandalism and
relic collecting when the site cannot be protected.

7.3

SUMMARY OF INVENTORY RESULTS

On May 7, 2019, Horizon archeologists Jahleen Sefton and Rachel Naasz conducted an
intensive cultural resources survey of the project area. The purpose of the survey was to locate
any significant cultural resources that potentially would be impacted by the proposed undertaking.
Horizon’s archeologists traversed the parks and thoroughly inspected the modern ground surface
for aboriginal and historic-age cultural resources. The project area runs along the upper stream
terraces of Cottonwood Creek. Both Fritz and Creekside parks are within fields of freshly mowed
grass which produced a ground surface visibility of less than 5%. Fritz Park holds three baseball
diamonds, a basketball court, volleyball courts, and a football field along with a water garden and
several pavilions. The park has several concrete walkways, including a hike-and-bike trail that
runs north to south along Cottonwood Creek through both parks. Creekside Park runs between
Cottonwood Creek and a residential area and has a baseball diamond and soccer field on the
property along with two pavilions. Three man-made drainage ditches dissect Creekside Park,
including two in the northern portion of the park and one at the southern end. The southern end
of Creekside Park was extensively disturbed by a man-made reservoir and small levee as well as
an existing pipeline corridor that that runs from northwest to southeast north of the reservoir and
levee.
In addition to pedestrian walkover, the TSMASS require a minimum of one shovel test per
2.0 acres for project areas between 11.0 and 100.0 acres in size. As such, a minimum of
28 shovel tests would be required within the combined 55.6-acre project area. Horizon excavated
a total of 30 shovel tests during the survey, thereby exceeding the TSMASS for a project area of
this size. Shovel testing typically revealed dense, gravely, dark grayish-brown to black clay
extending from the modern ground surface to the bottom of all excavated shovel tests. It is
Horizon’s opinion that sediments with the potential to contain subsurface archeological deposits
were fully penetrated and that the project area was adequately assessed for cultural resources.

H438-190095

35

Chapter 7.0: Summary and Recommendations

No cultural resources of historic or prehistoric age were observed on the modern ground
surface or within any of the shovel tests excavated within the project area during the survey.

7.4

MANAGEMENT RECOMMENDATIONS

Based on the results of the survey-level investigations documented in this report, no
potentially significant cultural resources would be affected by the proposed undertaking. In
accordance with 36 CFR 800.4, Horizon has made a reasonable and good-faith effort to identify
historic properties within the project area. No cultural resources were identified within the project
area that meet the criteria for designation as SALs according to 13 TAC 26. Horizon recommends
a finding of “no historic properties affected,” and no further archeological work is recommended
in connection with the proposed undertaking. However, human burials, both prehistoric and
historic, are protected under the Texas Health and Safety Code. In the event that any human
remains or burial objects are inadvertently discovered at any point during construction, use, or
ongoing maintenance in the project area, even in previously surveyed areas, all work should
cease immediately in the vicinity of the inadvertent discovery, and the THC should be notified
immediately.

36

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

8.0 REFERENCES CITED

Adovasio, J.M., J. Donahue, and R. Stuckenrath
1990
The Meadowcroft Rockshelter Chronology 1975-1990. American Antiquity 55:348354.
Barnes, V.E.
1974
Geologic Atlas of Texas—Austin Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Blair, W. F.
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93-117.
Bomar, G.W.
1983
Texas Weather. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Bryant, V. M., Jr., and R.G. Holloway
1985
A Late-Quaternary Paleoenvironmental Record of Texas: An Overview of the Pollen
Evidence. In Pollen Records of Late-Quaternary North American Sediments, edited
by V.M. Bryant, Jr., and R.G. Holloway, pp. 39-70. American Association of
Stratigraphic Palynologists Foundation, Dallas, Texas.
Carr, J.T.
1967
Climate and Physiography of Texas. Texas Water Development Board, Report No. 53,
Austin.
Collins, M.B.
1995
Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:361-400.
Dice, L.R.
1943
The Biotic Provinces of North America. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.
Dillehay, T.D.
1989
Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—Paleoenvironment and Site
Context, Vol. 1. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
1997

Monte Verde: A Late Pleistocene Settlement in Chile—The Archaeological Context,
Vol. 2. Smithsonian Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

H438-190095

37

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

Dincauze, D.F.
1984
An Archaeo-Logical Evaluation of the Case for Pre-Clovis Occupations. Advances in
World Archaeology 3:275-323. Academic Press, New York.
Haynes, C.V., Jr., D.J. Donahue, A.J. T. Hull, and T.H. Zabel
1984
Application of Accelerator Dating to Fluted Point Paleoindian Sites. Archaeology of
Eastern North America 12:184-191.
Jurney, D.H., F. Winchell, and R.W. Moir
1989
Cultural Resources Overview of the National Grasslands in North Texas: Studies in
Predictive Archaeological Modeling for the Caddo and LBJ Grasslands. Archaeology
Research Program, Institute for the Study of Earth and Man, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas. Submitted to the US Forest Service, Lufkin, Texas.
Kelly, R.L., and L.C. Todd
1988
Coming into the Country: Early Paleo-Indian Hunting and Mobility. American Antiquity
53:231-244.
Larkin, T.J., and G.W. Bomar
1983
Climatic Atlas of Texas. Publication LP-192. Texas Department of Water Resources,
Austin.
Lynch, T.F.
1990
Glacial-Age Man in South America?: A Critical Review. American Antiquity 55(1):1236.
Meltzer, D.J.
1989
Why Don’t We Know When the First People Came to America? American Antiquity
54(3):471-490.
Meltzer, D.J., D.K. Grayson, G. Ardila, A.W. Barker, D.F. Dincauze, C.V. Haynes, F. Mena, L.
Nuñez, and D.J. Stanford
1997
On the Pleistocene Antiquity of Monte Verde, Southern Chile. American Antiquity
62(4):659-663.
National Environmental Title Research (NETR)
2019
Historic Aerials. <http://www.historicaerials.com>. Accessed March 30, 2019.
National Park Service (NPS)
2019
National Register of Historic Places online database. <http://nrhp.focus.nps.gov>.
Accessed May 8, 2019.
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2019
Web Soil Survey, <http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx>.
Accessed May 8, 2019. US Department of Agriculture.
Patterson, L.W.
1980
The Owen Site, 41HR315: A Long Occupation Sequence in Harris County, Texas.
Houston Archeological Society, Report No. 3.

38

190095_arch_survey_report

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:239-264.

Open Street Map (OSM)
2019
OpenStreetMap. < http://www.openstreetmap .org>. Available under the Open
Database License: <www.opendatacommons.org/licenses/odbl>. Accessed May 8,
2019.
Prewitt, E.
1981
Cultural Chronology in Central Texas. In Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:65-90.
1985

From Circleville to Toyah: Comments on Central Texas Chronology. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 53:201-238.

Ricklis, R.A.
1994
Toyah Components: Evidence for Occupation in the Project Area During the Latter
Part of the Late Prehistoric Period. In Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in
the Middle Onion Creek Valley, Hays County, Texas, by R.A. Ricklis and M.B. Collins,
pp. 207-316. Studies in Archeology, No. 19. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT)
2019a Historic Bridges of Texas. <https://www.arcgis.com/home/webmap/viewer.html?
webmap=e55a0c5725644e5badef578db02bee9f&extent=-109.4371,25.5608,86.8053,37.2641>. Accessed May 8, 2019.
2019b

Historic Districts & Properties of Texas. <http://maps.dot.state.tx.us/AGO_Template/
TxDOT_BasicViewer/?appid=c8fc0a742ec44e0e9da4b009c21eb70c>.
Accessed
March 30, 2019.

Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2019
Texas Archeological Sites Atlas Restricted Database.
state.tx.us/>. Accessed May 8, 2019.

<http://www.nueces.thc.

Texas State Historical Association (TSHA)
2019
Williamson County. The Handbook of Texas Online: A Digital Gateway to Texas
History.
<http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/hcw11>.
Accessed
May 8, 2019.
Thornwaite, C.W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
38:55-94.

Geographical Review

US Department of Agriculture (USDA)
2016
Digital orthophoto, Williamson County, Texas. National Agriculture Imagery Program,
Farm Service Agency, Aerial Photography Field Office.

H438-190095

39

Chapter 8.0: References Cited

US Geological Survey (USGS)
1997
7.5-minute series topographic maps, Hutto, Texas, quadrangle.
Wheat, J.B.
1953
The Addicks Dam Site. Bulletin 154:143-252. Bureau of American Ethnology, US
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

40

190095_arch_survey_report

APPENDIX A:

Shovel Test Data

Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of the
City of Hutto’s Creekside and Fritz Parks, Hutto, Williamson County, Texas

Table A-1. Shovel Test Summary Data

UTM Coordinates1
ST No.

Easting

Northing

Depth
(cmbs)

ES01

639642

3380437

0-15

Very dark gray to black gravelly
loam

No

15-30+

Dark grayish-brown mottled with
dense orange clay

No

Soils

Artifacts

ES02

639734

3380460

0-30+

Very dark gray to black gravelly clay
with heavy caliche

No

ES03

639802

3380477

0-30+

Very dark gray gravelly clay with
heavy caliche

No

ES04

639899

3386509

0-50+

Very dark gray gravelly clay with
caliche

No

ES05

639998

3380415

0-50+

Very dark gray gravelly clay with
caliche

No

ES06

639996

3380219

0-40+

Very dark gray to black clay mixed
with brown sand

No

40-50+

Very dark gray brown clay with
caliche

No

0-10

Very dark gray clay mixed with
reddish-brown sand

No

10-30

Very dark gray clay

No

30-50+

Dark gray brown clay

No

Very dark gray clay

No

Dark gray brown clay

No

Very dark gray to black clay mixed
with white chalky clay

No

ES07

ES08

639992

640013

3380105

3380041

0-25
25-50+

ES09

640090

3379434

0-30
30-50+

Very dark gray to black gravelly clay
with caliche

ES10

640109

3379268

0-50+

Very dark gray gravelly clay

No

ES11

640115

3379042

0-40+

Dense very dark gray gravelly clay

No

ES12

640101

3378861

0-30

Dark gray mixed with light
yellowish-brown sand

No

30-50+
ES13

RN01

640243

639733

H438-190095

3378696

3380380

Very dark gray clay

0-10

Dark gray clay

10-20

Light yellowish-brown to white
caliche/limestone fill

20-40+

Very dark gray clay

0-15+

Dense dark brown gravelly clay

No

No

A-1

Appendix A: Shovel Test Data

RN02

639824

3380414

0-30+

Very dense dark grayish-brown
gravelly clay

No

RN03

639918

3380414

0-30+

Very dense dark grayish-brown
gravelly clay

No

RN04

639977

3380622

0-5

Dark brown sandy clay loam

No

5-15+

Dense dark gray sticky clay

RN05

640099

3380623

0-30+

Dark grayish-brown clay mottled
with dense orange clay

No

RN06

640022

3380535

0-25+

Dark grayish-brown clay mottled
with dense orange clay

No

RN07

640012

3380367

0-45+

Dense dark brown sticky clay

No

RN08

639930

3380332

0-30+

Dense dark brown sticky clay

No

RN09

639924

3380231

0-5

Dense dark brown gravelly clay

No

RN10

639922

3380111

5-10+

Caliche

0-30

Dense dark brown gravelly clay

30-35+

Caliche

RN11

639902

3379996

0-30+

Dense dark brown gravelly clay

No

RN12

640044

3379517

0-25

Dense pale gray sticky gravelly clay

No

25-30+

Caliche

RN13

640155

3379348

0-30+

Dense gray sticky clay with few
gravels

No

RN14

640115

3379152

0-30+

Dense gray sticky clay with few
gravels

No

RN15

640093

3378963

0-30+

Dense gray sticky clay with few
gravels

No

RN16

640187

3378787

0-35+

Dense pale grayish brown stick clay

No

RN17

640261

3378600

0-35+

Compact dark brown clay

No

1

All UTM coordinates are located in Zone 14 and utilize the North American Datum of 1983 (NAD 83).
CaCO3 = Calcium carbonate
cmbs = Centimeters below surface
ST = Shovel test
UTM = Universal Transverse Mercator

A-2

No

190095_arch_survey_report

