A Cultural Resource Inventory
And Assessment At

Camp Swift, Texas

DUFORD W. SKELTON
MARTHA DOTY FREEMAN

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY RESEARCH REPORT NO. 72
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

A CULTURAL RESOURCE INVENTORY AND ASSESSMENT
AT CAMP SWIFT, TEXAS

Part I.

Prehistoric Resources

Duford W. Skelton

Part II. Historic Resources
Martha Doty Freeman

RESEARCH REPORT NO. 72
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
1979

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR
David S. Dibble

EDITOR
Solveig A. Turpin

Submitted to the Lower Colorado River Authority in
partial fulfillment of the terms of the letter of
agreement dated February S, 1979 by the Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at Austin

1979

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Part I.

Prehistoric Resources

Abstract . . .

3

Introduction

3

Location and Setting

5

Archeological Background .

18

Prehistoric Sites

25

Summary

52

Assessments and Recommendations

53

References Cited

56

Acknowledgements

60

Appendix I: Site Descriptions

61

Part II. Historic Resources
Abstract . . .

81

Introduction .

83

Early Travel Through Bastrop County 1691-1821

85

1821-1860: Austin's Little Colony and Other
Early Settlement . .
. . . . . . . . .

87

Settlement in the Camp Swift Area After 1860 .

92

The Creation of Camp Swift .

101

Summary and Recommendations

102

Bibliography . .

118

Acknowledgements

123

iii

List of Figures
Figure 1 .

v

Project Location Map

Figure 2a. View of Valley Margins .
2b. View of Mclaughlin Creek

. .

11

Figure 3a. View of Valley Terrace . . . . . .
3b. View of Aboriginal Hearth in Active
Floodplain
Figure 4.

15

27

Prehistoric Site Location Map

Figure 5a. Test Excavations at 41BP113
5b. Test Excavations at 41BP113

. . . .

41

Figure 6a. Test Excavations at 41BP120
6b. Test Excavations at 41BP121

. . . . . .

49

. . . . . .

91

Figure 7.

Historic Site Location Map

List of Tables
Table 1.

Plant Communities in the Study Area

Table 2 .

Prehistoric Site Attributes

Table 3 .

Artifact Provenience

Table 4.

Prehistoric Sites Recommended for
. . . . . .
Further Work

Table 5.

Historic Sites

.

. . .

. . .

30
37

. . .

iv

17

55
105

Figure

PROJECT LOCATION :
Camp Swift, Texas
\ ...........

1979
...

~

\

\

:··"'-··..r-'·· 1
~

...

'·

... r--

-..J. :

\.

I

_..

)'

N
MN

:

\

.'\

\
\

~

.,

·'"'-···-.......

a

(

.

/

,

(
..·

-···_,..../

../"'""'''

f7J
Lill

/

/

Mining Area
Buffer

Zone

........... Military Reservation Boundary
0

2

3

MILES

KILOMETERS

0

2

3

4

COLORADO
RIVER

Texas Archeological Survey/L.A.M. 1980

This page intentionally left blank.

PART I.

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Duford W. Skelton

This page intentionally left blank.

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES
ABSTRACT
This report details the results of an intensive
archeotogicat survey conducted by the Texas Araheotogiaat
Survey, the University of Texas at Austin, of an area of
approximately 4,000 acres on the Camp Swift Military
Reservation, Bastrop County, Texas.
Sponsored by the
Lower Colorado River Authority, the survey was designed
to determine the nature, extent and potential significance
of cultural resources which may be affected by proposed
development of this area for surface lignite mining. The
survey, consisting of surface inspections and limited subsurface testing, resulted in the definition of 42 prehistoric sites. As a group these localities are smatt
and poorly preserved as a result of active natural prod~sses
and prior ·land use. Alt observed cultural materials are
tithic; limited variability in toot types is characteristic
of the assemblages. Age determination of the deposits was
hampered by the rare occurrence of time-sensitive artifact
forms.
Most of the study area fatts within the tigniteproducing limits of the prospect and therefore is subject
to surface mining. The assumption is thus made that sites
occurring therein would be totatty destroyed by the proposed
action. Sites situated in an adjoining buffer zone may or
may not be directly endangered by project-related modifications.
Evaluations of the potential importance of the identified
prehistoric resources are offered as are recommendations for
further investigations or actions designed to conserve the
archeotogicat values present.

INTRODUCTION
During the months of January, February, March and June of
1979, the Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas
at Austin, conducted an evaluative survey of the archeological
ar.d historical resources within designated areas of the Camp
Swift Military Reservation, Bastrop County, Texas (Fig. 1)
at the request of the Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA).
The survey included a literature search and an intensive
on-site examination of approximately 4,000 acres to be
affected by a proposed lignite surface mine.
The Camp Swift prospect is one of several lignite areas
with the potential to provide fuel for future and existing
power generation. As part of an environmental assessment
of the proposed lignite mining development, the LCRA
requested an inventory and evaluation of all archeological

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

and historic sites in specified areas of Camp Swift to
determine adverse effects on these resources that could be
anticipated from this mining. Since Camp Swift has not been
included in previous professional investigations, the LCRA
contracted with the Texas Archeological Survey to effect an
intensive archeological survey and present recommendations
concerning any identified resources in compliance with state
and federal laws.
The present study assesses the impact of the proposed
lignite mine on the archeological and historical resources.
When anticipated conflicts with potentially valuable archeological sites are demonstrated, an evalua~ion of the significance of that resource is presented and a discussion of appropriate mitigation is outlined. In addition to surface evaluations, a program of subsurface testing was conducted at
selected sites within the prime mining areas. These minor
subsurface probes are a site evaluative procedure to
assist in making final recommendations. This testing program
does not fulfill mitigative requirements.
The following objectives were outlined at the initiation
of the study:
1) precisely locate and evaluate the present condition
of any archeological, historical or other cultural
resources known to exist or to have existed within the
study area, especially those sites, if any, listed on,
or under consideration for, the National Register of
Historic Places;
2) conduct an intensive archeological survey including
subsurface testing and analysis of recovered cultural
materials to determine the location and present condition
of newly discovered archeological resources;
3) evaluate identified resources in terms of their
scientific or historic value;
4) present recommendations for feasible measures to avoid,
lessen, or minimize adverse effects to any archeological
resources of demonstrable significance; and
5) make recommendations for any additional studies
related to the interpretation of these resources which
may exceed the investigative scope of this study.

4

LOCATION AND SETTING
INTRODUCTION
Bastrop County is in the west Gulf Coast Plain of Southcentral Texas. The county encompasses an area of 885 square
miles bounded on the north by Williamson and Lee counties,
on the west by Travis County, and on the south by Caldwell,
Gonzales and Fayette counties.
The Camp Swift lignite prospect is located in the northern
section of the county on the Camp Swift Military Reservation,
28 miles due east of Austin, Texas and approximately halfway
between the communities of Bastrop and Elgin. The Reservation
is bounded on the northeast by U.S. Highway 290, the west by
State Highway 95, and the southeast by Farm Road 2336. The
approximate center of Camp Swift is in UTM Coordinate Zone
14, 665000E-3348000N. The Reservation includes approximately
11,740 acres; 4,000 of these are contained in the potential
lignite prospect and are the subject of this study.
The general topography within the Camp Swift area is
moderately dissected rolling, hilly uplands and flat lowlands. Slopes are gentle, ranging from about three to
eight percent. The elevational relief is 150 feet, from
400 to 550 feet AMSL.
GEOLOGY
Bastrop County lies in the outcrop belt of the Eocene
formations in the central portion of the west Gulf Coastal
Plain of Texas. Local formations are part of the Wilcox
Group which is divided into three formations, from oldest
to youngest: the Hooper, the Simsboro and the Calvert Bluff.
These formations are expressed as sands and muds that resulted
from major deltaic progradation and marine regression when
locally fluvial or marine conditions dominated. Although the
Wilcox Group includes lignite beds which accumulated as thick,
extensive peat deposits during deltaic progradation (Pattarozzi
1975: 8), the Calvert Bluff Formation contains the commercially
exploitable lignite deposits.
The Calvert Bluff deposits are the only formation that
outcrops within the study area of Camp Swift. The outcrop
belt generally trends north-south, roughly paralleling the
present Gulf Coast. The Calvert Bluff Formation has been
described by Proctor and others (1974) as:
mostly mudstone with various amounts of sandstone,
lignite, ironstone concretions, and in uppermost
part locally glauconitic. Mudstone, massive to thin
bedded with silt and very fine sand laminae, pale brown

5

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

to yellowish brown, weather yellowish brown. Sandstone,
medium to fine-grained, moderately well sorted, crossbedded, lenticular thin beds locally burrowed, light
grey to pale yellowish brown, weathers to various shades
of brown lignite, mostly in lower part of formation,
seams 1 to 20 feet thick, brownish black. Thickness
up to about 1000 feet.
Within the boundaries of Camp Swift, the formation has
weathered to thin, relatively unproductive soils.
The Carrizo Formation of the Claibourne Group uncomformably
overlies the Calvert Bluff, the sands of_which are hydrologically connected to form the Wilcox-Carrizo aquifer, one of
the major aquifers of Texas (Follett 1970). In Bastrop
County the general direction of ground water flow in the
Wilcox-Carrizo aquifer is southeast, towards the Colorado
River. Topographically, the aquifer is a ridge of moderate
relief covered by loose buff or grey sand. It usually
supports hardwood forests and dense understory growth.
The only Tertiary deposits recognized during the field
investigations are shallow, scattered deposits of gravels
on sand hills and along ridges. These gravel deposits
appear to be associated with the 450-foot elevational
contour. They are believed to be a residual of a formerly
widespread Colorado River and are probably relatable to
the "Uvalde Gravel" remnants (see Byrd 1971). The gravel
deposits seen during this study are usually less than 20
cm. thick and composed of quartzite, jasper, and chert
rounded to subangular pebbles.
During the field inspection of Camp Swift observations
were made on the sources of lithic raw materials found at
prehistoric sites. Local outcrops of raw material were
noted and small quantities were collected to establish a
comparative sample. The following s~ctions provide a brief
account of the types of lithic materials that were exploited
for stone tool industries as well as providing raw material
for other maintenance-related activities.
Uvalde Gravels
Surfact inspections at prehistoric sites recorded at Camp
Swift indicate that the Uvalde Gravel deposits are the major
local source of lithic raw material. Composition of the
gravel deposits is variable, although most of the outcrops
contained some quantities of chert, quartz, quartzite,
jasper, limestone, and silicified wood. Granite is noted
occasionally. Individual pebbles and cobbles range in
size from less than 3 cm. to a maximum of about 20 cm. in
diameter. The small~r pebbles are usually well-rounded;
the larger cobbles are subangular and natural fracturing is
common.

6

LOCATION AND SETTING

The chert varieties contained in the gravel deposits are
generally of poor quality. A high percentage of the chert
cobbles have numerous fossil and quartz inclusions as wel1
as fracture planes.
These Uvalde Gravel deposits are noted as occurring in
scattered, thin, isolated patches throughout the survey area
but are appreciably more abundant in the northern sections,
especially along the lower reaches of the interfluvial divide
and upper valley margins of the Big Sandy drainage. All
eleven quarry-type sites recorded during the survey are
located in the northern section of the project area. In the
southern section, near the vicinity of Dogwood Branch and
an unnamed watershed, these gravels are highly localized and
occur only as small clusters, ranging from less than five
meters to approximately 25 meters in areal extent. Often
these isolated patches contain as few as 50 cobbles with a
somewhat greater frequency of the smaller pea-size gravels.
Generally, the gravels exposed at Camp Swift occur in the
clayey soil matrix that mantles the upland knolls of the
interfluvial stream divides. They are perhaps best characterized as lag deposits that overlie the Wilcox Group and the
Carrizo Member of the Claibourne Group. These gravel outcrops
appear to distribute around the 450-foot elevational contour;
they are occasionally noted below this elevation but rarely
above it. Small concentrations of the cobble gravels are
also found in the main channels of the Big Sandy drainage,
usually near the headwater confluences. These stream gravels
are isolated cobble clusters, not gravel bars.
Although these lithic resources are numerous at Camp Swift
and often evidence of quarrying is observed, a greater abundance occurs a few kilometers south of the range near the
community of Bastrop. The deposits noted on Camp Swift are
always thin and highly localized. Furthermore, the chert
varieties are of relatively poor quality, displaying numerous
fossil and quartz inclusions as well as fracture planes.
Although the availability of lithic raw materials presumably
contributed to the attractiveness of the Camp Swift area in
prehistoric times, it is not considered as a major resource.
HYDROLOGY
In Bastrop County, the Wilcox and Carrizo sands are
hydrologically connected, forming the Wilcox-Carrizo aquifer
(Follett 1970), the most important source of ground water in
the county.
The vast majority of Bastrop County is drained by the
Colorado River and its tributaries. The only other drainage
basin in the county is Yegua Creek, a tributary system of the
Brazos River which drains the northeast corner of the county.

7

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Thus, the northern section constitutes an upland divide
between the Brazos and the Colorado rivers. The western
section of this divide, including the northwest section
of Bastrop County, is drained by Wilbarger, Big Sandy and
Piney creek watersheds; all flow in a southerly direction
to the Colorado River. To the east of the divide, north
of Paige, the slope is towards the Brazos River; the areas
south of Paige are drained by Gravelly and Pin Oak creek
systems. The southern section of the county is also an
upland divide formed from a broad outcrop of Norfolk fine
sand parallel to the divide north of the Colorado River.
The western and southwestern sections of the county, between
the divide and the river, are drained in-an easterly direction
by the Walnut Creek watershed. This watershed includes
Cedar and Alum creeks from the north, and Elm, Sandy and
Piney creeks from the south. The extreme southern section
of the county is drained by Borden, Prickley Pear, Grady and
Willow creeks, all of which flow into the Colorado River.
Within the Camp Swift study area, the principal watershed is Big Sandy Creek which flows southward to the Colorado
River. In addition, there are sections of three other
tributary systems of the Big Sandy watershed: McLaughlin
Creek in the north-central area, Dogwood Branch which drains
the south-central portions, and an unnamed stream which flows
through the southeast section.
Big Sandy Creek has formed narrow (<5 meters) steepsided cutbanks, exposing sands, clays, sandstones, and
occasional lignite deposits of the Calvert Bluff Formation.
The more prominent meanders of the stream channel, usually
associated with relatively large floodplains, often extend
over an area of 2,500 square meters. During the present
study, Big Sandy Creek maintained a constant low discharge
flow throughout the study area. Several large pools,
resulting from natural log and brush dams as well as historic
modification, are present on the creek.
The smaller tributary systems are best described as
numerous shallow pools separated by often lengthy stretches
of dry channel.
All of these tributary systems are perennial and
characterized by seasonal variations in stream discharge.
PHYSIOGRAPHIC ZONES
The areas of Camp Swift Military Reservation under study
are contained entirely within the uplands of the Colorado
River. Within this upland environment, four physiographically
discrete zones are defined on the basis of morphological
characteristics: Active Floodplains; Upper Terraces; Valley
Margins; and Upland Divides. These four terrain types

1
8

LOCATION AND SETTING

exhibit distinctive depositional features and related
ecological associations which may have affected prehistoric
subsistence and adaptation in this area. The following
sections provide a brief discussion of the distinctive features
of each of the four zones.
Active Floodplains
The active floodplain includes those areas that border the
present drainage channel (Fig. 2b). These areas are composed
of sediments deposited during the modern regime of the stream
and are occasionally covered by flood water during the periods
of excessive stream discharge. Floodplains investigated in
this study form narrow strips of alluvium parallel to the
low water stream channel. Generally, they are smooth and
flat but may slope gently up towards the terrace and/or the
valley margin. Often there are no floodplains; the stream
channels abut the upper terraces and/or valley margins.
Vegetation in the active floodplain is represented by the
Riparian plant community which is occasionally encroached upon
by species associated with the Post Oak-Red Cedar community.
Upper Terraces
The term upper terrace is reserved for relatively flat
surfaces bounded on one side by low vertical escarpments
(generally less than 10 meters in height) which extend down
to the modern floodplain and, on the other side, by the more
elevated terrain of the valley margins (Fig. 2a, 3b). As
used here, the terrace zone is restricted to the more developed
drainage systems; Big Sandy Creek and its major tributaries,
Mclaughlin Creek, and Dogwood Branch. In areas along the
major streams where alluviation was low, there are no
recognizable terrace developments. Such areas are typified
by wide, gently upward-sloping modern active floodplains
that integrate directly into the valley margins. This zone
does not include the headwater channels which run through the
heavily dissected valley margin and are created by downcutting, not alluviation.
Terrain features associated with the upper terraces include
slopes and rises; only the latter is of importance in the
location of prehistoric settlements. These small, rounded
protruberances or
terrace knolls" are not common in the
study area, but when they do occur, there is a high probability
they will exhibit residues of prehistoric encampment.
Sediments associated with the upper terrace zone are
consistently composed of sandy loams originated by alluviation
and colluviation. These sandy soils vary greatly in depth,
from a few centimeters to more than three meters. Cutbank
exposures of terrace stratigraphy usually indicate that the
sandy loams overlie dense clayey sediments.
11

9

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Figure 2.
a.
A view of the valley margins showing eroded slopes
which result from military training exercises.
The
slope extends down to the right bank of McLaughlin
Creek.
The small knoll in the upper right-hand corner
is 41BP93 seen from 41BP98.

b.
View of McLaughlin Creek taken below site 41BP93
showing stream channel, active floodplain, and upper
terrace remnants.
Note restriction of vegetation to
stream margins.
These situations of lower active
floodplains and abutting upper terraces were preferred
camp sites in prehistory.

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Terrace vegetation in uncultivated areas includes a
mixture of both Riparian and Post Oak-Red Cedar plant
communities associated with the climax Post Oak Savannah.
The vast majority of terraces has been cleared in recent
historic times for pasture and crop land. Vegetation in
these areas is the Old Field and Mesquite-Brushland
communities.
Valley Margins
Valley margins include the areas situated between
lower terrace developments and the higher upland drainage
divides (Fig. 2a). The valley margins are dissected by
numerous headwater streams, which has resulted in gently
rounded slopes with gradients that vary from relatively
flat to a maximum of eight to ten degrees. Elevations
range from 420 to 450 feet AMSL.
The most prominent terrain features of the valley
margins are small knolls. These valley margin knolls
usually occur along the downslope gradients, especially
near drainage confluences. In areas where stream discharge
is insufficient for terrace development, these small
"valley margin knolls" appear as secondary terraces overlooking modern floodplain deposits.
Examination of surface and subsurface sediments in
exposed areas of the valley margins indicates sandy
deposits to an undetermined depth. In areas where deflation
and slopewash, the result of historic clearing, have eroded
the top soils, the dense yellowish-red clay is exposed.
These areas also contain the scattered, thin deposits of
Uvalde Gravels often used as quarries for lithic raw
material in prehistoric times.
Valley margins exhibit two major vegetational patterns,
both a result of historic farming and ranching. MesquiteBrushland plant communities are common throughout the valley
margins, especially along the severely deflated higher areas.
In lower areas, which served as farmlands in historic times,
the vegetation grades into the Old Field plant community.
Post oak and red cedar are present, but highly localized
along tributary streams and other erosional features.
Upland Divides
The upland divide physiographic area is the interfluvial
summit which separates the major tributaries of a common
drainage system, in this case, Big Sandy Creek and its major
tributary, Mclaughlin Creek. Subsurface exposures along
erosional gullies indicate that the sandy sediments lie over
a dense yellowish-red clay that extends to an undetermined
depth. Within the areas under study, the interfluvial summit

12

LOCATION AND SETTING

is characterized by sandy and clayey deposits often covered
by a thin, scattered veneer of cobble-size Uvalde Gravels.
The upland divides are characterized by rounded, occasionally
linear, hills with elevations ranging from 450 to 510 feet
AMSL, resulting in a maximum relief of 60 feet. Slope
gradients are moderate, rarely exceeding 15 degrees.
Terrain features of the upland divides include slopes and
small hills. These small hills, or "upland knolls", are
generally small, rounded protruberances that stand out from
the surrounding land. Cobble-size gravels are consistently
associated with these and may explain their origin. As
previously noted, upland slopes grade moderately, except
along the margins of erosional features such as gullies.
Thin, scattered gravels are common along the upland slopes
and appear to relate to the 450-foot contour line.
The vegetation of the upland divides is almost exclusively
dense woods characteristic of the Post Oak-Red Cedar plant
community.
SOILS
Soils of the Camp Swift area are represented by the
Patilo-Demona-Silstid and Axtell-Tabor associations. These
are generally composed of sands, loams and sandy clays. The
sandy soils of the Patilo-Demona-Silstid association are
formed in clayey and sandy substrata often interbedded with
sandstone. These sands are consistently noted in woodlands
of the valley margins and upland divides, especially along
tributary streams. In cleared areas of the valley slopes,
and adjacent upland divides where soil erosion has accelerated,
these sandy soils are often totally displaced, exposing the
sandy clay substrate.
Loamy soils of the Axtell-Tabor association are noted in
bottomlands along active and fossil floodplains of the more
prominent streams. These soils are commonly related to old
agricultural fields.
CLIMATE
The study area lies in the south central climatic division
which experiences maximum precipitation in May and September
(Carr 1967). It is characterized as dry, subhumid with hot
summers, short mild winters and an annual evapotranspiration
which exceeds annual precipitation. Bastrop County experienced
93.2 cm. average annual rainfall between 1917 and 1966
(Follett 1970). The average temperature for the same period
was 21° C. Growing seasons are generally about 268 days.

13

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Figure 3.
a.
View of valley terrace near the upland drainage
divide.
Note dense vegetation and organic ground
cover.
An aboriginal hearth at 41BP111 is exposed
near the center of the picture along the eroded
section of the terrace slope.

b.
View of aboriginal hearth exposed in active
floodplain at 41BP105.
Stream is at normal flow,
floodplain surface is visible at the top of the
picture.

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

VEGETATION
The Camp Swift study area is situated within a secondary
forest and woodland region, usually referred to as the Post
Oak Savannah. It is recognized by a prevalence of post oak
(Queraus steZZata), blackjack oak (Querous maryZandriaJ and
numerous species of elm (Ulmus spp.J and hickory (Hiokory spp).
The Post Oak Savannah vegetation area (Gould 1962) also
supports an understory growth characterized by a mixture of
prairie grasses associated with the western Plains. Wooded
areas are typically composed of small deciduous trees of the
eastern forest, a dense understory growth, and a thin ground
cover of forbs and grasses. Climax grasses of the Post Oak
Savannah include little bluestem (Sahizaahyrium soopariumJ,
indian grass (Sorghastrum nutans), purple top spile (Trideus
fZavus), switchgrass (Paniaum virgatum), silver bluestem
(Bothrioohloa saooharoides), spikegrass (Chasmanthium Zaxum),
and Texas wintergrass (Stipa ZeuootriohaJ.
During the present study several localized areas were
identified that retain the original character of the Post Oak
Savannah. These areas are usually located in uncleared sections
of interfluvial divides. However, significant vegetational
changes have occurred within the study area, primarily as
a result of clearing by early European settlers. Continuous
land clearing, and subsequent cultivation and grazing, have
caused extensive ecological changes including severe erosion
of land surfaces. The greatest indication of these modifications is the presence of numerous invader species such as
eastern Red cedar (Juniperus virginianaJ, mesquite (Prosopis
gZanduZosaJ, yaupon holly (IZex vomitoria), eastern
prickly pear (Opuntia aompressa), and greenbriar (Smilox sp.J.
In addition to the invader species, there is a general absence
of the climax grasses characteristic of the Post Oak Savannah.
The newly introduced species, especially mesquite and prickly
pear, are now dominant in eroded sections of the valley margins
which are often associated with historic homesteads.
Recently the Tera Corporation (1978) collected data on
floral composition and distribution within the Camp Swift
study area. During their field investigations over 120
plant species representing 46 families were identified.
Data compiled from this study resulted in the recognition
of four vegetational communities: Post Oak-Red Cedar Woodlands,
Mesquite-Brushland, Old Field and Riparian. These four plant
communities are briefly outlines in Table 1.
Examination of rare and endangered plants native to Texas
at the Rare Plant Study Center of the University of Texas at
Austin reveals that one form of the Duckweed family called
little water lentil (Lemna obsoura) is known to occur in
Bastrop County. Although this plant has not yet been identified,
it may be present on Camp Swift. It has been described as very
rare and acutely endangered in Texas (Wermund 1972: 12).
16

1
'

LOCATION AND SETTING

Table 1.

Plant Communities identified in the study area (Compiled from Tera 1978)

Plant Community

Predominant Vegetation

Comments

Post Oak-Red Cedar
Woodlands

Post oaks and red cedar

Mesquite Brushland

Mesquite, red cedar, netleaf
hackberry and winged elm

Old Field

Grasses and weeds

Riparian

Red cedar, black willow, elm,
cottonwood, black hickory,
pecan, post oak, hackberry

May represent the remnants of the climax Post
Oak Savannah; found in upper sections of valley
margins and upland divides on sandy soils
Associated with disturbed areas along the valley
slopes and knolls where accelerated soil erosion
exposes the basal clay
Generally restricted to the flood plain and the
lower section of the valley margins on thick
sand deposits
Restricted to active flood plain with alluvial
deposits

FAUNA
Located near the southwestern edge of the Texas Biotic
Province (Dice 1943), the area represents an ecotonal situation,
marginal to the eastern woodlands of the Austroriparian province
and the grassland prairies to the east. This interdigitation
of forest and grassland associations is considered the major
biogeographical phenomenon of the Texas province. This mixture of woodlands and prairies supports a rich variety of
faunal resources. Historic accounts of identified fauna
include 49 species of mammals, 16 species of lizard, 39
species of snake, five species of urodele and 18 species of
anurans. Species recorded during the current study include
cottontail rabbit (SyZviZagus floridanus), plains pocket
gopher (Geomys bursarius), grey squirrel (Soiurus oaroZinensis), white-tail deer
(OdoooiZeus virginianus), striped
skunk (Mephitis mephitis), raccoon (Procyon Zotor), oppossum
(Di de Zphis virginiana), coyote (Canis Zatraus), n i·n e-ba nded
armadillo (Dasypus novemoinotus), terrestrial and aquatic
varieties of snakes and turtles, and various birds, fish,
toads, lizards and mussels.
Recent information concerning the faunal components of
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems within the Camp Swift
study area has been compiled by Tera Corporation (1978).
During this study all major vegetation communities and
habitats were surveyed, identifications of recognizable
species were made, and limited samples of questionable
fauna were collected for more precise identification. This
study should be consulted for a more thorough description
of the faunal resources available within Camp Swift.
Although faunal remains were not represented in occupational residues obtained from testing campsites, it seems
predictable that the edible species were a major resource
for prehistoric groups occupying the area.

17

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Bastrop County lies in the southeastern section of the
Central Texas archeological region. Characterized by physiographic diversity, this region includes portions of the
central Gulf Coastal Plain, the eastern woodlands, and the
Edwards Plateau. It encompasses the middle stretches of the
Colorado and Brazos rivers and includes the headwaters of
the Nueces and Guadalupe rivers. Although the precise
boundaries of this archeological unit are not rigorously
delineated, it is generally defined as extending west to
Tom Green and Edwards counties, north to- Jones and Kaufmann
counties, south to Wilson and Karnes counties, and east to
the Trinity River.
The prehistory of the Central Texas region is organized
in terms of a developmental sequence which consists of four
general cultural stages: Paleoindian (12,000-8,000 B.P.),
Archaic (8,000-1,250 B.P.), Late Prehistoric (Nee-American)
(1,250-200 B.P.) and Historic (200 B.P.-present) (Prewitt
1976; n.d.). Although there is presently a dearth of
reliable data concerning the prehistoric occupation of
Bastrop County, the following regional synthesis is provided
as a contemporary framework through which additional information, including the present study, may be viewed. It
must be emphasized that the scheme presented here relates
to the current stage of knowledge about the general Central
Texas archeological area and may not conform to cultural
developments within the study area.
PALEOINDIAN PERIOD
The Paleoindian stage represents the earliest welldocumented evidence of aboriginal exploitation in Central
Texas. Evidence for earlier "pre-projectile point" cultures
has been suggested by some (Crook and Harris 1958). However,
this data is sketchy at best and thus far no reliable associations have been produced to clarify matters.
In Central Texas, the Paleoindian stage is known mainly
from the recovery of surface-exposed lanceolate-type projectile points including such types as Clovis, Fotsom,
Scottsbtuff, Ptainview, Meserve, Gotondrina and Angostura.
These fossil index markers have been recovered elsewhere in
Texas in direct association with extinct Pleistocene megafauna (Dibble and Lorrain 1968; Johnson 1974). This association of extinct Pleistocene mega-fauna and lanceolatetype projectile points is one of the salient characteristics
of Paleoindian sites throughout Texas. Investigated sites
in the Central Texas region which have yielded time-diagnostic
artifacts indicative of Paleoindian occupation include:

18

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Levi Rockshelter, located on the Pedernales River
(Alexander 1963); the Loevi Site, located on the San
Gabriel River (Eddy 1973; Prewitt n.d.); and Tombstone
Bluff, also located on the San Gabriel River (Prewitt
1974, n.d.). The an~lyses of faunal remains recovered
from these three sites reveal no evidence for Pleistocene
mega-fauna. This apparent absence has caused some researchers
to redefine the Paleoindian tradition in Central Texas in
light of this situation. Shafer (1977) and Bryant and
Shafer (1977) have suggested there was no "big-game hunting"
subsistence pattern in the early Paleoindian cultural
tradition in Central Texas. They argue that these early
inhabitants practised a hunting and gathering subsistence
which more closely represents an "Archaic" economy.
ARCHAIC PERIOD
The Central Texas Archaic period is estimated to span
at least 8,000 years of prehistory (Weir 1976; Prewitt 1976,
n.d.). Indigenous cultures in this region are generally
grouped into the Edwards Plateau Aspect (Kelley 1947; Suhm,
Krieger and Jelks 1954) of the Texas Archaic Tradition.
These complexes have become a major subject of interest
in several recent studies (e.g., Weir 1976a, 1976b; Prewitt
1974, 1976, n.d.; Bond 1978). These studies have attempted
to synthesize previously unavailable data such as new
projectile point chronologies and radiocarbon assays from
recently excavated archeological sites (Bond 1978; McCormick
n.d.; Prewitt 1974, 1976, n.d.). As a result, a refined
chronological framework has emerged which allows more precise
seriation of cultural traditions and related artifact
residues from Archaic sites in Central Texas. This synthesis of the major classification schemes of previous
investigators (Kelley 1947, 1959; Jelks 1951; Suhm, Krieger
and Jelks 1954; Johnson 1967) and recently published information (Prewitt 1974, 1976, n.d.; Weir l976a, 1976b) resulted
in six sequential phases of cultural development proposed
for the Edwards Plateau Aspect. In chronological order,
these phases include: Circleville (8,000-6,800 B.P.), San
Geronimo (6,800-5,000 B.P.), Clear Fork (5,000-4,000 B.P.),
Round Rock (4,000-2,600 B.P.), San Marcos (2,600-1 ,750
B.P.), and Twin Sisters (l,750-1,250 B.P.). These phase
names generally correlate respectively with Terminal Paleoindian, and Incipient, Early, Middle, Late and Terminal
Archaic.
Most archeologists working in Central Texas agree that
the Archaic stage developed as an adaptation to continuing
environmental changes of the post-Pleistocene period and the
concommitant fluctuations in plant and animal populations.
19

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

With the climatic warming trends during the
Holocene all of the area was occupied by hunters
and gatherers who belong to the period known
archeologically as the Archaic. (Weir 1976a: 11)
Although these ecological changes were initially expressed
on a continent-wide basis, they resulted in the gradual
development of more specialized and highly efficient
cultural adaptations to specific, localized environmental
changes.

I

1

In brief, I view the Central Texas-Archaic as a
regional expression of a continent-wide cultural
pattern that is characterized by strong foraging
and hunting traditions; was adapted to the ecological systems of central Texas; and was conservative in its cultural system. (Weir 1976a: 119)
In Central Texas, this cultural change is marked by the
sudden appearance of barbed and side-notched projectile
points of numerous types; the increased frequency of nonportable tools such as manos and metates used in processing
vegetal resources; and the development of the burned rock
midden as a site type.
LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD
The Late Prehistoric (Neo-American) Period in Central
Texas is known as a period of innovation and change. It
is distinguished from preceding Archaic cultures by the
introduction of the bow and arrow evidenced by the recovery
of small arrow-type projectile points which stratigraphically
overlie the earlier Archaic diagnostics. It also represents
technological innovations such as the manufacture of
ceramics and the development of agriculture, although
these are not as widely recognized in Central Texas as in
other cultural areas of the state.
Late Prehistoric manifestations are common in Central
Texas and have been designated as the Central Texas Aspect
(Suhm 1954). Two subdivisions are recognized within this
Aspect; the Austin and Toyah Foci (Suhm 1954). The earlier
Austin Focus encompasses 600 years from 1250 to 650 B.P.
(Prewitt 1974). It is recognized by the presence of
Scallorn and Granbury arrow-type projectile points.
The
Austin Focus is thought to represent an in situ cultural
development from indigenous late Archaic populations
•

!
20

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

(Stephenson 1970). It has been suggested that the Austin
Focus represents the archeological remains of the historic
Tonkawa Indians of central Texas (Krieger 1946: 165-168)
but archeological evidence has failed to support this
linkage.
The Toyah Focus spans about 500 years between 650 and
150 B.P. (Prewitt 1974). The most salient characteristic
of this cultural focus is the Perdiz and Cliffton type
projectile points. Other distinguishing characteristics
include a sandy paste pottery often referred to as Leon
Plain.
Cultural residues associated wtth the Toyah Focus
were once thought to be the archeological remains of the
Jumano Indians of the early historic period (Kelley 1947:
l 21 ) •

HISTORIC PERIOD
The Historic period commences with the arrival of the
Europeans and their material culture. Indigenous populations are gradually displaced by the expanding land
acquisition of the new settlers.
LOCAL DEVELOPMENTS
No intensive archeological investigations of Bastrop
County have been conducted but the area has been the focus
of several reconnaissance level surveys for close to 50
years. The earliest reference to prehistoric sites in
the county is A. M. Wilson's (1930) survey of the central
section of the Colorado River including portions in Bastrop
and Fayette counties. Wilson documented six prehistoric
sites in Bastrop County but the lack of detailed site
reports and associated artifacts precludes classification
of these sites into a locally developed chronological framework. Wilson did provide the first evidence of the potential
of archeological resources in this region of Texas.
Bastrop County was not further explored until 1935 when
A. T. Jackson returned to investigate a prehistoric site
(41BP40) originally recorded by Wilson. An "Agreement
for Securing and Preserving Indian Relics" was signed by
both Jackson and the local landowner but no further work
at this site has been reported.
In 1953 T. N. Campbell and E. B. Jelks, both affiliated
with The University of Texas Department of Anthropology,
excavated two burials at the Goodwin site (41BP1). The
skeletal remains exposed were recovered in direct association
with Late Prehistoric material cultural remains, including
ceramic sherds and Scallorn type projectile points.

21

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Except for sporadic reconnaissance surveys conducted
by local amateurs, the county was not investigated again
until 1962. In that year The University of Texas
Archeological Society began an archeological survey of
Bastrop County to record and perform minor testing of
archeological sites. The Society recorded burial remains
at the McCormick Site (41BP43) near the community of
McDade. Documentation of the burial site could not be
located but the daily journal indicates that two skeletons
were exposed in association with Late Prehistoric artifacts
(Davis 1964}. Two years later, in 1966~ the Society
documented the Pease Site (41BP51 ), the first possible
Paleoindian site in Bastrop County. That same year the
Society, working with local amateurs, tested 41BP55, a
prehistoric campsite located southeast of Sayersville.
Cultural materials recovered from the occupation indicated
a Late Prehistoric encampment (Hester 1966; Brown 1966).
In 1968 the Society conducted test excavations at three
prehistoric sites: 41BP62, BP63 and BP64. All three
yielded cultural materials associated with Archaic through
Late Prehistoric cultures (Malone 1968).
The Texas Archeological Survey began work in Bastrop
County in 1975. An intensive survey of 160 acres of Camp
Swift to be included in the proposed development of the
Federal Youth Center, located just north of the present
study area, was conducted. Only a single prehistoric site
(41BP68) was recorded; it is an extensive chert scatter
with little or no depth (Fawcett 1975). No time-diagnostics
were found, precluding temporal placement of this site.
Reconnaissance level surveys of limited areas within Bastrop
County were carried out by TAS staff members in 1976 (Dibble
1976) and in 1979 (Dillehay 1979).
In 1979 the Texas Archeological Survey investigated a
reported blade cache near the town of Bastrop. The cache
contained thirteen large bifacial blades and was associated
with a prehistoric campsite (Prewitt and Skelton 1979).
The blades are currently being analyzed by archeologists
of the Texas Historical Commission. Plans to sample the
prehistoric site associated with the blade cache are presently under consideration by the Travis County Archeological
Society.
These brief accounts of prior archeological investigations in Bastrop County represent years of study by both
amateur and professional archeologists. The data presented
is not adequate for the establishment of a local chronology
but valuable information on the types and physical characteristics of sites within the county is provided.

22

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

METHODOLOGY
Prior to field investigations an archival and literature search was conducted to familiarize the investigators
with the existing record and to gain insights into the
potential for cultural resource recognition in the field.
Field inspections were initiated by reconnaissance
·level survey of the Camp Swift prospect. The reconnaissance
was conducted by the project director for the specific
purpose of assessing the general characteristics of the
archeological resources and factors affecting the recognition of cultural deposits. Such factors as visibility,
variability, accessibility, and distribution were explored
in order to develop an explicit set of field techniques
to employ in the intensive survey. Professional relationships between the Camp Swift military personnel and the
Texas Archeological Survey field crew were established at
this time; the cooperation of the military personnel was
of great assistance in the later stages of the survey.
This reconnaisance survey showed that complete coverage of the Camp Swift lignite prospect could best be
achieved by partitioning the study area into separate
units which were individually surveyed using pedestrian
transects augmented by shovel tests and auger probes for
subsurface deposits.
Areas within the lignite prospect were partitioned
into nine survey units, using natural and artificial features such as stream channels, fence lines and road networks.
Each area was intensively inspected by the field archeologists using a combination of evenly spaced "straight-line
transects" and "meandering transects." Straight-line
transects were used primarily in the lower valley margins
and adjacent upper terrace settings where visibility is
greatest. Meandering transects are walked in a snakelike
pattern, and were used in uplands and floodplains, where
surface visibility is minimal, to insure all natural and
artificial exposures of sediments were inspected. Transects
were generally spaced at 50 to 75 meter intervals depending
on ground cover and terrain. Although all of the project
area was intensively covered, efforts were concentrated in
old fields, along eroded stream channels, and in cleared
areas of the uplands.
Shovel testing and soil auger probing were extensively
used and equally successfully. Shovel testing consisted
of excavating small shallow pits approximately 25 ems. in
diameter and from 50 to 75 ems. in depth in areas of low
surface visibility, especially in uplands, on terraces,
and on the floodplain. They were used primarily to aid

23

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

in determining horizontal and vertical extent of cultural
residues at suspected prehistoric sites. Soil auger
probing was employed more frequently to find archeological sites buried by post-occupational deposits and not
recognizable from surface examination. These tests were
about five ems. in diameter and 50 to 75 ems. deep.
Both techniques were employed at the discretion of
the field archeologists, in situations located during the
preliminary reconnaissance where archeological residues
would be expected to occur. Documentation of nine prehistoric sites (41BP93, BP107, BP108, BPlll, BP112, BP113,
BP121, BP124 and BP131) resulted from, or was improved by,
the use of subsurface probes.
THE SITE CONCEPT
The term 11 site" when used herein refers to any location
which exhibits by-products and residues of past human
activity. Criteria for designation of archeological sites
were formed from the preliminary reconnaissance and background studies, which strongly suggested that prehistoric
sites in the vicinity of Camp Swift were surficially characterized by light scatters of chert debitage and firecracked rock. Because sites were defined by the presence
of lithic and/or ceramic debris, those recorded vary from
small, isolated scatters of chipping debris to relatively
large encampments. The only evidence of cultural activity
not recorded as a site was isolated single artifacts found
in areas where subsequent subsurface probes failed to
produce any further residues. Field observations included
sites of both prehistoric and historic age. The latter
were reported to the project historian for evaluation.
SITE DOCUMENTATION
Sites located during the survey were documented on
standard University of Texas site survey forms. Generally,
these were descriptive accounts of surficial and subsurficial exposures of all cultural residues, recognized or
suspected associations between residues, and the type,
size, frequency, spatial distribution. and character of all
visibile features and residues. Sketch maps were drawn of
all sites and a photographic record of the local environs
was maintained. Site locations were plotted on l :1000
aerial photos and on U.S.G.S. 7.5' topographic quadrangles.
The horizontal and vertical extent of each site was estimated from visible residues and subsurface probes.

24

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

Additional data recorded include physiographic
setting, associated hydrological features, type of site,
vegetation, soils, slope and other environmental considerations. Presently active erosional, depositional and
bioturbational processes were recorded for assessment
of site integrity and recognition factors. Recorded sites
were assigned temporary field numbers until completion
of the survey when permanent trinomial site designators
were issued by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin. The trinomial system
employs a numerical prefix for the state (Texas=4l} in
alphabetical order excluding Alaska and Hawaii, followed
by two letters to indicate the county (BP=Bastrop County),
and a numerical suffix to indicate the site (95=95th site
recorded in the county).
Material culture remnants collected from prehistoric
sites during the field investigations were usually limited
to unique items. Most of the artifacts were formed from
silicious wood, a characteristic previously unnoted in
background studies. Therefore, a few specimens were collected for further study. No materials were removed from
most of the prehistoric sites located during the survey.
Those specimens removed from the sites were bagged,
labeled with provenience data, and deposited at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at Balcones
Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
PREHISTORIC SITES
The intensive survey concentrated on locating and
recording all archeological sites regardless of size,
type or amount of cultural remains. Site recognition
was affected by such factors as post-occupational deposition, dense vegetation and land modification. Although
the study was limited to surface inspections and minor
subsurface testing, certain general observations of the
nature of the identified resources are possible. These
observations are tentative, subject to support, contraction or revision by future investigations.
A total of 42 prehistoric sites was identified during
the field investigations (Fig. 4). Many of these sites
were patterned in their composition, location and relationship to the physical environment. The following sections
will focus on these aspects. A summary review of this
data is presented in Table 2. Additional description of
the prehistoric sites is presented in the sections 11 Tested
Sites" and in Appendix I.

25

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Figure 4.

Prehistoric Site Locations

FIGURE 4

PREHISTORIC SITE LOCATIONS
Camp Swift, Texas: 1979

N

//'

MN

///
/

. /
{ ~·~
.
)
)

'

'f7V

... /

•'

/

/~

•124 /

. - "'L
'\
/
...

•;

·~ /

\/

.· /

~~,/
I

103

Prehistoric

Site

All site numbers are preceded by

41 BP.

'•

r• : ;
)

•

Mining Area

----- Buffer

~

~,

Texas Archeological Survey/L.A.M. 1980

Boundary

Zone
~

..

l(ILOMETffl

Boundary

-·

PREHISTORIC

RESO~RCES

SITE TYPE
Identified sites are assigned to four general classificatory units based on recurrent patterns of surfaceexposed residues: Cobble Procurement Camps, Chipped Stone
Scatters, Chipped Stone/Burned Rock Scatters, and Buried
Hearths.
Cobble Procurement Camps
Eleven cobble procurement camps, 26% of the total
number of recorded prehistoric sites, were found during
the survey. Surficially visible remains include cores,
flakes and other chert debitage; hammerstones; and moderate frequencies of unmodified cobble gravels of chert
varieties, quartzite, limestone, jasper and silicious
wood. Fire-fractured stone is occasionally noted. Ten
of these sites are situated in valley margins; one was
located on an upland divide. These sites appear to cluster
around the 450-foot elevational contour conforming with
the previously described distribution of gravel deposits.
Chipped Stone Scatters
Four sites were recorded which exhibited chert flakes,
cores and other chert debitage. No cobble outcrops were
noted in the immediate vicinity of these sites. Burned
rock is notably absent. Two sites were located on upper
terraces, one in the valley margins and one on an upland
divide.
Chipped Stone/Burned Rock Scatters
Twenty-five chipped stone/burned rock scatters, 59%
of the site inventory, were identified. Archeologically,
they are represented by light to moderate quantities of
chert debitage, chipped stone tools, and fire-cracked rocks.
Presumably these sites were intermittently occupied foraging or hunting camps. Locations includ·e 13 on the valley
margins, ten on upper terraces, and two on upland divides.
Buried Hearths
Two prehistoric sites were located which were evidenced
by hearths exposed in cutbanks within the active floodplain
(Fig. 3b). These sites would be considered as chipped
stone/burned rock scatters if additional site area was
exposed.

28

PREHISTORIC SITES

SITE SITUATIONS
Identified prehistoric sites are located on eight
different terrains: active floodplains, upper terraces,
terrace knolls, valley slopes, valley knolls, valley
terraces, upland drainage divides, and upland divide
slopes. The majority were found along the valley margins.
Twelve were on valley slopes, four on valley knolls and
eight on valley terraces accounting for 57% of the total
sites recorded. Valley slope sites are usually located
near tributary confluences overlooking dissected terraces.
The dominant vegetation is Mesquite Brushland. Soils are
eroded sands with sandy clay substrata lying just below
the surface sediments. Site types represented are one
chipped stone scatter, five chipped stone/burned rock
scatters and six cobble procurement sites.
Valley knolls are similar to slopes. The four sites
located on this terrain are one cobble procurement site
and three chipped stone/burned rock scatters.
Valley terraces are dissected surfaces situated along
upland tributaries. The dominant vegetation is of the
Post Oak/Red Cedar community. Soils are sandy. Five
chipped stone/burned rock scatters and three cobble procurement sites were located on valley terraces.
Twelve prehistoric sites (28% of the total) were
located on upper terraces along the major drainways.
Three of these sites are situated on small knolls which
generally rise some two to three meters above the surrounding
terrain. Grasses and forbs of the Old Field plant community dominate. Soils are sandy and sandy loam. Upper
terraces displaying evidence of prehistoric occupation
always overlook lower, active floodplains. These active
floodplains are usually long, 50 to 75 meters wide and
are formed on the outward side of stream meanders. This
topographic setting was the most consistent feature of
site location noted during the survey, suggesting that
these areas were choice campsites. This association was
evident along all major streams as well as the upland tributaries. Upper terrace site types were ten chipped stone/
burned rock (three of these on knolls) and two chipped
stone scatters.
Four prehistoric sites, including one chipped stone,
two chipped stone/burned rock and one cobble procurement
site, lie in upland divides. Three are situated near the
crest of prominent ridge lines; one lies just below the
ridge on an eroded slope. Dominant vegetation is the Post
Oak/Red Cedar community. Soils are sands and sandy clay.

29

Table 2.
Site No.

Summarx: of Prehistoric Site Attributes
Location

Coordinates
UTM Zone 14

Physiographic
Plant
Zone
Slope Community Soils

Dist. to
Drainage

Drainage

41BP90

Buffer Zone

662350E 465- Valley Slope
3347400N 475

w

41BP91

Buffer Zone

663050E 450- Valley Knoll
3349950N 460

S,SW Post Oak- Sands,
5-10 Red Cedar Sandy
Clay

41BP92

Buffer Zone

662600E 450- Valley Slope
3349050N 460

s

Mequite5-10 Brushland

41 BP93

Outside Study
Area

662950E 420- Upper Terrace
3350550N 425 Knoll

41 BP94

Buffer Zone

Mesquite5-10 Brushland

Condition

Horiz. Vert.

300 10 Chipped Stone

.60 5

Und.

Eroded
Displaced

150 10 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.75 5

Und.

Eroded
Displaced

Clay
Big Sandy Cr.
Gravels tributary

50 10 Cobble
Procurement

.50 Sur. Archaic Eroded
Displaced

E,W Old Field
0-5

Sandy
Loam

Mclaughlin Cr.

60 7

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.54 50

Und.

Rodent and
Military Disturbance

663250E 430- Upper Terrace
3355330N 435

s.

Old Field

Sandy
Loam

Mclaughlin Cr.

75 7

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.48 75

Und.

Rodent Disturbance
Rillwash Erosion

McLaughlin Cr.

75 7

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.2420

Und.

Rodent and
Historic Disturbance

0-5

Eroded Big Sandy Cr.
Sands
tributary

Extent

Site Type

Horiz. Vert.

Mclaughlin Cr.

---

41BP95

Buffer Zone

663500E 430- Upper Terrace
3350375N 435

SE
0-5

Old Field

Sandy
Loam

41BP96

Mining Zone

664100E 450- Valley Slope
3350625N 460

s

Old Field

Sandy Mclaughlin Cr.
Clay
Gravels

300 12 Cobble
Procurement

.25 Sur. Und.

Eroded
Displaced

.32 Sur. Und.

Eroded, Displaced
Military Excavation

5-10

41 BP97

Mining Zone

665550E 480- Valley Knoll
3351950N 490

s

Post Oak- Sandy Mclaughlin Cr.
tributary
5-10 Red Cedar Clay
Gravels

200 12 Cobble
Procurement

41 BP98

Outside Study
Area

663225E 465 ·Upland Divide
3350900N

E,W, Post Oak Sandy Big Sandy Cr.
Red Cedar Clay
Gravels
0·10

200 20 Cobble
Procurement

.90 Sur. Und.

Eroded, Displaced
Military Excavations

41BP99

Mining Zone

663800E 430- Valley Slope
3350400N

s

250 10 Cobble
Procurement

.37 Sur. Und.

Eroded
Displaced

664050E 428
3350250N

s

41BP100
41BP101

Mining Zone
Mining Zone

Active
Floodplain

664250E 450- Valley Slope
3350625N 460

s

Old Field

Sandy Mclaughlin Cr.
Clay
Gravels

Riparian

Sandy
Loams

Old Field

Sandy Mclaughlin Cr.
tributary
Clay
Gravels

5·10

0-5

s
5-10

Mclaughlin Cr.

'

1 2 Buried Hearth
200 12 Cobble
Procurement

1m Und.
.05 Sur. Und.

Buried
Eroded
Displaced

41 BP102

Mining Zone

s

663950E 470- Upland Divide
3350850N 480

Post Oak- Sands
Red Cedar Clays

Big Sandy Cr.
tributary

400 15 Chipped Stone

.24 5

0-5

Und.

Severely disturbed
Historic clearing

41BP103

Buffer Zone

663550E 450- Upland Divide
3351185N 455

N
0-5

Post Oak- Sands
Red Cedar Clays

Big Sandy Cr.
tributary

75 5

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.54 10 Und.

Historic Clearing,
Military Activity, eroded

41BP104

Buffer Zone

663500E 430
3351300N 440

Divide Slope

N,W Post Oak- Sandy
+10 Red Cedar Clays

Big Sandy Cr.

100 9

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.01 Sur. Und.

Eroded
Displaced

41 BP105

Outside Study
Area

663200E 410
3351850N

Active
Floodplain

E
0-5

Sandy
Loams

Big Sandy Cr.

1 1

41BP106

Buffer Zone

663675E 430- Valley Slope
3351700N 435

NW Post Oak Sandy
5-10 Red Cedar Clays

Big Sandy Cr.

75 6

41 BP107

Buffer Zone

663625E 450
3351450N

NW
0-5

Old Field

Sands

Big Sandy Cr.

200 12 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

41BP108

Buffer Zone

664100E 440- Upper Terrace
3352850N 445

s

Old Field

Sands

Upper Terrace

s

Post Oak- Sandy
Red Cedar Clays

41 BP109

Buffer Zone

664350E 440
3352450N

Valley Knoll

Riparian

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

1m. Und.
.06 5

Buried

Archaic Eroded
Displaced

.48 40 Und.

Historic clearing,
Rodent Disturbance

Big Sandy Cr.

40 10 Chipped Stone/ 1.2 40 Und.
Burned Rock

Historic Clearing
Rodent Disturbance

Big Sandy Cr.

50 10 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.25 5

Und.

Eroded
Displaced

0-5
0-5

Buried Hearth

41 BP110

Mining Zone

664675E 480- Valley Slope
3350900N 485

SE
Post Oak- Sandy Mclaughlin Cr.
5-10 Red Cedar Clays
tributary
Gravels

75 10 Cobble
Procurement

.54 Sur. Und.

Eroded
Displaced

41BP111

Mining Zone

665125E 480- Valley Terrace
3351350N 485

s

664600E 450
3350550N

s

41BP112

Mining Zone

Upper Terrace

Post Oak· Sands
Red Cedar

Mclaughlin Cr.
tributary

25 10 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.70 75 Und.

Some rodent
disturbance

Post Oak- Sandy
Red Cedar Loams

Mclaughlin Cr.

10 10 Chipped Stone

.60 50 Und.

0-5

Some rodent
disturbance

0-5

41BP113

Buffer Zone

663550E 455- Upper Terrace
3349725N

SW
0-5

Post Oak- Sands
Red Cedar

Mclaughlin Cr.
tributary

25 10 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.48 45 Und.

Totally disturbed

41BP114

Buffer Zone

663550E 430- Upper Terrace
3350125N 435

NW
0-5

Old Field

Mclaughlin Cr.

50 10 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.75 45 Und.

Totally disturbed

41 BP115

Outside Study
Area

662700E 430- Valley Terrace
3349600N 435

w

100 12 Cobble
Procurement

2.2 Sur. Archaic Eroded
{?)
Displaced

Sands

Big Sandy Cr.
Post Oak· Clays
5-10 Red Cedar Gravels tributary

Table 2.
Site No.

Summary of Prehistoric Site Attributes
Location

Coordinates
UTM Zone 14

Continued

Physiographic
Plant
Zone
Slope Community Soils

Drainage

Dist. to
Drainage

Site Type

Horiz. Vert.

Extent

Condition

Horiz. Vert.

41BP116

Buffer Zone

662650E 460- Valley Terrace
3349350N 470

w

Post Oak- Clays
Big Sandy Cr.
5-10 Red Cedar Gravels tributary

100 12 Cobble
Procurement

.50 Sur. Und.

41BP117

Buffer Zone

663350E 450- Valley Terrace
3349625N 460

Post Oak- Clays
N
5-10 Red Cedar

Mclaughlin Cr.
tributary

50 10 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.80 5

41 BP118

Mining Zone

663700E 460- Valley Terrace
3349925N 465

s

Sandy
Loams

Mclaughlin Cr.
tributary

30 10 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

Rodent
.24 120 Late
Archaic Disturbance

Old Field

0-5

41 BP119

Mining Zone

665250E 450- Upper Terrace
3350175N 460

N
Mesquite5-10 Brushland

Clays

Mclaughlin Cr.

80 6

41BP120

Mining Zone

665550E 460- Valley Slope
3350400N 470

s

Old Field

Sands
Clays

Mclaughlin Cr.

665300E 460- Valley Slope
3350625N 470

s

Old Field

Sandy

Mclaughlin Cr.

41BP121

Mining Zone

5-10
5-10

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

Eroded
Displaced

Archaic Eroded
Displaced

5 Und.

Eroded
Displaced

100 80 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.80 10 Und.

Eroded
Displaced

200 10 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

Rodent
.96 100 Late
Archaic Disturbance

.48

41BP122

Mining Zone

664950E 440
3350500N

Upper Terrace

SW
0-5

Old Field

Sandy

Mclaughlin Cr.

15 6

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.06 10 Und.

Eroded
Displaced

41BP123

Mining Zone

665200E 460
3350900N

Valley Terrace

NW
0-5

Post Oak- Sands
Red Cedar Clays

Mclaughlin Cr.
tributary

30 10 Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.32 10 Und.

Eroded
Displaced

41BP124

Buffer Zone

663500E 470
3344250N

Valley Slope

E
Mesquite- Clays
5-10 Brush land

Big Sandy Cr.
tributary

50 6

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.01

Und .

Eroded
Displaced

41BP125

Mining Zone

665550E
3349875

SW Post Oak- Clays
Mclaughlin Cr.
5-10 Red Cedar Gravels

70 6

Cobble
Procurement

.32 Sur. Und.

Eroded
Displaced

41BP126

Buffer Zone

666325E 460- Valley Terrace
3350675N 470

E
Post Oak- Clays
Mclaughlin Cr.
5-10 Red Cedar Gravels tributary

50 6

Cobble
Procurement

.25 Sur. Und.

Eroded
Displaced

41BP127

Buffer Zone

664875E 460
3346450N

Upper Terrace

w

Post Oak- Sands
5-10 Red Cedar Cfays

Dogwood Branch 50 6

Chipped Stone

.01 Sur. Und.

Eroded
Displaced

41BP128

Mining Zone

663950E 460
3345950N

Valley Slope

SW Post Oak- Sandy
5-10 Red Cedar Clays

Dogwood Branch 50 6

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.18 5

Und.

Eroded
Displaced

41 BP129

Mining Zone

664400E 455
3346225N

Upper Terrace
Knoll

SW
0-5

Post Oak- Sandy
Red Cedar Clays

Dogwood Branch 25 6

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.24 10 Und.

Eroded
Displaced

41BP130

Buffer Zone

662350E 420- Valley Terrace
3346300N 425

s

Mesquite- Sandy
Brushland Clays

Dogwood Branch 75 6
tributary

Chipped Stone/
Burned Rock

.01

5

Und.

Eroded
Displaced

662500E 420- Valley Knoll
3346150N 425

s

Post Oak- Sands
Red Cedar

Dogwood Branch 60 6

Chippec:l Stone/
Burned Rock

. 12 5

Und .

Eroded
Displaced

41BP131

Mining Zone

450- Valley Slope
460

0-5
0-5

5

PREHISTORIC SITES

Available sources of water are rare in these drainage
divides; an occasional through-flow seep spring was noted
after moderately heavy showers.
Active floodplains contained the fewest identified
prehistoric camps; only two sites were documented there
and both were buried in alluvial deposits. The low
frequency of floodplain sites seems predictable in view
of the frequent innundation of these areas. The two sites
found in this terrain are thought to represent functionally-specific ephemeral campsites.
TESTED SITES
Test excavations (other than minor shovel probes) were
conducted at eight prehistoric sites in order to further
explore the potential of promising locations and to obtain
a sample of the material culture to assist in making
final evaluations. Six of these encampments (41BP100,
BPlll, BP118, BP120, BP121 and BP123) are located in the
prime mining zone and two (41BP113 and BP114) are located
in the buffer zone. Topographic settings of the eight
tested sites include: one (41BP100) active floodplain,
five (41BP111, BP118, BP120, BP121 and BP123) valley margins,
and two (41BP113 and BP114) upper terraces. Seven of the
tested sites are surficially characterized as chipped
stone/burned rock scatters; one is a buried hearth.
4lBPlOO

This buried hearth is exposed in the right cutbank
along the active floodplain of Mclaughlin Creek just over
two kilometers upstream from its confluence with Big Sandy
Creek. The floodplain rises about 2.5 meters above the
stream channel. Outcrops of heavily weathered sandstone
and hematite are exposed at the base of the stream bed.
The stream margins support dense stands of hardwoods and
other vegetation characteristic of the Riparian plant
community. The upper terrace has been partially cleared
of trees leaving post oaks and junipers clustered along
fence lines and erosional gullies.
When the area was initially inspected, two rock hearths
were partially exposed in the cutbanks of the lower terrace.
Both of these features are constructed of locally-obtainable
chert, quartzite and limestone cobbles. All of these
materials evidence heat-fracturing indicative of their
use in hearths.
The overburden above the features was removed and
their depositional context and structural integrity was

33

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

documented. The profiled bluff sections are two meters
in length and extend one meter into the terrace. All
recent colluvial slumpage was removed. Fill was not
screened but was examined for artifacts and other occupational residues.
The first profile was cut to expose the remnants
of a hearth which was partially stabilized by the root
system of a hackberry tree. Two major depositional units
were revealed in the profile:
Zone l (surface-35 cm.) consists of a dark brown
loamy sand, moderately humic, possibly a developing
A horizon. No cultural materials were found in
this zone.
Zone 2 (35 cm.-undetermined depth) consists of
dark brown yellowish brown silty sand with numerous thin (2 cm.) lenses of sterile silt deposits.
This silty sand contains some humus indicative
of old terrace surfaces. Cultural material
recovered from Zone 2 included one hearth remnant
(50 cm. x 15 cm. x 10 cm.) at a depth of 90 to
100 ems. One core fragment and two chert flakes
(one primary and one secondary) were found in
the soil matrix around the feature. Matrix
within the feature was pale brown (10YR6/3)
silty sand.
The second profile was located two meters east of the
initial exposure. The stratigraphic sequence exposed in
this profile is essentially identical to that described
for the first, except that a west-sloping lens of hematite
was encountered 2.5 meters below the terrace surface. More
importantly, this profile indicated that the second hearth,
exposed at l .75 meters below the surface, is contained in
a mottled, disturbed soil matrix shown by the presence of
recent organics in the surrounding sediments.
Recommendations: This site is recommended for subsurface excavation to obtain a sample of occupational
refuse buried in the floodplain.

4ZBPZZZ
This prehistoric campsite is situated on a wedgeshaped terrace remnant that separates two upland tributaries that merge just below the site and drain into the
north side of Mclaughlin Creek approximately 500 meters

34

PREHISTORIC SITES

below the locality. The upper terrace rises some ten
meters above the streams and slopes south towards their
confluence. A large, 25 meter-wide active floodplain
lies below the terrace along the eastern stream channel.
The site is contained within a heavily wooded area with
post oak, juniper, black walnut, hickory and pecan predominant. A dense understory growth of woody shrubs and
vines is also present.
Surface-exposed cultural materials were first noted
along the eastern terrace edge. These residues were
limited to a few small interior flakes of chert and burned
rock fragments.
Initially, a section of the terrace cutbank was
profiled, exposing a small concentration of fire-cracked
rocks at a depth of 25 cm. below the surface. A second
concentration was encountered 10 cm. below the first,
35 cm. below the surface. Both of these features appear
to be remnants of prehistoric hearths constructed of chert,
quartzite, hematite and silicious wood. Five interior
flakes were also exposed; all were in the upper 25 cm.
of the cutbank profile.
A 1 x 1 meter test pit was excavated on the terrace
edge just below the profiled cutbank. Fill was removed
in 25 cm. arbitrary levels through Level 4 where a culturally sterile sandy matrix was exposed. Cultural materials
recovered from this test unit were 39 specimens of chert
debitage and 116 fragments of fire-cracked rock. Naturally occurring materials included hematite and silicious
wood fragments.
Fill Characteristics
Level 1 (0-25 cm.) Sediments exposed consisted of
a loose, brown sand. Many small roots and rootlets
as well as other organic materials were noted. This
level yielded 54% of the recovered cultural materials.
Level 2 (25-50 cm.) Sediments graded from a brown
sand to a loosely compacted yellowish brown silty
sand containing a higher percentage of organics.
Many roots and extensive rodent disturbances were
noted. Twenty-six percent of the recovered materials
were obtained from this level.
Level 3 (50-75 cm.) The silty sand continued to a
depth of 65 cm. at which point the sediments graded
into a light yellowish brown silty sand and containing very little humus. Cultural materials significantly decreased in frequency; only 16.8% of the
total cultural residues came from this level.

35

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Level 4 (75-100 cm.) The silty sand matrix continued to an undetermined depth. However, the
sediments became sterile of cultural material
approximately 85 cm. below the surface.
Cultural Materials
Material culture remnants recovered from the test unit
included one core fragment, 38 chert flakes and 116 fragments of fire-cracked rock (See Table 3).
Core: A single core fragment was recovered from
Level 2. This specimen is a coarse-grained chert
available in lag gravel deposits noted throughout
the study area. Thermal exposure is noted.
Unmodified flakes: Of the 38 flakes recovered,
six are secondary, 26 are interior and six are
fragments. Many display evidence of thermal
alteration.
Thermally fractured stone: One hundred sixteen
pieces of fire-cracked rock, representing 74.8%
of the total assemblage, came from the test unit.
Rock types represented include quartzite, limestone,
hematite and silicious wood. Approximately 5% of
the fire-cracked rock was found in Level 1.
Discussion
The vast majority of cultural residue was recovered
from Level 1 with a decrease in materials until the presumably sterile silty sand was encountered 85 cm. below the
surface. No time-diagnostic artifacts were found, precluding any age estimates. No intact cultural features
were unearthed in the test unit. Two probable hearths were
observed in the cutbank exposures. No faunal remains were
encountered.
These limited excavations are insufficient for final
site evaluation. Although the locality appears to contain
only limited quantities and varieties of occupational residues, with little or no stratigraphic relationship, it still
may be capable of providing needed information on prehistoric
exploitation within the region. The location of the site
within an upland environment and adjacent to an ephemeral
stream, the small areal extent of the occupation, and the
low frequency of associated occupational residues are all
at least suggestive of limited, perhaps specialized activities. The locally dense vegetation has retarded erosion

36

TABLE 3. Artifact Provenience Table
Site No.
Horizontal Unit ( m2)
Vertical Unit (cm)
Debitage:
Flakes
Primary
Secondary
Tertiary
Chips
Cores:
Bidirectional
Multidirectional
Rejects
Residuals
Fragments
Utilized Debitage
Flakes
Blades
Chips
Chipped Stone Tools:
Thin Bifaces
Expanding Stem
Fragments
Hammerstones
Fi re-cracked Rock

BPl11

BP113

BP114

BP118

BP120

1m2

2m2

1m2

2m2

2m2

BP121

BP123
1m2

2m2

0-25 25-50 50-75 75-100 0-25 25-50 0-25 25-50 lo-10 10-20 20-30 30-40 40-50 50-60 60-80. 80-100 100-120 0-25 25-50 50-75 0-25 25-50 50-75 75-100 0-25 25-50 50-75

2
12
4

3
8
2

1
4

2

1
2
12
4

1
7
3

11
3

15
6

6
3

1
1
7
7

2
4
3

5

5

3

3

2

4
1

5
4

1
7
2

1
2

3

20
6

1
19

7
21
6

84
19

3
27
96
22

1
12
41
18

2
3

5
27
9

1
2
17
2

2
11
4

1
2
11
6
2

1
1
2

1

2

1

1
1

1

2

1
2

2

1

1

1

1

83

32

1

1

1
1
66

27

21

2

6

4

10

19

18

7

9

13

13

19

12

1
14

8

30

1
67

6

1
121 45

128

13

27

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

in this area, reducing the degree of reworking exhibited
at other sites in the region. The only disturbances
noted are caused by root action and rodent acti~ity,
and these, apparently, have resulted in only minor
disruption of cultural deposits.
Recommendations: 41BP111 appears to be capable of
yielding significant information on archeological problems
as yet unsolved in the regional prehistory. However,
data collected thus far are not sufficient for precise
site evaluation. Therefore, additional subsurface testing
is recommended in the event that protective maintenance
is not feasible.
4ZBPZZ3

This prehistoric campsite is situated on a sloping
upper terrace along the northern side of a tributary drainage, approximately 600 meters from its confluence with
Mclaughlin Creek. The terrace lies approximately ten
meters above the lower active floodplain and slopes westward towards the stream conjunction. Much of the terrace
has been cleared; various grasses are the dominant vegetation. Wooded areas are restricted to the terrace edge
and lower stream margins.
Cultural materials were first noted in rodent disturbances and along eroded sections of the terrace edge.
Occupational residues observed during surface inspections
were 15 chert flakes and a few small fragments of firefractured stone. No time-diagnostic artifacts were noted.
Several small shovel probes indicated that cultural
materials were contained in a 50 cm. thick deposit of sandy
matrix. Two interior flakes were recovered from the shovel
testing.
A l x 2 meter test pit was excavated near the edge of
the terrace where the site appeared the least disturbed.
Fill was removed in 25 cm. arbitrary levels.
Fill Characteristics
Level l (l-25 cm.) Exposed sediments consisted of
a loose, brown sand containing some organic
materials. The brownish color graded into a
slightly lighter brown near the bottom of this
level. Sixty-one percent of all cultural materials
were recovered from this level. Extensive rodent
disturbance was noted.

38

PREHISTORIC SITES

Level 2 (25-50 cm.) The sandy soils extended to
48 cm. below the surface where a densely compacted
yellowish-red clay was encountered. No eultural
materials were found in the lower clay zone although
some residues were found resting on this contact.
Rodent disturbances continued into the clay.
Cultural Materials
Thirty chert flakes and ten pieces of fire-fractured
stone were recovered from the test unit (Table 3).
Unmodified flakes: The thirty flakes consist of
one primary, three secondary, 19 interior and seven
chips. Some thermal alteration was noted.
Thermally fractured stone: A total of ten fragments of chert and quartzite, six from Level 1 and
four from Level 2, were recovered.
Discussion
Data collected from this test excavation and extensive
shovel probing indicate that only scanty occupational
residues are present and these have been extensively
disrupted by active post-depositional processes (Fig. 5a).
The potential of this site to produce any reliable archeological information is considered limited.
Recommendations: No further work is recommended at
this site.
4lBPll4

This site is situated on the upper terrace southeast
of a confluence of Mclaughlin Creek and one of its northflowing tributaries. The locality lies just over l .5
kilometers upstream from the confluence of Mclaughlin and
Big Sandy creeks and about 400 meters downstream from
41BP113. This section of the terrace has been cleared
of trees and is presently covered by grasses and forbs.
A few small interior flakes and small quantities of
fire-fractured rock were noted in numerous animal burrows
and in erosional rills near the downslope edge of the
terrace.
Shovel testing first suggested that the cultural
materials extended to a minimum depth of 50 cm. One
1 x 1 meter test unit was excavated near the center of
the occupation where several flakes were noted on the

39

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Figure 5.
a.

Test excavations at 4lBPllJ.
Note extensive
animal disturbance which oaaurred overnight
in test unit.
Evidence of gopher activity
was extensive at all tested sites and has
detrimentally affected all sites recorded
at Camp Swift.

b.

Test excavations at 4lBPllJ; upper terrace
site.
Test excavations were terminated at
l20 am. below the surface due to small pit
dimensions.

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

surface. Fill was removed in 25 cm. levels and screened
through quarter-inch mesh.
Fill Characteristics
A loose, yellowish-brown sand unit was exposed to
depths of 45 to 55 cm. below the surface. This homogeneous
sediment was superimposed over a dense, reddish sandy clay
subsoil.
Cultural Materials
Cultural materials recovered from the testing include
11 interior flakes, three chips and ten pieces of fire•
fractured stone from Level l and 15 interior flakes, six
chips and 19 pieces of fire-fractured stone from Level 2.
A high percentage of the residues collected from Level 2
were found lying directly on top of the clay, presumably
as a result of downward movement. All of the flakes are
of locally available chert varieties. Fire-fractured
stone is chert and quartzite.
Discussion
Additional shovel probings subsequent to completion
of test excavating failed to locate any additional cultural
residues. The scanty remains of the site are shallow and
appear to lack potential for yielding significant data.
Recommendations: No additional work is recommended at
41BPll4.
4ZBPZZB

This open campsite is situated on the upper terrace
along the north side of a Mclaughlin Creek tributary about
one kilometer upstream from 41BP113. This section of the
terrace overlooks a long, 50 meter-wide active floodplain
characterized by Riparian vegetation. The upper terrace
rises ten meters above the floodplain. A few post oaks
and red cedars remain along terrace margins but the site
area has been cleared and various grasses and weeds predominate.
Initial evidence of prehistoric encampment consisted
of a flew flakes and small quantities of fire-fractured
stone exposed in rodent disturbances and rill channels
along the edge of the terrace. A closer examination of
the partially eroded terrace bluff revealed a thin biface,
two core fragments, a quartzite hammerstone, and two
pieces of possibly modified silicious wood.

42

J

PREHISTORIC SITES

A 1 x 2 meter test unit was excavated.approximately
ten meters from where cultural materials were noted in
the terrace bluff (Fig. 5b). Fill matrix was first
removed in 10 cm. arbitrary levels. At Level 7 this
was increased to 20 cm. because of time limitations.
Although culturally sterile sediments had not been
reached, the excavations were terminated at a depth of
120 cm. because of extremely loose sediments and small
pit dimensions.
Fill Characteristics
Levels 1 and 2 (0-20 cm.) Sediments exposed in the
upper 20 cm. of the unit consisted of a light gray
noncohesive sand. Very little humus was noted.
Evidence of rodent disturbance was present.
Material culture recovered from the first two
levels include an expanding stem Marshall type
dart point exposed at the bottom of Level 1,
chert debitage and fire-fractured stone. Twentyfive percent of all occupational residues were
recovered from Levels 1 and 2.
Levels 3 and 4 (20-40 cm.) The sandy sediments
exposed in the first levels continued throughout
Levels 3 and 4, grading from the grayish color to
dark brown at approximately 30 cm. The variation
in color results from a significant increase in
organic material. This dark brown sand may be a
buried A horizon. Root and rodent disturbance was
noted throughout. Two probable hearth remnants
were exposed at 28 and 35 cm. below the surface.
One core fragment and one thin biface fragment were
recovered. Small quantities of chert debitage and
fire-fractured stone continued in somewhat uniform
densities. Materials collected from these levels
comprised 19.3% of all recovered.
Levels 5 and 6 (40-60 cm.) The dark brown sandy
sediments continued with only slight color changes.
Organics were still present, root and rodent disturbance noted, and densities of cultural residues
remained the same. Only one stone tool, an edgemodified blade, was recovered. These levels contained 23.7% of the recovered occupational debris.
Level 7 (60-80 cm.) Sediments were the same as
previous levels to 65 cm. where a marked change

43

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

to light yellowish brown sand occurs. Rodent
disturbance was especially noticeable
at the boundary of the two zones where the upper
dark brown sediments have filled rodent holes,
creating a contrast to the lower yellowish brown
sand. Cultural materials decreased in this level
to 11 .9% of the recovered materials.
Level 8 (80-100 cm.) Sediments were identical to
those of the previous level. Moisture content
continued to increase, rodent dist~rbances were
still prevalent. Cultural debris increased slightly
to 13.8% of recovered materials.
Level 9 (100-120 cm.) Sediment characteristics were
similar to the previous level except for a slight
lightening in color. Only 5.4% of all occupational
debris was recovered from this level.
Cultural Materials
Test excavations resulted in the recovery of 202 lithic
specimens, 89 (44%) of which are chipped stone and 113 (56%)
are fire-fractured stone (Table 3).
Chipped Stone
Cores: One residual specimen from Level 7, and two
core fragments of locally available very coarsegrai ned chert from Levels 3 and 8, were recovered.
UnmOdifi~d flakes:
Eighty flakes, 90% of all chipped
stone recovered, are comprised of one primary,
eight secondary, 45 interior and 26 flake fragments.
Two of the flakes were produced from quartzite, the
remaining 78 are of various cherts. A few of these
specimens are thermally modified.

Utilized flakes: Three flakes show utilization or
modification along lateral edges or distal ends.
One came from Level 6 and two from Level 8. All
specimens are chert.
Thin bifaces: Expanding stem - a fragmentary
specimen missing distal tip and one barb. Broad
triangular blade, straight edges, strong shoulders
and barbs, broad expanding stem with slightly
concave edges, short and slightly concave base.

44

PREHISTORIC SITES

Similar to Marshall type dart point described by
Suhm and Jelks (1962: 211). Manufactured from a
fine-grained chert as yet unidentified in the
study area.
·
Thin biface fragment - missing base, form similar
to dart point projectiles. Manufactured from finegrained chert as yet unidentified in the study area.
Hammerstone: One specimen, a golf-ball size, eggshaped cobble of locally available quartzite has
extensive battering evident on one end.
Thermall~

fractured stone: One hundred thirteen
pieces o fire-fractured stone, predominantly chert
with some quartzite and silicious wood, were found.
Discussion
Although there is more depth to the cultural deposits
at 41BP118 than the other tested sites, there appears to
be no correlation between the artifacts and the sediments
exposed in test pit profiles. The cultural deposits seem
to be equally distributed throughout the arbitrary levels.
The low frequencies and limited variation in tool
types may reflect a small, intermittent occupation by a
few individuals perhaps engaged in hunting or foraging.
The recovery of a single time-diagnostic artifact, the
Marshall type dart point, is suggestive of the late Archaic
(ca. 2,500 to 2,250 B.P.J. This, the only diagnostic artifact recovered, is of a chert variety not yet identified
within the study area.
The two small clusters of thermally-fractured stone
in Levels 3 and 4 appear to be hearth remnants. These presumable hearths indicate that the cultural deposits buried
at this site have not been totally disrupted although
considerable rodent disturbance was noted.
Recommendations: This site appears to be sufficiently
intact to allow the recovery of contextual information.
This site should be avoided and preserved, but if protective
maintenance is not feasible, it is recommended that 41BP118
be further excavated.
4lBPl20

This open campsite is situated on the lower valley
margins between two tributaries that empty into the north
side of Mclaughlin Creek just over four kilometers upstream
from its confluence with Big Sandy Creek. The upper
terrace rises ca. three meters above the stream channel
and extends northwards for almost 60 meters to the gently
sloping edge of the lower valley. Except for the terrace
45

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

margins, the area has been cleared of trees leaving
grasses dominant. A narrow strip of Riparian growth
parallels the stream channel.
Cultural materials found during preliminary investigations consisted of flakes and fire-fractured stone noted
in erosional rills and deflated areas of the valley slope.
Several shovel probes failed to locate intact cultural deposits along the lower valley slope. Additional
probings conducted along the lower terrace recovered three
small interior flakes approximately 35 cm. below the
surface.
Two 1 x 1 meter test units were e~cavated. Test Unit
1 was placed near the stream bluff; Test Unit 2 was excavated ten meters north towards the lower valley slope
(Fig. 6a). Levels were excavated in 25 cm. increments;
all fill was screened. Data for both units is combined
for the following description.
Fill Characteristics
Level 1 (0-25 cm.) A loose yellowish-brown sand to
20 cm. below the surface is superimposed over a
dark yellowish-brown sandy loam. Twenty-nine flakes
and 30 fire-fractured rocks were collected from this
level.
Level 2 (25-50 cm.) Sandy loam continues with an
abrupt change to light yellow brown at 45 cm. One
hammerstone fragment, 36 flakes and 67 pieces of
fire-fractured rock came from this level.
Level 3 (50-75 cm.) A dense brownish-yellow clay
was exposed below the sandy loam at 55 cm. Six
fire-fractured stones were the only cultural residues
in this level.
Discussion
The vast majority of cultural material recovered was
lying on, or just above, a dense clay zone indicating these
materials have been totally displaced, presumably as a
result of slopewash which redeposited these residues on
the terrace where they were subsequently buried by colluviation.
Recommendations: No further work is warranted at
this s1te.

46

~

l

i

!

PREHISTORIC SITES

4lBPl2l

This site lies along the lower section of the valley
slope just above the floodplain on the north side of
Mclaughlin Creek which flows 200 meters south of the
area. The valley slopes gently south toward the stream,
leveling off just above an old overflood channel. The
area has been cleared and only a few grasses and forbs
are present.
A moderate number of chert flakes, two small cores,
fire-fractured rock and two pieces of silicious wood that
may have been used as cores, were seen in erosional rills
and the numerous rodent disturbances. One of the cores,
a small uni-directional flake production specimen, and
both pieces of silicious wood were collected.
A series of shovel probes indicated that the sandy
matrix exposed on the surface extends to a minimum depth
of 75 cm. Four small chert flakes were recovered from
one of these probes.
A test unit (1 x 2 meters) was placed near the center
of the surface-exposed residues (Fig. 6b). Fill was
removed in 25 cm. levels and screened through quarterinch mesh until a culturally sterile, sandy clay subsoil
was exposed.
Fill Characteristics
Level 1 (0-25 cm.) Sediments consisted of noncohesive
yellowish brown sand. Some organic materials were
noted; rodent burrowing is extensive. Five cores,
131 flakes, three modified flake tools, one hammerstone and 121 pieces of fire-cracked rock were
removed. These compose 32.4% of the total assemblage unearthed in the test unit.
Level 2 (25-50 cm.) The loose sandy matrix continued through this level. Cultural materials
(193 specimens) in this level are similar to those
found in the previous level except for a decrease
in thermally-fractured stone to 45 specimens.
This level yielded 24.7% of all residues.
Level 3 (50-75 cm.) Sediments were the same as
above but slightly lighter in color. Chipped stone
artifacts increased to 74 items; thermally-fractured
stone to 128. The artifacts include a Montell type
projectile point recovered in association with a
hearth remnant. These residues account for 25.8%
of the total.

47

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Figure 6.
a.

Test excavations at 4lBPl20 located on the
valley slope.
This section of the valley
extends down to active floodplain along
McLaughlin Creek.
The floodplain was also
tested for intact cultural residues.

b.

Test excavations at 4lBPl2l.
Note increased
moisture content near the bottom of the test
unit.

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Level 4 (75-100 cm.) The loose sand continued to
about 95 cm. where a dense sandy clay containing
moderate quantities of silicious gravels was encountered. The sandy clay was sampled but appears
sterile of cultural deposits. Cultural materials
decreased to 17% of the total recovery.
Cultural Materials
Cultural materials recovered total 781 items; 403
(51.6%) chipped stone specimens, 377 (4B.3%) pieces of
thermally-fractured stone, and one hammerstone.
Cores (13 specimens): Three bi-directional (two
from Level 1 and one from Level 4); one multidirectional (Level 4); five rejects (three from
Level 1 and two from Level 4); and four core
fragments (two from Level 3 and two from Level 4)
are all fashioned from locally available chert and
some evidence thermal modification.
Unmodified flakes (383 specimens): Recovered
specimens include four primary, 63 secondary, 248
interior, and 68 flake fragments. Thermal modification is evident on many of these specimens.
Unmodified flakes account for 49% of the total
assemblage and 95% of the chipped stone.
Utilized flakes (5 specimens): Three flakes and
two chips show utilization along lateral edges or
distal ends.
Thin bifaces (1 specimen): This fragmentary
expanding stem thin biface was exposed in situ
next to a partially intact hearth at a depth of
75 cm. It is identical to the MonteZZ type dart
points described by Suhm and Jelks (1962: 215).
This specimen is fashioned from a dark, almost
black, chert which has not been identified within
the study area.
Hammerstones (1 specimen): This hammerstone of
locally available quartzite was exposed in Level 1.
Thermally-fractured stone: These residues were
recovered in every level but the only apparent
clustering occurred at the bottom of Level 3 where
a partially intact hearth was exposed in association

50

PREHISTORIC SITES

with an expanding stem thin biface fragment.
Rock types represented include limestone, quartzite,
and silicious wood; chert predominates.
Discussion
This site contains the largest, most varied assemblage
of cultural materials of any site tested. These materials
were concentrated in Levels l and 2 but significant frequencies were found in all levels. Although some rodent
disturbance was recognized, and additiqnal colluvial displacement is probable in the loose sands containing the
deposits, at least partial integrity is shown by the hearth
in Level 3. The recovery of the Montell type projectile
point ·in direct association with the hearth tentatively
assigns the occupation of this site to the late Archaic
Period (oa. 2,500-1,750 B.P.). The site may represent a
single component foraging or hunting camp.
Recommendations: It is recommended that 41BP121
be further excavated to obtain a sample of the cultural
deposits known to exist at this site.
4lBPl23

This upland terrace site is situated near the medial
section of the valley along the east bank of a headwater
tributary 500 meters upstream from its confluence with
Mclaughlin Creek. The terrace lies ten meters above the
streambed, overlooking a long, narrow, active floodplain
which extends along the east side of the channel. The
upper terrace has been partially cleared, leaving scattered
stands of post oak and juniper.
Occupational residues, including chert flakes, cores,
and burned rock, and unmodified chert, silicious wood and
quartzite cobbles, were noted along the eroded section of
the terrace.
Shovel testing indicated that the cultural materials
extend to a minimum depth of 50 cm. A 1 x 1 meter test
pit was set near the terrace edge where artifacts were
noted in the cutbank. The unit was excavated in 25 cm.
levels; all fill was screened through quarter-inch mesh.
Fill Characteristics
Level 1 (0-25 cm.) Sediments consisted of a loose
brown sand. Extensive rodent disturbance was noted
throughout this level. Artifacts recovered are 23
flakes and chips, and 32 burned rocks.

51

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

Level 2 (25-50 cm.) The loose sandy sediments
continued in this level. Rodent disturbance was
still apparent. Thirteen flakes, four chips,
two cores and 13 fire-cracked rocks were recovered.
Level 3 (50-75 cm.) Sediments were the same as
above levels until 65 cm. where a reddish sandy clay,
containing many gravels in the upper 10 to 20 cm.,
was exposed. Cultural materials consist of 14
flakes, six chips, two cores, and 27 fire-cracked
rocks. A high percentage of thes~ residues were
lying on the gravelly sandy clay subsoil.
Recommendations: In view of the paucity of cultural
material and the shallow depth of the artifact-bearing
deposits, no further investigation of this site is recommended.
SUMMARY
The archeological survey of the Camp Swift lignite
prospect was successful in locating and recording 42
prehistoric sites (Fig. 4). These sites are reflected
by four different types of cultural residues: chert cores,
debitage, and large frequencies of unmodified cobbles;
scattered chipped stone; chipped stone/burned rock scatters;
and buried hearths. Twenty-five chipped stone/burned rock
sites, eleven cobble scatters, four chipped stone scatters,
and two buried hearths were identified.
These sites are situated in four topographic settings;
active floodplains, upper terraces, valley margins, and
upland drainage divides. Twenty-four are located along
valley margins, usually on low slopes or knolls. Twelve
occur on upper terraces along the major drainages, four
are located on upland divides and two are buried in recent
alluvium on the active floodplain.
Sites found on valley margins and upland divides are
generally in poor condition. They are often on, or just
below, the present ground surface, precluding the recovery
of intact remains. The poor condition of these sites is
directly related to historic land clearing and agriculture,
and subsequent use of the land for military training exercises often employing the use of heavy tracked vehicles.
These sites generally exhibit low frequencies and a limited
variety of lithic artifacts.
Prehistoric sites occurring on upper terraces and in
active floodplains are generally more intact than those on

52

SUMMARY

valley margins and upland divides. Terrace and floodplain sites appear to have suffered only moderate disturbances from rodent burrowing and agricultural activities. Artifact frequencies and variety are also quite
limited, suggesting that the entire Camp Swift area
reflects only specialized use in prehistory. No faunal
remains or artifacts manufactured from organic material
were found during the survey or recovered from the limited
test excavations.
Chronological ordering of the expressed archeological
record is extremely difficult. No time~diagnostic artifacts were found during the surface survey and only two
typeable specimens were recovered from the text excavations. However, some similarities are noted between the
materials found at Camp Swift and those associated with
the Late Archaic Period in the Central Texas region.
Specifically, the recovery of known tool types such as
Montell and Marshall type projectile points indicates
that the study area was occupied at least during the Late
Archaic Period (aa. 2,500-1,700 B.P.).
A review of the ethnohistoric accounts of aboriginal
groups indicates that such tribes as the Tonkawa, tipan
Apache, Comanche, Coushatta, Caddo, Waco, Delaware and
Towakoni were known to have utilized this region in historic times (See Part II: Historic Resources). No
cultural materials associated with these historic groups
were found on Camp Swift during this study.
ASSESSMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This study has contributed substantially to the present
knowledge of prehistoric occupation of the southeastern
section of the Central Texas archeological .region. Prior
to this study, little was known about aboriginal exploitation of the upland environments of this region. Past
studies have not been oriented toward regional problems,
but have by virtue of research opportunities or demands,
been concentrated in mainstems of the Colorado and Brazos
rivers where large, intensively occupied settlements are
known to be located. The present study thus bears on a
general question of regional importance -- the nature of
human utilization of upland areas away from these major
watercourses. The discovered resource base must then be
viewed in terms of its potential contribution to the understanding of regional settlement patterns and specialized
resource exploitation.

53

PREHISTORIC RESOURCES

With intent directed toward conservation of resources,
the following general recommendations are presented with
the assumptions that:
1) all areas within the delimited 4,000 acre study
area will be subject to eventual surface mining. Therefore, all prehistoric sites located there must be assumed
to be subject to complete destruction; and
2) prehistoric sites located in the buffer zone may
or may not be affected by the proposed surface mine. The
types and locations of surface modifi'cation within this
outer boundary have not yet been determjned.
Of the 42 sites identified from the current investigation, 31 are evaluated as having little or no importance
relative to our central query, i.e., the nature of prehistoric human activity in upland environments. These
sites are 41BP90-92, BP96-99, BPlOl-104, BP106, BP109,
BPllO, BP113-117, BP119, BP120, BP122-130. Data collected
from the surface examinations, minor probings, and limited
test excavations indicates that these sites are too disturbed to allow for the recovery of any intact or otherwise meaningful distribution of cultural remains. It is
clearly understood that all sites are potentially important. Even the most severely disrupted sites provide
information on prehistoric use of the uplands within the
study area. However, the potential of these sites is
quickly exhausted with a sampling of exposed materials
and a careful recording of site context. It is our opinion
that the contribution of the above-listed sites has been
fully exploited as a result of the work carried our during
this investigation.
The survey also located eleven prehistoric sites which
are considered to have the potential to contribute to the
understanding of prehistoric exploitation of these uplands
if further examined {Table 4). These sites are 41BP93,
BP94, BP95, BPlOO, BP105, BP107, BP108, BPlll, BP112,
BP118 and BP121. The assessments of these sites are based
on an evaluation of the possibility of recovering cultural
residues in a relatively intact relationship.
The sites recommended for additional investigations
are not completely unique; upland sites are known and have
been investigated in regions adjacent to the study area.
The importance of these sites is directly related to the
limited number of archeological sites presently known in
upland environments in this specific region. In a regional
perspective, the below-listed sites can be considered to
very generally meet the expressed criteria for nomination
to the National Register of Historic Places in that they
meet the present need for spatial extension of the

54

ASSESSMENTS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

archeological record into these upland environments.
However, the stated criteria "that the property retain
integrity compatible with the subject" cannot be demonstrated without more extensive subsurface sampling. Of
the eight sites subjected to limited testing during the
course of the survey reported, only four retained sufficient structural integrity to warrant further excavation.
Of the eleven sites recommended for further work, only
these four have been minimally tested. Therefore, it is
our opinion that nomination of all these sites to the
National Register of Historic Places at_ this time is premature. A determination of site eligibility can
effectively be made only after additional subsurface
sampling.
TABLE 4.
Project Area

Summary Data:

Assessment of Significance

Recommendation

41BP100

Contains intact deposits, may furnish
needed information on utilization of
upland area, 14c possible

Subsurface Sampling

41BP111

Preliminary investigations not sufficient
for evaluation
Same as above
A deep, terrace site, may furnish
stratified cultural deposits

Additional Subsurface Testing

Site No.

Q)

c:

0

N
Cl

·-c:c:

41BP112

2

41BP118

Q)
(.)

ctl

't

Q)
'I'I-

Subsurface Sampling

41BP94

Preliminary investigations not sufficient
for evaluation
Same as above
Same as above
Same as above
Same as above
Contains intact deposits buried in
modern floodplain alluvium

Preservation or Mitigation

Q)

c:
ca N
::I

0

Peripheral
Areas

Subsurface Sampling

Only prehistoric site identified in
valley margins with possibly intact
deposits, may furnish data on site
function in this environment

en

41BP95
41 BP107
41BP108
41 BP93
41BP105

Preservation
Preservation
Preservation
Preservation

or Mitigation
or· Mitigation

or Mitigation
or Mitigation
Preservation or Mitigation

It is strongly recommended that a program of investigations designed to sample or test the listed sites
situated in the proposed mining zone be carried out prior
to project implementation. Decisions as to specific
measures designed to conserve extant archeological
values in the buffer zone (i.e., preservation or mitigation through site excavation) should be delayed until
such time as construction plans are finalized.

55

I

Additional Subsurface Testing

41BP121

::I

...

Prehistoric Sites Recommended for Further Work

I

REFERENCES CITED

Alexander, Herbert L.
1963
The Levi Site:
Central Texas.
510-528.

A Paleo-Indian Campsite in
American Antiquity 28(4):

Bond, Clell L •
Three Archeological Sites at Hoxie Bridge,
1978
Williamson County, Texas. Report No. 3,
Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A & M University.
Brown, Kenneth M.
1966
41BP55. University of Texas Archeological
Society notes on file at the Texas Archeolological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Bryant, Vaughn M. and Harry J. Shafer
1977
The Late Quaternary Paleo-environment of Texas:
A Model for the Archeologist. Bulletin of
the Texas ArcheoZogical Society 48: 1-24.
Byrd, Clifford Leon
1971
Origin and History of the Uvalde Gravel of
Central Texas. Baylor Geological Studies
BuZZetin 20.
Baylor University Press, Waco.
Carr, John T., Jr.
1967
The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
Water Development Board Report No. 53.

Texas
Austin.

Cook, W. W. and R. K. Harris
1958
A Pleistocene Camp Site near Lewisville, Texas.
American Antiquity 23(3): 223-246.
Davis, E. Mott
Statement Concerning Investigations of C. J.
1964
McCormick Site near McDade, Bastrop County,
Texas. Unpublished notes on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Dibble, David S.
1976
Results of an Archeological Survey of Areas to
be Affected by a Proposed Sanitary Landfill,
Camp Swift, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Technical Bulletin ZZ. The University of Texas
at Austin.

56

Dibble, David S. and Dessame Lorrain
1968
Bonfire Shelter: A Stratified Bison Kill
Site, Val Verde County, Texas. Texas Memorial
Museum Miscellaneous Papers l. Austin.
Dice, Lee Raymond
1943
The Biotic Provinces of North America.
versity of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

Uni-

Dillehay, Tom D.
1979
An Archeological Reconnaissance of the Fayette
Power Plant to Lytton Springs Transmission
Line. Texas Archeological Survey Research
Report ?3, The University of Texas at Austin.
Eddy, Frank w.
Salvage Archeology in the Laneport Reservoir
1973
District, Central Texas. Report submitted to
the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Fawcett, William B., Jr.
1975
An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Federal
Youth Center, Bastrop County, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey Technical Bulletin lO,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Follett, C. R.
1970
Ground-water Resources of Bastrop County, Texas.
Texas Water Development Board Report l09, Austin.
Gould, F. W.
1962
Texas Plants--A Checklist and Ecological
Summary. Texas Agricultural Experimental
Station MP-585.
Hester, Thomas R.
1966
Daily log, Bastrop Archeological Survey. On
file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Johnson, Eileen
1974
Zooarcheology and the Lubbock Lake Site. In
C. C. Black (editor) History and Prehistory of
the Lubbock Lake Site: 107-122.
Texas Tech
University.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1967
Toward a Statistical Overview of the Archaic
Cultures of Central and Southwestern Texas.
Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin l2, Austin.

57

Kelley, J. C.
1947
The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological
Position of the Clear Fork Focus. American
Antiquity 13(2): 97-109.
1959

The Archaic Culture in Central, Southern and
West Texas. Paper presented at the 1955
Archaic Conference, Indiana University,
Bloomington.

Krieger, Alex J.
1946
Cultural Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas. University of Texas Publication 4640.
Austin.
Malone, Jim
Archeological Site Survey Work in Bastrop County.
1968
Unpublished manuscript on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
Patarozzi, M.
Economic and Enviromental Aspects of Lignite
1975
Strip Mining, Bastrop County, Texas. Unpublished
master's thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox
Site, Williamson County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report 49, The
University of Texas at Austin.
1976

Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site;
The San Marcos and Twin Sister Phases, in T. R.
Hester (editor) The Texas Archaic: A Symposium:
67-82. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

n.d.

The Rogers Spring Site: Everything You Always
Wanted to Know about Burned Rock Middens.
Unpublished manuscript on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Prewitt, Elton R. and Duford W. Skelton
1979
41BP89. Unpublished field notes on file at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

58

Proctor, C.V., T.E. Brown, J.H. McGowen and N.B. Waechter
1974
Austin Sheet. In Geologic Atlas of Texas,
V.E. Barnes (project director). Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Shafer, Harry J.
1977
Early Lithic Assemblages in Eastern Texas. In
Eileen Johnson (editor) Paleoindian Lifeways.
The Museum Journal 17, West Texas Museum
Association, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney
Reservoir Area, Central Texas. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 41: 37-286.
Suhm, Dee Ann and Edward B. Jelks (editors)
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Texas Archeological Society Special Publication
l, Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin 4, A~stin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and Edward B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 25.

Austin.

Tera Corporation
1978
Preliminary Drafts of Selected LCRA Inputs
to BLM for Camp Swift Lignite Lease. Dallas.
Weir, Frank A.
1976a The Central Texas Archaic. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, Washington State University,
Pullman.
1976b

The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered. In
T.R. Hester (editor) Texas Archaic: A Symposium.
Center for Archaeological Research Special
Report 2, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

We rm u nd , E • G.
1977
Plan for the Multiple Land-use of Camp Swift,
Bastrop County, Texas. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Wilson, A. M.
1930
Areal Survey of Travis, Bastrop and Fayette
Counties. Manuscript on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.
59

-----------------------------------------

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The survey and assessment of the prehistoric resources
of Camp Swift was conducted with the assistance of many
people. Mr. John E. Babcock, Director of Environmental
Resources for the Lower Colorado River Authority provided
materials essential to the completion of the project and
generally smoothed the way for the field party. Colonel
L. G. Fisher, Facility Manager of Camp Swift, granted
access to Camp Swift and provided general logistical
assistance. Colonel L. James Starr, Jr., Adjutant General's
Department of the Texas National Guard gave permission for
access to conduct the field work.
H.G. 11 Woody 11 Wooldridge was an able field assistant.
Martha Freeman, the project historian, collaborated on all
aspects of the field work and provided appreciated companionship. David S. Dibble served as principal investigator and Project Director. Editing of the manuscript was
done by Dr. Dibble and Solveig Turpin. Leslie Miller
drafted all maps and Linda Nance typed the final report.

60

APPENDIX I:

SITE DESCRIPTIONS

This page intentionally left blank.

APPENDIX I:

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNTESTED SITES

INTRODUCTION
Archeological sites recorded (but not tested) during
the present survey are described in this appendix. One
site, 41BP112, is within the potential direct impact area
and is recommended for testing. Seven sites, 41BP93,
BP94, BP95, BP105, BP107, BP108 and BP115, lie outside
the prime mining area and further evaluation is recommended
only if protective maintenance is not feasible. The
remaining 26 sites described are .not recommended for
further work.
SITE RECOMMENDED FOR TESTING
4lBPll2

The scanty remains of this campsite are situated on
a wedge-shaped terrace between the main channel of
Mclaughlin Creek and a major tributary stream. The site
lies just east of the tributary drainage and north of
Mclaughlin Creek near its headwater system. The terrace
containing the occupational remnants lies above a long,
narrow floodplain that parallels the stream channel along
this section of the watershed. Dominant vegetation at this
site is a mixture of the Riparian and Post Oak/Red Cedar
communities.
Cultural materials found on the surface of the terrace
include four small chert flakes and two fragments of firecracked chert. No other cultural residues were noted.
Shovel testing produced little additional information,
indicating only that the upper sediments of the terrace
were composed of a sandy matrix which extended to a minimum
depth of 50 cm. No cultural residues were found in the
shovel probes. Because of time limitations, no other
testing procedures were employed at this site.
Recommendations: This site is located in the direct
impact area and would be totally destroyed by mining operations. The site is situated in a densely wooded area and
has remained relatively undisrupted by post-depositional
disturbance. Since time limitations precluded the collection of sufficient data to allow for complete evaluation,
it is recommended that a limited testing program be completed at 41BP112 prior to any project implementation.

63

APPENDIX I

SITES RECOMMENDED FOR PROTECTIVE MAINTENANCE
4ZBP93

This is an open campsite situated on a prominent
sandy knoll at the edge of the upper terrace along the
north bank of Mclaughlin Creek, one kilometer upstream
from its confluence with Big Sandy Creek. The sandy knoll
is at the proximal edge of the terrace bluff on the outside of a large meander in the stream channel. A long,
60 meter-wide active floodplain l'ies directly below the
site. The knoll encompasses approximately 12,000 square
meters and rises two to three meters above the surrounding
terrain. Wide expanses of the fossil floodplain lie to
the north and east of the knoll. Much of the site has
been cleared of trees, leaving only two large junipers
and a single loblolly pine on the knoll. Grasses of
the Old Field plant community are the dominant vegetation.
The site is defined on the basis of six small interior
flakes, one flake core, and a few small fragments of firecracked limestone found in shovel tests at a depth of
25 to 40 cm. below the surface. No occupational materials
were found on the grass-covered surface.
The upper sediments revealed in shovel probings consist of brown coarse sand which appears to be noncohesive
in structure. This sandy matrix is superimposed over a
denser reddish sandy clay zone. Although no distinct
physical stratigraphy that can be related to prehistoric
occupations was recognized, it appears that the site has
retained enough structural integrity to allow for the
recovery of artifactual materials in a sound, reliable
context.
Recommendations: This site is located just outside
the western boundary of the project area and should not be
adversely affected by the planned mining operations. However, should the proposed modification associated with the
·mining area threaten this locality, additional sampling
of 41BP93 will be necessary.
4ZBP94

This open terrace campsite is located on the north side
of Mclaughlin Creek, approximately 1.5 kilometers upstream
from its confluence with Big Sandy Creek. The area is
within the upper terrace on the outside of a north-cutting
meander. A long, 75 meter-wide active floodplain lies
directly below the site, abutting the vertical cutbank of
the upper terrace. A small intermittent stream forms a
confluence just across the channel from the site. A large

64

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNTESTED SITES

erosional gully cuts down the eastern edge of the camp,
draining onto the lower floodplain. The western section
of the site is heavily wooded, but much of the eastern
portion has been cleared of trees, and grasses are the
dominant species. The active floodplain below the site
is characterized by vegetation associated with the Riparian
plant community.
Cultural materials found at this site include chert
flakes, quartzite, fire-fractured limestone, and a few
pieces of modified silicious wood. Two of these silicious
wood specimens were collected from the surface. No timediagnostic artifacts were recovered. Also noted were two
concentrations of fire-cracked quartzite and limestone
exposed approximately 50 cm. below the surface in the
erosional gully near the eastern edge of the site. Although
the exact character of the features was not determined,
they appear from surficial observations to represent in
situ remnants of hearths.
Two shovel tests were excavated in the wooded portions
of the site. The sediments revealed by these subsurface
probes are a dark brown sandy loam which extends to an
undetermined depth. No cultural residues were recovered
from these shovel tests.
Recommendations: This site lies in the buffer zone,
just west of the potential mining area. It is recommended
that the area be avoided by all project-related activity.
Should this locality become threatened by project-related
modifications, additional subsurface testing will be
necessary.
4lBP95

This campsite was found on the upper terrace along
the north bank of Mclaughlin Creek, l .7 kilometers upstream
from its confluence with Big Sandy Creek. The area lies
on the outside of a stream meander, just west of a confluence with a small tributary. This section of the upper
terrace rises six meters above the lower floodplain. The
scattered remnants of a historic site (41BP184) are located near the northwestern edge of the prehistoric encampment. The area has been cleared of trees and shrubs,
except along the lower stream margins and west of the
site near the tributary. The surface of the cleared area
is sparsely covered with grasses and mesquite bushes.
Numerous rodent disturbances extend throughout the site.
Occupational residues noted in these rodent disturbances
include a few chert flakes and some fire-cracked limestone.
Historic glass and ceramic fragments were also found.

65

APPENDIX I

Shovel tests exposed a brown sandy matrix which
extends to a minimum depth of 70 cm. No cultural
materials were found in these minor probings.
Recommendations: The site is 300 meters west of the
proposed surface mine in an area which may be indirectly
impacted by project-related activities. The site should
be avoided if possible. However, if protective management is not feasible, additional subsurface testing will
be necessary.
4lBPl05

This site is a buried hearth exposed in the cutbank
of the active floodplain on the west side of Big Sandy
Creek four kilometers upstream from its confluence with
Mclaughlin Creek. A small intermittent tributary empties
into the west side of Big Sandy Creek just north of the
site. The floodplain supports dense stands of hardwoods
and other vegetation associated with Riparian plant communities.
The site consists of a single layer of fire-cracked
chert, quartzite and limestone exposed in the cutbank of
the low water channel of the stream. The feature is situated one meter above the present water level and 50 cm.
below the surface of the floodplain. The exposed cluster
of fire-cracked rocks, presumably a prehistoric hearth,
measures one meter in length. No other cultural materials
were located during the inspection of this area.
Recommendations: The site lies 300 meters outside
the western limits of the study area and will not be
affected by the proposed surface mine. Subsurface testing
is recommended only in the event that project-related
activities directly or indirectly threaten the site.
4lBPlO?

This campsite lies on the southern edge of a large
sandy knoll near the medial section of the valley overlooking the upper terrace, on the east side of Big Sandy
Creek. A large upland erosional gully demarcates the
southwestern edge of the site. The large knoll has been
cleared of trees and brush and was probably cultivated
in recent historic times. Trees are present only in the
western areas near the erosional gully.
Cultural materials exposed at this site are limited
to a few small interior flakes noted in rodent disturbances.
Several small shovel probes indicate that the sandy
sediments extend to a minimum depth of 60 cm. No cultural

66

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNTESTED SITES

materials were recovered from the shovel tests.
Recommendations: This site is located in the buffer
zone 150 meters beyond the western boundary of the proposed surface mining area and may not be adversely
impacted by project-related modifications. Subsurface
testing will be necessary prior to final evaluations of
this prehistoric site.
4tBPtOB

This sandy knoll is situated on the upper terrace
along the east side of Big Sandy Creek, approximately 4.2
kilometers upstream from its confluence with Mclaughlin
Creek. The sandy knoll extends to the terrace margin and
overlooks a long, 40 meter-wide active floodplain on the
outside of a stream meander. A large erosional gully
marks the eastern edge of the site •. Although much of
the upper terrace has been cleared of trees, the lower
active floodplain and adjacent stream margins are still
densely forested.
Cultural materials found at this site include small
interior flakes and a few fragments of fire-cracked rock
exposed in rodent burrows and erosional areas along the
terrace edge. No chronologically-diagnostic artifacts
were found.
The site was tested by excavating several small shovel
probes. Those executed along the edge of the terrace
revealed a brown sandy loam extending from the surface
to a depth of 50 cm. A yellowish-red clay lies below the
sandy deposit. Four small interior flakes were recovered
at a depth of 25 to 35 cm. below the surface.
Shovel tests were also excavated north of the terrace
edge where the knoll slopes up and intersects the lower
valley margin. The sediments exposed in this area are
the same sandy matrix, but extend to a considerably greater
depth. The base of the sandy sediments was not determined,
but a minimum depth of 80 cm. is noted. Three chert
flakes were recovered at a depth of about 60 cm.
Recommendations: The site lies in the buffer zone
approximately 300 meters west of the planned surface mine.
The area should be avoided by all project-related activities.
Subsurface testing will be necessary should the site be
threatened by any project developments.
4ZBPZZ5

This cobble procurement site is situated at the headwaters of a small tributary drainage that empties into

67

APPENDIX I

the east side of Big Sandy Creek some 200 meters below
its confluence with Mclaughlin Creek. The area is dissected by numerous erosional gullies and rills that feed
into the tributary streams. Large quantities of unmodified cobble gravels, hematite concretions, and silicious
wood fragments cover the eroded slopes and lower channels
of these drainways. Much of the surface sediments have
been displaced by slopewash, leaving a deflated surface
covered by exposed gravels. Water-generated erosion has
destroyed much of the vegetation, but dense stands of
post oaks and red cedars remain in the_ surrounding areas.
Cultural materials found at the site include cores,
bifacial preforms, flakes and other chert debitage as
well as a few pieces of fire-cracked limestone and one
quartzite hammerstone. The chert cores include bidirectional, residual ·and reject specimens. All common
flake types were noted but no flake tools were recognized.
The fire-cracked rock was scattered; no clusters or concentrations were noted. All of the cultural materials
were lying on the surface among large quantities of unmodified cobbles. Although no diagnostic artifacts were
found, the site is thought to be an Archaic encampment
because of the bifacial preforms.
Shovel testing was conducted in areas where the surface sediments had not been totally displaced. These
probings generally encountered a yellowish-red clay below
about five ems. of loose sand. A few hematite concretions
were the only materials found in the sandy matrix.
Recommendations: The site is located 50 meters
outside the western project boundary and should not be
directly affected by the surface mining. If projectrelated activities threaten this site, it is recommended
that a sample of the surface-exposed artifacts be collected.
No subsurface testing is necessary.
SITES NOT RECOMMENDED FOR FURTHER WORK
4ZBP90

This prehistoric campsite is situated along the moderately west-sloping lower section of the valley margin
just above a dissected terrace on the south side of a small
headwater tributary that drains into Big Sandy Creek ca.
1.4 kilometers downstream. Slopewash deflation has displaced top soils, exposing a clay surface that is presently
covered by large quantities of hematite concretions and
silicious wood fragments. Except for scattered stands of
post oak and juniper, the area is clear of trees and most
shrubs. The dominant vegetation is mesquite bush and

68

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNTESTED SITES

various grasses. Below the site in the adjacent stream
margins, the vegetation is composed of numerous hardwoods
such as oak, hickory, elm, pecan, black walnut and other
species. Although the small drainage was dry during the
survey, water was available in through-flow springs
seeping from the bluff above the active floodplain.
Cultural materials found at the site include discarded cores and other chert debitage (by-products of
stone tool manufacture); battered pieces of silicious
wood; and a quartzite hammerstone. No time-diagnostic
artifacts were noted. The occupational residues are
exposed on the deflated clayey surface -and scattered among
the hematite concretions and unmodified pieces of silicious wood.
Several shovel tests were excavated in areas of
exposed cultural debris and below the site where artifacts could lie buried by slopewash sediments. These
subsurface tests indicate that this is a 11 surface site 11
with no vertical depth. No occupational refuse was found
in the shovel testing.
4ZBP9Z

41BP91 is situated on a deflated knoll near the lower,
north-sloping section of the stream valley overlooking
the south bank of Mclaughlin Creek, one kilometer north
of its confluence with Big Sandy Creek. A large erosional
gully has cut through the northwest portion of the site
channeling rainwash along the valley slope into Mclaughlin
Creek 50 meters north of the prehistoric camp. The knoll
has been deflated to basal clay and is covered by hematite
concretions, silicious wood fragments, and small pea gravels.
Numerous rills are present on the knoll and adjacent lower
valley slopes. The area supports dense stands of post oaks,
cedars, and hickory trees with an understory growth of
shrubs and vines.
Chert flakes are thinly scattered over the deflated
surface. Two cores, one thick biface fragment, a quartzite
hammerstone, and small quantities of fire-cracked rock
were also noted. No time-diagnostic artifacts were found.
Shovel tests below the site near the terrace edge
and observations of soil mantles exposed in erosional
gullies, indicate that the occupation refuse is restricted
to the knoll area.
4ZBP92

This is a cobble procurement site situated near the
medial section of the south-sloping valley along the north

69

APPENDIX I

side of an intermittent stream that drains into Big
Sandy Creek approximately one kilometer west of the
site. The area is heavily dissected by erosional gullies
and rills. The surface is covered by cobble-size gravels
including quartzite and chert. Jasper, limestone,
silicious wood, and hematite concretions are also present.
Surface-exposed sediments consist of a dense yellowishred sandy clay. The area is wooded with post oaks,
junipers, and other species. Understory growth is
extremely dense.
Scattered among the exposed gravels are a few cores
and associated debitage, small quantities of firecracked cobbles, and some battered fragments of quartzite
cobbles. Two thick bifaces (blanks) and two edgemodified flakes were also found. The area appears to
have been used to obtain chert and other lithic raw
materials for the production of chipped stone tools.
This site is tentatively assigned to the Archaic Period
based on the morphological and technological attributes
of the bifaces.
Shovel testing and observations of soil profiles
exposed in the stream cutbank indicate that the gravels
extend vertically to a maximum depth of 15 cm. below the
surface. These gravels are contained in the basal sandy
clay substrate.
4ZBP96

This cobble procurement site is located along a shallow
tributary stream that drains south across the valley slopes
emptying into the north side of Mclaughlin Creek, 300
meters south of the site. Cobble-size gravels are scattered
across the eroded surface and adjacent stream margins. The
area has been cleared of trees except along the confines
of the small drainage.
Cultural materials found at this site include a few
discarded core rejects and a few flakes. No tools or timediagnostic artifacts were recovered.
4ZBP9?

This cobble procurement site is situated on the eroded
slopes of the valley margin overlooking the north side of
Mclaughlin Creek just west of a small tributary stream.
A small knoll marks the site location. The area is severely
eroded with numerous gullies and rills dissecting the knoll
and adjacent valley. The dominant vegetation consists of
mesquite bush and grasses.
Cultural materials found at this site include a few
flakes and cores that are scattered among the unmodified
70

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNTESTED SITES

gravels. No tools or time-diagnostic artifacts were
recognized.
Shovel testing indicates that all materials are
exposed on the eroded surface.
4ZBP98

This cobble-procurement site is situated on the
southwest edge of a lenticular ridge which is the interfluvial divide between Mclaughlin and Big Sandy creeks,
some 1.25 kilometers northeast of their confluence. The
ridge marking the site location has been cleared of trees
and shrubs except for isolated stands of juniper. The
locality is currently utilized by military personnel for
training exercises including the use of heavy tracked
vehicles, resulting in serious disruption of this resource.
Small excavation pits are common and military refuse is
scattered throughout the area.
Cultural materials found at this site include several
cores, flakes, and other chert debitage, two quartzite
hammerstones, and fire-cracked cobbles. Some of the
debitage may have been subjected to thermal alterations
prior to knapping as evidenced by a vitreous surface. The
only chipped stone tools found are four edge-modified
flakes. A small sample of cultural debris including two
cores, two modified flakes, and one quartzite hammerstone
were collected from the surface. No time-diagnostic
artifacts were located.
Two shovel probes indicate that the cultural materials,
as well as the unmodified gravels, are contained in a
dense, reddish yellow clay. No culturally modified materials were recovered from this testing.
4ZBP99

This cobble procurement site is situated at a gravel
outcrop along the central sections of the south-sloping
valley margin approximately 250 meters north of Mclaughlin
Creek. A large erosional gully and numerous small rills
cut through the central portions of the exposed gravels.
The eastern sections of the site have recently been bulldozed and cleared of vegetation. Other areas of the site
are wooded with post oak and juniper.
Cultural materials found at this site include flakes,
cores, and two quartzite hammerstones. These residues
are scattered around the unmodified gravels and exposed
along the eroded gullies and rills. No time-diagnostic
artifacts were noted.

71

APPENDIX I

Shovel testing indicates that the cultural materials
and the unmodified gravels are limited to the surface,
or just below where sandy soils remain.
4ZBPZOZ

This cobble scatter is situated at the medial section
of the moderately south-sloping valley margin, 400 meters
north of Mclaughlin Creek and 300 meters due east of
41BP96. An erosional gully has cut through the central
section of the site. Trees and brush have been removed
in most areas, accelerating soil erosidn; the reddish
basal clay is exposed over large areas. Cobble gravels
are scattered over much of the eroded surface.
Small quantities of flakes and a few cores are present
among the numerous unmodified cobbles. No time-diagnostic
artifacts or other cultural residues were noted.
Shovel testing and observations of soil profiles in
dissected areas indicate that all prehistoric materials
are lying on the surface.
4ZBPZ02

41BP102 is a chert scatter exposed on the eroded
surface of a knoll along the southwestern edge of the
upland divide between Big Sandy and Mclaughlin creeks,
2.8 kilometers upstream from their confluence. The prehistoric site lies just east of some ~istoric structural
remnants associated with 41BP183. This section of the
knoll has been partially denuded of forest vegetation and
is presently characterized by scattered woodlands with
grass-covered open areas.
Cultural materials observed on the clayey surface
included two flakes, cores, and a few fragments of firecracked rock, concentrated along the eroded southern
slope of the knoll as a result of slopewash and rillwash
that are extensive in the area. Also noted were a few
glass and ceramic fragments associated with historic site
41BP183.
Shovel testing indicates that all cultural materials
found along this section of the knoll are exposed on basal
sandy clay sediments. A few isolated patches of sandy
matrix were noted, but subsurface probes showed these to
be very shallow.
4ZBPZ03

This campsite is situated at the northwestern edge
of an upland ridge marking the divide between Big Sandy

72

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNTESTED SITES

and Mclaughlin creeks, 2.5 kilometers upstream from their
confluence. The site overlooks the upper terrace of Big
Sandy Creek approximately 150 meters east of the stream
channel. The area lies 100 meters upslope from 41BP104,
which may represent an extension of this site. The area
has been partially cleared, leaving small clusters of
post oak and juniper scattered throughout the ridge area.
Cultural materials observed at this site include ten
interior flakes and a few pieces of fire-cracked rock.
No time-diagnostic artifacts or other cultural residues
were found.
Several small shovel tests revealed a thin veneer of
brownish sand generally less than 10 cm. thick. This
sandy soil is superimposed over a dense yellowish-red
clay which extends to an undetermined depth. No cultural
materials were found in the shovel tests.
4ZBPZ04

This prehistoric campsite is situated on a small rise
or projection of the west-sloping valley, just above the
upper terrace along the east side of Big Sandy Creek, two
kilometers upstream from its confluence with Mclaughlin
Creek. The locality lies 100 meters due north of 41BP103
and may actually be an extension of that site separated
by a small section of densely wooded valley slope. The
site area is characterized by small erosional gullies and
numerous rills. Dense stands of post oak and juniper as
well as thick understory growth form the local vegetation.
Sediments exposed in dissected areas consist of eroded
clays and sands.
During the surface inspections a large concentration
of fire-cracked rock was noted along an eroded upper slope
of a gullied area. This hearth measured one meter in
length and width. A few small interior flakes and two
bi-directional cores are also exposed along the gully
slopes. No time-diagnostic artifacts or other cultural
residues were noted.
Shovel testing and observations of soil profiles
revealed a shallow deposit of sandy sediments superimposed
over a dense yellowish-red clay unit. No intact cultural
materials could be located.
4ZBPZ06

This chert scatter is situated near the lower section
of the valley margin just above the upper terrace on the
southeast side of Big Sandy Creek, approximately 3.5
kilometers upstream from its confluence with Mclaughlin

73

APPENDIX I

'--

Creek. The area has been partially cleared of trees
resulting in accelerated soil erosion.
Cultural materials found at this site include cores,
flakes, and fire-cracked rock. Three thick bifaces, two
notched flakes, and a smooth quartzite cobble were also
noted scattered among the hematite concretions and
silicious wood fragments on the eroded surface. This
site is tentatively assigned to the Archaic Period based
on morphological characteristics and technological
attributes of the thick bifaces.
Minor shovel probes failed to locate buried occupational residues.
4ZBPZ09

This prehistoric campsite overlooks the lower floodplain from a secondary terrace on the east side of Big
Sandy Creek. The site lies just southeast of 41BP108 on
the outside of a relatively large east-flowing meander of
the stream channel. A large upland drainage channel cuts
along the northern section of the terrace just beyond the
site boundary. Numerous small erosional rills criss-cross
the terrace. The area has been partially cleared but post
oak, red cedar, hackberry and other trees are still thinly
scattered along the terrace; more densely forested areas
are located below the site in the active floodplain.
A light scatter of chert flakes and a few fragments
of fire-cracked rock are exposed in rills and rodent
disturbances. No time-diagnostic artifacts were found.
Subsurface shovel probes indicate a shallow sandy
deposit that is generally less than 10 cm. thick. Below
the sandy sediments is a yellowish-red clay zone that
extends to an undetermined depth. No cultural materials
were found in the shovel tests.
The terrace appears to be deflated; basal clay is
rarely more than 10 cm. below the surface and is exposed
in some areas. Rodent disturbances and rilling have also
caused extensive damage. Shovel tests indicate that much
of the cultural deposits is exposed on the present surface
or just below in a loose sandy matrix. Cultural materials
are extremely limited.
4ZBPZZO

This cobble procurement site is situated on the eroded
slopes along the medial section of the valley margin, just
east of an upland headwater tributary that drains into
Mclaughlin Creek approximately 350 meters south of the
site. The area is heavily dissected by erosional gullies

74

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNTESTED SITES

and rills. Although much of the site has been cleared,
dense stands of post oak and cedar are present in the
surrounding areas.
Chert debitage, including primary, secondary and
interior flakes and several partially-reduced discarded
cores, is scattered among unmodified chert, quartzite and
other cobbles. A few pieces of fire-cracked rock were
also noted.
Two shovel probes indicate that the gravels are
exposed on a dense clay surface. In wooded areas, less
subject to deflation and erosion, a thin layer of sandy
sediments less than 10 ems. in depth partially covers the
cobble gravels.
4ZBPZZ6

This cobble procurement site is located 100 meters
north of 41BP115 and is similar in character and situation
to that previously-described site except that 41BP116
lies at the northern reaches of the headwater tributary.
The only natural boundary separating these two sites is
a heavily forested area of post oak and juniper. However,
this site has been totally disrupted by the military use
of the area for a gravel and clay borrow pit.
Cultural materials were found in backdirt piles and
along the heavily eroded slopes of rills and gullies which
run throughout the area. Chert cores, including bidirectional and residual specimens, and scattered debitage
were noted. Several small chert and quartzite hammerstones
were found as well as heat-fractured chert and limestone.
Minor shovel probes indicate that cultural materials
are limited to the eroded surface.
4ZBPZZ?

This upland terrace site lies on the southwestern
side of the confluence of three smal 1 tributaries of
Mclaughlin Creek. The area is located 300 meters due
south of the main channel of Mclaughlin Creek about 1.2
kilometers upstream from its confluence with Big Sandy
Creek. Several erosional gullies dissect the area,
channeling rainwash from the higher interfluvial divide.
The location has dense stands of post oak and juniper.
Cultural materials were first observed along the
slopes of the erosional gullies. These materials include
chert debitage, one proximal section of an expanding stem
biface, two edge-modified flakes, some fire-fractured

75

APPENDIX I

chert, and a quartzite hammerstone. The site is tentatively assigned to the Archaic Period based on the
presence of the expanding stem biface.
Shovel testing was conducted in areas thought to be
undisturbed by post-occupational erosion. These minor
probes revealed a brown sandy soil in the upper 5 cm.
superimposed over a reddish sandy clay. No cultural
materials were found in these tests.
Based on information gathered from shovel testing,
as well as observations of soil mantles exposed in eroded
areas, it appears that the cultural materials are contained
in a noncohesive sand which has been totally displaced in
some areas and never reaches a depth greater than 5 ems.
The loose sandy top soil is superimposed on a culturally
sterile sandy clay zone. This site contains very small
amounts of cultural refuse.
4lBPll9

This site is situated on a prominent knoll along the
lower valley margin approximately 100 meters southwest of
a confluence of Mclaughlin Creek and a headwater tributary.
The knoll extends about ten meters above the surrounding
terrain and overlooks the large wide expanse of a lower
terrace development. Accelerated soil erosion resulting
from removal of woodland vegetation has exposed a reddish
sandy clay substrate. Vegetation includes mesquite,
juniper, forbs and grasses characteristic of the mesquite
brushland plant community. The remnants of historic site
41BP153 lie near the eastern edge of this prehistoric camp.
Cultural materials noted during the surficial inspections included approximately 25 to 30 chert flakes, two
small cores, and a light scattering of fire-fractured
stone exposed on the surface of the knoll and in rodent
burrows along its western slope. No time-diagnostic
artifacts or other cultural residues were noted.
Three small shovel probes were excavated near the
western edge of the knoll where sandy top soils remain.
These minor shovel tests exposed the sandy clay substrate
previously observed near the crest of the knoll at
approximately 10 to 15 ems. below the sandy matrix.
No cultural materials were found in the fill removed
from the shovel probings.
4lBPl22

This site is situated on a terrace remnant approximately 120 meters north of a confluence of Mclaughlin Creek

76

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNTESTED SITES

and one of its headwater tributaries. The site has been
extensively damaged by erosional gullies and rill wash.
Woodland has been cleared and only a thin cover of
grasses and forbs remains.
A few chert flakes and small quantities of firefractured stone were noted in erosional features and
rodent disturbances.
Observation of soil mantles exposed in gullies and
terrace cutbanks indicates that the sandy surface sediments
extend to a considerable depth. These sandy soils were
tested by shovel probes which failed to locate any cultural deposits.
4ZBPZ24

This small campsite is situated near the medial section
of the valley slope on a sandy knoll just north of an
upland tributary that drains into Big Sandy Creek four
kilometers downstream. The small knoll extends about two
meters above the surrounding terrain. Grasses are the
dominant vegetation; forested areas are restricted to
stream margins and old fence lines.
Cultural materials are exposed in rills and other
eroded areas of the surface. Approximately 12 interior
flakes and a few small fragments of fire-cracked rock were
noted among moderate ·quantities of hematite and silicious
wood. No time-diagnostic artifacts were found.
Shovel testing indicates that these materials are
exposed on a basal sandy clay precluding any depositional
context. Scattered remnants of a sandy top soil are present
but subsurface probing failed to locate any substantial
sandy deposits. No cultural materials were recovered from
shovel testing.
4ZBPl25

This cobble procurement site is situated near the
medial section of the valley slope on the south side of
Mclaughlin Creek. The area is severely deflated and heavily
dissected by erosional gullies and rills. Surface sediments are composed mainly of eroded sands and clay. Small
isolated outcrops of cobble-size gravels are common throughout this area but most exhibit no evidence of prehistoric
activity. Dominant flora includes mesquite bush and
grasses. Wooded areas are restricted to fence lines and
stream margins.
Cultural materials found at the site are limited to
a few cores and associated chert debitage. No fire-cracked
rock or other occupational residues were noted.

77

APPENDIX I

4ZBPZ26

This cobble procurement site is situated on an
upland terrace in the medial section of the valley
between two headwater tributaries that drain into
Mclaughlin Creek approximately 600 meters to the south.
Surface sediments are reddish clay. Soil profiles
exposed in erosional gullies indicate that these surface
sediments extend to a considerable depth. Cobble-size
gravels are exposed on the eroded surface and along the
slopes of the gullies. Vegetation, majnly mesquite bush
and grasses, is sparse.
Cultural materials include two cores, a few flakes
and one thick biface (preform) randomly scattered among
numerous unmodified cobbles. No fire-cracked rock or
other cultural residues were found. The site is tentatively assigned to the Archaic Period because of the
morphological characteristics of the single biface.
4ZBPZ2?

This small site is situated near the upland headwaters on the east terrace of Dogwood Branch. Surface
sediments include eroded sands and clay. The area has
been partially cleared, leaving scattered stands of post
oak and juniper.
Two partially reduced bi-directional cores and approximately ten flakes were contained in an area encompassing
no more than 150 square meters. No fire-cracked rock
or other occupational residues were noted.
Several small shovel tests were excavated below the
exposed materials near the terrace edge where some sandy
top soil still remains. These subsurface probes indicated that the sandy matrix is generally less than 10 cm.
thick and is superimposed over the basal red sandy clay
characteristic of the upper terrace areas. No artifacts
were found in the shovel tests.
4ZBPZ28

This prehistoric campsite is situated near the proximal edge of the valley margin just above the upper terrace
along the south side of Dogwood Branch. A small tributary
stream flows 75 meters south of the site and drains into
Dogwood Branch about 100 meters below the area. This
section of the valley is characteristically deflated and
dissected by erosional gullies, rills and slopewash.
Dominant vegetation consists of mesquite, grasses and
a few scattered post oaks and junipers. A small stand of
loblolly pine lies just west of the site.

78

DESCRIPTIONS OF UNTESTED SITES

Occupational residues observed at this site include
chert flakes, cores and a few fragments of fire-cracked
rock. The cores are bi-directional and multi-directional
flake production specimens. No cluster or concentrations
were found and no time-~iagnostic artifacts were recovered.
Areas along the terrace below the exposed residues
were shovel tested exposing loose sandy soil in the top
10 cm., superimposed over a sandy clay. No cultural
materials were found.
4ZBPZ29

41BP129 lies on a sandy knoll on the northern terrace
of Dogwood Branch. The area is marked by the confluence
of three headwater tributaries. The small sandy knoll,
a prominent feature of this section of the floodplain,
rises about one meter above the surrounding terrain. The
knoll has been cleared of trees and is presently covered
with dense grass. Adjacent areas near the stream channel
are characterized by post oaks, red cedars, hickory and
other hardwoods.
Numerous chert flakes, cores, and small quantities
of fire-fractured quartzite and limestone are exposed in
tank tracks and other areas disturbed by military use of
the area for training exercises.
Shovel testing conducted near the crest of the sandy
knoll and in the adjacent floodplain indicates that the
sandy deposits on the knoll are less than 5 ems. thick;
a reddish sandy clay extends to an undetermined depth
below this sand. In the adjacent floodplain the upper
sandy matrix reaches a maximum depth of 10 to 15 ems. at
which point the sandy clay is encountered. No definable
cultural zone or midden was observed during the shovel
testing. Two small flakes were recovered from subsurface
probes in the floodplain.
4ZBPZJO

This site is situated on an upland terrace overlooking the confluence of three small tributary streams.
The area lies 400 meters north of the main channel of
Dogwood Branch near the lower portion of the valley margin.
The eroded surface is dissected by gullies and rills. The
dominant vegetation is mesquite and other bushes.
Cultural materials, including five interior flakes
and a single core, are exposed in rodent disturbances and
on the eroded surfaces. No time-diagnostic artifacts or
other cultural debris was noted.

79

APPENDIX I

4ZBPZ3Z

The scanty remains of this site are scattered over
a small knoll on a wedge-shaped terrace bounded on the
south side by Dogwood Branch and on the west side by one
of its tributary streams. Erosion of the small knoll
has exposed the basal clay in most areas. Vegetation
is scattered oak and juniper trees and various grasses.
Cultural materials found at this site included ten
flakes and a few small fragments of fire-cracked rock.
No time-diagnostic artifacts or other ~ultural residues
were located.
Shovel testing indicates that all cultural materials
are exposed on the surface; none was found below the present
surface.

80

PART II.

HISTORIC RESOURCES

Martha Doty Freeman

This page intentionally left blank.

HISTORIC RESOURCES

ABSTRACT
During December of Z9?8 and January, February,
March and July of Z9?9, a field survey of historic sites
was conducted on approximately 4,000 acres of Zand included
within the boundaries of Camp Swift Military Reservation,
Bastrop County, Texas.
Simultaneously, archival and
legal records were assessed and individuals associated
with specific historic sites and areas were interviewed
in an attempt to develop a regional history, to identify
sites which had been located by the field archeologist,
and to obtain a description of sites which were believed
to have existed prior to Z900 but which had not been located
during the field survey.
As a result of the research and field investigations,
43 historic sites were recorded.
A number of additional
historic sites were noted because they were mentioned in
various documents or remembered by informants but not
located in the field.
A soil survey map indicated the existence by l899
(Winston l908) of approximately 60 houses or other buildings
in the Camp Swift lignite area.
The relatively dense
population suggested by that number of sites might support
the contention that Camp Swift, prior to its acquisition
by the government in the Z940s, was the scene of considerably
more activity than previously thought.
Historic sites on the Camp included a variety of types
and reflected a variety of functions:
at least five cemeteries were located, as well as more than 30 house sites,
sites associated with various farming and ranching activities, and the presumed existence of an early nineteenth
century fort.
In addition, it is assumed that, given the
intensity of historic Indian activity north of the Colorado
River and south of Yegua Creek and the Colorado River-Brazos
River Basin Divide, some sites associated with this
cultural group may exist in the area.
None, however,
were identified during the course of the Texas Archeological
Survey's field work.

INTRODUCTION
In the span of several centuries during which documented
European historical activity occurred in the vicinity of
the Colorado River and the crossing at Mina (now the Bastrop
area), there was, in the very early years, a surprising
paucity of such activity in the vicinity of what is now
known as Camp Swift. The area was agriculturally desirable;

HISTORIC RESOURCES

drained by Mclaughlin and Sandy creeks in the north and
by Dogwood Branch and Piney Creek on the south, the land
should have attracted numerous settlers soon after the
approval of Stephen F. Austin's Little Colony in 1829.
Unfortunately for early nineteenth-century Anglo settlers,
though, the area along the Colorado River was attractive
to numerous Indian tribes as well, whose variety and
number increased geometrically as pressure from Anglos
on the northeast and Plains Indian groups to the northwest
compacted their range dramatically. By 1840, no fewer
than eight groups of Indians had been described, ranging
from the native Tonkawa to the immigra~t Caddo and Delaware.
Indian hostilities until the mid-1840s kept the Anglo
settlement at a minimum in the Camp Swift area. Although
nine individuals were granted land there by 1854, only
a few brave souls ventured to establish agricultural units
during those pre-Civil War years, among them David Holderman
and probably William Mclaughlin.
The division of the Mclaughlin estate precipitated
the initiation of new settlement in the 1850s and 1860s
between Sandy and Mclaughlin creeks. Parcels of land on
the desirable divide between the Creeks were obtained
by heirs or sold to neighbors until the entire region
was populated by families such as the Scotts, Floyds,
Forts, and Sprengers (also spelled Springer) who carried
on ranching and subsistence farming.
The history of land ownership in the Camp Swift area
became exceedingly complex after the Civil War. What had
begun as a sparsely-settled area suddenly experienced a
burgeoning of population in the last forty years of the
nineteenth century, until a geological survey made in 1899
recorded approximately sixty structures of various kinds
as well as an almcst bewildering maze of primary and
secondary roads leading from neighbor to neighbor. Three
primary roads were the Sayersville-McDade Road, running
generally northeast/southwest through the middle of the
survey area; the Oak Hill Road, running southeast from the
Sayersville-McDade Road to the vicinity of the Oak Hill
Cemetery where many area residents were buried; and the
Scott Falls Road, running northeast from the SayersvilleMcDade Road, crossing Mclaughlin and Sandy creeks, and
eventually ending in the outskirts of Elgin.
Each road served relatively discrete subcommunities
within the larger Camp Swift area. One group of families
in the southwestern part of the survey area seems to
have been attracted to the land drained by Dogwood Branch,
another group to the uplands between Sandy and Mclaughlin

84

INTRODUCTION

creeks. Each group frequently had close familial ties
with the others; most of the families participated in an
agricultural economy. House types also appear to have
been consistent throughout Camp Swift, initial construction
consisting of one- or two-room log cabins with ironstone
chimneys and footings. Later, these were replaced by
frame homes of three or four rooms, again using local,
worked stone for some of the structural elements.
Governmental acquisition of the Camp Swift area in
the early 1940s resulted in the dramatic disruption of a
conservative social and economic commu~ity, as well as the
destruction of most structures associated with that community. However, sufficient structural remnants remained
in 1979 to allow identification of perhaps as many as fifty
percent of the sites presumed to have been standing on the
camp prior to 1940. In addition, displaced families frequently moved to nearby towns such as Elgin and McDade
where they were available to aid in the identification of
a large number of located sites.
By 1942, the transformation of the hills between
Bastrop and Elgin was almost complete. Total contracts
of about twenty-five million dollars were let by the government; activation of the Camp on May 4, 1942, was the move
that eventually resulted in an influx of some 40,000
military personnel (Houston and Long 1958: 10-11). Although
much of the Camp was placed in the category of surplus by
the War Department in 1947, the government chose to retain
most of the land between Sandy Creek on the northwest and
FM2336 on the southeast. The hills that had been empty
of settlers for the last five years remained relatively
uninhabited except for small numbers of military troops
and other personnel.
EARLY TRAVEL THROUGH BASTROP COUNTY 1691-1821:
THE CROSSING AT THE COLORADO
For all its natural beauty and agricultural potential,
the area along the Colorado River encompassed by presentday Bastrop County was free of permanent European settlement for more than a century after initial exploration.
Expeditions such as those of Domingo Teran de los Rios,
Pedros de Aguirre, and Louis Juchereau de St. Denis hardly
paused at the Crossing on the Colorado (now site of the
town of Bastrop) as they marched along the Camino ReaZ
between the population centers of Texas and Louisiana.
Their hesitation may have been fueled by the proximity of

85

HISTORIC RESOURCES

frequently hostile Indian tribes. Certainly, attacks such
as one experienced by St. Denis in 1714 hardly added to
the attractiveness of the situation.
Teran's expedition of 1691, whi~h followed the Camino
Real from San Antonio to Nacogdoches
paused for approximately a month during the early su~mer at the Colorado
near the main crossing. There, party members encountered
a number of Tejas Indians, who brought the Spanish reports
of White men who had visited the Cadodachos to the northeast (Clark 1901: 191).
The Teran expedition was only the first of many groups
to use what was to become one of the most important river
fords on the Camino Real, and for 200 years, soldiers,
friars, traders, and civilians traveling to and from East
Texas crossed the Colorado near the present town of Bastrop.
In 1709, an expedition composed of Captain Pedro de Aguirre
and two Franciscan priests, Antonio de San Buenaventura
Olivares and Isidro Felix de Espinosa marched from San
Antonio to the Colorado River where they had understood
a group of Tejas Indians would be awaiting them. Their
arrival found no Tejas, but they did encounter a group of
Yojuane who told the Spanish that the Tejas had no intention
of settling in the vicinity of the Colorado River. 11 • • •
only a few [Tejas] were in the habit of going in search of
buffalo meat to the Colorado River and its neighborhood 11
(Castaneda 1936: II, 22-23).
Five years later, in the fall of 1714, Louis Juchereau
de St. Denis had a somewhat less pleasant experience at the
Crossing when, having left the Asinai villages of East
Texas with the intent of visiting San Juan Bautista on
the Rio Grande, he reached the Colorado where his party
was attacked by a band of about 200 Indians from the coast
(Castaneda 1936: II, 30).
By the beginning of the nineteenth century, traffic
along the Camino Real had become so intense that the
Spanish decided to construct a fort at the Crossing.
Named Puesta del Colorado, the post that was built in
about 1805, though small, was sufficiently important to

1 see Buckley 1911: 34-35n for a description of the various
routes of the Camino Real and the controversy surrounding
the identity of the person who actually 11 laid out 11 the
road.

86

EARLY TRAVEL THROUGH BASTROP COUNTY

attract the attention of such travelers as Zebulon Pike.
Puesta del Colorado grew nut of Antonio Cordero•s
desire to strengthen Spain's frontier against the encroachments of French and Anglo-American interests. In addition,
Cordero was anxious to protect Spanish commerce on the
Camino Real.
However, the post never appears to have been
the location of large numbers of troops. The total number
of forces deployed at the Puesta, and at other posts on
the Guadalupe and San Marcos rivers, never exceeded approximately thirty men.
In June 1807, Zebulon Pike visited_ the Colorado River
and recorded the Puesta as a small Spanish station. He
also noted the presence of Tonkawa Indian lodges near the
post, and described the men as tall and handsome--altogether
11
the most naked savages I ever yet saw without exception 11
(Quaife 1970: 218).
Although the demise of the Puesta del Colorado has not
been absolutely dated, it is clear that the Fort did not
exist many more than fifteen years. In 1821, Stephen F.
Austin used the ford on the San Antonio Road and described
the vicinity of the Crossing in detail. Nowhere did he
mention the existence of a fort near the present-day site
of Bastrop, but described only the bottom where the main
road crossed the Colorado River, the high prairies, rich
lands, and pecan, ash, oak, and cedar timber ([Austin]
1904: 295).
1821-1860: AUSTIN'S LITTLE COLONY AND OTHER
EARLY SETTLEMENT IN THE CAMP SWIFT VICINITY
Austin's 1821 visit to the vicinity of Bastrop County
bore fruit when, six years later, he implemented a plan
to colonize lands between the Brazos and Colorado rivers.
Specifically, he took steps in 1827 to establish what
became known as the 11 Little Colony 11 north of the Colorado
River and encompassing most of present-day Bastrop County.
According to a document written from Saltillo on October 11,
1827, Austin had been solicited by several inhabitants of
Bexar to settle some families on the borders of the Colorado
River near the Old Spanish Road or Camino ReaZ. He had been
asked to form a town at the River crossing to provide
services to travelers on the Road. In addition, the new
settlement would be used to penetrate further into the
internal areas of Texas towards the "Savage tribes" (Texas.
General Land Office. Spanish Archives 1825-1835: 131).
The boundaries of Austin's Little Colony as confirmed
by the Imperial Government of Mexico by November 20, 1827,
were the banks of the Colorado River at the place where
the River was crossed by the road leading from Bexar to
Nacogdoches (the Camino ReaZ), up the Colorado fifteen
leagues, thence east on a line which ran parallel with the
87

HISTORIC RESOURCES

Camino to the dividing ridge of the waters of the Brazos

and Colorado rivers (also the boundar¥ line between the
Little and Nashville Company colonies), thence with the
line of the Nashville Company Colony to the Camino, and
then south to the place of beginning (Texas. GLO.
Spanish Archives 1825-1835: 132-133). Within a year,
the first members of Austin's Little Colony had begun to
settle in the area, most of them south of the presentday site of Camp Swift. They included Martin Wells,
William Barton and his sons, Lehman Barker, Josiah
Wilbarger, Reuben Hornsby and his family, and Bobby
Mitchell (Ray 1949: 304).
There is little, if any, evidence of settlement in
the Camp Swift area prior to 1839 largely because of the
presence of hostile Indians. Jean Louis Berlandier, who
crossed the Colorado River near Bastrop in 1828, reported
having seen 11 Tahuacano 11 Indians in the vicinity (Berlandier
n.d.: n.p.). The recollections of John Holland Jenkins
are full of stories of encounters throughout Bastrop County
among Whites and various Indian groups, including Comanche,
Coushatta, Caddo, Waco, Delaware, Tawakoni, Tonkawa, and
Lipan Apache. Indeed, Jenkins' memoirs, with those of
Noah Smithwith, provide the best eyewitness descriptions
of the multitudinous tribes which, experiencing pressures
from the north, east and west, were pushing into the
region along the Colorado River.
Jenkins described the Spanish-speaking Comanche who
visited the Tumlinson family as
large, fine-looki~g men, • • • entirely
naked, with the exception of a small
apron attached to a belt or girdle,
which was made of cloth of all textures
and colors, with fringes and tassels at
the ends. They had keen black eyes
without lashes, and long plaits of
coarse black hair hanging from their
bare heads down to the very ground behind
them. All this peculi'arity of costume,
combined with their no less peculiar
color, and their arms consisting of bows,
arrows, lances, and carbines, made a rare
picture of wild, untamed beauty, which
could not be viewed without interest,
and once seen could never be forgotten
(Jenkins 1958: 5-6).

88

AUSTIN'S LITTLE COLONY AND OTHER EARLY SETTLEMENT

Jenkins mentioned that the party of Comanches he
described were 11 hunting Tonkawa Indians" (Jenkins 1958: 9),
a group Smithwick remarked made trouble for White settlers
in 1836 (Smithwick 1900: 153) when communities along the
Colorado River were already thrown into confusion by the
events of the Revolution. Other tribes Jenkins and Smithwick recalled as being troublesome were the roving
Coushattas, who showed a predilection for taking the
Jenkins family horses; a band of Caddoes who 11 came constantly in and out, pretending to be hunting and trying
to seem friendly and honest • . • ; 11 Wacos who scalped
Josiah Wilbarger; a solitary Delaware who, knowing nothing
of the events of the Revolution, chose to meander through
the Bastrop vicinity from the San Saba where he had been
trapping beaver; Tawakoni who made a raid on an area about
twelve miles below Bastrop after the Revolution (Jenkins
1958: 10, 26-29, 42, 53); and Lipan Apaches who Worth S.
Ray described as "[running] amuck 11 in 1839 (Ray 1949: 304).
Jenkins' summary of Indian movements until the early
1840s ("For a time, bands of Indians would be seen passing
to and fro in their warfare against other tribes and in
search of game • • • • ) (Jenkins 1958: 10) does much to
explain why permanent settlement on Camp Swift probably
did not occur until after 1836. As Worth S. Ray pointed
out, everything outside of Mina [Bastrop] was the extreme
frontier, and "every home erected in that part of the
country was from necessity a 'Fort' • • • 11 (Ray 1949: 305).
It is possible that one of these frontier 11 forts 11
was located within the portion of Camp Swift surveyed
during 1978-1979. No structural remains were located by
the field crew during the course of the survey, but several
legal records pertaining to LCRA Tract D-146 specifically
mention an 11 0ld Fort" on the northwest bank of Mclaughlin
Creek. The fort was situated on land originally surveyed
in 1838, granted to William Mclaughlin, and divided among
Mclaughlin heirs in the 1860s. Litigation between the
heirs and a purchaser of one of the tracts, the Floyd
family, ended in District Court. In 1874 (the 1865 partition of the Mclaughlin land failed to describe any
structure), the minutes of the District Court case mentioned an "Old Fort" on the northwest bank of Mclaughlin
Creek (Bastrop County Civil Minutes District Court F:
171-172). A field map of the property is unfortunately
missing from the District Court files.
While some nine individuals had been granted land
within the survey area before the Civil War, conclusions
about early (pre-1850) settlement there can only be conjectural. William Mclaughlin, for example, arrived in

89

HISTORIC RESOURCES

Texas in 1822 and patented twenty-six labors in 1841;
Peter Wade immigrateq in 1836 and patented one-third
league five years later; Robert Owen arrived in Texas
in 1831 and patented one-third league in 1845; Jesse
Barker patented a labor in the early 1840s after his
arrival in Texas in 1833; John Anderson, who had served
in the Army of Texas from 1836-1837, received a relatively
small patent of 177 acres; and Samuel Wolfenberger, who
participated in the Storming of Bexar, patented 320 acres
in the southwestern portion of present-day Camp Swift
although the location of his residence was nearer Bastrop
and the Colorado River (Texas. General-Land Office 1841:
n.p.; ibid. 184la: n.p.; ibid. 1845b: n.p.; ibid. 1844(?):
n.p.; ibid. 1846a: n.p.; ibid. 1854: n.p.}.
It is apparent that at least one of the original
patentees actually resided on his grant. David Holderman,
immigrant of 1832 (Texas. General Land Office: 1945),
was living on 2,725 acres evaluated at $9,086 by 1839.
The following year, his holdings included 545 a~res
appraised at $2,180, 12 Negroes, and 20 cattle.
Holderman's ownership of a significant number of
slaves in 1840 strongly suggests that he was attempting
to practice a plantation way of life in the southern Camp
Swift area. Although such an attempt seems incongruous
in the uplands of Bastrop County (most large plantations
were clustered along the Colorado River), at least one
other resident is thought to have participated in a
similar economic system by the mid-l850s. According
to an informant, Libbie Wade Cameron, her grandfather,
S. B. Chandler, owned slaves and practiced large-scale
agriculture before the Civil War (Cameron 1978). Chandler,
born in 1812, supposedly came to Texas from South Carolina
by way of Hope, Arkansas, where he was elected a judge
(Cameron 1978). Although Cameron stated that Chandler
had settled on present-day Camp Swift by 1843 or 1845,
when he had built a log cabin and barn, Bastrop County
Deed Records show that he actually bought property on
Camp Swift in 1854 and 1855 before settling at Site
41BP169. Four hundred acres of the David Holderman
Headright were purchased from David and Tabitha Reynolds
for $250 on August 14, 1854 (Deed Record I & J: 335-336).

2rn 1850, Holderman owned 3,000 acres assessed at $7,500;
the only other resident assessed for property in that
year who lived near the survey area was Lewis Stopbleburg
whose 175 acres in the Reuben Gage Grant were assessed at
$900.

90

FIGURE

HISTORIC SITE LOCATIONS
Camp Swift, Texas: 1979

(?
-~-.

N

MN

.13s

Historic

Site

All site numbers are preceded by

Mining Area
Buffer

Boundary

Zone

Boundary

.5
' - - - - - - - ' - - - - - - - - - ' MILE

.5

Texas Archeological Survey/L.A.M. 1980

41 BP.

KILOMETEA

7

HISTORIC RESOURCES

Seven months later, Chandler acquired the 177 acres now
comprising Tracts G-315 and G-316 from Neill Robison for
$250 (Ibid.: 535) .3
Historical records briefly examined during January
1979 gave no indication of other settlers in the Camp
Swift area before 1860. However, hints from informants
and in the archeological record do indicate that there may
have been residents in the area other than Holderman and
Chandler. Mclaughlin and his heirs may have resided on
the divide between Sandy and Mclaughlin creeks. One informant remembered having been told years ~go of an early log
cabin site on Tract D-151; surely the existence of an
apparently early, solitary grave site on the tract near
the supposed location of the log structure opens possibilities of more pre-Civil War historic sites than were
actually recorded.
SETTLEMENT IN THE CAMP SWIFT AREA AFTER 1860
Sandy and Mclaughlin Creeks
With the 1860s, the end of the Civil War, and all threat
from hostile Indian groups twenty years in the past, the
land now in Camp Swift began to fill up rapidly. Some of
the larger grants were subdivided among heirs of the original
grantees; in other cases, parcels were sold off to settlers
who had been living in the immediate vicinity.
The story of the best-known of these individuals,
Abner Scott, begins some thirty years before he actually
settled on the divide between Mclaughlin and Sandy creeks.
The site where Scott built in 1865 or 1866 is just outside
of the boundary of the Camp Swift survey area. But the
influence of the man spread well beyond the log cabin he
built and grew to encompass a goodly proportion of the
territory south to Piney Creek. By 1880 he was related

3The relative acreages and prices of the land involved in
the two transactions indicate that G-315 and G-316, the
177-acre headright of John Anderson, were improved pieces
of real estate by 1855. It is possible, then, either
that Chandler lived on and improved the land before he
purchased it, or that former owners, Robison and Thomas
Gazley (the latter being Anderson's assignee) had improved
it with structures or by cultivation.

92

SETTLEMENT IN THE CAMP SWIFT AREA AFTER l860

by marriage to the Chandlers to the southwest; by 1900 his
children or other relatives had built homes south of
Mclaughlin Creek which account in number for a significant
percentage of all historic structures in the area.
Abner Scott was born in 1835 in Richmond, Texas, Fort
Bend County (Bastrop County Old Date Birth Record 8: 631),
to Henry and Martha Scott. Martha Scott was born in
Georgia in about 1800; a son, David, was also born in
Georgia in about 1816 (U.S. Census. Bastrop County: 1860).
The place and date of birth of Henry is unknown; however,
it is thought that he died sometime between April 8, 1831,
when he acquired title from the Mexican Government to one
league on the Brazos River, and January 27, 1838, when
Martha applied for letters of administration to his estate
(Ulmer 1964: 40; Fort Bend Chapter DAR n.d.: 9).
The history of the Scott Family in the late 1830s is
unclear. A Mrs. Martha Scott of Fort Bend County is known
to have married L. M. Armstrong sometime in this period.
However, it seems unlikely that this was Abner's mother
since she is mentioned in deed records for Bastrop County
as early as 1839. In that year, Pinkney Hill, curator
of the estates of George and Mathew Duty, noted that
Joseph Duty and Martha Scott were George's and Mathew's
heirs and were entitled to shares in the Duty estate
(Bastrop County Transcribed Deed Record C: 229). Certainly, it can be assumed that by 1839, Martha, Abner, and
David had proper~ in Bastrop County and/or had moved there.
By 1850, David had married and had two children one
year of age or younger: Martha and Sarah A. (U.S. Census.
Bastrop County: 1850). A year later, his mother, Martha,
and an individual named Napoleon Scott, had purchased 164
acres on Sandy Creek.4 The Scott Family's eventual move

4Again, the marital situation of Martha Scott is confusing
here. She· either had a third son named Napoleon, or she
may have been married to an individual by that name. Whatever their relationship, by the 1860s, she had sold onehalf of her interest in a piece of property they owned
jointly to David Scott (Bastrop County Deed Record N: 604).
There is no doubt that Martha, David, and Abner were indeed
the Fort Bend County family recorded in the 1830s: Abner
always gave his birthplace as Fort Bend County; Bastrop
County tax and census records indicate that Abner, David,
and Martha all lived together at various times; and David
named one of his daughters Martha, while Abner appears
to have named a son for his brother.

93

HISTORIC RESOURCES

to the vicinity of Camp Swift occurred in 1857 when they
bought 370 improved acres out of the Peter F. Wade
Headright on Sandy Creek from Larkin P. Sullivan (Bastrop
County Transcribed Deed Record K: 302, 319).5
Although Abner was listed as a member of Martha's
household until at least 1860 (U.S. Census. Bastrop
County: 1860), he had actually started to purchase land
nearby several years before. Land on Mclaughlin Creek
had attracted his attention, so in 1857 he purchased
ninety-three acres from Stanton and Arremissa Mclaughlin
in the Joseph Black Headright League (Bastrop County
Transcribed Deed Record K: 654).
Sometime during the early 1860s, Scott must have
become acquainted with settlers who were already living
on the William Mclaughlin Grant. One of the families was
that of Henry Sprenger (also spelled Springer) who had
migrated to the United States from Hanover, Germany, by
1832, and had come to Texas by way of Louisiana where a
daughter, Louisa, was born in 1838. Louisa and Abner were
married on November 10, 1865 (U.S. Census. Bastrop County:
1870; Bastrop County OZd Date Birth Record 8: 631; Marriage
Record A: 195) .6
Within a year, the Scotts had begun to acquire the
core of an estate which eventually spread from Sandy Creek
to the south side of the Sayersville-McDade Road. Much of
the land was purchased from various Mclaughlin heirs and
included fifty acres from Emily Yeoman on July 24, 1966;
fifty-two-and-one-half acres from David Mclaughlin as
attorney for Elizabeth and John Hampshire on July 27, 1868;
another one hundred nineteen acres from the same parties
on February 18, 1870; and three hundred acres from B. D.
Orgain (formerly owned by the Yeomans) (Bastrop County

5rn 1867, Martha Scott sold her one-half of the 370 acres to
her son, David, for $1 ,500, a transaction in which she also
turned over her entire stock of cattle, cows, hogs, two
horses, farming implements, and her crop of corn and cotton
(Bastrop County Deed Record N: 604-605).
6The Sprenger Family is known to have lived within the
survey area, but Henry Sprenger's housesite was not positively identified. Tract D-153 was the north half of the
Springer Survey, but he owned other parcels of significant
size, including an orchard on the Mclaughlin Survey and
321 acres in the Mclaughlin Survey on Sandy Creek near
Spring Branch.

94

SETTLEMENT IN THE CAMP SWIFT AREA AFTER Z860

Deed Record N: 184-185; Deed Record 0: 57; Transcribed
Deed Record P: 191; Deed Record Y: 460).

All through these years, the Scotts were having the
children to whom their land would eventually go: William
in 1866, Mary B. in 1868, David B. in 1875, May Louise
(Louisa May) in 1878, and John H. on an unknown date. In
addition, it is likely that Louisa inherited some Sprenger
land since parcels of it were included in property she
and Abner deeded to their children in later years. The
core of their holdings, however, remained the ridge north
of Mclaughlin Creek where they built a -log cabin and
raised a family.
Scott Family members who live in nearby Elgin were
helpful in describing life on Mclaughlin Creek, identifying
historic sites and listing neighbors whose housesites
remain scattered throughout the Camp Swift area. According
to Abner Scott's great-grandson and the widow of his grandson (Sgt. Harlan Scott 1978; Ina Fay Scott 1978, 1979),
Abner and Louisa built a one-room log cabin with a rock
chimney on Tract D-150. All their children were born there
and so they gradually added on rooms to accommodate their
growing family.
Over the years, Abner and Louisa gave their children
parcels of Scott and Sprenger land. In 1890, they deeded
William about 200 acres in the David Holderman Survey, as
well as 70 acres in the Mclaughlin League (Bastrop County
Deed Records Z6: 89, 91 ); they deeded John H. 200 acres in
the Holderman Survey and about 30 acres in the Mclaughlin
Survey south of Springer's [sic] orchard7 on September 15,
1890 (Bastrop County Deed Record Z6: 92, 94-95). Three
years later, they sold Louisa May 321 acres in the Mclaughlin
Survey less one acre they had previously sold to Aussillaux
and Gaston.8 All of that acreage had been purchased earlier
by W. H. Springer [sic] from David Mclaughlin on January 2,
1868 (Bastrop County Deed Record 2Z: 30-31).
Much of the land deeded to John H. Scott was located
south of the Sayersville-McDade Road near its intersection
with the Scott Falls Road (Tract A-21). In addition, John

7The majority of these parcels appear to have been Sprenger
land originally.
8 Aussillaux and Gaston were two Frenchmen who lived at
Site 41BP138. They purchased one acre from the Scotts
so that they could build a dam across Spring Branch and
irrigate their vineyards.

95

HISTORIC RESOURCES

eventually obtained Tract G-316, probably through his wife,
Minnie Chandler Scott, who was a daughter of S. B. Chandler.
early Camp Swift resident. But Scott built his home on
Tract A-21. There he had an enclosed dog-trot house
immediately northeast of a stock tank. The children
stayed in a bunkhouse located in the vicinity of the dogtrot, and bathed in a small building which was adjacent
to the stock tank. The main house stood until 1937 when
it burned. Scott received injuries in the fire which
resulted in his death three years later (Etgin Courier
n.d.).
After the deaths of Abner and Louisa, Scott Family
members continued to use the little log cabin they had
built in the 1860s. Last residents were John H. Scott's
son and daughter-in-law, Grover and Ina Fay Scott, who
moved into the structure after they married in 1922. There
they raised nine children, farming and ranching on a limited
scale. Grover experimented with grafting different types
of pecans on the trees which grew abundantly along the
creek bottoms. The family gathered nuts every year, and
the income they received from the crop, which they sold
for ten cents a pound, paid the taxes on the land and
bought Christmas presents.
Some of the Scotts' neighbors had been there on
Mclaughlin Creek and near the Sayersville-McDade Road
almost as long as Abner Scott; others moved into the
vicinity and purchased land from Scott heirs such as
Belle Scott whose land was acquired by the Fleming Family
and then by Otis Evans, a Fleming son-in-law. The Andy
Fleming Housesite (41BP135) stood nearly opposite the
Abner Scott cabin; downhill to the west was an associated
·barn. Footings from both locations are still visible today
as are the cut pieces of ironstone from the collapsed
chimney at the Fleming House. Further west, just before
the dirt road up to the Fleming and Scott houses intersected the Scott Falls Road, was a corral (41BP136) which
was built by Otis Evans after World War II when he leased
the land from the government for cattle grazing.
While he still lived on what became Camp Swift, Evans
actually resided at Site 41BP147, a piece of property with
a complicated history. According to a Scott Family member,
Evans obtained the land from the Flemings who obtained it
from John H. Scott via a local bank. Although Scott had
owned the land for some time, the name 11 Herms Place 11 9 was
9 The spelling of this family name is a matter of conjecture.

96

SETTLEMENT IN THE CAMP SWIFT AREA AFTER l860

already associated with it, indicating that at least one
other family had previously lived there. Certainly, the
archeological record confirms the probability of several
occupations by various individuals or families over an
extended period of time. Within the immediate vicinity
of the elevation overlooking Mclaughlin Creek on its south
bank are two sites, 41BP150 and 41BP151, on which were
discovered artifacts roughly dating from the mid-to-latenineteenth century. Site 41BP150 appears to have been
recently cut by a military road, but 41BP151 located on
the west side of the road is relatively_ intact. Visible
remains consist of a collapsed ironstone chimney and
evidences of an early (mid-to-late-nineteenth century)
lime mix mortar.
The site to the north which is actually associated
with Otis Evans (41BP147) covers approximately fifteen
acres of land which were obviously used for grazing and
were cultivated over a span of many years. Thick stands
of cholla, opuntia cactus, and mesquite grow everywhere.
Historic remains, which appear to date from the 1900-1930
period, are further masked by intensive military activity
which has severely disturbed house footings, chimneys,
and the remains of outbuildings.
The likelihood of locating the remains of the small
log cabin which one informant remembered on the property
(Ina Fay Scott 1979) seems small, but the existence of an
early, solitary grave (41BP146) which dates to the period
prior to John Scott's ownership, lends credibility to
what would otherwise be difficult, if not impossible, to
confirm without further archival research.
Perhaps the only other pre-1900 housesite within the
vicinity of the Evans property and Abner Scott's cabin
was what remained of the house built by the Floyd Family
(41BP132). Located on a ridge overlooking Mclaughlin
Creek, the house was roughly contemporaneous with the
Scott cabin. Like the Scott structure, the Floyd home
was located on land that had originally belonged to W. M.
Mclaughlin and had passed to his heirs. By 1870, John
D. Floyd appears to have been living on the property
(Bastrop County. Tax Assessor and Collector 1870: n.p.).
Floyd's possession of the land was not without its
drawbacks. The family had purchased the property after
the Mclaughlin estate was divided, but by 1872, David
Mclaughlin and Abner Scott were involved in District
Court Case 2080 against Jonathan D. and Silas Floyd, and
James Brown. The land was confirmed to the Floyds until
1874 when other Mclaughlin heirs, the John Hampshires,

97

HISTORIC RESOURCES

again filed suit against John D. Floyd.lo Again, the land
was confirmed to the Floyds who retained firm possession
until the 1940s (Bastrop County Deed Record 22: 527-528;
Civil Minutes District Court F: 171-172).
In 1895, Jim Floyd, son of J. D., bought a one-eighth
interest in the 197 acres from S. W. Floyd (Bastrop County
Deed Record 22: 527-528).
Eventually, probably by inheritance, Jim ended up with a six-eighths interest, while
his sister, Cynthia E., held a one-eighth interest (Bastrop
County Probate Minutes u: 484). They lived together in
the old house which one of the Scotts remembered as having
been a frame structure with two big rooms, a porch across
the front, and a shed room across the back (Ina Fay Scott).11
Eventually, Cynthia Floyd obtained a seven-eighths interest
in the property after her brother died on July 27, 1934,
and left her three head of cattle, two mules, one wagon,
one surrey, one cultivator, one planter, and miscellaneous
household and kitchen furniture in addition to his interest
in the land (Bastrop County Probate Minutes u: 476-477,
484) .
The Scotts, Floyds, and Evans were all well-known
families on the divide between Mclaughlin and Sandy creeks.
But other portions of northeastern Camp Swift contain
historic sites as well. In the north-eastern sector,
many sites were associated with the Westbrook Family who,
even though they were relative late-comers, soon blocked
up large amounts of acreage.
According to a former resident of the Camp Swift area,
patriarch of the family was J. W. Westbrook, a preacher
lOrt is in these two District Court cases, 2080 and 2081,
that mention is made of the "Old Fort" on the northwest
bank of Mclaughlin Creek in Tract D-146. Floyds owned
land on Sandy Creek by 1856 when James Floyd, Sr., as
guardian for the estate of James Floyd, Jr., purchased
one labor of land in the Enoch Harris Headright (Bastrop
County Transcribed Deed Record K: 85; Probate Minutes D:
450; Probate Record E: 378-379).
11 This frame structure may have represented a later building
phase. Ina Fay and Harlan Scott believe that the Floyds
and Scotts were related. A suggestion of a relationship
is implied in a deed signed in 1893 in which S. W. and E.
l. Floyd sold their interest in the real estate of S. B.
Chandler, deceased (Bastrop County Deed Record Z9: 547),
indicating that they could have been heirs of Chandler
who was, indeed, related by marriage to the Scotts.

98

j

SETTLEMENT IN THE CAMP SWIFT AREA AFTER Z860

who had fought in the Civil War (Cameron 1978). He moved
to the McDade area and began making purchases of land
around Yegua Creek in Bastrop County. Soon, the land
west of McDade caught his eye, and he made his initial
purchase in the Martinez League on January 27, 1890.
Other purchases followed, and by 1915 he had bought a
total of almost 2,000 acres in the A. Martinez, David
Holderman, and William Mclaughlin surveys.
There are at least six different house or school sites
located today on what was Westbrook land, but not all of
them can be presumed to have been associated with the
family. Sites 41BP155 and 41BP156 are the locations of
homes which belonged to J. W. Westbrook and his daughter,
Alma. Historic features also include cisterns, scrap
lumber, and scattered bricks and artifacts, all that remains
of a two-story, late Victorian frame home which had a large
enclosed porch with a cistern in the yard and one inside
the porch.
One of the Westbrooks' children married a member of
the Joiner Family who owned property on the south side of
the Sayersville-McDade Road. A housesite (41BP144) which
had been disturbed by a recent road cut is probably associated with the Joiner Family, but is marked only by a
well and some scattered ceramics.
An important historic site in the eastern portion of
the survey area was the Wayside School (41BP154), located
midway between the Joiner and Westbrook houses on the north
side of the Sayersville-McDade Road. Two acres for the
School were surrounded by Westbrook land and were conveyed
in 1902 to the School trustees by B. P. and Bennie Jones.
Children from as far away as the Abner Scott place attended
school there in classes taught by Florence Adkins and
Paulene Stagner (Ina Fay Scott 1979). 12
Dogwood Creek
Another favorite area for settlement on Camp Swift
after the Civil War era was the land drained by Dogwood
Creek. Located generally on the southwest side of Oak
Hill Road, the elevations along this drainage soon filled
with stockmen and farmers.
Much of the land along Dogwood Creek was part of the
Samuel Wolfenberger Grant, made in the early 1850s to a

12rhe spelling of the names of both teachers at Wayside
School is a matter of conjecture.

99

HISTORIC RESOURCES

veteran of the Texas Revolution. However, as in other
parts of Camp Swift, there is little evidence to indicate
settlement on the Grant prior to 1860.
Perhaps the earliest permanent residence was built
by A. 0. Beck who acquired the interest of James P. Wallace's
heirs in a parcel land described as lying on Dogwood Branch
in 1867 (Bastrop County Deed Record N: 378-379, 409).
Although the exact date when the Beck family moved onto
their land is not known, they probably lived at Site 41BP158
by at least 1870. An informant, Mrs. J. D. Owen, remembered
her father's having stayed with the Becks in their fourroom frame home in about 1884 when he made a cotton crop
on the Beck property (Owen 1979).
Other early housesites near Dogwood Creek were the
J. W. Scruggs Home (41BP162), built by relatives of Libbie
Wade Cameron; the s. B. Chandler Home (41BP169) which
probably post-dated Chandler's improvements on Tracts
G-315 and G-316; and the Eschberger Home (41BP159), marked
today by a chimney constructed of cut red stone and lined
with firebrick.
Beck, Chandler, the Scotts, and the Floyds were all
typical examples of early settlers on Camp Swift. But as
the nineteenth century drew to a close, the area became
the focus of new immigration. Several families settled
on or near the old roads and trails which criss-crossed
Mclaughlin, Sandy and Dogwood creeks. Some of them built
homes along a road which led south from the Floyd home to
Mclaughlin Creek, climbed the hill to the Evans property,
and then followed the property line between Tracts D-151
and D-152 to intersect the Sayersville-McDade Road near
John Scott 1 s home. At that place, A. G. 11 Gus 11 Sowell had
bought 200 acres identified as the north half of the
Springer [sic] Survey from Will Scott in 1911. His house
was located at Site 41BP152. A second historic site,
41BP149, was located between Gus Sowell 's and John Scott's
homes and belonged to Charley Sowell, Gus's son, who built
a home which has been largely destroyed by the construction
of a new dirt road by the military. Dating from the
post-World War I era, all that remains of the site are a
cistern, house footings, a collapsed chimney, and miscellaneous historic debris.
A number of sites on either side of the SayersvilleMcDade Road also date from the post-1900 era. Two of the
more interesting of these sites were associated with the
activities of Frank Denison, a well-to-do Bastrop businessman who early saw the possibilities of developing Camp
Swift's coal resources.13 Denison leased hundreds of acres
l3on the basis of Winston's soil survey of Bastrop County,
mining activity is known to have occurred in the area as
early as the 1890s.
l 00

SETTLEMENT IN THE CAMP SWIFT AREA AFTER l860

in Tracts G-314 and G-317. From about 1913 to 1928, he
financed mines throughout Tract G-314 (Site 41BP148) and
built a commissary and shacks for the Mexican families
he employed to work in the pits. Approximately thirteen
Mexicans died while in Denison's employ, and they are buried
at Site 41BP170, a small cemetery located a short distance
south of the Sayersville-McDade Road (Owen 1979).
THE CREATION OF CAMP SWIFT
The acquisition of the property now within Camp Swift
by the United States government in the early 1940s put an
end to Frank Denison's dream of developing the rich coal
reserves on Tract G-317. It also spelled the doom of every
historic structure on Camp Swift and the disturbance of
most historic sites. Plans for a military camp outside
of Bastrop began as early as 1940 and were encouraged by
business leaders in every surrounding community and city.
On July 29, 1941, the contract to make an engineering
survey of the projected camp area was awarded by the army
to the firm of Frees and Nichols of Fort Worth; approximately six months later, contracts were let for the construction of the Camp. In an area of 55,906 acres, 2,750
buildings were constructed for a maximum population of
44,000 at an expenditure of $25,000,000 (Houston and Long
1958: 5-11).
Named for Eben Swift, a military figure in Texas and
Mexico, a World War I commander, and author of many military
books, the Camp was the scene of World War II infantry
training. At various times, troops trained at the Camp
included the 97th and 102nd Infantry divisions, 5th
Headquarters Special Troops of the Third Army, 116th and
120th Tank Destroyer battalions, and the 2nd Air Base
Security Training Group. Post commanders included Colonels
Oscar P. Houston and Alfred G. Brown.
With the conclusion of the War, military activities
at Camp Swift began a slow wind-down. On January 31, 1947,
much of the Camp was placed in the category of surplus by
the War Department, and a large number of tracts of land
which had been condemned by th€ U.S. government earlier
were returned to their former owners. However, many other
tracts, including all those within the present lignite
prospect area, were retained by the government for use by
the National Guard and other military units. Former landowners protested vigorously, but despite their efforts to
repossess family homesteads, the land was gone forever.
With plans to strip-mine the property in the 1980s, all
traces of earlier human occupation will disappear.

101

HISTORIC RESOURCES

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
During late 1978 and the early months of 1979, a
limited survey of historic sites on about 4,000 acres of
Camp Swift, Bastrop County, Texast was conducted. Fortythree sites were recorded (Fig. 7J and a number of sites
which were not located but which are presumed to exist
within the survey area were noted. A very general narrative of the history of the region was developed on the
basis of the archeological record, interviews with former
residents, and research in county records of various types.
A number of conclusions were drawn on the basis of
the work done by the Texas Archeological Survey:
1) There may have been as many as sixty historic
sites located in the survey area by 1900.
2) Most of the domestic sites which were located
seemed to cluster in a number of discrete areas. One group
of sites was located in the uplands along creeks, such as
Dogwood Branch, Mclaughlin Creek and Sandy Creek. Another
group of sites appeared to be less associated with creeks
and more with historic roads, such as the Sayersville to
McDade Road, the Scott Falls Road, and the Oak Hill Road.
Finally, at least one group of historic sites was a function of a natural resource--coal--and was located on either
side of the Sayersville-McDade Road a short distance from
its intersection with present-day Highway 95.
3) There were a significant number of sites from the
pre-1865 period which were fleetingly referenced in documents or interviews, but the remains of which have either
been destroyed or are subsurface in location and so were
not apparent to the historian during the field survey.
4) A large number of sites dated from the post-1865
period. Almost without exception, these sites were readily
recognizable because of the vegetation in the surrounding
area. Thick stands of mesquite, cholla and opuntia cactus
told a story of historic activity over an extended period
of time.
5) While vegetation appeared to be a useful indicator of historic activity from the post-1865 period, it
became apparent during the course of the survey that it
was little or no help in identifying historic sites that
dated from the pre-Civil War years. For example, while
records and interviews clearly pointed to the existence
of historic activity in certain parts of the survey area
as early as the 1840s, such activity may not have been of
sufficient duration to result in the creation of the
diagnostic vegetation associated with many other, later
historic sites. Some of the earlier sites and site areas
had been cleared perhaps 125 years before, yet the second
growth of trees had become so immense in the intervening
years as to be virtually indistinguishable from primary

102

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS

growth to the untrained eye.
6) The historic population of the Camp Swift survey
area, then, spanned the years from the seventeenth century,
when Spanish explorers noted the presence of Tonkawa and
other Indian tribes; to the late 1830s, when the first
Anglo-Americans are thought to have established plantations;
to the post-Civil War period, when the ancestors of the
most recent residents first took up land on Sandy and
Mclaughlin creeks and along Dogwood Branch.
Sufficient information was obtained during the 19781979 survey to formulate a series of re£ommendations for
further work on Camp Swift.
1) Most of the sites occurring along the eastern
portion of Mclaughlin Creek were recorded in 1979. One
possible site believed to be in the area needs to be searched for further, however. This is a structure which
appeared in legal documents as "The Old Fort" and was
located on the northwest bank of Mclaughlin Creek near
its confluence with an eastern tributary. Concerted
efforts should be made to locate the Fort site by coordinating detailed mapping on the basis of documentary
evidence with field searching. Should such a search fail
to locate the fort, it is imperative that mining in the
area be done only with the realization of the potential
sensitivity of the land bordering Mclaughlin Creek.
2)
Efforts should be made to associate family names
with specific, recorded historic sites within the Mclaughlin
Grant in general and on the Westbrook Ranch in particular.
A partition map of McLaughlin's estate, presently located
in the Bastrop County probate records, could be used to
assign proper identification to various historic sites in
that Grant. In addition, a number of individuals still
live in Elgin who are familiar with the Westbrook property
and could identify families associated with historic sites
in that locale. Sites included within this category are
41BP142, 41BP143, 41BP150, 41BP151, 41BP153, 41BP157,
41BP183 and 41BP184.
3) Two sites -- 41BP150 and 41BP151 -- included
artifacts which appeared to date from the pre-Civil War
period. It is suggested that both sites be tested to
determine the extent to which subsurface architectural
features are intact, and that measurements of such features,
such as footings, chimneys, etc., be made. Some effort
should be made, through artifactual analysis and research,
to assign specific dates to these two sites.
4) Architectural features at Sites 41BP158, the Beck
Housesite, and 41BP159, the Eschberger Housesite, should
be revealed and recorded. These are two of the oldest
and least disturbed of the nineteenth century historic

103

HISTORIC RESOURCES

sites in the Dogwood Branch drainage, and their architectural
features should be recorded to aid in establishing a
structural 11 norm 11 for the Camp Swift area.
5) All recorded cemeteries, 41BP145, 41BP146, and
41BP170, and two reported cemeteries shown on Figure 7
should be left undisturbed by mining activities. In
addition, Camp Swift personnel should take positive steps
to enclose extant graves and protect them from military
activity and livestock presently on the range.
6) Although the Abner Scott cabin site, 41BP134, lies
outside the mining area at this time, it is suggested that
the Site be excavated should it be endangered by future
mining or by actions peripheral to presently-planned
mining activities.
7) Tracts G-315 and G-316 are thought to have been
the location of improvements by the early 1850s. While
field surveys concluded in 1979 failed to locate any such
improvements in the form of house footings, wells or other
historic features, caution should be exercised as mining
proceeds in this area.

l 04

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary of Historic Sites
Site Name

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Strea'"

41BP132

Floyd
Housesite

Site dates from the last
quarter of the 19th Century. Stone house footings clearly indicate
the size and layout of
the structures which
overlooked Mclaughlin
Creek to the south.

Ina Fay Scott
Sgt. Harlan Scott

460 -470

1

Mclaughlin
Creek

41BP133

John H. Scott
Housesite

Site of a two-story log
structure built about
1885-1890 which burned
in 1936. The area included a bunkhouse and
other outbuildings, a
stock tank and dipping
vat.

Ina Fay Scott
Sgt. Harlan Scott

500'-510'

Mclaughlin
Creek

41BP134

Abner Scott
Housesite

Location of a log cabin
built by Abner Scott ca.
1866-1870. Outlines of
the structure are still
visible.

Ina Fay Scott
Sgt. Harlan Scott

460 1 -470

Sandy Creek

41BP135

Fleming Housesite and Outbuilding

Site is comprised of the
footings from a late 19th
century, early 20th century house and barn.
Scattered pottery and
bricks litter the area.

Ina Fay Scott

450'.-460'

1

1

Sandy Creek/
Mclaughlin
Creek

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary of Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

41BP136

Otis Evans'
Corral

A mid-20th century lumber
corral used when Evans
leased the surrounding
property from the government for cattle grazing
after World War II.

Ina Fay Scott

420'-430'

Sandy Creek/
Mclaughlin
Creek

41BP137

Ernst
Housesite

Site consists of a cistern, ironstone footings,
brick and miscellaneous
glass and ironstone ceramics. It probably
dates from the early
20th century.

Bruno Ernst

470'-480'

Sandy Creek/
Mclaughlin
Creek

41BP138

Aussilloux s
Housesite

Remains of Aussilloux's
house include a rock
basement, partial first
floor, and wooden joists.
The footings for a structure that housed a wine
press are located to the
northwest of the house.
Vineyards stretched out
to the southeast towards
Sandy Creek at one time.

Ina Fay Scott

440'-450'

Sandy Creek

41BP139

Russel 1
Housesite

Site probably dates from
the first third of the
20th century. It consists of scattered brick,

Mrs. J.D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen

420 1 -430 1

Dogwood Branch

1

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary_of Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name

41BP139,
continued

41BP140

Site Description

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

Bruno Ernst

500'

Mclaughlin
Creek

Bruno Ernst

515'-525'

Mclaughlin
Creek

480'-490'

Mclaughlin
Creek

Informants

a cistern, white ceramics,
some modern glass bottles,
and metal fragments; construction of Highway 95
may have cut through part
of the site.
John Gest
Housesite?

A collapsed ironstone chimney and miscellaneous
cultural debris such as
white ceramics, are all
thickly overgrown with
grapevines. Mortar types
suggest a construction
date sometime during the
latter half of the nineteenth century.

41BP141

Heinze (?)
Housesite
(Amanda
Nicholas)

Historic remains consist
of brick, 20th century
glass bottles, possibly
locally-made pottery and
large (l 'xl 'x2 '-square)
pieces of local, worked
ironstone which have been
used as house footings.

41BP142

Unknown

Situated on a rise overlooking Mclaughlin Creek,

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary of Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name

41BP142,
continued

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

the site is comprised of
20th-century brick, ceramics and glass. It may
be associated with Site
41BP143.

41BP143

Unknown

The site is situated unusually close to Mclaughlin
Creek and is cut by an
historic road which runs
from northwest from the
Sayersville-McDade Road.
It seems to be comprised
of at least three discrete,
collapsed buildings and
areas of disturbed,
mounded earth.

450'-460'

Mclaughlin
Creek

41BP144

W.H. Joiner
Housesite?

Historic remains include
a brick well, broken glass,
and white ceramics which
seem to date from the
early to mid-20th century.
The site appears to have
been cut by a recentlyconstructed military road.

440'-450

Mclaughlin
Creek

41BP145

Chandler
Cemetery

Burial site for S. B.
Chandler {1812-1883),
Robert Chandler {18521857) and William B.
Chandler {1867-1870).

Libbie Wade
Cameron

1

510'-520'

Dogwood Branch

TABLE 5:
Site
Number
41BP146

Summary of Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name
Grave

Site Description
Site consists of five
slabs of cut ironstone
enclosing an area of ca.
30 x50
Scott identified the site as a grave
dating from the period
of her husband's grandparents' occupation of
the area.
11

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

Ina Fay Scott

450'-460'

Mclaughlin
Creek

465'-475'

Mclaughlin
Creek

490'

Dogwood Branch

11

•

41BP147

Otis Evans
Housesite

Consisting of the remains Ina Fay Scott
of buildings which span
several occupation periods, the site is littered with brick, pottery
sherds, glass bottles,
and large pieces of
ironstone with cemented
joints. It has been
severely disturbed by
tank and troop activities.

41BP148

Coal Mines

The general site area,
which covers perhaps 40
acres, includes a series
of sites which are functionally related. The
area appears on an 1899
USGS map as "Coal Mines,
a designation confirmed
in 1979 by observations
of pits and scattered
chunks of lignite.

Mrs . J • D• Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen

11

TABLE 5:

Summary_of Historic Sites, Continued.

Site
Number

Site Name

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

41BP149

Charlie Sowell
Housesite?

The site consists of
ceramic scatters in and
on either side of a
recently-cut military
road; 20th-century brick,
possibly outlining a
housesite, and the overturned top of a brick
and cement-plastered
cistern.

Ina Fay Scott

500 1 -510

1

Mclaughlin
Creek

41BP150

Unknown

One of about four such
domestic-ranching sites
in the area, this site
also appears to hav~
been divided by a
military-constructed
dirt road. A piece of
pottery and a bottle
neck suggest that the
site may date from the
mid-19th century.

500 1 -510 1

Mclaughlin
Creek

41BP151

Unknown

Remains of a collapsed
ironstone chimney show
evidence of an early lime
mix mortar, indicating
that the site probably
dated from the mid- to
late-19th century.

480 1 -490 1

Mclaughlin
Creek

Site Description

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary of Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name

Site Description

41BP152

Gus Sowell
Housesite?

The site consists of
pottery, fencing for a
corral, stock tank,
brick and building stone.

41BP153

Unknown

Located on a hill overlooking the Mclaughlin
Creek area, the site is
is comprised of the
remains of at least two
discrete buildings.
Elgin and handmade brick
are scattered profusely
over an area of about ~
acre, and a set of cut
ironstone footings indicates the location of
one structure. Mounds
of disturbed earth are
also present.

41BP154

Wayside
Schoolhouse
Site

This is a late 19th-century, early 20th-century
schoolhouse site which
is composed of ironstone
footings, a brick well
supposedly constructed
by John Scott, and scattered ceramics, glass
and metal.

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

Ina Fay Scott

490'-500'

Mclaughlin
Creek

460'-470'

Mclaughlin
Creek

465'-475 1

Mclaughlin
Creek

Ina Fay Scott

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary of Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

41BP155

Westbrook
Housesite

Site of a house, numerIna Fay Scott
ous outbuildings, corrals,
and fences which cover
aa. 15 acres.
20thcentury, local brick are
visible, as are scattered
ceramics and glass.

485 1 -495 1

Mclaughlin
Creek

41BP156

Westbrook
Housesite

This is the location of
the original Westbrook
House. Remains include
two brick cisterms, one
partially covered by a
front porch column of a
type commonly popular
during the late Victorian
era.

485 1 -495 1

Mclaughlin
Creek

41BP157

Unknown

Probably dating from the
20th century, the housesi te appears to have been
inhabited until the time
the government acquired
the land. Artifacts include a well or cistern,
scattered brick, recent
glass and ceramics, and
a child's metal toy.

470 1 -480 1

Mclaughlin
Creek

Ina Fay Scott

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summarl of Historic Sites
Site Name

2

Continued.

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

41BP158

Beck
Housesite

Historic remains include
two brick cisterns which
are situated in such a
way that they indicate
the extent of adjacent
house foundations; and
brick, some of which are
covered with a light
g1 a ze. There are indications that at least
two large structures
were situated on the
site at one time.

Mrs. J. D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen

490 1 -500 1

Dogwood Branch

41BP159

Eschberger
Housesite

Location of the only
recorded standing rock
fireplace in the survey
area, this site consists
of house footings aligned
southeast/northwest.
Scrap metal is scattered
around the site, and one
example each of purple
glass and cream-glaze
pottery were observed.

Mrs. J.D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen

470 1 -480 1

Dogwood Branch

41BP160

Stockpens

Possibly associated with
41BP161, this site has
been disturbed by military activity. Historic
remains included corrugated metal roofing,
stacked ironstone,

Mrs. J.D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen

470 1 -480

Dogwood Branch

1

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary of

Hist~ric

Site Name

Sit~s,

Continued.

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

470'-480'

Dogwood Branch

465 -475

1

Dogwood Branch

470'-480'

Dogwood Branch

miscellaneous pieces of
lumber and brick.

41BP160,
continued

Mrs • J. D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannel 1
Andrew Owen

41BP161

Cottle
Housesite (?)

Site of a house, indications of which include a
depression where a cistern probably was located
and the remnants of some
collapsed brick, probably
from a chimney.
20thcentury glass and some
white ceramics are also
visible. Corrals are
located to the southeast.

41BP162

Scruggs
Housesite

Mrs. J.D. Owen
The site is the location
Mrs. Fay Pannel 1
of a filled-in cistern
Andrew Owen
which can be located by
the ring of 20th-century
brick on the ground surface. Ironstone house
footings are also visible,
as are scattered artifacts
such as brick, glass and
a snuff bottle.

41BP163

Well
(associated
with Scruggs
Housesite)

An historic well is located on the north side of
a drainage. It is lined
with brick, the top layer
of which is capped with
cement into which is inscribed the name, Owen
Shelton.

Mrs. J.D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannel 1
Andrew Owen

1

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary of Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

41BP158

Beck
Housesite

Historic remains include
two brick cisterns which
are situated in such a
way that they indicate
the extent of adjacent
house foundations; and
brick, some of which are
covered with a light
glaze. There are indications that at least
two large structures
were situated on the
site at one time.

Mrs. J.D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen

490 -500

1

Dogwood Branch

41BP159

Eschberger
Housesite

Location of the only
recorded standing rock
fireplace in the survey
area, this site consists
of house footings aligned
southeast/northwest.
Scrap metal is scattered
around the site, and one
example each of purple
glass and cream-glaze
pottery were observed.

Mrs. J.D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen

470 1 -480

1

Dogwood Branch

41BP160

Stockpens

Possibly associated with
41BP161, this site has
been disturbed by military activity. Historic
remains included corrugated metal roofing,
stacked ironstone,

Mrs. J. D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannel 1
Andrew Owen

470'-480'

Dogwood Branch

1

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary of Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name

41BP160,
continued

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

miscellaneous pieces of
lumber and brick.

41BP16l

Cottle
Housesite (?)

Site of a house, indications of which include a
depression where a cistern probably was located
and the remnants of some
collapsed brick, probably
from a chimney.
20thcentury glass and some
white ceramics are also
visible. Corrals are
located to the southeast.

Mrs. J.D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen

470 1 -480'

Dogwood Branch

41BP162

Scruggs
Housesite

The site is the location
Mrs. J.D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
of a filled-in cistern
Andrew Owen
which can be located by
the ring of 20th-century
brick on the ground surface. Ironstone house
footings are also visible,
as are scattered artifacts
such as brick, glass and
a snuff bottle.

465 1 -475'

Dogwood Branch

41BP163

We 11

An historic well is located on the north side of
a drainage. It is lined
with brick, the top layer
of which is capped with
cement into which is inscribed the name, Owen
Shelton.

470 1 -480

1

Dogwood Branch

(associated
with Scruggs
Housesite)

Mrs. J. D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannel 1
Andrew Owen

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary of Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

41BP164

Unknown

A housesite which appears
to date from the late 19th
century was located by
evidences of brick, a
collapsed ironstone chimney,
the depression of what was
probably a cistern, and
what appears to be locallymanufactured pottery sherds.
One house pier, still in
place, was made from part
of a telephone pole.

440 1 -450

1

Dogwood Branch

41BP165

George Thomas
Housesite

485'-495

1

Dogwood Branch

41BP166

Lewis
Housesite

The site appears to cover Mrs. J.D. Owen
an area of as much as 15- Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen
20 acres, and includes a
stock tank, heavily
eroded slopes and 20thcentury brick which mark
the location of a possible
outbuilding. The remains
of a second, seemingly
older, structure are marked
by a collapsed ironstone
chimney.
The site, which covers an Mrs. J.D. Owen
elevation of several acres Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen
is marked by a possible
corral, dense growths of
mesquite which strongly
suggest the presence of
other historic remains
and an historic road which

470'-480'

Dogwood Branch

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary pf Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name

41BP166,
continued

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

480 1 -490 1

Dogwood Branch

runs through the site in
a generally northeast/
southwest direction.

41BP167

Unknown

White ceramic sherds, 20thcentury brick, some brown
glass, and shaped ironstone rock which may indicate house footings mark
this historic site. An
old road passes through the
site, proceeding from the
present Center Road, southeast, then turning northeast to pass the Chandler
Cemetery and intercept the
Oak Hill Road.

41BP168

Historic Well

Probably associated with
the Chandler House, the
site is a brick well
situated on the bank of
a drainage.

Mrs. J.D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen

490 1 -500 1

Dogwood Branch

41BP169

Chandler
Housesite

Supposedly the site of
S.B. Chandler's house,
although observed artifacts did not seem to
support this contention.

Mrs. J.D. Owen
Mrs. Fay Pannell
Andrew Owen

500 1 -510

Dogwood Branch

1

TABLE 5:
Site
Number

Summary__of Historic Sites, Continued.
Site Name

Site Description

Informants

Elevation

Nearest
Major Stream

41BP170

Mexican
Cemetery

Resting place for empMrs. J .D. Owen
loyees in Frank Denison's Mrs. Fay Pannell
coal mines, located a
Andrew Owen
short distance north.
Some graves are clearly
marked. Others are
apparent only because
of the iris growing nearby.

460 1 -470

1

Dogwood Branch

41BP171

Unknown

The site consists of stone
house footings, 20thcentury glass fragments,
china and scattered metal.

455'-465

1

Dogwood Branch

41BP172

Unknown

Handmade brick, some of
which are covered with a
thick blue-green glaze,
mark this site which seems
to have been heavily disturbed by military activity.

415'-425'

Dogwood Branch

41BP183

Unknown

A stock tank is located
downslope to the southwest
of what appears to have
been a 20th-century housesi te.

465 1 -576 1

Sandy Creek

41BP184

Unknown

The proximity of this and
several nearby historic features to the former location
of the Scott Family log cabin
suggests that, depending on the
age of the artifacts, the sites
may be associated.

425 1 -435

Mclaughlin
Creek

1

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Anonymous
1893

A History of Texas:
History of Milam,
WiZZiamson, Bastrop, Travis, Lee, and
Burleson Counties.
Lewis Publishing Co.,

Chicago.
[Austin, Stephen F.]
Journal of Stephen F. Austin on His First Trip
1904
to Texas, 1821. The Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Associatio~ 7 (April 1904):
286-307.
Bastrop County
Birth Records
Deed Records
Marriage Records
Probate Minutes
Bastrop County. Tax Assessor and Collector.
1846
Assessment of Property lying within Bastrop
County, owned by residents thereof, made by
• • • Assessor and Collector, for the year 1846.
1850

Assessment Made for the Year 1850, by Wm R
Reding Assessor and Collector of Bastrop County,
of Property rendered by Citizens thereof, and
situated therein.

1863

Assessment of Property situated in the County
of Bastrop for 1863.

1864

Assessment of Property situated ; n the County
of Bastrop for 1864.

1865

Assessment of Property, situated ; n the County
[of Bastrop], for 1865.

1870

Assessment Roll of the County of Bastrop for
Ad Valorem Income and Salary Tax for 1870.

Berlandier, Jean Louis
n. d.

Journey to Mexico During the Years Z826 to ZBJ4.
Translated by Sheila Ohlendorf, et at. To be

published by the Texas State Historical As sociation, Austin.

Bolton, Herbert Eugene
1962
Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century.
and Russell, Inc., New York.
118

Russell

Cameron, Libbie Wade
1978
Interview with Libbie Wade Cameron, December 11,
1978, Austin, Texas by Martha Doty Freeman.
Casteneda, Carlos E.
Our Catholic Heritage in Texas 1519-1936.
1936
Vol. II: The Mission Era: The Winning of
Texas 1693-1731. Von Boeckmann-Jones Company.
Austin.
Clark, R. D.
The Beginnings of Texas. The Quarterly of the
1902
Texas State Historiaal Assoaiation 5 (January):
171-205.
Ernst, Bruno
1979
Interview with Bruno Ernst, March 21, 1979,
McDade, Texas, by Martha Doty Freeman.
Fort Bend Chapter DAR
n.d.
From: Wills and Administrations Fort Bend
County, Texas Book A-1. Richmond, Texas, n.p.
Typescript, Texas State Library, Austin.
Houston, Oscar Parke and Walter Ewing Long
1958
History of Camp Swift Texas. 1958. Typescript
in the Austin-Travis County Collections, Austin
Public Library.
Jenkins, John Holmes, III
1958
Reaolleations of Early Texas the Memoirs of
John Holland Jenkins.
The University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Korges, William H.
1939
Bastrop County, Texas: Historical and Educational Development. Unpublished Master's thesis,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Krenek, Harry Lynn
1966
Civilization on the Colorado to 1860. Unpublished Master's thesis, Southwest Texas State
University, San Marcos.
1979

The Early Days of Bastrop.
River Review 4: 11-15.

Midura, Joseph
1978
Bastrop County Plan:

Lower Colorado

Historiaal Assessment,
Population, Land Use Analysis, Future Land Use,

119

Southwest
Texas State University Community Development
Institute, San Marcos.

Housing Study and Plan, Environment.

Moore, William
1973
Bastrop County, l69l-l900.
San Angelo.

Educator Books,

Newspapers
The Austin Statesman
Elgin Courier

Owen, Mrs. J.D., Mrs. Fay Pannell and Andrew Owen
Interview with Mrs. J. D. Owen, Mrs. Fay
1979
Pannell and Andrew Owen, July 18, 1979, at the
Owen home on Highway 95 near Camp Swift.
Interview by Martha Doty Freeman.
Quaife, Milo Milton, Editor
1970
The Southwestern Expedition of Zebulon M. Pike.
Books for Libraries Press, Freeport, New York.
Ray, Worth S.
1949
Austin Colony Pioneers Including History of
Bastrop, Fayette, Grimes, Montgomery, and
Washington Counties, Texas and Their Earliest
Settlers.
The Author, Austin.

Scott, Sgt. Harlan
1978
Interview with Sgt. Harlan Scott, December 6,
1978, Camp Mabry, Austin, Texas, by Martha
Doty Freeman.
Scott, Ina Fay
1978
Interview with Ina Fay Scott, December 8, 1978,
Elgin, Texas, by Martha Doty Freeman.
1979

Interview with Ina Fay Scott, March 14, 1979,
Elgin, Texas, and Camp Swift by Martha Doty
Freeman.

Smithwick, Noah
1900
The Evolution of a State or Reaolleations of
Old Texas Days.
Compiled by Nana Smithwick
Donaldson. Gammel Book Company, Austin.
Sumerlin, Oliver W.
1963
The History of Bastrop, Texas, 1851-1935.
Unpublished Master's thesis, The University
of Texas at Austin.
120

Texas. General Land Office
n.d.
Bastrop 1st 167. (Application of James Rians
for a 1st class certificate in Bastrop County.)
1841*

Bastrop 1st 70. (Application of William
Mclaughlin for a 1st class certificate in
Bastrop County.)

184la

Bastrop 1st 101. (Application of Peter F.
Wade for a 1st class certificate in Bastrop
County.)

184lb

Bastrop 1st 431. (Application of Leman [Lemon?]
Barker for a 1st class certificate in Bastrop
County~)

1844

Bastrop 1st 99. (Application of Dennis Dykes
for a 1st class certificate in Bastrop County.)

1844?

Bastrop 1st 428. (Application of Jesse Barker
for a 1st class certificate in Bastrop County.)

1845

Bastrop 1st 66. (Application of David Holderman
for a 1st class certificate in Bastrop County.)

1845a

Bastrop 1st 73. (Application of Augustin
Martinez for a 1st class certificate in Bastrop
County.)

1845b

Bastrop 1st 249. (Application of Robert Owen
for a 1st class certificate in Bastrop County.)

1846

Bastrop Bounty Warrant 191. (Application of
John Anderson for a Bounty Warrant in Bastrop
County.)

1846a

Bastrop 1st 491. (Application of Reuben Gage
for a 1st class certificate in Bastrop County.)

1854

Bastrop Bounty Warrant 235. (Application of
Sam'l. Wolfenberger for a Bounty Warrant in
Bastrop County.)

*This date, as well as the dates that follow under "Texas.
General Land Office," refer to patent dates.

121

Texas. General Land Office. Spanish Archives.
1825- Record of Translations of Empresario Contracts
1835
Coahuila and Texas.
Ulmer, Mary Louise
An Abstract of the Original Titles of Reaord
1964
in the General Land Offiae.
The Pemberton
Press, Austin.
United States. Bureau of Census.
1850
Texas. Bastrop County.
1860

Texas.

Bastrop County.

1870

Texas.

Bastrop County.

Vest, D. L.
Watterson Folk of Bastrop County, Texas.
1963
Texian Press, Waco.
Winstont R. A., et al
Soil Survey of Bastrop County, Texas.
U.S.
1908
Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Soils.
Government Printing Office, Washington.

122

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Fortunately for the purposes of the survey for historic
sites on Camp Swift, Bastrop County, Texas, many of the
families who had once called the area home still lived
nearby. Even more happily for this researcher, their
knowledge of the history of present-day Camp Swift, their
ability to pinpoint housesites, and their willingness to
cooperate with the survey, made the job of recording historic sites considerably easier.
In Austin, Mrs. Libbie Wade Cameron shared genealogical
information about and memories of her family who had settled
in the vicinity of Dogwood Branch before the Civil War.
Sgt. Harlan Scott at Camp Mabry provided information about
the Scott and other families who had settled on the divide
between Sandy and Mclaughlin creeks. Personnel at the
Barker Texas History Center, the Texas State Library, and
the Austin-Travis County Collection, Austin Public Library,
performed in their usual professional, helpful manner,
making available primary and secondary sources which threw
light on the history of Austin's Little Colony in general
and the Camp Swift area in particular.
In Elgin I met Mrs. Ina Fay Scott, whose husband was
descended from one of the Camp's first residents, and who
proved to have an exhaustive knowledge of historic sites,
their whereabouts and the families associated with them.
Mrs. J. D. Owen, Mrs. Fay Pannell and Andrew Owen
provided a similar service for the portion of the Camp
along the Sayersville to McDade Rpad and the Oak Hill Road.
Finally, a particular debt of gratitude is owed to
Dufford Skelton, who located many historic sites in the
course of his search for prehistoric sites, guided me back
to them, and provided desperately needed encouragement
during an especially hot summer's day.

123
- - - -

--

