Bulletin 14

July 1969

TEXAS MEMORIAL MUSEUM
The University of Texas at Austin

:A ~ipa11 Apaelte )1issio11
San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz · 1762-1771
By Curtis D. Tunnell and W. W. Newcomb, Jr.

BULLETIN
OF THE TEXAS MEMORIAL MUSEUM

14
July 1969

A ,C,ipan Apaclte Mission
San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz · 1762-1771
PART I

THE ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION
By Curtis D. Tunnell
PART II

THE ETHNOHISTORICAL INVESTIGATION
By W.W. Newcomb, Jr.
PART III

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

THE TEXAS MEMORIAL MUSEUM
24th & Trinity, Austin, Texas 78705/The University of Texas at Austin

Pref ace and Acknowledgments
Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz was
founded by Franciscan missionaries of the College of Queretaro in the winter of 1762 for the
Lipan Apache Indians. It was situated beside a
large spring on the upper Nueces River at a place
known as El Canon in what is now south-central
Texas, about 40 miles north of Uvalde. A scant
nine years after it was founded the mission was
burned and abandoned. The missionaries and
soldiers departed, never to return; occasional Indians visited the place for a few years, finding
shelter against the broken walls, but they too
finally disappeared. Never officially sanctioned,
never successful in converting Lipan Apaches,
this crude frontier mission was quickly forgotten. Its timbers rotted, tools rusted, and its adobe
buildings crumbled :into low mounds covered
with cactus and mesquite. Eventually a new
people came into the land. American soldiers set
up temporary quarters near the spring and called
it Camp Wood, perhaps wondering about the
desolate ruins. But it was not until 1936 that historians identified the ruins for what they were,
and the state of Texas in that year of its centennial erected a granite marker on the site.
In the fall of 1962, 200 years after the mission
had been founded, the town of Camp Wood decided to develop the site as a tourist attraction.
After bulldozers had exposed large quantities of
adobe bricks, rocks, and broken pots, the Texas
Memorial Museum was contacted and the archeological and ethnohistorical investigations of
the mission were begun. Over a period of several
months the entire mission quadrangle was outlined, 14 structures were completely or partially
excavated, and the middens adjacent to the compound were tested. At the same time, the story
of the mission as it was written :in letters and
reports of those who were there and participated
in its life was sought out in libraries and archives.
This is a report on these investigations.
The ruins of Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz, now belonging to the town of Camp Wood,
are enclosed by a heavy fence, the untended
ru:ins awaiting the preservation and restoration
which could breathe life into the historic moment they represent. A parking area adjacent to
the site and capping of some adobe walls constitute the only improvements.

Reports about all sorts of things, from mastodon bones to two-headed calves and from
wrecked ships to lost mines, are received by the
museum :in a slow but steady stream. B\lt only
a few of the more promising can be acted upon.
When the report reached the museum that Camp
Wood intended to restore Mission San Lorenzo
de la Santa Cruz, and that part of the site had
already been bulldozed, there was no hesitation.
This was an investigation the museum had to
make. The reasons for such a quick decision may
not be obvious, however, particularly to those
unfamiliar with the state of knowledge about
Spanish missions in Texas and the Lipan Apache
Indians. In 1962 no mission in Texas had been
excavated utilizing the sophisticated techniques
available to the modern archeologist, and this
one represented an excellent opportunity to do
so. San Lorenzo was a small mission and the
possibility of making a relatively thorough investigation in the short time that could be alloted to it seemed good. S:ince San Lorenzo
existed for only a few years, the various artifacts
found in its ruins would serve as valuable
markers for dating other historic sites containing similar objects. Archeologists have long
known that some of the historic and protohistoric
sites they have found and sometimes excavated
in Texas were probably Lipan Apache, but they
lacked positive evidence for such attribution.
Since the Lipan Apaches were the only Indians
attracted to San Lorenzo, the possibility seemed
good that this evidence, in the form of distinctive
Lipan Apache remains, would be found. The history of the Lipan Apaches, and particularly their
relationship to the Spaniards, had been so distorted by the ethnocentric bias of some scholars
that it was hardly comprehensible. A fresh and
hopefully more objective appraisal of the history
of the Lipan Apaches promised to shed light on
their clouded past. We also were aware that there
were a number of documents :in The University
of Texas Archives, never carefully scrutinized
by anthropologists, which dealt with the mission
and the Li pans. It seemed likely that they would
add to our knowledge of the Lipans and the mission. Finally, this joint archeological-ethnohistorical investigation seemed a good way of
finding out how mutually beneficial such a

combined approach actually would be. On the
one hand, we likely would find the adobe brick,
the potsherd, and the glass bead; on the other,
the written word of the men who laid the brick,
broke the pot, and buried the Indian who wore
the bead. Surely these different kinds of data
could be put together in such a manner as to recreate the past more fully and effectively than
had ever been done before, at least so far as missions established by the Spanish for Texas Indians were concerned.
No doubt there are several good ways to present the results of investigations such as ours.
After several false starts we adopted the organization this report has now.as the best one for our
purposes. We have jointly written this Preface;
Part I was written by Curtis D. Tunnell and
Part II by W. W. Newcomb, Jr. Part III, Conclusions and Summary, is again a jol.nt effort.
Our aim has been to write the story of the Lipan
Apaches and Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz in a way that will be interesting and informative. We also have attempted to satisfy the
special interests and demands of professional anthropologists whether they be archeologists or
ethnologists, by including the detailed descriptions, discussions, and citations as unobtrusively
as possible. We do this in the conviction that the
findings of anthropological investigations can be
written for the edification and information of
both lay and professional readers.
Many people have contributed significantly
to the San Lorenzo investigations. James Greer
of Camp Wood has worked for many years
through the Camp Wood Mission Association
and the Texas Old Missions Restoration Association for the preservation of Mission San Lorenzo
de la Santa Cruz. A. J. and Mary Thompson of
Camp Wood generously donated the south portion of the mission site to the city of Camp Wood
as a historic park in an effort to preserve the
ruins. Mr. and Mrs. A. W. Mitchell of Camp
Wood permitted excavation of the north portion
of the ruins which lay on their property. Mr.
J. E. Bruce, who lives near the site, was helpful
throughout the excavation and arranged for
temporary preservation of the foundations in the
south part of the site. Other local residents who
helped during the investigation include T. W.
Priest, L. J. Dean, J. A. Boone, and Clarence
Nelson. C. A. Nielsen, owner of the Rapid Aero

Service in Uvalde, Texas, generously furnished
aerial photographic and reconnaissance services.
Special thanks are due Edward B. Jelks, whose
encouragement and support led to the archeological investigation of Mission San Lorenzo.
The field excavations could not have been carried out without the hard work and keen observations of Lathel F. Duffield. Among those who
donated skilled assistance in the field were Dee
Ann Story, John Greer, Bob and Alice Benfer,
Claude Bramblett, Dessamae and Paul Lorrain,
Glen Greene, Mark Parsons, Terence Grieder,
and Ernest Lundelius. Local men employed during the excavation were L. W. Welch, Enemcio
Falcon, Cayetano Falcon, Castulo San Miguel,
and Jose Gonzales.
Hal M. Story of the Texas Memorial Museum
made the drawing of the artifacts and the
sketches of the reconstructed structures. Nancy
L. Kott drafted many of the measured drawings
and helped edit Part I. Marilyn Deneke typed
the original draft of Part I, and Catheryn
Peoples prepared the final manuscript of Part I,
including many of the tables. ·Gene Renner
Mobley drafted Figures 1 and 3. Thomas W. McKern, then at The University of Texas, analyzed
the skeletons and prepared Appendix A. Gerald
G. Raun, then Curator of Zoology at the Texas
Memorial Museum, identified the species represented by the food bones from the structures and
middens (Appendix B). Hugh Cutler, Executive
Director of the Missouri Botanical Gardens, furnished an analysis of the charred corn from the
granary and identified the seeds. The cloth fragments from the burials were examined and identified by F. E. Petzel, Professor of Home Economics at the University.
Graciela Garza and Martha Cotera were important to the ethnohistoric investigation, searching out and translating many documents.
Chester Kielman, Director of The University of
Texas Archives, gave enthusiastic help and encouragement to the ethnohistoric investigation.
Willena C. Adams of the museum staff edited the
entire manuscript. Louise Glass and Mary Carnahan typed the several drafts of Part II.
Finally, the prompt financial assistance given
us by the Research Institute of The University of
Texas at Austin made this investigation possible.
We are most grateful for this help.

rI
I
Contents
PAGE

PREFACE AND ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

111

PART I: TIIE ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION
THE SITE

3

THE STRUCTURES .

8

FEATURES .

52

THE ARTIFACTS

54

REFERENCES CITED

135

PART II: TIIE ETHNOHISTORICAL INVESTIGATION
TIIE HISTORIC SETTING .

141

ORIGINS OF THE MISSION

154

LIFE AND DEATH OF THE MISSION

165

REFERENCES CITED

177

PART III: SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS.

183

APPENDIX A: BURIALS FROM SAN LORENZO DE LA
SANTA CRUZ .

187

APPENDIX B: VERTEBRATE REMAINS FROM
SAN LORENZO DE LA SANTA CRUZ

190

Illustrations
Frontispiece: Marker at the site of the Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz, Real County, Texas
PART I
FIGURE

1. Contour map of the mission site
2. Aerial view of site during excavation
3. Plan of the mission compound showing
structure numbers
4. Details of the four patterns used in adobe
brick construction .
5. A, Details of roof construction. B, Details
of stone wall construction
6. Excavations in the southeast corner of
quadrangle

PAGE

4

6
7

10
12

13

FIGURE

7. Excavation of the southeast corner of
quadrangle showing Structure 2 in center
8. Plan of walls and upper floor of Structure 2
9. Burials beneath floor of Structure 2
10. Burial No. 1
11. Artist's reconstruction of Structure 2
12. Structures 3-6 and 9
13. Excavation of Structure 7 .
14. Plan of walls and floor of Structure 7
15. Ditches and post holes in Structure 8

PAGE

16
17
19
20
23
26
29
30
32

Illustrations
FIGURE

16. Excavation of the northeast corner of the
quadrangle showing Structure 10
17. Plan of walls and floor of Structure 10
18. Vertical cross section of Structure 10
19. Excavation of Structure 10 showing adobe
floor and brick patterns
20. Brick patterns in north and south walls
of Structure 10
21. Plan of walls and floors of Structures
11 and 12
22. Structure 12 after excavation showing
features on adobe floor
23. Excavations in northwest corner of the
quadrangle pertaining to Structures 11,
13, 14
24. Plan of walls and floor of Structures 13, 14
25. Excavation of the northwest corner of quadrangle showing Structures 11-14
26. Artist's reconstruction of northwest corner
of quadrangle
27. Copper vessels
28. Copper. artifacts
29. Religious medallions and crucifixes (copper)
30. Copper artifacts
31. Iron and copper artifacts
32. Provenience of copper artifacts
33. Iron artifacts, A-C
34. Iron artifacts, A-K
35. Iron artifacts, A-G
36. Provenience of iron objects
37. Shell and lead artifacts .
38. Provenience of lead .
39. Non-wheel-made ceramics
40. Ceramics, A-M
41. Provenience of non-wheel-made earthenware
42. Ceraxnics, A-E .
43. Sherd profiles of amber lead-glazed
plainware
44. Provenience of lead-glazed sherds
45. Ceramics, glossy white majolica, A-N

PAGE

35
37
38
40

FIGURE

46.
47.
48.
49.

42

50.
51.
52.

43

53.

45

54.
55.

46
49

56.
57.
58.
59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.

50
51
55
57
59
61
63
64
66

68
69
70
71
72
74
76
80
82

76.
77.

84
88
89

78.

Ceramics, majolica, typical rim sherds
Ceramics, glossy white majolica .
Ceramics, majolica, showing typical rim sherds
Ceramics, glossy white majolica polychrome
on white .
Ceramics, white majolica, A-C
Ceramics, white majolica, A-J
Rim, body, and basal sherds associated with
majolica color groups
Associations of design elements and colors
on majolica sherds
Cross sections of majolica sherds
Provenience of tin-enameled majolica sherds
by color group .
Provenience of various types of ceramics
Ceramic comparisons
Bottle fragments
Provenience of glass .
Glass beads and plant remains
Provenience of beads
Gunflints, A-K .
Gunflints, A-D .
Provenience of gunflints
Stone artifacts, A-M
Stone artifacts, A-D .
Stone artifacts, A-C .
Diagrammatic sketches of cores
Stone artifacts, A-E .
Ground ·stone artifacts
Provenience of worked stone
Bone artifacts, A-0
Provenience of worked bone and shell
Scale model of Mission San Lorenzo
Texas and the Southern Plains, early
18th century
Mission San Lorenzo and environs .
Tabulation of cranial measurements and
indices for the San Lorenzo sample
Provenience of food bones .

PAGE

90
92
93
94
95

96
97
97
98
99
104
105
107
108
109
113
115
117
118
119
121
123
127
128
130
131
133
134
140
142
155
187
191

PART I

THE ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION
CURTIS D. TUNNELL

.J

The Site
The ruins of Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz are located on a low ridge which runs parallel to the east bank of the Nueces River just below the mouth of a spring-fed tributary, at the
north edge of the city of Camp Wood, Real
County, Texas, at approximately 29° 40' 40" N.
latitude and 100° 01' 00" W. longitude. The
spring-fed Nueces is never dry here near its
headwaters, and despite severe periodic flooding,
the highest recorded floods have never covered
the mission ruins. A large spring rises from the
limestone bedrock some 500 feet northeast of the
mission and flows into the Nueces about 200 feet
west of the quadrangle wall. Flowing at a constant rate of approximately 2,000 gallons per
minute, it serves as the water source for the city
of Camp Wood. The spring influenced the selection of this site for the mission and furnished an
abundant supply of fresh water during its occupation.
The excellence of this locality as a habitation
spot is demonstrated by evidences of a series of
occupations. (1) Archaic and Neo-American
burned rock middens, many feet in thickness,
are scattered around the vicinity, and a few artifacts from these aboriginal occupations were
found beneath the floors of some of the mission
structures. (2) The mission occupied the ridge
during the 1760's, leaving hundreds of tons of
construction materials and midden debris to
mark its existence. ( 3) The ruins of the burned
out mission apparently saw intermittent occupation by small Indian groups (possibly some
Lipans occasionally returned to the familiar
spot) in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth
centuries; a hearth in the fill of Structure 8 belonged to one such visit. ( 4) A temporary United
States military outpost (Camp Wood) occupied
part of the mission site intermittently between
1857 and 1861 (Webb, 1952, I: 285). Artifacts
from these camps were found around and in the
fill of some of the mission structures and on the
surface of the ridge farther to the south. ( 5)

Local legend tells of a sheepherder and his family who camped among the mission ruins in the
latter part of the nineteenth century; a hearth
and other artifacts in the upper fill of Structure
10 possibly represent this occupation. (6) Early
Anglo-American house foundations and debris
are found to the north and south of the mission
site. (7) Houses on the outskirts of the present
city of Camp Wood are scattered around the old
mission ruins and the spring-fed tributary.
The primary concern here is with the Franciscan Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz, established on this site by the Spanish in the latter
half of the eighteenth century. By 1962, 200
years after its establishment, the walls of Mission San Lorenzo had fallen into irregular low
mounds of crumbled adobe. Cactus, scrubby
grass, and mesquite brush covered the uneven
surface. Aside from a granite monument alongside State Highway 55, east of the site, there was
little to indicate its presence.
The southern portion, comprising about 70 per
cent of the site, had been thoroughly leveled by
machinery when a Texas Memorial Museum
field crew began work at Mission San Lorenzo in
the fall of 1962. Its surface was strewn with
crushed adobe bricks and Spanish colonial artifacts, and large numbers of undressed limestone
building blocks had been gathered from the surface and stacked in long piles. Since no walls or
foundations were visible among the debris it was
feared that most of the site had been destroyed,
but fortunately most of the floors were intact.
The northern 30 per cent of the site, on another
property, was undisturbed, and the lower walls
and floors of the mission structures in this area
were protected by low mounds of melted adobe
and native vegetation.

Excavation Procedure
A grid system, oriented with magnetic north,
was established over the entire site, and the nu3

Mission San Lorenzo
ContO\lr map of the site
showing the location of
the compound and
associated features

.....,...

0

_...,._.120

80

40
Feet

0

B

16243240

r=;=

r=;=

Varas

. ··.·

·· ..
' ~

Fig. 1. Contour map of the mission site.

4

. . .•

I

r=;=

merous grid stakes proved to be an invaluable
aid in mapping the structures, features, and
walls of the mission quadrangle. A contour map
of the site showing the topographic features in
the immediate vicinity was drawn (Fig. 1). All
elevations at the site were measured in relation
to an "X" mark cut in the level surface of the
threshold stone in the west entrance of Structure
2. This datum mark was assigned an arbitrary
elevation of 100.0 feet.
Along the property line the low rubble
mounds had been cross-sectioned by the machinery, and a little work on the first day of excavation revealed the presence of adobe wall
bases and adobe floors in the profile. After making an exhaustive surface collection from the
site, a small ditching machine was used to locate
wall foundations in the bulldozed area. Shovels
were then employed to follow the foundations
and thereby outline structures.
When the complete outline of a structure had
been revealed, small test pits about one foot
square were dug along the inside of the walls to
determine the depth to the floor. The structure
fill was always less than one foot in depth in the
bulldozed area of the site. This fill was removed
down to the burned roof material and the contents were collected from a one-fourth-inch
mesh screen and bagged. Samples of the roof
materials were then collected and the fill of the
floor was processed and bagged separately. When
multiple floor levels were encountered, the fill
between the floors was processed as a separate
provenience unit.
In the non-bulldozed portion of the site a similar excavation procedure was employed. Vegetation was cleared and shovels were used to find
and foUow the tops of adobe walls. The fill from
each structure (up to 3.0 feet in depth in this
area) was removed in several units: ( 1) fill
above the primary wall rubble (removed in arbitrary 0.5 foot levels); (2) fill between the primary wall collapse and the burned roof material;
(3) burned roof debris; (4) fill on the floor-no
double floors were encountered in this area.
Grid squares and arbitrary levels were used
in test excavations in the mission middens and in
areas outside the structure walls.
1

Measured drawings were made of each structure, all associated features, and of the entire
quadrangle complex (Fig. 3). The exact brick
patterns, both vertical and horizontal, of all
walls were recorded. Daily field notes recorded
work progress, general excavation observations,
and detailed provenience information. Color and
black-and-white photographs were taken daily.
All artifacts (ceramic, metal, lithic, bone, shell,
glass) and faunal and :floral remains were collected, and samples of adobe, roof materials,
hearth contents, building stones, plaster, and
soil types were taken.
After several structures had been partially
cleared, an attempt was made to locate all four
corners of the mission compound. As a result,
structures 7, 8, 10, and 11, which were found to
occupy the four corners (Fig. 3), were excavated
and as many structures along the four walls were
cleared as time and money permitted.
Several tests were made in the mission middens to determine their content, thickness, and
extent. Areas adjacent to several structures,
both inside the quadrangle and outside the compound walls, were excavated down to the old
mission occupation surface. Testing indicated
that the central portion of the west wall, including at least three habitation structures, had been
bulldozed down to bedrock.

Unexcavated Areas
Several portions of the mission compound need
further investigation. These are: ( 1) the central
part of the north wall-which probably includes
several large structures; (2) a small area along
the east wall just south of Structure 10-possibly
the gate area and one small structure; (3) the
central part of the south quadrangle wall which
includes at least one structure; ( 4) the central
plaza area; (5) the midden areas, containing
large quantities of Spanish artifacts; and (6) a
probable Lipan Apache village area or areas
somewhere in the vicinity which was occupied
by the various bands during their visits to the
mission.

5

4i

>

i>:

.,e::>"'
z.,
..c
.....

""!!
c

~

2

Cl

c:

:;:
0

~

c:'

.!!

Ci
>
8

.,
)(

Cl

·E

::>
"'C

.,c:

-"'

.E

-~
.,"'
£

-.,
0

~

·;;:
c

.,

·;:

<

"'

°'

u:

1
J,
I:

I

0

10

20

30

40

50

--~ --r' ---Feet

==

0

4

8

12

==;-=

16

20

Varas

Wall Rubble

Gate
Area

11
3

!

1r···----6

I

l;

9

4

.~.

fl!~~·--:-~
-------::~

------::::---~------

Mission San Lorenzo
Pion of the compound showing structure

numbers and ex1erior features

Fig. 3. Plan of the compound. Structures 1, 11, 12, and 14 are living quarters; Structure 2, church;
Structure 3, unidentified; Structure 4, storage area; Structure 5, sacristy; Structures 6 and 9, convent;
Structure 8, stable; Structure 10, granary; Structure 13, kitchen.

7

The Structures
Arrangement and Orientation
The structures of Mission San Lorenzo were
constructed side by side in a rough quadrangle
(Fig. 3). All exterior doorways opened onto a
plaza which served for storage of nonperishable
supplies, an outdoor work area, and as a stockade
for domestic animals at night and when the mission was under attack. The enclosed plaza had
one large gateway in the northern end of the
east wall leading out toward the spring.
The outside wall of the quadrangle was composed for the most part of the abutted back wall
of the various structures. The possible exception
was the south wall, which seems to have been
free-standing but strengthened along the base
by piles of boulders (Fig. 3). The outside dimensions of the quadrangle were: north wall 187.5
feet, east wall 152.5 feet, south wall 163 feet,
west wall 166 feet, N-S central axis 157 feet
(a bout 5 7 varas), and E-W central axis 169 .5
feet (about 62 varas). These figures are somewhat less than an estimate made by a military
inspector:
There is in it a plaza of seventy varas square enclosed completely by walls howsoever weak: it has
two bulwarks [baluartes] with two stone throwers
[pedreros] and only one gate (Arricivita, 1792:
391).

The walls of all the structures in the southeast corner of the plaza (Structures 2, 4, 5, 6, 8,
and 9) were oriented exactly with magnetic
north and ran along our grid lines. The walls of
all the other structures (those along the north,
west, and south walls) were oriented about 15°
west of magnetic north, giving a somewhat
asymmetrical outline to the quadrangle (Fig. 3).
The former group of buildings housed the church,
sacristy, friary, and a stable. The remainder of
the buildings-for housing soldiers, Indians, and
supplies-probably represents a later building
phase which was laid out on a slightly different
orientation for some unknown reason.

8

Fourteen structures were investigated during
the 1962 field season. At least six, and perhaps
as many as twelve, additional structures remain
to be excavated along the central portions of the
north, west, and south walls.

Building Materials
Stone
Limestone slabs from 0.2 to 0.6 feet thick and
up to 2.5 feet in length were used in various
kinds of construction at the mission site. The
larger slabs were probably obtained from the
limestone hills within one-half to one mile of the
site, while the smaller ones could have been
gathered from nearby dry creek beds.
The walls of Structures 6 and 9, parts of the
walJs of Structures 4 and 5, and the walls facing
onto the plaza of all the structures down the west
side, were built of limestone slabs. Only one or
two courses of these stones remained in the wall
foundations. These were carefully leveled and
spaced with slivers of limestone and set in dark
brown clay mortar. The walls' slabs were laid
roughly in an interlocking pattern (Fig. 5, B).
Neither interior nor exterior wall plaster was detected on the existing stone foundations.
Large quantities of limestone slabs had been
bulldozed from the stone wall bases and stacked
in long piles prior to the time of the excavation.
Local residents reported that the Barksdale
schoolhouse was built largely with slabs carried
from the mission site many years ago.
The floor of Structure 10 was paved with carefully fitted limestone slabs (Fig. 17), identical to
those used in the walls, and also spaced with
limestone slivers and set in a brown clay mortar.
An extra large limestone slab, about 3 feet by
5 feet served as an interior threshold in the west
entrance of the church (Structure 2). The upper
surface of this stone was worn quite smooth.
Smaller limestone slabs were set around the

large stone, forming a flagstone pattern (Fig. 8).
Two interior features in Structure 7 (Fig. 14)
were constructed of limestone slabs set in adobe
plaster. The purpose of these features is unknown. Other structures may have had interior
stone platforms prior to the bulldozing operation.
Limestone slivers (snecks) from 7 to 15 cm. in
diameter and about 3 cm. thick were chipped
from limestone boulders and used in leveling and
spacing the stone wall slabs. Each of these stone
flakes had a striking platform, bulb of percussion,
and thin sharp edges. A stockpile of snecks was
found in Structure 4.
Cobbles of various sizes were gathered from
the gravel bars of the nearby Nueces River and
used at the mission. The large majority of these
cobbles were streamworn limestone, but a few
were silicified wood, chert, and conglomerate.
Walks made from closely spaced cobbles (up
to about 15 cm. in diameter) were found in the
plaza at the following locations: outside Structures 12 and 13, along the west wall of Structure
6 and outside the main entrance of the church
(Fig. 3). The cobblestone walks are described in
detail in the section on structures.
Larger cobbles (up to one foot in diameter)
were stacked at the base of the south wall on the
inside and outside of the compound and around
the outside base of the south wall of Structure 7
(Fig. 14). In these areas there was little or no
slope for drainage, and the cobbles probably not
only strengthened the lower walls, but kept the
water from standing along the wall foundations
after rains.

Adobe Bricks
Many thousands of sun-dried building blocks
made from local soil were used in the walls of
the mission structures. All were mold-made as
shown by their uniform size and by striations on
the edges made by the mold as it was lifted off
the still-moist bricks. The average size of the
bricks was 45.6 cm. long, 26.3 cm. wide, and
11.3 cm. thick. The adobes used in the church
(Structure 2) were made from a light tan caliche, while the adobes in other structures were
made from brown, humus-stained soil identical
to the topsoil at the site. A few of the light tan
adobes occurred in Structure 10 and the south
quadrangle wall, among the dark adobes (Fig. 6,
B). These and the light colored adobes in the
church seem to be somewhat more durable and

were probably made of carefully selected soil,
whereas the dark adobes of the other buildings
were made from the most readily available topsoil. All of the adobes contained large quantities
of river gravel up to 3 cm. in diameter. In some
areas the dark adobes contrasted with the topsoil only in their gravel content. No straw or
manure could be detected in the adobe bricks at
this mission, and it is likely that the readily
available river gravels were mixed with the
adobe mud to add strength, prevent cracking,
and turn aside the rain in lieu of the fibrous materials which are used for the same purposes in
modern adobes. An examination of adobe bricks
at several other Spanish sites in West Texas reveals that they are consistently of large size and
tempered with gravels, as opposed to adobe
bricks in more recent structures which are
smaller in size and tempered with straw or manure. Many of the adobe bricks at San Lorenzo,
especially in the non-bulldozed area, were as
hard and solid as modern adobes, although they
had lain in the ground for 200 years.
Situated about 100 feet southwest of Structure
7 is a circular depression about four feet deep,
which ranges from about 15 feet in diameter at
the bottom to about 40 feet in diameter at its
maximum extent. Modern trash disposal made it
impossible to test, but it is probable that it was a
small, natural depression which was developed
into a puddle pit for the manufacture of adobe
bricks. No other similar depressions were found
near the mission. Soil from the surrounding
ridge could have been used, and water and gravel
were readily available in the Nueces River about
200 feet to the west.
Adobe bricks were used primarily in wall construction, but one was found plastered onto the
floor of Structure 10 near the door (Fig. 17), and
some others served as an interior threshold in the
west entrance of Structure 6.
Four basic brick patterns producing three wall
thicknesses were used in the various walls of the
mission structure (Fig. 4). Pattern No. 1 (one
brick width in thickness) was used for a few interior partition walls such as between Structures
11 and 12. Pattern Nos. 2 and 3 (one brick
length in thickness) were used in the east and
south walls of Structure 8, the west wall of Structure 2, and in part of the outside wall of the
structures along the west side of the quadrangle.
Pattern No. 4 (one brick length plus one brick
9

T
I

A

B

c

D
Fig. 4. Details of the four patterns used in adobe brick construction. A, Pattern 1; B, Pattern 4; C, Pattern 2; D, Pattern 3.

width in thickness) was the pattern used in most
of the other walls of the mission compoundStructures 2, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and the south
wall.
Many of the excavated walls had broad cracks
up to 12 cm. wide between the bricks (Fig. 8).
These cracks were filled with brick fragments
and adobe mortar, indicating that these materials
were present as the walls were being built. These
filled cracks may have resulted partly from the
fact that the brick sizes were such that they did
not overlap to form perfectly smooth wall faces
(especially in Pattern Nos. 3 and 4) without
leaving internal crevices. It is also probable that
the builders left broad internal cracks (filled
with mortar) between the bricks in the lower
part of the walls and then gradually narrowed
these cracks toward the top, making the walls
broader at the ba$e3 and thereby somewhat more
stable.

Puddled Adobe
This commonly used construction material
had the same consistency as the bricks-soil
with a high gravel content-and made a very
durable surface when dry and hard. The puddled
adobe was made with caliche and dark brown
soil, as were the bricks, and the light colored puddled abode was used only in the structures built
of light colored bricks.
A massive layer of puddled adobe up to 9 cm.
in thickness was used to cap the roof of all the
structures.
Puddled adobe was used as a floor covering in
all structures except Nos. 4, 8, and 10. A layer of
mud containing the usual gravels covered the
floors to a depth of about 3 cm. When these adobe
floors began to get worn and develop low damp
spots, a layer of fine brown clay (about 6 cm.
thick) was laid over the old floor and a second
adobe floor was poured (Fig. 6, C). These double
floors were detected in Structures 2 and 5 and
may have been present in other structures where
the floor was not penetrated. A stockpile of dark
brown clay was found in Structure 4 (Fig. 12).
Puddled adobe was used as mortar in setting
the bricks in the walls and filling cracks between
the bricks. It was also used to fonn a threshold
between Structures 2 and 5 (Fig. 6, D) and as
a plaster covering for interior features in Structures 7, 10, and 12.

Plaster
Prepared plaster was used on the interior and
exterior surfaces of the adobe walls. The interior
plaster of Structures 2 (church) and 10 (granary) was composed of lime and fine-grained
river sand. This high quality plaster had been
. applied in a layer ranging from about 5 to 15
mm. thick, and the surface had been whitewashed. Numerous fragments of such plaster
were collected from the floors of these two structures, and some of these lumps showed that the
plaster had been applied in two layers with
whitewash between. Fragments of this white
plaster found at the base of the western end of
the north wall of Structure 2 showed patches of
red pigment adhering to the surface, and drippings of red pigment were found along the base
of the wall in this area. Red religious murals
probably adorned this wall of the church.
The plaster used in the other buildings at the
site was composed of a fine-grained caliche soil
with lime and small pebbles added. This plaster
was applied to the walls in coating up to 7 cm. in
thickness and was occasionally found preserved
in fragments up to 2 feet in diameter (Structure
13). There was no evidence that this coarser plaster was either whitewashed or painted.
Lime for use in the plaster was probably made
from locally abundant limestone. A large pile of
pure white lime lay on the floor in the southwest
corner of Structure 10 (Fig. 17). The presentday landowner of the northern part of the site
described a large, circular "oven" in the bank of
the spring creek 150-200 feet north of the north
quadrangle wall. The oven was several feet in
diameter and several feet deep, lined with adobe
bricks, and showed signs of intensive burning.
Destroyed a few years ago, the oven quite likely
was the mission lime kiln.
A stockpile of water-washed sand and gravel,
used as a tempering agent in adobe and in preparation of wall plaster, was found in Struc!ur3 4
(Fig. 12), and samples of it were collected for
comparison with these other materials.

Wood
Although we know from the documents that
wood was a common building material at the site,
the only surviving evidence of its use is in the
charred roof fragments lying on the structure
floors and the large charred support post (oak,
11

a

b
c

d

A

B
Fig. 5, A. Details of roof construction: a, puddled adobe; b, grass; c, savinas; d, vigas. B. Details
of stone wall construction.

about 27 cm. in diameter) in the floor of Structure 14 (Fig. 23, C). Many large charred fragments of roof beams (vigas) were made from
oak (probably live oak) but several of juniper
were found and at least one was made from an
unidentified wood.
The small cross pieces ( savinas) used in the
roofs were usually about 3 cm. in diameter, and
complete stems, not split fragments, were used
(Fig. 5, A). Juniper was the wood most commonly selected for these cross sticks, but a few
stems of unidentified shrubs were found. The
original length of these savinas is not known.
Only short broken fragments were recovered.
12

Wood was probably commonly used for doors,
windows, framing, furniture, ladders, tools, and
other purposes, but only indirect evidence is furnished by the iron nails found in and around
each structure.

Fig. 6. Excavations in the southeast corner of the quadrangle.
A, cobblestone walk west of Structure 2; 8, light and dark adobe

bricks in south quadrangle wall !note reinforcement outside the
base of the walll; C, superimposed adobe floors exposed inside a burial pit in floor of Structure; D, adobe threshold leading through north wall of Structure 2 into Structure 5.

1
Grass
Local grasses were gathered and used between
the sticks and the puddled adobe in the roofs
(Fig. 5, A). Charred mats of this grass were
found preserved in some structures, and impressions of grass stems appear in the undersurface
of the puddled adobe roof material. No identifications of the grasses have been obtained.

Clay
Clay-bearing soils were used for the following
purposes in the mission buildings: ( 1 ) Llgh t tan
caliche and brown topsoil were used in the adobe
bricks, adobe floors, and adobe roofs. (2) Dark
brown clay was used as mortar in the limestone
block walls and flagstone floors. ( 3) Dark brown
clay was used between adobe floors in structures
which had double floors. These clayey soils were
probably acquired locally, but no obvious borrow
sources were found in the vicinity. A stockpile
of dark brown clay was found in Structure 4
(Fig. 12).

Sand and Gravel
Water-washed sand and gravel from the bed
of the nearby Nueces River was used as a tempering agent in the adobe and in the preparation of
wall plaster. A stockpile of this sand and gravel
was found in Structure 4 (Fig. 12), and samples
of it were collected. After each flood, the Nueces
River leaves bars of clean, assorted sands and
gravels of various diameters near the mission
site.

Structure 1 (Fig. 3)
Excavation: The bulldozing operation had partially uncovered the floor of this structure, and
some troweling exposed about 60 square feet of
floor with a fragment of an adobe wall running
along the west edge. The bulldozer had removed
the southern portion of the room down to below
floor level and the south part of the east wall was
completely gone. The north end of this structure
extended beyond the property line fence and was
not .excavated.
Location: This structure lay just inside the central portion of the west quadrangle wall, centered
at about N335-W260 on the grid. The area im-

mediately to the north was not excavated and the
area to the south of it had been bulldozed down to
bedrock.

I
I

Dimensions: About 60 square feet ( 6 feet N-S, 10
feet E-W) of floor was cleared, but the original
dimensions could not be determined.

:I

Fill: From 3 to 12 cm. of ashy soil containing
burned roof material and cultural debris lay on
the floor. This fill, heavily disturbed by the bulldozer, was carefully removed with a trowel but
was not screened.

I

Wall construction: Only a few adobe brick fragments remained in the west wall. The thickness
and pattern of this wall and details of the other
walls were not determined.
Plaster: No data.
Floors: A single adobe floor lay from 3 to 6 cm.
above the limestone bedrock. Dark brown topsoil
containing some flint chips and burned rocks lay
between the floor and the bedrock. Ranging from
1 to 3 cm. thick, the floor was made of light tan
puddled adobe containing some small river
gravels. The surface of the floor was smooth and
hard though ashy soil and cultural debris lay on
it. Overlying the debris were fragments of
charred beams and burned clay roof material in
several places.
1

Roof construction: The roof of Structure 1 apparently was constructed in the same manner as
Structure 7. Charred beams up to about 9 cm.
in diameter, charred sticks, and burned clay with
grass impressions were found above the floor
along the fence where it was not removed by the
bulldozer. This burned roof material reached a
thickness of 27 cm. just inside the west wall.
Doors: No data.
Hearths: No data.
Miscellaneous features: No data.
Associated artifacts:
Copper: 1 perforated overlay.
Iron: 4 handmade nails; 1 unidentified object.
Ceramics: 1 dark gray plainware; 18 amber
glaze plainware; 5 clear glaze brown painted
ware; 6 majolica.
Stone: 1 Type 5 gunflint; 2 Type 3 flakes; 3
miscellaneous flakes.
Bone: 6 food bones.

I

The presence of animal bones and other trash
indicates the structure probably was a dwelling,
burned perhaps at the time of the mission's abandonment. The northern part of the structure is
preserved beneath the property line fence.

Structure 2 (Figs. 3, 7)
Excavation: The bulldozing operation has removed the walls and fill of this structure down
to within 3 to 9 cm. of the upper floor on the west
end. The upper floor sloped up toward the east
and about 18 feet of it had been scraped away,
but the lowest course of adobe bricks remained
in the walls forming the eastern end. Encountered on the first day of excavation, the structure's entire area eventually was cleared of debris (Fig. 8).
Location: Structure 2 lay just inside the east
quadrangle wall near the southeast corner. The
east wall formed part of the enclosure and the
south wall was shared with Structure 8, which
lay parallel to Structure 2 and in the southeast
quadrangle corner. Structures 4 and 5 lay just to
the north of 2, with a doorway between 2 and
5. Structure 2 was centered about N295-W120
on the grid.
Dimensions: The central dimensions were 16.4
feet N-S by 41.6 feet E-W inside, and 21.8 feet
N-S by 45.9 feet E-W outside. The inside dimensions of the structure, in varas, were 6 N-S and
15E-W.
Fill: From 3 to 9 cm. of light brown soil,
crumbled adobe, and fine-grained white plaster
fragments lay above the upper floor in the west
part of Structure 2, and there were large concentrations of burned roof material on the floor in
several places. The fill contained few artifacts.
All fill, and portions of the floor, had been removed by the bulldozer in the eastern part of
the structure.
Wall construction: All of the walls were made
of adobe bricks. The north, east, and south walls
were one brick-length plus one brick-width thick
(Pattern No. 4, Fig. 4, B), and the west wall was
one brick-length thick (Pattern No. 3, Fig. 4, D).
The north, east, and south walls averaged about
2.75 feet or 1 vara in thickness. The north, east,
and south walls had adobe-filled cracks up to 15
cm. wide running longitudinally. One of these
cracks in the northwest corner had been partially

filled with brick fragments which indicated it
was present during the construction of the wall
rather than having developed later. There was
no evidence of special footings beneath the walls.
Only a single course of bricks remained in the
wall around the east end of the structure, but two
or three courses remained around the west end.

Plaster: Traces of white sandy plaster were found
along the base of the north wall where it extended
about 3 cm. above the upper floor near the west
end of the structure. There were drops and
streaks of bright red pigment on the surface of
the plaster in several places, indicating that there
had been red paintings on the wall. Slabs of wall
plaster up to 18 cm. in diameter were found on
the upper floor in the west end of the structure.
It averaged about 2 cm. thick and was composed
of fine-grained river sand cemented with lime
and coated on the outer surface with whitewash.
Patches of red pigment, which once formed designs, were found on several of the larger fragments of fallen plaster. Some of the plaster
showed evidence of having been applied in two
layers with whitewash between them.
Floors: Structure 2 had two superimposed adobe
floors (Fig. 6, C). The western end of the upper
floor (No. 1) was cleared of debris except for a
few patches of burned roof material. The surface elevation of this floor ranged from 99.49
to 99.73 ft. Toward the eastern end of the structure, the upper floor sloped upward sharply onto
what apparently had been a raised area (sanctuary) resting on a hard-packed gravelly soil base.
Unfortunately, the bulldozer had removed about
18 feet of the eastern end of the upper floor and
the entire sanctuary area. Composed of light tan
adobe with small river gravels, the floor averaged about 3 cm. in thickness, and its upper surface was smooth and hard-packed. At least twelve
burial outlines (several of which intersected)
could be seen in the surface of the upper floor;
most of the::;e were later excavated. A lower floor
(No. 2) was detected in the edges of the grave
pits, and was separated from the upper floor by
about 3 to 9 cm. of dark brown, very compact
clay which apparently was placed over the lower
floor as a base for the upper floor. The lower floor
was not cleared; it was studied only in the grave
walls. It, too, was composed of light tan adobe
with river gravels. Its average thickness was
about 3 cm., and its upper surface elevation
15

Fig . 7 . Excavation of southeast corner of quadrangle showing Structure 2 in center with Structure 8 to the right and Structure S to the left. Note burial pits through door of Structure 2 and portion
of cobbles lone

wal ~

in front. Looking east.

---------~

N~

N~
0

N~

m

cobblestone

Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz

B

burials in floor

Structure No. 2

-

stone threshold

plan of wolls ond upper floor

walk

[[2J adobe threshold

m

disturbed

area

Fig. 8. Structure 2, walls and upper floor.

0

2

4

6

I I I I I I I
feet
0

I

varas

2

t
N

J

ranged from 98.99 to 99.37 feet sloping upward
toward the east wall. In several instances, burials
had been dug while the lower floor was in use
(as indicated by the grave profiles) and later
burials which originated from the upper floor had
encountered and disturbed these older graves.
Very few artifacts were found in association with
the upper floor.
Roof construction: Several large patches of
burned roof materials (up to 4 feet across and
0.3 foot thick) lay on the upper floor in the west
end of Structure 2. This material (beams, sticks,
and grass-impresfed clay) indicates that the roof
was constructed in the rnme manner as that of
Structure 7. The majority of the larger beams
lay north to south, indicating that they had
spanned the structure along the short axis. Burial
Pits 2 and 3 contained large quantities of burned
roof material in large chunks lying just as it had
fallen, indicating that the pits must have been
open at the time the roof burned and collapsed.
Doors: Two doorways led into Structure 2 (Fig.
8). One, centered in the west wall, led out onto
a cobblestone walk in the plaza. The other door
led through the north wall into Structure 5, about
7 feet from the east wall. The north door was
3.5 feet E-W and 4.7 feet N-S. This threshold,
made of light tan adobe with small gravels, was
smooth, hard-packed, and had a slightly concave
surface. The surface elevation ranged from 99.55
to 99.74 feet.
The west doorway was about 5 feet wide with
a threshold formed by a large flat stone, irregular
in outline and with a very smooth surface. The
stone, about 2.5 feet by 5 feet, was surrounded
by small flat stones about 0.8 foot in diameter,
set at the same elevation. During excavation a
cross-mark was cut into the surface of the large
stone to serve as a datum point.

Hearths: There is no evidence (ash, burned
adobe, etc.) of a hearth in this structure.
Miscellaneous features: Burials (Figs. 9, 10).
Burial pit outlines were clearly visible in the floor
of the church (Structure 2). Ten burial pits were
excavated and several others were left intact due
to a lack of time. The pits excavated produced the
remains of at least 17 individuals including 9
adults, 3 adolescents, and 4 infants (Appendix
A). Most of the skeletons were incomplete because of intersecting pits. The articulated skeletons were extended on the back with the heads

18

toward the west (away from the altar) and hands
folded acro3s the lower chest (Fig. 9). Many of
the burials contained glass beads and brass religious ornaments.
The burial pits were for the most part arranged
in rows in the west half of Structure 2. The pits
were filled to floor level and well-packed so that
the floor surface remained smooth and flat. The
burned roof debris lay above the burial outlines
in the south half of the church floor. Burial pits
in the north half of the church floor had been
opened and the skeletons partially removed prior
to the collapse of the burned roof, and the undisturbed burned debris partially filled these pits
(Fig. 9).
In many examples, burials from the upper
floor level had intersected and disturbed burials
which had been placed through the lower floor,
and in at least one instance a burial pit on the
upper floor clearly intersected and disturbed another upper floor burial. In the restricted nave of
this small church, burial plots were apparently
at such a premium that disturbance of previous
burials was common. A good example of this is
found in Burial 8 (Fig. 9), in which a complete
adult skeleton associated with a brass crucifix
was stacked along one wall of the pit when another adult, also associated with a crucifix, was
placed in the bottom of the pit. No bones of the
first skeleton remained articulated after it was
moved aside, although it could not have been in
the ground more than nine years and had been
protected beneath the floor of the structure.
Most of the burials were about 2.5 feet below
the floor, and the bottom 1.0 to 1.5 feet of the pits
extended down into the rotten limestone bedrock
(Fig. 10). The fill in the burial pits was composed of limestone fragments, caliche nodules,
and a small amount of dirt. Most of the adult
burials had a small open cavity above the chest
and abdomen (Fig. 10), and when this cavity
was encountered, the bones could be seen lying
articulated within it. This cavity resulted from
the decay and collapse of the torso and there was
no evidence of the use of a coffin in any burial.
The bodies were buried in homespun clothing,
small fragments of which were preserved
through contact with the brass religious medals.
Dr. F. E. Petzel of The University of Texas at
Austin identified this cloth as plainweave fabric
of flax (Burial 8-1) and plainweave fabric of
coarse cotton (Burial 4). The bodies were ap-

i'~

,,.,.--------- .... . . . ,

I

~

\

I
I

I
I
I
I

I
I

I
1

Q

~

I

§

c;~ \

l

Burial
No. 3

\

Burial

~'o' ~

~

\;)

~I

~

\\

~~~.
~~·
I

\

Bur
No

~

I

\

' '~--------' /

'"''o'
'"·'

I

N

/
/.

,,,,"" ...

ii •

v,.

Burial

Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz

No.9~2

Structure No.2
burials beneath

··· ......... .

0

i

2

Burials

4&6

Fig. 9. Structure 2 showing burials beneath floor.

feet

floor

3

E-W Cross Section of Bl/rial No. I

100'

w

E
99

99

98

98

97

97

0

2

3 feel

Adobe

floor

Cloy between

Mission San Lorenzo
de la Santa Cruz

Structure No. 2

Coliche and

floors
soi I

Bedrock
Grove fill
Cov it y o bove bones

fig. 1 0. East-west cross section of Burial 1 (top) and detail of burial.

20

100'

parently wrapped in sheets before interment and
small fragments of this cloth were preserved on
some skulls and longbones. Dr. Petzel identified
this finely woven fabric as "probably linen."
There were no buttons or other clothing fasteners
in the graves and no evidence of wood or nailsonly glass beads and religious ornaments. The
beads, probably presented to the individuals at
the time of their conversion, were strung in small
numbers, along with the religious medals, around
the necks of the individuals.

Burial 1 (Fig. 10) contained one complete,
adult female articulated skeleton with fragments
of a child's disarticulated skeleton in one corner of
the burial pit. The only bones not present with
the adult were the end joints of three fingers
which apparently were missing at the time of interment. The skeleton was extended on the back
with the head toward the west, the hands and
forearms folded across the lower chest, right
above left. A large brass medallion (No. 1, Fig.
29, B) was strung around the neck (crucifixion
scene upward), along with 28 small burgundy
red glass beads and one amber bead. In the intestinal area was a concentration of several hundred small seeds. Dr. Hugh Cutler of the Missouri Botanical Garden identified these as
"Opuntia seeds, from fruits of a pad cactus like
0. engelmanni."
Burial 2 (Fig. 9) contained an articulated
fragment of an adult postcranial skeleton-right
femur, pelvis, lumbar vertebrae, some ribs;
oriented head to west in a supine position. This
probably was a Spanish burial which was partially disinterred prior to abandonment of the
site.
Burial 3 (Fig. 9) contained a few scattered
teeth and bone fragments of an adult and apparently was another Spanish burial moved in
part to sacred ground elsewhere.
Burial 4 was the upper· half of an infant articulated skeleton which was disturbed by Burial
6. The infant was lying extended on the back,
head toward the west. A small brass crucifix
(No. 2, Fig. 29, E) was strung around the neck
(crucifixion scene upward) with 17 small, clear
glass beads, 2 alabaster beads, and 1 coral bead.
Burial 5 (Fig. 9) was a child's articulated
skeleton, extended on the back, head toward the
west; the forearms were folded over the abdo-

men, right above left. This burial pit, which had
no associated artifacts, intersected q.nd disturbed
therightlegofBurial 7.

Burial 6 was an articulated fragment of an
adult skeleton-left scapula, humerus, radius,
ulna, carpals and phalanges, and a few ribs;
oriented on back, head to west. This probably
was a Spanish burial which was partially moved.
The pit disturbed the lower half of Burial 4.
Burial 7 (Fig. 9) was a child's articulated skeleton in a supine position, extended, head to the
west. The forearms were folded across the lower
chest, right over left. The right leg was removed
by Burial 5. There were no associated artifacts.
Burial 8-1 (Fig. 9) was an adult male articulated skeleton lying extended on the back, head
toward the west, with forearms folded across the
lower chest (right above left). It had been placed
in the pit previously occupied by Burial 8-2,
which was conveniently stacked to one side. Crucifix No. 3 (Fig. 29, C), with the crucifixion
scene upward, was strung around the neck with
29 medium compound red glass beads, 6 small
compound red glass beads, 4 medium simple bluegreen glass beads, 7 small simple blue glass beads,
and 1 coral bead. Some small fragments of finely
woven linen adhered to the skull, mandible, and
right radius and ulna. Burial 9-1 disturbed the
lower legs and feet of Burial 8-1, and some infant bones were scattered in the eastern part
of the pit.
Burial 8-2 (Fig. 9) was a complete disarticulated skeleton of a young adult female. The bones
were stacked to one side in their approximate
relative position (skull to the west) when Burial
8-1 was placed in the same pit. A handmade
brass crucifix (No. 1, Fig. 29, D) was found in
the pelvic area, and small fragments of finely
woven linen were adhering to some of the longbones.
Burial 9-1 (Fig. 9) was the articulated skeleton of an adult male lying fully extended in a
supine position with the head toward the west.
The entire left arm, including the scapula, was
removed by an adjacent burial pit (not explored). The right arm was extended along the
right side. Some infant bones were scattered in
the grave fill. There were no associated artifacts.
Burial 9-2 was lying partially above this skeleton and was possibly buried in the same pit at
21

the same time.· These were the shallowest of all
the burials and the pits did not penetrate the
bedrock.

Burial 9-2 (Fig. 9) was an articulated skeleton of an adult female, extended on the back,
head toward the west. The forearms were crossed
on the lower chest. The lower legs were not removed due to a lack of time. Some infant bones,
including a complete skull, were scattered in the
fill above this individual. Burial 9-2 overlapped
Burial 9-1 and may have been buried at the
same time.
Burial 10 (Fig. 9) was the complete articulated
skeleton of an adult female, buried fully extended on the back, head toward the west. The
forearms were crossed over the abdomen, right
above left. A complete but disarticulated skeleton
of an infant was stacked beside the skull (to the
south). A small brass medallion (No. 2, Fig.
29, A) strung with 2 small simple blue glass
beads and 5 alabaster beads was around the neck
of the adult. The downward face of the medallion
depicts "Our Lady of Zaragossa" and the upturned face depicts the "Sacred Heart."
Cobblestone walkway
Extending along the west wall of the church
(Structure 2), and forming a walkway in front
of the main portal, was a rectangular paved area
about 27 feet long and 7 feet wide (Fig. 8). The
smooth river cobbles used in this pavement
ranged from about 8 to 15 cm. in diameter and
were carefully placed to form a smooth, allweather surface. The surface of this pavement
was relatively flat and sloped downward slightly,
away from the base of the wall.

Associated Artifacts
There were very few artifacts associated with
Structure 2, except for those found in the burials.
Three brass vessels (Fig. 27) found during the
bulldozing are said to have come from the vicinity of Structure 2, but their provenience is uncertain.
Copper: 5 religious objects
Iron: I handmade nail
Glass: 1 pale green bottle glass
Beads: 93 glass; 1 amber; 7 alabaster; 2 coral
Structure 2 was probably the main church of
San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz because ( 1) It
22

was the only structure investigated which contained burials under the floor, and burials were
frequently placed beneath the nave floor in Spanish missions of this period. (2) The burials all
followed Christian tradition. (3) This was the
largest structure, and it was built of the best
quality adobe. ( 4) There was very little cultural
debris lying on or above the floor. (5) There was
evidence that the white plaster walls were decorated with red murals. The sanctuary and high
altar probably were in the east end-where the
floor sloped up and a side entrance led into the
sacrisity and friary-but all traces of these features were destroyed by the bulldozer. This structure apparently was burned when it was abandoned. Several burials still remain beneath the
nave floor in the areas covered by the burned
roof material. The bulldozer operator and other
observers said the walls were still standing 2
to 4 feet high before they were bulldozed. The
remaining wall bases have been capped with new
adobe bricks to help preserve them.

Structure 3 (Fig. 3)
Excavation: The bulldozer removed the walls
and fill of this structure down to within about
15 cm. of the floor. The remaining fill was
troweled from a section of the floor about 5 feet
N-S by 8 feet E-W. The remainder of the structure, including the north end which extends under the property line fence, was not excavated.
Location: Structure 3 was situated against the
east quadrangle wall just north of Structure 9
and about 25 feet south of Structure 10 at grid
location N370-W110.
Dimensions: About 40 square feet of floor were
cleared and the south wall was mapped, but dimensions of the structure were not determined.
Fill: The fill, composed of fine brown soil mixed
with crumbled adobe and building stones, was
removed by careful troweliU:g and passed through
fine-meshed screens. No burned roof material
was encountered in the area.

Wall construction: The south wall was constructed of flat, undressed stone slabs ranging from
about 9 to 46 cm. in diameter and from 3 to 15
cm. in thickness. The limestone slabs had been
laid in horizontal courses, leveled with small
stones, and set in place with a dark clay mortar.

.;;
0

;"
~

II)

c

:>:

...
0
0

ai

ii>
c
I!
"'O

0

"

Ir

0

:;;
c

g
-:;;
0

"
'S

..c

~
.!:

\-

N

' Ill!!!
\

I!!

~

2

.n

·\ \

0

_/;
\
·.·:.,"'

,/

I\

'

·/

,.
·>
/

c
0

t
'

.

~
c

g

I!!

The other three walls of Structure 3 probably
were made of adobe bricks because no stones remained in place to the north, east, or west of the
floor area cleared. No details about these other
walls were determined.

Plaster: No data.
Floors: A single floor of puddled adobe was partially cleared. Made of light brown adobe, it attained a maximum thickness of about 1 cm.
and in some places it was worn through to the
dark brown soil beneath. The surface of the floor
was fairly smooth, compact, and easy to follow
with a trowel.
Roof construction: No data.
Doors: A doorway probably led through the east
end of the south wall of this structure into Structure 9. The doorway area was not cleared and
no details about its construction are known.
Hearth~:

The floor showed scattered traces of
gray ash, but no hearth was encountered.

Miscellaneous features: None excavated.
Associated artifacts:
Iron: 2 handmade nails
Ceramics: 8 amber glaze plainware; 3 majolica
Glass: 1 pale green bottle glass
Stone: 1 scraper blade; 1 Type 3 flake
Structure 3 was only partially excavated, and
its function in the mission complex is uncertain.
It did contain a few sherds and stone artifacts,
but far fewer than the obvious habitation structures, 11, 12, and 14. Perhaps this structure
served as the living quarters of a priest or other
Spanish official and was kept relatively clean.
Most of Structure 3 remains to be cleared, and
the part beneath the property fence should have
at least one foot of fill over the floor and wall
bases. In the area excavated, there was no evidence that this structure was burned.

Structure 4 (Fig. 12)
Excavation: This area was heavily bulldozed,
but about 1 to 1.5 feet of fill remained above the
old ground surface. A small test pit, 2 feet N-S
by 4 feet E-W in the center of the area dis:::losed
several layers of material lying on the old sterile
surface. The south portion, about 20 feet E-W
by 12 feet N-S, was cleared to the old surface,

and all of the lenses of construction material
were recorded and samples of each were taken.

Location: The area labeled Structure 4 in the
field probably was not an actual building, but a
partially enclosed area used for storage of building materials. This area was formed by the north
wall of Structure 2, the west wall of Structure 5,
the south wall of Structure 6, and a short stub of
wall extending south from the west wall of Structure 6. This partial enclosure faced the plaza
(Fig. 3) at about N315-W125 on the grid.
Dimensions: The area involved was about 24 feet
long N-S and extended for about 20 feet along
the north wall of Structure 2.
Fill: A layer of brown sandy soil, crushed adobe,
plaster fragments, and building stones about 3 to
18 cm. thick covered this area. Between this fill
and the old sterile surface were three overlapping lenses (Fig. 12) of building materials: ( 1)
This lens of small river gravels was up to about
0.8 foot thick and 18 feet across; the gravels were
all less than about 0.1 foot in diameter, very
smooth, and they were not badly contaminated
with sand or dirt. The gravel in this lens was
the same type and the same size range as the
gravels used in the adobe bricks and adobe floors.
(2) A lens about 0.3 foot thick and 12 feet across
held limestone slivers. These spalls were identical
to the leveling snecks or wedges used in constructing the stone walls, and this lens apparently
represented a stockpile of them. ( 3) A third lens,
composed of a very fine-grained dark brown clay,
was about 0.3 foot thick and 14 feet across. This
clay was the same type used as mortar in the
stone walls and used, in some instances, as a
base for adobe floors.
Wall construction: The three walls enclosing this
area are described in the sections on Structures 2,
5, and 6.
Plaster: Fragments of a rather coarse sandy plaster from about 1 to 3 cm. in thickness were found
scattered over the bulldozed surface of this area.
Floors: There were no prepared floors in this
area, but the old ground surface beneath the
lenses of building material was very hard-packed
and smooth; it could be trowled easily and swept
clean.
Roof construction: There was no evidence that
this area was roofed.

r
I

I
I

I

Doors: The west side of this area opened out onto
the plaza. There were no doorways leading into
Structures 2, 5, or 6.
Hearths: There were scattered patches of gray
ash on the old ground surface beneath the lenses
of construction materials. These seemed to be
secondary depositions, however, as there was
no evidence of burning on the surface.
Miscellaneous features: Lying on the old ground
surface at about N312-W125 were three crushed
amber beads and one composite button (brass/
wood/glass). A small pit (15 cm. deep and about
37 cm. across) had been dug into the old ground
surface about 1 foot from the wall of Structure
2 and 18 feet east of the northwest corner. This
pit contained no artifacts and its purpose is unknown.
Associated artifacts:
Ceramics: 2 majolica
Glass: 3 amber beads
Stone: 1 cutting tool; 1Type3 flake
Bone: 5 food bones
This partial enclosure, which opened onto the
plaza, was used as a storage area for construction
materials. It was heavily bulldozed, but about
1.0 to 1.5 feet of fill remained over the old ground
surface. The area was only about one-half excavated.

Structure 5 (Fig. 12)
Excavation: The walls of this structure were
largely removed by the bulldozer, but a few
inches of fill remained over the floors. A deep
test trench, about 6 feet E-W and 2.5 feet N-S
was excavated in the south end of the room down
to sterile subsoil. Two superimposed floors were
visible in the walls of this trench and several
square feet of each floor were cleared and examined. The fill on the floors was screened.
Location: This structure lay against the east wall
of the quadrangle between Structure 2 (to the
south) and Structure 9 (to the north), at about
N315-W110 on the grid.
Dimensions: The interior dimensions of this
structure were 21 feet N-S and 14 feet E-W, or
about 5 by 7.5 varas.
Fill: Up to about 6 cm. of fill, composed of adobe
brick debris, plaster, and brown sandy soil, re-

mained above the floors of this structure. There
were no artifacts or burned roof materials on the
floors. The upper floor was separated from the
lower by about 9 cm. of dark brown sterile clay
which had apparently been placed on the lower
floor to serve as a base for the upper one.

Wall construction: The remaining base of the
east wall was composed of adobe blocks on the
south end and of unshaped limestone blocks on
the north end. The adobe portion of this wall
seemed to be an extension of the east wall of
Structure 2-the adobe was of the same type and
the brick pattern was similar. Perhaps adobe
bricks left over from the construction of Structure 2 were used to build a part of this wall. The
south wall was shared with Structure 2. The
west wall, which was abutted against the north
wall of Structure 2, was composed of limestone
blocks from 0.5 foot to 2.35 feet in diameter and
averaging about 0.3 foot in thickness. These
building stones were set in place with dark brown
clay mortar and leveled with limestone chips.
The north wall probably had a doorway which
weakened it, making it collapse more completely,
and contributed to its being largely removed by
the bulldozer.
Plaster: A few small fragments of sandy white
plaster about 1 cm. in thickness were scattered
across the upper floor. No plaster remained on
the lower edges of the walls which were cleared.
Floors: There were two prepared adobe floors,
and about 50 square feet of each were exposed
along the south wall. The upper floor (No. 1)
was composed of light tan adobe with small
gravels, had a smooth upper surface, and was
about 3 cm. thick. The northern portion was partially removed by the bulldozer. About 6 to 10
cm. of dark brown sterile clay separated floor
No. 1 from the lower floor (No. 2). The lower
floor showed the same composition and thickness
as the upper floor, and it lay on the unprepared
old ground surface.
Roof construction: No traces of roof material
were found on the upper floor of this structure.
Doors: One doorway in the south end of this
room linked it to Structure 2. This doorway and
its adobe threshold are described under Structure 2 (Fig. 6, D). A second doorway apparently
led through the center of the north wall into
Structure 9, but a deep cut by the bulldozer re-

r

Mission San
Structures

Lorenzo

3-6,9

0

11

20

J

I

I

feet

I

I

0

8

3

varas
J

I

I

-------"flJ§l.~~9.fJOCO
uaiec_____
______---88Q
__ n

;--- -I
r----------

00

lJi

rJ
rDlJ

R'81
~

f i
l I

~

ti

;a

~

6

9

iooo
~
oo

~
clay

,I

\

\

'

,,.,

,--r- --,_

---···---···-''"";I.:-'........,, '
:
\
~
•
"i : s 11vers
"f.·
do

•---•---•---o-- . . ~·" .,,\.
"::::'~

r•,..

,o
I

t.
I

.·'

I

gravels

O

\

:

I

I

;1,...

a,

. __ o~

-o.........
·--- o- _, o-- -

'IJ...

--o- - - O'

,,,.,.,. .

0 -.,

Fig, 12. Structures 3, 4, S, 6, and 9.

5

moved the lowest course of stones from the west
end of this wall and disturbed the doorway and
it was not completely excavated.

Hearths: No traces of hearths were found in the
excavated portion of the room.
Miscellaneous features: No data.
Associated artifacts: The floors and fill above the
floors were clean and no artifacts were found.
Structure 5 probably served as the sacristy
for Mission San Lorenzo. It was linked by a
doorway to the sanctuary of the church ( Structure 2) toward the south and by a second doorway to the friary (Structure 9) toward the north.
The priests would have used this as a dressing
room, and as a storage place for the robes, altar
furnishings, sacred vessels, and other religious
objects. The lack of artifacts on the floor indicates this room was kept clean and there was no
evidence that Structure 5 was burned. The northern half remains to be excavated.

Structure 6 (Fig. 12)
Excavation: This structure was in the heavily
bulldozed area. The wall foundations were
cleared and recorded and a cobblestone walk outside the west wall was exposed, but the interior
of the room was not excavated.
Location: West of Structure 9, north of Structure
4, this room faced out onto the plaza. It was centered at about N345-W125 on the grid.
Dimensions: The central dimensions of this
structure were 28 feet N-S by 14.5 feet E-W inside and 32.3 feet N-S by 19.5 feet E-W outside.
The interior dimensions were about 10.2 varas
N-S by 5.3 vams E-W. The long axis was oriented almost exactly with magnetic north.
Fill: Most of the fill of Structure 6 was removed
by the bulldozer. Apparently a few inches of
brown sandy soil remained above the floor but
this was not excavated because of limited time.

Wall construction: The walls of this structure
were all made of unshaped limestone slabs from
a·bout 0.5 foot to 2.5 feet in diameter and 0.2 to
0.5 foot thick. Only the lowest one or two courses
remained in the walls after the bulldozing, and
the northwest corner of the room was completely
cut away. The stones in the walls were set in
place with a dark brown clay mortar and were

spaced with limestone spalls. The walls averaged
about 2. 7 feet, or one vara, in thickness.

Plaster: No data.
Floors: No data.
Roof construction: No data.
Doors: The only doorway detected in this room
opened through the center of the west wall out
onto the plaza. It was about 3 feet wide and the
lowest course of stones in the wall formed the
threshold. There was a cobblestone walk leading
away from the outside of this doorway and an
adobe brick platform extending from the doorway into the room for an undetermined distance.
Hearths: No data.
Miscellaneous features: A walk made of a single
layer of smooth river cobbles led away from the
west doorway of Structure 6. The cobbles ranged
from about 6 to 15 cm. in diameter and were set
in the ground in such a way as to produce a
rather smooth, level, all-weather surface. This
walk, which was from 3 to 5 feet wide, ran westward for about 10 feet, then turned south toward
the church (Structure 2). Before the bulldozing,
the walk may have extended north toward the
granary (Structure 10) .
Associated artifacts: While clearing the cobblestone walk outside Structure 6, the following
material was collected:
Cobblestones: 10
F1int flakes: 11
Dart point fragment: 1
Ado be brick fragments: 2
Structure 6 probably formed part of the friary
or living quarters for the priests and their assistants. It is one of the sturdy stone structures in
close proximity to the church and sacristy, and
shows the same orientation as these buildings.
The floor of this room was not cleared and consequently many questions, such as the presence
or absence of features, artifact content, and
whether or not the roof was burned, remain
unanswered.

Structure 7 (Fig. 14)
Excavation: Structure 7 was located in the heavily bulldozed portion of the site, but it was partially protected by the primary mission midden

r
l

which was mounded around its exterior walls.
The interior of the building was cleared down to
the floor, the wall bases were completely exposed,
and a shallow trench was excavated around the
outside of the east and south walls to expose the
boulder-covered areas. About one foot of fill on
the floor was carefully removed by troweling and
most of it was processed through quarter-inch
and finer mesh screens.

Floors: The floor of Structure 7, composed of a
layer of dark puddled adobe 3 cm. thick, was well
preserved beneath the mass of roof debris. The
floor was smooth, hard, and relatively level except for a shallow depression about 3 feet wide
which ran down the entire length of the north
wall base. The floor elevation ranged from 100.46
feet to 100.63 feet and down to 100.24 feet in the
depression.

Location: This structure was situated in the
southwest corner of the plaza at approximate
grid location N250-W245. Structure 7 extended
about 14 feet out beyond the western exterior
wall of the enclosure and about 7 feet beyond the
south plaza wall (Fig. 3) in the usual manner of
a defensive bastion.

Roof construction: Virtually the entire floor of
Structure 7 was covered with a thick layer of
well-preserved roof debris. Large quantities of
this material were carefully collected to show the
exact techniques of roof construction. The roof
was constructed in the following manner (Fig.
5, A): (1) Heavy beams (vigas) spanned the
structure across its short axis. (2) These beams
were crossed by a layer of small limbs or sticks
(savinas). (3) A heavy layer of grass covered
the sticks. ( 4) About 9 cm. of adobe mud tempered with river gravels was poured on the grass.
After this layer of mud dried it furnished a
strong, waterproof roof. When the structure was
burned, large blocks of these roofing materials
fell to the floor and were preserved-the beams,
sticks, and grass survived as charcoal and the
fire-hardened adobe layer retained its smooth
upper surface and grass-impressed lower surface.

Dimensions: The interior dimensions were about
9.5 feet N-S and 27 feet E-W, or about 3.5 by 10
varas.

Fill: Lying on the floor was a thick layer of
burned roof debris-the largest quantity found
in any structure. Above it was about 15 cm. of
disturbed fill composed mainly of adobe brick
fragments and midden debris from outside the
walls. This upper fill produced large quantities
of artifacts derived from the mission midden and
a few recent artifacts introduced into the upper
surface of the fill by the bulldozing operation.
The fill was removed in three basic layers: upper
fill, roof debris, and fill on floor.
Wall construction: All four walls of this structure were built of dark adobe bricks laid in Pattern No. 4 (Fig. 4, B), one brick length plus one
brick width in thickness. From two to four courses
of bricks remained in these walls because of the
protective mass of midden mounded outside. The
walls ranged from about 2 to 3 feet in thickness
(average, about one vara) depending on the
width of the internal cracks between bricks.
Against the exterior bases of the south and east
walls was a broad band of boulders and cobbles
(Fig. 14). It is not known how high these stones
may have been stacked against the walls, but
they probably were simply low ridges which
served to drain rain water away from the bases
of the walls which were situated on level ground.
Plaster: No evidence of plaster was found inside
or outside the walls of this building or in the fill.
The defensive cannons were fired from the top
of this bastion.

Doors: One doorway 3 feet wide led out into the
plaza through the north end of the east wall. A
burned-out post about 15 cm. in diameter on the
north interior side of the doorway probably supported the base of a wooden door, and a burned
plank on the south interior edge probably was
part of the framing for the door (Fig. 14).
Hearths: None was found, although
mounts of wood ash were scattered on
A hearth may have been supported on
platform near the southwest corner of
(see features described below).

small athe floor.
the stone
the room

Miscellaneous features: Situated near the center
and against the base of the east wall (Fig. 14)
was a low, triangular platform. The back of this
platform, which abutted the wall, was about 3.4
feet wide and was situated just south of the doorway. It extended out into the room about 3 feet
at a uniform height above the floor of about 1.0

Fig. 13. Excavation of Structure 7. A, cleared down to floor,
looking west; S, feature against south wall and' lying on floor.

0

I

j:-c

"'"l

fMif:)j

Ef1

lllJ

2
I

I

4
I

I

6

t

I

I

feet
adobe

covered

disturbed
burned
rocks

rock

rock

pl a !form

0

N

2

platform

ili

varas

post
piled

I

against

wall

N250~

~

Mission San Lorenzo de la

Santa Cruz

Structure No. 7
plan of walls and floor

Fig. 14. Structure 7, plan of walls and floor.

""

.......,

··-1

foot. The platform consisted of limestone slabs
and cobbles, up to about 15 cm. in thickness and
30 cm. in diameter, carefully fitted together with
adobe mortar and plastered with adobe to form
vertical sides and a smooth, flat, upper surface.
There was no sign of burning on the flat surface
of this platform and its function is unknown.
Abutted against the interior of the south wall
about 3 feet from the west wall was the base of a
small rectangular stone platform. This feature
was also formed of limestone slabs and cobbles
(Fig. 13, B) set in adobe mortar, but it was not
plastered on the edges. This platform was about
2.5 feet wide where it joined the wall and extended out into the room about 2 feet. The top of
this feature was removed by the bulldozer, but it
may have served as a platform for a hearth because wood ash was scattered on the floor around
it.

Associated artifacts:
Copper: 2 rolls
Iron: 1 handmade nail
Ceramics: 2 dark gray plainware; 9 amber
glaze plainware; 2 clear glaze brown painted
ware; 2 majolica
Glass: 2 pale green bottle glass
Stone: 1 Type 2 gunflint; 1 Type 3 gunflint;
3 cutting tools; 1 scraper flake; 2 Type 2
flakes; 6 Type 3 flakes; 9 Type 4 flakes; 16
miscellaneous flakes
Shell: 2 miscellaneous
Bone: 170 food bones
Structure 7 was completely excavated and
mapped (Fig. 14). It was situated in the southwest corner of the plaza and probably served as
the defensive bastion because: ( 1) It was the only
corner structure which extended beyond the exterior wall of the plaza. (2) Defenders on the roof
of this building could direct their fire along the
outside of the south and west walls of the plaza.
(3) Because of the topography, the southwest
corner of the south and west walls of the plaza
faced the direction from which an attack was
most likely to originate. ( 4) The mass of heavy
roof debris on the floor indicates that this building had an especially strong roof. (5) This was
the only structure which had all four walls constructed with the thickest brick pattern No. 4,
Fig. 4).
The primary mission midden was mounded
from 1 to 2 feet deep around the outside walls of
Structure 7 in a broad, fan-shaped deposit. The

debris extending out from the wall 50 to 100 feet
was 1.0 and 1.5 feet in depth. This large mound
of trash undoubtedly was thrown from the top
of the bastion which offered easy access to a
sturdy roof. Considering the predominant southwesterly wind, this seems to have been an unfortunate choice of direction for trash disposal. A
smaller concentration of midden debris which
surrounded the outside northwest corner of the
quadrangle (Structure 11) probably was thrown
from the roofs of Structures 11, 12, and 13. The
middem contained both Spanish and Indian artifacts plus large quantities of food bones, ashes,
stones, and other debris.

Structure 8 (Fig. 15)
Excavation: This long, narrow building was
heavily damaged by the bulldozing operation.
Only about 10 to 15 cm. of fill and wall foundations remained intact. The entire structure was
excavated, most of the fill was screened, and a
wide strip outside the east, south, and west walls
was cleared down tu the old ground surface.
Location: Structure 8 was situated in the southeast corner of the plaza at about N278-W120 on
the grid. The church (Structure 2) formed the
north wall of this building and the south plaza
wall lay to the west (Fig. 3). The west end of the
building apparently had two doorways.
Dimensions: This building was lo'°"nger in relation
to its width than any other structure uncovered.
Its central interior dimensions were about 11.5
feet N-S and 42.3 feet E-W.
Fill: About 10 to 15 cm. of fill composed of topsoil, disintegrated adobe, and cultural debris lay
above and on the floor. In several large areas, especially in the western half of this stru~ture, a
thin (about 1 cm.) layer of heavily decomposed,
brown, fibrous material lay on the floor surface.
Samples of this material examined in the lab
seem to be the remains of straw and animal
manure.
Separated from the floor by several centimeters
of soil and adobe wall debris, two large hearths
were found in the western end of the building.
These contained large amounts of ash, charcoal,
and burned earth. The material from in and
around these hearths was collected separately
from that which was found on the structure
floor or in the fill above the floor. All of the fill
was removed and processed.
31

r
!

Mission San Lorenzo
Structure 8

0

I
feet

I

var as

8

I

I

I

It

n

I I
f I \ 11 i

(

"''".l. I

I I
I

I

I

I

I

I
__ ../

I

8

0

c:''''''JI~; ;,'//;'/;,J'

20

I

I

r__

------

Wall construction: The south wall of the church
formed the north wall of Structure 8. The east
and south walls were formed by adobe bricks
laid one brick length thick in Pattern Nos. 2 and
3 (Figs. 4, C, D). These walls averaged 1.5 feet
thick and were built of dark adobe bricks set with
dark mortar. There was only about a 5-foot long
section of west wall between the two doorways,
but it was identical to the south and east walls.
The southwest corner of this building was not
well aligned with the south plaza wall and a gap
of about 2 feet resulted. Exactly how this gap
was closed could not be determined, but there
were numerous fragments of dark adobe bricks
in the vicinity which may have helped plug it up.
Plaster: None was found.

J.

Floors: There was a smooth and hard-packed
surface just beneath the decomposed manure
layer in this building, but no evidence of a prepared, puddled adobe floor was found. This hardpacked floor was cut by four deep, narrow
trenches running along the short axis in the west
end of the building, and several scattered postholes were cut through it (Fig. 15). The floor
ranged in elevation from 99.47 feet in the northwest corner to 99.05 feet in the southeast corner.
Roof construction: No data.
Doors: Two doorways led through the west wall
out onto the plaza-one through the north end
of the wall was 4 feet wide and had no threshold
or evidence of a door; the one through the south
end was about 3 feet wide and had a flagstone
threshold made from small limestone slabs (Fig.
15).
Hearths: No data.
Miscellaneous features: Situated in the western
end of Structure 8 were four narrow parallel
trenches cut through the floor of the building
parallel to its short axis (Fig. 15). These trenches
ranged from 0.6 to 1.0 foot in width, averaged
about 1.0 foot in depth, and were spaced from
1.5 to 3 feet apart. All four trenches originated
about 2 feet from the north wall. The east and
west ones extended out under the south wall of
the building and connected to a cross trench and
the other two ended 1 to 3 feet inside the south
wall. Small stones, gravel, and soil filled the

Fig. 15. Structure 8 showing ditches and postholes.

trenches up to the floor level. Apparently these
served as drainage ditches for the west end of
the building.
In a cluster among the trenches were five postholes which penetrated the floor near the south
wall. These postholes ranged from 12 to 23 cm. in
diameter, were about 30 cm. deep, and were
spaced from about 6 to 36 cm. apart.
A cluster of small chunks of limestone lay on
the floor about 2 feet from the center of the west
wall. There were about 25 stones in this group
and they averaged about 10 cm. in diameter.

Associated artifacts:
Copper: 1 patch; 1 perforated overlay
Iron: 3 unidentified objects; 1 bit fragment;
1 pronged object
Lead: 1 sprue; 2 discs
Ceramics: 2 red-slipped plainware; 1 miscellaneous non-wheel-made earthenware· 12
'
amber glaze plainware; 8 clear glaze brown
painted ware; 4 majoll.ca; 7 wheel-made
unglazed red-slipped ware
Glass: 2 pale green bottle glass; 21 recent bottle glass ( 1 bottle)
Stone: 1 Type 5 gunflint; 3 choppers; 1 spokeshave; 1 Type 1 flake; 1 Type 2 flake; 3
Type 3 flakes; 2 Type 4 flakes; 9 miscellaneous flakes
Shell: 3 scrapers; 3 miscellaneous
Bone: 1 ulna tool; 98 food bones
It is assumed that Structure 8 served as a stable
because: ( 1) The structure had no prepared
adobe floor-only a hard-packed dirt floor. (2)
Large patches of decomposed manure and straw
lay on the floor in the west end. ( 3) The trenches
probably served to drain away animal waste
products and keep the floor relatively dry. ( 4)
The postholes situated among the trenches probably mark the locations of tether posts for animals which were kept in the area.
The eastern half of the building had a clean
floor which was devoid of features and, if the
building was indeed a stable, may have served
for storage of hay for the animals. If these interpretations are correct, the building may have
accomodated several choice milk cows and a few
fleet horses for use by the missionaries.
In the fill above (and separated from) the
floor of this structure were several large hearths
filled with ash and food debris and numerous
Spanish and Indian artifacts. It is probable that
this represents a temporary campsite made in the
33

~

(
'

r
lee of the church walls after the mission was
burned and abandoned. One broken bode in a
disturbed area probably was left during the Camp
Wood occupation in the mid-nineteenth century.

Structure 9 (Fig. 12)
Excavation: Structure 9 was in the heavily bulldozed portion of the site. Wall foundations were
completely exposed so the exact size, location,
and orientation of the building could be recorded,
but the fill was not excavated. Several centimeters of fill still remained on the floor.
Location: Structure 9 was situated against the
central portion of the east quadrangle wall between Structures 3 to the north, 6 to the west,
and 5 to the south. Its grid location was about
N345-W107 and the long axis was oriented with
magnetic north.
Dimensions: The central interior dimensions
were about 30 feet N-S and 14 feet E-W, or about
5by11 varas.
Fill: Some dark soil and roof debris covered the
floor of the building.
Wall construction: All four walls were made of
unprepared limestone slabs, up to 2.5 feet in diameter and averaging about 0.3 foot in thickness, set in dark brown clay mortar and leveled
and spaced with limestone slivers. From one to
two courses of stone remained in the wall foundations except for the east end of the north wall
and the west end of the south wall which had
been completely removed during the bulldozing
of the site. The remaining wall foundations averaged about 2. 7 feet or 1 vara in thickness.
Plaster: No data.
Floors: A shallow test pit in one corner of the
room indicate:l that the floor was made of puddled adobe.
Roof construction: No data.
Doors: Apparently there had been a doorway in
the center of the south wall leading into Structure 5, but it was heavily damaged by the bulldozer. It is possible that there was also a doorway leading through the east end of the north
wall into Structure 3.
34

Hearths: No data.
Miscellaneous features: No data.
Associated artifacts: None.
This large and sturdily built structure probably was part of the friary which was built at the
same time as the sacristy (Structure 5 to the
south) and the church.

Structure 10 (Fig. 17)
Excavation: This was the first structure excavated in the un'bulldozed portion of the site. It
was visible on the surface as a large smooth
mound covered with vegetation-no walls or outlines were visible. After the vegetation was
cleared, the bases of the adobe walls were encountered just beneath the grass roots (Fig. 19,
B). About 3 feet of stratified fill was removed
from the inside of the building, exposing the entire floor. The fill in the east third of the building
was removed in arbitrary levels down to the floor,
then the remainder of the fill was excavated by
natural strata using the vertical profile (Fig. 18)
as a guide. The fill against the outside of the walls
was left undisturbed to help protect the walls,
and at the end of the field season this structure
was backfilled in order to preserve it.
Location: Structure 10 occupied the northeast
corner of the quadrangle at about N412-W115 on
the grid. The main gate leading into the plaza
from outside was just south of this building, and
the area to the west was not excavated.
Dimensions: The outside wall dimensions were
36.2 feet north, 16.2 feet east, 33.6 feet south,
and 15.8 feet west. The central in~erior dimensions were 11.2 feet N-S and 30.6 feet E-W, or
about 4 by 11 varas.
Fill: About 3 feet of well-stratified fill in this
structure showed clearly how the buildings of
San Lorenzo had filled and become low mounds
(Fig. 18). ( 1) Lying on the flagstone floor was
from 12 to 35 cm. of loose, grayish soil which
contained large quantities of burned roof material and wall plaster which probably was deposited as the building was burned and abandoned. (2) Above this material was a layer of
dark brown sandy soil from 15 to 40 cm. thick
which probably drifted into the ruined structure
before the walls began to collapse. It contained

r
an occasional stone but was otherwise sterile.
(3) Next was a layer composed almost entirely
of melted adobe and fragments of adobe bricks,
and it must have represented the material deposited by the walls as they collapsed down to
where they were protected by the growing
mound of debris. ( 4) The top layer, lying on
the collapsed wall material and covering the remaining wall bases, was a dark brown sandy soil
from about 15 to 40 cm. in thickness.

Wall construction: All four walls were built with
adobe bricks-the north, east, and south walls
were one brick length plus one brick width in
thickness and generally were in Pattern No. 4
(Fig. 4, B), and the west wall was one brick
length in thickness in Pattern No. 3 (Fig. 4, D).
At several places in the walls there were anomalies in the brick patterns (Fig. 19, C, D) such
as several courses of bricks laid identically (one
brick directly superimposed on the one below)
without breaking the joints. These anomalies
were usually not more than three courses in
height and four bricks in length.
The east wall and about 3 feet of the east end
of the north wall were oriented exactly with
magnetic north (and the grid) but the remaining
walls were oriented about 15 degrees off magnetic
north. This gave the building an unusual outline
(Fig. 17). The masons may have begun Structure 10 by laying the base of the east wall oriented with the previously finished buildings, but
when they turned the corner and began laying
the north wall they found that a rather steep
slope made it necessary to orient the remaining
walls of the structure about 15 degrees off magnetic north. As construction progressed around
the quadrangle (probably along the north wall,
then the west wall, and finally the south wall,
back to the original buildings) the new structures were all oriented off-north like No. 10.
The walls of Structure 10 were preserved beneath the mound of rubble to a height of about
3 feet. The north, east, and south walls averaged
about 2. 7 feet or 1 vara in thickness.
Plaster: Large quantities of wall plaster were
found in the debris on the floor. This plaster,
made of fine river sand and lime, was very similar to that found on the interior of the church.
It averaged from 1 to 3 cm. in thickness and
some fragments showed evidence of having been

applied in two layers with whitewash between.
Some plaster was still in place along the base of
the east and south walls.

Floors: This was the only building excavated
which had a flagstone floor. Since this was the
storehouse and granary, a good dry, durable stone
floor was probably considered to be a necessity.
The flagstones were all limestone slabs up to
about 3.5 feet in diameter, but averaging about
2 feet in diameter and 0.5 foot in thickness.
Spaces between the larger stones were filled with
small limestone fragments (Fig. 19, A) and a
dark brown clay mortar filled the cracks and kept
the stones tightly in position. The floor was quite
smooth but sloped slightly from east to west with
a maximum elevation of 98.75 feet along the east
wall and a minimum of 98.03 feet along the west
wall.
Four flagstones, all about 1 foot in diameter,
had been removed from the floor. Three of these
were situated along the south wall in the west
end of the room and the other was centrally located about 5 feet from the center of the west
wall (Fig. 17).
Roof construction: The roof was constructed like
that described for Structure 7. Large quantities
of burned roof debris lay on the floor and various
samples of it were collected.
Doors: One doorway led from the building,
through the south-central part of the west wall,
into the plaza. This doorway was 3. 7 feet wide
and the walls abutting it were faced with vertical
adobe slabs about 0.3 foot in thickness. There was
no evidence of how the door had been attached to
this opening. A layer of sandy plaster about 0.1
foot thick served as a threshold and extended out
into the room for about 1.5 foot.
Hearths: Apparently there was none.
Miscellaneous features: As previously mentioned, four small flagstones had been removed
from the floor-three adjacent to the south wall
and one centrally situated near the doorway. This
latter hole was cleaned out and contained a post
mold about 15 cm. in diameter extending about
30 cm. below floor level. Each of these four features probably represents where posts were inserted in the floor and served to brace sagging
vigas in the roof.

'.,,~,._.,,,..., " ' - ·--,..,.,,. ,_.~

0

2

4

A

44

IA

2

I

I

4 I

I ;;

I

$

Z

(,

>.«

6

feet

a

2
varos

W0'f!H~d ash deposit
~;\\~:~] plaster

fJ:m
EB

Mission Son Lorenzo de la Santa Cru;z:

m

Structure No. 10

N4001~

posthole
missing

~ wall

plan of walls and floor

threshold

plastered adobe brick
stones

sloping

outward

Fig. 17. Structure 10, plan of walls and floor.

;;WW'l'W"',.-~""S--'""'"""*¥""',

,A,c41Af!kl

i

.4i

q;;;;.,.

ti

->Kt§iii.!4,/J\C4AW4

U.-i.,(

1

;z

t?t

,£,

i¥4@µ

(LQ,44.4;;;.Z.QiAJ!tii{!NW-;4$5UKQ"4&;()_@!ii'it«Cs...~~j4~1l,1\.i?A( ... }iti4,¥Jijd~.A#!J\~i§J{;4.~.i4£@Ji.,(iij,t;JQ~,-

0

?

I

2

feet

1
1

var as

B-- N -------(7

~

_S_u_r_fo_c_e~~~~---~~--~~~

Unexcavated
Mission

San

Lorenzo

St r u ct u r e

Vertical

Cross

de

lo

Santo

Cruz

~

a do be

~

plaster

~

ash

kXLd

stone

No. I 0

Section

Along

N. 120

Line

8

rock

Fig. 1 B. Structure 10, vertical cross section along N. 120 line.

,

Along the base of the south wall, about 10
feet from the west wall, there was a crack about
0.1 foot wide, 2 feet long, and 0.5 foot deep between the plaster and the brick wall. This cavity
was completely filled with grains of shelled corn.
(Fig. 60) which had apparently fallen through
cracks in the plaster and were charred when the
building burned. Dr. Hugh Cutler of the Missouri
Botanical Gardens furnished the following comments on the charred corn grains found in Structure 10:
. . . carbonized kernels, mainly from 14-16-18rowed long-grained dents, similar to recent Southern and some Mexican dents. There are a few
kernels from 8 or 10-rowed ears, usually shorter
and broader in proportion and apparently also dent
corn. The long-grain dents are 4-5 mm. thick, 8-9
mm. wide, 10-11 mm. long. A few have a burned
area in the center of the top of the grain and the
surrounding hard shoulders are puffed out. All
kernels were carbonized when loose, not on cobs.
... These dent corns are similar to some Southern
dents which were grown in the delta region and
perhaps along part of the east Texas coast in early
historic times and may have been grown there in
prehistoric times. I suspect that your [the San
Lorenzo J dents came from Mexico where a number
of races of corn, with kernels almost identical to
yours, may still be found today and has been grown
since at least 1300 A.D. In other words, your [San
Lorenzo] corn is probably introduced from Mexico
and does not represent the native kinds of corn.
Situated in the southwest corner was a stockpile of fine quality lime about 3 feet in diameter
and a maximum of 0.83 foot in height. This probably was produced in the mission limekiln and
used to make fine plaster for the buildings and as
a whitewash.
Just north of the doorway and about 10 cm.
from the wall, a single adobe brick lying on its
side was plastered to the floor. It possibly served
as a kneeling block beneath an icon.

Associated artifacts:
Ceramics: 2 amber glaze plainware
Bone: 10 food bones
Structure 10 was the best preserved of all the
excavated buildings. This undoubtedly was the
storehouse and granary mentioned in the documents as being built after the church, sacristy,
and friary. The following data support this identification: ( 1) It was a sturdily constructed

building, situated near the main gate, and the
only structure with a durable, dry, flagstone floor.
(2) Shelled corn was found between the plaster
and the wall (the only occurrence at the site).
(3) Pure white lime was stored in one corner.
( 4) There was no hearth for either cooking or
heating.
Structure 10 was backfilled at the end of the
field season to protect it from weathering and
vandals.

Structure 11 (Fig. 21)
Excavation: Structure 11 was situated in the
northwest corner of the quadrangle. This area
was not bulldozed and was covered with low
mounds of rubble supporting cactus and shrubs
(Fig. 23, A). The fill of the room was removed
by natural strata and screened.
Location: This room was in the extreme northwest corner with Structure 12 to the east and
Structure 13 to the south. It was at about N397W274 on the grid.
Dimensions: The interior dimensions of this
room were 11.3 feet N-S and 14.2 feet E-W, or
about 4 by 5 varas.
Fill: The fill was very similar to that of Structure 10, but it was only about 1.5 feet deep. A
relatively large quantity of food bones, artifacts,
and other debris lay on the floor beneath the roof
and wall rubble.

Wall construction: All four walls were built of
adobe bricks. The north, west, and south walls
were one brick length plus one brick width in
thickness (Pattern No. 4, Fig. 4, B) and averaged
about 2.5 feet thick. The east wall was a partition
one brick width in thickness (Pattern No. 1, Fig.
4, A) which was interlocked into the more massive side walls (Fig. 21). The remaining wall
bases were from 1 to 1.5 feet high.
Plaster: Fragments of coarse, thick, dull brown
plaster were found in the fill and around the
bases of the walls in a few places. These fragments were up to 3 cm. thick and some had been
applied in 2 or 3 layers.
Floors: The floor consisted of the smooth surface
of limestone bedrock which had been leveled by
filling the low spots with puddled adobe-about
39

50 per cent of the floor area was covered with
the patches of adobe (Fig. 21). The floor ranged
from 98.63 to 99.51 feet in elevation.
Roof construction: The roof construction was the
same as described for Structure 7. Small quanUie.o of burned roof debris lay on the floor fill.
Doors: One doorway led from this room through
the eastern end of the south wall, into Structure
13. This doorway was 2.9 feet in width, and had a
threshold composed of two layers of adobe bricks
(about 0.66 foot in he'.ght) capped with a layer
of puddled adobe about 0.2 foot thick. The exterior edge of this threshold ended in an abrupt
step, but on the inside of the room a fan-shaped,
puddled adobe ramp sloped gently from the
threshold down to the floor (Fig. 21). There was
no evidence to indicate how a door was attached
to close this doorway.

Hearths: There were several lenses of wood ash
on the floor, but no intensively burned area was
found.
Miscellaneous features: From 20 to about 40 cm.
of midden debris was mounded against the exterior north wall of this room (Fig. 3) and probably was thrown from its roof.
Associated artifacts:
Iron: 1 unidentified lump
Lead: 1 disc
Ceramics: 1 non-wheel-made red-slipped plainware; 8 amber glaze plainware; 1 majolica;
1 stoneware, white, salt-glazed
Glass: 1 pale green flat glass
Stone: 1Type5 gunflint; 1spokeshave;1 Type
1 flake; 4 Type 2 flakes; 3 Type 3 flakes; 1
. Type 4 flake; 10 miscellaneous flake3; 1
metate fragment; 1 chert core, No. 2
Bone: 182 food bones.
The occurrence of a metate fragment, numerous chert flakes, a large chert core, cactus fruit
seeds, and many food bones suggests that a family of mission Indians may have used this structure. The mission soldiers may have lived in
rooms nearer the bastion (Structure 7) . Structure 11 was backfilled for preservation.

Fig. 19. Excavation of Structure 10. A, flagstone floor; 8,
horizontal adobe brick patterns in wall at southeast corner; C,
vertical adobe brick patterns in east wall; D, vertical adobe
brick palterns, norlh wall.

Structure 12 (Fig. 21)
Excavation: This room, located in the unbulldozed part of the site, was completely excavated.
About 1 to 1.5 feet of fill was removed by natural strata and screened, but the room was backfilled before the end of the field season.
Location: This room was situated against the
north wall just east of Structure 11 in the northwest corner and adjacent to Structure 15. The
approximate grid location of Structure 12 was
N400-W258. It was one of a row of small rooms
separated by narrow partition walls.
Dimensions: The central interior dimensions of
Structure 12 were 11.3 feet N-S and 14 feet E-W,
or about 4 by 5 varas.

Fill: About 1.5 feet of fill, stratified in the usual
manner, lay above the floor, and living debris
littered the floor surface.
Wall construction: The north and south walls
were made of adobe bricks, one brick length plus
one brick width in thickness (Pattern No. 4, Fig.
4, B), and the east and west walls were adobe
brick partitions only one brick width in thickness
(Pattern No. 1, Fig. 4, A). The wall bases were
from 1.5 to 2.0 feet in height after excavation.
Plaster: Fragments of coarse brown plaster up
to about 3 cm. thick were found in the fill and
adhering to the bases of the walls in several
places.
Floors: A single puddled adobe floor had been
poured over the uneven surface of limestone bedrock. The exposed bedrock surface formed the
floor in the northwest corner of the room (Fig .
21). The adobe floor ranged up to about 4 cm. in
thickness and had a smooth, hard, upper surface.
The floor ranged from 99.30 to 99.57 feet in elevation.
Roof construction: Small fragments of burned
roof debris from the fill indicated that the roof
was constructed in the same manner as described
for Structure 7.
Doors: One doorway, leading through the east
end of the south wall (Fig. 21) into the plaza,
was 3.2 feet wide. It showed no evidence of facing, or of a prepared threshold, or how the door
was hung.
Hearths: A hearth ~as situated in the adobe
floor about 2.5 feet from the center of the south

I
I

"'"

-·----

---"'""-~---------

-

~E

, ~-,x;--:--,r'-, --i-~-1-,I;n:x- ;_-_}T:
-- . ------ --- -----

r; :~ r
1

North Wall Looking North

E~

uz:)-rr?,-:-&! ~: :'! i ~ !=1 : [ /i

Mission

San Lorenzo

de la Santa Cruz

St r uc tu re N o. I 0
Brick Patter n s In N.

a

S. W ol Is

South Woll Looking South

Fig. 20. Structure 10, brick patterns in north and south walls.

_,__,

)P".,

0

2

4

6

N409~

feet
0

I

2

0

var as

bedrock
odobe features
Mission San Lorenzo de lo Santa Cruz

Structures Nos. II and 12
plan of walls and floor

cobblestone walk

N390~
0

rocks
ash deposit

Fig. 21. Structures 11 and 12, plan of walls and floor.

~-:..-;;_ -·~~~-~-·~-=-~_,.-=_-_-:-:::----~ -~_--::_=-::-====--~=~

=--=--===-=-= -

·-~--1

wall of the room. It consisted of a circular depression in the floor about 2.5 feet in diameter and
0.13 foot in maximum depth. This depression
was baked hard and contained light gray wood
ash which produced evidence of burned eggshells
and bone slivers when examined microscopically
in the laboratory. Along the southeast edge of the
depression-between the hearth and the doorway-was a smooth adobe ridge about 15 cm.
high which probably served as an air deflector
for the fire (Fig. 21). This feature apparently
was formed by a fragment of an adobe brick
which had been smoothly plastered to the floor.
This was the only complete, prepared hearth
found in the structures at San Lorenzo.

Miscellaneous features: Six large river-smoothed
limestone rocks lay on the floor of this roomone in the southwest corner, two against the east
wall, and three about 3 feet out from the center
of the east wall (Fig. 22). These stones ranged
from 1 to 2 feet long and 0.3 to 0.66 foot thick.
They do not seem to have been incorporated into
platforms and their function is unknown.
At the west edge of the doorway, a cobble::;tone
walk about 2.7 feet (1 vara) wide led from the
exterior surface of the wall southward into the
plaza (Fig. 3). It was composed of a single layer
of closely spaced limestone fragments and cobbles from about 6 to 15 cm. in diameter.
Associated artifacts:
Copper: 2 strips
Iron: 1 handmade nail
Lead: 1 sprue
Ceramics: 2 dark red polished plainware; 28
amber glaze plainware; 13 clear glaze
brown painted ware; 3 green glaze olive
jars; 2 majolica; 1 wheel-made unglazed
red-slipped ware; 1 dark brown appliqued
ware
Stone: 1 scraper blade; 1 scraper flake; 4 Type
2 flakes; 5 Type 3 flakes; 1 Type 4 flake; 6
miscellaneous flakes
Shell: 3 scrapers; 2 miscellaneous
Bone: 46 food bones
It is likely that this room served as a habitation, probably for Indians living in the mission
establishment, because: ( 1) It was small in size.
(2) It contained a hearth. (3) The floor was littered with potsherds, food bones, and other debris. ( 4) Chert tools and flakes and red ochre
were found on the floor.
44

Structure 13 (Fig. 24)
Excavation: This small room, like the two preceding ones, was situated in the unbulldozed area
of the site and was relatively well preserved beneath mounds of melted adobe covered by native vegetation. It was completely excavated.
Location: Structure 13 was near the northwest
corner of the quadrangle between Structures 11
and 14 (Fig. 3). It was at about N387-W270 on
the grid, and its short axis was oriented about 15
degrees west of north.
Dimensions: The central interior dimensions
were about 7 feet N-S and 14.4 feet E-W, or
about 2.5 by 5 varas. This was the smallest structure excavated at the site.
Fill: The room contained from 1.5 to 2 feet of
fill composed primarily of melted adobe, adobe
brick fragments, roof debris, artifacts, wind-deposited sand, and an especially large amount of
wall plaster (described below) . The fill was carefully excavated by hand and screened.

Wall construction: The north, west, and south
walls were made of adobe bricks laid in Pattern
No. 4 (Fig. 4, B). The north wall was shared
with Structure 11 and the south wall with Structure 14. The east wall, facing the plaza, was
made of flat limestone slabs set with brown clay
mortar. The walls averaged about 2.2 feet in
thickness and were standing about 2 feet high
after excavation.
Plaster: Large quantities of plaster were present
in the room fill and on the bases of the south and
west walls. This plaster ranged from 0.2 to 0.3
foot in thickness and some fragments up to 2
feet in diameter were collected. The plaster, composed primarily of lime, ash, and soil, was light
in weight. It contained very little sand and
showed no sign of paint or whitewash.
Floors: A single adobe floor about 3 cm. thick
lay partially on limestone bedrock and partially
on dark brown topsoil. Penetrated by the large
hearth (described below), the floor had a smooth
surface, sloped slightly east to west, and ranged
in elevation from 99.19 to 99.60 feet.
Roof construction: Some small fragments of
burned roof found in the fill indicated that it was
constructed in the same manner as that of Structure 7.

c

.!!

0

>

8

.

><

~

!

ii

...

Doors: One doorway led through the east end
of the north wall (see Structure 11 for description). Another doorway, about 2.6 feet or 1 vara
in width, opened through the north end of the
east wall into the plaza. It showed no evidence of
a threshold nor how the door had been attached.
A disturbed area near the east end of the south
wall (Fig. 24) appeared to be a doorway which
had been plugged with adobe brick fragments
and stones. Its original characteristics could not
be determined.
Hearths: One large oval hearth occupied the
southwest corner of this small room (Fig. 24).
It was about 5 feet long NE-SW, and about 4
feet wide, and penetrated the floor to a depth of
about 0.66 foot. It consisted of a large, unlined
pit which showed some evidence of burning on
the bottom and around the edges. The pit contained about 20 cm. of concentrated, light gray
wood ash, a few potsherds, some rust fragments
which had probably been nails, and microscopic
fragments of burned eggshell, bone and other debris.
Miscellaneous features: In the northwest corner
of the room, a hole about 2 feet wide and 1 foot
high penetrated the exterior quadrangle wall at
floor level. Three large smooth limestone cobbles
were wedged into the hole to plug it (Fig. 23,
D). This feature may have served as a ventilator to create a draft for the large hearth described
above.
Associated artifacts:.
Copper: 1 roll; 1 rivet; 1 perforated overlay;
1 buckle
Iron: 5 unidentified lumps; 5 unidentified obects; 1 ladle
Ceramics: 2 polychrome polished; 4 red polished decorated ware; 4 red-slipped plainware; 1 non-wheel-made miscellaneous; 48
amber glaze plainware; 20 clear brown
painted ware; 1 green glaze olive jar; 3 miscellaneous lead glazed; 14 majolica; 7 wheelmade unglazed red-slipped ware; 1 dark
brown appliqued ware; 3 hard paste blue
featheredge

Fig. 23. Excavation in
initial clearing; 8, adobe
burned roof support post
plugged hole in west wall

northwest corner of quadrangle. A,
floor on bedrock in Structure 11; C,
in floor of Structure 14; D, boulderof Strvcture 13.

Glass: 1 pale green flat glass
Beads: 1 coral; 3 glass
Stone: 1 type 5 gunflint; 1 cutting tool, 1 scraper
flake; 1 spokeshave; 3 Type 2 flakes; 5 Type
3 flakes; 4 Type 4 flakes; 13 miscellaneous
flakes
Shell: 1 miscellaneous
Bone: 6 cut ribs; 475 food bones
i

r-

This small structure probably served as a
food preparation room for the following reasons:
( 1) There was a very large ash basin in the floor
and a probable vent hole in the wall. (2) The
floor was littered with potsherds and food bones.
(3) A common kitchen would have made it unnecessary to have large cooking hearths in other
quarters-and most structures did not contain
hearths. ( 4) From a kitchen in this corner, food
rations could have been conveniently distributed
to soldiers and Indians in the rows of living quarters along the west and north walls. ( 5) A copper pot rivet and an iron ladle were found on the
floor.

Stn1cture 14 (Fig. 24)
Excavation: Structure 14, undisturbed by the
bulldozer, was one of the last rooms excavated
and could not be completely cleared before the
end of the field season.
Location: This room was situated along the
northern end of the west side of the quadrangle
between Structures 1 and 13 at about N370W268 on the grid.
Dimensions: The interior width near the north
end was 14.1 feet or about 5 varas. Other dimensions were not determined.
Fill: About 2 feet of the usual fill lay above the
floor of this building. There was an especially
thick layer (up to about 8 cm.) of refuse between the floor and the fallen roof and wall debris which seemed to have accumulated while
the structure was in use. In order to accelerate
excavation, the upper fill was removed rapidly
with shovels, but the material on the floor was
troweled up and processed on the screens.
Wall construction: The north and west walls
were about 2.3 feet thick and made of adobe
bricks laid in Pattern No. 4 (Fig. 4, B), the west
wall forming part of the exterior quadrangle
47

I

wall. The east wall, facing the plaza, was built
of unshaped limestone slabs up to about 2 feet
across and 0.4 foot thick set in dark brown clay
mortar. This wall was about 2 feet thick and
was not as carefully constructed as were the stone
walls of Structures 5, 6, and 9. When the fiil was
cleared, the wall bases stood about 2 feet high.
Plaster: There were traces of thick wall plaster
in the north part of this room. The plaster was
composed of soil with a small amount of lime and
sand and it decomposes easily through weathering.
Floors: This structure had a prepared floor composed of dark dirt adobe. The upper floor surface was smooth but somewhat undulating and
sloped upward slightly toward the north. The
floor elevation ranged from 99.17 to 99.61 feet.
Roof construction: Small quantities of burned
roof material in the fill of this room indicated
that the roof was constructed like that of Structure 7. A few large fragments of charred vigas
were oriented east-west and had apparently
spanned the room across its short axis.
Doors: One doorway about 2.7 feet wide led
through the east end of the north wall into Structure 13 at one time. This doorway had been
thoroughly, plugged with adobe bricks sometime
during the mission occupation and its original
characteristics could not be determined. Perhaps smoke from the large hearth in Structure 13
led to the plugging of this doorway. In the part
of Strncture 14 excavated, no other entrances
were found.
Hearths: No prepared hearths were found in
Structure 14, but there was a concentration of
fine gray ash about 1.5 feet in diameter and 0.1
foot thick situated about 18 feet from the north
wall and 3 feet from the west wall. Here, as in
other structures, a small fire was apparently
maintained directly on the floor.

M iscellaneuus f eaiures: ( 1) Centered a bout 6
feet from the north wall and 4 feet from the east
wall was a circular concentration of limestone
slabs. This group of rocks, lying on the floor,
was about 4 feet in diameter and the individual
stones ranged from about 0.3 to 2.0 feet across.
There were at least 25 stones in this concentration. Its function is unknown. (2) Seven large
smooth chunks of limestone were laying on the
floor (Fig. 24). These stones ranged in size from
1.0 foot in diameter and 0.3 foot thick, up to
2.0 feet in diameter and 1.0 foot thick, and like
the ones in Structure 12, probably constituted
part of the furnishings of the room. ( 3) The basal
portion of the two burned-off posts were found
near the west wall. These posts had been inserted
in holes through the adobe floor. One post base,
0.5 foot in diameter, was centered 1.5 feet from
the north wall and 1.2 feet from the west wall.
These posts were probably installed to support
the ends of sagging vigas and were destroyed
when the structure was burned.
Associated artifacts:
Copper: 2 strips; 1 perforated overlay
Iron: 1 disc lunate
Lead: 1 ring
Ceramics: 1 polychrome polished; 4 dark red
polished plainware; 28 amber glaze plainware; 13 clear glaze brovvn painted ware;
1 green glaze olive jar; 5 majolica
Glass: 1 pale green flat glass
Stone: 1 Type 1 gunflint; 1 Type 3 gunflint;
2 Type 2 flakes; 2 Type 3 flakes; 1 Type 4
flake; 9 miscellaneous flakes
Shell: 1 miscellaneous
Bone: 1 ulna tool; 1 cut rib; 118 food bones
The large amount of debris, apparently accumulated while the room was in use, would indicate that it served as living quarters. Spanish and
Indian artifacts found on the floor along with a
large quantity of food bones included such things
as a complete bison scapula.

N370
W258_J

~;:~

~~

Structo,e No.13

·

~

Mission

Son Lorenzo

S t r uc t ure 1
Pion

of

Walls

de Jo

N o. I '3

a

Santo Cruz

a

~

St,ycture No.14

•

~

,..._N ----C:

I4

Floors

Fig. 24. Structures 13 and 14, plan of walls and floor.

~

osh

liiilll

WO 0

~

adobe

d

~

plaster

D

stone

lliITIIill

cobble stone

a

rock
walk

Fig . 25 . Excavation of northwest corner of quadrangle showing Structures 11-14, looking west . Nueces River is visible through trees in background .

Fig. 26. Artist's reconstruction of norlhwest corner of quadrangle showing doorways II. to r.J into Structures 13, 11, and 12. Looking northwest.

Features
Interior
Many types of features, reflecting various aspects of frontier Spanish colonial life, were
found in the structures. These features are listed
below and detailed information can be found under the appropriate structure descriptions.

Interior Features
Feature type
1. Prepared floors

2. Wall plaster
3. Roof debris
4. Doorways
5. Prepared thresholds
6. Door pivot
7. Hearths and ash basins
8. Hearths in fill
9. Burials
10. Charred corn
11. Lime concentration
12. Building material caches
13. Plugged hole in wall
14. Stone platforms
15. Adobe brick platform
16. Burned post
17. Postholes
18. Drainage trenches

19. Straw and manure
20. Large smooth rocks

Structure Numbers
1-2-3-5-7-910-11-12-13
2--4-5-10-1112-13
1-2-7-10-1112-13
2-3-5-6-7-8-910-11-12-13
2-8-10-11
7
11-12-13-14
8-10
2
10
10
4
13
7
10
14
8-10-14
8
8
12

Exterior

bottom up to about 40 feet in diameter at its
maximum extent. Modern trash disposal made it
impossible to test this depression, but it is probable that it was a small, natural drainage which
was developed into a puddle pit for manufacturing the thousands of adobe bricks used at the mission. Soil from the surrounding ridge could have
been used and water and gravel were readily
available in the Nueces River about 200 feet to
the west. No other large depressions were found
near the mission site.

Cobblestone walkways
Carefully prepared cobblestone pavements
were found in three locations: outside the main
entrance of the church (Structure 2), outside
Structure 6, and outside Structure 12. Extending
along the west wall of the church, and forming
a walkway in front of the main portal, was a rectangular paved area about 27 feet long and 7
feet wide (Fig. 8). The smooth river cobbles used
in this pavement ranged from about 8 to 15 cm.
in diameter and were carefully placed to form a
smooth, all-weather surface. The surface of this
pavement was relatively flat and sloped downward slightly, away from the base of the wall.
The cobblestone walks outside Structures 6 and
12 are described in the appropriate parts of the
section on Structures.

Building materials concentrations
Various kinds of commonly used building materials were stockpiled within the mission compound. These concentrations are described under
Structure 4.

Adobe puddle pit

Rock piles against wall foundations

About 100 feet southwest of the bastion ( Structure 7) there is a shallow, circular depression
which is currently used for trash disposal. This
basin is about 4 feet in depth at the present time
and ranges from about 15 feet in diameter at the

Along the south part of the quadrangle, large
smooth limestone slabs were stacked against the
bases of adobe walls (Fig. 3). This technique
was found outside the south wall of Structure 7
and both inside and outside the south quadrangle

wall. Stones one to two feet in diameter and four
to six inches thick were laid in a strip about three
feet wide along the bases of the walls. Dirt and
small stones filled the spaces between the large
rocks. These rock piles probably were used to fill
shallow depressions and protect the adobe foundations from puddles of rain water. This south
wall area was the only part of the compound
which did not have good exterior drainage.

Limekiln
Lime was used in wall plaster in many of the
structures and a concentration of lime was found
on the floor of the granary (Structure 10) . This
lime was probably manufactured locally from
the abundant limestone. The landowner of the
north part of the site described a large, circular
"oven" in the bank of the spring creek about 200
feet north of the north quadrangle wall. He said
this oven was several feet in diameter and several feet deep, lined with adobe bricks, and

showed signs of intensive burning. This oven,
which was quite likely the mission limekiln,
was destroyed a few years ago by construction
of a private road.

Trash middens
A large midden concentration surrounded the
exterior wall of the bastion (Structure 7) in a
broad, fan-shaped deposit. This debris extended
out from the wall for 50 to 100 feet and was up
to 1.0 and 1.5 feet in depth. This large mound of
trash was undoubtedly thrown from the top of
the bastion which offered easy access to a sturdy
roof. A smaller concentration of midden debris
surrounded the outside northwest corner of the
quadrangle (Structure 11). This debris was probably thrown from the roofs of Structures 11, 12,
and 13. The middens contained both Spanish and
Indian artifacts plus large quantities of food
bones, ashes, stones, and other debris.

53

The Artifacts
In classifying artifacts from a historic site it
is difficult to decide between basic categories
based on function (ornaments, tools, containers,
etc.) and those based on material (glass, metal,
shell, etc.). With these collections several complications are introduced into the classification
process which are usually not found in prehistoric assemblages: ( 1) There are more functional
categories and the exact source and function of
many items cannot be determined. (2) There are
frequently more types of materials used including such exotic things as semi-precious coral.
In a consistent classification, using basic functional categories, all ornaments would be described together, regardless of material (copper,
glass, shell, etc.), but items whose functions are
not known would form an unwieldy group. One
who is interested in comparing artifacts to published descriptions for purposes of identification also finds functional categories difficult to
use. For these reasons, the artifacts from San Lorenzo have been classified according to the material used for their manufacture--metal, ceramics, glass, stone, shell, bone. The only exception is found where coral, alabaster, and amber
beads are described along with the glass beads.

Metal
Copper
A total of 54 copper alloy artifacts was found
at the site of Mission San Lorenzo. Four of these
are modern cartridge cases, calibres .22, .25, .30,
.38, all of which were found on the surface. The
remaining 50 artifacts, apparently all dating to
the Spanish occupation of the site, are composed
of copper alloys (brass, bronze) containing small
amounts of zinc, tin, and other metals. Most of
these artifacts are hand-wrought and some were
probably made locally. They show hammer
marks on one or both surfaces and various chisel
54

cuts and grinding striations. The thickness of the
copper alloys used in these objects varies from
1 mm. to about 3 mm., with the entire range of
thickness frequently occurring on one object.
Some of the religious ornaments and the buckles
were cast, and probably were made elsewhere.
All of the copper objects were coated with patina
ranging from thin and stable to thick and bubbly.
Some objects were sufficiently cleaned simply by
brushing and polishing with a soft cloth; others
were cleaned chemically using techniques suggested by Plenderleith ( 1962: 232-25 7) .

Vessels
Three copper vessels and two fragments, probably from the same vessels, were found on the
surface by local people while the south portion
of the site was being bulldozed in the summer of
1962. These vessels, all heavily damaged by the
machinery, were reportedly uncovered in the
vicinity of the church (Structure 2). Possibly
they were cached together in the raised sanctuary.
Vessel No. 1 (Fig. 27, A) is a deep bowl with a
rounded base, a slight shoulder, and an everted
lip. The original diameter was about 22 cm. and
the depth about 13 cm. The neck of the vessel is
about 4.5 cm. high and the lip is turned out and
downward for about 1 cm. The original ragged
edge of the lip is turned under and flattened
against the under surface, leaving a rounded edge
on the lip. Hammer marks show clearly on the
exterior surface while the interior surface is
coated with carbon and salts and pitted by corrosion.
Vessel No. 2 (Fig. 27, B) is a shallow bowl with
a rounded bottom and a serrated lip. The original
diameter was about 22 cm. and the depth about
7.5 cm. The lip of this vessel is irregularly cut
and unfinished (except for the serrations). It appears that the upper portion of the bowl may

~
0

.D

.,,..

Cl.

-i

.
~

Cl.
Cl.

0

u

..."

en
ii:

have been trimmed off. The shape and dimensions of this vessel are about the same as for Vessel No. 1, and it may be the lower portion of a
similar vessel. The interior and exterior surfaces
sh9w some hammer marks and small striations.
There is no deposit on the interior surface.
Vessel No. 3 (Fig. 27, C) is a shallow plate
with a rounded bottom and a flattened rim. The
diameter is 23 cm. The lip is cut and ground
smooth, and two parallel lines are engraved
around the plate just below the lip on the interior (upper) surface. These lines are about 3
mm. apart, with the first one about 1 mm. below
the lip. This plate is well finished, showing very
few hammer marks, with fine striations (from
polishing?) and corrosion pits on both surfaces.
Two fragments of copper found on the surface
in the vicinity of Structure 2 appear to be parts
of the vessels described above. One fragment, 10
cm. in diameter, is heavily coated with salts and
carbon on one surface and is probably part of
the bottom of Vessel No. 1. The other fragment,
9 cm. across, appears to be part of the side portion of Vessel No. 2.

Patches
Four perforated copper fragments, two of
which still have rivets in place, reflect the thrifty
nature of the missionaries where copper was concerned.
A small copper patch (Fig. 28, B) is a square
fragment, 5 cm. by 5 cm., cut out with clippers
and perforated in each of the four corners. The
corners are rounded, and the holes, about 5 mm.
in diameter, were all punched from one side into
an anvil or other such device. One hole is split
out, and three still contain copper rivets. The
rivets are rolled cylinders of sheet copper about
5 mm. in diameter, 1to2 cm. long, and flattened
on both ends. Some tiny fragments of carbonized
wood adhere to the rough side of the patch.
Another copper patch (Fig. 28, C) is trapezoidal in outline, 5.5 cm. wide, 9.8 cm. long on
one side, and 4 cm. long on the other side. It was
cut from sheet copper with clippers, and only
one corner is rounded. It contains four holes,
about 5 mm. in diameter, all punched from one
side into an anvil or other such device. Three
holes are spaced along the long side, one at each
end and one in the center; the other hole is at
one end of the short side. Distinct circular hammer marks appear on both surfaces.

A fragment of a copper vessel bottom has a
large patch applied as described below. Apparently after the vessel was patched, its sides were
lost; the bottom, including the patch, was subsequently cut in two with clippers. So the fragment remaining is half of a pot bottom with half
of a hole covered with half of a patch. This fragment, 17.5 cm. long and 8.5 cm. wide, shows
very well how large patches were applied to
vessels: The hole in the bottom was cut smoothly
with clippers to form a square with rounded corners. A large patch, about 5 cm. wider than the
hole on each side, was placed inside the vessel
and centered over the hole. Large rivets, about
5 mm. thick, were placed near each corner of the
hole to hold the patch securely in place. Small
rivets, 3 mm. in diameter, were spaced around
the outside of the patch at 2 cm. intervals. All of
the rivets were made by rolling cyinders of sheet
copper and all of them are well flattened and
smoothed on the inside and outside of the vessel.
The rivet holes were all punched from the inside
of the vessel outward. Two large rivets and nine
small rivets i;ire still in place in this patched fragment.
The other patch apparently was not completed. It is an irregularly shaped sheet of copper about 21 cm. by 11 cm. Two 6-millimeter
perforations have been made near one edge, and
this edge is folded over about 1 cm. and flattened
against the sheet.

Strips and cylinders
Two rectangular strips of copper are about 3
mm. thick. The larger is 17 cm. by 2.4 cm., and
the smaller is 5.5 cm. by 2 cm. The long edges
of both fragments were cut with clippers, and
the short ends were cut with a chisel. Both artifacts show circular hammer marks on both faces.
The other seven strips were cut from sheet
copper about 1 mm. thick. All edges of these
fragments were cut either by clippers or with a
chisel. They range in width from 1.0 to 2.3 cm.,
and in length from 3.0 to 8.2 cm.
One of these fragments ( 1.0 by 4.0 cm.) is
bent into a semicircle with both ends rolled inward. Two specimens have faint lines engraved
on one face. A line is centrally located running

Fig. 28. Copper artifacts. A, heavily patched portion of pot
bottom; B, patch with rivets in place; C, patch; D, strip.

B

A

0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

I
cm .
57

r
!

lengthwise on one, and the other has three parallel lines running lengthwise (one in the center
of the face and one near each edge) .
Four small cylindrical rolls of sheet copper
were found. Two are made from copper about
3 mm. in thickness, and two are made from sheets
about 1 mm. thick. The thick rolls were cut from
sheet copper with a chisel. One of these is rolled
into a complete cylinder, with only a slight overlap of the ends, 2.0 cm. long and 1.5 cm. in diameter. The other is incompletely rolled, but it is
2.0 cm. long and about 1.3 cm. in diameter.
The two thin copper cylinders were apparently made to serve a different purpose. One
specimen was made by rolling in all the edges
of a sheet of copper, then rolling the entire sheet
into a heavily overlapped cylinder. This is probably a prepared but unused rivet. It is 2.5 cm.
long and 1.5 cm. in diameter. The other specimen was made by rolling a sheet of copper into
a cylinder and soldering the edges together so
that the seam down the side of the cylinder is
nearly invisible. This cylinder has one smoothly
cut end and one broken end. Its dimensions are
3.7 cm. long and about 1.5 cm. in diameter.

Religious medals
Five brass or bronze religious objects, two medallions and three crucifixes, were found with
burials beneath the floor of Structure 2. The under faces of these medals, as they lay in the
ground, were heavily corroded, and it was necessary to clean them chemically to detect the designs.
Medallion No. 1 (Fig. 29, B) was found on the
sternum of Burial No. 1. It had been strung with
many small glass beads. This cast medallion is
heavily worn on both faces, but some design details can still be determined. It was originally
octagonal in outline, but the lower corners have
been rounded by wear. Each face has a raised
border around the edge and a raised religious design. The face showing the least wear, which was
uppermost when it was found in the burial, depicts Christ on the cross with a tablet above His
head and a weeping, robed figure on either side
of the cross with their faces turned outward.
PASSIOCHRISTI is spelled out around the medallion's border beginning at lower left; other
letters are too worn to be deciphered.
The reverse, or down side of the medallion is
heavily worn and only the faint outline of a

ro1ed figure with long hair and with rays of
extending outward from the chest can be
seen. This is probably a depiction of Christ kneeling with the "Sacred Heart" exposed and giving
off light rays. The medallion is 4.5 cm. long, 3.7
cm. wide, and 4 mm. thick. A stem extends 1 cm.
above the top of the medallion and is 6 mm. by 3
mm. thick with a 3 mm. suspension hole through
it near the top. The suspension hole runs parallel to the wide axis of the medallion and is heavily worn by the thong which suspended the
medal.
Medallion No. 2 (Fig. 29, A) was found near
the sternum of Burial No. 10 (Fig. 9). It had been
strung with an assortment of colored glass beads.
This cast oval medallion is very well preserved,
showing almost no wear on the raised border and
religious designs on both faces. The face, which
was turned downward in the burial, depicts a
rob~d figure holding a child and standing on a
pillar. Halos of light surround both heads. A
kneeling figure in an attitude of prayer or adoration is shown on each side of the pedestal, and
the one to the left is holding some sort of staff.
Reading from the lower left, the following letters
appear around the edge of the medallion: N.S.
DEL.PILAR. DE. ZARAG. This can be translated "Nuestra Senora del pilar de Zaragosa" or
"Our Lady of the Pillar of Saragossa." This depicts the "Virgin Mary" as she appeared holding the Christ child on a pillar of jasper in Saragossa, Spain. Two saints (one is probably St.
James) are witnessing the event (Aradi, 1954:
22-23).
The upturned side depicts a large "Sacred
Heart" with a cross extending out of a severed
artery on top. Two cherubs are hovering above
the heart and two below, while numerous beams
of light extend outward from the heart. To the
left of the heart are the letters S. C., and to the
right are the letters IESV. These may be translated "Sagrado Corazon Jesu" or "Sacred Heart
Jesus."
Measurements are 2.6 cm. long, 2.4 cm. wide,
3 mm. thick; a stem extending 1 cm. above the
top is 5 mm. by 2 mm. thick with a 2 mm. suslig~1t

Fig. 29. Religious medallions and crucifixes. A, Medalllion
No. 1 from' Burial 1 O; 8, Medallion No. 2 from Burial 1; C,
Crucifix No. 3 from Burial 8-1 after cleaning; D, Crucifix No. 1
from Burial 8-2; E, Crucifix No. 2 from Burial 4; F, Crucifix
No. 3 from Burial 8-1 before cleaning, showing attached cloth
and glass bead.

B

c

0

I

2

I

3

4

5

6

7

8

I

I

I

I

I

I

9

I

10

I

cm
59

r
pension hole running through it near the top and
parallel to the wide axis of the medallion.
Crucifix No. 1 (Fig. 29, D) was found associated with the distarticulated bones of Burial
No. 8-2 (Fig. 9). This somewhat asymmetrical
crucifix apparently was cut with a chisel from a
piece of sheet brass, then carefully smoothed and
polished. The upper portion of the main shaft
widens out on both sides in two places near the
top end, and the end itself is rounded. Each end
of the cross bar and the bottom of the main shaft
are widened on both edges at the end and have a
straight or slightly convex end. The crucifix is
6 cm. long, 3 cm. wide, and 1 mm. thick. The
shafts range from 5 to 7 mm. in width and the
ends of the shafts extend to from 1 to 1.4 cm. in
width. There are two smooth round perforations
in this cross: one, for suspension, is 4 mm. in
diameter near the top of the main shaft, the other,
3 mm. in diameter, is through the center of the
main shaft just below the cross arm. When the
crucifix was found, a tiny fragment of a thin
leather thong was wrapped and tied securely
through the suspension hole at the top. It had
been preserved by its contact with the copper in
the cross.
Crucifix No. 2 (Fig. 29, E) was found in the
chest area of Burial No. 4. Strung with colored
glass beads, it was a very thin, cast brass crucifix showing some wear on both faces. A raised
border runs around all edges of both faces and
both have a raised religious design. The face
which was uppermost in the burial depicts Christ
on the cross with a tablet over His head. His
lower body is turned slightly to the left so that
His right leg overlaps His left one. No lettering
could be detected.
The reverse, or downward face has a thin
layer of fine plain weave cloth of flax adhering
to the lower portion. As with Crucifix 1, it was
undoubtedly preserved by contact with copper.
The face was not cleaned in order to preserve the
cloth, but the upper part of what is probably a
Madonna and Child design can be seen.
This crucifix is 2.5 cm. long, 2 cm. wide, and
slightly less than 1 mm. thick. Each of the shafts
of the cross is 6 mm. wide with a slightly convex end. A stem extends 7 mm. above the top
of the crucifix and is 4 mm. by 2 mm. thick. A
suspension hole about 1 mm. in diameter penetrates this shaft near the top and runs parallel
to the wide axis of the crucifix.
Crucifix No. 3 (Fig. 29, C and F) was found

60

in the chest area of Burial No. 8-1, and it had
been strung with glass beads. Like Medallion
No. 1, this crucifix is heavily worn on both faces
and shows faint diagonal striations where it was
polished on an abrasive surface. This cross is so
heavily worn that the ends of the crossbeam are
actually quite sharp. Both faces of the cross originally had a raised border around all edges and
a raised religious design.
The face which was uppermost in the burial
depicts Christ on the cross with the lower part
of His body turned slightly to the left. A tablet
is above His head, but no lettering remains.
There is a raised spot at the base of the cross beneath Christ's feet-probably a skull.
The reverse, or downward, face is not only
heavily worn but also badly pitted by corrosion.
A standing robed figure can be faintly discerned,
and it probably is a "Madonna with Christ child"
design.
Measurements are 4.3 cm. long, 2.8 cm. wide,
and 3 mm. thick. The shafts of the cross are 7
mm. wide and have convex ends. A stem extending 8 mm. above the top of the crucifix is 4
mm. by 3 mm. with a 2 mm. suspension hole running through it parallel with the wide axis of the
cross. The hole is well worn by the suspension
cord.
Overlays (Adornos)
Nine sheet copper alloy overlays (Fig. 30,
A-F) were found during the excavation. Three
are undecorated, but the others all have chiselcut and die-stamped scroll, leaf, and curvilinear
designs on one face. All of them have small
drilled holes, 1 mm. in diameter and evenly
spaced around the edges, which apparently
served for attachment of the objects to wooden
surfaces by the use of small brass or iron pins.
These decorations probably were used on furniture, storage chests, and perhaps gunstocks (DiPeso, 1953: 199, and Fig. 23).
In outline, these decorations are quite variable.
Two of the plain ones are incomplete and irregularly shaped. The larger of these, about 8 cm.
long, 3 cm. wide, and 1 mm. thick, has four attachments holes spaced at 1. 7 cm. intervals along

Fig. 30. Copper artifads. A, strip with small attachment
holes; B-F, decorated overlays with small attachment holes;
G, buckle; H, handle from pot.

c

~'
F

E

O

I

11111111111

2 3
I
I
cm

4

I

F

one edge, and about 2 mm. back from the edge.
The smaller one is about 4 cm. across (maximum) and 1 mm. thick. It has three attachment
holes along one edge at 1 cm. intervals and 1 mm.
from the edge. The complete specimen (Fig. 30,
A) is in the shape of a long rectangle with the
two corners on one end clipped off. It is 11.6 cm.
long, 2.8 cm. wide and 1 mm. thick with 14 attachment holes spaced around the edges at intervals of from 8 mm. to 2.4 cm. and about 4 mm.
back from the edge. One face of this decoration
is quite smooth and shows faint polishing striations.
The other six specimens each have one face
decorated with die-stamped designs. Design elements used include leaves and scrolls, semicircles, enclosed areas which are cross-hatched or
punctate-roughened, rows of short curved lines
spaced perpendicularly along edges, and other
curvilinear patterns (Fig. 30, B-F). In outline,
two specimens are wing-like with scalloped
edges, two are leaf-shaped with dentate edges,
one is rectangular with notched edges, and one is
lanceolate with smooth edges. All have attachment holes, about 1 mm. in diameter, spaced
around the edges at intervals of from 6 mm. to 2
cm. All of the specimens have a uniform thickness of about 1 mm.
The rectangular decoration (Fig. 30, C) mentioned ab:>ve has a smooth hole 8 mm. in diameter situated in the center of the specimen. Wear
marks on one face surrounding this central hole
indicate that this specimen probably was a decorative shield around the base of a small door knob
or drawer pull. The lanceolate specimen has a 7
mm. hole centered laterally toward one end, and
it probably served the same purpose.

Buckles
Four fragments of ornamental buckles (Fig.
30, G) were found in the ruins of Mission San
Lorenzo. All are made of brass or bronze and
decorated on the upper surface only. These
mold-made buckles are rectangular in overall
outline, concave-convex (with only the convex
side decorated), with thickened areas in the
center of both sides. Cross-bar holes, about 1 mm.
in diameter, are drilled completely through the
thickened areas on the sides. No cross-bars or
tongues were found.
The only complete specimen (Fig. 30, G) is
5.3 cm. long, 4.6 cm. wide, 2 mm. thick (except

in the thickened areas on the sides) . It has a
filed-on design, clearly showing the file striations, consisting of chevrons and parallel
straight lines. The end piece of an identical
specimen also was found.
One of the other buckle fragments has a
simple molded dentate ridge along one edge. The
other fragment has a very ornate molded design
consisting of scrolls, curliques, floral elements
which are emphasized by notched edges, and
cut-out areas. These last two fragments apparently represent buckles of the same general size
as the complete specimen described above.
Light weight, fancy buckles such as these
were used for ornamentation on shoes and clothing in the eighteenth century (DiPeso, 1953:
203).

Thimble
A small brass thimble (Fig. 31, I) was found
at the site. It has fine parallel striations on the
inside. It has a dome-shaped upper end decorated with a grid of indentations 1 mm. square,
a distinct shoulder, and straight sides decorated with diagonal rows of circular punctations 1 mm. in diameter. The punctations extend down to within 3 mm. of the lower edge.
The exterior dimensions are: overall length, 1.8
cm.; length of walls, 1.5 cm.; width at top, 1.3
cm.; width at bottom, 1.7 cm.; wall thickness, 1
mm.

Hawk bell
This tiny bell (Fig. 31, H) is made from two
thin, sheet-brass hemispheres whose edges are
soldered flush together forming a smooth joint
around the center of the bell. Two faint parallel
lines with ticked edges encircle each hemisphere
about 1 mm. from the soldered joint and are
spaced about 1 mm. apart. The lower half of the
bell has two perforations, 4 mm. in diameter,
spaced 9 mm. apart and connected by a narrow
slit. The upper portion of the bell has a part of a
thin brass suspension loop situated centrally.
This loop is fashioned from a thin strip of brass
1 mm. wide which was inserted through a hole
Fig. 31. Iron and copper artifacts. A-E, hand-forged iron
nails; F, portion of mouth and side piece of iron bridle bit; G,
brass button; H, two views of brass hawk bell; I, brass thimble;
J, unidentified copper strip; K, unused rivet made from sheet
copper.

E

A
0

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

I

cm.

H
0

2

3

4

5

cm.

G
0

2

K

J

cm.

0

2
I

3

4

5

I

cm.
63

.,
l

in the hemisphere and fixed in place by a drop of
silver colored solder. Inside the bell are some
badly rusted iron pellets. The exterior surface of
the hawk bell has faint parallel striations and
ridges forming concentric circles extending from
the median seam to the apex of each hemisphere.
These striations appear to have resulted from the
manufacturing process used in shaping the bell.
This specimen is 1. 7 cm. in diameter, 1.3 cm.
thick (top to bottom), and it is made from sheet
brass less than 1 mm. thick.

Button
Only one copper alloy button was found. It is
made of very thin (less than 1 mm.) sheet brass
stamped into a mold which formed a very complex raised design on the outer face (Fig. 31, G).
This brass shell was mounted on a wooden backing (partially preserved) by folding under the
outer edge and thereby forming a flange about 2
mm. wide around the circumference of the rear

face. In the center of the outer face of the button
is a circular depression 8 mm. in diameter and
about 2 mm. in depth. A crushed green glass set
of a;bout this same size, found very near the
button, probably was glued to the front of the
button at one time. The outer surface of this
button, although patinated, retains a very high
degree of polish. The button is 2.2 cm. in diameter and 4 mm. thick.

Loop handle
A copper loop (Fig. 30, H) which probably
served as a heavy pot handle, was formed in the
following manner: ( 1) Both ends of a copper
bar about 17 cm. long and 1.3 cm. in diameter
were hammered to a thickness of about 2 mm.
for a distance of about 4 cm. (2) The bar was
then bent in the center to form a circular loop
with an inside diameter of about 2 cm. ( 3) The
overlapping flattened ends were hammered together. ( 4) A rivet hole 7 mm. in diameter was

Fig. 32. Provenience of copper artifacts.
Vessels
& frags.

Structure 1
floor
Structure 2
burials
outside
Structure 4
fill
Structure 7
fill
floor
,Structure 8
floor
Strutcure 10
fill
Structure 11
fill
Structure 12
floor
Structure 13
floor
Structure 14
fill
floor
Midden
W. Wall Area
Surface
Total

64

Patches

Strips

Rolls

Religious
objects

PerforatPd
Rivets overlays !luckies Thimble

Hawk
bell

Loop
handle

Modern
Button cartridges Total

1

1

1

5
1

5

1
1

1

1

3
2

1
2

1

1

2
1

1

1

1

2

2
1

1
1

4

5
5

4

1

4

1
1
1
2

1

1

4

2
3
6
3
17

9

4

1

4

54

1
2

1

1

1
3
9

4

5

6

1
1
1

1

1

r
I

I

punched through the center of the flattened area
from one side. The overall dimensions of the
completed loop are 7.8 cm. long and 4.2 cm.
wide.

Rivets
Six copper rivets and rivet fragments, all
heavily corroded, were recovered. One specimen
made from a rounded bar 5 mm. in diameter has
a shaft length of 1 cm. and a flattened end 1. 7
cm. in diameter. Another specimen made from
rolled sheet copper has the following dimensions:
shaft diameter, 5 mm.; shaft length, 5 mm.; diameter of flattened end, 1 cm. All other specimens are too fragmentary for description.
Iron
A total of 177 iron artifacts was found during
the excavation of the site. Eighty-four are considered to be of Spanish origin either because of
direct association with the mission structures or
because of the technique of manufacture. The
mission iron is heavily oxidized. It could not be
chemically cleaned because only a thin and discontinuous core of iron remained in many objects. All of these artifacts were mechanically
cleaned and coated with a preservative. Some
show signs of having been shaped by hammer,
chisel, and punch, but the technique of manufacture of many of the objects cannot be determined.
The other 93 iron objects were found either
on the surface or in the fill of the structures and
probably date to old Camp Wood and subsequent
occupations of the site. These objects, including
tin can fragments, harness buckle, button, machine-cut round and square nails, horseshoes,
and a padlock, are less oxidized than the mission
iron. Although they are not described in detail
their provenience is shown in Fig. 36.

Ladle
This ladle (Fig. 33, C) has a round, shallow
bowl and a short (probably broken) handle
which is rectangular in cross section. Found on
the floor of Structure 13, it may have been used
to handle molten lead in the manufacture of
lead balls for muskets. The bowl is 7.5 cm.
across, 2.0 cm. deep, and 4 mm. thick. The
handle is 7.7 cm. long, 1.8 cm. wide, and 1.1 cm.
thick.

Ladle handle
A long thin iron bar, circular in cross section,
has a flattened area at one end which apparently
was attached to a shallow bowl. It is 16.6 cm.
long and about 8 mm. in average diameter; the
flattened end is 2.0 cm. across and 2 mm. thick.

Bridle bit fragments
Five fragments (Fig. 31, F) of a heavy iron
bridle bit were found. These included the distal
and adjacent ends of a cheekpiece, part of a
mouthpiece, a ring for attaching the bit to the
headstall, and part of an ornamental chin piece.
These scraps, too fragmentary to furnish meaningful measurements, compare closely with an
early Spanish ring bit in the collections of the
Texas Memorial Museum and with ring bit
fragments from many other early historic sites
in Texas.

Buckle fragments
Hand-wrought iron buckles were made in the
following manner: (1) Small iron rods, about 5
mm. in diameter, were folded and twisted into
loose spirals. (2) The spirals were flattened by
hammering to form short, twisted bars with flattened loops at each end. (3) Four of these bars
were arranged into a rectangular shape with the
loop ends overlapping. ( 4) The ends of the bars
were riveted together forming a rectangular iron
buckle showing the woven or twisted pattern on
all its side~-molded brass and iron buckles of
the same period sometimes were decorated with
a woven or twisted design reminiscent of these
hand-wrought buckles. (5) A cross bar was inserted in small holes, about 2 mm. in diameter,
which penetrated the centers of the side bars.
Only three fragments were found (Fig. 34,
E). These are all parts of side bars showing the
lateral perforation for the cross bar. If complete,
each side piece would have measured about 8
cm. long, 1 cm. wide, and from 2 mm. thick at
the ends to 6 mm. thick at the center.

Anquera iingler or fica
One jingler for horse trappings is made from
a short bar of iron about 6 mm. in diameter. One
end of the bar was bent around to form a suspension loop. The other end was flattened to
about 1.2 cm. in width and the flattened end was

A

..

·'

·:~

I
{

I
~

B

\

l
0

I
1011111111

2

3

I

J

cm

c

t

lightly notched. This formed a stylized hand
symbol or fica commonly used on horse trappings as decoration and as a charm to ward off
the "evil eye."

Sash hook for small firearm (Fig. 34, B)
This smooth iron hook is broken at the base,
where it was attached to the side of the gun stock.
Itis 8.5 cm. long, 9 mm. wide, and 5 mm. thick.
It extended out from the gun stock about 1.3 cm.
and ran parallel to it for a distance of about 8
cm. It was used to clip a small firearm to a waistband or sash.

Trigger guard fragment (Fig. 35, A)
This is a badly rusted fragment, about 3.5 cm.
long from the end of a trigger guard. It is about
3 mm. thick with smooth outer surface, beveled
edges, rounded end, and an attachment loop on
the center of the inner face about 1 cm. from the
rounded end. The loop was inserted into the
stock and fixed into place by a pin. It is about 1
cm. wide, 1 cm. long, 4 mm. thick, and forms a
hole about 2 mm. in diameter.

Gun worm or bullet worm
Apparently this artifact (Fig. 34, A) was
mounted on a long wooden rod and used for
clearing the barrel of a firearm. The basal end is
a round hollow tube where the wooden rod was
inserted. The other end, hammered into a solid
piece, is twisted into a long spiral with a sharp
tip. The corkscrew end is 3 cm. long, overall
length is 8 cm., and the diameter tapers from 9
mm. at the hollow base to 6 mm. at the tip.

Knife blade
This is a fragment of the handle-end of a small
knife (Fig. 35, E) made of one piece of hammered iron. Only about 1.5 cm. of the blade remains. It is 2.6 cm. wide and a maximum of 4
mm. in thickness. A flange about 3 mm. thick
and 1.5 cm. in diameter separates the blade from
the tang, which is 7 cm. long, square in cross section, and tapers from a thickness of 8 mm. at the
flange down to a dull point.

Fig. 33. Iron arlifacts. A, unidentified iron disc; B, ladle
handle; C, heavily rusted ladle.

Rapier hilt quard (Fig. 35, C)
A thickened area in the middle of this sturdy
iron cross piece has a depression on one side to
receive the base of the blade and a hole 9 mm.
across, through which the tang passed. The base
of the blade was about 2.2 cm. wide and 7 mm.
thick. One end of the cross bar is split into three
parts, with two curving quillons ending in
rounded balls and a flattened arm with a rivet
hole for attachment to one side of a cup guard.
The diameter of the cup would have been about
10.5 cm. The quillons are about 5.5 cm. long and
8 mm. in diameter, and the ball ends are 1.3 cm.
in diameter. The maximum width of the cross
piece, at the point where the tang went through
is 1.8 cm.

Scissors
Half of a pair of scissors was found (Fig. 35,
D). This implement has a long, triangular blade
with a sharp point, straight back, and a curved
cutting edge. An attachment hole, 2 mm. in
diameter, is situated centrally near the base of
the cutting blade. The handle, square in cross
section and about 5 mm. thick, ends in a circular
finger loop with an inside diameter of about 2
cm. The overall length of this scissors half is 12
cm. The blade is 7 cm. long, 1.5 cm. wide at the
base, and about 3 mm. in average thickness.

Nails
Twenty-four relatively complete handwrought nails were collected from in and around
the mission structures (Fig. 31, A-E). The shafts
are roughly squared and taper slightly from the
head to the point end. The heads are flattened,
ovoid in outline, and usually not centered on the
shaft. One extra long specimen has a very thick,
many-faceted head. The nails range in length
from about 4.5 cm. to 12.5 cm., the shaft thickne3s varies from about 3 mm. to 8 mm. The heads
are from 1 cm. to 2.2 cm. in diameter and average about 4 mm. in thickness.
Many of these nails appear to have been driven
through boards, had the tip end curled over, and
then all of the exposed shaft bent over and bradded down so that the tip was reinserted into the
back surface of the wood. The thickness of the
joined material reflected by these bent nails
varies from 3.0 cm. to 4.9 cm.

c
D

E

,'

I

F

H

J

0

2

3

K
4

5

6

7

8

I

cm.
Fig. 34 . Iron artifacts. A, end of bullet worm ; B, sash clip for small firearm ; C and 0 , unidentified ;
E, buckle fragment ; F-K, unidentified.

68

9

10
I

T
B
0
I

I
I

2

3

4

I

I

I

5

6

I

I

7
I

8

9

10

I

I

I

~

cm

....
.;

··'

..,
:.•

J

J

l
., :~

-.r

1

E

:~

..

...

~

f ~-:

', >·

F
Fig. 35 . Iron artifacts. A, end of musket side plate ; B, unidentified small disc; C, hand guard for
sword handle ; 0, scissors; E, knife handle ; F, G, unidentified .

G

Fig. 36. Provenience of iron objects.
Ma-

Probably Sponish

Uniden- UnidenHand- tified tified
n1ade
iron
iron
nails hunps objects Knife

Structure 1
floor
Structure 2
outside
floor
Structure 3
floor
Structure 4
fill
Structure 7
outside
fill
floor
Structure 8
fill
floor
Structure 10
fill
Structure 11
fill
floor
Structure 12
fill
floor
Structure 13
fill
floor
Structure 14
floor
Midden
Gate Area
W. Wall Area
Surface
Totals

Gun
worm

Ladle
Scissor handle

Ladle

Miscellaneous
recent
iron
objects Totals

5

1

4

1

8
1

2

2

1

1

8

1
16
1

1

1

5

9

1

1

1

1
1

3

2

5

1

5

7

1

1
1

1
1

1?

5

3
5

16

7

5

1

1
8

1

19

24

33

1

1?

5
11

1

11

1

30

6

12

1
24
12
2
64

65

9

19

177

1

1

12
1
1

1

1
1
1

Unidentified iron objects are shown in Figs.
33, 34, and 35, and their provenience is shown
in Fig. 36.
Heavily rusted scraps of iron were found, but
they show no particular form and are unidentifiable as to function. Their provenience appears
in Fig. 36.
Lead
All of the lead artifacts from the mission are
coated with a thick white to light gray layer of
oxide, and under slight magnification the sur-

70

Bit
frag- Pronged Disc,
ment object lunate

MaRecent
chine- chinen1ade made
square round
nails
nails

1

1

1

1

1

1

faces appear very uneven and bubbly. Bulk lead
in sheets and bars probably was brought to the
site from Mexico and shaped into functional
forms by melting/molding, cutting with shears,
and hammering/imprinting.

Fig. 37. Shell and lead artifacts. A-C, scrapers made from
fresh water mussel shells; D, button made from a circular lead
seal; E, clipped lead sprue from a three-shot musket ball mold;
F, musket ball with sprue from one-shot mold; G, clipped
musket ball; H-K, circular lead discs cut from sheet lead; l,
two views of shell pendant, shown full size.

I

B

A

5

4

2

0

9

8

7

6

10

I
cm.

F

K

J

H
0

G

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

'

cm.

71

r
Musket Balls
Number 1 (Fig. 37, G) is a complete ball with
no impact facets. It is spherical with faint mold
marks and a small nipple opposite the sprue
scar. Its diameter is 1.3 cm. and its weight 10
grams.
Number 2 (Fig. 37, F) is a misshapen ball
with the sprue still attached. It was made in a
one-ball mold and the marks show clearly. There
is a small nipple opposite the sprue. Its diameter
is 1.3 cm. and its weight including the sprue is
10 grams. The sprue is 6 mm. wide, 1 mm. thick,
and 7 mm. long, with a small round drop of lead
on the end opposite the ball.
Fig. 38. Provenience of lead.
Musket
balls

Structure 7
fill
1
Structure 8
floor
Structure 10
fill
1
Structure 11
fill
floor
Structure 12
floor
Structure 14
floor
Midden
Surface
1
Total

3

Sprues

Ring

1

Discs

Sheet

Scraps

2

1
1
1

1
1
1
6
2

1

10

3
2
1

6

Number 3 is badly misshapen from impact.
No marks are visible on the surface and its diameter cannot be estimated. Its weight is about
4 grams.

cm. intervals (measured from center of shaft
to center of shaft). One specimen weighs 8 grams
and the other weighs 12 grams.

Ring
This molded specimen is fragmentary with
about 75 per cent of the original circumference
present. It is a band of lead 7 mm. wide and 2
mm. thick in the form of a ring with an exterior
diameter of 1.8 cm. There were two rectangular
cutouts through the band, but their original sizes
cannot be determined.

Discs (Fig. 37, D, H-K)
Four of these thin, circular objects were
molded and the others were cut from sheets of
lead. One specimen (Fig. 37, D) has been made
into a button by having two small holes punched
through the central area. The holes are 2 mm. in
diameter and 5 mm. apart. On one surface is an
impressed design consisting of a shield with a
coat of arms, above which are plumes and banners. Details of the design cannot be determined
due to wear and oxidation, but the specimen
probably is a lead seal which was converted to
a button because of its fancy design.
Two other specimens have very faint traces
of impressed designs on one face. These discs are
apparently all single components of lead with no
evidence of protuberances from the faces or
edges. Their function is uncertain, but some may
have served as lead seals with impressed designs
and others may have been weights for use with a
balance.
Dimensions (cn1.):

72

Thickness

1.3
0.15
2.3
0.6
2.2
0.4
2.3
0.4
2.9
0.4
2.8
0.5
2.4
0.4
4.0 (button) 0.2
0.1
3.8
4.8
0.7

Sprues
These are the excess lead strips cast on the outside of a three-ball bold (Fig. 37, E). Both specimens came from the same mold or nearly identical musket ball molds. The three musket balls
were clipped from each specimen with shears.
The lead shafts which were cast in the holes le~d­
ing into the ball cavities of the mold are oval in
shape and the two halves of the mold did not
meet evenly, as shown by the mold marks on the
sprues. The lead shafts from which the balls
were clipped are 7 mm. by 5 mm. and from 5 to
7 mm. in length. They are evenly spaced at 2

Diameter

Weight (grams)

1.2
19.2
12.8
14.6
23.8
28.7
13.1
15.1
10.8
106.5

Sheet Lead
This roughly diamond-shaped sheet of lead
has been cut with shears on all four edges. The
surfaces are smooth except for heavy oxidation
and the thickness is uniform. This specimen is

II

~
'

probably part of a large sheet of bulk lead. Its
dimensions are: long axis, 13.5 cm.; short axis,
7.1 cm.; thickness, 2mm.

.

'

I

I
!

Scraps
Six small amorphous lumps of lead probably
were fo~med from spilled or discarded lead during the molding of musket balls. They range in
weight from 1.1 grams to 17.8 grams.

Ceramics
The ceramic sample recovered from Mission
San Lorenzo, although relatively small in quantity, is varied in nature and gives a good cross
section of the pottery types in use on the northeastern frontier of New Spain in a restricted
period from 1762 to 1771. The majority of the
3,482 sherds collected are of a plain, lead-glazed,
utility ware which probably originated within a
few hundred miles of San Lorenzo at one of the
more permanent frontier settlements. The second most common type is tin-enameled earthenware. Its abundance reflects the temporal position of the site before the great florescence of
English and American hard-paste earthenwares,
and the geographical location of the mission within the distributional shadow of Puebla, Mexico,
with its fine array of majolica. Among the decorated sherds are some from areas far removed
from San Lorenzo, such as England and the
orient. Even this poor mission, one of the smallest
and most remote of outposts, benefited from the
world wide trade network of eighteenth century
Spain. Good quality ceramics in the New World
tradition also were present and appreciated at
San Lorenzo as reflected by the Indian-made
wares from Central Mexico represented among
the 201 non-wheel-made sherds.
The 3, 482 sherds recovered during the excavation represent only a small fraction of the total
sherds present in the site. More than half of the
collected sherds ( 1, 789) came from a test ten feet
square in the primary mission midden. This
midden averaged about 1 foot in depth and covered at least 5,000 square feet. These figures indicate a possible sherd content of about 90,000
pieces in the primary midden, to which number
would have to be added the sherds contained in
the structures, excavated and unexcavated, and
in the midden along the north wall, which was as
rich as the primary midden but of unknown ex-

tent. One implication of this sherd abundance is
that similar Spanish outposts of an even more
temporary nature-and there are many in Texas
which have not yet been located-should have a
scattering of distinctive sherds to mark their location permanently.
In the descriptions which follow, the ceramics
are divided into three basic groups, Earthenware, Stoneware, and Porcelain, on the bases of
porosity and hardness of the paste. The earthenwares, composing more than 99 per cent of the
sample, range from 1.5 to 6.0 (Mohs' scale) in
paste hardness, and have clearly distinguishable
unfused grains in the paste. The stonewares have
a paste hardness of about 6.5, and the paste grains
are partially fused and inseparable. The porcelain sherds are near 7.0 in hardness and the paste
is vitrified and translucent. A technique for determining the exact porosity of earthenwares,
stonewares, and porcelains is described by Norton ( 1956), but the samples of each of these
wares from San Lorenzo were discrete and could
be separated readily by microscopic examination and hardness tests.
The earthenwares have been further divided
into soft-paste wares with a paste hardness between 1.5 and 5.0 on Mohs' scale and hard-paste
wares whose paste is between 5.0 and 6.0 in hardness. Included under the soft-paste earthenware
are the non-wheel-made Indian ceramics, the
wheel-made utility pottery, and tin-enameled
sherds. The hard-paste earthenware includes ceramics which have been variously called semiporcelain, ironstone, chinaware, edgedware, and
other names.
Within the larger groupings, the sherds are
further segregated on the basis of such attributes
as paste composition and inclusions, type of glaze,
color of glaze, surface finish, type of decoration
and color of enamel.
The following outline is furnished to help
guide the reader through the section on ceramics.
I. Earthenware

A. Soft Paste
1. Non-wheel-made

a. Polychrome polished ware
b. Dark red polished ware
c. Red polished and decorated ware

d. Red slipped plainware
e. Dark gray plainware
£. Miscellaneous non-wheel-made
sherds
73

A

4

0

c

cm.

D

-~

/157.?

..s-7

./';//.

.)

(

8

9

Iv

'
(;
r

II.

III.

IV.
V.
VI.

2. Wheel-made
a. Unglazed, red slipped plainware
b. Lead-glazed
( 1) Amber glaze
(a) Plainware
(b) Noded ware
(2) Clear glaze, brown painted
ware
(3) Green glaze, olive jars
( 4) Miscellaneous lead-glazed
sherds
c. Tin-enameled
(1) Glossy white, majolica
(2) Dull white
d. Unidentified glaze, dark brown appliqued ware
B. Hard Paste
1. Clear-glazed, white
2. Clear-glazed, blue feather-edge
3. Clear-glazed, polychrome painted
Stoneware
A. Salt-glazed, white
B. Salt-glazed, brown
C. Salt-glazed, blue
Porcelain
A. American porcelain
B. Oriental porcelain
Ceramic Discs
Ceramic Scrapers
Plastered Sherds

Pastelnclusions: A few scattered angular grains of a
hard transparent (probably quartz) mineral are
visible under magnification. Rounded microscopic sand grains can be found rarely in the
paste.
Texture: The paste is fine-grained and uniform,
but it has a rough, friable fracture. Small gas
pockets commonly occur.
Hardness: About 3.0 to 3.5 on Mohs' scale of
hardness.
Color: The paste is a uniform light gray in color.
One sherd has a dark gray core in a thickened
area where a handle was attached.
Surface FeaturesFinish: The outer surface of these sherds is finished in the following sequence: ( 1) A very finegrained, light gray slip was applied. (2) Complex
polychrome designs were painted over the slip.
(3) The surface was highly polished by rubbing
in various directions with a narrow (about 2
mm. wide) object. The polished surface usually
has a finely cracked pattern resembling the crazing of some glazes.
Color: The gray slip is mostly covered by dull
orange, red, and green paints, as described below.

Earthenware

Hardness: Between 2.5 and 3.0.

SOFT-PASTE, NON-WHEEL-MADE
POLYCHROME POLISHED WARE

(Fig. 40, F, G), 10 sherds
Published descriptions of a comparable ware
have not been found, but similar sherds are
known to occur at other Spanish colonial sites in
Texas (Fig. 59). This is probably an Indianmade earthenware brought from somewhere in
Central Mexico. It closely resembles modern ceramic figurines from Tonala.

Method of manufacture
Paddle and anvil. Thinning and smoothing
marks are visible on the unfinished interior surfaces.

DecorationT echnique: Slipping and painting.
Painting: A dull orange paint was applied as a
background over the gray slip on much of the
exterior surface. Dull dark red and dull dark
green paints were used for various designs over
the orange and gray backgrounds. For an impression of the colors involved, one can refer to
Maerz and Paul (1930) as follows: orange 14A-12, red 7-L-6, and green 24-L-12.
Designs: The exterior surface apparently was
well covered with small tight spirals, small nests
of concentric circles, small dots, and broad lines,
arranged in patterns which cannot be reconstructed from these sherds.
Form-

Fig. 39. Non-wheel-made ceramics. A, red-slipped plainware bowl rim; 8, C, dark red polished and decorated rim
sherds; D, dark gray plainware vessel fragment.

Very little can be determined about vessel
forms. One end of a strap handle, 1.7 cm. wide
75

B

A

c

D

F
G

J
H

0

2

3

4

5

I
cm.

6

~

I'.'

and 6 mm. thick, is present. Sherd thickness
ranges from 4 mm. to 1 cm.

Provenience. Fig. 41.
DARK RED, POLISHED PLAINW ARE

36 sherds
Sherds of this type of earthenware are found
on other Spanish colonial sites in this area (Fig.
57), and it probably originated with Indians
somewhere in Mexico. This pottery resembles
the polychrome painted polished ware described
previously.

Method of Manufacture
Paddle and anvil. The vessel interiors are unfinished and show the tool marks.

DecorationThe only decoration is the polished red slip
described above.

FormVery little can be determined about vessel
shape from these sherds. The few rim and
shoulder sherds indicate that they were probably
small bowls and large bottles with constricted
necks.
Thickness: One group of small sherds has an
average thickness of about 4 mm., and another
group of large sherds averages about 1.1 cm. in
thickness.
Provenience. Fig. 41.
RED POLISHED DECORATED WARE

Pastelnclusions: The paste contains a large quantity
of microscopic sand grains of many different
colors and textures.
Texture: The paste is fine-grained and uniform,
but with a rough, ragged fracture. Elongated gas
cavities are visible in the paste of most sherds.

(Fig. 39, B, C), 40 sherds
This well made and attractive earthenware
has been found on many other Spanish colonial
sites in Texas (Fig. 5 7). It probably was made
by some Indian group in Central Mexico.

Met hod of manufactureProbably paddle and anvil.

Hardness: Between 3.0 and 4.0.
Color: Many sherds have a dark gray, incompletely oxidized core. The paste color ranges from
this dark gray at the core to light gray near the
surfaces.
Surface FeaturesFinish: Only the exterior vessel surfaces were
coated with a thin, fine-grained slip. These surfaces were highly polished while the slip was still
plastic. A fine system of cracks can be seen in the
polished slip under magnification.

Pastelnclusions: Small rounded grains of a soft, dark,
reddish brown material are visible to the unaided
eye throughout the paste. These lumps are easily
cut with a knife point. No sand grains were detected in the paste of this earthenware, making it
distinctly different from the other red slipped
earthenware described above.
Texture: Very fine-grained and uniform. Gas
cavities up to about 1 mm. long are scattered
throughout the paste.
Hardness: About 3.0.

Color: The slip is a uniform shade of dark dull
red (Maerz and Paul, 1930: 7-L-6).

Color: A uniform dark dull red.

Hardness: The surface averages about 3.5 in
hardness.

Surf ace Features-

Fig. 40. Ceramics. A, B, smoothed circular discs made from
amber-glazed plainware sherds; C, smoothed sidescraper made
from red slipped plainware shard; D, E, dark brown appliqued
ware; F, G, non-wheel-made polychrome polished ware; H, I,
red slipped plainware; J, plastered sherd; K, blue feather-edge
shard; L, dull white tin-enameled sherd; M, green glazed oli'!_e
jar rim.

Finish: The interior and exterior surfaces were
decorated in the following manner: ( 1) Surfaces
were coated with a very thin and fine-grained
slip. (2) While the slip was still somewhat plastic, all surfaces were polished to a high gloss. ( 3)
Panels just below the rim, interior or exterior or
both, were roughened by scratching in various
directions with a fine-pointed instrument. ( 4) A

77

dull implement, about 1 mm. wide, was used to
incise designs very lightly on these roughened
panels. The highly polished surface often has a
fine network of cracks. The red slip occasionally
spalls off in a characteristic spotty fashion, especially around the base of the vessels.
Color: Dark rich red with an occasional light
speckling of black (possibly carbon).
Hardness: From about 3.5 to 4.0.
DecorationTechnique: Roughened panels on a polished surface with lightly incised designs on the roughened
areas.
Designs: The only designs that can be reconstructed from these sherds are stylized floral
motifs resembling palm fronds, and tightly coiled
spiral lines.
FormShapes: Very little can be determined about vessel shapes. There apparently were some sort of
small bowls with tiny strap handles and large
jars with vertical rims.
Rims: The small bowls had outward curving,
scalloped rims. The jars had vertical rims with
thickened vertical ridges, spaced several centimeters apart, which separated the design panels
(Fig. 39, B).
Base: Some of these vessels, probably the large
jars, had a tall, flaring ring foot. These ring bases
averaged about 2.5 cm. in height.
Thickness: Body thickness ranges from 5 mm.
to 8 mm., basal foot about 6 mm. in thickness.
Appendages: The bowls have small strap handles
(Fig. 39, C) just beneath the lip on the exterior
surface. These are about 1.1 cm. wide and 7 mm.
thick.

Met hod of manufacture-

V nknown. The surfaces are all well scraped
and slip-covered so that no traces of coils can be
detected.
PasteInclusions: The paste contains large quantities
of rounded sand grains. The grains include white,
transparent, light brown, and black minerals.
The most conspicuous inclusions are white grains
which range up to 0.5 mm. in diameter and are
obvious to the unaided eye. These white grains
are a hard, translucent mineral which fractures
along shiny, angular planes.
Texture: The paste has a fine sandy texture with
a granular, irregular fracture.
Hardness: Averages about 3.5 and can be cut
easily with a knife.
Color: The sherds all have a dark gray core
which is incompletely oxidized. The color gradually grades into a light reddish brown near
each surface. The white granular inclusions are
visible throughout the paste.
Surface FeaturesFinish: The inner and outer surfaces of all sherds
are uniformly coated with a bright red slip. This
slip is very fine-grained, from 0.2 to 0.4 mm. in
thickness, and has flaked away from the paste in
small areas on many sherds. The surface of the
red slip shows many parallel striations where it
was applied and smoothed before it hardened.
Hardness: The slip is about 2.5 in hardness.
DecorationThe red slip is the only decoration on the sherds.
Several sherds have a calcareous deposit over
part of the inner surface which apparently resulted from boiling in the vessel.

Provenience. Fig. 41.
RED SLIPPED PLAINWARE

(Fig. 39, A), 58 sherds
The source of this distinctive earthenware is
unknown and descriptions of comparable ceramics have not been found. These bowls were possibly made locally or at one of the other frontier
mission establishments by Indian servants from
Mexico.

FormShape: All of the sherds came from small shallow bowls.
Rim: The rims are curved slightly outward (Fig.
39, A).
Lip: Lips are the same thickness as the walls
and are rounded.

T
!I

Base: The bowls had simple rounded bases which
were slipped on both surfaces.
Thickness: Within each sherd there is variation
in thickness. They range from 4 mm. to 8 mm.,
and average 6 mm. in thickness.

Hardness: About 4.0.
DecorationThere is no evidence of decoration.

FormProvenience. Fig. 41.
DARK GRAY PLAINWARE

(Fig. 39, D), 48 sherds
This earthenware is quite different from all the
other wares found at this site, and an examination of ceramics from other Spanish colonial sites
in Texas failed to yield comparable sherds. These
sherds may represent an indigenous earthenware
which was being made and used by the Lipan
Apaches in the 1760's.

Method and Manufacture

Shar>e: A large vessel fragment provides the only
indication of shape. It has a rounded body with a
restricted neck and an outward flaring rim (Fig.
39, D). The reconstructed dimensions of this vessel are: maximum body diameter 25 cm., exterior
rim diameter at lip 18 cm., height from base to
lip20 cm.
Rim: Smoothly curved, outward flaring (Fig. 39,
D).

Lip: Flattened and the same thickness as the
vessel walls.

Probably paddle and anvil. Fired in a reducing
atmosphere.

Body: Rounded or globular.

Paste---

Thickness: The vessel has an uneven thickness
ranging from 5 mm. to 8 mm.

lnclusions: A large quantity of rounded sand
particles composed of quartz and other minerals
are included in the paste. The grains range from
microscopic to about 0.5 mm. in diameter.
Texture: The paste has a granular texture with
a rough uneven fracture.
Hardness: About 4.0. It is difficult to scratch because of the hard sand grains.
Color: Dark gray to black. Some sherds refired
to 1500°F. oxidized to a light orange color and
the sand grains were much more apparent.
Surface FeaturesFinish: The interior and exterior surfaces are
smoothed but undulating and uneven. Very faint
impressions, apparently made by a cord-wrapped
paddle, are visible on the exterior surfaces of
some sherds. Around the lower exterior portion
of a large vessel fragment there are numerous
shallow scratches in the surface which could
have resulted from turning the pot on sharp rocks
ina hearth.
Color: The color ranges from dark gray to almost black on all the sherds. On the large vessel
fragment there is some carbon staining on the
exterior surface and heavy carbonized deposits
up to 1 mm. thick on the interior.

Base: Smoothly rounded.

Appendages: None. A possible suspension hole,
5 mm. in diameter, is drilled through the vessel
wall (from the exterior surface only) 4.2 cm.
beneath the lip.
Descriptions of comparable ceramics
These sherds from San Lorenzo seem to be
quite similar to pottery associated with the Dismal River Aspect (Gunnerson, 1960) in the
Southern Plains. Wedel (1959: 592) gives the
following summary of Dismal River pottery:
This pottery is gratifyingly uniform over most of
the area, although by no means without variations;
and it is usually readily distinguishable from other
wares of the region. Generally speaking, it is a fairly
thin, hard, dark gray to black ware, tempered generously with a very fine to medium sand, and exhibiting almost everywhere a pronounced tendency
to fracture into small sherds. There is no evidence
of coiling, and the pottery was presumably shaped
by lump modeling and by the paddle and anvil
method. The few whole or restorable vessels so far
recovered, most from 25CH1 [in southern Nebraska] are small to medium in size, not exceeding
25 cm. in maximum body diameter and 27 cm. in
height. Shapes are simple, the commonest having
a more or less globular to slightly elongated (vertically) body with rounded or subconoidal base,

79

fig. 41. Provenience of non-wheel-made earthenware.

Provenience Unit

Structure 1
fill
floor
Structure 2
fill
floor
Structure 7
fill
floor
Structure 8
outside
fill
floor
Structure 11
fill
floor
Structure 12
fill
floor
Structure 13
fill
floor
Structure 14
fill
floor
Midden
Gate area
W. Wall area
Surface
Totals

Polychrome
polished

Dark red
Red polished
polished plainware decorated ware

Red-slipped

Dark gray

plainware

plainware

l\'liscellaneous
sherds

Totals

1

1
1

1

1

36
2

4

41

2

1

1
1

2

3

1

1
1

1

2

2

2
1
1
3

4

1

4

11

1
4
20

10

2
5
44

6

7

90

1

1
1

1
1

8

20

6

3

10

36

40

58

48

38
9

201

constricted neck, and vertical to slightly outflaring
rim. Vessel lips are usually simple and unmodified,
but may be flattened or slightly thickened horizontally, especially where they have been decorated.
There is no certain evidence of bowls, bottles, and
other shapes; and handles, lugs, and other appendages are everywhere rare or absent. Much of
the pottery is plain surfaced; surface roughening
with a grooved or thong-wrapped paddle (i.e., simple stamping) is often present; and very rarely, incising is found.

large vessel fragment. The debris in the fill of
Structure 7 apparently originated in the mission
midden.

No other description has been found which so
closely fits the sherds from San Lorenzo.

(Fig. 40, H, I), 49 sherds

Provenience
The majority of these sherds (Fig. 41) came
from the fill of Structure 7, and represent one
So

MISCELLANEOUS NON-WHEEL-MADE SHERDS

Nine small body sherds could not be included
in any of the aibove groups.
SOFT PASTE, WHEEL-MADE EARTHENWARE
UNGLAZED, RED SLIPPED PLAINWARE

These sherds resemble some of the plainware
from Mission Espiritu Santo; they were probably
made either there or at one of the other more
permanent settlements on the frontier.

Method of manufacture: Wheel turned.

Paste-"·
Inclusions: These sherds have numerous fine
rounded grains of various materials included in
the paste-probal:fly inadvertently with the clay.
In addition to this sand, some sherds contain
small angular fragments of a soft white mineral,
and eight sherds have many fragments of crushed
bone in the paste.
Texture: The paste has a granular sandy texture
with a rough, irregular fracture.
Hardness: Variable between about 2.5 and 4.0
on Mohs' scale.
Color: Most of the sherds have a dark gray core
comprising about one-third to one-half of the
sherd thickness. The paste is oxidized to a light
orange color on the interior and exterior surfaces.
Surface FeaturesFinish: Most of the sherds are well smoothed on
both surfaces, but a few show distinct parallel
striations, derived from their being turned on the
potter's wheel, on the interior surfaces. The exterior surface and/or interior surface of all sherds
is coated with a thin, very fine-grained slip: 5
interior only, 28 exterior only, 16 both surfaces.
Color: The slip color ranges from a dull, pale red
to a dull, dark red. The surface color outside the
slipped parts of the vessels range from dull
orange to light gray.
Hardness: The surface is relatively soft, averaging between 2.0 and2.5.
DecorationThe red slip described above is the only form
of decoration.
FormVery little can be determined about vessel
form from these sherds. They seem to represent
large jars. The sherd thicknesses range from
5 mm. to 1.1 cm. and average about 8 mm.

Provenience. Fig. 56.
LEAD-GLAZED, AMBER, PLAINWARE

(Fig. 42, A, B; Fig. 45), 1,988 sherds
This was the common utility ware at Mission San Lorenzo. It probably was made in large
quantities locally or at one of the other frontier
mission establishments. Since San Lorenzo was

a rather small-scale and temporary outpost and
the documents make no mention of a ceramicmaking operation there, it is quite likely that
this utility ware- was brought from the permanent establishments at San Antonio or one
of the settlements just south of the Rio Grande.

Met hod of manufacture
Wheel-turned.

PasteInclusions: The most obvious inclusions are numerous small, angular fragments of a soft white
mineral (possibly calcite) which are scattered
throughout the paste. In addition, there are
rounded sand grains in all sherds; these may
have been naturally associated with the clay.
Some sherds also have a few larger (up to 2 mm.
in diameter) lumps of a dark, opaque red material.
Texture: Medium to fine-grained and fairly uniform. The paste contains many small, angular
cavities and it usually fractures roughly and irregularly.
Hardness: Average between 3.5 and 4.5 on
Mohs' scale.
Color: Paste colors are ( 1) light orange, probably
produced by firing in an oxidizing atmosphere;
(2) black or dark gray, reducing atmosphere;
( 3) black or dark gray core with orange or light
gray surface layers.
Surface FeaturesFinish: The surfaces are poorly smoothed, and
frequently show parallel striations made by the
potter's fingers and by sand grains in the paste
which were dragged along the surface making
deep grooves. Some sherds are glazed on interior
and exterior surfaces, some on interior surfaces
only, some are unglazed (181 sherds, apparently
from unglazed areas of vessels with glazed in terior bottoms). The glaze, unevenly and carelessly applied, ranges from a trace to about 0.5
mm. in thickness. The surface of the glaze is uneven and the larger grains in the paste sometimes
extend through the glaze, which usually is very
finely crazed (visible only under magnification).
Color: The paste is always visible through the
glaze, and under magnification, and when slivers

81

0

I

2

3

4

I

I

I

I

J

5

I

cm

6

7

8

I

I

I

9 10
I

;

I'

are detached, the glaze has a distinct amber color.
Sherds which have a heavy coating of glaze
usually have a black or gray paste beneath so
that superficially they appear to be coated with
a dull green glaze (this green is similar to 15-J-5
in Maerz and Paul, 1930). But close examination
shows this to be an illusion created by the dark
gray paste seen dimly through the amber glaze.
Sherds which have a light coating of glaze, or
none at all, have an orange-colored paste at the
surface and appear orange in color. The orange
and green colors are frequently found on different areas of one large sherd.
Hardness: The glaze surface has a hardness of
between 4.5 and 5.5.

DecorationThe only decoration appears on the lips of a
few small bowls. Eleven rim sherds have a flattened lip with a notched outer edge formed by
closely spaced vertical notches which were
pressed into the plastic clay with a cylindrical
implement about 1 mm. in diameter.

FormThere are four basic shapes in this utility
ware. ( 1) Small simple bowls are hemispherical
in shape, with vertical or slightly outsloping rims
(Fig. 43, B), rounded lips, and rounded bases.
Reconstructed rim diameters range from 16.5 to
19 cm.; vessel depths from 7 to 9 cm. Thickness
ranges from 5 mm., averaging 7 mm. These
bowls are thick and coarse, usually heavily
glazed, and dark in color. (2) These plates have
widely flaring rims (Fig. 43, C) which slope
smoothly into slightly rounded or flattened bases.
The lips are thinned and flattened and projected
rim diameters range from 20 to 20.8 cm. The
thickness is fairly uniform and ranges from 4
mm. near the lip to 7 mm. at the base. The plates
are rather thin and well shaped, tend to be lightly
glazed, and are usually light in color. (3) Jars,
the most common vessel form, have spherical
bodies with tall rims ranging from vertical to
sharply flaring. The rims usually slope smoothly

into the body (Fig. 43, D), but a few form a
definite angle with the body (Fig. 43, E). The
lips are either rounded or slightly flattened and
are never thickened or thinned. The reconstructed exterior rim diameters range from 14 to 23
cm. and average about 21 cm. The bases are
usually rounded, but a few vessels have flattened
bases (Fig. 43, K), or a short, basal ring foot
(Fig. 43, J). Some of the jars have horizontal
handles molded to the vessel exteriors. These
handles were formed as follows: A cylindrical object about 1 cm. in diameter was held vertically
against the side of the still plastic vessel. Either
a flattened lump or a roll of plastic clay about
1 cm. across, was securely and smoothly pressed
onto the vessel wall over the vertical cylinder.
The vertical cylinder was removed, leaving a
round suspension hole through the handle. One
large vessel fragment has an upward sloping
horizontal handle placed 8 cm. below the lip.
The thickness of these vessels ranges from 6 mm.
to 1.1 cm. and averages about 8 mm. ( 4) Another vessel form, represented by only three
sherds, is a molca;ete or chili-grinding bowl. It
is hemispherical, with a rounded base which is
stabilized by three short, stubby legs spaced
evenly around the center of the base. The interior surface of the bowl has deeply incised
lines radiating from the center toward the rim.
These lines, applied beneath the glaze while the
clay was plastic, are about 0.5 mm. wide and 0.5
mm. deep. They are spaced from about 1 mm.
to 4 mm. apart, and they furnish an abrasive surface through the thinly upplied glaze which was
used to grind chilis and other plant products.
Similar vessels can be found in northern Mexican
markets.

Provenience. Fig. 44.
LEAD-GLAZED, AMBER, NODED WARE

9 sherds
Sherds comparable to these have not been
found at other Spanish colonial sites in Texas
(Fig. 5 7), and published descriptions of similar
ceramics could not be found.

Method of manufacture
Wheel-turned, kiln fired.
Fig. 42. Ceramics. A, amber lead-glazed plainware bowl
rim; B, amber lead-glazed plainware jar rim; C, white saltglozed stoneware sherd; D, clear lead-glazed brown pointed
jar rim; E, clear lead-glazed brown painted bowl rim.

Paste-Inclusions: None.

c

B

0

2

3

I

I

4

5

I

6

7

I

I

8 9 10
I

I

cm.

H

J

K

L

Texture: Very fine-grained and uniform with
some elongated cavities visible under magnification.
Hardness: Between 3.0 and 3.5.
Color: Light gray throughout.
Surface FeaturesFinish: Interior and exterior surfaces covered
with a thin (about 0.1 to 0.2 mm.) glaze. The
glaze has a very fine craze pattern.
Color: The glaze is pale amber in color; the light
gray paste, visible through the glaze, produces a
dull green superficial color on the sherds. In a
few spots the glaze is very thin and the paste
has partially oxidized to a light orange color.
H«rdness: About 6.0.
DecorationRows of small rounded nodes, 5 mm. in diameter and a little less than 1 mm. in height,
decorate the exterior surfaces of the sherds. They
are spaced about 4 mm. apart and seem to have
been formed by slightly depressing the surrounding area and leaving the nodes standing out. The
exact distribution of these nodes on the vessel
cannot be determined.

FormAll of the sherds are probably from the same
small cup with a vertical rim and a slightly
thinned and rounded lip. A small vertical strap
handle 1.3 cm. wide and 4 cm. thick was attached to one side. No basal sherds are present.
The cup walls are from 3 to 4 mm. thick.

Provenience
All of these sherds were found beneath the surface of the midden.
LEAD-GLAZED, CLEAR, BROWN PAINTED WARE

(Fig. 42, D, E), 492 sherds
Painted, lead-glazed earthenware very similar
to that described below can be bought in any
market in northeastern Mexico at the present

Fig. 43. Sherd profiles of amber lead-glazed plainware. A,
typical jar rim; S, typical bowl rim; C, typical plate rim; D-F,
other jar rims; G, H, other bowl rims; 1-L, typical basal sherds.
Exterior surfaces of all profiles are to the left.

time. The colors, designs, and vessel shapes (sets
of bowls and straight-rimmed bean pots with
handles) are surprisingly similar to this missionassociated ware.

Method of manufacture
Wheel-turned and kiln fired.

PasteInclusions: The paste contains numerous
rounded, bright to dull orange-red lumps of an
unidentified material. The lumps range in size
from microscopic to about 1 mm. in diameter, the
average size being about 0.5 mm. They have an
angular glassy fracture, and can be cut with a
knife blade. In addition, occasional rounded clear
grains, probably quartz, also are included in the
paste.
Texture: The paste is very fine-grained and uniform except for the inclusions mentioned above.
It has a straight but granular fracture. Small
elongated gas cavities are scattered through the
paste in some of the harder sherds.
Hardness: From 3.0 to about 4.5 on Mohs' scale.
It can be cut with a steel knife.
Color: The paste always is light in color, ranging
from very light tan to light orange-red and light
brown, the shade depending on the quantity and
size of the inclusions and the degree of oxidation
during firing.
Surface FeaturesFinish: These sherds are all glazed on the interior surface and about half of them on the exterior surface as well. Apparently the vessels
were glazed on the interior and on the upper,
decorated part of the exterior, but they usually
had unglazed exterior bases. The lead glaze is
very thin, clear, and averages about 0.1 mm. or
less in thickness. This glaze is finely crazed and
very glossy. The surface of the glaze is bumpy
and uneven because of the inclusions in the paste.
Color: The light tan to light orange-red and medium brown paste shows through the clear glaze
and the inclusions in the paste can be seen clearly.
Hardness: The glaze ranges from about 5.0 to
6.0 in hardness.

DecorationTechnique: Underglaze painting.
Painting: Dark brown paint (probably manganese-derived) was applied on the paste before
glazing. The paint, ranging from very thin and
smooth to thick and lumpy, was not carefully
applied.
Designs: The designs consist of carelessly applied
spirals, flattened spirals, dots, crescents, broad
lines, and rows of comma-shaped elements. These
designs were applied primarily around the rim
on the exterior surfaces of vessels. Some vessels
had lines or rows of dots along the lip, and a few
vessels had designs in the interior bottom surface.
FormShapes: Two vessel shapes are represented: small
shallow bowls and small jars with rounded
bodies, distinct shoulders, tall cylindrical rims,
and vertical strap handles (Fig. 42, D). The latter form is very similar in size and shape to the
copper chocolate pots found at Quiburi (DiPeso,
1953: 185 and plate 71-A) in the Southwest, and
Mission Espiritu Santo in Texas, and these leadglazed earthenware pots may have been in imitation of the copper pots to serve the same purpose.
Rim: The bowls have curving rims which slope
slightly outward and have a reconstructed diameter of about 14 cm. The small jars have
straight vertical rims, often not perfectly round,
which have a reconstructed diameter of about
9cm.
Lip: The lips on the bowls are rounded and
sometimes painted. The jar lips are slightly
thickened and rounded (Fig. 42, D) and also
sometimes painted.

Base: The bases are generally rounded, but 7
sherds are from vessels which had a slight ring
foot around the base.
Thickness: Ranges from 2 mm. to 6 mm., the
average being about 3 mm. This thinness caused
some vessels to be slightly warped or off-round,
and most of the sherds are quite small compared
to sherds from thicker wares.
Appendages: The jars have small vertical strap
handles attached to the exterior surface of the
86

vertical rims. These handles average about 1.2
cm. wide and 7 mm. thick.

Descriptions of comparable ceramics
Published descriptions of comparable ceramics
have not been found, but an examination of the
collections at The University of Texas shows that
similar wares occur at later Spanish colonial sites
such as Mission Espiritu Santo and house sites
in the Falcon Reservoir area (Fig. 57).

Provenience: Fig. 44.
LEAD-GLAZED, GREEN, OLIVE JARS

(Fig. 40, M), 33 sherds.
These sherds are from large, sturdy jars
which were widely used in Spanish colonial
times for transporting and storing olives, olive
oil, wine, dried foods, and water (Goggin, 1960:
6). Most probably were made in Spain, but by
the 1760's there may have been potteries in Mexico which were turning out similar jars.

Method of manufacture
Wheel-turned and kiln-fired.

Pastelnclusions: The paste is well tempered with
rounded sand grains up to about 1 mm. in diameter; a few sand grains as large as 4 mm. in
diameter were found. They are clear, white, dull
red, and dark brown.
Texture: The paste is coarse and lumpy with a
rough, uneven fracture. Elongated cavities and
cracks are common in the paste, and these sometimes cause spalling-off of sherd surfaces.
Hardness: Between 3.0 and 4.0 on Mohs' scale.
Color: Paste colors range from pale pink to dull
brick red. A few sherds have a light gray core.
Surface featuresFinish: Broad parallel ridges on the interior and
exterior surfaces constitute one of the most distinctive features of these sherds. Apparently
made by the potter's fingers while the vessel was
being turned on the wheel, the ridges are up to
about 2 mm. in height and average about 1 to
1.5 cm. from crest to crest. The interior surfaces
of all sherds are uniformly coated with a thin
but opaque green glaze composed of very small,

angular grains which are partially fused together. The glaze has a very rough, uneven surface, is never crazed, is pebbly and distinctly different from all other glazes (smoothly fused layers) found on San Lorenzo ceramics. The exterior
surfaces of the sherds are well-smoothed and
coated with a thin layer of very fine particles
which may have floated to the surface while the
clay was plastic. The larger sand grains protrude
through this layer, giving the surface a speckled
appearance.

Color: The interior glazed surfaces range from
pale green to dull, dark green in color. The exterior surfaces are light gray and light pink to
almost white with a speckling of darker sand
grains.
Hardness: The glaze, softer than glazes found
on other ceramics from the site, is between
about 4.5 and 6.0 on Mohs' scale, and it can be
scratched and easily pulverized with a steel knife
point. The exterior surfaces are about 3.5 in
hardness.
DecorationNone.

FormExcept for one rim fragment, all of these are
large body sherds which indicate nothing about
vessel size and shape. Goggin (1960) illustrates
various olive jar forms.

Rim: The one rim sherd (Fig. 40, M) is like the
Late Style rim illustrated by Goggin ( 1960: Fig.
10: C), although San Lorenzo is earlier than his
suggested date (post-1800) for the style. The rim
thickness is 1.7 cm., the height of the thickened
portion is 2.7 cm., and the projected exterior rim
diameter is 8.6 cm.
Thickness: Ranges from 7 mm. to 2 cm., average
1.3cm.
Descriptions of comparable ceramics
Caywood, 1950: 86; DiPeso, 1953: 223-224;
Goggin, 1960; Olds, 1962: 785-193, Fig. XXI-B.
Comparable sherds have been found in small
numbers at other Spanish colonial sites in Texas
(Fig.57).

Provenience.Fig.44.
MISCELLANEOUS
LEAD-GLAZED SHERDS

These 22 sherds fall into six groups which
probably represent individual vessels. They do
not fit into any of the wares described above because of minor differences in paste or glaze. The
provenience appears in Fig. 44.
TIN-ENAMELED, GLOSSY WHITE MAJOLICA

(Figs. 45-55), 613 sherds
Majolica had its beginnings in the Maiolica
or Hispano-Moresque earthenwares made at
various centers in Spain and Italy before and
during the colonizing of the Western Hemisphere (Barber, 1960, A). After about the middle
of the sixteenth century the city of Puebla (La
Puebla de los Angeles) in Mexico began producing large quantities of tin-enameled majolica,
and by the middle of the eighteenth century,
when San Lorenzo was established, Puebla was
the primary source of this type of pottery in the
New World. Since the supplies for San Lorenzo
came directly from Mexico, all of the majolica
found there probably was manufactured at pot-teries in and around the city of Puebla. This distinctive earthenware has been found at Spanish
colonial sites in Florida, Texas, New Mexico,
Arizona, California, and throughout Mexico, and
it occurs in small quantities in some English
colonial sites along the Atlantic coast of the
United States. Good descriptions of the history
of majolica are found in Barber ( 1908, 1911 a-b,
1915a) and Caywood (1950: 81-97). Details
about the majolica industry in Puebla, Mexico,
are given in Cervantes ( 1939) .

Method of manufacture
Wheel-turned and kiln fired.

PasteInclusions: Bright red, opaque lumps of an unidentified material are scattered through the
paste. These may be fragments of the "red clay"
which was mixed with white clay in making majolica (Barber, 1911, a: 14). Generally the red
grains are very fine, only a few being visible to
the unaided eye, but rarely a lump as large as
1 mm. in diameter is found. Angular fragments
of a translucent pink material are present in

Fig. 44. Provenience of lead-glazed sherds.

Amber glaze, plaiuwcue
Pro,·enience Unit

Structure 1
fill
floor
Structure 2
outside
fill
floor
Structure 3
fill
floor
Structure 7
outside
fill
floor
Structure 8
outside
fill
floor
Structure 10
fill
floor
Structure 11
outside
fill
floor
Structure 12
fill
floor
Structure 13
fill
floor
Structure 14
outside
fill
floor
Midden
Gate area
W. Wall area
Surface
Totals

bnwl rims

plate rims

1

jar rims other shenh

Clear glaze
Amber gL;tZe
brown
noded ware p'td. ware

Green glaze Misc. lead
olive jars glazed sherds Totals

3

14

5

23

1

2

1

4

8

2

1

4

2

8

2
75
9

1
14
2

5
3

4
2
8

10

3
2

3

11
2
7

4
2

3
98
11

2

13
6
20

4

6
2
1

18
4
8

13
44

4
25

13

3

1
3

5
43

2
20

1

1
38

27

47

9

10

5

2
21

6
13
227
3
11
142

1
4

1
37

5
27
27
979
1
34
479

1
18

1
7

5
33
42
1,341
4
50
709

86

37

83

1,782

9

492

34

22

2,545

1

2

2

some sherds. Exclusive of these inclusions, the
paste is composed of a very fine-grained white
clay.

9

3

8
72

probably fired longer or at a higher temperature.
The paste of all sherds can be cut easily with a
knife, and the softer ones can be scratched with
a fingernail.

Texture: Very fine-grained and uniform.
Hardness: Most sherds are between 2.0 and 3.5
on Mohs' scale, but a few specimens are as soft
as 1.5 or as hard as 4.0. The harder sherds were

88

Fig. 45. Ceramics, glossy white majolica. A-I, dark and light
blue on white rim sherds; J-N, dark and light blue on white
body sherds.

D

A

E

H

J

l

0

2

3

4

5

'

6

7

8

9

10

cm .
89

Fig. 46. Ceramics. A-C, typical rim sherds of dark and light blue on white majolica. Exterior surfaces
of sherds to right.

go

;,.,

Color: Paste color ranges from white to pale red.
The reddish sherds supposedly are from vessels
which were fired longer at higher temperatures
(Caywood, 1950: 81). A microscopic examination of sherds from San Lorenzo reveals that the
reddish sherds contain more of the red inclusions
mentioned above, which adds to their reddish appearance. Sherds refired to 2,000°F. and 1,500°F.
for 30 minutes did not change appreciably either
in color or hardness.
Surface FeaturesFinish: The interior and exterior surfaces are
completely covered with an opaque enamel composed of tin oxide in a transparent lead glaze
(Jelks, 1958: 202) . The enamel is uniformly
applied, but in some cases it has worn off along
the lip and around the basal foot. Striations made
in the clay by the potter's fingers show through
the enamel very rarely. Marks left by the spurs
or stilts used in stacking the vessels for firing are
commonly found on both surfaces of basal sherds.

Color: The enamel color ranges from white to
pale gray and cream, and it has a very glossy appearance.

Hardness: The enamel surface has a hardness of
about 6 to 7 on Mohs' scale. Under magnification
(30X), the surface is smoothly vitrified and in
some instances appears to have a superficial coating of transparent glaze. Interior heat bubbles
are common in the enamel, but do not open to the
surface. Slight crazing of the enamel occurs commonly, although no evidence of flaking or peeling
was found.
DecorationT echnique: Painting in opaque colors on a white
enamel background.
Paint: Dark opaque blue, the most commonly
used color, was applied in a thick viscous form
which stands out in relief from the background
enamel. Other colors used, all of which are thin
and flat compared to the dark blue, are light blue,
light and dark brown, yellow, orange, and green.
The possible source materials of these colors are
as follows: Blue-cobalt; brown-managanese;
yellow-antimony; orange-antimony plus iron
oxide; green-copper (Singer et al., 1958: 335).
Although it is very difficult to compare accurately
the shiny majolica colors with the flat colors in
standard color references, the approximate references for San Lorenzo majolica in Maerz and

Paul (1930) are as follows: dark' blue 39-L-12
and 38-K-9, light blue 35-1-10 and 34-G-7, green
20-J-9 and 23-H-11, orange 12-L-9 and 13-F-11,
yellow about 9-L-4. All colors were applied over
the white background enamel and fused into it
during the firing. The brown paint usually has a
th:n mottled appearance when examined closely.
The majolica sherds from San Lorenzo can be
divided into five descriptive groups on the basis
of color and color combinations. These groups
may simply correspond to separate sets or shipments of dishes:
(1) Dark and light blue designs on white. A few
sherds have only dark blue on white, but the two
shades of blue were usually used together for different design elements--dark blue for floral motifs and
broad lines, light blue for narrow lines and spiral
designs on vessel exteriors.
(2) Dark and light blue on white with narrow
brown lines outlining and connecting the blue design elements.
(3) Light or dark blue lip bands on otherwise undecorated white vessels.
( 4) Orange, yellow, green, blue, and light and dark
brown designs on white background enamel. All of
these colors are frequently found, used for different
elements, on one sherd.
(5) Plain white enameled sherds with no painted
designs. Many of these sherds probably came from
walls or bases of vessels with decorated rims, but
some plain white rim sherds seem to represent small
undecorated cups and bowls. The number of rim
sherds, body sherds, and basal sherds showing each
of the above color combinations appears in Fig. 52.
Majolica styles from San Lorenzo apparently correspond to the following types named by John M.
Goggin: dark and light blue on white = St. Augustine Blue-on-white; blue and brown on white =
Puebla Blue-on-white; blue rim on white= Huejotzingo Blue-on-white; polychrome on white =
Aranama Polychrome (Goggin, 1950; Mounger,
1959: 182, 191, 192).

Designs: These consist of lip bands, interior and
exterior lines paralleling the rim, flattened spiral
lines and overlapping curved lines on vessel exteriors, and floral motifs on vessel interiors. The
floral designs consist of rows of thick, rounded
leaves, composite leaves, and blossoms. These elements occur in clusters, suspended from lines,
arranged on brown stems, or free-floating on the
white background. Zoomorphic elements are
commonly found on majolica at other sites, but
are extremely rare on sherds from San Lorenzo.
The variety of rim designs is shown in Figs. 46,
91

B

F

E

J

K

M

L

0
I

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

I
cm.

Fig . 47. Ceramics , glossy white majolica. A-I, blue and brown on white rim sherds; J-N, blue and
brown on white body sherds . Note drilled hole in lower edge of C.

Fig. 48. Ceramics. A-C, typical rim sherds of blue and brown on white majolica. Exterior surfaces of
sherds to right.

93

c

D

A
B

E

F

0

2

3

4
I

5

G

6

7

8

9

10

I
cm.

Fig. 49. Ceramics, glossy white majolica . A-0, polychrome on white rim sherds ; E-1 , po lychrome on
white body sherds .

04

Fig 50. Ceramics. A, typical rim sherd of blue rim on white majolica; 8, unusual rim sherd of dark
and light blue on white majolica; C, typical rim sherd of polychrome on white majolica. Exterior surfaces
of sherds to right.

'i

95

D

A

~
G

E

H

J

0

2

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

I
cm.
Fig . 51 . Ceramics, glossy white majolica . A-H, blue rim on white rim sherds ; I , J, plastered majolica
sherds.

g6

48, and 50, and the use of colors in connection
with design elements is shown in Fig. 53.

Marks: Part of a maker's mark appears in light
brown on the exterior of a blue and brown on
white basal sherd.
Farm-Shape: Vessel shapes include small cups, bowls,
and deep plates.
Rim: Cups have nearly vertical rims, bowls have
slightly outcurving rims, plates have broadly
flaring flat rims about 3 to 4 cm. in width (Fig.
54). Projected rim diameters range from 8 to 12
cm. on cups and bowls and from 19 to 22 cm. on
plates.
Lip: Lips are rounded and slightly thinned on
all forms.
Base: Cups, bowls, and plates all have a flat base
with a ring foot from about 4 mm. to 7 mm. in
height (Fig. 54). The lower edge of this foot is
usually worn through the enamel into the paste,
either from use or from deliiberate grinding to
make the vessels sit level. Projected basal diameters range from 4 to 5 cm. on cups and bowls,
and from 10 to 12 cm. on plates.
Thickness: Cups range from 2 to 5 mm., bowls
from 3 to 6 mm., and plates from 4 to 9 mm.
(average about 6 mm.). in thickness. In every
case, the thinnest measurement is at the rim and
the thickest is at the base.
Appendages: None noted.
Descriptions of comparable ceramics
Barber, 1906a, 1908, 1911 a-b, 1915a; Caywood, 1950: 81-97; Cervantes, 1939; DiPeso,
1953: 218-223; Goggin, 1950; Jelks, 1958: 201210; Montgomery et al., 1949: 315-316; Plowden, 1958; Smith, 1965; Snow, 1965: 25-35;
Toulouse, 1949: 21, 27-28; Tunnell, 1966; TunFig. 52. Rim, body, and basal sherds associated with majolica color groups.
polylight-dark blue-brown chrome
blue/white on white
on white

un-

decorated blue lip
white bands/white

Rim sherds
44
Body sherds 122
Basal sherds
9

38
81

19

11

28

3

7

173
24

175

122

54

208

Totals

54

54

nell and Ambler, 1967. Subsequent to the preparation of this report for publication, several

other publications have been released which describe majolica collections: Gerald, 1968; Goggin, 1968; Gilmore, 1969; Schuetz, 1969.

Provenience. Fig. 55.
Fig. 53. Associations of design elements and colors on majolica sherds.
Dark
blue

Light Dark light
blue
brown
Onuwe

Lip bands
x
Broad lines x
Narrow lines
Overlapped
curves and
spiral
design
'.:;;j Leaves
x
Stems
Outlining

Green

x
x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x

~ Blossoms x

t::

Yelluvv

x
x

x
x

TIN-ENAMELED, DULL WHITE

(Fig. 40, L), 4 sherds
These sherds are probably a European-made
majolica or faience ware.

Method of Manufacture
Wheel-turned and kiln fired.
PasteInclusions: Numerous microscopic fragments of
a bright red opaque material are scattered
throughout the light pink paste. Rounded transparent sand grains, visible to the unaided eye,
occur occasionally.
Texture: Very fine-grained and uniform.
Hardness: About 2.0 on Mohs' scale; it is easily
cut with a knife.
Color: The color of all the sherds is a uniform
shade of light pink.
Surface featuresFinish: The interior and exterior surface are
uniformly coated with an opaque tin-oxide
enamel which averages about 0.2 mm. in thickness.
Color: The enamel color is pure white and the
surface is dull or flat with almost no gloss. This
is quite different from the majolica described
above which has a high glossy surface.
97

''
I I

II
\ \

I I

~

3

0

\~

A

''

cm.

c

B

Fig. 54. Cross sections of majolica sherds. A, typical rim and base cross seclion of deep cup; 8, typical
rim and base cross section of deep bowl; C, typical rim and base cross section of deep plate.

Hardness: About 6.0. This is somewhat softer
glaze than that found on the other tin-enameled
earthenware.
DecorationT echnique: Painting in opaque blue. The color
was applied over the white enamel background,
but both were fused smoothly together during
the firing.
Painting: Dark and light blue paints, probably
cobalt derived, where applied very thinly on the
white enamel.

UNIDENTIFIED GLAZE, DARK BROWN APPLIQUED

WARE

(Fig. 40, D and E) 27 sherds

Method of manufacture: Wheel-turned, impressed a1_1d appliqued decorations, kiln fired.
PasteInclusions: Widely scattered soft white lumps
up to 1 mm. in diameter, probably are accidental inclusions in the paste.
Texture: Very fine-grained and homogeneous
with a smooth, sharp fracture.

Designs: Delicate dots and floral motifs in dark
blue are connected by very fine light blue meandering lines. These designs are more delicate
than those on the majolica described above. The
designs are apparently applied in bands around
the rims of vessels, on the interior surface only.

Color: The paste is a uniform dark gray, but
when refired to 1,500° F. in an oxidizing atmosphere the paste turned a uniform shade of light
orange.

Form-·

Surface features-

Shapes: These sherds came from a deep plate.
Rim: The plates had a flaring rim with a concave
upper surface (Fig. 40, L).
Lip: Rounded and thickened.
Thickness: Body thickness averages 4 mm. and
the lip thickness is 7 mm.
Provenience
All of the sherds were found on the bulldozed
surface of the site.

98

Hardness: About 5.0.

Finish: Interior and exterior surfaces of all
sherds are coated with an opaque glaze about
0.1 to 0.3 mm. in thickness. This glaze is very
glossy and finely-crazed (visible under magnification only). No bubbles are visible.
Color: The glaze is a very dark chocolate brown
and is probably a manganese pigment.
Hardness: The glaze has a surface hardness of
only about 5.5, and can be easily cut with a knife
point.

Fig. SS. Provenience of tin-enameled majolica sherds by color group.

Dark-Light
blue/white

Structure 1
fill
floor
Structure 3
fill
floor
Structure 4
fill
floor
Structure 7
outside
fill
floor
Structure 8
outside
fill
floor
Structure 10
fill
floor
Structure 11
outside
fill
floor
Structure 12
fill
floor
Structure 13
fill
floor
Structure 14
fill
floor
Midden
Gate area
W. Wall area
Surface
Totals

Blue·Brown
on while

Polychrome
un white

3

Blue Rim
on white

1

Undecorated
white

2

3

1

1

5

7

2
2
1

1

2

2
1

15
2

1

4

1
4

1

3
1

6

3

2

1
1

Totals

2

3

1

2
1
1

2
1

1
1

1

1
2

1

14

1
2
124
1

4
5
332
1

5

4

98

2
47

1
30

34

6
45

49

17

15

5
67

14
193

175

122

54

54

208

613

4

1

2

1

2

DecorationTechnique: The exterior surfaces of all sherds
show signs of the following decorative techniques: ( 1) broad, raised, parallel ridges, running horizontally around the vessel, produced
by creasing the interior walls of the still-plastic
vessel with the fingers or a blunt instrument,
and measuring about 1.5 cm. from crest to crest;
(2) impressing the surface of the still-plastic
clay with highly decorated stamps; (3) broad

bands of applique strips which were probably
mold-made; ( 4) dark brown glaze over the other
decorations.

Designs: The designs cannot be reconstructed
because of the small size of the sherds.

FormShape: Very little can be determined about the
vessel shape. It was probably a deep jar or bowl
99

with a rounded bottom, slightly flared rim, and
small, vertical strap handles ( 1.5 cm. wide and
5 mm. thick) .

Thickness: The vessel walls range from 3 to 6
mm. in thickness. Applique bands of about the
same thickness have been added to the surface of
some areas.
Descriptions of comparable ceramics
The vessel or vessels represented by these sherds
must have been similar to those illustrated by
Mankowitz and Haggar ( 195 7: Plate 104 A & B)
and listed as made in the west of England in the
late seventeenth century. Similar sherds have
been found at Mission Espiritu Santo in Texas
(Mounger, 1959: Plate 91-E) where they were
identified as "Rockingham Ware."

Provenience. Fig. 56.
HARD PASTE
CLEAR-GLAZED, WHITE

19 sherds

Methods of manufacture
Wheel-turned and kiln fired.
PasteInclusions: None noted.
Texture: Very fine-grained and uniform.
Hardness: About 5.0 to 6.0 on Mohs' scale. Some
sherds can be scratched with a knife point with
difficulty.
Color: White.
Surface featuresFinish: The interior and exterior surfaces are
coated with a clear glaze containing numerous
tiny bubbles. The glaze, about 0.2 to 0.4 mm. in
thickness, has occasional thick spots in it. It is
coarsely-crazed and has a smooth, glossy surface.
Color: The white paste is visible through the
transparent glaze.
Hardness: The glaze hardness averages about
7.0.

FormShapes: There are three rim sherds, six basal
sherds, and ten body sherds. Three thick, flat
body sherds probably are from large, flat-bottomed plates or platters. The remainder of the
sherds seem to be from small cups.
Rim: The cups have vertical walls and rims. The
projected exterior rim diameter is 7.8 cm.
Lip: The lips are the same thickness as the walls
and are rounded.
Base: The cups have ring bases with a foot about
3 mm. high and a projected diameter of 4.6 cm.
Thickness: The plate basal sherds are 7 mm.
thick; the cup walls are 5 mm. thick.
Provenience
Three sherds were found in the mission
midden and sixteen were found on the surface.
Since none of the sherds was found in direct association with the floors of the mission structures,
they may.represent more recent occupations of
the site.
CLEAR-GLAZED, BLUE FEATHER-EDGE

(Fig. 4-0, K), 3 sherds
Blue and green "feather-edge" or "shelledge" wares were made in England in the
latter half of the eighteenth century and the first
half of the nineteenth century, and this popular
pattern became very widely spread. Several secondary sources have said that this popular
earthenware was in common usage principally
after about 1790 (see Descriptions of comparable
ceramics below). A recent Wedgewood catalogue
lists this type of decorated edgeware as first produced about 1765 and designed by Josiah
Wedgewood (Wedgewood Catalogue of Bodies,
Glazes, and Shapes Current for 1940-1950, page
M). The occurrence of blue feather-edge at Mission San Lorenzo in the 1760's constitutes the
earliest occurrence of this ware in North America
that this investigator has been able to find recorded. Although it seems very unusual that a
plate of this ware, first produced in England in
1765, would have been broken at San Lorenzo
before 1770, that apparently was the case (see
Structure 13 for statement about provenience).

Met hod of manufacture
DecorationNone.
100

Probably wheel-turned, impressed inner rim,
and kiln fired.

PasteInclusions: None noted.
Texture: Very fine-grained and uniform, but not
vitrified.
Hardness: About 6.0, cannot be scratched with a
knife point.
Color: White.
Surface featuresFinish: Interior and exterior surfaces are uniformly coated with a thin (0.1to0.2 mm.) clear
glaze. The surface of the glaze is very finelycrazed and glossy.
Color: The white paste shows through the clear
glaze.
Hardness: The glaze is about 7.0 hardness, and it
can be scratched with quartz with difficulty.
DecorationT echnique: Clear glaze over white paste with
impressed and painted interior rim.
Painting: Blue paint (probably cobalt) was applied over the impressed rim beneath the clear
glaze. The paint ranges from dark blue at the
edge of the rim and on the lip to light blue at the
ragged edge of the design.
Designs: The inner edge of the rim was decorated with a row of shallow, parallel, diagonal,
linear impressions. The impressions are about 1
cm. in length and spaced at 3 mm. intervals. Blue
paint was applied over this impressed edge in a
"feather" design (Fig. 40, K), the spine of the
feather represented by the edge of the rim and
the edge of the feather extending out on the interior surface slightly past the impressions
(about 1.3 cm. maximum). The flat lip of the
vessel was painted blue also, but paint does not
extend onto the exterior surface. The remainder
of the vessel was apparently undecorated.
FormShape: All three sherds are from the rim area of
a shallow plate.
Rim: The plate has a flaring rim with a slightly
concave upper surface (Fig. 40, K). A projection
of the rim curvature indicates a diameter of 23
cm. or about 9 inches for the plate.

Thickness: The body thickness is 4 mm. and the
rim thickness about 6 mm.
Descriptions of comparable ceramics
Fairbanks, 1962: 13 and Plate II; McClinton,
1951: 21; Olds, 1962: 196-197; South, 1962:
Plate VIII; Watkins, 1960: 299.
Provenience
The association of these sherds with the mission occupation seems certain because: (1) They
were found on the floor of Structure 13 beneath
fallen roof and wall debris and associated with
the usual mission tin-enameled and lead-glazed
wares (2) There was no evidence of disturbance
on the floor of this structure. (3) No intrusive
materials were found on or above the floor in this
non-bulldozed structure.
CLEAR-GLAZED, POLYCHROME PAINTED

3 sherds
These three small body sherds will not be described in detail since they were found on the
surface and their association with the mission is
uncertain. Blue, red, and green pignients are
present beneath clear glaze on white paste. Vessel shapes or design elements cannot be determined.

Stoneware
SALT-GLAZED, WHITE

(Fig. 42, C), 1 sherd
This type of fine quality stoneware was produced in Staffordshire, England, primarily in the
first half of the eighteenth century (Barber, 1906
b and c: 18-19, Plate facing Page 17).

Method of manufacture
Wheel-turned body with an impressed nm
decoration, kiln-fired.

Pastelnclusion: None noted.
Texture: Fine-grained and vitreous with smooth,
glassy fracture. Very small, elongated gas cavities are common in the paste, but do not show on
the surface.
Hardness: About 6.0. It cannot be scratched with
a knife.
Color: Very light tan.
101

Surface featuresFinish: Interior and exterior surfaces are covered
with a thin, uniform salt glaze. The glaze consists of a thin, transparent coating, containing
some tiny heat bubbles, which has an uneven surface often described as resembling the surface of
an orange peel. The glaze is produced by throwing salt into the kiln when the heat is intense.
The salt vaporizes, settles on the surface of the
vessel, and acting as a flux, produces the thin,
glossy, transparent coating (Barber, 1906C: 5 ) .
The surface shows no signs of crazing.
Color: The very light tan paste shows through
the transparent glaze. Although this ware is
called "white salt-glazed stoneware," it apparrently is usually a very light tan or gray in color.

sherds are not definitely mission-associated, they
probably show where someone drank a bottle of
ginger beer among the mission ruins at a much
more recent time.
Method of manufacture

Wheel-turned and kiln-fired.
PasteInclusions: None visible.
Texture: Vitreous with a glassy fracture, and
containing numerous small, elongated gas cavities.
Hardness: About 6.5. It cannot be scratched with
a knife point.

Hardness: About 6.5.

Color: Very light tan.

Decoration-

Surface features-

Technique: The flaring rim of a wheel-thrown
vessel was pressed into a clay mold or metal die,
and the design of the mold was clearly impressed
into the plastic clay of the vessel.

Finish: Interior and exterior surfaces, except for
the exterior bottom, are covered with a thin salt
glaze. The upper portion of the bottle was coated
with a brown glaze beneath the clear salt glaze.
The glaze contains numerous tiny bubbles and
has a rough, pitted but glossy surface. Parallel
striations in the clay, made by tools during the
manufacturing of the bottle, show through the
glaze in many places.

Design: The design (Fig. 42, C) consists of a
regular pattern of sinuous parallel lines which
form lozenge-shaped elements. The design is contained in adjacent panels outlined by parallel
border lines. It was restricted to the interior rim
surface of the vessel represented by this sherd.
FormShape: This sherd came from the shoulder area
of a deep plate with a flat, flaring, decorated rim.
Thickness: A uniform4mm.
Description of comparable ceramics
Barber, 1906 band c; South, 1962: Plate III;
Maxwell and Binford, 1961: 93; Tunnell and
Ambler, 1967: 43-45.
Provenience
This sherd was found on the floor of Structure
11.

Color: The upper portion of the bottle has a soft
tobacco-brown colored glaze beneath the clear
glaze; on the lower part of the bottle, the light
tan paste shows through the transparent salt
glaze.
Hardness: The glaze has a surface hardness of
about 6.5 to 7.0-it can be scratched with quartz
with difficulty.
Decoration-

About the upper one-half of the bottle was
coated with a thin, brown glaze beneath the salt
glaze. No other decoration is present.

SALT-GLAZED, BROWN

7 sherds
These sherds all seem to be part of a single
"ginger beer bottle." These beverage bottles,
most of which originated in Scotland, were very
commonly imported into the United States in
the latter half of the nineteenth century (Cecil
Calhoun, personal communication). Since these
102

Form--

All of the sherds are from a tall, slender bottle
with a flat base, vertical body walls and a neck
which gradually slopes inward toward the lip.
The exterior diameter at the base is 7.2 cm. The
thickness ranges from 1 cm. at the base to 5 mm.
at the neck. There are no rim sherds.

j 191
\

Descriptions of comparable ceramics

Color: Milky-white to very light blue-gray.

Olds, 1962: 204, 205; Cecil Calhoun, personal
communication.

Hardness: The surface hardness is about 7.0. It
can be scratched with quartz with great difficulty.

Provenience
These sherds were found together outside of
Structure 2 and just beneath the bulldozed surface.
SALT-GLAZED, BLUE

2 sherds
These two small body sherds were both found
on the surface and could be from any one of the
several occupations of the site. They have a dull
blue paint under a salt glaze, with the characteristic rough finish, applied over a light tan
paste. Vessel size or shape cannot be determined.

Porcelain
Two sherds of modern American porcelain
from a recent occupation of the site were found
on the surface.

DecorationT echnique: Glazed surface with either underpainting or overpainting.
Painting: Three sherds have a thin, orange-red
paint applied over the glaze. This paint can be
scratched with a knife point only with great difficulty. Three sherds have a dark to light blue
paint applied beneath the glaze. This pigment
fused into the glaze during the firing.
Designs: The orange-red surface paint is used for
fine floral design and was applied in bold smooth
strokes. The blue underglaze paint is used for
broad curving lines and rather thick leaf designs
composed of straight parallel elements arranged
on a stem. All of these are body sherds so there is
no information on rim decorations.

ORIENTAL

7 sherds
These sherds probably are from fine oriental
porcelain vessels. Fragments of such vessels have
been commonly found at Spanish colonial sites
in North America (see description of comparable
ceramics below).

Method of manufacture
Wheel-turned and kiln-fired.

Pastelnclusions: None noted.
Texture: Vitreous and uniform with a sharp,
glassy fracture. No gas cavities are evident in
the paste. The sherds are translucent against a
strong light.
Hardness: About 6.5 to 7.0.
Color: White to very light blue-gray.
Surface featuresFinish: Interior and exterior surfaces are uniformly coated with a thin, clear to milky-white
glaze. The glaze contains numerous tiny bubbles
which do not open onto the surface which is glossy and not crazed.

Form-

!'

Thickness: 3 to5 mm.
Descriptions of comparable ceramics
DiPeso, 1953: 227; Toulouse, 1949: 21; Deetz,
1963: Plates 5 and 8; South, 1962: Plate 4. In
addition, similar porcelain sherds occur at various Spanish colonial sites in Texas (Fig. 57).

Provenience. Fig. 56.
CERAMIC DISCS

(Fig. 40, A, B), 3 sherds
All three of these artifacts are made from amber, lead-glazed, plain eathenware. The sherds
are shaped into more or less round discs with
smoothed edges, and they show signs of wear
on all surfaces. All three discs are approximately
the same size: 3 cm. in diameter and 9 mm. in
thickness. Almost identical sherd discs, one made
of majolica and eleven made of Goliad plainware,
are illustrated by Mounger ( 1959, Plates 38 and
39-A) from Mission Espiritu Santo, and others
are mentioned in the text (Mounger, 1950: 175).
Similar ceramic discs of a comparable size are
reported by DiPeso, 1953: 146; Toulouse, 1949:
22.
103

~··

r
Fig. 56. Provenience of various types of ceramics.

Provenience
Unit

VVheel-made
Tinunglazed enameled
red slipped dull-white
ware
ware

Structure 2
outside
1
Structure 7
fill
Structure 8
floor
7
Structure 11
floor
Structure 12
floor
1
Structure 13
floor
7
Midden
14
W. Wall Area 1
Surface
17
Totals

48

Dark
Hard-paste
brown Hard-paste
blue
Hard-paote Stoneware St<meware Stoneware
appliquCd while
feather- polychrome
white
brmvn
blue
American Orjental
ware
ware
edge
painted
salt glaze salt glaze salt glaze porcelain porcelain

7

8

7

7
7

1

1
2

1
8

3

4

10

16

4

27

19

3

2

2

6

11
26
1
60

2

2

7

123

1
3
3

CERAMIC SCRAPERS

(Fig. 40, C), 2 sherds
Two sherds, both from below the surface in
the midden, have heavily worn edges which
apparently were used for a scraping purpose.
The abraded edges are slightly convex and are
3.5 cm. and 5.0 cm. in length. One sherd is
amber, lead-glazed, plainware and the other
is non-wheel-made, red slipped plainware. These
sherds must have served for a long or strenuous
task because to produce similar wear on similar
sherds it was necessary to rub them vigorously
on a rough concrete surface for many minutes.

Ceramic Comparisons
A cursory examination of large ceramic
samples from other Spanish colonial sites in
Texas (Fig. 57) shows the following interesting
facts about the decorated wares:
(1) Excavations of the probable location of Presidio
de Nuestra Senora de Loreto (1722-1726) on the
site of La Salle's Fort St. Louis on the Texas coast,
produced thousands of blue on white majolica
sherds like those from San Lorenzo. This earlier site
_has none of the blue and brown on white majolica
sherds or the polychrome on white sherds which
are commonly found at San Lorenzo and other later
sites.
104

Totals

3

1

7

(2) Excavations at the third location of Mission
Espiritu Santo de Zuniga (1749 to about 1830) and
Mission Nuestra Senora del Rosario (1754 to about
1808), both near the city of Goliad, Texas, produced
large ceramic collections. The collections contain
most of the same types of ceramics found at San
Lorenzo, as well as many additional (probably
later) types of majolica such as polychrome on blue,
bright crude polychrome (orange, yellow, green)
on white, and a rather sloppy blue rim on white
majolica which has the blue applied in a large
sawtooth design, possibly made in imitation of blue
feather-edge. These sites, which were occupied later
than San Lorenzo, also produced a wide variety of
hard-paste European earthenwares such as direct
painting, transfer printed, and edged wares.
(3) Surface collections and excavated samples from
Spanish colonial house sites in the Falcon Reservoir
area on the Rio Grande (mostly late eighteenth
century and early nineteenth century) contain
some of the same ceramic types found at San Lorenzo, but they contain a larger percentage of the
later, and somewhat cruder, bright polychrome
majolica mentioned above.
( 4) The brown painted, lead-glazed earthenware
found at San Lorenzo does not occur at the earlier
site of Fort St. Louis, but it is rather common in all
of the other Spanish colonial collections examined.
In the later sites such as Mission Espiritu Santo and
especially in the house sites at Falcon, there is a
similar ware also present in large quantities-a

,,.I~

l:,

~

1:

1!
J!

.

Fig. 57. Ceramic comparisons.
Estimated sher<l count

20,000

3,400

Presidio
de N.S. de
Loreto-Ft.
St. Louis

Iv1ission
San Lorenzo

10,000

5,000

'

500

500

500

Falcon
Site
78-B9-5

Falcon
Site A

Falcon 10
minor sites

x

x

x

x

x

x

3rd Location

Polychrome polished ware
Dark red polished plainware
Red polished decorated ware
Red slipped plainware
Dark gray plainware
Unglazed, red slipped plainware
Lead-glazed,amber,plainware
Lead-glazed, amber, noded ware
Lead-glazed, clear, brown painted
Lead-glazed, green, olive jars
Tin-enameled, majolica B/W
B-Br/W
B-rim/W
Poly./W

w

x
x

Santa f:ruz

x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x

i',

x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x

polychrome painted (brown, yellow, and orange),
lead-glazed ware which is made in the same manner
and same vessel shapes as the brown painted ware
found at San Lorenzo.
(5) Two of the highly polished, nonwheel-made
types of pottery, described at Mission San Lorenzo,
occur in small quantities at all the other Spanish
colonial sites examined. This pottery, probably
brought from somewhere in Central Mexico, must
have been popular with either the Spaniards or
their Indian servants.

Glass
Pale green bottle glass (31 sherds)
This transparent glass is a pale, dull green.
Acording to Lardner ( 1832: 151 ) , the green
color of common bottle glass "is owing to the
presence of a portion of iron in the sea sand, and,

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

;;

i'

x

x

Unidentified glaze, dk. brown appliqued
Hard-paste, clear glaze, white
Hard-paste, clear glaze, blue feather-edge
Hard-paste, clear glaze, poly-painted
Stoneware, salt glaze, white
Porcelain, oriental, blue underglaze
Porcelain, oriental, red overglaze
Tin-enameled, majolica, poly/It. blue
Tin-enameled, majolica, crude poly/W
Tin-enameled, majolica, sawedge B/W
Lead-glazed, clear, poly-painted

de la

.l.Vlission
Espiritu
Santo
Mission ~.S.
de Zuniga de! Rosario

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x

x

x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x

x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x
x
x
x

x
x

x

x

x
x
x
x

x

x
x
x
x
x

x

x
x
x

probably also, in the vegetable ashes of which it
is composed." It contains numerous small bubbles
throughout, none of which opens onto the surface. Bubbles near the exterior (convex) surface
of the glass tend to be elongated while those near
the interior (concave) surface are more spherical. Some sherds have only very slight patina on
the surface, but most of them are heavily patinated. The patina ranges from off-white to golden
in color and has a mottled red/green lustre when
viewed at an angle toward a strong light. The
patina is smooth and hard but it can be flaked
from the glass with a needle or knife point. All of
the sherds are apparently from hand-blown bottles-there are no mold marks. The thickness is
variable, ranging from 2 to 5 mm. with almost
the entire range found on some large sherds.
The largest fragment is a complete bottle neck
105

r
t

(Fig. 58, E), 12 cm. long. Its smoothly sloping
shoulder has a long, narrow neck tapered in
slightly toward the lip, which is straight and
smoothly finished. A narrow band of glass about
1.2 cm. wide and 2 mm. thick has been added
around the exterior of the neck just below the lip.
This reinforcing band is smoothly polished onto
the bottle neck. The exterior diameter ranges
from about 6 cm. on the slope of the shoulder to
2.9 cm. near the lip. There are no mold marks on
this fragment.

bottle neck fragment which has a sloping shoulder and a short, vertical neck with a slightly
thickened, rounded lip. A thin (less than 0.5
mm.) flap of glass was folded down from the lip
and smoothed tightly against the upper 4 mm. of
the inner neck surface. The neck of the bottle was
1.8 cm. long and had an estimated exterior diameter of 2 cm. at the lip. These sherds were found
on the surface and just beneath the surface outside Structure 2. Their association with the mission occupation is uncertain.

Pale green fiat glass ( 8 sherds)

Recent bottle glass ( 89 sherds)

The color and transparency of these pieces
match those of the bottle glass described above.
A few widely scattered, small bubbles are visible, all of which are elongated. The surfaces of
the sherds are very smooth and flat and the thickness on each sherd except one is uniform. One
sherd is 1 mm. thick, two are 2 mm. thick, and
the others are 4, mm. thick. All are heavily patinated and the patina ranges from off-white to
brownish-gold in color. Although the patina is
hard and smooth, it can be scraped and cut with
a knife point. One sherd has been broken into the
shape of one-quarter of a circle and the edges are
ground smooth. The radius of this fragment is 3
cm. Possibly it was used as an inlay or one element in a leaded glass panel. The other flat glass
sherds may be fragments of square bottles or
flat panes.

These sherds are of recent origin and a variety
of colors: white, dark brown, dark green, colorless. Some have trade names such as "Lea & Perrins." One molded dark green whiskey bottle (21
sherds.), with a hand-finished neck, (Fig. 58, B
and C) was found in a disturbed area on the floor
of Structure 8. This bottle probably dates to the
Camp Wood occupation in the mid-nineteenth
century.

Colorless glass (2 sherds)

Two sherds of a small, thin-walled vessel were
found in the midden, its glass colorless and transparent with a few widely scattered, small, spherical bubbles. The surface is coated with a layer
of white patina which has a pearly lustre in
bright light. The vessel was a small glass with
vertical sides and a straight, smooth lip. There
are no mold marks. The sherd thickness is rather
uniform 2 mm. The estimated diameter of the
complete vessel, at the lip, is 6.5 cm.

Beads
In the comparatively small collection of 132
beads from San Lorenzo there are twelve distinct
types. Four types not commonly reported in
North American historic sites are includedamber, alabaster, red coral, and pearl-although
glass beads comprise the bulk of the collection.
Glass beads, the most frequently found type of
artifact in many historical sites, have seldom
been described or illustrated sufficiently for purposes of intersite comparisons. With more than
80 per cent of these specimens unquestionably
associated with the mission occupation, i.e., in
burials or on house floors (Fig. 61), this dated
sample from a restricted time period-1762 to
1771-is described in detail for comparison by
other investigators.
GLASS BEADS

Pale blue-green bottle glass (23 sherds)

A pale aquamarine is the color of these transparent sherds, containing a few tiny, spherical
bubbles. All sherds are heavily coated with a
dull white, chalky patina and all are from small
bottles (Fig. 58, D), with no mold marks visible.
Thickness ranges from 1 mm. to 6 mm., and is
variable on each sherd. The only large sherd is a
106

The glass beads found at the site of Mission
San Lorenzo undoubtedly originated in the Republic of Venice, which held a tight monopoly on
the blass bead industry at that time. So carefully
guarded were secrets of the industry that as late
as 1762 a local law forbade glassmakers to go
abroad on pain of having their families in Venice
imprisoned; and, " ... if in spite of the imprison-

cm.
Fig. 58 . Bottle fragments. A, base of dark green wine bottle ; 8 , neck of dark green, mold-made
whiskey bottle ; C, base of dark green, mold-made whiskey bottle ; D, neck of pale blue-green bottle; E,
nee!< of pale green wine bottle .

Fig. 59. Provenience of glass.

Pale

Pale

green bottle green fl,flt

Strncture 2
outside

Pale
blue-green
Colorless bottle
glass
glass

Recent
bottle
glass

17

5

10

(one bottle)
floor
Structure 3
floor
Structure 7

fill
floor
Strncture 8
outside
floor

1
1

2

1
21
(one
bottle)

2

Structure 11
floor
Strncture 13
floor
Structure 14

1
1

fill
floor
Midden
6
W. Wall Area
12
Surface
Totals

2

1

31

2
1
2
2
8

2

1
5

54

23

89

1

ment of his relations he should persist in remaining abroad, an emissary will be charged to kill
him" (Sauzay, 1871: 45). At least sixty different
kinds of glass beads were manufactured in large
quantities at Venice and the nearby island of
Murano. Lardner (1832: 183-184) states that
" ... the principal trade in these is carried on with
Spain and the coast of Africa; but some portions
find their way to nearly all parts of the world."
The Venetian monopoly lasted until late in the
nineteenth century (Scientific American Supplement: May, 1900: 20400).
All the glass beads from San Lorenzo are
the hollow-cane variety, made in the following
manner: ( 1) A cylindrical mass of molten glass
containing a large central bubble was drawn out
to form a long, thin tube or cane. (2) When cool,
this cane was broken into cylindrical bead-size
fragments. (3) The fragments were stirred in a
mixture of ash and sand until the holes were
filled. ( 4) This mass was heated and stirred until
the edges of the cylindrical fragments were
108

smoothly rounded. (5) The completed beads
were cleaned and size-graded with a sieve.
The San Lorenzo specimens are all either
simple hollow-cane (made of a single layer of
glass) or compound hollow-cane beads (made of
two or more concentric layers of glass) (Edward
B. Jelks, personal communication) . Although
hollow-cane type beads are basically cylindrical,
many terms have been used in the literature to
describe the slight variations in form which are
largely caused by temperature and/or time involved in the fourth step of the manufacturing
process.
Additional details about glass head manufacture are found in: Lardner, 1832: 182-183; Orchard, 1929: 82-88; Sauzay, 1871: 205~206;
Scientific American Supplement: May, 1900:
20400; Harris and Harris, 1967. Terminology
employed in the following descriptions follows in
part that proposed by Duffield and Jelks (1961:
41).
The glass beads from San Lorenzo fall readily
into three distinct size groups-large, about 9
mm. in diameter; medium, about 5 mm. in diameter; small, about 3 mm. in diameter-with
no graduation between groups. All sizes were apparently used for necklaces (see burial associations). In examining them microscopically
( 30X), one or more specimens of each type were
broken to determine their internal structure and
characteristics. A vernier caliper was used for
measurements.
MEDIUM-SIZE, COMPOUND, RED BEADS

(Fig. 60, A), 29 specimens

Description
Short and cylindrical; most are slightly asymetrical. End edges of all specimens well rdunded
and coated with an opaque white patina which
flakes away easily with washing or dry brushing, leaving a smooth outer surface.

Fig. 60. Glass beads and plant remains. A, medium-size
compound red beads; 8, alabaster beads; C, medium-size,
simple, blue-green beads; D, small-size compound, red beads;
E, small-size, simple, clear beads; F, small-size, simple, blue
beads; G, small-size, simple, dark burgundy red beads; H, coral
beads; /, pearl bead; J, seeds of a prickly pear cactus !Opunlia sp.l; K, L, charred com grains from Structure 1 O; A-H, upper
scale; J-L, lower scale.

l
'

I
I

•'
•
0

A

c

B

D

E

0

G

H

F

10

0
1

0 0
If

I

I '

I

I

f

ft'

mm •

• •

J

K

L
0
I

10
I'
mm.

I,'

I

I'

I

I

109

r
f

Components

Description of comparable beads

Composed of four layers: (1) a thin (about 0.2
mm.) outer layer of translucent pale green glass
with no visible bubbles; (2) two identical superimposed, opaque red layers (sometimes appearing to be a single layer), each about 0.1 mm.
thick and seeming to contain no bubbles; (3) a
translucent pale green core layer averaging about
1.4 mm. in thickness and containing chains or
lines of tiny bubbles running parallel to the hole.
The green layers are probably the same type of
glass used in making eighteenth century pale
green wine bottles. A gold or copper-derived pigment was frequently used to produce bright red
glass (Lardner, 1832: 210-215). The red glass in
these beads probably contains one of these expensive pigments, and the use of very thin layen
of red over a thick green core enabled the makers
to produce a brilliant red bead with a minimal
expenditure of the red pigment.

(See medium compound red above) Harris et al.
1965: 313, #51; Harris and Harris, 1967: 147,
#87.

Provenience. Fig. 61.
MEDIUM-SIZE, SIMPLE, BLUE-GREEN BEADS

(Fig. 60, C), 4 specimens

Description
Short, cylindrical, and rather asymmetrical in
shape. Three have well rounded edges; the remaining specimen has sharp, angular edges.
Made of one layer of light, translucent bluegreen glass containing many bubbles which pit
the surface. Two specimens have a bubble about
1 mm. in diameter opening onto exterior surface,
and surfaces of all specimens are coated with an
opaque white patina which can be easily flaked
away.

Dimerzsions
Diameter 4.3 to 5.3, average 5.0 mm.; length 3.3
to 4.5, average 4.0 mm.; hole diameter 1.2 to 1.5,
average 1.3 mm.

Description of comparable beads
Comparable to those called "Cornaline
d'Aleppo" by Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 49 (medium-sized, clear/red/green, oblate beads); probably also like the short specimens shown in Pratt,
1961: #72; Watt and Meroney, 1937: 54-55;
and Watt, 1937: 64, #82; Harris, et al. 1965:
313, #51, #55; Harris and Harris, 1967: 147,
#86, #99.

Dimensions
Diameter 4.5 to 5.0 mm.; length 3.3 to 4.3 mm.;
hole diameter 1.1 to 1.5 mm.

Description of comparable beads
Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 44 (medium-sized
robin-egg blue, subcylindrical beads) ; Pratt,
1961: #66; Watt, 1937: 66, #114; Harris, et al.
1965: 309, #10; Harris and Harris, 1967: 152,
#138.

Provenience. Fig. 61.
SMALL-SIZE, SIMPLE, BLUE BEADS

Provenience. Fig. 61.
SMALL-SIZE, COMPOUND, RED BEADS

(Fig. 60, D), 6 specimens

(Fig. 60, F), 16 specimens

Description

Identical to medium compound red beads described above, except for size and probably manufactured by the same process.

Short, cylindrical specimens with well rounded
edges, composed of a single layer of dark blue
translucent glass. Unlike the other blue specimens, these have very few visible bubbles in the
glass, leaving the surface smooth and only
slightly frosted (no heavy patina).

Dimensions

Dimensions

Diameter a uniform 3 mm.; length 2.6 to 3.2,
average 3.0 mm.; hole diameter 0.8 to 0.9 mm.

Diameter 3.3 to 3.5 mm.; length 2.3 to 2.9 mm.;
hole diameter 1.2 to 1.3 mm.

Description

110

Description of comparable beads

Description of comparable beads

Harris, et al. 1965: 313, #48; Harris and Harris,
1967: 144, #48.

Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 46 (small, translucent,
colorless, doughnut-shaped beads); Smith, 1960:
141 to 143, reports small colorless beads which
may be comparable to these; Watt, 1937: 62,
#22; Harris, et al. 1965: 313, #49; Harris and
Harris, 1967: 144, #49.

Provenience. Fig. 61.
SMALL··SIZE, SIMPLE, DARK BURGUNDY RED BEADS

(Fig. 60, G), 33 specimens

Description
Very short, cylindrical (doughnut-shaped), with
well rounded edges, appearing to be opaque dark
brown or black, but freshly broken slivers examined against a strong light show them to be a
deep burgundy red. Composed of a single layer
of glass with a few chains of bubbles running
parallel to the hole. None was patinated-surfaces smooth and slightly frosted.

Dimensions
Diameter 2.8 to 3.5, average 3.1 mm.; length 1.8
to 2.3, average 2.0 mm.; hole diameter about 1
mm.

Description of comparable beads
Duffield and Jelks, 1961 : 45 (small and medium,
purple-black, doughnut-shaped beads); Pratt,
1961: #84; possibly like Watt, 1937: 66, #126;
Harris, et al. 1965: 313, #50 (?);Harris and
Harris, 1967: 144, #50 (?).

Provenience. Fig. 61.
SMALL-SIZE, COMPOUND, WHITE BEADS,

6 specimens

Description
Short and cylindrical, with well rounded edges.
Some small chains of bubbles open onto the bead
surfaces; ends are heavily pitted by bubbles. Surfaces are partially coated with an opalescent
white patina. Hole is not centrally situated on
some speomens.

Components
Two layers were used: ( 1) a thin outer layer of
clear, transparent glass containing some chains
of .bubbles paralleling the hole, average thickness
about 0.1 mm.; (2) a core component of opaque
white glass containing a very large quantity of
bubbles and probably pigmented with a phosphate of lime (Lardner, 1832: 217). Because of
the excessively bubbly nature of the white glass
core, the clear glass coating may have been added
for d!-1rability.

Provenience. Fig. 61.
SMALL-SIZE, SIMPLE, CLEAR BEADS

(Fig. 60, E), 20 specimens

Dimensions
Diameter 3.0 to 3.5 mm.; length 2.5 to 2.9 mm.;
hole diameter averages about 0. 7 mm.

Description
Short, cylindrical beads-some might be called
doughnut-shaped, edges well rounded. Made of a
single layer of translucent glass with few visible
bubbles, the surface is smooth, slightly frosted,
and has some patches of an opaque patina. The
central hole, visible through the wall of each
bead, gives these specimens a distinctive opalescent lustre.

Descriptions of comparable beads
Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 46 (small, clear/white,
subcylindrical beads); Ray and Jelks, 1964: 130;
also possibly like beads shown in Pratt, 1961:
#110; Smith, 1953: 45 (white, milky, opaque);
Harris, et al. 1965: 312, #45; Harris and Harris,
1967: 144, #45.

Provenience. Fig. 61.
Dimensions
Diameter 3.3 to 4.0 mm., average 3.8 mm.;
length 2.1 to 3.1 mm., average 2.8 mm.; hole
diameter averages about 1.0 mm.

AMBER BEADS

Amber, fossilized resin of long-disappeared conifer forests, occurs in some alluvial soils in Eu111

rope and Asia and is especially abundant on the
beaches along the Baltic Sea. It is highly translucent, soft, takes a high polish, and its colors
range from yellow or pale pink to light brown. If
rubbed briskly, a piece of amber will become
electrified and attract bits of paper. These five
beads are probably of European origin.

Descripl ion
These specimens are so heavily weathered that
only one bead is sufficiently complete for detailed
description. It is cylindrical but not perfectly
circular in cross section as there are flattened
areas on its sides. It has flattened ends, rounded
edges, and a well smoothed and frosted surface.
The hole is a uniform diameter throughout, apparently drilled from one end only. The amber
is heavily laced with cracks which render it
rather opaque, but small detached fragments of
the amber, a light pinkish brown, are transparent. The amber is easily cut and scratched with
a knife blade.

Dimensions
Diameter 4.0 mm.; length 4.5 mm., hole diameter a uniform 1.0 mm. Incomplete specimens
were apparently of approximately this same size.

Description of comparable beads
Casanowics ( 1909: 354) mentions rose tinted
amber used for beads in a Roman catholic rosary.
Webster's New International Dictionary (second edition, unabridged, 1951) mentions the use
of amber for beads.

Provenience. Fig. 61.
ALABASTER BEADS

(Fig. 60, B)
A very fine-grained, compact, non-crystalline
form of gypsum was used to fashion these beads,
which are white to dark pink, with fine, irregular banding visible under magnification. Although alabaster has long been used for statuary,
small vessels, and other ornamentation, a specific
reference to its use for beads has not been found.
Webster's New International Dictionary also
uses the word alabaster for a compact, banded
form of calcite. Orchard's mention (1929: 34)
of calcite beads from Jamaica may refer to beads
112

similar to these eight specimens from San Lorenzo.

Description
Generally cylindrical in shape, but slightly irregular in cross section. Various flattened areas
are present on the well smoothed and highly
polished surface. Ends are straight to slightly
concave, edges are sharply defined. The holes,
frequently not exactly centered, are smooth,
straight, and are of uniform diameter.

Dimensions
Diameter 4.2 to 5.0 mm.; length 3.8 to 4.3; hole
diameter is a uniform 1 mm. on all specimens.

Provenience. Fig. 61.
CORAL BEADS

(Fig. 60, H)
A thorough examination and comparison with
specimens of red "precious" coral ( Corallium
nobile) from the Mediterranean reveals these
beads to be made of that material. This occurrence of true coral in good association (Fig. 61)
with Mission San Lorenzo in the 1760's is somewhat earlier than the first well-documented occurrence of this material in the Southwest. In an
article on the use of coral, Clara Lee Tanner
(1950: 124-125) states:
The red and red-orange coral of the Southwest
tribes of the United States Indians, originated off
the coast of Sardinia and on the banks off Sciacca,
Sicily. It was manufactured in Torre del Greco in
the Province of Naples, as well as in Leghorn, Italy.
As to the time this material was sent into the Southwest, we regret our inability to give you any information. It was shipped by manufacturers from the
above centers in Italy in the early 1800's, while
\ coral concerns in the United States started late in
that [the nineteenth] century.
The statement regarding the shipment of coral in
the early 1800's would fit in with the first known
date for the existence of real coral in the Southwest
[Feb. 6, 1822], recently published by Arthur Woodward [1947: 25-26]. Shipment [of red coral] from
the Mediterranean via Mexico is reported, but remains a question (Tanner, 1950: 130).

It is quite probable that the coral beads from San
Lorenzo came via Mexico and answer the above
question insofar as the Texas frontier is con-

cerned. This red coral has long been used for
jewelry and beads and it is highly prized by the
modern Southwestern Indians.

ton (1922: 250) illustrates some tiny, eccentric
fresh water mussel pearl beads from aboriginal
sites in the eastern United States. Although
pearls have long been highly prized as beads,
they are unreported from Spanish colonial sites
in Texas or the Southwest.

Description
Cylindrical, with flattened ends and rounded
edges. Surfaces well smoothed and polished to a
high gloss, but parallel ridges found on original
coral stems are visible on bead surfaces running
parallel to the hole. This indicates that the beads
are simple short sections broken from the small
round coral stems, polished, and perforated.
Holes are centrally situated and of a uniform
diameter. Color is a brilliant red-orange similar
to 1-J-12 in Maerz and Paul (1930).

Description
Eccentric in shape, smooth but undulating surface, opaque white with brilliant, iridescent
gleam. Hole is circular and of uniform diameter
throughout.

Dimensions
Length 2.9 mm., width 2.1 mm., thickness 1.8
mm., hole diameter 0.8 mm.

Dimensions

Provenience. Fig. 61.

Diameter 3.5 to 4.0 mm. (the same as the finer
stems on the coral specimens used for comparison); length 2.8 to 3.7 mm.; hole diameter a uniform 1 mm.

Worked Stone
In addition to its use as a construction material, stone was utilized in the manufacture of a
variety of tools at San Lorenzo. All of the stone
artifacts and debi tage are locally occurring
cherts and limestone with the exception of three
metate and mano fragments of vesicular basalt
and a pipe made of an unidentified igneous material. The local cherts occur in nodular form in
the limestone and are abundantly represented in
the river gravels. The chert ranges from light
reddish brown to tan to medium gray in color,

Provenience. Fig. 61.
PEARL BEAD

(Fig. 60, I)
This tiny, eccentric specimen could have been
taken from a local Nueces River mussel and perforated, although it is not definitely known
whether it is from a salt or fresh water mollusk.
Orchard (1929: 29) discusses the use of pearls
from fresh water mussels as beads, and Harring-

Fig. 61. Provenience of beads.

Glass Beads
Medium
com-

Provenience
Unit

Burial 1
Burial 4
Burial 8-1
Burial 10
Structure 13, floor
Structure 4, floor
Structure 7, fill
Midden
Surface
Totals

pound
red

Small

Small
Small simple
simple burgundy
blue-green blue
red

comSmall
Large Medium
pound compound siinple simple

red

white

blue

Small
simple
clear--.

28

Amber Alabaster

4

6

2

7

7

1

3
1

29

6

3
1

1

6

1

4

5
1

5

3

16

32

20

1

1

5

8

Totals

29
20
47

1
1

5

2
1

2

Pearl

1
17

29

Coral

3

1

4
3
1
18
3
132
113

with broad banding and mottling occurring commonly. Chert river cobbles, usually coated with
a thick, patinated cortex, were probably utilized
by the knappers at San Lorenzo. None of the
flakes or tools made at the mission show traces of
patina on the freshly broken surfaces, but flakes
and tools from nearby prehi~toric sites are almost all coated with light to heavy white patina.
Only those stone artifacts and bits of chipping
dehris which were found in the excavations or
on the disturbed surface in the immediate area
of the mission structures are included in this
analysis. Surface collections from nearby prehistoric sites have been excluded. The worked
stone described below has the same general pattern 0£ distribu~ion as the Spanish colonial artifacts at the site, and most of this material is assumed to have been associated with the mission
occupation. Since closely dated lithic assemblages in the historic period are rare, more descriptive detail and measurements are included
below than would usually be demanded by such
material.

Chipped Stone
Gunfiints
A total of 47 flints for flintlock firearms was
found at the site. All of these are made from the
local brown and gray banded and mottled chert.
Most of these gunflints (especially Types 1 and
2) were probably made by Apache flint knappers-Hamilton ( 1960: 73-77) cites "-everal examples of Indians making gunflints long after
contact with Europeans-but Spanish soldiers
who had been on the frontier for a long time
may have become adept at making their own
flints out of local materials. Although European
gunflints occasionally occur in Spanish colonial
sites, none was found at Mission San Lorenzo.
As a group, these gunflints are rather large.
Both faces of some specimens are completely
covered with small thinning flake scars ( especially Type 1), but most of the flints have large
removal flake scars of the original flake showing
on one or both faces. Only one flint (Type 6) retains the bulb of percussion of the original flake
on one face. All of the specimens show signs of
some use, usually on more than one edge, but
none shows really heavy wear or battering. The
leading edges (which struck the frizzen) are
usually ragged rather than smooth and straight.
114

Type 1 (Figs. 62, G-I, & 63, A), 10 specimens.
-Ranging in shape from almost square to rectangular, these flints are bifacially flaked on all
four edges. They have distinct corners forming
an angle 0£ about 90° and st~aight or slightly
convex edges. The edges are usually thin and
sharp without beveling and most specimens are
completely flaked on both faces-the workmanship resembles that found on carefully flaked
projectile points.
Weight
D'.me~l';ians

(cm.):

Length

Width

Thickness

in grams

2.9
2.7
3.0
2.7
2.9
3.5
3.6
3.1
3.7

2.5
2.4
2.5
2.4
2.7
3.1
2.4
2.7
3.0

0.8
0.8
0.9
0.7
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.8

7.0
5.8
7.9
6.0
7.0
7.1
5.9
6.9
10.5

Type 2 (Figs. 62, D-F, and 63, B), 5 specimens.--These rectangular flints are unifacially
flaked on all four edges. They have distinct
angular corners and straight to slightly convex
edges which are steeply beveled from one face.
They were made from long, narrow, thin blades
and have one smooth flake scar on the flat ventral
face and two large parallel flake scars on the
beveled dorsal face. It is probable these specimens were made from the midsections of long
blades like those described below in the section
on flakes (as were the Type 1 scrapers).

n·meT;ions (CID.);

Length

3.7
3.4
3.5
3.4
2.6

Width

Th;ckne;s

2.8
2.7
2.6
2.2
1.8

0.8
0.9
0.8
1.1

0.7

Weight
in grams

9.5
11.7
9.1
8.2
4.1

Type 3 (Figs. 62, A-C, & 63, C), 9 specimens.
-Unifacially flaked on all four edges, the flints
described here range from almost square to
slightly rectangular in outline. The edges are

Fig. 62. Gunflints. A-C, Type 3; D-f, Type 2; G-1, Type 1;
J, Type S; K, Type 6; A-I, scale al left; J, K, scale at right.

A

B

D

E

G

0

F

H

4

cm.

0

4
115

straight to convex, all are steeply beveled from
one face, and the corners are usually distinctly
right angular. They are made from rather thick,
broad flakes. The ventral face is a single flake
scar with no trace of the removal bulb of percussion. The beveled dorsal face shows several
irregular flake scars.
\Vr!'.ght
D"mension~ (cm.):

Long th

3.3
3.2
2.8
3.1
3.2
2.3
3.4
3.6
4.5

Width

Thickness

3.1
3.0
2.8
2.8
3.2
2.3
3.1
3.2
4.1

0.9
0.7
1.0
1.0
1.2
0.6
0.8
1.5
1.2

2.8
2.6
3.2
3.1
3.5
3.7

"Width

Thickness

2.3
2.5
3.0
2.9
2.9
3.4

0.9
0.6
0.7
1.0
1.0
0.8

in grams

6.2
6.9
10.0
11.4
12.4

Type 5 (Fig. 62, J), 10 specimens.-The outline ranges from almost square to rectangular,
with corners from sharply angular to slightly
rounded; edges straight to convex. Each specimen
is bifacially and/or unifacially flaked on three
edges; fourth edge is left essentially unflaked.
The unworked edge is characterized by a single
smooth flake scar oriented parallel with the thin
axis of the flint. This flat edge, which probably
rested against the screw of the cock, is not the
striking platform of the original flake in any example. Rather, evidence of some battering shows
116

Length

2.3
2.9
2.8
2.5
3.1
3.4
2.8
3.6
3.4
4.0

11.5
11.0
10.0
11.7
15.0
3.2
11.3
17.5
26.3

\l\feight
Length

Dimensions (on.):

in bl'ams

Type 4 _(Fig. 63, D), 6 specimens.-These
flints are roughly square to rectangular in shape
with angular corners and straight to convex
edges. All four edges are worked on each specimen, but some are steeply beveled and others
are relatively thin. They are not regularly fashioned like the previously described types. Each
specimen has one or more steep~y beveled edges
on each face and one or more thinly chipped
edges on each face.

Dimensions (cm.):

on every specimen, indicating that this facet did
not result simply from the flint having been
snapped into two pieces. The unworked edge is
parallel to the long axis of the flint on five specimens and parallel with the short axis of the flint
on fiv2 specimens.

Width

Thickness

1.9
2.2
2.7
2.5
2.1
2.3
2.7
2.3
3.0
3.0

0.8
0.9
1.0
1.0
0.6
1.0
0.9
0.6
0.8
0.8

Weight
in grams

4.2
6.7
7.7
7.1

6.2
9.8
9.4
5.8
10.6
11.0

Type 6 (Fig. 62, K), 7 specimens.-Roughly
oval in outline with one straight edge; bifacially
flaked around the entire perimeter except for the
straight edge which is steeply beveled toward
one face.
·weight
Dimension<> (cm.);

Length

Width

ThickneJs

2.3
3.0
3.3
3.2
3.8
4.4
4.5

2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
3.0
3.0
3.5

0.9
0.6
0.6

0.9
1.1

1.4
1.5

in p;rarns

4.5
4.5
5.5
8.5
13.4
18.4
22.3

Bi facially ·ffoked tools

Arrow points (Fig. 65, E-I) .-Nine arrow
points and fragments were found at the site. Two
Scallorn and one Perdiz (Suhm, et al., 1954:
504-506) were found on the surface and probably represent prehistoric occupations in the
vicinity. Four triangular arrow points (Fig. 65,
E through H) resemble the Fresno type (Suhm,
et al., 1954: 498). Three of these specimens have
straight bases and the other has a concave base.
The blade edges are straight. The basal widths
in centimeters are: 1.2, 1.4, 1.6, and 1.7. The
only complete specimen is 2.9 cm. long. The
maximum thickness of the specimens varies
from 3 to 5 mm. Two of these points were found

I

D

'
3I

0

cm.

Fig. 63. Gunflints. A, Type 1; B, Type 2; C, Type 3; D, Type 4.

117

r
in the fill of Structure 7, one was recovered beneath the surface outside Structure 8, and one
was on the surface. The other two arrow point
specimens are distal tips only. One was found in
the fill of Structure 7 and the other on the surface.
fig. 64. Provenience of gunflints.
Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

Type 4

Type 5

Type 6

Structure 1
floor
outside
Structure 7
fill
floor
Structure 8
floor
Structure 11
fill
floor
Structure 13
floor
Structure 14
floor
1
Midden
5
4
Surface

1
3

1
4
3

5

1
3

2
5

10

5

9

6

10

7

Totals

1
1
1
1

1
1
1

1
1

Triangular arrow points similar to the four
described above have been frequently found in
historic Indian sites in association with European-made artifacts (Suhm, et al., 1954: 498;
Duffield and Jelks, 1961: 19, Harris, et al., 1965:
292) and a good sample has recently been discovered from the Indian quarters in Mission San
Juan Capistrano at San Antonio, Texas. It is
quite probable that this was the style of arrow
point being made and used by the Lipan Apaches
during their initial contact with the Spaniards.
Late Apache sites on the Southern Plains contain a preponderance of unnotched triangular
arrow points (Wedel, 1959: 594).
Dart JXJints, 13 specimens.-These artifacts
represent several different types of projectile
points which have been commonly found in prehistoric components dating to the Archaic stage.
All of these specimens probably originated at
nearby prehistoric burned-rock middens. Two of
the dart points are expanding stem specimens
(Frio type, Suhm, et al., 1954: 428) with the
distal tips missing. The fractured end of each
specimen has been well battered. It is likely that

118

these points, one from the floor of Structure 7
and one from the surface, were collected from
nearby prehistoric sites and used by the Spaniards as gunflints. Their present dimensions in
centimeters are: length 4.0 and 3.2, maximum
width 2.9 and 2.9, thickness 0.7 and 0.7. The
other eleven dart points are unaltered and all
were found on the surface.
Cutting tools, 40 specimens.-Ten of these implements are roughly circular, chipped around
the entire perimeter, and show thinning flake
scars on both faces. The edges are thin but jagged
and irregular. Maximum diameters and thicknesses (in centimeters) are: 3.8 and 1.0, 5.6 and
1.4, 6.5 and 1.4, 7.2 and 1.7, 7.3 and 1.3, 8.0 and
1.4, 8.7 and 1.7, 9.1and1.7. Seven fragmentary
specimens are ovoid in general outline with a
crude point at one end. They are well thinned on
both faces with sharp but irregular edges, and
range from about 2.5 to 6.0 cm. wide, 3.5 to 8.0
cm. long, and 0.6 to 1.0 cm. thick. The remaining 23 bifacially flaked cutting implements are
too fragmentary for meaningful description.
Blade knife, 1 specimen.-Found in the mission midden, this artifact is made from a long,
narrow blade (much like those used for making
blade scrapers) with a cortex-covered striking
platform forming the base on one end and a positive bulb of percussion on one face. All edges of
the flake have been carefully sharpened by bifacial flaking to form a triangular shaped knife.
Dimensions in centimeters: Maximum width
at striking platform, 2.4, length 5.5, maximum
thickness (at striking platform) 0.9.
Choppers, 7 specimens.-These large implements are irregular in shape and bifacially
flaked to form a sharp and smooth cutting edge
along one side. Six are made from chert river
cobbles which have the original cortex intact except along the cutting edge (Fig. 67, B), the
seventh is made from a large, multi-faceted core
(Fig. 67, A). The cutting edges on all show signs
of intensive use, and several show signs of battering on their unflaked edges where they apparently were used as hammerstones.
Discoidal, 1 specimen.-The function of this
limestone spall is unknown. It has been bifacially
flaked into a circular shape (Fig. 70, A) and

Fig. 65. Stone artifacts. A-D, long, narrow fla!<es, Type 1;
E-H, small triangular arrow points; I, Perdiz arrow point; J-M,
blade scrapers; E-1, upper scale; A-D and J-M, lower scale.

D
0

1,,,,1 ....

2
I

1

cm.

c
B
A

E

G

F

H

M

.

1
K

J

L
0

2

3

4

5

cm.
119

r
t
'
Dimensions (cm.) :

i\1aximum
Lenglh

8.2
9.7
8.7
10.4
10.0
13.0
13.6

Thickness

3.7
3.5
5.2
3.2
6.7
4.4
6.4

Length of
Cutting Edge

7.0
8.3
7.8
9.2
8.5
9.8
13.1

then pecked and ground smooth on both faces.
Found on the surface, its dimensions are: diameter 8 cm., thickness 1.4 cm.

Unifacially fiaked tools
Blade scrapers, 22 specimens.-These scrapers
(Fig. 65, J through M) are made from long,
narrow chert blades which were removed in succession from a prepared core. Each implement
has a smooth ventral surface composed of the rem.oval flake scar. The dorsal surface of each
scraper has two to four large flake scars which
show where other blades were removed from. the
core previously (Fig. 66, A through D). Fifteen
specimens are complete and have a portion of the
original striking platform intact, with an .adjacent positive bulb of percussion on the ventral
surface. One specimen has a cortex-covered
striking platform and the others all have freshly
prepared striking platforms composed of a single
facet. When the long axis of these scrapers is oriented vertically and they are viewed from one
edge, the striking platform remnant is inclined
from 12 to 18 degrees above horizontal with the
upper edge toward the dorsal surface and the
lower edge toward the bulb of percussion on the
ventral surface. In other words, all the flakes
were struck from the core at approximately the
same angle-102 to 108 degrees below the plane
of the striking platform. The entire perimeter of
each blade (except for the striking platform at
the base) is beveled on the dorsal face. On each
specimen the steepest beveling and most intensive use occurs at the end of the blade opposite
the striking platform and it is probable that resharpening along this end has reduced the length
of most specimens. Many unused blades from
which these scrapers were made were found and
are described below. It is likely that types 2 and
3 guni1ints were made from the midsections of
the same type of chert blades.
120

Length

Dimensions (cm.)
Length
Width of
MaxiMaxi- Width of Thickness
of
n1u1n
Striking
l11Ul11
Beveled at Beveled Slriking
End
Platform Platform
Widt'1 1hickness
End

4.4
5.5
5.1
6.3
5.0
5.7
6.4
7.6
7.8
9.9
4.3
4.7
5.0
5.0
3.9

2.8
3.2
3.9
4.4
3.3
4.4
4.9
4.6
4.4
4.5
3.4
3.7
3.6
4.0
3.0

1.0
0.9
0.9
1.6

2.4
2.7
3.1
4.1
2.4
4.0
4.3
3.7
3.6
4.0
3.2
3.6

0.5
0.9

1.2
1.2

2.9

1.1

3.2

2.4
4.6
3.9

0.8
0.9

2.2
4.2
3.5

1.3

1.2
1.6
1.6
1.3

1.7
1.3
1.3
1.3

1.1

0.9
3.4
3.3
3.9

1.1

0.6
1.2

3.1
3.1

1.1

1.6
1.8
1.0
1.2
1.3

1.0
0.8
1.2
0.6
0.9
0.9
0.4
0.8
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.5

1.1

1.2
1.2
2.2
2.8
1.9
2.8
2.6
2.4
1.8

0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1.2
0.7
1.4
1.2
1.2
1.3

1.6
1.0
1.5

1.0
0.7
0.7

1.1

0.6
0.5

1.0

Cortex scrapers, 5 specimens.-These implements are very similar to the blade scrapers
except that they are made from an initial flake
which is cortex-covered on the dorsal surface instead of having large flake scars from previously
removed flakes. Each has a smooth ventral surface composed of the removal of flake scar, a

Length

6.5
5.5
5.2
4.0

Dimensions (cm.)
Length
l\1axiMaxiWidth of Thickness
Width of
of
mum
Beveled at Beveled Striking
Striking
n1um
End
Platform Platform
Width Thickness
End

5.5
3.8
4.2
3.8
4.2

2.2
1.4
1.7
1.4
1.2

4.2
3.0
4.0
3.5
3.4

1.1

1.1

0.7
1.0
0.8
1.2

0.8
1.2
1.7

0.7
0.3
0.6
0.7

fragment of the original prepared striking platform, and a positive bulb of percussion on the

Fig. 66. Stone artifacts. A-D, blade scrapers.

A

c

0

I

I

I

2
I

3
I

4
I

cm

D

Length

Width

12.1
5.9
5.7
5.4
4.0
5.8
4.8
4.6
5.0
3.9
3.5
3.7
4.6
6.0
4.8
4.9
3.3

7.8
4.4
3.8
3.8
3.7
3.1
3.4
3.3
2.7
3.4
2.9
2.4
2.4
3.8
3.8
3.0
2.6

Dimensions (cm.)
Maximum Thickness

3.3
1.9
1.0
1.6
0.8
1.0
1.5
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.7
1.1

1.2
1.3
1.3

1.5
0.8

ventral surface near the striking platform. The
dorsal face of each specimen is covered with cortex of the original cobble-core except around the
edges, which are beveled by secondary flaking.
The steepest beveling occurs around the end of
the flake opposite the striking platform.
Flake scrapers, 28 specimens.-These implements are made from irregularly shaped flakes
of chert. Every specimen has a smooth ventral
surface composed of the removal scar of the original flake. The dorsal surfaces show no regular
flake pattern. Each scraper has a steeply beveled
scraping edge along from about 10 to 80 per cent
of the flake perimeter. Thirteen specimens have
a remnant of the striking platform intact and an
adjacent positive bulb of percussion on the ventral face. Three of the striking platforms have a
cortex coating and the other ten are freshly prepared and show only a single facet. Measurements of more complete specimens are shown
above.
Scraper fragments, 9 specimens.-The nine
fragments of scraper edges found probably are
from one of the scraper styles described above.
Each has a smooth ventral surface and a steeply
beveled edge on the dorsal face. Sizes range from
2 to 4 cm. in maximum length.
Gravers, 8 specimens.-All of these implements are formed on the edges of irregularly
122

Length ol
Striking Platform

Length of Scraping Edge

Width of
Striking Platform

2.8
1.5
1.0
2.8
1.9
4.0
1.6
1.9
1.9
0.8
1.0
1.9

80% of perimeter
80% of perimeter
80% of perimeter
3.0&2.3
2.4 & 1.0
2.7
2.2
1.8
4.2
80 % of perimeter
1.4
2.8
2.1
60 % of perimeter
1.6 & 3.0
2.4
2.4

1.1

1.9
0.6
0.6
0.9
0.8
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.7
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.4

shaped flakes. In five of the flakes, the striking
platform remnant and adjacent positive bulb of
percussion are intact, two are cortex-coated, and
three are freshly prepared, showing only one
facet. One graver has three cutting beaks and all
others have only one-all show some wear and
several are heavily worn. The graver beaks are
formed by two adjacent concavities chipped unifacially into the edge of the flake leaving the
sharp beak between the concavities.

Dimensions (cm.)
Maximum Maximmn
Beak
Striking Striking
Flake
Flake
Beak
Width
Beak
Platform Platform
Diameter Th-icknc:;s Length
at Base
Thickness Length
Width

5.7
4.6
3.8
3.4
3.8
5.3
2.5
3.3

1.3
1.3

1.0
0.7
1.1
1.1

0.7
0.6

0.7
0.5
0.4
0.7
1.0
0.8
0.4
0.5,0.4,
0.4

0.4
2.2
1.5
0.3
0.9
1.1
0.7
0.4
1.5
0.9
0.2
1.9
1.4
0.3
2.1
1.2
0.3
0.5
0.4
0.6,0.6, 0.4,0.3,0.3
0.7

1.0
0.4
0.8
0.8
0.9

Fig 67. Stone artifacts. A, B, large choppers; C, limestone
socket for door post.

0

2

3

4

5

6

7

I
I"

8

9

10

r
Spokeshaves, 12 specimens.-Twelve irregularly shaped flakes with small concave scraping
edges unifacially chipped into an edge were
found. Each has a smooth ventral surface composed of the original flake removal scar. The
concave scraping edges, steeply beveled on the
dorsal surface, show intensive use on all specimens. The concavities are all U-shaped in outline. One spokeshave, made on a blade scraper
described previously, has three concave scraping
edges, but all other specimens have only one concavity.

J\r1aximum
Flake
Diameter

Maximum
Flake
Thickness

7.3
5.8
6.2
5.4
5.2
5.0
4.1
4.4
3.2
3.0
3.5
5.0

1.8
2.1
1.5
1.3

0.9
0.8
1.1
0.7
0.5
0.8
0.7
1.3

Dimensions (cm.)
Depth of Width <>f
Concave
Concave
Scraping
Scraping
Edge
Edge

0.3
0.9
1.1
0.6
0.4
0.9
2.2
0.4
1.2
0.4
0.7
0.3
0.5
1.7
0.5
1.4
0.4
0.9
0.2
0.7
0.2
0.8
0.4,0.5, 1.0,0.7,
0.4
0.8

Length of
Striking
Plalfom1

Width of
Striking
Platform

1.9

1.0

0.7
0.5
1.1
0.9
0.7
0.5

1.5

0.7

1.1

2.6
1.7
1.3

Cores
Six chert cores, from which numerous flakes
had been removed, were found at the site (Fig.
69,A,D).
Number 1 is 9.3 cm. by 8.8 cm. by 6.3 cm. It
retains cortex of the original stream-rolled
cobble on about 40 per cent of the surface. Remainder of the surface is composed of two fairly
flat, prepared, striking platforms adjacent to each
other; several long, narrow flakes have been
struck from each of them. This core is in the
shape of a rough tetrahedron with two adjacent
cortex-covered facets and two adjacent prepared
striking platforms. It was found in the fill of
Structure 11.

Number 2 is 9.0 cm. by 7.4 cm. by 7.4 cm. The
original cortex is present on only one small
corner. The surface of the core is composed of
four roughly triangular, adjacent, prepared
striking platforms (Fig. 68, C), which are
124

roughly flat and composed of several large flake
scars which resulted from flake removal using
one or more of the adjacent striking platforms.
This core forms an excellent tetrahedron and
probably, along with other similar cores, served
as the source of the long, narrow blades which
were made and used so commonly at this site. It
was found in the fill of Structure 11.
Number 3 is 8.2 cm. by 8.1 cm. by 4.4 cm.
About 50 per cent of the surface is covered by
cortex of the stream-rolled cobble. A striking
platform was prepared on one end of the cobble
by three long, narrow, adjacent flake scars (Fig.
68, A). At least five long, narrow, adjacent
flakes were removed from one face of the cobble
using the prepared striking platform. Here is
another obvious source of the long blades and
blade tools used at this location.
Number 4 is 10.3 cm. by 8.8 cm. by 6.0 cm.,
and is a fine example of a conical shaped core
(Fig. 68, B). The prepared striking platform is
roughly oval in outline, roughly flat-surfaced,
and formed by several large, adjacent flake scars
(one is 9.6 cm. long and a maximum of 3.3 cm.
wide) . Many long flakes were struck from the
core around the entire perimeter of this platform
and the ends of the flake scars form the point of
this conical core. Although different in shape
from the cores described previously, this one
would have served as an excellent source of the
long, narrow blades which were found commonly at the site.
Number 5 is 9.2 cm. by 7.0 cm. by 4.6 cm.
About 50 per cent covered by cortex, it was a
river cobble which was broken in half by one
fracture. Using the fracture plane as a striking
platform, several flakes were removed along one
edge.
Number 6 is 7.1 cm. by 5.6 cm. by 3.1 cm.
This small core retains small patches of cortex in
several places. It is irregularly shaped, but scars
reveal that several long, narrow blades were removed from its surface in a variety of directions.

Flakes
Included in this category are all the unaltered
fragments of chert which were found at the site.
A large number of these fragments are complete
flakes with the removal flake scar forming one
face and a fragment of the original striking platform and adjacent positive bulb of percussion
preserved intact.

Type 1 (19 specimens) are long, narrow
blades with the removal flake scar forming the
ventral face and from one to five long, parallel
flake scars of previously removed blades forming
the dorsal surface (Fig. 65, A-D, and Fig. 69, B,
C, E). Only three were removed from a core
with a cortex-covered striking platform-the remainder have remnants of freshly prepared
striking platforms. Two broke away from the
core with a hinge fracture on the end opposite
the source of the removal blow, and the remainder broke straight out of the core and have
a feathered end opposite the striking platform
and bulb of percussion. In general outline the
flakes are roughly rectangular with the striking
platform forming one end. The maximum width
of the flakes occurs at the striking platform end
of three specimens, at the end opposite the striking platform of three specimens, and more toward the center of the remaining blades. Flakes
of this type were used for fashioning the blade
scrapers and blade knife described above and
probably served as a source of Type 2 and 3 gunflints. Measurements of more complete specimens
are shown below.

Length

9.4
7.1
8.6
8.8
8.0
6.7
8.7
6.8
7.7

7.5
5.4

Dimensions (cm. i
Length of
]\'foximum ~\'Iaximm;n
Striking
Width
Thickness
Platform

5.3
4.0
5.0
3.9
3.4
2.9
4.5
3.4
4.3
3.5
2.9
3.2
5.3

1.4
2.5
2.0
1.7
1.1

0.9
2.0
1.2
1.5
2.0
0.8
0.8
1.6

3.1
2.9
3.7
2.3
1.6

core using an unaltered cortex-covered face as
the striking platform. Ten specimens have additional cortex-covered areas on the dorsal surface.
Four flakes broke out of the core with a hinge
fracture opposite the striking platform, and the
other complete flakes all broke straight through
and have feathered or faceted end. Measurements of a sample, including largest and smallest,
are shown below.

Di.mens.ions (cm.)
lVTaximmn

Length

Width

Thickness

8.0
6.4

6.5
4.7
3.0
3.2
3.0
3.4
2.5
2.7
2.9
2.4
2.0
1.8
1.9

2.3
1.0
1.6

6.9

5.0
4.8
4.3
4.1
3.9
3.2
3.0
2.7
2.8
2.5
1.7

1.3

1.1

1.0
0.9
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.5
0.7
0.6
0.7
0.4

Length of
Striking
Platform

Width of
Striking
Platform

7.5
4.2
1.4
3.7
2.3
3.1
1.8
2.4
2.5
1.2

2.3
1.2
0.8

1.1

1.2
1.0
0.8

1.1

1.0
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.7
0.4
0.4
0.6

0.3
0.4

Number of
Width of Long Flake
Striking
Scars rm
Platform Dorsal Face

1.1

1.1

1.7
2.0
1.0
0.9
0.5

1.8
3.5
1.9
1.4
1.5
2.9

1.0
1.3
1.0
0.7
0.8
1.4

3
2
3
3
3
2
3
1
3

1
2
3
3

Type 2 (39 specimens) are irregularly shaped
flakes, showing much variation in size, but all
have a single flake scar forming the ventral surface and an intact striking platform remnant
and positive bulb of percussion. The one characteristic which all these specimens share is a
cortex-covered striking platform remnantshowing that every one was removed from the

Type 3 (95 specimens) flakes vary widely in
size and shape, but every specimen was struck
from a core using a freshly prepared striking
platform. Each flake has a portion of the prepared striking platform preserved on one edge
with an associated positive bulb of percussion on
the ventral surface. These flakes show no signs
of either alteration or use. Measurements of a
sample, including the smallest and largest, are
shown below.
Type 4 (54 specimens) flakes are irregularly
shaped and tend to be small and thin compared
to the previously described types. They apparently resulted from the thinning or resharpening
of bifacially flaked cutting tools. A small part of
the cutting edge of the tool is preserved as the
striking platform on the flake and the striking
platform is oriented less perpendicular to the
long axis of the flake. The use polish on the edge
of the original cutting tool can usually be seen
along the distal edge of the striking platform of
each flake. Measurements of a: sample, including
the largest and smallest, are shown below.
125

Dimensions (rm.)

Length

Width

8.8
7.3
6.6
5.9
4.5
5.2
3.8
4.1
4.0
3.5
3.8
3.0
3.0
2.5
1.8
1.5
4.9
4.3
4.3
4.0
3.1
2.6
2.0

6.7
4.6
5.1
5.0
3.7
3.9
2.9
3.1
3.1
2.0
2.9
2.1
2.8
1.9
1.6
1.5
3.0
3.6
3.4
2.8
2.8
1.9
1.9

Length

l\ilax.imurn
Thickness

Length ol
SLriking
Platfonn

2.9

1.4
1.8
3.6
2.7
2.6
2.1
1.0
2.8
1.8
1.5
1.6
1.5

1.1
1.3
1.1

1.9
1.7
0.6
1.1
1.1

0.6
1.0
0.5
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.4
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.5
0.8

1.1
1.1

1.0
0.7
2.8
1.6
2.3
2.0
1.5
1.5
1.0

Dimensions (cm.)
::\faximum
Width
Thickness

4.4
3.8
4.3
3.5
3.3
2.6
2.2
1.8
2.3
1.7
1.9

3.9
3.2
2.0
2.5
2.0
2.0
1.5
1.7
1.4
1.6
0.8

1.3
1.1

1.1

0.9

0.5
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.15

Number
of Large
Facets on
Width of Striking
Striking Platform
Platform Remnant

0.5
0.5
1.2
1.1

0.9
1.0
0.5
0.8
0.8
0.5
1.0
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.8
0.7
0.4
0.5

Length of
Slriking
Platform

1.2
0.5
0.3
0.5
0.6
0.3
0.7
0.4
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.2

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
3
2
2
3
2
2
3

Width of
Striking
Platform

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.05
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.05
0.05
0.05

Miscellaneous flakes (255 specimens) include
all of the remaining flakes from the site. Most
are fragmentary and do not retain the striking
platform and removal bulb of percussion. Many
of them are probably the broken distal ends of
previously described types of flakes. More than
50 per cent of these specimens show some evi126

dence of thermal fracturing and several dozen
specimens have been intensively burned. There
is a rather even size gradation from a maximum
of 6.5 cm. by 5.3 cm. by 1.4 cm. to a minimum
of 14mm. by8mm. by 1.5 mm.

Ground Stone
Pipe (Fig. 70, E) .-This tubular stone pipe is
made of an unidentified cryptocrystalline igneous rock which is dark gray in color. The
smooth exterior surface was shaped by pecking
and grinding. Large conical holes drilled in each
end of the pipe meet to form an interior aperture
about 2 mm. in diameter. The larger hole served
as the bowl of the pipe and shows signs of burning; the smaller hole received the wood or reed
pipe stem. The pipe's dimensions are: length, 4.5
cm.; diameter of stem end, 1.9 cm.; maximum
hole diameter at stem end, 1 cm.; diameter of
bowl end, 2.3 cm.; depth of bowl 2.5 cm.
The pipe, probably originating with the Lipan
Apaches, was found in the mission midden. Tubular ceramic and stone pipes are a commonly
occurring item in the late Apache sites on the
Southern Plains (Wedel, 1959: 594).
Grinding slabs, 8 specimens.-All of these artifacts are made from local limestone. The more
complete ones are thin and oval to roughly rectangular in shape. One fragmentary specimen is
ground on only one surface, but all others have
been well smoothed on both surfaces and around
the edges as well. On two slabs there are numerous fine, parallel striations in one face which
look like they could have been made by cutting
the surface with a sharp flint flake. These slabs
do not have distinct or deeply concave grinding
surfaces, but virtually the entire surface is well
smoothed from use. Measurements of complete
specimens are shown below.

Length

Dimensions (cm.)
Width

Thickness

20
19
20
16
16

16
14
14
12
12

4.8
4.4
4.2
3.0
3.8

Fig. 68. Diagrammatic sketches of cores. A, No. 3; 8, No. 4; C,
No. 2.

A

B

c
127

B

A

c

E

2

0

3

t

4

5
I

cm.

Metale (Fig. 70, D).-One small fragment of a
metate made of vesicular basalt was found on the
floor of Structure 11. It has a smoothly ground
upper surface, a beveled edge and flat undersurface, all of which were shaped by pecking.
This specimen, 3.8 cm. thick, is probably part of
a carefully shaped metate which was made in
Mexico and laboriously transported to the frontier. It probably was similar to modern basalt
metates used in Mexico which are curved rectangular slabs with beveled edges and supported
at an angle on three tapered legs.
Manos, 2 specimens.-Two fragments of manos
made of vesicular basalt were found. Both are
square in cross section with smoothly ground,
convex faces and rounded edges. One is an end
fragment and the other a median section (Fig.
70, B and C) of long, two-handed manos used
with the style of metate described above. A complete mano of this style is a long bar (about 30
cm.) tapered slightly toward each end. These
manos probably were brought to San Lorenzo
from some manufacturing center in Mexico.
The median fragment tapers from 5.1 cm. by 5.1
cm. at one end to 4.6 cm. by 4.6 cm. at the other
and is about 9.5 cm. long. The end piece is 8.5
cm. long and tapers from 4.4 cm. by 4.4 cm. to
2.8 cm. by 2.8 cm. One specimen was found in
the fill of Structure 14, and the other was on the
disturbed surface of the site.
Pitted slab (Fig. 67, C) .-This large slab of local
limestone has been carefully shaped into a circular disc about 26 cm. in diameter and 12 cm. in
thickness. Situated centrally in one face is a
smooth circular pit 13 cm. in diameter and 5 cm.
in maximum depth. It was found on the bulldozed surface of the site and may have served as
a socket to support the base of a pivot post on a
door or gate.
H ammerstones
Flint knappers probably used these well-worn
implements from the mission midden. Both are
made from small limestone cobbles.
Specimen 1 is oval and fairly thin. Both ends
show signs of extensive battering. The faces and
one long edge are highly polished from use; the
other long edge has been extensively battered

Fig. 69. Stone artifacts. A, D, large cores with prepared striking
platforms; B, C, and E, flakes, Type 1.

and pitted. Extending back onto the central part
of each face from the battered edge are hundreds
of very fine striations. It is quite possible that the
battered ends of this hammerstone resulted from
the removal of blades and flakes from chert cores
that the battered edge and adjacent scratched
surfaces were produced through the percussion
shaping of scraping and cutting tools. This tool
is 10.5 cm. long, 6 cm. wide, and 3 cm. thick.
Specimen 2 is thick and pear-shaped. It shows
an identical pattern of use as that described for
Specimen 1, but it was not used as intensively or
extensively. Both ends and one edge show slight
battering. One face is smoothly polished and has
many fine striations extending back from the
central part of the battered edge. This hammerstone is 11 cm. long, 6.2 cm. wide at large end,
3.8 cm. at small end, and 4.5 cm. thick, maximum.

Worked Shell
Fresh water mussels probably were brought to
the site from nearby pools in the Nueces River
where these mollusks still can be found. In addition to serving as a food source, the shells were
used as tools and ornaments. The mission midden contained numerous fragments of mussel
shells, but only a sample of these were _collected.
The mussels apparently were collected regardless of size, and shells 3 to 5 cm. in length occur
as commonly as do the larger ones 12 to 14 cm.
in length. One perforated pearl (Fig. 60, I) from
a mussel is described in the section on beads.

Shell scrapers
Nine of these 17 scrapers (only one a complete
valve) consist of heavily worn ventral edges of
large mussel shells (Fig. 37, A-C). The naturally sharp and convex ventral edge of a complete valve or large fragment apparently was
utilized for scraping with the shell held approximately perpendicular to the surface being
scraped. The scraping edges range from 2 to 8
cm. in length, but most appear to be fragmentary.
The other eight specimens are fragments of
large mussel valves which have a heavily worn
edge. On every specimen a thick, broken edge
oriented approximately perpendicular to the
ventral edge of the valve was used for scraping,
with the shell fragment held at an angle of about
129

A
B

t

E

3

4

I

I

5

I

cm.

6

7

8

9

10

I

I

I

I

I

Fig. 71. Provenience of worked stone.*
Flakes

Scrapers

Cutting
tools Chopper; Blade

f
~

~
~-

v

~·-

~r
t"\

i
f'

I

I
ro

f,i
i~

I

I'

II

l:

r
;'

I
I
I
I

I

I

I
I
I

I

i.

r

Structure 1
floor
Structure 2
outside
fill
floor
Structure 3
floor
Structure 4
floor
Structure 6
outside
Structure 7
fill
floor
Structure 8
fill
floor
Structure 10
fill
Structure 11
fill
floor
Structure 12
fill
floor
Stn1cture 13
fill
floor
Structure 14
fill
floor
Midden
Gate Area
W.Wall Area
S.Wall Area
Surface
Totals

Spoke-

FragCortex

Flake

ments G-rnvers shaves Cores

Type 1 Type 2 Type .1 Type 4 Misc_

Grin<ljng
slabs

3

2

1
4

8

2

1
4

1
1

·i
:~

1

1

3

2
2

6

4
9

16
16

1

1
3

2

1
9

7

1

1

4

1
3

1
1

1
10

4

5

1

6

1

2
2

4

5
2
31
1

4
1
18
1

8

2

1

1

2

1

1

1
1
10

1

1
2

7

2

11

6

3

4

4

3
2
13

5
2

1

13
9

3
1

86
1
2

1

20

2

11

3

13

3

5

4

3

11

G

19

40

7

22

5

28

9

8

12

6

19

39

95

57

2

54 255

8

* Provenience of stone items nut shuwu here appears in Lhe text.

45 degrees to the surface being scraped and the
concave surface of the shell forming the upper
and advancing surface of the scraper. The scraping edges range from 1.5 to 3.5 cm. in length.

Fig. 70. Ground stone artifacts. A, round flat disc; B, end of
circular cylindrical mano; C, end of rectangular mano; D, edge
of flat metate; E, tubular stone pipe. Specimens B-E are made
of igneous rock not found in the Nueces canyon.

Shell ornaments
Number 1 is a pendant made from the hinge
of a very large mussel shell. The cusp portion of
the hinge was cut out of the valve, carefully
smoothed into a rough teardrop shape, and
drilled through the small end for suspension.
This attractive ornament was found in the mission midden, but it is perfectly preserved and
has a bright, pearly lustre. The dimensions

131

(cm.) are: length 2.1, width at big end 1.2,
width at small end 0.6. The suspension hole was
drilled through the specimen from one side and
its uniform diameter is 1 mm.
Number 2 is a small, flat slab of shell which
has been carefully formed into an egg-shaped
outline. Both faces and all edges have been
ground very smooth. This object may have been
shaped to be inlaid in a wood or metal surface.
Its dimensions are: length 2.4 cm., width 1.6 cm.,
thickness 3 mm. This specimen was found on the
disturbed surface of the site.
Number 3 is a complete valve of a small mussel
whose interior and exterior surfaces have been
ground smooth. The exfoliated outer surface has
been entirely removed leaving only the smooth,
white, nacreous inner layer which has a brilliant
pearly lustre. Upon careful examination it can
be seen that the surfaces of the shell are covered
with fine random striations, which resulted from
the grinding and polishing process. This artifact,
its function unknown, was found in the mission
midden and is 3.4 cm. long and 2.5 cm. wide.

Miscellaneous shell
A sample of 33 fresh-water mussel shells was
collected from the site. Their provenience is
shown in Figure 73 .

from the bone which forms the dorsal fin of a
catfish. The distal end has been ground and polished to a sharp point and the curving shaft also
shows grinding striations in the surface. The joint
on the proximal end has been altered only
slightly. This specimen, found in the fill of Structure 7, would serve well as either a straight pin
or a needle. A similar catfish spine implement is
reported from a prehistoric site in West Texas by
Epstein ( 1963: 81). The dimensions: are 3.2
cm. long, 2 mm. wide at shaft and 5 mm. wide
at proximal end.

Antler fiaking tool
This tip from a deer antler shows evidence of
intensive use on the distal end. A long beveled
facet has been ground at the end to produce a
working edge shaped like the end of a screwdriver. This working end has been well smoothed
from use, and numerous scratches and grooves
radiate back onto the shaft from the end. The
proximal end of the implement has a fresh, irregular break. It was found on the bulldozed surface. This artifact may have been used in shaping stone tools by the pressure flaking technique.
Its dimensions are: 6 cm. long, 1.3 cm. maximum
diameter, 5 mm. long at working edge, and 2
mm. wide at working edge.

Deer ulna tools

Worked Bone
Bone pins
Number 1 is a heavily ground and polished
second or fourth metapodial of a deer. The distal
end has been ground to a long, sharp point and
many grinding striations are visible under magnification. The curved shaft has been well polished. The proximal joint forms a flattened circular head for the pin. This joint also has been
ground smooth on both sides and the notches between the joint and the shaft of the bone have
been deepened. In its present shape this specimen
would serve excellently as either a straight pin
or a sewing needle (thread could be tied in the
notches below the head). This pin is 4.2 cm. long,
the central part of the shaft is 4 mm. my 2 mm.,
and the head is 6 mm. in diameter. Identical pins
have been found recently with Coahuiltecan Indian burials and in the middens at Mission San
Juan Capistrano in San Antonio, Texas.
Number 2 is a similar pin but this one is made
132

Four deer ulnae show signs of use, probably
as awls or pressure flaking tools. The distal tips
of all four specimens have been broken (Fig. 72,
K, L), but around the broken edge on each there
are scratches and striations. The proximal ends
are unaltered. Because of their convenient size
and shape, deer ulnae have been commonly utilized by Indians and are frequently reported at
prehistoric sites in Central and West Texas. One
specimen was found on the floor of Structure 8,
one on the floor of Structure 14, one in the mission midden, and the other on the disturbed
surface of the site.

Cut bones
Many of the food bones which were found at
the site show butchering marks (Fig. 72), mostly
Fig. 72. Bone artifacts. A-H, deer and bison ribs cut into
lengths; /, J, midsections of long bones showing cuts on both
ends; K, l, worked deer ulnae; M-0, bones showing cut marks;
P, bone pin, full size.

I

g

•

ttl l

B

A

~

D

~-----

c
,,_.

i-.··--.".... _,.~·-·

I'; er:tr

F

.E
\_,

G
H

i\
..#

I

J

L

N

0

0

2

3

4

5

I

6
I

7

8

9

10

I

cm.

p

l

r
I
I

clean, deep, straight cuts which probably were
made with iron axes and knives. Long bones
commonly have one or more cut marks near the
joint ends. The cut marks run perpendicular to
the long axis of the bones and probably resulted
from cutting into joints to divide the carcass into
sections.
The most obvious and consistent butchering
evidence is furnished by the rib bones of the food
animals. After the two "sides" of ribs were separated from the vertebral column, they were cut
into long strips across or perpendicular to the long
axes of the bones~in other words, they prepared
the equivalent of our modern "short ribs" or
"spare ribs." Thirty-nine short rib sections have
been grooved and broken at each end. On all
except one specimen the cutting grooves are on
the interior or concave face of the ribs. Five specimens probably are cow or bison, eighteen deer,
and sixteen sheep or goat. The length of these cut
rib sections ranges from 3.5 cm. to 9.0 cm. with
the average being about 6.5 cm. in length. The
provenience of the cut rib bones is shown in
Figure 73.

134

Fig. 73. Provenience of worked bone and shell.

Bone

Shell
Onrn,·
Scrapers men ts

Structure 7
. fill
floor
Structure 8
floor
3
Structure 12
floor
3
Structure 13
fill
floor
Structure 14
fill
floor
Midden
5
W.WallArea 2
4
Surface
Totals

17

II

Misc.

Pins

3

1

Antler
tool

Ulna
tools

Cut
rib~

4

2
1

3

2
1
1

2

2
1
14
1

1

4

3

33

6

1
1

1
21

1

1

6

1

4

39

1

2

II

References Cited
PART I
ARADI, ZsoLT
1954 Shrines to Our Lady Around the World.
Farrar, Straus and Young, New York.
ARRICIVITA, JUAN DoMINGO
.
1792 Cr6nica serafica y a post6lica del Coleg10
de propaganda fide de la Santa Cruz de
Queretaro en la Nueva Espana, segunda
parte, F. de Zuniga y Ontiveros, Mexico.
BARBER EDWIN ATLEE
1960~ Tin Enameled Pottery. Art Primer, Ceramic Series No. 5. Pennsylvania Museum
and School of Industrial Art, Philadelphia.
1960b Salt Glazed Stoneware of Germany, Flanders, England, and United States, Pennsylvania Museum and School of Industrial
Art, Philadelphia.
1906c Salt Glazed Stoneware. Art Primer, Ceramics Series No. 6. Pennsylvania Museum and School of Industrial Art, Philadelphia.
1908 The Maiolica of Mexico. Art Handbook.
Pennsylvania Museum and School of Industrial Art, Philadelphia.
1911a Catalogue of Mexican Maiolica Belonging
to Mrs. Robert W. DeForest. Hispanic Society of America, New York.
1911b The Emily Johnston DeForest Collection
of Mexican Maiolica. New York.
1915a Mexican Maialica in the Collection of the
Hispanic Society of America, Publication
No. 94. Hispanic Society of America, New
York.
1915b Hispano-Moresque Pottery in the Collection of the Hispanic Society of America,
Publication No. 94. Hispanic Society of
America, New York.
1915c Spanish Porcelain and Terra Cottas in the
Collection of the Hispanic Society of
America. Hispanic Society of America,
New York.
BELL, RoBERT E., EDWARD B. JELKS, and W. 'W. NEwcoMB (editors)
1967 A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Final Report to the
National Science Foundation, Grant GS-

964. Southern Methodist University, Anthropology Research Center, Dallas.
BOLTON, HERBERT E.
1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century.
University of California Press, Berkeley.
CASANOWICZ, IMMANUEL M.
1909 The Collection of Rosaries in the United
States National Museum. Proceedings of
United States National Museum, Vol.
XXXVI, No. 167.
CA nvooD, Lours R.
1950 Hispanic Pottery as a Guide in Historical
Studies. For the Dean, edited by E. K. Reed
and D.S. King, pp. 77-97. Hohokam Museum Association, Tucson, Arizona and
Southwestern Monuments Association,
Santa Fe.
CERVANTES, ENRIQUE A.
1939 L~za Blanca y Azuleja de Puebla. Mexico,
D.F.
DEETZ, JAMES F.
1963 Archeological Investigations of La Purisima Mission. Archeological SurveyAnnual Report 1962-1963, pp. 161-191.
Department of Anthropology and Sociology, University of California, Los Angeles.
DrPEso, CHARLES C.
1951 The Babocomari Village Site on the Babocomari River, Southeastern Arizona. The
Amerind Foundation, Inc., No. 5. Dragoon,
Arizona.
1953 The Sobaipuri Indians of the Upper San
Pedro River Valley, Southeastern Arizona.
The Amerind Foundation, Inc., No. 6.
Dragoon, Arizona.
DUFFIELD, LATHEL F., and EDWARD B. JELKS
1961 The Pearson Site. The University of Texas
Department of Anthropology, Archeology
Series No. 4. The University of Texas,
Austin.
EPSTEIN, JEREMIAH F.
1963 Centipede and Damp Caves: Excavation in
Val Verde County, Texas, 1958. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
33, for 1962. Texas Archeological Society,
Austin.

135

FAIRBANKS, CHARLES H.
1962 Ceramics of New Echota, Georgia. Southeastern Archeological Conference Newsletter, Vol. 9, No. 1, June, 1962. Papers
presented at the First and Second Conferences on Historic Site Archeology.
GERALD, REX E.
1968 Spanish Presidios of the Late Eighteenth
Century in Northern New Spain. Research
Records, No. 7, Museum of New Mexico,
Santa Fe.
GILMORE, KATHLEEN KrnK
1969 The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site Identification. Report No. 16,
State Building Commission, Austin.
GOGGIN, JoHN M.
1960 The Spanish Olive Jar, An Introductory
Study. Department of Anthropology, Yale
University. Publication in Anthropology
No. 62.
1968 Spanish Majolica in the New World. Publications in Anthropology, No. 72, Yale
University, New Haven.
GUNNERSON, JAMES H.
1960 An Introduction to Plains Apache Archeology-The Dismal River Aspect. Anthropological Papers No. 58, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 173, pp. 131-260.
HAMILTON, T. M.
1960 Additional Comments on Gunflints. The
Missouri Archaeologist, Vol. 22, pp. 73-77.
HARRINGTON, M. R.
1922 Cherokee and Earlier Remains on Upper
Tennessee River. Museum of the American
Indian, Heye Foundation, Indian Notes
and Monographs, No. 24, New York.
HARRIS, R. K., INus M. HARRIS, JAY C. BLAINE, and
JERRYLEE BLAINE
1965 A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack Site, Lamar
County, Texas. Bulletin' of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 36, pp. 287-363.
Austin.
HARRIS, R. K., and lNus M. HARRIS
1967 Trade Beads, Projectile Points, and Knives.
A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by Robert
E. Bell, Edward B. Jelks, and W.W. Newcomb. Final Report to the National Science
Foundation, Grant GS-964.
JELKS, EDWARD B.
1958 Ceramics from Jamestown. Appendix A in
Archeological Excavations at Jamestown,
Virginia, by John L. Cotter. Archeological
Research Series No. 4, National Park Ser-

vice. United States Department of Interior,
Washington, D.C.
LARDNER, REVEREND DIONYSIUS
1832 A Treatise On The . . . Manufacture of
Porcelain and Glass. The Cabinet Cyclopaedia. Carey and Lea, Philadelphia.
MAERZ, A. and M. PAUL
1930 A Dictionary of color. McGraw Hill Book
Company, New York.
MANKOWITZ, WoLF, and REGINALD G. HAGGAR
1957 The Concise Encyclopedia of English Pottery and Porcelain. Hawthorn Books, Inc.,
New York.
MAXWELL, MOREAU S., and LEWIS H. BINFORD
1961 Excavations at Fort Michilimackinac,
Mackinac City, Michigan, 1959 Season.
Publications of the Museum, Michigan
State University Cultural Series, Vol. 1,
No. 1.
McCLINToN, KATHARINE MoRRISON
1951 Antique Collecting for Everyone. Bonanza
Books, New York.
MoNTGOMERY, Ross G., W. SMITH, and J. 0. BREW
1949 Franciscan Awatovi. Peabody Museum
Paper, Vol. 36, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge.
MouNGER, MARIA A.
1959 Mission Espiritu Santo of Coastal Texas:
An Example of Historic Site Archeology.
Master's Thesis, The University of Texas,
Austin.
NoRTON, F. H.
1956 Ceramics for the Artist Potter. AddisonWesley Publishing Company.
OLDS, DORRIS L.
1962 History and Archaeology of Fort Saint
Marks in Apalachee .. Master's Thesis,
Florida State University.
ORCHARD, WILLIAM C.
1929 Beads and Beadwork of the American In~
dians. Museum of the American Indian,
Heye Foundation, Vol. II.
PLENDERLEITII, H. J.
1962 The Conservation of Antiquities and
Works of Art. Oxford University Press,
London.
PLOWDEN, WILLIAM w., JR.
1958 Spanish and Mexican Majolica Found in
New Mexico. El Palacio, Vol. 65, No. 6,
Santa Fe.
PRATT, PETER P.
1961 Oneida Iroquois Glass Trade Bead Sequence 1585-1745. The Fort Stanwix Museum, Rome, New York.

f

RAY, CYRUS N., and EDWARD B. JELKS
1964 The W. H. Watson Site: A Historic Indian
Burial in Fisher County, Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol.
35, pp. 127-142.
SAUZAY, A.
1871 Wonders of Glass Making in All Ages.
Charles Scribner and Company. New York.
SCHUETZ, MARDITH
1969 The History and Archeology of Mission
San Juan Capistrano, San Antonio, Texas
(Vol. II). Description of the Artifacts and
Ethnohistory of the Coahuiltecan Indians.
Report No. 11, State Building Commission,
Austin.
SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN SUPPLEMENT
1900 May: 20400
SINGER, CHARLES, E. J. HoLMYARD, A. R. HALL, and
TREVOR J. WILLIAMS (editors)
1958 A History of Technology. Vol. IV. The Industrial Revolution. Oxford University
Press.
SMITH, G. HUBERT
1953 Trade Beads from Fort Berthold, North
Dakota. Central Texas Archeologist, December, 1953, No. 6, pp. 41-55, Waco.
1960 Fort Pierre II, A Historic Trading Post in
the Oahe Dam Area, South Dakota. Bureau
of American Ethnology, Bulletin 176,
Washington.
SMITH, HALE G.
1965 Archaeological Excavations at Santa Rosa
Pensacola. Notes in Anthropology, Vol. 10,
Florida State University, Tallahassee.
SNOW, DAVID H.
1965 The Chronological Position of Mexican
Majolica in the Southwest. El Palacio, pp.
25-35. Museum of New Mexico, Vol. 72,
No. 1, Spring, 1965, Santa Fe.
SOUTH, STANLEY
1962 The Ceramic Types of Brunswick Town,
North Carolina. Southeastern Archeological Conference Newsletter, Vol. 9, No. 1,
June, 1962. Papers presented at the First
and Second Conference on Historic Sites
Archeology.
SuHM, DEE ANN, ALEX D. KRIEGER, and EDWARD B.
JELKS
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25, Austin.
TANNER, CLARA LEE

1950

Coral Among Southwestern Indians. For

'

the Dean, edited by E. K. Reed and D. S.
King, pp. 117-132. Hohokam Museum Association, Tucson, Arizona, and Southwestern Monuments Association, Santa Fe.
TOULOUSE, J. H., JR.
1949 The Mission of San Gregorio de Abo. The
University of New Mexico Press, Monographs of the School of American Research, Albuquerque.
TUNNELL, CURTIS D.
1966 A Description of Enameled Earthenware
From and Archeological Excavation at
Mission San Antonio de Valero (The
Alamo). Report No. 2, State Building Comsion, Austin.
TUNNELL, CURTIS D., and J. R1cHARD AMBLER
1967 Archeological Excavations at Presidio San
Agustin de Ahumada. Report No. 6, State
Building Commission, Austin.
WATKINS, C. MALCOLM
1960 Appendix 2, Glazed Earthenware and
Glass from Kipp's Post. River Basin Surveys Papers, No. 20, Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 17 6, United States Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

w ATT, FRANK H.
1937

Descriptive Analysis of Glass Indian Trade
Beads Found in Central Texas. Central
Texas Archeologist, No. 3, pp. 61-67,
Waco.

WATT, FRANK H., and W. P. MERONEY
1937 Glass Indian Trade Beads in Central
Texas. Central Texas Archeologist, No. 3,
pp. 52-59, Waco.
WEBB, WALTER PRESCOTT (editor)
1952 Handbook of Texas. Texas State Historical
Association, 2 vols., Austin.
WEBSTER'S NEW INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY
1951 Second edition, unabridged.
WEDEL, WALDO R.
1959 An Introduction to Kansas Archeology.
Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin 174. Washington,
D.C.
WEDGEWOOD, JosIAH & SoNs, LTD.
1939 Catalogue of Bodies, Glazes, and Shapes
Current for 1940-1950. New York, 1953.
WooDWARD, ARTHUR
1947 Notes on Coral in the Southwest. The Masterkey, Vol. XXI, No. 1, pp. 25-26, Southwest Musemn, Los Angeles.

137

This page intentionally left blank.

I
I
i

PART II

THE ETHNOHISTORICAL INVESTIGATION
W.W. NEWCOMB, JR.

1;.,,

The Historic Setting
Established in the wilderness of the upper
Nueces River Valley, lacking official sanction,
short on funds, poorly defended, and beset by
innumerable other problems, the Franciscan
Mission of San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz was illstarred from its founding in 1762. Even during
its brief existence the mission played a minor
role in the efforts of New Spain to maintain her
northern borderlands, and her missionaries
failed in their attempt to convert the Lipan
Apaches to Christianity. No wonder the mission
is poorly remembered and few have reason to
note its story. Yet the tale of obscure, unsuccessful, short-lived San Lorenzo is one well worth
telling, for it encompasses a critical and portentous period in Spanish-American history and it
reveals much about the Lipan Apaches and other
native peoples, as well as the Spaniards of eighteenth century Texas.
During the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the Spanish had advanced relentlessly
northward up the Mexican Plateau as mines
were opened and as ranches and farms were established. This was a bloody, ruthless conquest;
if the native peoples could not be enslaved, they
were exterminated. But the farther the Spaniards
advanced, the more difficult progres~ became. By
the beginning of the seventeenth century the
Spaniards realized that it was going to be extremely difficult, perhaps impossible to control
and settle the northern regions of their colonial
empire by military might alone. As a result, a
system of conquest grew up which was an amalgam of bribery, the threat of force as exercised
by strategically located presidios, and the establishment of missions in which to settle the natives. Bribery took the form of supplying food
and goods and offering protection against
enemies, if the Indians would agree to settle in
"reductions." Such bribes were effective so long
as the local Indians were impoverished and weak,
but ineffective when the natives were well fed
and military strong. Military force had been
the stock-in-trade of the Spaniards, and in the

north the threat of force was made permanent
by the construction of presidios. From such
strong points garrisons could supposedly protect
nearby missions and conduct campaigns. During
the sixteenth century, chaplains had accompanied many expeditions, but they ordinarily
served the Spaniards, making no serious attempts
to convert Indians (Forbes, 1960: 39-40). But
early in the following century the Franciscans
began to build missions and in 1683 the Franciscan order established the Colegio de la Santa
Cruz de Queretaro to train missionaries. Two
other mission colleges, Nuestra Senora de Guadalupe de Zacatecas and San Fernando de Mexico,
subsequently were opened. Priests from all three
served in Texas missions, but only those from
Queretaro served at San Lorenzo on the Nueces
(Castaneda, 1938: 18-21) .
The purpose of the missions was much broader
than that of merely converting the Indians to
Catholicism (Bolton, 1915: 10-13; 1918). Itwas,
in fact, a broad-gauged attempt to destroy almost
every facet of native culture and replace it with
the "civilization" of the Spaniards. The Indians
first were to be gathered together in a mission
or village where they would live permanently.
Once settled, the natives were to be taught the
agricultural arts and many skills, such as housebuilding. They were to learn Spanish and abandon their native tongue, adopt European dress,
and finally, become Catholics. Thus, the missions
were extremely ambitious institutions, aiming
for almost complete assimilation of the Indians.
As Forbes (1960: 39) expressed it, "after a period of such 'brain washing,' they were expected
to emerge as useful subjects of the King of Spain,
although, of course, still Indians, and still inferior to Spaniards." This system of bribery, presidios, and missions was used until the end of
Spanish colonial days and was very much a part
of the Spanish attempt to pacify and settle the
Apaches of Central Texas during the second half
of the eighteenth century.
Most of the northern Mexican Indians and

'

I
\

CUARTELEJO

'

- - --- -----Cimarron R.

.J,

l

\

Legend

Ii

Mission

A

Presidio, Fort

X I ndion

village or

camp

Mop I.
Texas and the

Southern

Plains

£orly 18th Century
o

20 50

10 C mileli

200

Fig. 75.-Texas and the Southern Plains, early 18th century.

particularly those in northeastern Mexico, were
nomadic or semi-nomadic, following a hunting
and gathering existence in a harsh and rather
desolate land. These Coahuiltecan peoples could
hardly have been numerous to begin with, and

though militant and recalcitrant when first encountered, by the eighteenth century most had
been decimated and they posed no serious threat
to the conquerors (Newcomb, 1961: Chapter 2;
Weddle, 1968: 3-28). The frontier could move

beyond them, and in the last years of the seventeenth century Spain began to push the borders
of her colonial empire northward into what is
now Texas. Spaniards and Spanish expeditions
had, of course, crossed parts of Texas before,
from De Vaca and Coronado to De Soto and
Oiiate. In the early years of the century the
Spaniards also had made permanent settlements
in New Mexico, but they had not become familiar with the forbidding plains to their east. Vast
reaches of Texas were unexplored and most of its
native populace was all but unknown.
The immediate reason for renewed Spanish
interest in Texas was the unexpected establishment of a French fort by La Salle on the Texas
coast in 1686. Although the expedition of Alonso
de Leon in 1689 found La Salle's Fort St. Louis
a ruin, and the Frenchmen dead or captured by
Indians, the import of their attempt was clear.
The viceroy ordered the occupation of East
Texas, and missions were established on the
Neches River. The first, San Francisco de los
Tejas, was founded in the spring of 1690 near
the present town of W eches, and the second,
Santisimo Nombre de Maria, was established
nearby soon afterward. But the initially friendly
Tejas Indians, who were village-dwelling Caddos
of the Hasinai Confederacy, were not as docile or
as amenable to Catholicism as had been supposed, the French threat was not as great or at
least not as imminent as the Spanish supposed,
the nearest Spanish settlement was about 400
miles away, and Spain needed to husband her
hard-pressed resources. The missions were abandoned in 1693 (Newcomb, 1961: 286-289; Weddle, 1968: 14 ff).
But the French were establishing colonies in
Louisiana, exploring the lower Mississippi River,
and soon were acquainted with the Wichitas and
other distant tribes far up the Red and other
rivers. The Pawnees, for example, were known
to the French by 1678, and traders were among
the Osage and Missouri tribes by 1694 (Thomas,
1935: 13). Before the century was over Apaches
had brought word to the Spaniards in New Mexico of strange white men. In 1706 Juan de Ulibarri found incontrovertible evidence while at
El Cuartelejo in western Kansas that the French
were assisting and apparently arming the Wichita tribes in their struggles with the Plains
Apaches (Thomas, 1935: 67-68; Gunnerson,
1968: 168). In 1714 Louis Juchereau de Saint

Denis, a French trader who had established a
settlement on the Red River at Natchitoches,
Louisiana, appeared at San Juan Bautista on the
Rio Grande at the present Villa de Guerrero,
Coahuila (Fig. 76). He had come to arrange a
trade agreement with the Spaniards (Phares,
1952: 49-64; Weddle, 1968: 99-106). The viceroy was horrified by the man and his proposal,
and as a consequence the Spanish reoccupied
East Texas in an effort to erect a barrier to halt
French penetration. Mission San Francisco de
los Neches was built several miles from the abandoned San Francisco de los Tejas. Missions Nuestra Senora de los Delores, Nuestra Senora de la
Purisima Concepcion, and San Jose de los Nazonis were established near San Augustine, and
San Miguel de los Linares was placed on the east
side of the Sabine, eight leagues from the French
settlement of Natchitoches. Presidio de los Adaes
was constructed in 1721-22 near Mission San
Miguel de Linares in the vicinity of present
Robeline, Louisiana, serving as the Spanish capitol of Texas until 1772 when it was moved to
San Antonio.
Although vigorously pushed, the East Texas
missions were not successful and by 1731 three
of them had been removed to the infant San Antonio, where the presidio of San Antonio de
Bejar and the Mission San Antonio de Valero
had been founded in 1718. In the west, Spain had
also redoubled her efforts to secure and expand
her northern borders. The Pueblo peoples of New
Mexico had successfully revolted in 1680 and
for twelve years were free of their foreign oppressors. But by the opening of the new century
Spain was again in control of the Pueblo country.
As a portent of things to come, however, when
Colonel Pedro de Villasur was sent from Santa
Fe into the plains in the summer of 1720 with
forty-two soldiers, three settlers, sixty Indians,
and a priest to investigate reports of French activity, his force was all but wiped out by hostile
Pawnees. (Thomas, 1935: 36-39).
In 1719, after establishing a post among the
Caddo Indians in northeastern Texas (Fig. 75),
the French Benard de la Harpe explored to
the northwest well into what is now Oklahoma,
reaching a thriving village complex of Wichita
Indians (Margry, 1888: 241-306; also see Lewis,
1924; Smith, 1958-59; Newcomb and Field,
1967: 246 ff.). La Harpe, who had been instructed to explore the Red River and to establish
143

commerce with the Spaniards in Texas and New
Mexico, dispatched M. Du Rivage to accomplish
this mission. Du Rivage did not meet Spaniards
and ascended the Red River only a little over a
hundred miles (apparently to Lamar County,
Texas; see Harris, et al., 1965), but he carried
much merchandise for the Indians and made
friendly contact with a number of tribes. He
heard, incidentally, that Canecys (the Caddoan
term for Plains Apaches) lived upstream in the
vicinity of what later became Spanish Fort. Also
in 1719 Claude Du Tisne, coming from the Illinois country, visited two Wichita villages, and
by 1723 :Etienne Veniard de Bourgmond, former
commandant at Detroit and an experienced
trader, had built a post to protect French fur
traders on the Missouri River well above the
mouth of the Kansas. In the fall of 1724 in central Kansas he arranged a brief truce between
the Kansa Indians and a band of Comanches
(Wedel, 1959: 28-34).
From these beginnings, the way to the Spanish
settlements in New Mexico through Comanche
territory was opened up by Pierre Mallet in
1739. Mallet (or Pedro Malec as the Spanish had
it), a 35 year-old trader and native of Montreal,
traveled with a party of eight men including his
brother, from a point on the Platte River near the
mouth of the Loup, on a southwesterly course
across Nebraska and Kansas, to Santa Fe (Margry, 1888: 455-462). The Mallet party was well
treated in the Spanish settlements and remained
eight or nine months. From Pecos Pueblo on his
return journey, Mallet headed east, struck what
was probably the Canadian, and followed its
course until his horses were worn out. Part of his
company turned northeast for the Illinois country but Mallet and three companions constructed
canoes and floated down the river to the Arkansas, then to the Mississippi, and continued on
to. New Orleans. The news of Mallet's exploits
encouraged the French in Louisiana to pursue
the possibility of opening up trade with the Spanish in New Mexico. Andre Fabry de la Bruyere
was soon sent by the governor of Louisiana to
follow up the explorations of the Mallet brothers,
but the expedition was abandoned because of
dissension among its members and other difficulties (Margry, 1888: 472-492).
It was not until after 1747, following the conclusion of an alliance between the Wichitas and
Comanches, that Frenchmen again found their
144

way across the plains to Santa Fe. Those men
who made the journey-Luis Febre, Pedro Sartren, and Joseph Miguel in 1749; Felipe de Sandoval, a Spaniard, in 1749-1750; and Juan Chapuis and Luis Foissy in 1752 (Hackett, 1941:
298-324; Thomas, 1940: 82-89), and perhaps
others, did so on their own initiative and in their
own interest. The Spanish, frightened at the
French activity, confiscated the traders' goods
and did not allow these men to return to French
territory. It long has been held that some unknown Frenchman persuaded the Wichitas and
Comanche'> to make peace, thus breaching the
Comanche barrier to Santa Fe. But this view is
almost certainly in error (Newcomb, n.d., and
Newcomb and Field, 1967: 256-257).
The nature of the French advance into the
plains from the east and northeast was, then,
quite different from that of the Spanish. The
French came primarily as traders, as employees
of commercial enterprises or as private entrepreneurs. Their motives were personal gain, not
necessarily the advancement of country or conversion of the Indian. Instead of subjugation of
native peoples, they were interested in lucrative
trading relationships; instead of establishing
farms, ranches, or missions, at most they built
trading posts. The French trader supplied what
the Indian wanted-guns and ammunition particularly-not what the government dictatedand in return he obtained hides, tallow, skins,
and slaves. The French trader worked within
the framework of existing intertribal relationships, manipulating them to his own advantage
when he could; the Spaniard imposed his own
system, and when this was impossible he almost
invariably acquired a new set of enemies. The
French strengthened native peoples militarily
by supplying them with firearms, and commercially when, as with the Wichitas, they happened
to become middlemen in trade with more remote
tribes. The French did not need to maintain large
armies to protect themselves, though they were
not immune to attack from those with whom
they had not established friendly relations. The
French trader was apt to acquire an Indian wife
and settle in an Indian village; the Spanish soldier, in contrast, brought along his wife and children to live with him in a presidia. The Indian
might reside with priest or other Spaniard, but
only as neophyte, servant, or slave, not as an intimate member of the family.

In the vast buffer zone between the Spaniards
on the south and west and the French on the
north and east were hundreds of tribes and bands
of Indians (Fig. 75). Some were known, many
unknown, some hostile, and a few friendly to the
European powers. Plains Apaches were adjacent
to much of the Spanish frontier in the eighteenth
century, extending eastward from ·the Pueblos
of Spanish-held New Mexico through the Llano
Estacado, south into the Trans-Pecos region, and
southeastward through the Edwards Plateau and
beyond. Apaches are speakers of Athapaskan (or
Athapascan), a far-flung language family of
western North America. Geographically, there
were three discontinuous Athapaskan groups, a
northern one distributed throughout much of
Canada west of Hudson Bay from the southern
provinces into Alaska, a Pacific coastal group
scattered from northern California into British
Columbia, and the Southern Athapaskans, referred to here as Apaches. The modern Apaches
are split into a western and an eastern division on
the basis of dialectic distinctions (Hoijer, 1938).
The western tribes are the Navaho, San Carlos,
Chiricahua, and Mescalero, the eastern the Kiowa Apache, Lipan, and Jicarilla. In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, ancestors of
the modern eastern tribes, plus the Mescaleros,
constituted a geographical and broadly similar
cultural entity and they will be referred to here
as Plains Apaches.
The Spaniards were the first Europeans to encounter and describe Apaches, Coronado's expedition meeting bison-hunting Querechos and
Teyas in 1541. Subsequent Spanish expeditions
met or learned of Apaches whenever they entered the American Southwest or ventured onto
the southern plains. But the Apaches were scattered over a tremendous extent of territory, much
of which Spaniards never visited, and were so
little organized in a tribal or political sense that
the Spaniards were unable to obtain an accurate
idea of their divisions, numbers, or diverse cultural characteristics until the eighteenth century.
Various explorers gave different designations to
the same or similar peoples, and by the eighteenth century many Apaches were being forced
out of their original homelands, some joining
other Apache groups, so that all in all, it is difficult (and perhaps foolhardy) to attempt to
trace the ancestry of modern Apache tribes.
After cowing and looting the Pueblos, Coro-

nado turned his army eastward in search of the
riches of Quivira. For more than two months the
expedition wandered over the plains, from eastern New Mexico, the Texas Panhandle, and Oklahoma, to Kansas, the exact route being a matter of conjecture. About two weeks after leaving
Pecos Pueblo (the time depending on which
source is used), on the Llano Estacado of eastern
New Mexico or the Texas Panhandle, the expedition encountered bison-hunting Indians. Coronado said of them (Winship, 1896: 580-581):
... I came to a settlement of Indians who are called
Querechos, who travel around with these cows, who
do not plant, and who eat the raw flesh and drink
the blood of the cows they kill, and they tan the
skins of the cows, with which all the people of the
country dress themselves here. They have little field
tents made of the hides of the cows, tanned and
greased, very well made, in which they live while
they travel around near the cows, moving with
these. They have dogs which they load, which carry
their tents and poles and belongings. These people
have the best figures of any that I have seen in the
Indies.

Thus the Spaniards and Apaches met, the
Spaniards intrigued by their first glimpse of life
as it was lived on the plains, the Indians impressed perhaps by the horses, equipment, and
size of the Spanish army. So also begins the multiplicity of names for Apaches. In this case, the
name is derived from one of the Pueblo languages, for Jaramillo states (Winship, 1896:
588) : "We found Indians among these first cows,
who were, on this account, called Querechos by
those in the flat-roof houses [i.e., Pueblos]."
Hodge (1910: 339) has also pointed out that
Querecho is "the Pecos generic T agukeresh for
the Apache or the specific Keretsa for the Navaho
tribe."
After leaving the Querechos the army traveled
on for several days, Jaramillo alone saying that
he believed it to be "twenty days or more" (Winship, 1896: 588), then encountered other Indians
hunting bison. These people were called Teyas
by the Spaniards, and though culturally very
similar to the Querechos, they were their enemies
(Winship, 1896: 578, 581). Castaneda said that:
(Winship, 1896: 507)
The country was well inhabited, and they had
plenty of kidney beans and prunes like those of
Castile, and tall vineyards. These village settlements extended for three days. This was called

145

r
I

'

Cona. Some Teyas, as these people are called, went
with the army from here and traveled as far as the
end of the other settlements with their packs of dogs
and women and children ... A Teya was seen to
shoot a bull [bison] right through both shoulders
with an arrow, which would be a good shot for a
musket. These people are very intelligent; the
women are well made and modest. They cover their
whole body. They wear shoes and buskins [probably high moccasins] made of tanned skin. The
women wear cloaks over their small under petticoats, with sleeves gathered up to the shoulders, all
of skin, and some wore something like little sanbenitos [tunics J with a fringe, which reached halfway down the thigh over the petticoat.
Coronado (Winship, 1896: 581) added that the
Teyas:
... have their bodies and faces all painted, are a
large people like the others [ Querechos J, of a very
good build; they eat the raw flesh just like the Querechos, and live and travel round with the cows in
the same way as these.
Harrington ( 194-0: 512) has discovered that the
word Teya still exists in the Pecos-Jemez dialect
and means eastern Apache. The probability
would seem to favor the Teyas being eastern
Apaches, but some authorities demur from this
viewpoint (Schroeder, 1959a: 34-36).
Although several Spanish expeditions skirted
or crossed Plains Apache lands in the years following the Coronado expedition, it was not until
1598 that these plains people again came into
relatively intimate contact with the Spaniards. In
the fall of that year, Vicente de Zaldivar was sent
by Juan de Oiiate, then in the process of colonizing New Mexico, to explore the plains east of
Pecos Pueblo. Near modern Las Vegas, New
Mexico, Zaldivar encountered Indians he termed
Vaqueros, and crossing over to the Canadian
River he continued to find Vaqueros (Bolton,
1916: 224-230). Before Oiiate personally had
been among these plains people, but after he had
received the report of Zaldivar's expedition, he
equated the Vaqueros with the Querechos (Hammond and Rey, 1953, I: 484). Oiiate apparently
had knowledge of what these Apaches were called
by the members of Coronado's expedition, but
preferred the Spanish designation for them to the
older Pueblo term. Zaldivar and Oiiate, though
apparently knowing the Plains Apaches better
than had the members of the Coronado expedition, failed to differentiate between subdivisions,

so that the generic "Vaquero" probably includes
both the Querechos and Teyas (Gunnerson,
1956: 353-354). In June, 1601, Oiiate himself set
out to explore the plains and visit Quivira. Near
the Canadian River, some eight days after crossing the Pecos " ... some Indians of the nation
called Apachi came out with signs of peace,"
made by extending the palm of the right hand
toward the sun (Bolton, 1916: 252). This seems
to have been the first recorded instance of the
usage of Apache. The word is apparently derived
from a Zuiii word, "Apachu," meaning "enemies" (Hodge, 1907: 63; Hodge, Hammond
and Rey, 1945: 302; but also see Schroeder,
1959a: i).
There were few other direct contacts between
the Spaniards and Plains Apaches in the early
decades of the seventeenth century. Apaches continued to come to the Pueblos in winter to trade,
and in this indirect way improved their knowledge of the European strangers. Soon, too, Pueblo
refugees were seeking safety among Apaches,
bearing witness to Spanish oppression. Of great
ultimate importance, apostate Pueblo Indians
brought with them a knowledge of horses and undoubtedly often escaped with these wonderful
animals, so that the Apaches became familiar
with them and probably began to acquire some.
The internecine Spanish conflict between the
Franciscans and the military, basically over
which force was to benefit from the exploitation
of the Pueblo Indians, dissipated Spanish
strength, and at the same time the Pueblos, with
a growing knowledge of Spanish motives and
capabilities, were slowly mustering the strength
and determination necessary to oust their conquerers. During these early years of the century
the Plains Apaches were, for the most part, at
peace with the Spaniards. It was not until
friendly Vaquero Apaches were attacked and the
survivors carried away as slaves in 1627 or 1628
that the usual pattern of later Spanish-Apache
relations was established, but not until after another slave raid in 1638 did many of the Plains
Apaches become chronically hostile to Spaniards.
The increasing difficulties the Spaniards were
experiencing in New Mexico, the growing belligerency of the Plains Apaches, and the dearth
of expeditions into the plains meant that Spanish
knowledge of the Apaches on the southern plains
was hardly increased during the middle decades
of the seventeenth century. In 1675 an expedi1

tion led by Fernando del Bosque and Fray Juan
Larios penetrated what later became the heart of
Lipan Apache country. Crossing the Rio Grande
in the vicinity of modern Eagle Pass, this expedition rode northward to the neighborhood of modern Edwards County, not many miles west of
where the Mission of San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz was to be established. Many different
groups of Indians were encountered, but they
were of Coahuiltecan, Tonkawan, or other affinity. None was Apache (Bolton, 1916: 288 ff.).
The Pueblo Revolt in 1680 had repercussions
among nearby Indian peoples, one being the
hastened spread of horses to them. It can hardly
be coincidental that Plains Apaches appeared
south and east of their usual range soon after
1680, raiding Spanish settlements and terrorizing already weakened native tribes. In 1684, Captain Juan Dominguez de Mendoza was sent from
El Paso eastward into Texas in response to pleas
from Jumanos and other tribes requesting aid
against marauding Apaches. The reality of the
Apache menace was brought home to the expedition by Apache attacks on it. Near modern San
Angelo, Mendoza reported that Apaches "from
the north" had up to that time "attacked us three
times by night and by day, and the last night they
wounded a soldier, inflicting upon him three arrow wounds, besides other injuries which the
Apaches have caused" (Bolton, 1916: 337-338).
Mendoza's report makes clear that the Apaches
possessed horses; they even succeeded in stealing
horses from the expedition.
In 1705, a year after he became governor of
the province of Coahuila, Martin de Alarcon visited the missions of the Rio Grande and made a
report on their condition to the viceroy. Among
other things, he mentioned populous Indian nations living on the Frio River and suggested that
Mission San Bernardo be moved there from the
Rio Grande. These Indians were Coahuiltecans,
indicating that Apaches had not yet displaced
the indigenous people of south-central Texas.
But a smallpox epidemic in 1706 almost wiped
out the Indians in San Juan Bautista and San
Bernardo, and it spread to the natives north of
the river with equally disastrous effects. The missionaries had to recruit new neophytes to replace
those fallen in the epidemic, with the result that
there may have been few Coahuiltecans left in
south-central Texas to oppose the entry of
Apaches (Weddle, 1968: 71-74). Within a de-

cade or so Plains Apaches were in possession of
the upper Nueces Valley and presumably the
hill country to the north and west.
With the return of the Spaniards to New Mexico in 1692 and ·their growing concern about the
French threat from the east and northeast, interest in the Plains Apaches was considerably
heightened. This stimulus, combined with a
growing familiarity with Apache groups, resulted in the old generic names, such as Vaqueros,
being replaced with more specific designations.
Most of the new names were derived from the localities in which Apaches were found or were
those of leaders. Since many, if not most Apache
groups were soon displaced and old leaders died,
it is difficult and often impossible to trace Plains
Apache subdivisions through time. Nevertheless,
in general terms it is clear that at the opening of
the eighteenth century two major groups of
Apaches were in the plains. One group was ancestral to the Mescaleros of more recent times,
the other ancestral to the Jicarillas, Kiowa
Apaches, and Lipans.
The Mescalero group extended from the Rio
Grande in New Mexico eastward well into the
plains. Their northern border seems to have
been in the vicinity of the Canadian River Valley; their southward extent is but vaguely
known, but within a few decades of 1700 they
were ranging throughout most of southwest
Texas and into Mexico (Thomas, 1935: 50;
Schroeder, 1960). The Spaniards in Texas were
familiar with a number of Mescalero divisions,
each of which seems to have been composed of a
congeries of bands. So far as is known these divisions had no political or tribal reality to their
members. The Faraones (the Spanish term for
Pharoah, Hodge, 1907: 453; Schroeder, 1960:
13) were one of the major Mescalero divisions.
First mentioned ·by Governor Vargas in 1692
during the reoccupation of New Mexico, they
also were well known to the Spaniards in Texas
in the eighteenth century, and seem originally
to have been the northernmost division. The
Spaniards in Texas also knew what appears to
have been a Faraone subdivision, perhaps the
easternmost band, the Pelones (Round or Bald
Heads), since they referred to them as the
Pelones Faraones" (Jimenez, et al., 9/19/1763).
The Pelones were sometimes mentioned as a
separate entity, however, and Dunn ( 1911: 202,
263) lists them as a Lipan subdivision. Another
147

Mescalero subdivision, the Natage, (also Nataje,
Nataina) was sometimes referred to by the Texas
Spaniards as the Apache proper (Jimenez, et al.,
9/19/1763). They had somewhat closer ties to
the Lipans than did the other Mescalero subdivisions and originally seem to have ranged to the
south of the Faraones. Their name is apparently
derived from their Lipan designation, Natahe,
which means mescal people (Hodge, 1907: 846).
The San Lorenzo missionaries were also familiar
with a group they designated as Mescalero, the
people under whose name these groups eventually came to be known.
At the beginning of the eighteenth century the
ancestors of the Jicarilla-Llpan-Kiowa Apaches
of more recent times were scattered widely in
the plains. Archeologically known as the Dismal
River Aspect, they occupied the region from
roughly the 100th meridian on the east to the
Rocky Mountains on the west, and from the
Black Hills in the north to about the Canadian
River Valley in the south (Gunnerson, 1960:
144; 1968: 167-170). Two expeditions traversed
parts of this region in the early part of the century and these supply considerable information
about its inhabitants. In 1706 Juan de Ulibarri
was dispatched to bring back a group of Picuris
Indians who had revolted and sought sanctuary
with the Cuartelejo Apaches in the plains, and in
1719 Governor Antonio de Valverde led a campaign against the rampaging Utes and Comanches, both expeditions passing through much of
the same territory (Thomas, 1935: 59-77, 110133; Schroeder, 1959b). Near present Cimarron,
New Mexico, on the east side of the Sangre de
Christo Mountains, Ulibarri encountered Jicarilla, Conejero, Ocho, and Rio Colorado Apaches.
The affiliations of all but the Jicarillas are in
doubt, Thomas (1935: 17) listing them as Jicarillas, Schroeder (1959b: 5-7; 1960: 15-16)
suggesting that the Ochos (or Achos) were the
westernmost band of Lipans. These Apaches
were friendly, but they warned Ulrbarri that
hostile Penxayes, Flechas de Palo, Lemitas, and
Nemantinas "blocked the way eastward"
(Thomas, 1935: 17). Consequently, Ulibarri
turned to the north and after several days encountered friendly Jicarilla, Flechas de Palo, and
Carlana Apaches. Along the Purgatoire in southeastern Colorado and extending in scattered
groups to the Arkansas were Penxaye Apaches.
Whether the Penxayes were Jicarillas (or rather,

were observed by and enumerated as Jicarillas in
later times), or were affiliated with some other
Plains Apache division is not entirely clear. Apparently they should be considered a Jicarilla
subdivision (Thomas, 1935: 263, note 13).
To the northeast and east of these groups were
Cuartelejo Apaches, first mentioned under this
name by Father Escalante, who reported that
some Taos Indians had fled to the plains and fortified themselves in a place that on this account became known as El Cuartelejo. It has been suggested that this hegira took place between 1639
and 1641, since Taos had revolted and a priest
had been slain in this period (Hodge, Hammond,
and Rey, 1945: 284). In any case, the culturally
similar, but scattered and loosely organized
Apaches of eastern Colorado and western Knasas,
north of the Arkansas River, were given a Spanish name for a geographical spot (Wedel, 1959:
422 ff.) . When Valverde in 1719 visited El
Cuartelejo " ... another nation or rancheria of
the same Apaches whom they called the Calchufines" was there, as well as a band of Paloma
Apaches, whose chief had a gunshot wound
(Thomas, 1935: 130). Valverde stated that there
were more than two hundred tents, and "more
than three hundred Indians under arms ... Together with the crowd of women and children
there were probably more than one thousand persons." The Paloma Apaches, according to the
testimony of the wounded chief, had lived "on
the most remote borderlands of the Apaches,"
which Thomas (1935: 132, 271) suggests was
in northeastern Colorado, probably along the
South Platte. The Pawnees and/or Wichitas had
ambushed the chief's people while they were
planting corn, and only nightfall permitted their
escape, according to the chief. The gunshot
wound of the Paloma chief suggests one reason
why these Indians had become more aggressive
in their warfare with the Apaches. This defeat
also seems to mark the beginning of a Paloma
and Cuartelejo retreat southward.
References to the Apaches of El Cuartelejo and
associated peoples, such as the Calchufines and
Palomas, disappear in the mid-eighteenth century, the last documents to mention them being
dated 1752 and 1754 (Thomas, 1940: 124, 135).
The probabilities would seem to be that those
who survived were eventually given new designations or were assimilated by other Plains
Apache groups. Some, no doubt, were assimilated

r

!
\

by the Jicarillas and are represented among their
five surviving subdivisions (Schroeder, 1959b:
63). It seems likely that one of the Cuartelejo
bands, or remnants of one, became the Kiowa
Apaches of later history, and it is possible that
various bands or fragments of bands joined the
Lipans or were enumerated with them.
Unfortunately, the relatives of the Cuartelejo
and Jicarilla Apaches who ranged to their south
and southeast were not clearly distinguished by
the New Mexican Spaniards in the early years
of the eighteenth century. The first reference to
the Lipans by name may have been in 1715 by
Don Geronimo, a Taos Indian, who said that "on
the road to the plains there are some rancherias
of Apaches whom they [the inhabitants of Taos
pueblo] call Chipaynes or Limitas, who in their
language are known as Sejines, and that these
and the Faraon nation are one and the same"
(Thomas, 1935: 80). Schroeder (1960: 17)
argues that the Chipaynes (or Limitas or Trementinas) were not Faraones since they had
been distinguished from them by Governor Cubero in 1702. Certainly the similarity between
Chipayne (also appearing as Cipayne and Chilpaine) and Lipan is undeniable. It will also be
recalled that Ulibarri in 1706 was warned about
hostile Apaches barring the way to the plains
when he was on the eastern slopes of the Sangre
de Christo Mountains. He subsequently met
Penxaye and Flechas de Palo Apaches, who
turned out to be friendly, but he did not encounter the Limitas and/or Trementinas.
Don Geronimo stated that to find and punish
the Chipaynes Apaches, who had been raiding
the pueblo country from their home on the Canadian River, it would be necessary to attack
their rancherias
... in the middle of August when the moon is almost
full. At this time they are shaking out the grain
from the ears of corn. Having finished doing this
and having buried it beneath the soil, they all go
on a hunt for buffalo where they maintain theme
selves until they return to sow which is at the end
of April or the beginning of May. There they remain until they cut it. They will not find them in
any other manner since they live where there is
hunting and then invade this province for com
when they need it (Thomas, 1935: 81).

Hurtado's subsequent expedition late in August
against the Chipaynes on the Canadian River
was unsuccessful, however(Thomas, 1935: 94-

98) . This seasonal cycle was characteristic of the
Lipans, but it also applied to various Mescalero
subdivisions, so that no decision about their
identity can be made from this information.
The earliest usage of the name Lipan by
Spaniards in Texas is not known. It apparently
gained currency in the 1720's, and it was written with but a few spellings and no known synonyms-Ipande, Ypande, Hipandis, Lipanes,
Hipanes, Lypanes, and the like. The name is
said to be derived from the personal name of a
band chief to which the suffix (n'de), signifying
people, has been added (Hodge, 1907: 768-769;
Castaneda, 1935: 16; Swanton, 1952: 322).
All of these Apaches, the Jicarillas and their
subdivisions, the Cuartelejos and those affiliated
with them, and the Lipans, were linguistically
and culturally similar to one another. Their dispersal at the end of the seventeenth century probably has led to the relatively minor cultural differences which distinguish their modern descendants. The Jicarillas, driven into close contact
with the Pueblo Indians, adopted some southwestern traits; the Kiowa Apaches, closely linked
with the Kiowas in the nineteenth century, remained a thoroughgoing Plains people, as did the
Lipan Apaches. (This characterization is at odds
with the traditional view of the culture-history of
these peoples. See, for example, Opler, 1936,
1940, 1945; Kroeber, 1947: 37; Lowie, 1963: 9;
Brant, 1949, 1953; Sjoberg, 1953h: 97-98; but
also see Schroeder, 1959a: xxx-xxxi, and Gunnerson, 1956).
The Lipans were a semi-nomadic, tipi and
wickiup-dwelling (or hogan-dwelling ? ) Plains
people whose subsistence was based primarily on
bison. The principal hunting seasons were fall
and spring, at which times they conducted largescale communal hunts. Many other animals, including deer, antelope, and bear were also hunted. The wonien raised corn, beans, squash, and
tobacco in _valley bottoms, and the produce from
their gardens was an important, though secondary subsistence activity. After the Lipans
adopted horses and were driven from their old
lands, the importance of agriculture dwindled.
Wild plant food may have taken the place of
some of the domesticated crops they no longer
raised, but gathering activities apparently were
always important. Prickly pears, other cacti,
mesquite beans, and agaves were sought, as well
as other wild plant foods. (For a more complete

149

description of Lipan culture see Opler, 1936,
1940, 1945; Sjoberg, 1953b; Newcomb, 1961:
Chapter 5.)
Matrilocal-extended families were the basic
social unit in Lipan life. These families-composed of parents, unmarried sons, daughters,
their husbands, and the children- worked and
lived together. They may have been the scattered
local groups, referred to as rancherias by the
Spaniards, which farmed in the valleys and were
so vulnerable to enemy attack. Or, perhaps several extended families which habitually stayed
together and cooperated with one another, may
have comprised these rancherias.
During the mission years the political entity
with which the Spaniards dealt was the band.
Bands were named for their leaders, and strong
band chiefs sometimes had considerable authority, including the ability to invoke the death
penalty. Bands were formed around a nucleus
of extended families, but life had been so disrupted that most bands were composites, that
is made up of remnants of several bands or
families, even including Apaches who were not
Lipan. Bands normally numbered about 400
persons, if those which settled at San Lorenzo
and Candelaria were typical. Since the missionaries reported between 3,000 and 5,000 Lipans,
and there seem to have been twelve Lipan bands
in the Central Texas area during the mission years, confidence in the figure of about 400
persons per band is enhanced. Such band size
may have been an optimal number of persons
for bison hunting, or it may have been a response
to other factors. During the mission years many
Lipan bands also maintained close ties with one
another, and at least occasionally joined forces
for hunting and warfare. On at least one occasion
all of the Lipans in Central Texas apparently
joined forces for a great hunting and fighting
venture. Lipan bands also united temporarily
with other Apaches, usually the Natages, for
purposes of hunting and fighting.
By the eighteenth century if not before, the
Li pans were ·a militaristic people. Like other
Plains Indians, they preferred small raiding parties, and they were expert guerrilla fighters,
though they also engaged in a number of largescale defensive and offensive battles. Scalps were
taken and scalp and victory dances were held for
successful war parties. Captives were often tortured and killed and occasionally eaten. Women
and children were frequently adopted.

The Lipans believed in a vaguely defined supreme supernatural power, but the important
supernaturals, so far as individuals were concerned, were lesser celestial and other deities
who were propitiated as the individual saw fit. In
common with other Apaches, the Lipans feared
the ghosts of the dead and believed that the afterworld was nearby and that they would live there
with their relatives after death. Theoretically
anybody could become a shaman through mystical or visionary experiences, but they seem not
to have been common. Power thus obtained
could be transferred, but was not ordinarily
passed on until the holder was old. Shamanistic
rites were conducted to cure the sick, to help obtain game, to bring misfortune upon enemies, to
foretell an enemy's approach, to control weather,
and other things.
The missionaries at San Lorenzo made a number of estimates of Lipan population, varying
from a low at "at least 3,000 of all ages and sexes"
(Jimenez and Cuevas, 2/25/1763), a population
of 4,000 (Jimenez, 12/26/1764), to a total
population of 5,000 (Jimenez, Banos, and Garcia, 2/7/1762). But it is doubtful that the missionaries were acquainted with all Lipan bands,
since their rancherias at this time were scattered
out as far to the west as southeastern New Mexico (Castaneda, 1939: 187-190). It is also probable that their population had been drastically
reduced during the first half of the eighteenth
century, and it continued to decline during the
mission years. Two epidemics of smallpox were
recorded during the mission years, and at least
one of them was serious. Losses in warfare also
were heavy, not because abnormal numbers of
warriors were slain, but because women and
children captured by Spaniards, Comanches, and
other Indian enemies were almost never returned. Conversely, Lipan numbers were augmented to an unknown but probably small
extent during the mission years when individuals from other Apache subdivisions joined
them.
The southeastward movement of the Lipans
took them on a collision course with the northward moving Spanish frontier and into the territory of other Indian groups who quickly
engaged them in battle. In the early decades of
the eighteenth century the entire northern Spanish frontier from El Paso to the Gulf came under
repeated attack from Mescaleros and Lipans.
Which Apaches were responsible for any specific

raid is usually impossible to determine, in part
because the two groups often joined forces. The
Apaches were particularly eager to drive off
Spanish horse herds, but they also stole their
livestock, harassed mission Indians, and killed a
substantial number of Spaniards. The Spaniards
replied in kind, killing warriors when they
could and frequently selling captives, who were
mostly women and children, as slaves (Dunn,
1911).
As the Lipans moved into central and southern Texas they also encountered Coahuiltecan
remnants and scattered bands of Tonkawas, the
original inhabitants of the region. A poorly
known people, the Tonkawa tribe came into being during the eighteenth century and was composed of remnants of what had been a number
of autonomous groups, the Tonkawa proper,
Mayeye, Yojaune, Ervipiame, and the smaller
and less well known Cavas, Emet, Sana, Toho,
and Tohaha (Sjoberg, 1953a; Newcomb, 1961;
Chapter 6). In 1745 chiefs of the Rancheria
Grande Indians (chiefly Ervipiames), Yojaunes,
and Mayeyes asked that missions be established
for them, and their request was granted with the
founding of three missions on the San Xavier
River (San Gabriel), near modern Rockdale in
Milam County, Texas (Fig. 76). Mission San
Francisco Xavier de Horcasitas was founded in
1746 and made permanent in 1748, and the missions of San Ildefonso and Nuestra Seiiora de la
Candelaria were established soon after. They incorporated remnants or bands from a number of
different tribes including the Atakapan Bidais
(Bolton, 1914b) .
The missions were not successful; Apache
raiders harassed and drove away the mission Indians; Pedro del Barrio y Espriella, the governor,
quarreled with the missionaries; and Lieutenant
Juan Galvan, in command of a detail of thirty
soldiers and charged with protecting the missions, sided with the governor. His soldiers mistreated the Indians and encouraged them to be
insubordinate and to run away. In 1750 a smallpox epidemic caused the death of forty Indians.
In 1751 Presidio de San Xavier de Gigedo was
established to protect the missions and Captain
Felipe de Rabago y Teran was named to command it. Rabago immediately suggested moving
the missions to the San Marcos River and was
soon in open conflict with the missionaries when
they gave protection to the husband of a woman
with whom the commander had had an adulter-

ous affair. The situation on the San Xavier continued to deteriorate under Rabago's command
and finally was climaxed by the murders of
Father Ganzabal and Juan Jose Ceballos, the
cuckolded husband. Rabago was relieved of
command and imprisoned for a time. While
waiting for the final disposition of his case he
was made commander of the garrison of Presidio
del Sacramento in Coahuila. Eventually, eight
years after the murders, Rabago was cleared and
restored to his command, as it turned out, of the
presidio on the San Saba (Castaneda, 1938:
241-338).
The Tonkawas and portions of other tribes
that had been in the missions on the San Ga'hriel
were frustrated and ultimately estranged by the
actions of the Spaniards. Although some of them
became avowed enemies of the Spaniards, they
did not become allies of the Apaches. Even before the missions were established, Tonkawas
had traded with the French and were in friendly
contact with the Wichitas and Caddos. Now,
more or less abandoned by the Spaniards,
equipped with firearms by the French, and finding allies in the Wichitas and Caddos, they constituted a dangerous enemy, and an enemy
which was to exact its retribution from the Spaniards.
Far more powerful than the Tonkawas were
the tribes forcing the Lipans southward-the
Wichitas and Comanches. They were also the
most potent and destructive enemies the Spaniards were to face in the southern plains. Wichita
is used here in a generic sense to include a number of autonomous but closely related sub-tribes,
the Taovayas, Tawakonis, Iscanis, Kichais,
Wichita proper, the Flechazos (a sub-tribal
group of the eighteenth century), and the
W acos, who surface in the nineteenth century
and may be latter-day Flechazos or Iscanis. The
Kichais spoke a distinct Caddoan language and
the other subdivisions, slightly varying dialects
of Wichita, another Caddoan language. The
probabilities favor an aboriginal population of
more than 10,000 persons, perhaps triple this
figure, scattered out in fifteen to twenty villages.
Until the last third of the eighteenth century,
population seems to have continued in excess of
10,000 persons, but with a reduction in the number of villages (Newcomb and Field, 1967).
In a broad sense Wichita culture was like that
of a number of tribes on the eastern margins of
the plains. The Wichitas were a gardening and

hunting people, remaining in their grass lodge
villages throughout the spring and summer
while the women tended their fields of corn,
beans, and squash. In fall and winter the villages
were abandoned and the Wichitas became roving hunters, living in tipis, the men hunting
bison, deer, and other game. This dual subsistence was practiced before the Wichitas acquired
horses and it persisted up to the reservation period. Each village had a chief, a sub-chief, and a
number of lesser officials. Although villages were
politically independent, some large villages with
outstanding leaders exerted considerable authority over lesser ones. Chiefs were elected by an
informal council of eminent warriors, and they
functioned primarily in the domain of foreign
affairs, internal matters being guided by the
matriarchal families which were the cornerstones of Wichita society (Newcomb, 1961;
Chapter 10; Newcomb and Field, 1967).
Coronado encountered villages of Wichitas in
1541 within the great bend of the Arkansas
River in what is now south-central Kansas.
About the beginning of the eighteenth century,
as a result of Osage pressure from the north,
Comanche pressure from the west and northwest,
and possibly for other reasons, the Wichitas, or
at least the more northerly villages, began a
southward migration (Harper, 1953a, b, c; Newcomb and Field, 1967). By 1719, when visited by
Claude Du Tisne, Sieur Du Rivage, and Benard
de la Harpe, the Wichitas were scattered out in
the river valleys from the vicinity of the KansasOklahoma border south through eastern Oklahoma into Texas. The Wichita withdrawal to the
south was to continue for another century, with
villages eventually being established as far south
as Waco on the Brazos River in Central Texas
(Margry, 1888: 309-315; Harper, 1953a, b, c;
Wedel, 1959: 526-634; Bell and Baerreis, 1951:
91; Bolton, 1914a; Lewis, 1924; Harris, et al.,
1965: 287-361; Newcomb and Field, 1967).
The Osages, made militarily superior by their
abundant supply of French firearms, could not
be repulsed until the Wichitas also acquired
firearms and learned how to use them effectively. And the traditional enemies of the
Wichitas, the Plains Apaches, possessed a plentiful supply of horses, making them more formidable than ever. The Wichitas also had acquired
some horses and learned the art of horsemanship
before the opening of the new century, but
152

horses were relatively scarce and remained a
precious commodity. Though the Wichitas were
obviously in a precarious situation in the early
decades of the century, their relationship with
the Osages and other enemies to their rear seem
to have stabilized soon after French traders supplied the firearms they so badly needed. The
acquisition of French firearms also gave them
the upper hand in their long-standing conflict
with the Plains Apaches. Finally, in 1746 or
1747, as has been mentioned, the Wichitas were
able to enter into a mutually beneficial alliance
with the Comanches, an alliance which continued in effect as long as both peoples maintained their independence (Newcomb and Field,
1967: 256-257; Newcomb, n.d.). This alliance
removed an increasingly powerful enemy from
one flank and assured the Wichitas of a continuing supply of horses. As a result of these
events, by mid-century the Wichitas had become
a very powerful force in the southern plains.
Ensconced in villages along the Red River and
acting as middlemen between the French and
the tribes to the west, primarily the Comanches,
they and their allies were able to thwart the
Spanish and their new Lipan allies when an attempt was made to infringe upon their domain.
Early in the eighteenth century the Comanches entered the struggle for the southern
plains. These ill-equipped hunters and gatherers
originated in the mountainous country north of
the headwaters of the Arkansas. Soon after acquiring horses in the seventeenth century they
crowded and shoved their way into the rich bison
plains of what is now eastern Colorado and western Kansas (Wallace and Hoebel, 1952: 8).
They appeared in New Mexico in company with
Ute Indians early in the eighteenth century and
were already engaged in a vicious struggle with
Plains Apaches. There are reports of a nine-day
battle between Comanches and Apaches sometime between 1720 and 1723 on the plains east of
Pecos in which the Comanches bloodily established their military supremacy. Dunn ( 1911:
220) says the battle took place on the Wichita
River and that the defeated Apaches fled to the
upper Colorado and Brazos rivers. In 1724 the
Comanches made a massive assault on a rancheria of Jicarillas and succeeded in capturing half
their women and children while killing most of
the men (Bancroft, 1889: 239; Bolton, 1914a,
25; Thomas, 1932: 60). They apparently fought

the Wichitas on the upper Arkansas River, and
attacked the Pueblo and Spanish settlements in
New Mexico when it suited them. But they could
not acquire an adequate supply of the one item
which would ensure mastery of the southern
plains-firearms. The Spaniards would not sell
or trade firearms to the Indians, and the Indians
to the east of the Comanches who were able to
secure them were enemies. In short, the Comanche motivation to form an alliance with the
Wichitas was as powerful as the one drivjng the
Wichitas into the arms of the Comanches.
Divided into a dozen or so loosely structured
bands with shifting membership, the Shoshonian-speaking Comanches depended heavily on
bison for food, clothing, and other things. Gaining the plains by force of arms, and prospering
by raiding the fighting, almost every aspect of
life became intertwined in one way or another
with war. Though possessing few formal governmental institutions and lacking a tribal chief
and tribal council, nevertheless the Comanches
were able to establish alliances with other tribes
which were observed by all their bands. Although no study has been made of their population during the eighteenth century, it
apparently was comparable to that of the Wichitas and was probably increasing rather rapidly.
To the east of the migrating Lipans, and as
bitter enemies as the Wichitas and Comanches,
were three Caddo confederacies. The largest and
most weiterly, located in the upper Neches and
Angelina river valleys, was that of the Hasinai,
composed of eight tribes. The Kadohadacho Confederacy, composed of four tribes, was situated
in the vicinity of the great bend of the Red River
in northeast Texas and southwestern Arkansas,
and the third, the Natchitoches, was situated in
the neighborhood of Natchitoches, Louisiana.
The tribes of these confederacies, plus several independent tribes, shared a common language,
Caddo, and were quite similar to one another in
other aspects of culture. They were expert gardeners who raised corn, beans, squash, tobacco,
and sunflower seeds. Planting and clearing of the
fields was a communal enterprise, gangs of men
and women laboring separately. Although animals were secondary in subsistence, winter
hunts were made in the prairies to the west for
bison; deer, bear, and other game were also
hunted. Because of their location, the tribes of
the Hasinai Confederacy seem to have utilized
bison more than did other Caddos, and conse-

quently came into closer contact with the Plains
Apaches and other bison-hunting tribes. The
Caddos lived in grass lodges similar to those of
the Wichitas, though some were mud-plastered
as was the common custom of other peoples in
the Southeast. The confederacies were headed by
priestly rulers who inherited ,their office; below
them were the tribal chiefs, and under the tribal
chiefs was a corps of lesser officials (Swanton,
1942; Newcomb, 1961, Chapter 11).
These settled, prosperous, barbaric Caddo
theocracies were very different from the nomadic and often impoverished Coahuiltecans for
whom the Spaniards were establishing missions
during the last half of the seventeenth century
in northeastern Mexico. Apart from the need to
counter French expansion, it is not surprising
that the missionaries should want to attempt
their conversion; much might be gained with
relatively little effort. But the missions established among the Caddos were never successful.
The Indians turned hostile before San Francisco
de los Tejas was a year old, and they forced its
abandonment in 1693. The other mission in
Hasinai territory, Santisimo Nombre de Maria,
had already been flooded out. When the missionaries returned to East Texas in 1715, they were
hardly more successful, and French competition
had grown considerably. By 1731 only the presidio of Los Adaes was left as an isolated post in
East Texas. The animosity the Caddos developed
for the Spaniards was heightened when missions
were established for the Apaches.War parties of
Caddo Indians, predominantly Hasinai, were
active in harassing the Spaniards at San Saba
and San Lorenzo, and in attacking the Lipims
throughout Central Texas.
* * * * * * * * *
In sum, in the vast region between the French
and the Spanish, including much of what later
became Texas and Oklahoma, lived a considerable number of native tribes of varying culture
and origin. The relationships between these
peoples during the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries were complicated and constantly
changing, as were their relationships with the
European powers who directly and indirectly
were responsible for the revolutionary changes
taking place in their lives. It was against this
backdrop of change, violence, and instability
that the Lipan Apaches came into Central Texas,
cast up by the storm of Indian conflict against
the breakwater of the Spanish frontier.
153

The Origins of the Mission
In the fall of 1 723 the first of a number of
campaigns was finally mounted against the
Apaches, whose marauding from San Antonio to
San Juan Bautista and beyond had reached
serious proportions. On this occasion Apaches
had driven off eighty horses from the presidial
corral of San Antonio de Bejar, despite the fact
that the gates were locked and the corral guarded
by ten soldiers. Incensed at such boldness, the
captain of the presidio, Nicolas Flores y Valdes;
pursued the thieves but was forced to return for
reinforcements. Two days later he again set out,
this time with thirty Spaniards and thirty mission Indians. Doggedly pursuing the Indians,
thirty-six days later and 130 leagues toward the
northwest (apparently in the vicinity of modern
Brownwood, Fig. 76), the force came upon a
rancheria of some 200 Apaches. A six-hour
battle followed in which thirty-four Indians and
a chief were killed, twenty women and children
captured, and about 120 horses and mules together with plunder recovered. Three Spaniards
including Captain Flores were wounded (Dunn,
1911: 207-209).
One of the captured women was sent back to
her people from San Antonio with a message
that the Spaniards wanted to make peace with
the Apaches. About three weeks later the woman
returned to San Antonio bringing with her a
chief, his wife, and three other Apaches. The
chief indicated that he and four other chiefs
would come to San Antonio to make peace. But
rumors were soon heard in San Antonio that the
Apaches were talking peace only as a ruse to get
back the captive women and children. Finally,
in December, a group of thirty Apaches came in.
Father Joseph Gonzalez allowed them to enter
the mission and urged Captain Flores to release
the prisoners to them. Flores refused to do this,
insisting that he would not release them until all
of the chiefs had agreed to make peace. The argument between the two Spaniards became so
heated that ,the alarmed Apaches departed, leaving behind a twelve year-old girl as a hostage.
They also had said that in the spring four chiefs
would come in to make peace, but that the fifth
chief had no desire to be a friend of the Spaniards. There was a lull in the raiding that
winter, but the chiefs did not come to San Antonio to make peace and in March 1724, hostili-

ties were resumed when a soldier was killed near
SanAntonio (Dunn, 1911: 209-216).
Between 1726 and 1730 Apache raids in the
San Antonio vicinity declined almost to the vanishing point, then as mysteriously, hostilities
were renewed in 1731. In January of that year,
two priests with a small party, and escorted by
four soldiers, were attacked by fifty Apaches
while on their way from San Antonio to the Rio
Grande. A woman was killed and a boy captured. From that month until April there were
many raids in the San Antonio vicinity and
many horses and burros were taken by the
Apaches. There was
lull between April and
August, perhaps while the Apaches were raising
and harvesting their crops, but in September, in
broad daylight they got away with 60 horses
from San Antonio. Don Juan Antonio Perez de
Almazan, now captain of the presidio, sent a__sergeant and five soldiers in pursuit of the thieves.
When he overtook them a league from the presidio, with the eighteen additional men he could
hastily assemble, the advance party was in a
desperate fight with about forty Indians. But no
sooner did Almazan arrive than 500 more Indians emerged from their hiding places, all
mounted and well armed. The ensuing battle
lasted for two hours, the small Spanish force
finally dismounting at the foot of a tree, prepared to sell their lives as dearly as possible.
Though the Spaniards were surrounded, with
two dead and thirteen men wounded, and at the
mercy of the enemy, the Apaches suddenly
broke off the engagement and retreated (West,
1904: 40-41; Dunn, 1911: 223-227).
In 1732 another military campaign was waged
against the Apaches. Do~ Juan Antonio Bustillo
y Ceballos, then governor of Texas, led an expedition of 157 Spaniards and sixty mission Indians, with 140 pack loads of supplies and 900
horses and mules, from San Antonio into the unexplored hill country of what is now Central
Texas. Scouts discovered an Apache rancheria,
apparently on the San Saba River, on December
8, and after approaching it during the night, Bustillo attacked it with 100 picked men in the
morning. The surprised Apaches fought gamely,
waiting for the Spaniards to fire, then closing in
while the soldiers reloaded their muskets. But

a

San Antonio
deili Valero (1718)
ASan Antonio de

Laredo
Legend

iii

Mop 2. Mission Son Lorenzo

Mission

~ Presidio

l

1ndian village or

de lo Santo Cruz and Environs

camp

0 5 10 2.0

40miles 60

Fig. 76.-Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz and environs.

155

bows and arrows could not carry the day against
Spanish firearms, and after a five-hour battle
the Apaches withdrew. Bustillo claimed that 200
Apaches were killed, but since they were carried
off by their comrades and thrown into the river,
the estimate may be l.nflated. Thirty women and
children were captured along with 700 horses
and, 100_ mule-loads of booty. Seven Spaniards
were wourided, one of whom died a few days
later. The Spaniards estimated that there were
700 enemy warriors repr·esenting four different
"tribes." They weFe--eamped in as many neighboring ral1cherias, spread out along the river for
more than half a league (about a mile and a
third) and numbering more than 400 tipis. The
names of the tribes were the "Apaches" (Mescaleros), "Ypandis" (Lipans), "Ysandis" and
"Chentis" (Dunn, 1911: 230-237; West, 1904:
41-42; Castaneda, 1938: 35-40). The affiliations
of the last two groups are unknown; they had
just joined forces with the Lipans and Mescaleros, and had not been known before to the San
Antonio Spaniards (Dunn, 1911: 236-237).
Father Gabriel Vergara, president of the Quereteran missions of San Antonio, accompanied the
expedition, and thereafter strongly favored the
establishment of missions as a means of pacifying the Apaches.
The fact that military forces had penetrated
the heart of Lipan country did not put an end to
Apache raids. San Antonio was raided time and
again between 1736 and 1739; soldiers and
settlers were killed and much livestock driven
off. During this period, however, Cabellos Colorados (Red Hair), one of the most persistent and
feared raiders in the San Antonio vicinity, was
captu~ed_ with some members of his band near
San Antonio. They were imprisoned from December 173 7 until September 1738, and during
this time San Antonio suffered no depredations.
But in October the raids started again, and as a
result, the chief, his two year-old daughter, and
the other captives, were sent to Mexico City on
orders of the governor. As Dunn (1911: 247248) remarks, these Apaches were probably
banished into slavery in the West Indies or some
similar place.
In the winter of 1739, Captain Jose de Urrutia
of the Presidio of San Antonio de Bejar, an old
Indian fighter and dedicated foe of Apaches, led
a force once again into the San Saba River country. The expenses of his campaign were to be

paid for by the sale of captives the expedition
might take, and all the members of the expedition were to share in the division of plunder.
Though details of the campaign are lacking,
Urrutia seems to have ridden into the hill country through Bandera Pass. He surprised an Indian camp somewhere near the place where
Presidio de San Luis de las Amarillas was later
built (Fig. 76), and succeeded in taking many
captives (Dunn, 1911: 249; Castaneda, 1938:
46-47). In 1745, Toribio de Urrntia, who had
assumed command of the presidio after his
father's death, led another expedition into
Apache territory. More than 200 miles to the
northwest of San Antonio and north of the Colorado River, his force surprised a scattered rancheria of Lipans and Natages. Since many
warriors were away, a large number of captives
was taken easily (Dunn, 1911: 251-252).
These campaigns did not pacify the Apaches
and the conflict might have continued many
more years had not the missionaries strongly objected to the militant, retaliatory policy of the
military. As early as 1725, Father Francisco Hidalgo, who had served in the East Texas missions, suggested that the answer to the Apache
problem lay in the establishment of missions in
which to convert them. Subsequently, other
Franciscan missionaries in San Antonio were
disturbed by the actions of the Spanish soldiers,
particularly as their campaigns became increasingly difficult to distinguish from slave raids.
After Bustillo's campaign in 1732, Father Vergara led a drive for a new Indian policy, and for
a time succeeded in getting the Apaches to trade
peacefully with the settlers in San Antonio. But
in March 1733, two soldiers were killed and their
bodies stripped of flesh only a short distance
from the San Antonio presidia (Dunn, 1911:
237). Apaches were responsible, and as a result,
Father Vergara's efforts went for naught. Father
Benito Fernandez de Santa Ana, who succeeded
Father Vergara, unsuccessfully opposed the elder
Urrutia's campaign of 1739, and following it he
bitterly pointed out that the purpose of such
campaigns was really to plunder and enslave
the Apaches, and as such they could have
nothing but evil consequences (Castaneda, 1938:
47). Several years later, in 1743, Father Santa
Ana presented a petition to Viceroy Conde de
Rivilla Gigedo, in which he discussed the advantages of making peace with the Apaches and

suggested that a presidio be established in their
country, thus relieving the pressure on San Antonio (Castaneda, 1938: 41-43). There was no
immediate reaction to this petition, and the raids
on San Antonio were heavier than ever in the
next several years, probably in retaliation for
the captives taken by the Spaniards.
The younger Urrutia's campaign in 1745 was,
it seems, primarily a slave-hunting expedition,
and vengeance-seeking Lipans and Natages soon
descended on San Antonio. But before the
Apaches resumed hostilities they dispatched four
women to notify the Spaniards that the peace
was ended, apparently a unique act in the checkered relationships between the Spaniards and
Apaches. In the next three weeks nine people
were killed and robbed in the San Antonio vicinity; only Mission Concepcion under Father
Santa Ana was not molested. Hostilities were
climaxed on June 30, 1745 when 350 Lipans and
Natages, including their women and children,
gathered to attack San Antonio. The Apache
plans seem not to have been well laid, and the
Lipans apparently had little stomach for the
affair. Before the Indian operation was well
launched, a boy discovered them and gave the
alarm. Mission Indians quickly came to the aid
of the defenders of the town, but when they left
the mission so did a Lipan captive who quickly
joined his people. The Lipan chief, whose daughter was a hostage of Father Santa Ana's, asked
the escaped captive how his daughter was being
treated. When told that the captives were being
accorded every kindness and that the Spaniards
wanted to be friends of the Apaches, the chief
halted the attack. The Natage chief strongly opposed such action, but was eventually talked out
of further hostilities (Dunn, 1911: 252-253).
During the next few years San Antonio continued to be raided sporadically, but some Lipan
chiefs were also persistent in their requests that
missions be established for them. Urrutia in February 1749 conducted another expedition into
Indian country, quickly overrunning a rancheria but capturing only three old women and five
children. While he was absent a large number of
cattle was stolen from Mission Concepcion, and
in March he led another campaign. On the
Guadalupe he swept down on a rancheria of
Apaches, but most of its warriors were away on a
bison hunt. Those left behind-thirty men,
ninety women, and forty-seven children-were

captured. The men were imprisoned, the women
and children distributed among the citizens and
missionaries of San Antonio. Father Santa Ana
and Captain Urrutia soon sent two of the women
and one man back to their country with a message that if they would thereafter live in peace,
the Spaniards would release the people captured
on the Guadalupe as well as all of the captives
who had been taken previously. The Lipans
were delighted at this turn of events; a peace
conference was arranged, and in November 1749
peace was concluded between the Spaniards and
Lipans in San Antonio (Dunn, 1911: 258-261).
It is probably not coincidental that the
Apaches sought peace and requested missions
soon after the Wichitas and Comanches concluded their alliance. These northern enemies
were acquiring French weapons and ammunition, but the Apaches were still armed mostly
with their ancient and inferior weapons. Their
situation was desperate and the need for strong
allies pressing. Soon entire bands of Li.pans were
coming to San Antonio, hoping to camp there
until missions could be established for them.
Father Santa Ana, who was to retire soon because of illness, wanted to build missions for the
Apaches on the Pedernales River and move the
San Antonio garrison there. But Father Mariano
de los Dolores y Viana, who was to succeed
Father Santa Ana as president of the San Antonio missions, wanted to establish missions on
the Guadalupe River. The matter was referred
to the council of Villa de San Fernando (San Antonio) . The council opposed any mission for the
Apaches anywhere and any move of the garrison
from Presidio de San Antonio de Bejar. But
Father Dolores was not easily put off. He pointed
out to Captain Urrutia that the Apaches were
trading peaceably in San Antonio, had committed no depredations in a year, and a chief had
returned some stolen horses. Some Apaches had
even been baptized. Ultimately, in June 1751,
Father Dolores requested the governor, Jacinto
de Barrios y Jauregui, to ask the viceroy either to
approve the missions for the Apaches or tell
them himself that no missions would be built for
them. As a result of this request, suggestions filtered back down through ,the administrative
hierarchy to study the proposals for Apache missions and recommend suitable sites for their
settlement.
In 1753 Lieutenant Juan Galvan of the Pre157

sidio de San Antonio de Bejar, a few soldiers, and
Father Miguel de Aranda were sent to explore
Apache territory with a view toward finding a
site for a mission. The party explored the Pedernales River, then the Llano, and finally the San
Saba, where they found a suitable location.
Friendly Apaches welcomed the Spaniards and
even participated in a religious service at the foot
of a cross which was erected at the site of the
prospective mission. Galvan's report of the expedition suggested that many Apaches would
enter a mission located at this site; he also stated
that there were indications of rich mineral deposits in the region, and finally he recommended
that a large garrison be stationed at the site in
order to control the Apaches and defend against
the Comanches. Since the garrison at San Antonio would no longer be needed, Galvan suggested that it be moved to San Saba.
Despite Galvan's favorable report, the officials in Mexico City were hesitant to proceed
with the project. Instead, they dispatched Don
Pedro de Rabago y ~eran, the new commander
of the Presidio de San Xavier on the San Gabriel,
to investigate further. Rabago set out with 25
men and Father Jose Lopez a few days before
Christmas, 1754. They followed much the same
route as Galvan had, and camped on the San
Saba River near the cross. They encountered two
Lipan bands on their return journey, their
people vowing to enter the mission as soon at it
was established. Rabago's report confirmed Galvan's; he also mentioned that there might be
rich mineral deposits in the region, and he added
a recommendation that a strong stone fort be
constructed at the site. The reports of possible
mineral riches spurred Governor Barrios to dispatch his lieutenant governor, Bernardo de Miranda, to investigate. Late in the winter of 1756
the lieutenant governor and a small party secured a likely looking ore sample from a shaft
they dug in a hill of red hematite along Honey
Creek in what is now Llano County. Even more
exciting, Miranda was assured by the chief of an
Apache band whom they encountered on their
return trip, that six days' journey above the
Llano there was a mountain of pure silver. It
was, they said, in Comanche country (Dunn,
1914; Weddle, 1964: 27-29). Though the mineral riches of the San Saba region were wildly
exaggerated and no significant mines were
opened, the possibility of their existence un-

doubtedly helped get the mission and presidio
established.
While the idea of missions for Apaches was
gaining headway in Texas, Father Alonso Giraldo de Terreros, president of the Rio Grande
missions, finessed the Texas procrastinators by
establishing Mission San Lorenzo near San Fernando de Austria in Coahuila, on December 21,
1754, for the Lipan Apaches. But less than a year
later, while Father Terreros was absent, the
resident Apaches revolted, burned the buildings,
and departed. Located outside the normal range
of the Apaches, it made the argument for missions placed in their own territory stronger. But
those opposed to Apache missions could point to
the difficulty, perhaps impossibility, of ever turning the Apaches into peaceable, tractable mission
Indians (Dunn, 1912: 196-200; Weddle, 1968:
247-248).
In the fall of 1756, Colonel Don Diego Parrilla,
who was to command the presidia on the San
Saba, was ordered to move the San Xavier garrison to the San Saba, and to increase its strength
to 100 men. There was to be a mission on the San
Saba after all. The winter was spent making arrangements for the new presidia, recruiting soldiers, meeting with Apaches, and dealing with
the missionaries, who had split into two feuding
factions. A delegation of Lipans, led by two
chiefs, visited San Antonio to apologize for the
absence of other Apaches. They listed the absent
ones as the Natages, Mescaleros, Pelones, Come
Nopales, and Come Caballos (Dunn, 1914: 392).
The Lipans continued to assure the Spaniards
that they were eager to congregate in missions.
In a private report to the viceroy, Parrilla stated
that he felt that the Apaches were as treacherous
as ever, and that he had serious forebodings concerning the outcome of the venture. Father
Terreros, who was to be in charge of the new
mission, was upset by what he felt to be Parrilla's dilatory tactics. He, too, had misgivings
about the outcome of the new venture, but he
was much more optimistic than Parrilla about
the willingness of the Apaches to settle in missions. In a letter to his cousin, Don Pedro Terreros, who was giving financial aid to the
mission project, he noted that during the winter
Apaches had visited San Antonio in bands as
large as 300 persons. They had, of course, been
presented with gifts (Castaneda, 1938: 395396).

I

Finally, in April 1757, the missionaries, the
soldiers, and their families, with herders driving
large numbers of cattle and sheep, set out for
San Saba. There were almost 400 persons, twothirds of whom were women and children. They
arrived on the seventeenth, and after inspecting
the proposed site, Parrilla set out to explore the
San Saba to its source. Not a single Indian had
been seen in the vicinity of the future mission
and none was encountered along the river. Over
Parrilla's outspoken suggestion that the project be
abandoned, Father Terreros and the other missionaries insisted on pursuing their plans. Parrilla was forced to send for the soldiers and
supplies which had been left behind, and the
missionaries began to construct their mission on
the south bank of the San Saba River, about two
miles below the spot where Parrilla soon began
to build Presidio de San Luis de las Amarillas
(Fig. 76). The missionaries first built living
quarters and a temporary church surrounded by
a stockade of logs. They also cleared fields,
planted crops, and began work on an irrigation
ditch. The exact location of the mission has never
been discovered despite several attempts to do so
(Gilmore, 1967). The presidio was even cruder
than the mission, consisting of a log stockade
with several gun platforms, and a number of
mud and straw huts (Dunn, 1914: 396-397).
Father Benito Varela, who spoke the Lipan's
tongue, finally went in search of the Indians in
May. He learned from soldiers remaining behind on the San Marcos River, who had gotten
their information from an Apache woman, that
a war party of Tejas (i.e., Hasinai Caddo) Indians had attacked some Li pans on the Colorado,
and that the Lipans had fled. At about this same
time a Lipan chief, El Chico, visited San Antonio where Father Mariano de los Dolores admonished him for not keeping his promise to
settle at the mission on the San Saba. He told the
chief to go there immediately, and El Chico must
have done so because he and his people were
among the 3,000 Lipans who arrived from the
south and camped near the mission in June. But
the hopes of the missionaries were quickly
dasheJ as the sullen Apaches stated that they
had not come to settle down, but were going 011 a
bison hunt and also were preparing to go to war
against their northern enemies. The missionaries
were permitted to treat several people who were
sick, and the ill brother of a chief was baptized.

El Chico continued to indicate a willingness to
settle at the mission, but another chief, Casablanca, whose brother had recently been killed
in the Tejas attack, was bent on retaliation. His
was the more persuasive argument; the Apaches
soon departed for their hunt and revenge upon
their enemies (Castaneda, 1938: 398; Dunn,
1914: 398-399).
The departure of the Apaches was a blow to
the morale of the missionaries, and it hardly
improved when the Apaches returned several
weeks later. They had had a successful hunt and
carried much meat with them, but they refused
to remain at the mission. If the missionaries had
known the Apaches better, they might have
realized that while the warriors were away they
also had been on a raiding expedition and were
now eager to put as much distance as possible
between themselves and their enemies. The
Apaches hurriedly left the mission and headed
south, leaving the missionaries feeling more bereft and useless than ever. In a letter to the viceroy, Father Terreros reported the apparent
hopelessness of the situation, but he volunteered
to remain if it was thought advisable. Father
Trinidad in a letter to Don Pedro Terreros was
also pessimistic about the chances of getting the
Apaches to settle, and Parrilla wrote the viceroy
that there was no chance that the mission would
succeed. Parrilla suggested that his garrison be
moved to the Llano River in order to exploit the
mine Miranda had opened. The viceroy
promptly reminded Parrilla that his task was to
do everything in his power to make the San
Saba venture a success. But the missionaries
soon began to leave. Father Varela from the
College of Quer.etaro left before the summer was
out, and fathers Joaquin Banos and Diego Jimenez, who were to labor at the missions on the
upper Nueces a few years later, soon requested
permission to return to Mexico. Originally, plans
had called for three missions, and since only the
Quereteran Mission of Santa Cruz de San Saba
had been built and it had no Apaches, it is small
wonder that the missionaries were eager to find
more rewarding work. By the end of the summer
only fathers Terreros, Santiesteban, and Trinidad remained at the mission (Castaneda, 1938:
399-401; Weddle, 1964: 57-60).
That fall small groups of Apaches visited the
mission, but none remained for long, all of them
continuing on south. It was rumored that north159

r

em Indians were preparing an attack on the
mission and presidio in order to destroy the
Apaches. But it was difficult for the Spaniards to
take the rumors seriously for no Apaches had
ever tarried for any length of time at San Saba.
No attack came during the cold winter, though
the rumors persisted. But during the last days of
February the horse herd was stolen. The patrol
sent to recover it returned with only one animal
and reported that the country was full of armed
Indians. Upon receiving this information, Parrilla sent six men to warn a detail he had ordered out to escort a pack train coming from San
Antonio. The six men were attacked by a combined force of Tonkawas (both Tonkawa proper
and Yojaunes) and Bidais while camped on the
Pedernales. Four of them were wounded, but
they managed to join the supply train. The corporal in charge of the detail, Carlos de Uraga,
was sure of the identity of the attackers, since he
had been at the San Xavier Presidio where he
had become acquainted with these tribes. Parrilla was sent word of the attack on the soldiers,
and ordered out more men to escort the supply
train (Nathan and Simpson, 1959: 58-60).
Though Parrilla informed Father Terreros of
the stolen horse herd and the attack on the soldiers on the Pedernales, the missionaries were
unwilling to abandon the mission and come to
the presidio for protection. Finally they agreed
to forego working in the fields for the time being
and to take some other measures for protection,
but they had waited too long. On the next day,
March 16, 1757, the mission was attacked and
destroyed. The guard stationed at the mission
and the missionaries seem to have had no coherent plan for defense, and when the corporal
of the guard, Ascensio Cadena, reported that
Tonkawas, Bidais, and Tejas Indians, whom he
had known peaceably at San Xavier, were
among the Indians clamoring to get inside the
mission walls, no real defense of the mission was
made. The Indians opened the stockade gate and
several hundred of them, painted and dressed
for war, pushed inside. They were given presents, but soon fell to looting. And after Father
Terreros was shot from his horse while attempting to ride out of the stockade in search of a
Tejas chief, it was too late to put up effective resistance. The mission was pillaged, then burned.
Eight Spaniards were killed including fathers
Terreros and Santiesteban. Father Miguel de
160

Molina, who had replaced Father Trinidad, was
severely wounded, and Parrilla reported that
five other badly wounded soldiers had small
chance of recovering (Nathan and Simpson,
1959: 84-92; Weddle, 1964: 72-78).
The presidio had been weakened as soldiers
were absent on escort and other duty, and it
was crowded with 237 women and children, as
well as all the horses the enemy had not been
able to seize. There was no question of the garrison coming to the aid of the mission or issuing
forth to attack the Indians. It was too feeble; the
Spaniards could only hope the Indians would not
make a determined attack on the presidio and
overrun it. Fortunately, no attack materialized,
though the prairies around the presidio were
burned.
Several thousand Indians seem to have been
involved in the assault on the mission (Dunn,
1914: 406; Nathan and Simpson, 1959: 82), but
more impressive than their number was their
diversity. Tonkawas, Bidais, and Tejas (i.e., Hasinais) were very much in evidence and seem to
have spearheaded the attack. The Tonkawas and
Bidais were probably the same party which had
attacked the detail sent out to escort the pack
train. Comanches participated in force, marking
the first time that Spaniards in Texas had been
confronted with these formidable foes. The paramount chief in the affray was also a Comanche.
Father Molina gave four bundles of tobacco to
this "Great Chief" after he had ridden into the
mission compound. Molina said of him:
He was a Comanche, according to the barbarians
themselves, and worthy of respect. His war dress
and his red jacket were well-decorated, after the
manner of French uniforms, and he was fully
armed. His face was hideous and extremely grave
(Nathan and Simpson, 1959: 86).

Oddly, the Wichitas, who were to bear the brunt
of Spanish retaliation for the destruction of the
mission, were not mentioned by name as being
among the attacking force, probably because
none of the Spaniards were familiar with them
(Nathan and Simpson, 1959: 54, 69, 73, 82).
Significantly, the attacking Indians were plentifully equipped with "French firearms, bullet
pouches, and very large powder horns. Others
had pikes, and still others, bows and arrows; but
most of them had muskets and cutlasses, and all
wore the costumes that the Indians wear for war

and raids" (Nathan and Simpson, 1959: 44; see
also Dunn, 1914; Weddle, 1964: 72-89).
Parrilla soon proposed that a retaliatory campaign be made to chastise the Indians who had
attacked the San Saha Mission. Among other
things, he also suggested that the San Saba Presidio be abandoned. His proposals were considered by a junta in Mexico in June, 1758. The
campaign was approved and Parrilla was designated to lead it, but the proposal to abandon the
fort was rejected. Preparing for the campaign
was time-consuming, and it was not until August, 1759, that Parrilla was able to lead his
army from San Antonio to the presidio on the
San Saba. In his army of more than 600 men
were about 380 militiamen and presidia! soldiers, 90 mission Indians, 30 Tlascalteco Indians,
and 134 Lipan Apaches (Parrilla, 10/7/1759;
11/18/1759; Dunn, 1914). The army soon left
the relative safety of San Saba and headed north
into the poorly known country of the enemy. No
Indians were encountered at first, only abandoned rancher.ias, but on October 2, somewhere
north of the Brazos River (Allen, 1939: 66), the
army surprised a rancheria of Yojaune (Tonkawa) Indians. Parrilla attacked the rancheria
and in one hour, 55 Indians were killed and 149
made prisoner. None of the attacking force was
killed (Parrilla, 10/7 /1759; 11/18/1759). Parrilla did not mention the tribal affiliation of
these Indians, but their identity is revealed in
other documents (Newcomb and Field, 1967:
262-263).
After the prisoners were confronted with a
report of the army's scouts that a Taovaya and
lscani town lay ahead, one of them offered to
guide the army to it on a good, short road. The
prisoner did his job well, leading the army
straight to the vicinity, and on October 9 the
vanguard of Parrilla's army was attacked by 60
to 70 Indians. The enemy force retreated along
a well-tended road which led through a forest,
the Spaniards in hot pursuit. Suddenly Parrilla's
forces emerged on the shore of a river; across
from which stood a palisaded village. It was a
Taovaya village on the northern bank of the Red
River in what is now Oklahoma, opposite the vicinity of Spanish Fort, in Montague County,
Texas (see Duffield, 1965; Newcomb and Field,
1967: 261-262, and Bell and Bastian, 1967, 54ff.
and Fig. 26). The Spaniards came under heavy
musket fire from the fort and from the many

Indians outside it. The army had fallen into a
trap, taken in by an ancient strategic ruse. Parrilla was to pay dearly for his rashness. In the
ensuing battle the Indians attempted to surround
the Spanish army and annihilate it, while the
Spaniards defended themselves as best they
could, also trying to cross the river and get at the
palisaded village. The Taovayas were aided by
their kinsmen and confederates, the Iscanis, who
occupied a village a short distance downstream.
The Spaniards also could see the tipis of the
Comanches beyond the Taovayas' corrals, and
Parrilla believed that there were Frenchmen
with the Wichitas, giving them assistance. But
the presence of Frenchmen is to be seriously
doubted, as is any significant tactical help on
their part (Newcomb, n.d.; Newcomb and Field,
1967: 261-264). The Spaniards e>timated the
enemy force to be between 2,000 and 6,000 men,
possibly 500 of whom were mounted. The battle
raged from shortly after noon until darkness. But
even use of the two cannons the Spaniards· had
brought along and the death of a courageous
enemy chief could not win the day. Parrilla was
forced to retreat. The retreat turned into a rout
as his poorly trained and demoralized men fled
back through the tangled brush and forest to
their temporary camp, leaving behind their can~
non. With nightfall the Indians withdrew to
their palisaded village to celebrate while Parrilla
and his officers met in hurried consultation to
assess their predicament. The decision was not
long in the making; Parrilla ordered his shaken
army to break camp in the darkness and commence the return march to San Saba. More than
fifty men were dead, wounded, or missing; the
Apaches were on the verge of deserting, many
horses were dead or missing, and scouts reported
that new contingents of Indians were joining the
enemy in their village.
In a tactical sense the battle was almost a
standoff in that neither side won a clear-cut vie"
tory. But in broader perspective it was a decisive
Spanish defeat as it marked the end of Spanish
expansion and domination in Texas. With the
exception of the Tonkawas, the Spaniards had
been unable to punish the Indians responsible
for the destruction of the mission, and Indians
equipped with firearms and ridirtg horses were
increasingly to force the Spaniards onto. the de"
fensive and into retreat.
'
The Liparls acquitted themselves well

throughout Parrilla's campaign, serving mostly
in a scouting capacity, though in the battle on
the Red River they were stationed on the army's
left flank with some of the Spaniards and seem
to have performed as ably as they. But since they
were unable to steal any horses or acquire captives, they were eager to leave the scene of the
battle. In fact, Parrilla claimed that some of the
Lipans retreated "impetuously" taking not only
their own horses but some of the Spaniards' too.
But he also stated that the Lipans served "loyally
and affectionately" in the campaign. In one
place Parrilla mentioned that one Lipan was
wounded and one killed, but in another that they
suffered no casualties. Whichever the case, the
Lipans considered the campaign a success, and
hurried back to their families to celebrate the
victory. The families of the Lipan warriors had
sought refuge during the campaign with the
"Nattagees, Mescaleros, and Faraones" (Parrilla, 11/18/1759), so that the returning warriors did not remain at San Saba, if in fact they
passed through there on the return journey. Parrilla noted that while the Lipans were with these
other Apaches it had the beneficial effect of
halting their raids on Spanish settlements. He
also believed that the Lipans would return to San
Saba.
... once they have celebrated according to their
usage and custom their happiness that all 134 of
them who participated in the skirmishes are alive.
[We must allow] also for the distance of their habitat on one hand and of their need for establishing
their quarters wherever food is available. So that
this is in their favor now, and we cannot think
badly of them nor consider them false or deceitful
in the offer they made to reside at the missions once
they observed one of our campaigns against their
enemies (Parrilla, 11/18/1759).

While the Lipans could celebrate the outcome
of their part in the Parrilla campaign, they also
were fully aware of their precarious situation.
They had been wary of the Spaniard's ability to
defend them after the San Saba Mission was destroyed, and the recent battle of the Red River
demonstrated that the power of the Wichitas and
Comanches-or the weakness of the Spaniardswas perilously real.
Parrilla was soon relieved of his command
and replaced by Captain Felipe de Rabago y
Teran, and it must have seemed to the Llpans
that both the ability and interest of the Spaniards
162

in protecting them were in grave doubt. But the
new commander of the Presidio of San Luis de
las Amarillas quickly rebuilt and strengthened
the fort, brought its garrison up to full strength,
and saw to it that his soldiers were well mounted.
By November 1761, Rabago reported that the
stockade was almost finished.
Surely in its strength (it is made of stone) it looks
like a castle. Since the stockade dominates the view
for the entire fortress one should be able to defend
oneself very easily from it. It seems that its view
has encouraged some of the Apache chiefs to live on
this river in spite of the fear they always have for
the other Indians, their enemies. The stockade has
also caused contrary effects in their enemies. Two
numerous squadrons [war parties] arrived in these
environs and later retreated without doing any
harm at all (Rabago, 11/6/1761).

These were encouraging signs from the Lipan
point of view, and the new commander also was
friendly and distributed presents quite freely.
I treated the captains and the rest of the people of
this nation affectionately and entertained them
royally. In addition I have spent large sums of
money from my own pocket for goods that I have
distributed to them. I have given them tobacco, corn
(maiz), piloncillo [loaves of brown sugar], bridles,
spurs, iron material for saddles, and complete clothing for some. With such gifts I managed to have
several conferences with the captains. I reminded
them that they would be better off (temporally or
spiritually) if they established themselves in the
village or mission. I pleaded with them until I
convinced them (with temporal arguments). I
pointed out that it was reasonable to come, especially since they have lost most of their lands to the
Comanches and other nations. By taking possession
of their lands the enemy has also taken their bison:
Bison is the daily food of the Apaches. They were
deprived of it because they were afraid of their
enemy. They asked me to help them by giving them
some soldiers so they could hunt bison. I have
given them men on five occasions. I helped them to
make them feel obligated, to make the commanding
official with them realize the extent of the land and
recognize the advantages and disadvantages of
this land (Rabago, 12/31/1761).

Rabago's motives for so ardently courting the
Lipans may at first glance seem strange, but certainly not as vague or peculiar as some would
have you believe (Castaneda, 1939: 154). Rabago was well aware of the strengths and weaknesses of the Lipans, Mescaleros, Tonkawas,

Wichitas, and Comanches. But he was a victim
of circumstance as much as were the Lipans.
There was, he knew, little possibility of coming
to satisfactory terms with the Wichitas or Comanches and none at all that they could be induced to enter missions. Yet, if his regime was
to follow instructions, a successful mission or
missions had to be re-established. And perhaps
uppermost in his mind was the need to defend
the presidio from the powerful northern tribes.
Admittedly, the Lipans might not be ideal allies
but they had at least acquitted themselves well
at the Red River battle. While they could hardly
be called friends, they were not hostile either.
But if they were to become enemies, whether or
not they joined forces with the Comanches or
other Indians, the chances that the presidio could
long survive were poor. Rabago, it would seem,
had very little choice; he needed support from
some quarter, the Lipans were the only natives
who could give it, and after all, such an alliance
was only the continuation of a policy established
by his predecessor.
By August, 1761, Rabago (8/18/1761) had
become confident that the Llpans could be congregated in missions and so wrote the viceroy
and Father Jimenez at San Juan Bautista. Several chiefs had visited Rabago and promised to
live in a mission with their people after they had
secured meat on a last bison- hunting excursion.
Rabago provided an armed escort for the hunters. In his letter to the viceroy, Rabago suggested
that it would help to persuade the Lipans to
honor their promise if the commanders at the
other posts where the Lipans were apt to visitBejar, San Juan Bautista, and Santa Rosa del
Sacramento - were instructed to turn them
away. In October, El Gran Cabez6n (Big Head),
an important and powerful band chief, promised
Rabago that he would bring in his people to settle at a mission. Rabago quickly relayed this information to Father Jimenez, and Jimenez arrived at San Saba early in November.
On November 3, a meeting was held with a
Lipan chief, who stated that 10 other chiefs and
their people wanted to take up mission life
(Jimenez, 11/4/1761). Shortly afterward, Gran
Cabez6n and the other chiefs again visited the
presidio to confer with Rabago and Jimenez. The
Lipan captains agreed to recognize Gran Cabez6n as their spokesman and paramount chief,
but subsequent events suggest that his position

was not long recognized. Gran Cabez6n was now
ready to settle his band in a mission, but he could
not be induced to settle at San Saba. The destruction of the mission, the death of its priests,
the murder of presidia! soldiers, the nearness
of the Comanches, Wichitas, and other enemies,
and their continual theft of horses from the presidio and probably from the Lipans too, weighed
too heavily on his mind. But the chief was willing to discuss settling on the "San Joseph River"
-the upper Nueces, halfway between San Saba
and the Rio Grande. Rabago himself was familiar with the upper Nueces region, having
crossed it while cutting directly north from San
Juan Bautista to San Saba (Fig. 76). It was
rugged, isolated country and it had not yet been
penetrated by the Comanches, Wichitas, or their
allies.
But in order to persuade the Lipans even to
settle in their own upper Nueces River country,
Rabago had to agree to two other conditions.
First, Gran Cabez6n asked that more soldiers
than had been detailed ever before be provided
for a large bison hunt. Father Jimenez agreed
with Rabago that to do this would be beneficial,
since the Apaches would enter mission life with
a food supply and would not have to be fed immediately. Gran Cabez6n's second demand was
that the daughter of "Captain Grande Natage,"
a captive held by the Spaniards somewhere in
Nuevo Leon, be returned to her people. Rabago
readily offered to do everything possible to find
her, saying:
The Natage captain, a relative of Captain Cabez6n, has promised to restrain the Apache Indians
known as Mescaleros from stealing horses and killing in the province of Coahuila if his daughter is
returned. Should the Mescaleros continue to steal
and to kill, the Natage captain will take the horses
from them and present them to me so that I may
return them to the owners. In addition he will take
all their horses, women, and children (Rabago,
12/31/1761).

Whether Gran Cabez6n was literally a relative of the captive may be questioned, but in any
case the close tie between this Lipan and a Mescalero division at this point in time is of note.
Rabago was able to persuade Gran Cabez6n
and his people not to insist on their third demand, that soldiers accompany them on their
expeditions against the Comanches during the
prickly pear season. Rabago seems to have felt

that the presidio at San Saba was strong enough
to hold out against Comanche attack, and that
the new location on the upper Nueces would be
a safe one, but he was not willing to initiate a
campaign which might well be as disastrous as
Parrilla's recent one.
Following this productive conference, Father
Jimenez hurried back to Mission San Bernardo
on the Rio Grande in order to secure supplies
and make the necessary arrangements for the
new mission. Normally new missions were approved by viceregal officials and by the College
of Queretaro before they were established. Although Rabago had been urged to re-establish
a mission at San Saba, the new site on the upper
Nueces could hardly qualify in this respect. It
was too far away. But waiting months, perhaps
years for official approval was clearly an impossibility. The Lipans had never before been
as willing to enter into mission life and quite
probably never would be again, particularly as
they might be decimated by their enemies, scattered to the four winds, or be forced to join their
less friendly relatives. Father Jimenez also

thought the site on the upper Nueces a good one,
and until official approval and assistance were
obtained, the missions on the Rio Grande could
lend the new one corn, beans, tobacco, and some
meat. Jimenez also pointed out to his superiors
that it was important to be able to supply the
material wants of the Lipans, since they would
not put up with leftovers or skimpy provisions
(Jimenez, 11/23/1761).
Rabago and Father Jimenez seem to have had
high hopes for the proposed mission; if they had
serious doubts about the outcome of this venture,
they are not communicated in their letters and
reports. The Lipans, for their part, seem to have
been much more tentative and unsure about
what they were getting into. Yet they had already profited materially from their new association, their demands were being met for the
most part, and if things went poorly in the new
mission they could always desert and disappear
into the wilderness. Thus was the stage set for
the founding of Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz.

Life and Death of the Mission

.•
I
~
.

r

Gran Cabez6n and his band returned to San
Saba from the fall hunt in the last days of December, 1761. They were ready to begin mission
life and demanded that Rabago "get busy" and
proceed to the upper Nueces. Rabago hastily dispatched a letter to Father Jimenez on the thirtyfirst, requesting him to come to the upper
Nueces, and also ordered a detachment of 30
soldiers and a lieutenant to accompany the Indians on their journey. The detachment, including Rabago, departed from San Saba on January
3, 1761 (Rabago, 12/31/1761; 1/2/1762). The
journey of 100 miles was completed in seven
days, the party making camp near the spring at
El Canon on the morning of the ninth. Rabago,
who had gone ahead to examine this spot, "found
it very suitable for the establishment of the
town" (1/9/1762).
Rabago ordered the soldiers to explore the valley and hurriedly sent a message to Father Jimenez at San Juan Bautista informing him of his
arrival. Losing no time, Father Jimenez, hauling
many supplies and accompanied by Father Joaquin Banos, reached El Caiion on January 16.
Father Banos originally had been assigned to
Mission Santa Cruz de San Saba, but had become
discouraged and returned to Mexico before it
was destroyed. They brought with them axes,
iron bars which could be turned into various
kinds of implements, hoes, and yokes they had
made for oxen. They also brought a supply of
corn, tobacco, piloncillo, clothing, and hats for
the Indian captains. Some Indians from Mission
San Bernardo were brought along to build an
irrigation ditch so that corn might be planted in
the spring (Rabago, 1/16/1762).
By the twentieth of the month exploration of
the valley had been completed and Rabago ordered his men to make depositions concerning
the nature of the valley and adjacent lands, and
he requested that the priests do the same. Though
the men were obviously under pressure from
Rabago to report favorably on this wilderness,

there is remarkably little distortion or hyperbole
in the depositions. Lieutenant Manuel Valdez
(also appearing in the documents as Manuel
Baldes and Joseph Manual Valdez), who appears to have achieved his rank as a result of
Rabago's having had an adulterous affair with
his wife, was in charge of the survey (Castaneda,
1939: 150). Valdez was 37 years old and despite
his illiteracy and the peculiar relationship he
had with his commander, seems to have been an
able and reliable soldier. He was particularly
concerned with water resources of the valley
and how they might be employed. He said:
The river flowing from north to south through the
middle of this valley is abundant in soft water. The
river has three possible irrigation sites because the
river bed is so wide and because part of the water
goes under the area where there are no sharp
boulders or rock bottom. The problem can be solved
by digging the foundations where the dams arc to
be built until the rock bottom is found. One of the
irrigation sites, about one-eighth of a league away
in an easterly direction, allows all of the water to
be extracted from the river. The water is enough to
irrigate about four leagues of land. Three villages
or towns could be established beyond the irrigation
ditch. Water can also be taken from the western
side; the land is also level (Rabago, 1/20/1762).

Thirty year-old Sergeant Pedro de Rivera echoed
his liteutenant, Rabago's deposition quoting him
as saying,
... it is one of the best valleys he has seen, considering the length and width as well as the canyons
which surround it on all four sides ... The abundance of grass proves the land is fertile and that
cattle can easily live and reproduce in this area.

Francisco Longoria, a 40 year-old soldier from
the presidio on the Rio Grande, and Thadeo
Flores, a 49 year-old soldier, were impressed by
the large amount of wood available. Fathers
Jimenez and Banos made a deposition on January 22, and in addition to the claims made about

the abundance of water and the ease of irrigation, they pointed out the geographical advantages of the site. They believed the land between
the Rio Grande and San Antonio was useless and
thus impossible to colonize, but that the region
between the new mission site and the San Saba
River could be settled. They said,
Many villages or settled areas could be established
in these directions and utilize the mineral wealth
which is said to be so abundant in the territory. The
fields are extensive and easily irrigated from the
river. There are many types of wood in this area,
for example, cedar [Juniperus ashei], British oak
[ Quercus shumardii and/or Q. texana], cottonwood,
walnut [probably pecan, but possibly Texas black
walnut, Juglans microcarpa], evergreen oak [i.e.,
liveoak], mesquite, and many others for all types
of construction (Jimenez and Banos, 1j22/1762.

With these preliminaries out of the way, Rabago was ready to formally establish the mission,
and on January 23, 1762, the two priests, Lieutenant Valdez, other soldiers, Joseph Antonio,
a longtime Lipan captive who spoke "perfect"
Castilian and served as an interpreter (Rabago,
1/23/1762a), the leading Indians, and Rabago
went together to the flat knoll above the spring
where the mission was to be built. A hut with
a cross in front of it had been erected to serve as
a church, and the fathers standing at its front
door rang a bell summoning the Indians. A
crowd of 300 men, women, and children of Gran
Cabez6n's band gathered, as well as a number
of other Indians who were undecided about mission life. Father Jimenez, barefoot and dressed
in alb and stole, blessed the site. Rising from
prayer, he held the cross up and handed it to
Rabago, and in a solemn procession the soldier
bore it to the altar which had been prepared for
the holy celebration of the mass.
Following the mass and a hymn sung by the
fathers, soldiers, and the few mission Indians,
Captain Rabago through Joseph Antonio described to the Lipans the spiritual and material
blessings they were to receive from the Spaniards. Chief Gran Cabez6n responded that the
Indians were pleased with everything, and wanted the Catholic king to protect, defend, and govern them and their children. He also asked that
they be given possession of the site and the
sprmg.
Rabago, who had a feeling for the dramatic,
later recounted:

Leading Captain Cabez6n in his majesty's name
(may God keep him), I took him across the lands
and spring of the site. He uprooted some grass, drew
water, and watered the stones he had picked up.
By means of the interpreter we learned it was symbolic of possession. He spoke for all his people saying that they were in full agreement with him. He
asked me for the land he needed as pasture for his
horses. I granted his request in accordance with his
majesty's orders in his royal laws. Comprised in
these lands are those to be used for agricultural
purposes. I named this village Santa Cruz (Rabago,
1/23/1762b).

Rabago appointed Gran Cabez6n captain of
Santa Cruz, but he did not appoint any other officials, postponing it, he said, "until they are better instructed" (ibid.). Father Jimenez named
the mission San Lorenzo, and the birth of San
Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz was accomplished.
A few days later, while Rabago was still at the
new mission, Father Jimenez presented him with
a rambling petition which throws considerable
light on the problems which now confronted the
missionaries, as well as some pertinent facts
about Lipans. Uppermost in his mind was the
need for an adequate number of soldiers, not only
for defense of the mission from attacks of the
Comanches and other Indian enemies, but also
to impress the Lipans, whose constancy the
father doubted. Only Rabago could supply this
force, and Jimenez urged him to do so even
though he recognized the dangers Rabago would
face should he split his forces. For his part,
Jimenez was willing that his missions on the Rio
Grande lend supplies to the new mission until
it was officially recognized.
Most of the missionary's doubts sprang from
the nature and character of the Lipans, who were
so different from the acculturated Coahuiltecans
of the Rio Grande missions. He had found the
Coahuiltecans to have a "limited capacity" and
to be cowardly. Their land was poor and provided them with a meager and precarious existence. When brought into missions they were
easily and cheaply satisfied with a little corn, tobacco, and a goat on special occasions. In contrast, the Lipans were "proud," possessed a
"wide-awake understanding," "courage," and a
"haughty spirit." They were accustomed to living well on bison and other game animals, possessed large herds of horses, and were well supplied with bridles and saddles. They raised some

166

J

T
I

I.

'
I

I

of their own corn, as well as melons and squash,
and had excellent tobacco. The Lipans had obtained brass utensils, clothing, and some firearms from Europeans, and in general were well
off. There were always some "sorcerers" among
the Lipans, Jimenez added, probably meaning
shamans, who were antagonistic to the priests
and capable of causing all sorts of trouble.
Jimenez also realized that he and the other Spaniards saw things from a very different perspective than did the Lipans, remarking:

Squint-eyed," wanted a mission established for
his band. Using grains of corn, he counted out
for Rabago 114 armed men under his command,
but he could not enumerate the women and children exactly "since he did not have the ability
required" (Rabago, 2/7 /1762). His band must
have numbered between 4-00 and 500 people,
perhaps more. Turnio wanted to settle at a spring
Lieutenant Valdez had visited while surveying
the upper Nueces Valley. The lieutenant said
of this location:

We must move cautiously in dealing with the Indians regardless of how convincing previous incidents have been. According to what I know about
them our opinions are quite different. What seems
inconsistent to us is not inconsistent to them regardless of the insufficient reasons they express (Jimenez, 1/26/1762).

The other spring is at quite a distance from this
area [San Lorenzo]. It is about four leagues walking downstream on the other bank, or in other
words on the western bank of the river. The spring
originates at the height of a plain with a large
forest of walnut [pecan] trees (Rabago, 1/20/1762).

I

r

i

'

It would be expensive and ticklish to keep these
Indians satisfied and in the missions, at least at
first. But, the priest observed, for years the government had spent vast sums of money attempting to contain thes~ raiders; it would be wise now
to spend such money for peaceful purposes. His
task was to be a difficult one.
In addition to the more than 300 people of
Gran Cabez6n's band, other Lipans came and
went in a constant stream, curious about this new
Spanish settlement. Jimenez believed "that once
this mission is successful (which will occur if
the superior government provides the necessary
supplies) all the remaining heathen Indians will
be converted" (Jimenez, 2/5/1762). And at first
it seemed likely that many other bands would
come in to be settled. Captain Teja [Texa] had
promised to settle his band in a mission, but he
was sick and encamped on the Chanes [Llano]
River at the time San Lorenzo was founded. Sergeant Pedro de Rivera was, in fact, sent from the
new mission to the Llano River to help him recover (Rabago, 1/21/1762). The chief did so,
since he was at San Lorenzo the following summer. Teja was probably the chief later referred
to by the missionaries as the "captain, given his
health by our merciful Lord with the holy baptism [who] comes and goes almost as if he were
a mission Indian" (Jimenez and Cuevas, 2/25/
1763). Another band chief, Captain Panocha,
promised to "establish himself in a mission
within a year at most" (Rabago, 2/6/1762),
and finally, a chief known as El Turnio, or "The

At first, Rabago refused to establish this mission
because he could spare no soldiers to guard it and
there were no missionaries available to serve in
it (Ra bago, 2/6/1762). But Turnio was insistent
and Rabago fearful that the Indian "might become cold in his allegiance and prejudice the
other Indians against us" (Rabago, 2/7 /1762).
On February 6, 1762, this second mission was established. Father Jimenez and Lieutenant Valdez, Pedro Sanchez, Joseph de la Garza, Nicolas
de Mendoza, and Margil Falcon, all soldiers;
other Spaniards, Joseph Antonio the interpreter,
and Turnio with some of his men, gathered at the
spring.
1

By means of the interpreter, Joseph Antonio, we
asked El Turnio if he liked the land. After saying
yes, he asked if I liked it. I said yes, and the Captain
said he was glad. In addition, he expressed his desire to live there and to always support his family
who occupied ten tents. After saying he had many
people under his command, he added that they
would leave the mission whenever fruits [prickly
pear tunas] and cogallitos [probably agaves] were
in season. He felt that once the com began to grow
many more people would come to the village. I
shook his hand and as your excellency's representative I gave him royal and personal possession of the
spring and the lands designated by your excellency
for the development of conversion settlements. I
showed him where the village, church, square, and
royal houses were to be founded. I called the village
Nuestra Senora de la Candelaria. We had a cross
made to mark the exact location. To encourage
him I appointed him governor of the village. Later
I explained the power and obligation he would

have as governor. His reply was that as soon as his
brother, whom he feels is greater than he, saw him
settled in the mission he would also [settle J
(Rabago, 2/8/1762).

Rabago promised Turnio ten soldiers for Candelaria, a number the Indian considered insufficient. Actually, Rabago (2/6/1762) also felt
more soldiers were needed, since he stated in a
letter to the viceroy that he needed at least 30
soldiers for the two missions, and he suggested
that they be transferred from Coahuila where
they were no longer required. Rabago did not
manage to get the soldiers transferred; instead
he had to detach 30 of his badly needed men
from the San Saba Presidio for duty at the missions.
Information about the San Lorenzo Mission
in the early months of its existence is scarce,
partly because of the weather. When San Lorenzo was established the weather seems to have
been pleasant, but soon afterward a blizzard
struck and it was not until February 5 that Father
Jimenez could write his superior, Fray Manuel
Najera, that it had snowed and "froze considerably." He said that living in a small army tent
was inconvenient and the cold made it almost
impossible to write. The weather must have
ameliorated in the next few days for the Candelaria Mission was founded and the volume of correspondence also increased.
On February 7, Fathers Jimenez, Banos, and
Garcia collaborated on a lengthy report concerning the state of the missions of the northern Rio
Grande. Most of the report is concerned with the
missions of San Juan Bautista and San Bernardo
and their Coahuiltecan Indians, but a portion of
it is devoted to the new missions on the upper
Nueces. Among other things, the fathers reported
that five persons had been baptized in them and
that there were more than 400 Indians in each
mission. The exact number was unknown "because of many other Indians, their relatives, and
allies among them" who came and went (Jimenez, Banos, and Garcia, 2/7 /1762).
Work on the mission buildings was soon begun and a field prepared for planting. Presumably preparation of the field included the digging
of an irrigation ditch. In the spring six and a
half fanegas of corn (about 12 bushels) was
planted. Jimenez said (10/8/1762):
I had hoped to save on the expense of transporting

168

maiz. from the mission on the Rio Grande because
the six and a half fanegas of corn which we planted
were coming along nicely. But we have had so
many Indians come in, that like locusts, they have
cleaned out the field. Since we do not have many
soldiers, we have no strength to hold them back
even with our [Indian] chiefs' assistance.

In March 1762, the Comanches destroyed a
Lipan rancheria in one of the canyons near San
Lorenzo; in May the Comanches attacked another camp killing 40 persons, and in July another raid resulted in the death of 14 more Lipans
(Jimenez, 10/8/1762). No attempt was made
by the few Spanish soldiers to pursue or punish
the raiders. They learned of the attacks well after
they occurred, and in any case were too few to
take any significant action. So far, at least, the
Comanches and their allies had stayed away
from the missions.
In June, Father Jimenez gave permission to the
Lipans to go on a bison hunt. The men departed,
leaving the women and children at the mission.
But while the men were hunting, a rumor was
spread among them by "the evil one" that the
missionaries had abandoned the missions, taking
with them as captives the wives and children of
the hunters. Some of the hunters quickly returned to the mission to discover that the rumor
was untrue, and after the hunt was over they
rejoined their families at San Lorenzo (Castaneda, 1935: 399). Father Jimenez and his new
assistant, Father Manuel de Cuevas, had been
asked by the viceroy for a report on the situation
at the new missions, and in their reply, the Consul ta of February 25, 1763, they apparently referred to this incident. They said that one of the
band chiefs, El Lumen (The Light), who with
permission was hunting bison in the direction of
San Saba, had had a dream. He dreamed ,that the
missionaries and soldiers had left the missions,
taking Lipan women, children, and horses with
them. El Lumen hurried to San Lorenzo to discover whether or not his dream was true.
He found the families quiet and fond of the missions; the children diligent in the doctrine. Later he
thought that his wife and his people's wives had
been living with us, with the soldiers, and with the
mission Indians of the Rio Grande [Coahuiltecans]
who help us. He did not find this to be true; [but]
he left and has not returned since then. He suggested to the other captains that we were gathering
them in the mission to kill them deceitfully. The

killing was to occur before any more soldiers came.
With this warning he made all the other captains
restless and led them to that end. However, God
managed to defend us. The captains told him to
leave if he did not believe in our sincerity. He left
and we do not expect him to return, God willing.
There were other things besides the uneasiness
which almost caused everything to be lost. He
waited with his gun aimed to kill one of us without
knowing why. On another occasion they surrounded
the Spaniards' dwelling each with his arms. Another time he wanted the altar cloth to use as a
breechcloth. Although we were unable to provide
him with an equivalent, God was able to calm him
down (Jimenez and Cuevas, 2/25/1763).
Later in the summer of 1762 Father Jimenez
gave the chiefs permission to leave the mission in
order to gather prickly pear tunas, and they all
returned, faithful to their promise to do so (Jimenez, 10/8/1762). In the fall Father Jimenez
again gave the chiefs-Gran Cabezon, Teja,
Boruca (Chatterbox), and Bordado (or Zapato
Borda do, Embroidered Shoe )-permission to
leave the mission with their people to hunt bison,
supplying these chiefs with written statements
to this effect, so that if they encountered any
Spaniards from San Saha they would not be considered deserters or hostiles. Only one chief, El
Cojo (the Lame or Pegleg) left the mission without first seeking permission from the missionary.
In all, eight "captains" or band chiefs (Gran
Cabezon, El Turnio, Teja, Boruca, Panocha,
Bordado, El Lumen, and El Cojo) were known to
the Spaniards by the summer of 1762. By the
time the Consulta of Jimenez and Cuevas was
written, four more had been added for a total of
twelve. The Consulta does not mention the
chiefs' names; nonetheless, it is clear that the
four bands which constituted the core of the
mission-affiliated Lipans were those of Gran Cabezon and El Turnio, the "founding chiefs"
(Jimenez, 10/8/1762), plus the bands of Teja
and Boruca which briefly settled at the mission
somewhat later. Two other bands promised to
settle at the missions when more Spanish soldiers
were present to defend them (perhaps Panocha's
and Borda do' s bands) . Three other bands came
and went, more or less at will, Cuevas and Jimenez saying of them: "We do not insist that
they remain here since we do not have enough
provisions or a competent number of soldiers for
so many people." Two other bands, probably

Lumen's and Cojo's, had deserted the missions
the previous summer and had not returned. A
twelfth band, assuming it was not one of the unnamed bands listed in the Consulta, was that of
Bigotes (Mustaches). A sister of this chief,
along with some other women, was captured in
an attack made by "Texas" (i.e., Hasinai Caddo)
Indians and their allies on a rancheria on the
Frio River near San Antonio, in September,
1762. The chief's sister escaped the following
spring and sought refuge in the San Saba Presidio, where Rabago ( 4/4/1763) had her questioned. Bigotes was one of the three chiefs who
had temporarily settled in 1754 at the mission
Father Terreros established in Coahuila (Dunn,
1912: 199). The experience appears to have
soured him permanently on missions, as he was
never mentioned in connection with either of
those on the upper Nueces. In 1763 his band was
camped at Paint Rock, about thirty miles east of
San Angelo (Castaneda, 1938: 358; 1939: 187190).
In addition to these twelve Lipan bands of
Central Texas in the 1760's, there were unquestionably smaller sub-band sized remnants that
were unfriendly to the Spaniards. Rabago ( 10/
15/1762) apparently was referring to them
when he commented that some were
... killing a few cattle from the San Antonio
River villages. They do no other damage and I
know their captains try to prevent them. An example is that they have moved closer to the missions
and away from such villages.
He felt that if these few Lipans were dealt with
sternly, they could move to the upper Nueces,
come under the influence of the missions, and
"this would easily lead to conversion." He also
stated that once the Lipans had been converted,
the Mescalero and Natage Apaches would follow
their lead since "these nations are closely tied to
the Lipans" (Rabago, 10/15/1762). In the Consulta of Jimenez and Cuevas (2/25/1763), a
similar statement was made, the missionaries
claiming that the "Natajes," "Pelones," and
"Mescaleros" would be easily converted following the conversion of the Lipans, since these
Apaches "are either relatives, very good friends,
or have the same language."
Father Jimenez entertained no illusions about
his control over the Lipans, realizing that if he
had refused their requests to leave the missions
169

to hunt or forage "they would have gone anyway" (Jimenez, 10/8/1762). In the fall of 1762,
the Lipans had also heard a rumor that another
Comanche-Wichita attack was imminent, and
since there were too few soldiers in the missions
for defense, there was no possibility of restraining them. Father Jimenez half-heartedly tried to
persuade them that they ought to remain since
the Comanches had told the Spaniards in San
Antonio that they would not attack Lipans in
missions. But the Lipans could not be made to believe this tale and Father Jimenez (10/8/1762)
admitted that "neither do I, considering the
Comanches' endless hatred for our Indians, their
great strength, and our Indians' cowardice engendered by their great fear of the Comanches."
It turned out that the rumor was well founded,
for shortly after the Indians left on their hunt
some Lipans came to the mission to report that
the Comanches had attacked a rancheria, killing
some people and stealing horses. Jimenez was
unable to discover which band of Lipans had
been attacked.
The shortage of food with which to feed the
Indians both lessened the possibility of controlling the Indians and made the requests of the
chiefs to leave the missions to hunt and forage
almost a blessing. The situation was serious, even
as early as 1762. The missions on the Rio Grande
had sent many supplies, but they could not continue to do so indefinitely.
... since it takes so long to get provisions from the
superior government, I feel it is impossible to continue supporting so many people. Your excellency
must realize that it is necessary to give the essentials not only to those in the missions but also to the
many others who are frequently here because they
either are relatives or very good friends of the mission Indians. They promise to congregate whenever
there is plenty to eat (Jimenez, 10/8/1762).

As if Father Jimenez' problems were not bad
enough, he learned in the fall of 1762 that "the
governor and other officials of Coahuila and
Texas had recently made a formal complaint
against the Apaches" (Castai1eda, 1939: 170).
Jimenez (10/8/1762) implored Rabago to inform the viceroy that the Apaches who were
raiding in Coahuila and Texas were not his mission Apaches. Rabago, at San Saba, forwarded
the missionary's letter and added to it his own
plea that the various Apache divisions be distinguished from one another. He pointed out that

the Apaches themselves recognized three divisions-the Mescaleros, the Natages, and the
Lipans (Rabago, 10/15/1762). And in 1763 the
missionaries (Jimenez, et al., 9/19/1763) noted
that the Mescaleros and Lipans were:
... very different from each other. They live and
support themselves differently. Although we suspect some from those nations [Mescaleros], their
followers, and others comprised under the name
Apache have intermarried with some Lipanes (a
custom no longer practiced), it is true that each
has preserved some trading. This has been decreasing since the Lipanes have strengthened their
friendship with the Spaniards. Since the founding
of the Lipane missions it is true that the Apaches
(as they are known to the Lipanes) or Mescaleros
(as they are known to us) have on various occasions
stolen six horses from the Lipanes. In addition, it is
true that they have begged the Lipanes twice to
unite with them and resist our arms as one force.
This was attempted through the Lipane captains.
The attempt to convince the Lipanes who had dealings with them (the Mescaleros) to unite was a
failure. It led to a stronger union among themselves.
Others joined the Lipanes, for example, the captain
known as Cabellos Largos who belonged to the
people of Captain Voruca, and other individuals
who preferred not to recognize any captain and to
go on alone.

Jimenez and Cuevas (2/25/1763) succinctly
summed up the situation they found themselves
in by pointing out that the Lipans had horses,
firearms, and were in their own land and that:
We are very few and without any help nearby. The
Indians are very bold; if they are not punished they
misbehave more. They are brought up in Christianity on their own terms. To restrain them in the
conditions described we feel it is indispensible to
kwe a sufficient number of soldiers.

Despite the many and increasing problems,
work on the mission buildings had gone well and
by October 1762, Father Jimenez (10/8/1762)
could report that the church (Fig. 3, Structure
2), the sacristy (Fig. 4, Structure 5), and quarters for the priests (Fig. 4, probably Structure
9) had been completed. They were built of adobe
and "stoutly erected." A storehouse for corn and
other provisions had been started (Fig. 4, Structure 10) and Father Jimenez expected it to be
completed before the month was out. But in his
letter to the commissary general on the twentyeighth of the month, this building was not men-

.J

,.

tioned, so he may have been over-optimistic
(Castaneda, 1935: 403). The Indians took a
fancy to the storehouse, .Jimenez writing that
they "have become excited with it telling me
they will hide in it should their enemies come.
They have asked me to build their houses similarly and I have promised to do so" (.Jimenez,
10/8/1762).
Another encouraging sign, the missionaries
claimed, was that by early 1763 the Lipans were
much more willing to listen to the missionaries.
[They J now listen to the divine word with pleasure.
They ask us questions which manifest some of the
errors responsible for their disliking of Christianity
and of peace with other people. They have helped
us with some of the work. They are persuaded and
gladly agree to support themselves with their work
and remain in the missions like the other converts.
They bring us their children for baptism and call
us to baptize adults when they are sick. They have
not left the mission without our permission. When
they have had our permission to leave the missions,
they have left their dishes, a few horses, their children, and their wives for us to keep. Things such
as these and other similar ones convince us that the
Indians are in a frame of mind for conversion
(Jimenez and Cuevas, 2/25/1763).

In December 1764, Jimenez again said much the
same thing:
For the past three years two missionaries have lived
in San Lorenzo and Candelaria; they work with the
Indians domestically. Many of the new mission Indians who were against Christian doctrine would
leave as we began to explain it. Now they listen
with pleasure. Baptism was hated in the beginning,
today some bring their children to be baptized.
Others ask to be baptized especially after telling us
of their sick ones. God is responsible for this change.
MiraclPs such as a quick recovery from an illness
after receiving baptism have proven thP enemy
wrong. The enemy believes that everyone who was
baptized would die (Jimenez, 12/26/1764).
In 1764 an apparently devastating smallpox epiedmic struck the Lipans. Jimenez (12/25/1764)
said, "During the smallpox epidemic we baptized (in articulo mortis) forty children and
twenty-seven adults in San Lorenzo, and two
adults and five children in Candelaria. The majority died." More revealing of the situation is
the statement of a perturbed and mystified
Father Jimenez that the Indians were "seeing"
an old man, whose activities and message were

those of a prophet or messiah. The missionary
said:
All the Indians state that they see an old man
come and disappear. The old man advises them to
have a continuous war with the neighboring nations and with the Spaniards. He emphasizes that
they should never be baptized. Those that are will
die shortly after the ceremony. He appears in battle,
where he is killed. Later he reappears. The old man
uses this episode to encourage others to fight, promising that they will also live after death. After
death they are to live among their people reunited;
they are to reunite with the separated. He changes
forms to convince the skeptical. He often appears
in the form of a woman. The oldest Indian who has
seen her says she is always the same age. Sorcerers
[i.e., shamans J advocate that the old man be trusted
(Jimenez, 12/26/1764).
Nativistic movements are a common response to
cultural upheaval and social disorganization,
and are a well known phenomenon among North
American Indians, as well as among other
peoples. The occurrence of such a movement
among the Lipans in the 1760's indicates that
disintegration and disorganization of their culture had assumed major proportions.
Through the course of more than a century,
direct contact with the indirect influence from
European civilization had wrought revolutionary changes in Lipan culture. And in a contest
which had raged for at least sixty years, the
Lipans had been forced from their homeland by
Comanche, Wichita, and other Indian enemies,
and were still under attack from them. Heir to
the awful legacy of European diseases, their
numbers were also drastically declining. Many
Lipans had believed that the way out of their
predicament lay in alliance with the Spaniards,
though they could hardly have realized that such
alliance would include a challenge and assault
by the missionaries on their ancient faith, indeed
upon their entire way of life. But the Spanish
alliance had not proved to be a solution. The soldiers were too few, incompetent, and ill-equipped
to help the Lipans in their terrible military
struggles; the missionaries were too poor to feed
them regularly and too demanding of their labor
and allegiance. In short, the Lipans found themselves in an intolerable situation for which there
was no practical solution. But the prophet, with
his supernatural gifts, offered a way-a plan of
action and a road to salvation. To what extent
171

the Lipans embraced his creed is unknown, but
that he appeared at all is symptomatic of their
condition.
The inability of Rabago and the missionaries
to obtain formal approval and support for the
mission on the Nueces, combined with the growing reluctance of the Lipans to settle at the missions, must have made their future seem bleak
by the end of 1764. Unfortunately, little information is available concerning the progress being made with the building at San Lorenzo
during 1764 and 1765. Nor is much known about
Candelaria, save that by 1766 an adobe friary
and chapel had been built, as well as a mudplastered jacal which served as a granary and
warehouse. There also were temporary huts for
the neophytes, and fields had been cleared in the
vicinity but they were poorly cultivated (Castaneda, 1939: 179) .
In October of 1766, the unhappy plight of San
Lorenzo was worsened by an enemy attack.
Comanches and their allies had raided nearby
Lipan rancherias almost from the time the missions were established, as has been mentioned,
but they had never before dared to attack the
missions themselves. On this occasion, the thirty
soldiers Rabago had assigned to the missions
were all at San Lorenzo, perhaps there because
Turnio's band had abandoned Candelaria early
in the fall. Turnio's departure may, in fact, mark
the abandonment of Candelaria; no further reference to Lipans living there has come to light.
Perhaps the attack would have been successful
despite the presence of all the soldiers had not a
man who was out collecting wood early in the
morning discovered the enemy. He dashed back
inside the mission walls giving the alann and
providing enough time for the Spaniards and the
few Lipans who were there to brace themselves
for the onslaught. There appeared to be about
300 of the enemy, most of whom were on horseback and armed with firearms, lances, and
hatchets. Those who were on foot were armed
with bows and arrows. Their first headlong
charge almost reached the mission walls, but the
soldiers gamely returned the fire and the two
swivel guns mounted on the bastion at the southwestern corner of the quadrangle were particularly effective in repulsing them (Fig. 4, Structure 7). The attackers retreated from the area
covered by the swivel guns, probably the western
and southern sides of the quadrangle, so the sol172

diers moved one of the guns to another location,
probably the granary at the opposite corner of
the compound (Fig. 4, Structure 10). But since
there was no parapet on this building to give protection to the men serving this gun, and a withering fusillade was directed at it, it could not be
used effectively.
Following their unsuccessful charge, the attackers took cover behind rocks, trees, and along
the banks of the little stream leading from the
spring to the Nueces. Sporadic fire was kept up
by both sides until noon when it started to rain.
The wet and undoubtedly discouraged assailants
withdrew, taking with them a herd of mares;
they did not discover the pasture in which the
garrison's horses were kept. They apparently
lost several warriors in the first charge, but removed their dead and/or wounded from the
field so that the Spaniards could not. learn precisely how many had been killed. None of the
defenders in the mission was killed although
Lieutenant Manuel Valdez, who was in command, suffered a shattered right hand, one soldier received a head wound, and several others
sustained minor wounds (Arricivita, 1792: 391392; Castaneda, 1939: 182--183).
In November 1766, only a month after the
first attack, a second attempt was made to take
San Lorenzo. Profiting from the earlier experience, the Indian attackers attempted to ambush
the soldiers outside the mission. But a wary
guard spotted the warriors and fired his gun to
give the alarm. Women from the mission were
at the river, and a detail of soldiers was out
bringing in horses, but the women rushed back
to the mission safely and what men were at hand
took up their positions at the walls. The cannons
had been placed more effectively than during the
first attack, perhaps meaning that a parapet had
been built to protect the soldiers who manned
the cannon mounted on the granary (Rabago,
11 /20/1766). Still, the force was too small to
hold the mission against a determined attack, so
Lieutenant Valdez ordered the women into soldiers' overcoats and hats, and placed them with
guns along the walls. The Indians soon began
their attack, but seeing that the mission appeared
to be stoutly defended by numerous soldiers,
they fired but one volley, wheeled their ponies,
and retreated to a grove of oaks a short distance
away. Soon a chief galloped his horse from the
grove and approached within pistol-shot range of

the mission. He circled it three times before casually and leisurely returning to the grove unharmed, though hundreds of shots had been fired
at him. From the grove the attackers continued
to fire on the mission and received counterfire
from it, neither side causing any known damage.
The attack was made in the morning and the attackers withdrew at nightfall. They were
... not the same ones who attacked the first time,
but they are well informed and obviously have been
schooled by the latter, for the enemies who have just
attacked us held a meeting in the Presidio de los
Adacs area last August together with the Texas
[Caddo], Tahuacana [Tawakonis, a Wichita
band], Tancahues [Tonkawas], Tahuyas [Taovayas, a Wichita band), Yiojuanes [Yojaunes, a
Tonkawa band], and other allied nations. We have
learned about this meeting through a soldier from
the aforesaid Presidio de los Adaes, who discussed
it at the Presidio of San Antonio de Bexar. The
aforesaid Indians [supposedly] planned to destroy
the New Mission in retaliation for the damages received by the Texas because so many of them died
during the re-encounter with the [Spanish] troops
at the Chanes [Llano] River Pass on January
twenty-fourth of this year. This occurred when the
Texas attacked the Lipanes congregated in the New
Missions, killing some of them, and capturing
others, and [in addition] carrying off the entire
herd of horses, including those belonging to the
Indians and the Spaniards from the Senor San
Joseph [Mission] (Rabago, 11/20/1766).

It would seem, then, that the first attack was
made by Texas (Tejas, i.e. Hasinai Caddo) Indians, rather than Comanches as has been assumed (Castaneda, 1939: 182-184), and that the
second was made by their allies, who may have
been other Caddos, Wichitas, Comanches, or
others.
The raids on San Lorenzo in the fall of 1766
presaged increased attacks on San Saba during
the winter, and by spring the presidia was virtually under siege. In February, Joseph Antonio
de Trujillo, the interpreter, was killed outside
the presidia by enemy Indians.
... those examining the body said there were three
blows on the left side of the chest. There was another on one of the knees which had penetrated to
the other side. The flesh from both thighs was tom
and the right hand was cut off. They carried
[away] the hand, the flesh, and the hair (Rabago,
2/28/1767).

By March, in a plea for more help, Rabago wrote
that "supplies are desperately needed. I do not
have even the principal supplies which are corn,
beans, chile, and other essentials, and all the
cattle and sheep have been destroyed or appropriated by the Indians" (Rabago, 3/11/1767).
Wichitas, Caddos, Tonkawas, and Comanches
were all involved in the siege and "they have
taken over the roads and can be seen everywhere; taunting us in order to accomplish their
intention of killing anyone who might venture
out" (Rabago, 11/20/1766).
On March 17, 1767, a detachment of twentythree soldiers, with four scouts out ahead, was
ambushed at the river crossing near the presidia
while on a hay-cutting detail. Three soldiers
were killed, and if the party had not been close
and within view of the presidia, it is likely that
it would have been wiped out. Two of the bodies
could not be brought in until the attack was over,
and one of these was scalped, the other stripped
of flesh, beheaded, and the head scalped (Rabago,
3/18/1767). Rabago could ascertain only that
the attackers were "of various tribes who had
united to help the Tahuaias [Taovayas] and the
Comanches," this information coming from Ignacio Leal, one of the soldiers who had "experience in identifying the different tribes."
The immediate consequences of this affair
were that Rabago ordered all of the Spaniards at
the presidia to remain within its walls and the
horse herd was sent to Coahuila (Rabago, 4/20/
1767). Presumably the soldiers and missionaries
at San Lorenzo were also staying close to the
mission walls and maintaining a close watch.
The attacks on the mission had already destroyed
whatever possibility remained for it to be effective in settling and converting the Lipans. No
record has been left of the departure of various
bands from the mission, but it is clear that by the
summer of 1767 no Lipans remained at the mission or apparently even visited it. The Lipans
had abandoned Central Texas and they were
never again able to roam the area freely.
In April, learning that a supply train with a
large herd of sheep, convoyed by fifty men, was
approaching the presidia, Rabago sent a detachment of fifteen soldiers to meet it two days' journey from the presidia, warn it of the danger, and
escort it to the fort. Knowing that there were
only a few enemy spies or scouts in the vicinity
at the time, Rabago believed it would take sev1 73

eral days for the Indians to gather their forces.
His calculations proved to be correct. Neither
the escort nor the supply train was bothered, and
the convoy arrived safely at the presidio on April
18. The enemy appeared in force the next day,
Easter Sunday, however, and the presidio was
attacked the following day. The fire from the
cannons on the bulwarks and from the soldiers'
guns drove off the attackers, but the herd of
sheep was captured. The next day the Indians
attempted to lure the Spaniards from the presidio with the herd, trying to make it appear that
they had abandoned it. But the Indians had been
seen leading the sheep, and so the Spaniards did
not fall into this trap (Rabago, 4/20/1767; 4/26/
1767; Castaneda, 1939: 184-185 unaccountably
gives a different version of this incident).
On April 22, one of the sentries of the beleaguered fortress saw three men on foot descending the hill across the river, to the south of
the presidio. As they approached, the sentries
recognized one of the men as Manuel Valdez
and that the other two were also soldiers. V 8.ldez,
serving as a courier, had left San Saba February
26 with dispatches for Mexico City and was returning to his post (Valdez, 2/26/1767; Rabago,
2/28/1767). Brought before the commander, the
soldiers quickly revealed the extent to which the
Comanches and other Indian enemies had invested Central Texas. The three soldiers had left
San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz on March 16,
bound for San Saba. But three days' journey
from the presidio they got lost. They soon were
discovered by a large number of mounted enemy
Indians. The trio fled into a stream, which seems
to have been the San Saba, eluding their enemies
by traveling in the stream. They followed the
river, still lost, for six days, ultimately reaching
and recognizing the ford near the presidio. Two
of their horses had died from being run so much,
and the third, loaded with their possessions, was
left at this spot so that they could slip unnoticed
into the presidio. They had encountered the enemy four times at different places along the
river, and they had climbed the hill to see if it
was safe to enter the presidio. The men's feet
were badly blistered and they were exhausted,
but undoubtedly delighted to have reached
safety (Rabago, 4/22/1757).
The summer of 1767 did not carry out the
promise of the spring, being a quiet though no
doubt an ominous one for the soldiers at San
174

Saba and the missionaries at San Lorenzo. It was
during this summer that Marques de Rubi officially inspected the missions and the presidio.
Rubi had been dispatched in 1766 by the new
Spanish king, Charles III, to visit and inspect the
entire Spanish frontier from the Gulf of California to Texas. There had been no general inspection of frontier posts for more than 30 years and
it seemed likely that a realignment of Spanish
forces in this remote region was desirable.
Rumors of profiteering by presidia} commanders
at the expense of their soldiers had come to the
king's attention. Rubi was to report on the nature
and location of each presidio, the condition of
each garrison, the prices presidia! commanders
were charging soldiers for supplies and equipment, and he was to make recommendations for
future policy and action (Castaneda, 1939: 223).
Rubi, accompanied by Nicolas de Lafora, his
captain of engineers and assistant, left Mexico
City in March, 1766. They first visited New
Mexico, then California, returning to Monclova,
Coahuila, in June, 1767. They soon began inspection of Texas, and on July 14 crossed the Rio
Grande at or near the site of modern Del Rio. In
making the crossing two horses and a Pausan
(Coahuiltecan) Indian drowned. The party
struck Las Moras Creek four leagues to the
northeast and followed it to its source. Here, at
. Las Moras Springs, located on the present Fort
Clark Guest Ranch at Bracketville, they camped
(Weddle, 1964: 167). On July 18 they resumed
their journey, heading northeasterly toward the
Nueces Valley. They first visited the abandoned
Nuestra Senora de la Candalaria, Lafora saying
that
.. on the banks of a small arroyo of very fresh and
clear water, there was a house with its little chapel
and in front of it a large hut constructed by Lipanes.
The Fernandine missionaries flattered themselves
that they would be able to induce these Indians to
live in this place. They never did it and the Li panes
only laughed at the zeal and credulity of the friars
(Kinnaird, 1958: 147).

The next day they crossed the Nueces, Lafora
continuing:
We forded it in very little water but its bed shows
how furious its current must be at flood. Taking the
road from here to the north we found, at a league
and a half, the little pueblo of San Lorenzo de la
Santa Cruz, commonly known as the Mision del

Canon. Its origin and progress are similar to those
of Candelaria. It merely keeps a detachment of
thirty men and an officer from the presidio of San
Saba occupied, and it maintains two useless missionaries. It has no other function than to be a provisioning point for packtrains which enter with
supplies for that presidio [i.e., San Saba]. Its shape
and bad location are shown on the map I drew of
this settlement. Here they have two small threepounder cannon, one of them with its trunnion
broken and both mounted on unserviceable carriages. They are without ball of their caliber or
implements for their operation (Kinnaird, 1958:
147-148; see also Bolton, 1915: 94--95).
Unfortunately, the whereabouts of Lafora's
sketch of San Lorenzo, if it still exists, is unknown, and as the inspecting party left on the
twenty-first for San Saba, nothing more was said
about the forlorn little settlement on the upper
Nueces.
The situation at the San Saba presidia had become critical in the spring of 1768. There had
been no new Indian attacks, to be sure, but the
personnel of the fort, including its commander,
could hardly endure the situation any longer.
The garrison had long been on skimpy rations
and may well have been close to starvation. An
epidemic, possibly of nutritional origin, had
·swept through the fort, soldiers were deserting,
and Rabago was ill, suffering from fainting
spells. He knew appeals to the viceroy would be
fruitless, and finally he recognized that the presidia would have to be abandoned. In June he
acted, ordering the entire garrison-soldiers,
their wives and children-to abandon it and
move to Mission San Lorenzo de la San ta Cruz.
They arrived on June 22, apparently after an
uneventful trek, since there is no account of accidents, Indian raids, or other untoward events
on the journey (Castaneda, 1939: 197-198).
By July 10, Rabago had pulled himself together sufficiently to write a rather pathetic
letter to the viceroy, advising him of his unauthorized action and explaining why he had done
so. He cited as reasons the lack of provisions
partly caused by the harassments of the enemy,
the suggestion of Marques de Rubi that the presidia be abandoned, the desertion of soldiers, the
epidemic at the fort, and his own poor health. He
called the abandonment a temporary one, but
noted that San Lorenzo was more favorably located than San Saba. In August, Rabago re-

ceived an acid reply from the viceroy, severely
reprimanding him and inquiring about the condition in which he had left San Saba. If Rabago
got any satisfaction from the letter, it was that
the viceroy had not ordered him to reoccupy the
presidia.
On February 9, 1769 Rabago received an
order which meant the eventual abandonment of
San Lorenzo. He was to send twenty-one men
from his garrison to re-enforce the one at San
Antonio. This equaled the number of men taken
from San Antonio to found San Saba. Rabago delayed obeying the order, but it mattered little as
he was being removed from command, and in
fact, his replacement was already on the way.
Apparently at San Fernando de Austria in Coahuila, he learned of his removal, meeting there
Don Manuel Antonio de Oca, his replacement.
The change of command was made April 1, and
Rabago wrote the viceroy April 19 acknowledging his removal. Rabago quickly left for Mexico
City to report to the viceroy in person and to seek
reimbursement for the personal funds he had
spent maintaining San Saba. But the ailing soldier never seems to have reached his destination.
He wrote to the viceroy from San Luis Potosi on
July 5, 1769 that he was too ill to continue the
journey, and requested that he be promoted to
the rank of colonel. His subsequent fate is a mystery; this was his last known letter and it is presumed that he died in San Luis Potosi (Castaneda, 1939: 197-199; Weddle, 1964: 178-181).
Captain Oca apparently moved the garrison
from San Lorenzo back to the San Saba presidia,
remaining there until early in 1770 when he
pulled back to San Lorenzo. On June 1, 1771
Jacobo de Ugarte y Loyola, governor of Coahuila, notified Viceroy Marques de Croix that
five soldiers from the garrison at El Canon had
filed charges against Oca. On June 8, Ugarte
wrote that the 29 men of the garrison had been
sent to San Antonio. They were not needed there
and Ugarte requested that they be sent to San
Fernando de Austria. On June 21, 1771 the viceroy ordered removal of the remainder of the El
Canon garrison, marking the final abandonment
of the mission (Weddle, 1964: 181-182).
Thus ended the Mission of San Lorenzo de la
Santa Cruz and the Spanish effort to convert and
pacify the Lipan Apaches. Begun with high
hopes by the missionaries and with vigor by the
military, their aspirations soon had withered,

175

.......
their enthusiasm and energy given way to fear
and impotence. The failure of the mission has
most often been blamed on the Lipans. They
have been accused of "treachery" and "perfidy,"
and of being "faithless," "insolent," and "fickle"
because they did not settle permanently at the
upper Nueces missions and divest themselves of
their Indianness (Castaneda, 1939: 1, 43, 136,
144, 157, 165, 167, 181, 256). But as we have
seen, only a few band chiefs actually agreed to
settle down to a mission life, and it is doubtful
that any of them viewed it as a permanent arrangement. They also had agreed to settle for a
price-protection and sustenance. When little of
either was provided, any commitment some of
the Lipans may have felt dissolved. The Lipans
were interested in their own welfare and in
maintaining their own customs and way of life;
they had never agreed to give them up. Such selfinterest was neither treachery nor perfidy.
If responsibility for the failure of the El Canon
mission has to be fixed, it should be blamed on
the government of Spain. The missions on the
upper Nueces were not officially sanctioned and
never given adequate support. With such handicaps they might have failed in the best of times,
but they were founded in the worst. Even as San
Lorenzo was being established, France was secretly ceding Louisiana to Spain, an act ratified
by the Peace of Paris in 1763. No longer was
there threat of French encroachment to induce
Spanish authorities to aid a remote and struggling mission on the northern borderlands of
New Spain. The burden of a vast, inflated colonial empire was heavy. There was neither money
nor men to squander in a distant, unpromising
wilderness. Spain's day was nearly done in
North America, and the El Canon mission was
built in the spent evening of that day.
If perfidy, treachery, and faithlessness are to
be ascribed to someone, it should be to the Spaniards, not the Lipans. Marques de Rubi, among
other things, had recommended after his inspection of the frontier posts of Texas that a new Indian policy be adopted. Callous and calculated,
perhaps more accurately perfidious and treacherous, Rubi's suggestion was that amicable
relations be established with the powerful Comanches and their allies, and that the Apaches
be exterminated by the combined might of the

Spaniards and the Comanches. Fortunately for
the Lipans, the new policy was not carried out
effectively. The Spaniards could never coerce
sufficient numbers of Comanches and their confederates into joining them in a major campaign
of extermination (Castaneda, 1939: 256-258;
1942: 23; 110-128).
As the destruction of the San Saba mission and
Parrilla's subsequent defeat at Spanish Fort denotes the highwater mark of the Spanish colonial
frontier in Texas, so the abandonment of the
upper Nueces missions appears to mark the end
of the Lipan Apaches as a powerful and decisive
factor in the affairs of Texas and northern
Mexico. Their raids and thieving were troublesome in subsequent years, but no longer did they
threaten the very existence of Spanish settlements and ranches. Lipan numbers must have
been much reduced by the end of the mission
era, and thereafter the survivors were much
scattered. Some bands were reported in southeast Texas in the 1770's where they were in intimate contact with Atakapan tribes, trading and
even intermarrying with them. In the 1780's the
Lipans were said to be divided into two groups,
the Upper Lipans, who roamed Coahuila, Chihuahua, and Trans-Pecos Texas, and the Lower
Lipans who ranged from southeast Texas to
Nuevo Leon and Tamaulipas (Sjoberg, 1953b:
78-79).
The Mexican Revolution, the settlement of
Anglo-Americans in Texas, the Texas Revolution, and the subsequent flood of settlers all contributed to the further decline and dispersion of
the Lipans. Americans had no more sympathy
or concern for the Lipans than did their Spanish
predecessors, perhaps less. By 1865 some Lipans
had been driven into Indian Territory where
they ultimately settled with. their Kiowa Apache
relatives; others had joined forces with remnant
Tonkawas and they were removed to Indian Territory. Some of the Lipans of Trans-Pecos Texas
joined the Mescaleros and settled with them on
a reservation in southern New Mexico. Finally,
in 1905, a few Lipans who had held out in Coahuila and Chihuahua were removed by the
United States government and placed on the
Mescalero Reservation (Hodge, 1907: 768-769;
Sjoberg, 1953b: 79-80).

REFERENCES CITED
PART II

Manuscripts
When more than one entry occurs under a
name, they are listed chronologically, by month,
day, and year. The abbreviations used for archival depositories are: A.G.M. for Archivo General
de la Nacion, Mexico; A.G.I. for Archivo General de Indias, Seville. Copies of these documents
may be found in the Archives Collection, The
University of Texas, Austin.
JIMENEZ, FRAY DrnG-O
.«':.-

11/4/1761 To Fray Manuel de Najera. A.G.M.
Historia, Vol. 28, pp. 194-196.
11/23/1761 To the Guardian and Discretorio of
the College of Queretaro. A.G.M. Historia, Vol.
28, pp. 195-197.
1/26/1762 To Rabago. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84,
Part I, pp. 191-195.
2/5/1762 To Fray Manuel Najera. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part I, pp. 61-62.
10/8/1762 To Rabago. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84,
Part I, pp. 150-152.
12/26/1764 State of the Missions . . . A.G.M.
Historia, Vol. 20, Part I, pp. 180-185.
JIMENEZ, FRAY DIEGO AND FRAY JOAQUIN DE BANOS

1/22/1762 To Rabago. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84,
Part I, pp. 185-186.
JIMENEZ, FRAY DIEGO AND FRAY MANUEL ANTONIO
DE CUEVAS

2/25/1763 Consulta. A.G.I., Audiencia de Mexico, Part 11, pp. 140-146.
JIMENEZ, FRAY DIEGO, FRAY JoAQUIN BANOS, AND
FRAY MARTIN GARclA

21711762 Report of ... A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 29,
Partl,pp.113-115.
et al.
9/19/1763 Reply to Cancio's Questionnaire,
A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 29, Part I, pp. 173-180.

JIMENEZ, FRAY DIEGO,

W. w. JR.
n.d. Scholarly Distortion and the Southern
Plains Indians.

NEWCOMB,

p ARRILLA,

DIEGO ORTIZ

10/7 /1759 Testimonio ... A.G.I. Audiencia de
Mexico, pp. 208-228.

11/18/1759 Consulta, A.G.I. Audiencia de Mexico, pp. 228-240.
RABAGO y TERAN, PHELIPE

8/18/1761 To the Vicecroy. A.G.M. Historia,
Vol. 94, Part I, pp. 17-18.
11/6/1761 To the Viceroy. A.G.M. Historia, Vol.
94, Part I, pp. 28-30.
12/31/1761 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part
I, pp. 164-167.
1/2/1762 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part I,
p.167.
1/9/1762 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part I,
p. 167.
1/16/1762 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part
I, p. 167.

1/20/1762 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part
I, pp. 171-178.
1/21/1762 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part
I, pp. 179-181.
1/23/1762a Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part
I, pp. 185-186.
1/23/1762b Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part
I, pp. 187-190.
2/6/1762 To Viceroy. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84,
Part I, pp. 204-206.
2/7/1762 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part
I, pp. 201-202.
2/8/1762 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 84, Part
I, pp. 202-203.
10/15/1762 To the Viceroy. A.G.M. Historia,
Vol. 84, Part I, p. 153.
4/4/1763 Auto. S. F. G. A., Vol. 18, No. 1.
11/20/1766 To Marques de Croix, S. F. G. A.,
Vol. 20, No. 33.
2/28/1767 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 94, Part
I, pp. 78-79.
3/12/1767 To Barrios y Jauregui. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 94, Pa-rt I, pp. 79-81.
3/17/1767 Autos. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 94, Part
I, pp. 87-100.
4/20/1767 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 94, Part
I, pp. 102-103.
4/22/1767 Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 94, Part
I, pp. 104-105.
4/26/1767 To Marques de Croix. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 94, Part I, pp. 119-120.
VALDEZ, JOSEPH MANUEL

2126/1767
I, p. 78.

Auto. A.G.M. Historia, Vol. 94, Part

Books and Articles
EASTON
The Parrilla Expedition to the Red River
in 1759, Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. 43, No. 1:53-71.

ALLEN, HENRY

1939

ARRICIVITA, JUAN DOMINGO
1792 Cr6nica serafica y apost6lica del Colegio
de propoganda fide de la Santa Cruz de
Queretaro en la Nueva Espana, segunda
parte. Mexico City.
BANCROFT, HUBERT HowE
1889 History of the North Mexican States and
Texas. 2 vols. San Francisco.
BRLL, RonERT E. and TYLER BASTIAN
1967 Preliminary Report Upon Excavations at
the Longest Site, Oklahoma, pp. 54-118 in
A Pilot Study of Wichita Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Assembled by
R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and W. W. Newcomb. Final Report for Grant GS-964, National Science Foundation. Southern Methodist University, Anthropology Research
Center, Dallas.
BELL, RonERT E. and DAVID A. BAERREIS
1951 A Survey of Oklahoma Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 22: 7-100.
BOLTON, HERBERT EUGENE
1914a Athanase de Mezieres and the LouisianaTexas Frontier, 1768-1780. 2 vols. Cleveland.
1914b The Founding of the Missions on the San
Gabriel River, 1745-1749, Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Vol. 17: 323-378.
1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth Century.
Studies in Spanish Colonial History and
Administration. Berkeley.
1916 Spanish Explorations in the Southwest,
1542-1706. New York.
1918 The Mission as a Frontier Institution in
the Spanish-American Colonies. The
American Historical Review, Vol. 23: 4261.
BRANT, CHARLES s.
1949 The Cultural Position of the KiowaApache. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 5: 56-61.
1953 Kiowa Apache Culture History: Some
Further Observations. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 9: 195-202.
CASTANEDA, CARLOS E. (trans.)
1935 History of Texas, 1673-1779, by Juan
Agustin Morfi. Albuquerque: The Quivira
Society.

The Mission Era: The Missions at Work,
1731-1761. Vol. III in Our Catholic Heritage in Texas, 1519-1936. 7 vols. Austin.
1939 The Mission Era: The Passing of the Missions, 1762-1782. Volume IV in Our Catholic Heritage in Texas, 1519-1936. 7 vols.
Austin.
1942 The Mission Era: The End of the Spanish
Regime, 1780-1810. Vol.Vin Our Catholic
Heritage in Texas, 1519-1936. 7 vols. Austin.
1938

DUFFIELD, LATHEL F.
1965 The Taovayas Village of 1759: in Texas or
Oklahoma? Great Plains Journal, Vol. 4:
39-48.
DUNN, WILLIAM EDWARD
1911 Apache Relations in Texas, 1718-1750.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol.
14: 198-274.
1912 Missionary Activity among the Eastern
Apaches Previous to the Founding of the
San Saba Mission. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly, Vol. 15: 186-200.
1914 The Apache Mission on the San Saba
River; Its Founding and Failure. Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. 17:
379-414.
FORBES, JACK D.
1960 Apache, Navaho and Spaniard. Norman.
GILMORE, KATHLEEN
1967 A Documentary and Archeological Investigation of Presidio San Luis de las Amarillas and Mission Santa Cruz de San Saba,
Menard County, Texas. A Preliminary
Report. State Building Commission, Archeological Program. Report No. 9. Austin.
GUNNERSON, DOLORES A.
1956 The Southern Athabascans: Their Arrival
in the Southwest. El Palacio, Vol. 63: 346365.
GUNNERSON, JAMES H.
1960 An Introduction to Plains Apache Archeology--the Dismal River Aspect. Bureau
of American Ethnology, Bulletin 173,
Anthropological Papers, No. 58, pp. 131260.
1968 Plains Apache Archaeology: A Review,
Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 13, No. 41:
167-189.
HACKETT, CHARLES W. (ed.)
1941 Pichardo's Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana and Texas. Vol. 3. Austin.

HAMMOND, G. P., and AGAPITO REY
1953 Don Juan de Onate, Colonizer of New
Mexico, 1595-1628. 2 vols. Albuquerque.
HARPER, ELIZABETH ANN
1953a The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade
and Diplomacy, 1719-1768, Chronicles of
Oklahoma, Vol. 31: 268-289.
1953b The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade
and Diplomacy, 1769-1779. Southwestern
Historical Quarterly, Vol. 57: 181-201.
1953c The Taovayas Indians in Frontier Trade
and Diplomacy, 1779-1835. Panhandle
Plains Historical Review, Vol. 26: 41-72.
HARRINGTON, J.P.
1940 Southern Peripheral Athapaskawan Origins, Divisions and Migrations. In Essays
in Historical Anthropology of North
America. Swanton Anniversary Volume,
Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,
Vol. 100: 503-532.
HARRIS, R. K., INus MARIE HARRIS, JAY C. BLAINE
and JERRYLEE BLAINE
1965 A Preliminary Archeological and Documentary Study of the Womack Site, Lamar County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, Vol. 36: 287-364.
HoDGE, FREDERICK WEBB (ed.)
1907,
1910 Handbook of American Indians North of
Mexico. Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 30, Parts I and II. Washington.
HoDGE, F. W., G. P. HAMMOND and A. REY
1945 Fray Alonso de Benavides' Revised Memorial of 1634. Albuquerque.
HoIJER, HARRY
1938 The Southern Athapaskan Languages.
American Anthropologist, Vol. 40: 75-87.
KINNAIRD, LAWRENCE (translator and annotated by)
1958 The Frontiers of New Spain, Nicolas de
Lafora's Description, 1766-1768. Quivira
Society Publications, XIII. Berkeley.
KROEBER, A. L.
1947 Cultural and Natural Areas of Native
North America. Berkeley.
LEWIS, ANNA
1924 La Harpe's First Expedition in Oklahoma,
1718-1719. Chronicles of Oklahoma, Vol.
2: 331-349.
LowIE, RoBERT H.
1963 Indians of the Plains. New York.
MARGRY, PIERRE
1888 Decouvertes et etablissements des Franr;ais dans l'ouest et dans le sud de l' Amer-

ique Septentrionale, (1614-1754). Vol. 6.
Paris.
MoRFr, FRAY JuAN AGusTiN
1935 History of Texas, 1673-1779. (trans. with
biographical introduction and annotations
by Carlos E. Castaneda). Quivira Society
Publications, VI. 2 vols. Albuquerque.
NATHAN, PAUL D. (trans.) and LESLEY BYRD SIMPSON (ed.)
1959 The San Sabel Papers: A Documentary Account of the Founding and Destruction of
San Saba Mission. San Francisco.
NEWCOMB, w. w., JR.
1961 The Indians of Texas, from Prehistoric to
Modern Times. Austin.
NEWCOMB, W.W., JR. and W. T. FIELD
1967 An Ethnohistoric Investigation of the
Wichita Indians in the Southern Plains,
pp. 240-395 in A Pilot Study of Wichita
Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory. Assembled by R. E. Bell, E. B. Jelks, and
W.W. Newcomb. Final Report for Grant
GS-964, National Science Foundation.
Southern Methodist University, Anthropology Research Center, Dallas.
0PLER, MORRIS E.
1936 The Kinship Systems of the Southern
Athabaskan-Speaking Tribes .. American
Anthropologist, Vol. 38: 620-633.
1940 Myths and Legends of the Lipan Apache
Indians. ll;femoirs of the American Folklore Society. Vol. 36.
1945 The Lipan Apache Death Complex and Its
Extensions. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 1: 122-141.
PHARES, Ross
1952 Cavalier in the Wilderness, the Story of
the Explorer and Trader, Louis Juchereau
de St. Denis. Baton Rouge.
SCHROEDER, ALBERT H.
1959a The Apaches and Their Neighbors, Part I,
A Study of the Apache Indians. Santa Fe.
1959b The Jicarilla Apaches. Part II, A Study
of the Apache Indians. Santa Fe.
1960 The Mescalero Apaches. Part III, A
Study of the Apache Indians. Santa Fe.
SJOBERG, ANDREE F.
1953a The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe. The Texas Journal of Science,
Vol. 5: 280-304.
1953b Lipan Apache Culture in Historical Perspective. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology, Vol. 9: 76-98.

179

r

T

SMITH, RALPH A. (trans.)
19581959 Account of the Journey of Benard de la
Harpe: Discovery Made by Him of Several
Nations Situated in the West. Southwestern Historical Quarterly, LXII, No. 1: 7586; No. 2: 246--259; No. 3: 371-385; No.
4: 525-541.
SWANTON, JOHN R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of the Caddo Indians. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 132. Washington, D.C.
1952 The Indian Tribes of North America. Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 145.
Washington, D.C.
THOMAS, A. B.
1932 Forgotten Frontiers. A Study of the Spanish Indian Policy of Don Juan de Bautista
de Anza, Governor of New Mexico, 17771787. Norman.
1935 After Coronado: Spanish Exploration
Northeast of New Mexico, 1696-1727.
Norman.

180

1940

The Plains Indian and New Mexico, 17511778. Albuquerque.

WALLACE, ERNEST and E. ADAMSON HoEBEL
1952 The Comanches, Lords of the South Plains.
Norman.
WEDDLE, ROBERT s.
1964 The San Saba Mission: Spanish Pivot in
Texas. Austin.
1968 San Juan Bautista, Gateway to Spanish
Texas. Austin.
WEDEL, WALDO R.
1959 An Introduction to Kansas Archeology.
Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulh~tin
174. Washington, D.C.
WEsT, ELIZABETH How ARD (trans.)
1904 Bonilla's Brief Compendium of the History of Texas, 1772. Southwestern Historical Quarterly, Vol. VIII: 2-78.
WINSHIP, GEORGE PARKER
1896 The Coronado Expedition, 1540-1542.
14th Annual Report, Bureau of American
Ethnology. Washington, D.C.

PART III

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS

I.

I

Page intentionally left blank.

PART III

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The archeological investigation of Mission San
Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz revealed a complex of
more than fourteen structures arranged around
a plaza. In the relatively few years the mission
was occupied, the Spanish accomplished a massive construction project, using thousands of tons
of adobe bricks and limestone building blocks.
The first buildings-the church, sacristy, and
priests' quarters-were carefully oriented to the
cardinal directions and were more sturdily built
than later structures. The later buildings lie in
a slightly different orientation and have walls
built of stones and adobe bricks made of dark soil
acquired at the site. There is also some evidence
that the Spaniards built the walls of the Indian
cabins which faced the plaza of stone to resemble
the durable construction of the priests' quarters,
but built the more vulnerable outer walls of
more readily available dark dirt adobe. With
the exception of handmade iron nails, all construction material was locally derived-adobe
mud, limestone slabs, oak and juniper timbers,
lime made from the local limestone in a nearby
kiln, and sand, gravel, and cobbles from the
Nueces River.
San Lorenzo's buildings were generally kept
in good repair as evidenced by double floors in
several structures and multiple layers of wall
plaster in the granary and other buildings. Official structures such as the church, sacristy, and
granary were kept clean; no debris littered their
floors. Trash from the Spanish occupation was
thrown just outside the walls, mainly from the
bastion and the other structures whose roofs
were easily access~ble. The floors of the Indian
houses were littered with several inches of food
remains and other trash. The interior walls of
the church were painted with colored murals.
Numerous burials were placed under the floor
of the church, and in many instances later

burials were placed within earlier burial pits
disturbing their remains.
Although a relatively small number of people
occupied San Lorenzo for less than a decade, a
vast quantity of potsherds, perhaps in excess of
90 thousand, was deposited in the mission middens. Many of these ceramic vessels originated
a great distance from the site~majolica from
Puebla iIJ. central Mexico, olive jars from Spain,
glass beads from Venice, salt-glazed stoneware
from England, faience from France, and porcelain from the orient. Some non-wheel-made pottery was locally made by the Lipan Apaches.
Metal artifacts were much rarer than ceramics.
Handmade iron nails occurred in relatively
small quantities. Brass vessels were frequently
patched many times and some of the patches
were patched. There was a striking absence of
metal gun parts.
Food bones in the Indian houses suggest continued reliance on local game animals, and the
large quantity of seeds found in the stomach region of one of the Indian burials confirms the
documentary evidence that prickly pear fruit
was consumed. The relatively large amount of
flint detritus found on the floors of several of the
structures indicates that the Apaches retained
many of their aboriginal crafts. A number of
flint scrapers, small-flake knives, and at least one
triangular arrow point represent some of the
flint tools which were still in use. It is probable
that they also manufactured many of the gunflints used by the Spaniards of the mission.
When San Lorenzo was abandoned, the roofs
of the structures were burned and fell to the
surface of the floors. Some of the burials made in
the floor of the church were apparently removed
at this time. Those Indians who were buried in
the church were dressed in Spanish-supplied
homespun cloth and accompanied by religious

medallions or crucifixes and small strands of
colorful glass trade beads. There is some evidence that the Apaches returned to San Lorenzo,
or other Indians visited the site, after its abandonment. They camped within the walls of some of
the rooms, leaving the remains of campfires and
other traces of their presence.
The ethnohistorical investigation of Mission
San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz attempted to describe the situation and events which led to the
founding and failure of the mission, and to relate
as fully as possible the year by year story of the
mission itself. The Spanish established the missions on the Nueces for several reasons: as a
means of pacifying the Apaches whose attacks
along the northern frontier had been serious, as
a way of maintaining control of the northern
frontier in the face of the French and Indian
threat, and to convert heathen savages to Catholicism. Some bands of Lipans were ready to try
out mission life because they were hard-pressed
by their Indian enemies, and they needed the
protection and succor they believed the Spaniards could give.
In response to Lipan demands and at a place
partly dictated by their desires, Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz was established in the
winter of 1762. The mission was not officially
sanctioned, but it could depend upon the help of
the relatively nearby missions on the Rio Grande
for at least a short time. A second mission, Candelaria, was soon afterward established below
San Lorenzo on the Nueces River. The missionaries were determined and industrious, and at
first viewed their chances of converting the
Lipans to be good. The commander of the San
Saiba Presidio, while not as optimistic, did everything he could to make the mission a success, including stationing soldiers at the missions. The
erection of buildings and the preparation of a
field for crops at San Lorenzo proceeded swiftly
with the help of Indians brought from the Rio
Grande missions. But within a year hopes for a
successful mission were dimmed. Enemy Indians
had already attacked a Lipan rancheria in the
vicinity, disaffected Lipans had spread false
rumors about the malevolence of the missionaries, and the missions did not have enough food
for the Indians who had settled at them, with
the result that they had to be allowed to leave
on hunting and gathering ventures. Other
Lipans who might have been drawn into the

missions could not be for lack of food and other
supplies.
In 1763 the missionaries said that the Lipans
were becoming more receptive to Catholicism.
But a smallpox epidemic in 1764 wiped out a
considerable number of mission Lipans, perhaps
those most amenable to missionary persuasion.
About this same time the Lipans experienced a
nativistic revival, which was hostile to the mission movement and the Spaniards in general.
How widespread this social revulsion was is not
known, though the fact that the missionaries acknowledged it probably indicates that it was extensive enough to be harmful to their efforts. The
missions remained unsanctioned and poor and
the Indians increasingly reluctant to remain in
them, though construction continued at San Lorenzo. In October 1766, San Lorenzo itself was
attacked by enemy Indians; nearby Candelaria
had already been abandoned. In November San
Lorenzo was again attacked, again unsuccessfully. During this same period the San Saba
Presidio was coming under increasing pressure
from the Comanches and their allies. By 1767
few if any Lipans remained at San Lorenzo; it
had become merely a way station between the
Rio Grande and San Saba. In the spring of 1768
Rabago abandoned San Saba and retreated with
what remained of his garrison to San Lorenzo.
Rabago was soon replaced, and undoubtedly the
two missionaries soon left, though the date of
their departure is unknown. In the spring of
1771 the final abandonment of the mission was
ordered.
That joint archeological and ethnohistorical
investigations, such as this one, are much more
fruitful than either would be alone is obvious,
but nonetheless merits comment. Archeological
investigations sometimes seem mute and sterile
in the sense that they become estranged from the
loving, gossiping, quarreling people who used
the pots and loosed the arrows, the remains of
which the archeologist finds. The potsherds and
arrowpoints are reduced to arid inanimate objects to count and to compare, to fondle and to
hoard. Ethnohistorical investigations, on the
other hand, arc all too human in the sense that
those who chronicle events, as well as those who
employ such chronicles, view the events and the
accounts of such events through the crazed looking glasses of their own experiences and biases.
Events filtered through these faulty prisms seem

I

l

I

I

l

sometimes to have the objective reality of a passing dream. In short, in a dual approach each
kind of investigation enriches the other-the
potsherd takes on life, the historic happening becomes grounded in the reality of concrete objects
-and the combination leads to a more accurate
grasp of a vanished past.
Time and again in the course of our study one
kind of information, by itself enigmatic and
puzzling, when viewed against the other kind of
data added up to new and more positive knowledge about some aspect of San Lorenzo. The
archeological investigation, for example, revealed two kinds of construction of the mission,
distinguished by the geographical orientation of
the buildings and the sturdiness of their construction. By itself this was equivocal data from
which no conclusion could be drawn. But documentary information left no doubt but that the
initial construction was more carefully planned
and soundly executed than were the later structures, reflecting a vigorous initial enthusiasm
which soon waned. The last of the well-built
structures, though partly oriented like the later
ones, was the granary, and the one after which
Father Jimenez promised the Indians he would
copy their houses. Whether he intentionally deceived them or whether he was simply unable to
keep his promise is unknown. In any case, their
houses superficially resembled the granary but
were in fact inferior to it. In short, joint investigations revealed not only the chronological order
of construction, the reasons for differences in
construction, but even raise questions about the
attitudes the missionaries held about the Lipans.
Joint investigations also appear to reduce the
likelihood of making hasty judgments. The
quantity of ceramics found in the San Lorenzo
middens, for example, might lead one to assume
erroneously that the mission was populous, wellsupplied, and inhabited for a considerable period
of time. The historic sources and other archeological evidence reveal that this was not true.
The explanation would seem to be partly that
ceramics were relatively cheap and easily obtainable even in this isolated, frontier mission.
The fact that the entire garrison of the San Saba
Presidio totaling several hundred pe·rsons was
pulled back to San Lorenzo in June, 1768, to remain there at least until the following spring,
also may have much to do with the plentiful
ceramics. The relative scarcity of metal artifacts,

particularly the remains of firearms, is probably
more indicative of the wealth and condition of
the mission.
Similarly, the archeological evidence sometimes provides a background of facts against
which the allegations of various historic figures
m3.y be judged. Nicolas Lafora, Rubi's engineer
and assistant, for example, visited Candelaria
and San Lorenzo in their declining years. If his
comments about the missions and missionaries
were all we had to go on, it probably would be
concluded that the missions were poorly located,
indefensible mud hovels, operated by incompetent missionaries. But archeological evidence indicates that San Lorenzo was well located and
relatively well built. It was certainly defensible,
since it easily survived two attacks. On these
occasions the two cannons, which Lafora described as virtually useless, played important
roles in repulsing the attackers. Consciously or
unconsciously Lafora distorted the facts. Knowing this, the possibility that Rubi had decided
that the Apaches should be abandoned and the
Spanish alliances rearranged by the time he
visited the missions is immediately raised. If such
was the case, Lafora's comments become readily
comprehensible as those of an employee laboring in the cause of his superior.
The primary intent of the archeological investigation of San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz, of
course, was to discover what an eighteenth century Spanish mission on the northern border of
New Spain was like. A secondary aspiration was
to learn the nature of the archeological remains
of the Lipan Apaches, perhaps finding some trait
or complex of traits which would serve to distinguish them from others. While the major purpose of the investigation was achieved, lack of
time prevented any concerted attempt to satisfy
the second. Nevertheless, a number of salient
facts about the Lipans emerged. The identifiable
Indian remains in San Lorenzo are few relative
to artifacts of European manufacture, as was to
be expected. Surprising, however, was that the
Lipans, who had been directly and indirectly
exposed to European civilization for almost two
hundred years and had obtained various European tools and trinkets, retained so many of their
aboriginal crafts. The relatively large amount of
flint detritus found on the floors of several structures suggests this, as does a number of flint
scrapers, small-flake knives, and at least one tri-

rl
l

angular arrowpoint. Though only a small
amount of locally non-wheel-made Indian pottery was found, it is significant in that it is similar to that made by earlier Plains Apache groups
of the Dismal River Aspect, and it is the best
single item discovered which might serve to
identify Lipan archeological remains.
The Indian burials placed under the floor of
the church were probably Lipan, but it is barely
possible that some could have been the bones of
Coahuiltecan Indians the missionaries brought
from San Juan Bautista and San Bernardo to
labor in the fields, build the irrigation ditches,
and perform the other tasks the Lipans could not
or would not do. The fact that eleven of seventeen persons interred under the floor were
women and children argues that they were
Lipans, since the missionaries apparently imported only men from the Rio Grande missions
(Jimenez and Cuevas, 2/25 /1763). The absence
of old adults (the oldest is a forty year-old
woman; see Appendix A) may be meaningful,
but the size of the sample is too small to do more
than raise some possibilities. A smallpox epidemic, such as the one that ravaged the Lipans in
1764, for example, would probably strike hardest
at the age groups represented by the burials.
Since some later burials cut into or through
earlier ones, however, it seems likely that the
church floor was used as a cemetery over a con-

186

siderable period of time, probably throughout
the mission's life. It is also possible that the
young people were for one reason or another
more attracted to mission life than older people,
and there may be other plausible explanations
for the absence of older people in the burials. The
most curious aspect about the burials in the
church floor is that those in the northern half
were dug up and removed, presumably when the
mission was abandoned, but those in the southern half were untouched. Again several explanations come to mind, chief of which is that the
Spaniards who died at San Lorenzo were dug up
and removed for reburial elsewhere, while the
Indians were allowed to remain.
Finally, despite the considerable length of this
report, it should be made explicitly clear that we
do not regard it as the final word on the archeology or ethnohistory of San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz or the Lipan Apaches. An archeological investigation of the vicinity around San Lorenzo,
for example, might be very productive to our
knowledge of Lipan archeology. Similarly, we
are quite confident that there are many documents, undiscovered by us, which bear on the
history and ethnology of the Lipans. We hope,
then, that this investigation marks the beginning
of inquiry into a fascinating subject, not its culmination or conclusion.

APPENDIX A
Burials from Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz
BY THOMAS W. MCKERN

t

~·

I'

I

The 10 burial pits in the floor of the church
( Strncture 2, Figure 11) contained the skeletal remains of at least 17 individuals (nine adults, three
adolescents, and five infants) as follows:
Burial 1. One adult skeleton, and disarticulated
fragment of a child skeleton in one corner of the
grave.
Burial 2. Fragmentary remains of an adult skeleton.
Burial 3. A few teeth and the fragmentary remains of an adult skeleton.
Burial 4. Part of an articulated infant skeleton,
disturbed by Burial 6.
Burial 5. Articulated child skeleton, complete.
Burial 6. Partially articulated fragments of an
adult skeleton.
Burial 7. Articulated child skeleton, right leg removed by Burial 5.
Burial 8-1. Articulated adult skeleton, lower legs
removed by Burial 9-1. Some infant bones scattered
in pit.
Burial 8-2. Disarticulated adult skeleton in pit
with Burial 8-1, apparently complete.
Burial 9-1. Articulated adult skeleton, left arm
and most of left side missing because of another
burial pit. The lower legs were not collected. Some
infant bones were also in pit.
Burial 9-2. Articulated adult skeleton. Some infant or child bones scattered in pit. Almost complete
infant skull beside adult skull.
Burial 10. Complete articulated adult skeleton
with disarticulated infant skeleton near head.
METHODS
Of the nine adults excavated from burial pits at
San Lorenzo, only six are complete enough for
metric and comparative analysis. The adolescents
and infants are not included in this study. Although
much time and effort was spent in reconstructing
the individual skeletons, only two of the six can be
considered to be absolutely complete. The measure-

ments and observations used are standard and can
be found in Montagu (1960). Age identification
follows the techniques of McKern and Stewart
(1957) while stature was calculated by the revised
formulae of Trotter and Gleser (1958).

INDIVIDUAL DESCRIPTION
A general description of each individual in this
series represents the results of detailed metric and
morphological observations of the available material. Because of the fragmentary nature of the postcranial material, only the cranial measurements
have been reproduced. These can be found in Fig.
77.
Fig. 77. Tabulation of cranial measurements and indices for
th!! San Lorenzo sample.
Standard

Length
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Breadth.
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Basion-Bregma
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Porion Height
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Minimum
Frontal
San Lorenzo
Male
Female

No.

Range

Mean

Deviation

1
2

168170-176

168.0
173.0

4.24

1
2

136132-133

136.0
132.5

.71

1
2

137129-134

137.0
131.5

3.54

2
2

114-120
113-114

117.0
113.5

4.24
.71

2
3

89-91
87-93

90.0
90.0

1.41
3.00

II
!

Bizygomatic
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
NasionProsthion
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Nasal Height
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Nasal Breadth
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
BasionProsthion
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
NasionSubnasale
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Basion-Nasion
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Palate Breadth
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Palate Length
San Lorenzo
Male
Female

INDEX:
Cranial
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Mean Height
San Lorenzo
Male
Female
Nasal
San Lorenzo
Male
Female

1
2

132120-126

132.0
123.0

2.42

1
2

7366-70

73.0
68.0

2.83

1
2

5247-52

52.0
49.5

3.54

3

2523-30

25.0
26.3

3.51

1
2

10185-88

101.0
86.5

2.12

1
2

9078-84

90.0
81.0

4.24

1
2

9894--94

98.0
94.0

.00

1
2

7058-58

70.0
58.0

.00

1
3

5751-54

57.0
52.3

1.53

1
2

81.075.6-77.6

81.0
76.6

1.41

1
2

90.183.5-88.7

90.1
86.1

3.68

1
2

48.148.9-50.0

48.1
49.4

.78

* Catalogue numbers, Department of Anthropology, Osteological Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin.

188

Burial 8-1 (2153*) represents an adult male appruxim01tely 30 years of age. These remains are
almost complete and in excellent condition. The
skull is high (from porion to bregma) and round
(a brachycranic index of 81.0). It is fairly small for
a male (cranial capacity of 1350 cc.) but the supraorbital ridge is pronounced. The face is long and
narrow (a leptoprosopic index of 91.7) with round
orbits. The mandible is rugged and the mastoid
processes are pronounced. Most of the dentition is
present. Wear is medium, as is shovel-shaping of
the maxillary central incisors.
The postcranial skeleton is that of an individual
of medium height ( 5' 5") and medium musculature.
The only pathology is slight arthritic lipping on the
anterior rims of the vertebral centra in the lower
lumbar area.
Burial 8-2 (2154) consists of a badly warped skull
in fair condition and fragmentary postcranial material. It represents a young adult female, approximately 19 years of age. Due to cranial distortion,
very few measurements or observations are reliable.
Most of the maxillary and mandibular dentition
are present. Very little wear is demonstrated, and
the third molars have not yet erupted. No pathology
was observed.
The postcranial skeleton is that of a short (5' 2"),
gracile individual. The shafts of the right fibula
and right tibia are thickened at about the same
level, indicating a healed fracture of both bones.
Burial 1 (2155) consists of a skull in good condition and the complete postcranial skeleton. An adult
female, approximately 30 years of age, the skull is
small (a cranial capacity of 1250 cc.), fairly round
(a high mesocranic index of 75.6), and low (the
auricular head height is 113.0). Facial dimensions
show a narrow, fairly long face. The mandible is
typically female with pointed chin and inverted
gonial angles. Most of the maxillary and mandibular dentition are present with evidence of caries in
both upper and lower molars. The maxillary central incisors exhibit pronounced shovel-shaping.
The postcranial skeleton is that of an individual
of slight build with a stature of about 5' 1". No
pathology was observed.
Burial 9-1 (2156) consists of a fragmentary remains of an adult male approximately 35 years of
age. Measurements and observations were limited,
but the scant data indicates an individual of medium build with a stature of about 5' 6". No pathology was observed.
Burial 9-2 (2158) consists of the fragmentary remains of an adult male, 30 to 35 years of age. The
general condition of these remains is poor and what
remains of the skull is so badly warped that reliable
measurements are impossible. Stature was calcu-

lated from right and left humeri only and indicate
an individual of medium stature (5' 5"). No pathology was observed.
Burial 10 (2162) is represented by the complete
remains of an adult female, approximately 40 years
of age. The skull is small but high (a hypsicranic
index of 88.7) and round-headed (a high mesocranic index of 78.0). The face looks wider than it
actually is, due to the narrowness of the mandible
(a hyperleptoprosopic index of 98.3). There is a
noticeable alveolar prognathism and the teeth demonstrate an even bite. Both maxillary central incisors show extreme shovel-shaping. One apical
cavity was observed in the lower right second molar.
The postcranial skeleton indicates an individual

of medium build with a stature of 5' 1". Pathology
was represented by slight lipping of the anterior
rims of the lower thoracic and upper lumbar elements. It is interesting to note the similarity between this female and that from Burial 1 (2155).
SUMMARY
Though small, the sample indicates a Mongoloid
people of short stature, with round, high heads, narrow faces, and narrow palates. Body build is generally slight. Very little pathology was observed.
Arthritic lipping in the lumbar vertebrae and a few
carious teeth represented the total record of skeletal
disease.

REFERENCES CITED
F.
A Handbook of Anthropometry. Charles C.
Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.

AsHLEY-MoNTAGu, M.

1960

W., AND T. D. STEWART
Skeletal Age Changes in Young American
Males. HQ QM R&D Command, Technical
Report EP-45, Natick, Massachusetts.

McKERN, T.

1957

TROTTER,

1958

M., AND G. C. GLESER
A re-evaluation of estimation of stature
based on measurements of stature taken
during life and of long bones after death.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology, Vol. 16: 79-123.

189

r
I
j

I

I
I

APPENDIX B
Vertebrate Remains from San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz
BY GERALD G. RAUN

Vertebrate remains were present in samples from
10 of the 14 excavated structures (Fig. 78). A considerable amount of bone was also recovered from
the surface and the middens, the latter providing
about 35 per cent of the total sample. The distribution of bone among the structures was not random.
Structure 13 contained more than twice as much
bone as any of the other structures.

Distribution of bone by Features
Feature

Midden
Surface
Structure 13
Structure 11
Structure 7
Structure 14
Structure 8
Structure 12
West wall area
Structure 10
Structure 1
Structure 4
Structure 2
Structure 3
Structure 5
Structure 6
Structure 9
Gate area
Total

Number of bones

Per cent of sample*

937
589
475
182
170
118
98
46
26
10

35.1
22.1
17.8
6.8
6.4
4.4
3.4
1.7
1.0
.4
.2
.2
.2
0
0
0
0
0

6

5
4t
0
0
0
0
0
2,666

99.7

*To the nearest one-tenth of one per cent.
Bones from outside of wall.

t

Much of the bone from the surface and some from
the midden area is obviously recent. None of the
samples from other features give much evidence of
recent contamination.
The vast majority of the bone recovered is postcranial material, making identification of species
190

difficult. Only 1,135 of the total of 2,666 bone fragments were identifiable with any reasonable degree
of accuracy. The unidentified fragments are about
95 per cent mammalian.
Fish bones were second only to mammal bones in
abundance, representing 39 per cent of the identifiable material, but they were a much smaller percentage of the total since most unidentified fragments were mammalian. No attempt was made to
identify the fish beyond noting that catfish (lctalurus sp.) were included. Reptile bones were very
scarce. Two fragments of turtle shell and four snake
vertebrae were noted. It is probable that these may
represent recent contamination since they were not
found in the structure fills. Bird remains comprised
18 per cent of the identifiable sample, and 37 per
cent of the bird bones were identified as turkey
(Meleagris gallopavo). Quail probably are represented also, although a definite identification could
not be made. Two species of quail, bobwhite (Colinus virginianus) and scaled (Callipepla squamata), presently occur in this area. At least one
small passeriform bird is also present in the sample.
The bulk ( 42 per cent) of the identifiable bone
is mammalian and most of this (84 per cent) is referable to a composite group of artiodactyls-deer,
sheep, goat, and antelope. The whitetail deer
(Odocoileus virginianus) and the pronghorn antelope (Antilocapra americana) are native species.
The latter does not occur in the area now but formerly did. The whitetail deer is now abundant.
Sheep and goats are not native species and indicate
the presence of domesticated animals in abundance.
Specific identification was made on the basis of
teeth and the low frequency of occurrence of such
material precludes any analysis of the relative
abundance of the various species. No attempt was
made to identify all of the postcranial elements to
species, but the material was examined rather
closely. Sheep and goats seem to have been more
abundant, while deer and antelope formed only a
relatively minor part of the sample. The indications

are that the inhabitants were making little use of
the game species and were primarily utilizing the
domestic stock for food. This implication is further
strengthened by the scarcity of bones of other mammals. Cattle and bison are included, but much less
commonly than sheep, goats, deer, and antelope.
The identification of bison material is tentative,
based on postcranial fragments which appear too
large for cattle. Rabbits, usually abundant in the
area and a ready source of food, are represented by
only seventeen jaw fragments. At least two rabbits,

a cottontail (Sylvilagus sp.) and the jackrabbit
(Lepus californianus) were eaten.
Other mammals present include: 1) opossum
(Didelphis marsupialis)-from surface material
and probably of recent origin; 2) Canis sp.-probably a small dog, possibly a coyote but too fragmentary to be certain; 3) striped skunk (Mephitis
mephitis)-a complete skull unquestionably of
recent origin; 4) peccary (Tayassu tajacu)-a jaw
with teeth confirms the presence, and several toe
bones are questionably referred to this species; 5)
horse (Equus sp.)-represented by two teeth.

