ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF PREHISTORIC
SITE 41BO182: THE GREENWOOD DEVELOPMENT, INC.
PROJECT ON CLEAR CREEK IN BRAZORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

By
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 28

1994

ARCHAEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION OF PREHISTORIC SITE 41BO182
THE GREENWOOD DEVELOPMENT, INC. PROJECT ON
CLEAR CREEK IN BRAZORIA COUNTY, TEXAS

William E. Moore, SOPA
(Principal Investigator)

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Project Number 93-8

Prepared for
Greenwood Development, Inc.
Post Office Box 72
Friendswood, Texas 77546

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
106 West 26th Street
Astin Building - Suite 38
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
Site 41BO182 was evaluated by Robert Daigle for Brazos Valley Research
Associates on December 28 and 29, 1993. This study consisted solely of shovel testing
in an effort to identify site boundaries and assess its integrity. The site had already
been disturbed due to land clearing by the developer and extensive pothunting by local
collectors. This investigation determined that the site has been destroyed and no longer
contains significant intact deposits worthy of additional work.
Therefore, it is
recommended that construction be allowed to proceed with no restrictions. All artifacts
and records regarding this project have been turned over to Bryan Guevin, staff
archeologist at the United States Corps of Engineers, Galveston District. Mr. Guevin
will make the final decision regarding curation in accordance with 36 CFR, Part 79
(Section 79.3)
"Curation of Federally-Owned and Administered Archeological
Collections, Final Rule 1990."

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank everyone whose cooperation made the completion of this
project possible. William "Mitch" Mitchell of Greenwood Development, Inc. provided
maps and a surveyor to assist in the site mapping process. Bryan Guevin,
Archaeologist with the United States Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District,
visited the site and offered suggestions that allowed the project to proceed smoothly.
He also allowed me to review his memoranda that describe his work at the project area.
Lili Lyddon prepared the maps for publication. Roger G. Moore of Moore Archeological
Consulting allowed me to examine the artifacts recovered from the project area during
his earlier work there. The fieldwork was conducted by Robert Daigle, a doctoral
student in Anthropology at Southern Methodist University. His field notes served as the
basis for much of the report. I am also grateful to Kelley Lackey for transporting the
artifacts to Bryan for analysis and assisting me in preparing them for curation.
Assistance was also provided by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.
Carolyn Spock, Head of Records, and her assistant, Rosario Casarez helped with the
literature search and site recording process. Finally, I am grateful to Charles Hand for
allowing Roger Moore to examine his artifact collection. The analysis of these
specimens by Robert C. Booth was very helpful in the compilation of this report.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING......................................................................................... 5
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ............................................................................ 6
FIELD METHODS ......................................................................................................... 10
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 12
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 15
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 16
TABLES
Table 1. Shovel Test Log .................................................................................................................................... 11

FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location of Project Area .................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Map Including Location of 41BO182 .................................................... 3
Figure 3. Project Area on Friendswood Topographic Map .............................................. 4
Figure 4. Site 41BO182................................................................................................... 9

iv

INTRODUCTION
Greenwood Development, Inc. of Friendswood, Texas plans to construct a
detention basin and associated development on an 18 acre tract of land adjacent to
Clear Creek in northern Brazoria County, Texas (Figure 1). A more detailed map of the
area investigated, including the location of prehistoric site 41BO182, is depicted in
Figure 2. The project area is divided into three tracts (A-C). Areas A and B total 8
acres (including detention pond), while Area C is 10 acres. Topographic coverage is
provided by the Friendswood topographic quadrangle (Figure 3).
Construction was in progress when the United States Army Corps of Engineers
(COE), Galveston District, was informed of the presence of a prehistoric site that was
found to be located in the northwestern corner of Tract B (Figure 2). Greenwood
Development, Inc. was placed under a Cease-and-Desist order by the Regulatory
Branch of the COE for Section 404 Clean Water Act violations until the site could be
properly evaluated. The case number for this project assigned by the Corps is I-27-18.
Moore Archeological Consulting of Houston, Texas visited the project area and
examined the entire 18 acre tract. This study resulted in the confirmation of prehistoric
site 41BO182 that was considered to be potentially eligible for the National Register of
Historic Places. It was recommended that the site be avoided until its significance could
be determined.
In order to evaluate the research potential and significance of site 41BO182,
Greenwood, Inc. contracted with Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) to perform
this service. William E. Moore as the Principal Investigator, and Robert Daigle
conducted the initial field examination.

1

Figure 1. General Location of Project Area

2

Figure 2. Project Map Including Location of 41BO182

3

Figure 3. Project Area on Friendswood Topographic Map

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Brazoria County is located in the southeastern part of Texas along the Gulf of
Mexico. Much of the area is defined as Gulf Coast Prairie. According to the soils book
for Brazoria County, the inland portion of the county belongs to the Gulf Coast Prairies
Major Land Resource Area (Crenwelge et al. 1981:1). Along the coastal region the
county contains mainly salty soils and is part of the Gulf Coast Marsh Resource Area
(Crenwelge et al. 1981:1).
The land surface of the county is characterized as broad and nearly level. There
are a few sloping areas that occur mainly adjacent to major drainages such as the San
Bernard River, Brazos River, and Oyster Creek. Most drainage flows to the southeast
through the major streams, including Clear Creek. Other streams empty directly into the
Gulf of Mexico or into the bays adjacent to the Gulf (Crenwelge et al. 1981:1).
The project area is located on a coastal terrace that is comprised mainly of deep,
nonsaline soils referred to as Lake Charles on the General Soil Map of the soils book for
Brazoria County (Crenwelge et al. 1981). This map unit consists of clayey, somewhat
poorly drained, very slowly permeable soils on coastal terraces (Crenwelge et al.
1981:5). Included within this map unit is about 15 percent soils of minor extent.
Loamy soil was found to be present in the area of site 41BO182. It is probable
that this part of the project area consists of soils of the Bernard-Edna map unit, which
are described by Crenwelge et al. (1981:6) as "loamy, somewhat poorly drained and
poorly drained, very slowly permeable soils; on coastal terraces."
According to the soils map on Sheet Number 60 (Crenwelge et al. 1981), the
entire project area is located within the Lake Charles Clay detailed map unit. This is
very dark gray clay to a depth of about 50 inches, with continuing clays of other types to
depths of 90 inches. It is somewhat poorly drained with a water table above a depth of
two feet during most winter months. Surface runoff is very slow as is permeability.
Flooding is not uncommon.

5

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Brazoria County is located in the Southeast Texas cultural-geographical region of
Texas as defined by the Texas Historical Commission in a statistical overview compiled
in 1985 (Biessart et al. 1985:76). At that time, Brazoria County was fifth in the state in
terms of numbers of sites recorded (1630) and percentage of sites recorded (8.06%).
Within the region, Brazoria County was sixth with 89 sites (.44% of the state and 5.46%
of the region).
According to Biesaart et al. (1985:114), all major periods of Texas prehistory
were documented in Brazoria County in 1985. At that time, 89 sites had been recorded
with the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL). Of this number, 43 sites
were classified by temporal period as follows: Paleo-Indian (2 sites), General Archaic
(11 sites), Middle Archaic (2 sites), Late Archaic (2 sites), and Late Prehistoric (26
sites). One site has been designated as a State Archeological Landmark (SAL) and
one is listed on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). Information for the
county in 1985 came primarily from surface collections (79 sites). Thirty-three sites
were tested by hand in 1985, 12 were excavated, and 1 tested by machine. At the time
of this survey 181 sites have been recorded in the county.
Recent work by Prewitt and Associates, Inc. in Galveston and Harris counties
(Howard et al. 1992) and others have confirmed the presence of prehistoric sites
ranging from the Paleo-Indian through Late Prehistoric periods. The dates for this span
of time are believed to be from the early Holocene, about 10,000 to 7000 B.C. (Aten
1983:141, 144-152) through the influx of Europeans around A.D. 1700, otherwise
known as the Historic Period.
Archaeological sites in the Clear Creek drainage basin have been identified as
conforming to three types. These are shell middens, terrace sites, and natural mound
sites. The interested reader is advised to consult the report by Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. (Howard et al. 1992) and the scholarly work by Aten (1983) for more detailed
information regarding the kinds of sites found in the area.
The 181 previously recorded sites in Brazoria County are indicative of a number
of earlier investigations. Much of the work in the county consists of small area surveys,
many of which did not locate cultural resources. State and Federal agencies such as
the Corps of Engineers, Galveston District; Texas Water Development Board; and
Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation have been active in the
county and surrounding area. The remaining studies have been conducted by
universities, private contractors, and avocational archaeologists. Most of these projects
can be found by checking the current Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology series
sponsored by the Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission
(Moore 1990, 1991, 1992a, 1992b, 1993, 1994), a bibliography of Southeast Texas
(Moore 1989), and an ongoing database published by the Houston Archeological
Society (Patterson 1989).

6

The most recent investigation by professional archaeologists in the vicinity of the
project area was conducted in February and March of 1991 by Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. (Howard et al. 1992). This study conducted a pedestrian survey and archival and
informant research of selected areas along an 8.2 km (5.1 miles) stretch of the third
reach of Clear Creek in Galveston and Harris counties. The western edge of their
project area ended at the boundary of Brazoria and Galveston counties near the current
study area.
The report by Howard et al. (1992) is very thorough in its discussion of previous
work in the region. Although Brazoria County was not included in their investigation,
their report, because of the close proximity of their project area to the current study, is
considered by this author as a major reference for all future work in the region including
Brazoria County.
Specific to the project area, four investigations involving site 41BO182 and the
rest of the 18 acre tract have been conducted. The first effort was by a local collector,
Charles Hand, about seven or eight years ago. Mr. Hand dug in the site and recovered
artifacts to depths of three feet below the surface. He found arrow points, ceramics,
dart points, debitage, some bone fragments, and pieces of asphaltum. Fortunately, he
dug in a fairly systematic manner and documented the depth of many of the artifacts he
found. All of the artifacts found by Mr. Hand remain in his possession.
The land was purchased by Greenwood Development, Inc. who began
construction for a detention basin and other development. Unknown to the developer,
his construction had impacted site 41BO182. In the site area (Tract B) the disturbance
was severe and consisted of tree and brush clearing by a bulldozer and leveling,
including stump removal. Once the United States Army Corps of Engineers (COE),
Galveston District, became aware of this violation a Cease-and-Desist order was issued
to Greenwood Development, Inc. for Section 404 Clean Water Act violations. The case
number assigned by the COE for this violation is I-27-18.
Bryan Guevin of the Galveston COE visited the project area on two occasions.
On October 12, 1993, he and staff member Steve Ireland responded to a possible
wetland violation. Although a severe thunderstorm was in progress, they managed to
make a brief inspection of the western portion of the project area accompanied by Ms.
Susan Partridge, a local resident who originally notified the COE of the violation. On
this trip the COE lacked jurisdiction and no shovel testing was conducted. The site area
was tentatively confirmed by the presence of a pothole and a small artifact collection in
the possession of Ms. Partridge.
On October 20, 1993, Mr. Guevin revisited the project area. He examined all
three tracts and dug 18 shovel tests, and all were negative in terms of producing cultural
materials. During this visit he met the owner and developer, William "Mitch" Mitchell. At
that time, Mr. Guevin informed Mitchell that a permit may be necessary and advised him
to pursue the matter before continuing construction.

7

The developer was found to be guilty of a wetlands violation and required to
contract with a professional archaeologist to evaluate the 18 acre tract, specifically the
area of prehistoric site 41BO182. As a result of this order, Greenwood Development,
Inc. retained Moore Archeological Consulting (MAC) to perform a cultural resources
survey. All construction at that time had ceased. Documentation of this study appears
in an interim report by Roger G. Moore (1993) and a formal report by Roger G. Moore
and William E. Moore (1994).
Work performed by MAC consisted of a 100% pedestrian survey of the 18 acre
tract which was supported by shovel testing and probing and a thorough surface
inspection. MAC investigated Tract A by conventional survey methods that included the
excavation of 16 shovel tests. No artifacts were found in this tract. At the time of the
work by MAC, Tract A was relatively intact having been subjected only to minor
bulldozing and timber cutting.
Tracts B and C were examined differently. Bryan Guevin had already informally
surveyed tracts B and C, excluding the immediate known site area of 41BO182, prior to
bulldozer disturbance. Mr. Guevin was aware of the site location and planned to return
to it at a later date but did not have an opportunity to do so before it was bulldozed. At
the time of his visit he was more interested in shovel testing the rest of the 18 acres to
locate other sites or deposits. MAC restricted its work to the vicinity of the reported
prehistoric site in Tract B. At the time of the work by MAC, tracts B and C had been
severely impacted by deep bulldozing and ground leveling and at least several feet of
soil had been removed and displaced. No artifacts were observed on the surface of
either tract. In the site area, MAC excavated nine shovel tests (Figure 4) and made a
small surface collection. Mr. Hand, who had excavated at the site years ago, visited the
project and allowed Roger G. Moore to examine and photograph his collection. The
only evidence of a prehistoric site obtained by MAC was in the area of 41BO182.
No additional work in the project area has been conducted prior to this study. It
is likely, however, that relic hunting by local residents continues.

8

Figure 4. Site 41BO182

9

FIELD METHODS
The assessment of prehistoric site 41BO182 consisted of four separate tasks archival research, field reconnaissance and testing, artifact analysis, and report writing.
The fieldwork was conducted by Robert Daigle with William E. Moore acting as Principal
Investigator and author of this report.
Prior to commencement of the field reconnaissance, the files at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas were checked for
previously recorded sites in the project area and vicinity. Reports documenting work by
other researchers were reviewed. Data concerning soils were obtained by consulting
the soil survey book for Brazoria County prepared by the Soil Conservation Service
(Crenwelge et al. 1981).
On Christmas Day, the Principal Investigator visited the project area and
conducted a preliminary surface inspection of the entire tract in order to help formulate a
research design for the impending site assessment. In addition, the ground surface was
checked for cultural materials that might have become recently exposed due to heavy
rains in the area.
The field evaluation of site 41BO182 was conducted by Robert Daigle,
representing Brazos Valley Research Associates, and Bryan Guevin, staff archaeologist
for the Corps of Engineers, Galveston District. Both parties had been involved in this
project and were familiar with the site area and, likewise, were well aware of the
problems to be resolved.
Shovel testing was the medium chosen to assess site 41BO182, and four shovel
tests were excavated. It was in this area that the prior experience of Daigle and Guevin
was particularly useful. The effort by Moore Archeological Consulting had resulted in
digging nine shovel tests in the site area. Daigle and Guevin were able to recall the
areas tested by MAC enabling them to more strategically plan the location of their tests.
Normally, four shovel tests would be viewed as a low number to adequately assess a
site for its research potential. However, in this case, the four tests were added to the
nine previously dug by MAC making a total of thirteen in the site area. Mr. Guevin
viewed this number as enough, especially considering the disturbed condition of site
41BO182.
Earth from the four shovel tests was screened through quarter-inch hardware
cloth when possible. In some cases the soil was too wet and compact had to be broken
up by hand. The numbering system utilized was a continuation of the numbers used by
Moore Archeological Consulting. Since 24 tests had been excavated by MAC, the tests
dug by Daigle and Guevin were assigned the numbers 25 through 28 (Table 1).

10

Table 1. Shovel Test Log

______________________________________________________________________

Test
Date
Depth
Results
______________________________________________________________________
25

12-28-93

45 cm flake, ceramic fragment 

26

12-28-93

36 cm sterile

27

12-28-93

40 cm sterile

28
12-28-93
45 cm sterile
 _____________________________________________________________________
_
_____________________________________________________________________
The shovel tests were terminated when the sterile Beaumont clay was reached.
More detailed information regarding the four tests was logged by Robert Daigle in a field
notebook that will become part of the records curation. Some of these data appear in
the Results and Conclusions section of this report.
Bryan Guevin supervised the site
testing. He made the decision where the tests were to be placed and when they were
to be terminated. He is also responsible for making the field decision regarding the site
condition.
All records of this project have been turned over to Bryan Guevin for
permanent curation at the Corps of Engineers, Galveston District per his instructions.
The artifacts were also given to Mr. Guevin who will make the final decision regarding
their final disposition.

11

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Site 41BO182 was found to be very disturbed and is defined in this report as
destroyed. In all, 13 shovel tests were excavated in the site area with five producing
cultural materials. As stated above, the condition of the site was very disturbed due to
recent construction activities and extensive relic collecting. There is enough data,
however, to allow for some general statements regarding this site.
This prehistoric site is situated on the south bank of Clear Creek, a major
drainage of Brazoria County. It is on a high floodplain terrace overlooking a remnant
oxbow channel of the creek. Bryan Guevin believes that the site area formerly
consisted of a small natural pimple mound located about 75-100 feet directly south of
the existing Clear Creek levee bank. At the time of his visit, the project area contained
mixed pine and bottomland hardwoods with extensive yaupon and palmetto understory
of the remnant Clear Creek natural floodplain. Prior to modern channelization, circa
1970s, the configuration of the creek channel was much different as evidenced by the
presence of at least two relict oxbow channels that contain wetlands and overflow water
adjacent to the modern creek bed.
The size of the site was described by Mr. Hand as a low sandy mound
approximately 30 feet in diameter and 15-25 inches in height. This mound was
probably a natural pimple mound or, less likely, a restricted natural levee deposit.
Cultural materials were found by Mr. Hand at depths of up to three feet below the
surface in a sandy loam matrix underlain by yellowish clay.
During the two recent investigations by Moore Archeological Consulting and
Brazos Valley Research Associates artifacts were found only as deep as 30 cm below
the disturbed surface. When compared to the depth encountered by Mr. Hand, the
amount of recent disturbance is obvious. It is the opinion of the author that the site is too
disturbed to accurately describe it as either a terrace site or a natural mound site
without the services of a professional geomorphologist. Both types are thoroughly
discussed by Howard et al. (1992:15-19). Terrace sites along Clear Creek are poorly
known in comparison to the ubiquitous shell middens of the area. According to Howard
et al. (1992:17): the survey-level data on Clear Creek terrace sites - along with data
from other excavated terrace sites in the Houston area - suggest that the Clear Creek
sites represent exploitation of riverine resources and are likely to contain relatively thin
cultural deposits that represent multiple time periods.
Like the terrace sites, few natural mound sites along Clear Creek have been
subjected to systematic investigations. They are described by Howard et al. (1992:17)
in the following:

12

“The limited data on the contents of the Clear Creek natural mound sites suggest
that their deposits are relatively thin. They may contain single or multiple components
and date back to the early Archaic or Paleoindian periods in some cases, perhaps
containing the earliest occupations on Clear Creek. A few of these natural mound sites
preserve bones, shells, and intact features including human burials.”
Considerable research in the area suggests that the Clear Creek terrace sites
are most common in the tidal-influenced segments of this drainage and its tributaries,
although they are also found in the incised meander segment. Natural mound sites are
found in the tidal reaches but are most common in the incised meander segment of
Clear Creek. Site density according to type has been noted by McGuff and Cox
(1973:18-19) as a result of their work on Clear Creek. They noted site concentrations in
two areas: on the banks of Clear Lake and in the middle reaches of Clear Creek
between Friendswood and Pearland. The natural mound sites were found to account
for most of the concentration of sites in the middle reaches of Clear Creek (the third
reach). Between the two concentrations only a few sites were observed and no sites
were believed to lie west of Pearland.
Site 41BO182 is located just to the west of the area surveyed by Prewitt and
Associates, Inc. in 1991 described as the Third Reach of Clear Creek. It is on a terrace
above what appears to be an incised meander segment. That sandy soil is only present
in the immediate area of the site makes a strong case for a natural mound site instead
of a terrace site. The combined data from the various investigations at this site suggest
a site area of approximately 15 square meters. The site configuration is semi-circular
and probably conforms to the size of the pimple mound on which it was situated in
prehistoric times.
The function of 41BO182 can only be assumed at this time. Based on the
artifacts present it is believed that this site probably occupied a natural mound
overlooking an incised meander of Clear Creek and was an area selected for
exploitation of the available riverine resources. The presence of ceramics and arrow
points (possibly Catahoula and Cliffton) are indicators of a Late Prehistoric occupation,
while Gary and Kent dart points could date to the Transitional Archaic or Early Ceramic
periods. A large expanding-stemmed dart point was also found by Mr. Hand but was
not included in the collection examined by Roger G. Moore and Robert C. Booth. This
specimen may represent an Archaic point that could extend the date of occupation of
41BO182 further back in time.
In addition to the artifacts mentioned above, miscellaneous lithic tools (including
a prismatic blade tool), quantities of debitage, bone fragments, and asphaltum were
recovered by Mr. Hand. The artifact types from 41BO182 appears to consist of a very
interesting assemblage and certainly worthy of additional study if the site were intact.

13

The low number of recovered artifacts from shovel testing in the site area is a
strong argument for the destroyed nature of the site as well as the potential for recovery
should additional testing be instigated. Of the four shovel tests excavated during this
study, for example, only one test (ST 11) was positive with two artifacts, one flake and
one ceramic fragment. Similar results were encountered by Moore Archeological
Consulting during their shovel testing of the site area. They excavated nine shovel tests
but only four produced artifacts. In all, three flakes and one ceramic fragment were
recovered from four tests plus a few unidentified objects that have not been classified at
this time.
Thirteen shovel tests were excavated in the site area with only six artifacts found
in a very disturbed context of mixed loamy soil and clay. That most of these specimens
were recovered from shallow depths makes a case for the extent of destruction to the
major part of the midden soil that has been removed by the agents of construction and
relic collecting.
It is disappointing that this site was destroyed before it could be systematically
examined by professional archaeologists. That artifacts were found by Mr. Hand at a
depth of three feet in places suggests 41BO182 may have provided an opportunity to
collect valuable data, possibly stratified, not available in the more shallow natural
mound sites that appear to be typical of the area. Based on the information and
collection provided by Mr. Hand it is most likely that site 41BO182 was eligible for the
National Register prior to recent construction activity on the property.

14

RECOMMENDATIONS
The investigation at prehistoric site 41BO182 revealed the site area to be very
disturbed to the point of being defined as destroyed. Given the extent and nature of the
recent impacts (bulldozing and land levelling) to the property, no further archaeological
work is warranted. This includes possible monitoring or backhoe trenching. However,
construction is not allowed to proceed until a resolution of the Cease and Desist order
by the State Historical Preservation Officer (SHPO) and the Corps of Engineers,
Galveston District has been reached.

15

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press.
Biessart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985
Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Special Report 28.
Crenwelge, Gerald W., Jack D. Crout, Edward L. Griffin, Michael L. Golden, and Janet
K. Baker
1981
Soil Survey of Brazoria County. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service. Washington, D.C.
Howard, Margaret A., Martha Doty Freeman, and C. Britt Bousman
1992
Archeological Reconnaissance in the Third Reach of the Clear
Creek Flood Control Project, Galveston and Harris Counties,
Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations
Number 85.
McGuff, Paul R., and Wayne N. Cox
1973
A Survey of the Archeological and Historical Resources of Areas to
be Affected by the Clear Creek Flood Control Project, Texas. The
University of Texas at Austin, Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report 28.
Moore, Roger G.
1993

Cultural Resources Investigation for a Proposed 18 Acre
Development Project on Clear Creek in Brazoria County, Texas.
Interim Report submitted to Greenwood Development, Inc.,
December 1993, by Moore Archeological Consulting.

Moore, Roger G., and William E. Moore
1994
A Cultural Resources Survey of an 18 Acre Development Project
on Clear Creek in Brazoria County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigation Number 107.
Moore, William E.
1989

Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas.
Texas Historical Commission, Office of the State Archeologist,
Special Report 31.

16

Moore, William E. (continued)
1990
Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1988. Texas Historica
Commission, Department of Archeological Planning and Review,
Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1.
1991

Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1987. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Archeological Planning and Review,
Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 2.

1992a

Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1990. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Archeological Planning and Review,
Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 3.

1992b

Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1991. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection, Abstracts in
Texas Contract Archeology 4.

1993

Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1989. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection, Abstracts in
Texas Contract Archeology 5.

1994

Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1992. Texas Historical
Commission, Department of Antiquities Protection, Abstracts in
Texas Contract Archeology 6.

Patterson, Leland W.
1989
Data Base for Inland Southeast Texas Archeology. Houston
Archeological Society, Report 6.

17

