TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF A PROPOSED
BARGE OFF-LOADING FACILITY

Brazoria County, Texas

David G. Robinson

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

Technical Bulletin No. 32
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN

1979

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF A PROPOSED

BARGE OFF-LOADING FACILITY
Brazoria County, Texas

November 20 and 21, 1979 an intensive archeological survey
of a 15 acre tract, a proposed barge off-loading facility, on the
San Bernard River in Brazoria County, Texas (Fig. 1) was conducted
by David G. Robinson and J. Peter Thunnond of the Texas Archeological
Survey, the University of Texas at Austin for Dames and Moore of
Houston, Texas. The area of investigation is a recent river terrace
covered with pecan trees, vines, briars, palmetto, cane and some
grasses. Surface features were the result of modern development,
including a borrow pit for fill supporting the nearby San Bernard
River bridge, and a deep cut for drainage of the borrow pit. A
natural levee of sand and silt formed a bank varying'from 1.25 to
3.0 meters above the San Bernard River.
The survey procedure was a complete walkover of the tract,
followed by examination of the river bank and sides of the drainage
cut to locate stratified cultural materials. A maximum of three
meters of alluvial deposit was inspected in this manner. Twelve
shovel tests were dug to depths varying from .25 to .50 meters to
detect any subsurface cultural deposits. Placement of the tests
was at the discretion of the archeologist. In addition, two 1.0
meter profiles were cut into the walls of the drainage channel to
delineate the depositional sequence of the terrace.
No cultural resources were detected by any of these methods.
Two probable reasons for the lack of historic and prehistoric materials,
despite the proximity of the Sweeney Plantation and the tract's
favorable location for economic exploitation of the river, are:
1) Eighty to 90 percent of the area was disturbed by the
excavation of the borrow pit, the drainage cut and the displaced
fill from these features. This modification would have destroyed,
dispersed, or hidden any evidence of prior occupation.
On

-2­

2) A surficial examination does not rule out the possibility that
buried cultural remains could exist undiscovered below three meters, or
at shallower depths in areas not exposed by the riverbank and drainage
cut.
No further archeological investigations of the area are recommended.
However, the potential for prehistoric cultural materials at depths
greater than three meters warrants careful observation of natural deposits
excavated during construction of the barge off-loading facility.

November 21, 1979

David G. Robinson, Staff Archeologist

~/

u

::;1

Q.'<il

11."/
I

I

I

I

I

f

.0

I

r.
~-'-'

/SWindmiH
32

20

[

