fII.-rt meG CYl. {)o:3 ~7'r/~
C:t;rt;, J. G, C ~
~;,

~

REPORT OF ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIOns:
ZACATE CREEK FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT
Laredo, Texas

Grant D. Hall

o

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas at Austin
Technical Bulletin No. 3
1973

AR-TX
TARL 07.003

Copy 1

I

t-/ I vJi3 ;3- ,1

Ii? --

:!t.

P~D ;:;

.,

IIII

XAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

1.-,

,

•

REPORT OF ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS:
ZACATE C~EEK FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT
.

..

,

"_.,

Laredo, Texas

Grant D. Hall

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas at Austin

Technical Bulletin No, 3
1973
fRINTEO IN U./U

7~ ~ ;l!;'~d ..:!"d.
~

•

-', A_o".....!' ":e'.

..-4:~'"1V~.'~1-"

•

•

REPORT OF ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS:
ZACATE CREEK FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT, LAREDO, TEXAS
Grant D. Hall
Introduction
Herein submitted is a report of an archeological
survey along a 3.8 mile segment of Zacate Creek in
Laredo, Texas which would be affected by the proposed
flood protection project.
The survey was carried out
between June 8 and June 12 of 1973 by the Texas Archeolog­
ical Survey~ The University of Texas at Austin, working
under the auspices of the Fort Worth District, U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers.
The purpose of the investigation was
to locate 'and evaluate historic and. archeological resources
in and along Zacate Creek, a tributary of the Rio Grande,
ibetween the mouth of the creek to a point 1,300 feet upstream
from Marcella Street in the City of Laredo.* Survey proce­
dures were structured in a manner thought to be suited to
achieving this end.
Although large segments of the Zacate Creek channel
are choked with various forms of vegetation, chief among
them cattails and buffelgrass, it was still possible to
view potentially relevant deposits at many points along
the creek.
These included open fields in the northern
section of the survey and both water-eroded and man-made
cut banks in the central and southern sections.
The creek bed is composed of sandstone bedrock which
extends from the creek mouth to a point approximately 1.5
mile$ upstream from the Rio grande.
From this point north,
alluvial deposits gradually thicken and the sandstone
exposure disappears completely.
Erosional activity becomes
Increasin~ly pronounced as the creek approaches the Rio
Grande.
Small-scale dredging operations are evidenced in
the low-lying areas through which the creek passes, partic­
ularly to the north where the channel is not as deep and
subsequently more prone to overbank flooding.
I

*The area investigated coincided with project limits
described in "Draft Environmental Impact Statement, Flood
Protection, Zacate Creek, Laredo, Texas", dated April, 1973
(report prepared by the Fort Worth District, U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers).

l

,

--;,"[

~

t.
Survey Coverage and Results

The entire length of the creek under study was walked
out; special attention was given to areas of open ground,
both within the creek itself and in immediately adjacent
areas, where cultural remains would be exposed and visible.
In this fashion, three prehistoric sites, hence referred
to as 41 WB 53, 41 WB 54, and 41 WB 55*, were located
and recorded.
The characteristics of each of these sites were record­
ed on standard forms used by the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory of The University of Texas at Austin.
The sites
were then plotted on a U.S.G.S. topographic map (Laredo
East, Texas, 1965) and on an aerial photograph supplied by
the Corps of Engineers.
Black-and-white photographs were
taken of each site in order that the nature and extent of
the locality might be more adequately demonstrated.
Arti­
facts collected on the sites were placed in bags labelled
with all pertinent data.
These artifacts, notes, and
photographs are now being processed at the laboratories of
the Texas Archeological Survey and will be permanently
housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
,alcones Research Center, The University of Texas at Austin.
Site 41 WB 53 (see project map attached) is located
within and, to a certain extent, beyond the northernmost
reaches of the proposed flood control project. The major
portion of 41 WB 53 lies parallel to the left (east) bank
of the north fork of the creek directly above Pierce School.
The site is in a willow-covered field which shows consid­
erable evidence of past modifications including plowing
and bulldozing.
The area is now under development by
Paloma Properties of Laredo.
Surface indications included
three time diagnostic dart pOints of Archaic age plus
numerous flint cores and flakes.
The artifacts appeared
to be concentrated in a line somewhat parallel to, and
approximately 150 feet east of, the existing modified
creek channel.
In view of the fact that 41 WB 53 has received extensive
past modifications, as a result of development in the area
by Paloma Properties, and because the cultural deposits do
not appear to have depth, it is not recommended that any
further investigation be carried out in this locality.
I

*This standard trinomial system is used to provide official
designations for archeological sites.
The number 41 designates
the State of Texas.
The letters and final numerals distinguish
the county and specific site being dealt with.
,...,.,...

-2­

..LJf- - /'

":];:I _ ~ c " ' . " /.

/1"., ,"

I~ ,,-,r~, ~C"{~,",""~·r..(~'... /~t,.,t.J<""
A ../;:y/:,,~,~,
~W'''''''''''''Y

.-1

r

e.

e

Site 41 WB 54 is located on the left (east) bank of
the creek approximately 1/4 mile upstream from the Rio
Grande.
Flint cores and flakes were found on an eroded
slope lying directly above a prominent sandstone outcrop
which cuts across the creek bed.
The proposed plan for modification of this section of
.the creek calls only for clearing and brushing of the
existing channel.
Unless heavy equipment is used in the
clearing process, 41 WB 54 should suffer no significant
damage.
It is suggested, however, that any archeological
material discovered in this particular area during the
course of modifications be reported to a responsible
government agency (for example, the Texas State Historical
Survey Committee). An alternative, and more satisfactory,
recommendation is that clearing of this area be monitored
by a recognized professional archeologist.
With respect to historic locations along the creek,
the National Registry of Historic Places lists no sites in
the project area.
Mr. Luciano Guajardo, director of the
Laredo Public Library, was also contacted for information
, and opinions concerning this aspect of the survey. 'Mr.
Guajardo stated that all of the important historical sites
in the Laredo area lie west of San Eduardo Street (i.e.,
from four to eight blocks west of the creek). In our
opinion (based partly on our own in-field observation) the
proposed project should have no affect on significant
historical sites in the area.
Summary
An archeological survey of the Zacate Creek project
area has yielded information on three archeological sites.
Site 41 WB 53 is deemed of insufficient scientific merit
to justify further investigation beyond..~hat carried out
during this field inspection.
Site 41 ~ 54 should not
be significantly affected by project modifications planned
for this locality; however, further work is recommended
to mitigate losses to the site if significant archeological
materials are encountered during modification.
Site 41 WB
55 is outside the study area and should not be affected by
laud modifications described for this project.
No sites of
historical significance were listed in the National Registry
of Historic Places and no previously unreported historic
sites of potential significance were discovered during
the survey of the project area.

-3­

.....

_........

e

e.

With the possible exception Gf precautionary
measures recommended for site 41 WB 54~ it is our
general conclusion that the proposed engineering
modifications planned for Zacate Creek will have
no significant effects on either historic or arche­
ological resources located in the area.

~S·CJlli

Approved for submission:

,

~wI?~

David S. Dibb1e,Acting Director
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
June 15, 1973

/

-4­

'iN; t:

II-.W:..!:.ru. •. "",,.i...._,

_

......."''1':

