A Cultural Resource Survey of the Preferred Alignment and
An Archeological and Historic Land Use Assessment of Alternative Alignments for
Segment E of the Grand Parkway within Harris County, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 1734
William E. Moore, M.A.,
Roger G. Moore, Ph.D.,
Nicola Hubbard, D.Phil.
Sue Winton Moss, M.A.
and
J. Thomas Dureka

Prepared for
Turner Collie & Braden, Inc.,
The Grand Parkway Association,
and
The Texas Department of Transportation

Moore Archeological Consulting
Report of Investigations Number 183
2008

A Cultural Resource Survey of the Preferred Alignment and
An Archeological and Historic Land Use Assessment of Alternative Alignments for
Segment E of the Grand Parkway within Harris County, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 1734
William E. Moore, M.A.,
Roger G. Moore, Ph.D.,
Nicola Hubbard, D.Phil.
Sue Winton Moss, M.A.
and
J. Thomas Dureka

Prepared for
Turner Collie & Braden, Inc.,
The Grand Parkway Association,
and
The Texas Department of Transportation

Moore Archeological Consulting
Report of Investigations Number 183
2008

Abstract
Moore Archeological Consulting conducted a cultural resource investigation of
the proposed Grand Parkway (State Highway 99), Segment E, in western Harris County,
Texas. This report details the results of this investigation, which included (1) a study of
historical land use in the Project Area region; (2) an archeological survey of the Preferred
Alignment (Alternative Alignment Number 4) of Segment E; and (3) an archeological
assessment of the five alternative alignments of the proposed Grand Parkway.
The field survey of the Preferred Alignment was conducted between September
12 and October 3, 1996 and consisted of a 100 percent pedestrian reconnaissance of the
entire proposed right-of-way and a series of shovel tests excavated mostly in areas of
relatively high probability for cultural occupation. A total of 64 shovel tests were
excavated; 49 were placed in and near the three creek crossings and 15 were placed in
randomly chosen locales away from permanent water.
The reconnaissance of the surface revealed no significant cultural sites, although
the field crew noted that the proposed construction will impact two active corrals, a
collection of small outbuilding slabs associated with a concrete dip tank, an active well in
the area formerly designated as a fish hatchery, fallen barns, feeding stations, loading
ramps, ditches, roads, and other recent ranch-related features. None of these items appear
to be eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places, and none will
require further cultural resource investigations.
None of the randomly placed shovel tests yielded significant cultural debris. The
shovel tests on both sides of Bear Creek and South Mayde Creek proved sterile.
Likewise, no evidence of cultural occupation was found in shovel tests on the south side
of Cypress Creek. However, a sizable prehistoric lithic scatter and midden, extending
across the entire right-of-way, was encountered on the north side of Cypress Creek; this
site was designated MAC 96-32-TS-1 (or Temporary Site 1). The densest evidence of
prehistoric occupation was found in the shovel tests which were placed 15 to 45 m west
of the centerline and 30 to 50 m north of the present creek channel. Two shovel tests
penetrated a rich midden on a small rise in this area. One of the tests produced a biface
medial fragment (or possible dart point fragment), 25 chert flakes (including 1 blade and
several utilized flakes), 59 pieces of burned and unburned bone, and one tooth fragment,
along with a few small pieces of charcoal. The other test in this area yielded 48 flakes
and expedient tools, 3 tooth fragments, 144 fragments of burned and unburned bone (16
of which appear to be turtle shell), and 2 pieces of charcoal. These rates of recovery are
considered to be extremely high for shovel tests. Rather distinctive high counts of lithics
and bone were also noted at various depths; this perhaps indicates stratified multiple
occupations. No ceramics were discovered in any of the shovel tests at the site,
suggesting that this may be an Archaic-period occupation over 1500 years old.

i

Considering the thickness of the midden, the impressive recovery from some of
the shovel tests, the appearance of stratified multiple deposits and the virtually
undisturbed character of parts of the site, 41HR796 is almost certainly eligible for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. As such, the site should be
avoided during construction of the bridge over Cypress Creek. If avoidance is not
feasible, formal testing will be required to assess its depth, age and integrity.

ii

Table of Contents
Abstract ................................................................................................................................ i
Table of Contents............................................................................................................... iii
List of Figures ......................................................................................................................v
General Introduction: Objectives of the Investigations ................................................1
Part I: Historical Land Use Study....................................................................................8
Project Objective..................................................................................................................8
Project Methods ...................................................................................................................8
Summary of Findings...........................................................................................................8
Recommendations................................................................................................................9
Summary of Historical Land Use in the Project Area .......................................................10
Part II: Archeological Survey of the Preferred Alignment.........................................14
Introduction........................................................................................................................14
Background Research ........................................................................................................14
Previous Investigations ......................................................................................................17
Survey Methods .................................................................................................................20
Results and Conclusions ....................................................................................................24
Recommendations..............................................................................................................40

iii

Part III: Alternatives Analysis.......................................................................................41
Predictive Modeling for the Grand Parkway, E Segment, Alternative Alignments ..........41
The Existing Model for Prehistoric Settlement in Southeast Texas ..................................44
Application of the Land Use Study, Preferred Alignment Survey, and Settlement Model
to the Alternatives Analysis ...............................................................................................57
Additional Comments Regarding Site 41HR796...............................................................61
Recommendations..............................................................................................................63
References Cited ................................................................................................................64
Appendix: Shovel Test Log ..............................................................................................73

iv

List of Figures
Figure 1. Project Alternative Alignments
Figure 2A. Proposed Preferred Alignment as plotted on USGS Quadrangle Map, Katy,
Texas
Figure 2B. Proposed Preferred Alignment as plotted on USGS Quadrangle Map, Katy,
Texas (continued)
Figure 2C. Proposed Preferred Alignment as plotted on USGS Quadrangle Map, Katy,
Texas (continued)
Figure 2D. Proposed Preferred Alignment as plotted on USGS Quadrangle Map, Katy,
Texas (continued)
Figure 2E. Proposed Preferred Alignment as plotted on USGS Quadrangle Map, Katy,
Texas (continued)
Figure 3. Storm over Pasture near US 290
Figure 4. Aster Field North of Cypress Creek
Figure 5. Flooded Rice Field North of Longenbaugh Road
Figure 6. Soybean Field North of Morton Ranch Road
Figure 7. Shovel Testing in Pasture near House and Hahl Road
Figure 8. Dense Dewberries and Irrigation Ditch North of Longenbaugh Road
Figure 9. D. Trial and J. Clark Shovel Testing at Bear Creek
Figure 10. Shovel Testing at Bear Creek; note Channel Modifications
Figure 11. M. A. Paul Surveying near South Mayde Creek
Figure 12. Channel of South Mayde Creek
Figure 13. Pond and Berm on South Side of Cypress Creek
Figure 14. Berm and Slope on South Side of Cypress Creek
Figure 15. Channel of Cypress Creek

v

List of Figures (continued)
Figure 16. M. A. Paul and D. Trial Shovel Testing at 41HR796
Figure 17. 41HR796 Plan with Shovel Test Locations
Figure 18. Dip Tank and Fallen Barn near US 290
Figure 19. Corral near House and Hahl Road
Figure 20. Abandoned Farmstead near ROW North of House and Hahl Road
Figure 21. Barn within ROW between Cypress Creek and House and Hahl Road
Figure 22. Well South of Abandoned Fish Hatchery

vi

General Introduction: Objectives of the Investigations

This report addresses the cultural resource aspects of the proposed Segment E of State
Highway 99, also known as the Grand Parkway (Figure 1). This segment traverses 12.12 miles
of western Harris County, Texas. The highway will connect Interstate 10 near Katy with US
Highway 290 near Hockley. The report provides:

(1) The results of a study of historical land use in the Project Area region;
(2) The results of an archeological survey of the Preferred Alignment
(Alternative Alignment Number 4) of the E Segment; and
(3) An archeological assessment of the five alternative alignments of the
proposed Grand Parkway.

The report is divided into three parts reflecting the above three tasks. The alternative
alignments are depicted on Figure 1, while the Preferred Alignment is depicted on a topographic
map base on Figures 2A-2E. The work described herein was carried out under Texas Antiquities
Permit Number 1734. The Principal Investigator for the project was William E. Moore. Dr.
Roger G. Moore was the Project Archeologist.

1

Figure 1. Project Alternative Alignments

2

Figure 2A. Proposed Preferred Alignment as plotted on USGS Quadrangle Map, Warren Lake, Texas

3

Figure 2B. Proposed Preferred Alignment as plotted on USGS Quadrangle Map, Katy, Texas (continued)

4

Figure 2C. Proposed Preferred Alignment as plotted on USGS Quadrangle Map, Katy, Texas (continued)

5

Figure 2D. Proposed Preferred Alignment as plotted on USGS Quadrangle Map, Katy, Texas (continued)

6

Figure 2E. Proposed Preferred Alignment as plotted on USGS Quadrangle Map, Katy, Texas (continued)

7

Part I: Historical Land Use Study

Project Objective

The aim of the project was to determine the historic land use of, and the potential for
historic structures along, the proposed Preferred Alignment (Alternative Alignment Number 4)
of State Highway 99 (Grand Parkway, Segment E).

Project Methods

The following repositories were utilized for the preliminary background research:

1. Center for American History, University of Texas at Austin;
2. Texas Room, Houston Public Library; and
3. Clayton Genealogical Library, Houston Public Library.

Generally, secondary research materials were utilized, although readily available primary
sources, such as published census reports and maps, were also perused. Maps provided the
major historical resource.

Summary of Findings

The proposed Preferred Alignment of State Highway 99 (Grand Parkway, Segment E),
appears to have been primarily agricultural in both the nineteenth and the twentieth centuries.

8

Recommendations

Although this summary study of historic land use has revealed a low potential for historic
sites, structures, and buildings along the proposed route, only a field survey will determine the
existence of any cultural remains. Therefore, (1) a thorough survey of the proposed route should
be made to identify potential historic structures associated with the nineteenth- and twentiethcentury history of the route; and (2) All sites, structures, and buildings identified in the survey
should be investigated for determinations of historical significance and historical integrity.

9

Summary of Historical Land Use in the Project Area

The Project Area is located in Harris County, Texas.

It lies west of the Houston

Metropolitan area, between Interstate 10 and US 290. Although there has been some suburban
development in the I-10 area, the proposed route passes through lands that have been in
agricultural use since settlement in the mid-nineteenth century.

Agricultural productions

probably included the sugar and cotton that were grown to the south and north. William Eule
introduced rice-growing in the vicinity of the Project Area in 1901, and although the natural
rainfall was sometimes enough to irrigate the rice, water was usually obtained from wells
(Rylander 1991:44). Habitation has been very sparse in the vicinity of the proposed route, and
the historical record has reveals no habitation or other evidence of cultural resources.

The northern part of the Project Area (approximately the northern one-third of the route)
passes through lands that were surveyed and issued in the mid-nineteenth century. The John
Stoddard survey was patented in December 1847; the Mary Bulriece survey was patented
between 1862 and 1878 (Texas General Land Office (TGLO) 1941(I):388, 376). Grants to Q. N.
Kinman, James Askins, Alexander Gulliver and James R. Parker were issued in the 1840s and
1850s (TGLO 1941(I):384, 375, 380, 386).

The southern two-thirds of the Project Area was primarily in grants to railroads. The
Washington County Railroad Company and the J. D. Giddings estate surveyed a number of 640acre blocks in the southernmost part of the Project Area in 1878 and 1879 (TGLO 1941(I):392393). The Houston and Texas Central Railroad held thousands of acres that were surveyed in
640-acre blocks in December 1887 (TGLO 1941(I):382-383). None of these patents were
homesteading headrights, and the land was not necessarily settled after the title was issued. It
was almost certain, however, that there was little or no habitation or utilization (other than
occasional range cattle grazing) prior to the patent dates. (See also Maps 1 and 2, TGLO 1879,
1896).

While settlement in the northern part of the Project Area had probably begun prior to the
Civil War, the first occupation of the vicinity in the southern part came in the 1870s, when the

10

Texas Western Narrow Gauge Railway was built from Houston to Sealy. Always in financial
trouble, the Texas Western was supplanted by the Missouri-Kansas-and-Texas Railroad which
was built along its route in the 1890s (Tyler et al. 1996(6): 445).

The town of Katy emerged in the 1890s when the Missouri-Kansas-and-Texas Railroad
line was built. In the early 1890s, the area was bounded by the Houston and Texas Central
Railroad on the north and the Texas Western Railroad and the Missouri-Kansas-and Texas
Railroad on the south. There were some German-immigrant settlements to the east of the Project
Area along Horsepen Bayou and near the hamlets of Hillendahl and Addicks, but there was little
habitation in the Project Area itself (Immigration and Development Association of Harris
County, Texas 1892: Map 3).

Maps made after the turn of the century show some population growth in the southern
third of the Project Area. The USGS maps of 1915 and 1916 depict scattered structures and
habitations in the vicinity of the Project Area, but none were on the proposed routing (Maps 4
and 5). Roads were built following many of the survey lines, and various roads and landmarks
picked up the names of area landowners (Harris County Engineers 1917: Map 4). There was one
road that crossed the Project Area, north of Freeman Road (FM 529) in 1924: House-Hahl Road
zigzagged from the Hempstead Road, north of Cypress Creek, toward the Katy-Hockley Road.
It did not connect with the latter (Hatcher Drafting Company 1924: Map 5).

In the 1920s, little had changed in the northern portion of the Project Area. However, by
this time, House-Hahl Road did connect Cypress with the Katy-Hockley Road (Ashburn 1934:
Map 6; Hatcher Drafting Company 1924: Map 5).

A study of landownership in the Project Area is out of the scope of this report. Names of
early landowners, however, have probably survived in the names of the roads that criss-cross the
proposed route.

11

•

The Beckendorff family lived in the northern part of the project vicinity (near Hockley) as
early as 1875. The family, headed by Robert Beckendorff, moved to near the Katy area in
1897 (Rylander 1991:88-93). Beckendorff Road is probably named for family property
nearby.

•

Franz Road is probably named for the Peter Franz families who moved to Katy from
Nebraska in about 1906. David Peter Franz was a watch repairman and shopkeeper in Katy,
although his family probably owned and farmed land in the project vicinity (Rylander
1991:121-123, 60).

•

The Jesse Freeman family arrived in the Katy area in 1897 from Plano, Iowa. Freeman’s
son, William Elsworth Freeman, and his family also came to the area in 1897 (Rylander
1991:125-131). Freeman Road is also known as FM 529.

•

Another Iowa family, led by 72-year-old patriarch Christopher Columbus Peeks, joined their
fellow Midwesterners in the Katy area in about 1906. They gave their name to Peek Road
(Rylander 1991:170-174).

•

The road which runs near and parallel to much of the proposed route is the Stockdick Road,
also called the Stockdick School Road. The Stockdick family, headed by Adam Henry
Stockdick, came to the Katy area in 1898 from Plano, Iowa (Rylander 1991:211-213).
Adam Stockdick was a real estate dealer in the area. According to the Katy Herald of
February 19, 1909 (excerpted in Rylander 1991:21), Stockdick was one of the first settlers in
the Katy area. His advertisement in the same newspaper noted that he had lands for sale
suited to citrus production, rice farming, truck farming, general farming or oil production.

Stockdick Road runs east/west from Katy-Hockley Cut-Off. It passes Peek Road, then turns
north to end in Freeman Road (FM 529). Early maps note that the east/west portion was
called Stockdick School Road, no doubt named for the school that sat at the intersection of
Stockdick School Road and Peek Road. Built in 1914, the school took students from the

12

area northeast of Katy. A. J. Peek and W. C. Stockdick were early trustees of this school
(Rylander 1991:68c).

Secondary resources have revealed scant potential for above-ground cultural remains
from the historic period, 1820s to 1950. The Project Area and its surrounding vicinity was
sparsely settled and was devoted to mid- to large-scale agricultural enterprises. Land occupation
appears to have come late in the nineteenth century for most of the area. The few habitations
that appear on the twentieth-century maps of the Katy-Hockley area are on the few unimproved
roads. They do not appear to be along the proposed route of the alignment.

13

Part II: Archeological Survey of the Preferred Alignment

Introduction

Between September 12 and October 3, 1996, Moore Archeological Consulting executed a
cultural resource survey along the Preferred Alignment of Segment E of the proposed Grand
Parkway in western Harris County. Field operations were supervised and documented by J.
Thomas Dureka. The field crew consisted of Denise Trial, Jim Clarke, Mary Ann Paul and Anne
Michelle Huebner.

Weather remained hot and humid during most of the survey, and several days of
thunderstorm activity slowed field work. Saturated ground and knee-deep standing water were
commonly encountered during the latter half of the survey (Figures 3 and 4).

Background Research

A records check at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory in Austin found that no
previously recorded sites lie within the proposed right-of-way (ROW). However, in 1977, one
disturbed prehistoric scatter, 41HR334, was recorded on four terraces a short distance west of the
ROW. The scatter was reported to measure approximately 50 x 100 m, and artifacts were easily
observable in bare spots on the field. The proposed ROW bends east around the area of this site.
No trace of 41HR334 was encountered by the survey crew.

Land planning, continuous

cultivation and collection of artifacts in the two decades following the site's recording may have
obliterated the cultural remains.

In any event, the site is not mapped within the area of

anticipated impact.

14

Figure 3. Storm over Pasture near US 290

Figure 4. Aster Field North of Cypress Creek

15

Soils
The Preferred Alignment crosses several soil series which are not differentiated in terms
of agricultural use. Almost all of the soil types in the Project Area are dark grayish-brown in
color, poorly drained, and saturated during part of the year.

Well over a third of the alignment crosses the Katy fine sandy loam (Kf). These dark
grayish-brown soils sit high on the landscape, usually surrounding small depressions with
Gessner soils. The surfaces of Katy soils are plane to convex, and they are somewhat poorly
drained, with a perched water table during wet season.

The Aris Gessner (Ar) complex is widespread in the Project Area and comprises
approximately 25 percent of the landscape crossed by the alignment. In their native condition,
Aris sandy loams generally occupy higher positions on the landscape, while Gessner loams are
found in shallow depressions. Due to land planning, however, these soils are now found usually
mixed. Generally poorly drained, they may be saturated for long periods.

The low-lying, dark grayish-brown Gessner loam (Ge) make up approximately 25 percent
of the surface crossed by the alignment. They are poorly drained and generally saturated during
wet periods. The remainder of the Project Area is comprised of small areas of several other
loamy sediments.

Addicks loam (Ad) covers a small area of upland prairie, and although their surface is
plane to convex, they are poorly drained and occasionally saturated. Low-lying, dark gray
Clodine loam (Cd) may be saturated for six months at a time.

The Hockley fine sandy loam, 1 to 4 percent slopes (HoB) occupies gentle sloping
pastures in the north part of the Project Area; it is moderately well-drained and somewhat
erodable. The Wockley fine sandy loam (Wo) occupies nearly level to slightly concave surfaces,
and is somewhat poorly drained.

16

Previous Investigations

A number of archeological investigations have been conducted in Southeast Texas that
are relevant to the interpretation of the cultural resources of the Project Area where it crosses
Bear Creek, Cypress Creek and South Mayde Creek. The Project Area lies within a region that
has been the scene of several major reservoir and flood-control related projects. Other smaller
projects in the area have been conducted for small public works projects and by avocational
archeologists.

A check of the site records at TARL revealed that approximately 800

archeological sites have been recorded in Harris County at the time of this investigation.

The earliest major investigation in the region to be conducted by professional
archeologists was Joe Ben Wheat's (1953) survey of the Addicks Basin, located southwest of the
Project Area, as part of the River Basin Survey program. A number of sites were excavated, and
the Galveston Bay Focus, a component of the Neo-American Stage, was established on the basis
of data recovered from these excavations (Suhm et al. 1954). The Archaic materials from these
sites were later assigned to the La Harpe Aspect as defined by LeRoy Johnson (1962).

Cypress Creek Investigations

Cypress Creek flows through Harris County in a general east-west direction. Recent
studies on this major drainage include a 1989 survey of 645 acres by Texas A&M University
(Ensor 1991) and National Register testing at sites 41HR374 and 41HR375, also by Texas A&M
University (Ensor et al. 1991).

A survey conducted by the Texas Archeological Survey

(Freeman and Hale 1978) recorded sites 41HR342 and 41HR343. These are located on Cypress
Creek, east of the Project Area.

Moore Archeological Consulting has been active in the area with 11 projects on Cypress
Creek and its tributaries. These include surveys of the Welker Unit on Cypress Creek (Moore
1980), the proposed Missouri Pacific Railroad crossing of Cypress Creek (Moore 1981),
proposed extensions of Cypresswood Drive and Cutten Road (Moore 1985a), proposed
improvements within the Mercer Arboretum (Moore 1985b), the proposed Cypress Creek Golf

17

Course project (Moore 1988), Telge Road Park (Moore 1992a; W. Moore and Moore 1996),
Timber Lane Park tract (Moore 1992b), a 143-acre tract on Little Cypress Creek (Moore et al.
1994a), a 50-acre mitigation bank on an unnamed tributary of Cypress Creek (Moore and Daigle
1994), and a 347-acre survey on Cypress Creek (Moore et al. 1995).

In addition to field work, Moore Archeological Consulting has conducted an historical
overview of the Cypress Creek area (R. Moore and Moore 1991), and Roger G. Moore has
published his analysis of prehistoric settlement system data on Cypress Creek in the Journal of
the Houston Archeological Society (Moore 1985c). Most recently, Dr. Moore conducted a
comprehensive review of existing site records for the county and region supplemented by his
prior work on Southeast Texas settlement systems (Moore 1995a).

Bear Creek

A survey of cultural resources at Addicks Reservoir by Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
(Fields et al. 1983) investigated nine previously recorded sites and 39 newly recorded sites. This
study examined floodplain and upland settings on Bear Creek and South Mayde Creek.

Moore Archeological Consulting has participated in two surveys along Bear Creek. In
1996, a 237-acre tract on Upper Bear Creek was examined, and no sites were found (Moore
1996). The lack of sites was attributed to the distance from a significant perennial water course
and position of the Project Area on the Katy Prairie.

Also in 1996, Moore Archeological Consulting investigated a 46.6-acre tract on Bear
Creek within Addicks Reservoir (Moore and Dureka 1996). No new sites were identified, but
one previously recorded prehistoric site (41HR442) was partially shovel tested to identify the
site's southern boundary.

18

South Mayde Creek

Prewitt and Associates, Inc. investigated a portion of South Mayde Creek during their
survey of cultural resources at Addicks Reservoir in 1983 (Fields et al. 1983).

Moore

Archeological Consulting surveyed an area of slightly more than one acre on South Mayde Creek
in 1987. No sites were found. The negative findings were attributed to the position of the survey
area in the upstream prairie of this stream, where the topographic evidence conforms to the
terrain model for low site frequencies (Moore 1987).

Regional Syntheses

Works that have sought to synthesize prehistoric data relevant to the Project Area include
an early contribution by Sayles (1935) and more recent efforts by Suhm et al. (1954), Shafer
(1975), Shafer et al. (1975), Patterson (1976, 1979, 1983), Ambler (1973), Story (1981), and
Aten (1983). The final work by Aten, an expansion of his 1979 doctoral dissertation (Aten
1979), is a particularly ambitious and useful attempt to integrate ethnohistoric, archeological,
paleo-climatic, and geomorphological data for the Upper Texas Coast.

A broader overview of the Gulf coastal plain to southern Arkansas and Oklahoma is
provided in a new work commissioned by the United States Army Corps of Engineers’
Southwestern Division (Story et al. 1990). Harris County, in particular, has been the recipient of
numerous archeological investigations by contract archeologists.

For more region-specific information, the reader is advised to consult the bibliographies
by William E. Moore (1989), W. Moore and Moore (1986), and Leland W. Patterson (1996); an
ongoing data base by Patterson (1989); and the Abstracts in Texas Archeology series (W. Moore
1990, 1991, 1992a, 1992b, 1993, 1994). Specific to the Upper Texas Coast and the Project Area
is a compilation of papers that appear in a single volume published by the Houston
Archeological Society (Wheat and Gregg 1988). Most of these papers were written by local
archeologists, both avocational and professional.

19

Most recently, three major works have appeared that contain detailed overviews relevant
to Southeast Texas and the Project Area. These are Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region,
Texas: A Planning Document by the Department of Antiquities Protection (Kenmotsu and
Perttula 1993), Roger G. Moore's (1995b) Ph.D. dissertation, entitled The Mossy Grove Model of
Long-Term Forager-Collector Adaptations in Inland Southeast Texas, and Volume 66 of the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society. The latter reviews the current state of archeology in
Texas and contains a chapter devoted to Southeast Texas (Patterson 1995).

Survey Methods

The survey consisted of two parts: (1) a 100 percent pedestrian reconnaissance of the
entire proposed ROW, and (2) shovel testing in areas with a relatively high likelihood for
harboring cultural deposits.

The intensive pedestrian reconnaissance covered 100 percent of the proposed ROW at
transect intervals of 30 m (100 ft) or less. Surface visibility was generally less than 40 percent.
All unvegetated areas and exposures of the subsoil were examined for cultural materials,
including animal burrows, mechanically excavated pits, dirt roads, plowed fields and ditch
banks. Blueline aerial photographs, depicting existing roadways and the ROW, provided by the
firm of Turner Collie & Braden, were used for guidance. Occasional old survey stakes, usually
fallen, marked the approximate position of the centerline of the Preferred Alignment. The
archeological survey crew generally transected from one road-crossing to the next, then back to
the starting point. No significant cultural materials were encountered through this inspection
(Figures 5-8).

Shovel tests were concentrated in areas both near permanent water and within
undisturbed soils. To establish controls for the subsurface sample, some shovel testing was also
conducted in areas both at a distance from water sources and/or in current agricultural use.
Shovel tests measured approximately 20 cm by 40 cm and were excavated to clayey horizons or
to a depth of 100 cm if the clay had not yet been reached. Most of the soils from the tests were

20

Figure 5. Flooded Rice Field North of Longenbaugh Road

Figure 6. Soybean Field North of Longenbaugh Road

21

Figure 7. Shovel Testing in Pasture near House and Hahl Road

Figure 8. Dense Dewberries and Irrigation Ditch North of Longenbaugh Road

22

screened through 1/4-in hardware cloth. Clay soils were manually crumbled into 1-in clods, and
the ped faces were examined for artifacts. Soil horizons were defined and recorded. Any
potentially significant cultural materials were collected and provenienced. A total of 64 shovel
tests were excavated during this investigation. Forty-six tests were placed at the proposed creek
crossings, and 18 tests were placed at other locations. Shovel test locations are shown on Figures
2A-2E. The Appendix details individual test results.

23

Results and Conclusions

Much of the proposed ROW is now under intensive cultivation or has been in the recent
past. Almost every field reconnoitered exhibited a ditched, leveed and/or furrowed surface
underneath the vegetation. Drainage is a persistent concern for agriculture on the Katy fine
sandy loams, the Addicks loams, and the Gessners loams. Historically, rice has been the major
cultigen in this area. Flooded rice fields were not reconnoitered, although all other fields were
transected and shovel tested. Even in fields currently overgrown in head-high weeds, ditches and
berms indicating past land planning and cultivation were evident. Most of the land which may
be crossed by the Grand Parkway here has been leveled and deeply plowed. Surface features
which might have held some attraction for prehistoric occupants (such as mounds and rises
adjacent to undrained depressions) have been obliterated. All cultivated or formerly cultivated
areas are believed to harbor very low probability for intact cultural deposits. All shovel tests
excavated in these areas reinforced this belief.

The proposed ROW crossings for Bear Creek, South Mayde Creek and Cypress Creek
were accorded special scrutiny due to the higher probability of prehistoric occupation near
permanent water.

All three creeks have been disturbed on both sides to some degree, as

indicated by berms of dredged materials from within the drainages. It is presumed that the
channels of these waterways were also smoothed or otherwise altered during the course of
dredging.

Sixteen shovel tests were excavated at the proposed Bear Creek crossing Figures 9-10).
Except on the high dredge spoil berms, Bear Creek in this area is almost treeless. Disturbance
due to dredging and probable channel smoothing is profound. The original soils appear to have
been graded or removed. A considerable amount of modern debris has been dumped here, but no
archeologically significant deposits were found either in exposures of soil or in the shovel tests.

Dense young forest and brush gird South Mayde Creek at the proposed crossing, with a
few large trees interspersed (Figures 11-12). Barbed-wire fences separate the brushy area from
the active pastures to south, east and west. Berms on the north side indicate significant dredging

24

Figure 9. D. Trial and J. Clark Shovel Testing at Bear Creek

Figure 10. Shovel Testing at Bear Creek, note Channel Modifications

25

Figure 11. M.A. Paul Surveying near South Mayde Creek

Figure 12. Channel of South Mayde Creek

26

and disturbance. A few apparently natural rises on terraces of the creek were investigated and
shovel tested. None of the eight shovel tests in the South Mayde Creek area produced cultural
materials.

The south side of Cypress Creek is profoundly disturbed by artificial lakes and berms
which were constructed in association with a fish hatchery no longer in operation (Figures 1314). Three areas of relatively low disturbance were found and shovel tested; all proved negative.
However, a sizable prehistoric lithic scatter and midden was encountered on the north side of
Cypress Creek, extending across the entire ROW; this site was designated MAC 96-32-TS-1 (or
Temporary Site 1). The site subsequently received the trinomial designation 41HR796 from
TARL. The densest evidence of prehistoric occupation was found in the shovel tests which were
placed 15 to 45 m west of the centerline and 30 to 50 m north of the present creek channel
(Figures 15-16). A rich midden, over 1 m deep, was discovered on a small rise in this area. Two
shovel tests penetrated this midden: ST 45 and ST 61. ST 45 produced 26 chipped-stone
materials, including one biface medial fragment (possibly from a dart point) and one well-crafted
blade of chert, along with several dozen pieces of burned and unburned bone. Eight meters to
the west, ST 61 yielded over 50 chert flakes and expedient tools, along with several dozen pieces
of burned and unburned bone. No ceramics were discovered in any of the shovel tests at the site,
suggesting that this may be an Archaic-period occupation over 1500 years old. Given the
dimensions of the shovel tests, the bottom of the midden lies deeper than could be reached with
hand tools.

Twenty-two shovel tests were placed on the north side of Cypress Creek. Most of these
tests were intended to delineate the boundary of 41HR796 (Figure 17). Twelve of the tests were
positive for cultural materials, generally in the form of a few small chert flakes.

Site 41HR796 extends westward out of the ROW. Based on diminishing recoveries from
shovel tests heading east from the midden, the site apparently dwindles to nothing by the eastern
edge of the ROW. On the north, the site is truncated by a formerly cultivated field which is now
overgrown with baccharis, tallow trees, dewberries, honeysuckle and coarse annual weeds, such
as goldenrod, sunflower and ragweed. The site is bounded on the south by abandoned channels
27

Figure 13. Pond and Berm on South Side of Cypress Creek

Figure 14. Berm and Slope on South Side of Cypress Creek

28

Figure 15. Channel of Cypress Creek

Figure 16. M.A. Paul and D. Trial Shovel Testing at 41HR796

29

Figure 17. 41HR796 Plan with Shovel Test Locations

30

and recent flood deposits of Cypress Creek. Part of the site lies underneath a levee/road
composed of dredge spoil. Mature riparian forest, dominated by water oak, hackberry,
willows and other flood-tolerant trees, covers most of the site.

Considering the thickness of the midden, the impressive recovery from some of the
shovel tests and the virtually undisturbed character of parts of the site, 41HR796 may be eligible
for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. If site avoidance is not feasible,
formal testing will be required to assess its depth, age and integrity.

It may be possible to avoid the midden area of the site by diverting the proposed crossing
at least 60 m to the east.

However, areas outside of the Preferred Alignment were not

investigated during this survey, so other evidence of cultural occupation may also be discovered
in alternative highway ROWs.

31

Lithic Analysis, Site 41HR796
By Nicola Hubbard

A total of 121 lithic artifacts were recovered during the course of survey work at site
41HR796. Two of these were flaked tools; two were expedient tools (flakes that had been
utilized), and the remaining 117 were unmodified flakes (debitage). None of the tools recovered
were diagnostic.

As survey material is generally not collected with standardized vertical resolution, the
data analysis that can be undertaken at this stage of the investigation is somewhat limited.
Nevertheless, various attributes were recorded for each tool and flake. Utilized flakes and the
small pebbles that were recovered from various shovel tests were not included in the analysis of
the debitage.
Debitage
Raw material, size grade and lithic reduction stage was recorded for each flake.

The vast majority of flakes by far were chert (96.6% of the total sample). Only two
flakes at the site were of silicified wood, while two others were of quartzite. One of the most
noticeable aspects of the debitage sample was the extremely fine quality of some of the chert.
These pieces were very fine-grained and frequently either gray or deep red - that is, chert
varieties that are not found within the local area.

In the size analysis of the debitage sample, flakes were sorted according to the smallest
grade into which the entire flake would fit. Size grades were as follows:
size 1, between 5-10 mm2
size 2, between 10-15 mm2
size 3, between 15-20 mm2
size 4, between 20-25 mm2
size 5, between 25-30 mm2
size 6, between 30-35mm2
size 7, greater than 35mm2

32

Each flake was also categorized by lithic reduction stage. These stages were based on a
number of flake attributes, including the amount and distribution of cortex, the shape of the bulb,
the thickness of the flake and the number of flake scars on the dorsal surface. In general, flakes
that were thick, bulbar or had a large amount of cortex were classified as initial stage flakes;
those that had clear signs of earlier flake removal, were somewhat thinner and /or had little or no
cortex were classified as primary flakes. Flakes were only classified as secondary if they were
thin with flat bulbs. These flakes frequently showed multiple flake scars on their dorsal surface,
although occasionally these pieces showed only a single flake scar on their dorsal surface
because they were smaller than previously removed flakes.

Most flakes fell into either the size 1 or size 2 grade categories (59 and 41 flakes
respectively), with only 17 flakes size 3 or larger. Two of these larger sized flakes were of
silicified wood, while the remainders were of chert. The larger grade chert flakes were found in
shovel tests 45, 55, 56, 58, 59, and 61.

As would be expected with these results, the majority of flakes (81 flakes or 69.2%) were
secondary stage flakes (i.e. those removed in the process of fashioning a secondary stage tool);
seven flakes were initial stage; twenty-six were primary stage; and three were re-sharpening
flakes. Unsurprisingly, of the seven initial stage flakes, three were size grade 2, one was size
grade 3, and the remaining three were size grade 4 or greater. Likewise, most of the twenty-six
primary stage flakes were also size grade 2 or larger (21 flakes), with only five flakes falling into
size grade 1. The three re-sharpening flakes came from shovel tests 45 and 61.

Flakes were also examined for signs of heat treatment, such as potlid scars, color changes
or internal crazing of the structure. In some cases it was difficult to determine if the piece had
been heated because the signs were so slight. However, at least 30 flakes (25.6% of the sample)
showed clear evidence of heat treatment and a further 8 flakes may also have been heated.
However, there was no apparent pattern to the distribution of heat-treated flakes either across the
site or by reduction stage.

33

Utilized
In addition to the 117 pieces of debitage recovered from the Project Area, two flakes
were found that showed signs of utilization as ad hoc tools. The first of these was a chert flake
with signs of heat-treatment (internal crazing). The flake was broken longitudinally along the
right lateral edge, removing most of the bulb. Utilization damage, consisting of small, shallow
scalar flakes, could be seen along the distal edge on both faces. Similar shallow to deep scalar
flakes along the left lateral edge may have been due either to utilization or may have formed as a
result of the crazing induced by heat treatment. Without higher resolution microscopy it is
difficult to speculate as to the manner in which this piece was used or as to the material on which
it was used.

The second utilized piece was also an irregularly shaped chert flake. There was some
slight edge-rounding along the distal edge. Utilization traces consisted of minute, half-moon
shaped flake scars from the mid-center distal edge to the left lateral corner on the dorsal face.
These traces are consistent with the use of the tool in a slicing motion (Keeley 1980), but without
higher resolution microscopy it is impossible to ascertain the material on which the tool might
have been used.

Formal Tools
Two retouched tools were recovered from Shovel Test 45 at a depth of 90-100 cm.
Unfortunately, neither piece was diagnostic, although both were made from extremely finegrained chert, exotic to the local area. The depth of this material, as well as the type of chert and
the form of these tools, suggests an Archaic component at some depth in the site. These tools
may date as far back as the Early to Middle Archaic.

Provenience:
Catalogue Ref.

Grand Parkway Segment E
TS-1; ST-45

Metrical Data:
grams

Raw Material
Color
Function:

chert
reddish brown
possible dart point or knife

weight 6.8

34

mm
8.7
thickness
21.3*
length
max. width 28.0

* incomplete
Type: Unknown

Comments: This piece is a bifacially worked tool, which is bi-convex in cross section. It
has transverse fractures at both the distal and proximal ends. The blade edges are somewhat
convex, but there was an insufficient amount of the piece remaining to ascertain its original
shape. The tool is made of an extremely fine-grained chert, exotic to the local region. The piece
is finely flaked on both faces with shallow to deep scalar flakes and shallow, parallel-sided
rectangular flakes. Shallow, scalar edge retouch are present on the lateral edges of both faces.
The working edge angles are approximately 20-30o (lateral edges). The presence of larger scalar
flakes at the distal portion of the left lateral edge on one face may represent an aborted attempt at
thinning. The size of the piece and the extent of fine flaking across both faces indicate that this
piece was a secondary stage tool, probably originally part of a dart point or knife. The quality of
the chert, together with the form of the piece, would suggest that it most likely dates from the
Archaic period, possibly the Early or Middle Archaic.

Provenience:
Catalogue Ref.

Grand Parkway Segment E
TS-1; ST-45

Metrical Data:
grams

Raw Material
Color
Function:

chert
mid-brown
scraper

weight 4.1

mm
5.5
thickness
33.4
length
max. width 24.7

Type: unknown

Comments: This is a generally oval, unifacial flake which is relatively large in size and
concave-convex in cross section. Scalar retouch is present along the right portion of the distal
edge on the dorsal face of the tool. The working edge angle varies from reasonably shallow
(40o) to steep (80 o). The chert is extremely fine-grained and is exotic to the local region.

35

Conclusions
Due to the lack of diagnostic tools in the lithic sample, it is difficult to make any
inference about the chronology of the site. However, certain trends make it seem likely that the
earliest occupation at the site was indeed Archaic or earlier (as would be indicated by the
complete absence of ceramic material in the shovel test units). For example, most of the lithic
sample was recovered along a paleo-channel, rather than along the present-day channel.
Additionally, all of the larger sized flakes, as well as the two re-sharpening flakes, the utilized
pieces and both tools came from the inner side of this channel, possibly indicating that this area
was the original occupation site.

The quality of the chert used for both tools and seen within the debitage sample can be
taken as an indication of long-distance transport of raw material. Additionally, both tools were
recovered from deep (90-100cm) in shovel test 45. Although it was not possible to analyze the
debitage sample by vertical depth, the mixed quality of the chert in the sample, the horizontal
position of the larger flake grades and the depth of the tools recovered from the may suggest that
the site covers more than one cultural period, and that there may be both a vertical and horizontal
(toward the modern channel) temporal progression to the occupation sequence.

In addition to the prehistoric site, several structural remnants from modern, recent, and
possibly historic occupation were noted within the proposed ROW. Between US Highway 290
and Cypress Creek, the proposed ROW will impact a collection of small outbuilding slabs
associated with a concrete dip tank (Figure 18). It will also completely subsume an active corral.
Between Cypress Creek and House-Hahl Road to the south, the Preferred Alignment brushes the
corners of two active farmstead corrals (Figures 19 and 20) and will take out an active well in the
area formerly designated as a fish hatchery (Figure 21). In other locations along the proposed
alignment, fallen barns, feeding stations, loading ramps, ditches, roads and other recent ranchrelated features will be removed by the proposed construction (Figure 22). None of these items
appear to be eligible for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places, and none will
require further cultural resource investigations.

36

Figure 18. Dip Tank and Fallen Barn near US 290

Figure 19. Corral near House and Hahl Road

37

Figure 20. Abandoned Farmstead Near ROW North of House and Hahl Road

Figure 21. Barn within ROW Between Cypress Creek and House and Hahl Road

38

Figure 22. Well South of Abandoned Fish Hatchery

39

Recommendations

No previously recorded archeological sites were identified within the proposed Preferred
Alignment of Segment E of the Grand Parkway.

One cultural resource site, designated

41HR796, was encountered during the cultural resource survey of the proposed right-of-way.
Preliminary data from the survey investigation indicates that this site may exhibit significant
research potential. Site 41HR796 may be eligible for nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places. It is therefore recommended that highway construction be permitted to proceed
with no further cultural resource investigations except where the Segment E alignment impacts
41HR796. Site avoidance is recommended for site 41HR796. In the event that site avoidance is
not possible then controlled test excavations will be necessary at site 41HR796 in order to
definitively determine the site’s significance.

In the event that cultural materials or deposits are exposed during construction the client
is advised to cease operations in the immediate area of the find and contact the Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, for guidance and assistance.

40

Part III: Alternatives Analysis

Predictive Modeling for the Grand Parkway, E Segment, Alternative Alignments

The objective of this portion of the investigation is to conduct analyses which define the
parameters for prehistoric site location in the relevant portions of Harris County.

This

information will, in turn, permit ranking of the five alternative alignments in terms of potential
cultural resource impacts.

The assessment deals both with prehistoric (i.e., Indian) and historic archeological sites.
Examples of sites within the prehistoric category include human burials, habitation sites such as
campsites or villages, animal butchering sites, etc. Historic sites are those associated with EuroAmerican colonization and development of the Houston area. They may include, for example,
plantations, rural and urban homesteads, cemeteries, trash dumps, commercial sites and
industrial sites.

The ranking of alternative alignments for potential impacts is derived from a growing
general understanding of the processes governing site location in the Harris County region. This
general understanding is based on previous investigations conducted over the past 40 years and
especially on intensive survey work conducted within the last 10 years. Patterns of site location
in relation to landforms, soils, and other variables have emerged from integration and analysis of
these studies, and these patterns can be applied to the project under consideration. While only
limited archeological survey work has taken place previously within or near the alignments, it is
possible to examine the landforms and other environmental factors present in order to recognize
those areas that would have been most often selected as locations for settlement by the
prehistoric residents of the region.

The utility of the methodology proposed below has been demonstrated by a more limited
Moore Archeological Consulting study conducted for the Greater Houston Wastewater Program
(Moore 1995a). This study, upon review and concurrence by the Texas Water Development
Board and the Texas Historical Commission, permitted the exclusion of a major portion of the

41

Greater Houston Wastewater Program projects from further cultural resource investigations
based on demonstrated low probabilities for site occurrence within environmental contexts
identical to these projects.

Historic settlement within the project alignments were examined by the proposed Project
Historian, Sue Winton Moss.

All other tasks were the responsibility of the Principal

Investigator, William E. Moore, M.A., and the Project Archeologists, James Thomas Dureka and
Roger G. Moore. Analysis of lithic materials from site 41HR796 was performed by Nicola
Hubbard, D.Phil.

Various documentary materials were examined in order to conduct both the prehistoric
and historic cultural resource assessments. The following specific task objectives were carried
out in order to complete this assessment:

Task 1.

Ensure, by reference to the State of Texas archeological site files at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory at the University of Texas in Austin, that
there are no previously recorded archeological sites within each of the five
alternative alignments.

Task 2.

Define the probability of site occurrence within specific soils,
landform, etc., segments of the alternative project alignments. Employ
these specific probabilities to creative overlays broadly depicting the
high, moderate, and low probability portions of each alignment for
prehistoric site occurrence. This task was made possible by the
computerization of these variables as they are expressed within the
existing recorded site data set. Thus the task entailed the limited
collection of relevant site record forms and the extraction and
computer entry of data from the site record forms, as well as soils and
topographic maps and subsequent analysis of this data.

42

Task 3.

Define existing conditions within the project alignments that would
have had positive or negative impacts upon archeological site
preservation. Identify the portions of the alignments that have been
subjected to such destructive previous uses as rice cultivation and
industrial or dense urban development. Utilize this data to define the
high and low probability portions of each alignment broadly for the
preservation of any historic or prehistoric archeological sites that
might occur within the alignment.

Task 4.

Merge the data from the prehistoric site occurrence predictions, the
Project Historian’s analysis, and the existing conditions studies to
define the probability both of archeological site occurrence and site
preservation along the length of the alignment.

Task 5.

Utilize the data from all of the above analyses to produce a matrix
which quantitatively ranks each alternative with regard to cultural
resource potential.

43

The Existing Model for Prehistoric Settlement in Southeast Texas

In order to predict which portions of the Grand Parkway E Segment alternative
alignments are likely to contain prehistoric archeological remains, the environmental criteria by
which the prehistoric peoples of the region selected the locations for their encampments and
other sites must first be defined. The predictive model, most recently presented for the Greater
Houston Wastewater Program (Moore 1995a), attempts to determine and explicitly define these
criteria for inland Harris County. The fundamentals of this model are derived from an analysis
of prehistoric settlement along Cypress Creek in northern Harris County presented in Moore’s
recent Ph.D. dissertation (Moore 1995b); readers are referred to this work for the supporting data
for the settlement model. The Cypress Creek analysis has identified the following hierarchy of
environmental factors which combine to make a locality attractive for prehistoric settlement:

1.

A preference for site locations in forested
environments.

2.

A preference for site locations in the floodplain.

3.

A preference for site locations in proximity to sources
of potable water.

4.

A preference for site locations on well-drained, sandy
or loamy soils.

5.

A preference for site locations on topographic high
points.

These settlement rules have been demonstrated repeatedly to be powerful predictive tools.

The Cypress Creek model has been modified somewhat as a result of investigations by
Moore along Oyster Creek in Fort Bend County (Moore 1991a; R. Moore and Moore 1991) and

44

in the course of work on Spring Creek (Moore 1991b; Moore and Aronow 1994). On the basis
of data from Cypress Creek and Buffalo Bayou, the model previously assumed that the
association between sites and water courses would be quite intimate; that is, that the sites would
be found on or near creek margins, especially on low rises and ridges within the floodplain. The
work on Oyster Creek, a former course of the Brazos River until just 1000 years ago, and the
Spring Creek and San Jacinto River analysis has confirmed that prehistoric site location seems to
be dominantly influenced by access to fresh water, but that other factors may result in the
modification of the settlement model.

These other factors encompass watershed topography and, perhaps, water flow volume or
the frequency of flooding. The essential topographic and hydrologic factor shared by Oyster
Creek, Spring Creek, and the West Fork of the San Jacinto River is that each stream shares to
some extent a common topography. Initially defined by Saul Aronow, consulting geologist for
the Spring Creek Burroughs Park survey (Moore 1990), the terrain is characterized in crosssection by the following common features:

1)

A Pleistocene-age upland surface (represented by the Lissie
geologic surface at Burroughs Park) at a significantly higher
elevation than that of the stream channel.

2) A relatively broad scarp (the Lissie Slope at Burroughs Park)
marking the margin of the Pleistocene upland and separating it
from the younger Holocene alluvial deposits. The lower
portion of this slope will be partially encompassed within the
100-year floodplain in engineering terms.

3) A Holocene-age terrace surface wholly encompassed within
the 100-year floodplain (as defined in engineering terms).
This terrace surface ranges from 100 - 200 m wide to over a
kilometer wide.

45

4)

The Holocene-age floodplain in the narrower formal
geological sense.

This topography stands in contrast to, for example, that of Cypress Creek, where the
Holocene-age terrace surface is apparently narrow or almost wholly absent, and the Pleistocene
(or at least upland) scarp fronts almost directly upon the stream channel. It became apparent
during the current analysis of site records for Spring Creek that this four-part division of the
landscape possessed culture-historical significance: one of the four topographic zones, the Lissie
Slope, emerged as the most preferred location for prehistoric sites. This initial observation was
supported by data from the similarly configured Oyster Creek as well as the West Fork of the
San Jacinto River. Thus the upland/floodplain margin, typified by the Lissie and Beaumont
slopes, to streams with broad floodplains must be added to the list of probable site locales.
These elements are therefore added to the settlement model as the sixth and seventh preferred
environments for prehistoric settlement:

6.

A preference for site locations on geologic terraces in
watersheds with broad 100-year floodplains. These
terraces may range from 100 - 200 m wide to over a
kilometer wide and may be of Deweyville (late
Pleistocene) age or younger; they thus present good
loci for the discovery of Paleo-Indian through Middle
Archaic remains.

7.

A preference for site locations on the upland/
floodplain margin, typified by the Lissie and
Beaumont slopes, to streams with broad floodplains.
As geologically old surfaces, these upland margins
also present potentially good loci for the discovery of
Paleo-Indian through Middle Archaic remains.

46

The model was subjected to limited further testing in the predictive document prepared
for the Greater Houston Wastewater Program (Moore 1995a). The empirical method utilized to
test these issues was quite simple. Every site form for Harris County on file in the state site files
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory has previously been copied and is on file at
Moore Archeological Consulting. Each prehistoric site form was examined, and all littoral shell
midden sites were disregarded, since none or very few of the sewer line service areas were likely
to impinge on the estuarine environment. This culling process resulted in the compilation of a
database of 318 inland sites dispersed over the county. While there has been no systematic
sampling survey of all of Harris County, it is reasonable to assert that the cumulative results of
40 years of site recording in the county approximates an effective and representative ad hoc
sample of the full temporal and functional range of inland sites. Further, the fact that many sites
were recorded via cutbank exposures ensures that representative deeply buried components will
be included in the sample. Data was entered into separate fields of a computerized database on
the following variables:

1. Site Number.

2. Soil constituency of the stratum that yielded cultural
materials.

3. Topographic/geomorphic setting of each site.

4. Whether the cultural stratum was overlain by any sterile
soil of a radically different constituency such as clay
overlying sand. Artificial fills, such as channelization
spoils, were excluded from this characterization.

5. The period or periods of occupancy of each site.

Multiple sites for each period in Southeast Texas prehistory were represented in this
database. Thus it was argued that the rest of the results of the inquiry were not fatally temporally

47

biased. Likewise, the presence of many sites recorded from cutbank and other deep erosional
exposures mitigated against a bias towards shallow sites found by the agency of shovel testing.

The most striking fact to emerge from this exhaustive inquiry was that cultural materials
from almost 100 percent of the 319 inland sites were derived from soils which are described as
sandy or loamy. The representation of sites in clay matrices consists of one site upon which data
has just become available (41HR275). Indeed, the cultural strata at only five sites (1.6 percent)
were described as pure clay loams. Thus the presence of sands and silts seems to have been
overwhelmingly selected for by the prehistoric inhabitants of inland Harris County.

Likewise one-sided was the evidence against the possibility that inland sites might be
found with any frequency buried under sterile clay strata: no such sites have ever been recorded
in Harris County. Buried sites do in fact exist, of course, but those that are known are buried
under the same or very similar sandy or loamy deposits as that which forms the cultural strata.

The topographic model of settlement within or adjacent to the floodplain and on
relatively high ground is only slightly less supported by the data. Only six sites (1.9 percent) are
unambiguously listed as situated on the upland. Several other sites are listed by such
designations as “upland from creek” which probably implies the upland/floodplain scarp margin.
The great majority of sites are described as situated on ridges, levees, high banks, and other high
ground. To cite the most frequent example, 132 sites (41.5 percent) are situated on variations of
the ubiquitous Southeast Texas pimple mound.

An underlying pattern emerged from the site distributional data thus far presented. It is
necessary to quote extensively from a geologic overview of Harris County and adjoining
portions of Southeast Texas prepared by Saul Aronow in order to define the geoarcheological
basis for this pattern:

The Beaumont Formation is the youngest coast-wise or
coast-paralleling Pleistocene unit on the Texas Gulf Coast.
It was first named by Hayes and Kennedy (1903:27-29)

48

from clayey exposures and well logs reporting clays in the
vicinity of Beaumont, Texas. They referred to the unit as
the Beaumont clays and noted its occurrence in
southwestern Louisiana, where it is currently called the
Prairie Terraces (Snead and McCulloh 1984) or the Prairie
Formation. In the study area, the Beaumont flanks parts of
the East and West Forks of the San Jacinto River as
terraces. The writer believes that some of these terraces
should be mapped as Deweyville.

The Beaumont Formation has a regional slope of ~1 to ~2
feet/mile (~0.2 m to ~0.4 m/km).

Stream channels are

sharply incised in the Beaumont surface with steep
ungraded margins. The surface is less dissected than that
of the Lissie. Flat uneroded surfaces and poorly drained
surfaces are abundant.

The surface displays a relict

depositional fluvial, deltaic, and to a minor extent, barrier
island and strand plain topography. Vertisols, absent from
the surface of the Willis and Lissie, but developed on
exposed relict flood basin deposits, are widespread.

On a regional scale, the Beaumont Formation crops out in a
vast arc paralleling the northwestern Gulf coast from east
of the Holocene floodplain of the Mississippi in Louisiana,
where it is called the Prairie Formation (see Snead and
McCulloh 1984), to northeastern Kleberg County, Texas,
where it disappears beneath the sands of the South Texas
Sand Sheet (Barnes 1975; Bernard and LeBlanc 1965:
Figure 2). Most of the Beaumont was deposited as an
overlapping group of alluvial or deltaic plains by the
ancestors of the modern streams now draining into the

49

western Gulf of Mexico.

Other minor parts of the

Beaumont are of barrier island, strand plain, beach, mudflat
and lagoonal origin.

In many areas of the Beaumont outcrop, the surface is
crossed by a relict depositional topography of paleomeander belt or distributary ridges that rise less than 10 ft
(3 m) above the surrounding and intervening paleo-flood
basins and paleo-interdistributary areas. The higher areas
are generally underlain with sandy and loamy soils and
display, in many places, relict meandering stream patterns,
both as isolated fragments and as segments with
continuities of several kilometers. The flanking swales are
the sites of clayey soils and show relatively smooth
featureless surfaces. The landforms and soils on the parts
of the Beaumont laid down by the Pleistocene precursors of
the larger streams, such as the Trinity, Brazos, and
Colorado, exhibit well-defined meander belt ridges and
flood basin swales nicely partitioned by distinctive soil
series.

The flood basin areas are generally the sites of vertisols,
that is, soils that are clayey to the surface which expand and
contract upon wetting and drying. In many places, the
volume changes produce on the surface a micro-relief
complex of depressions and ridges called gilgai; in the
subsurface, intersecting striated shiny shear planes called
slickensides (Wilding and Tessler 1988; Yaalon and
Kalmar 1978) are formed.

The limiting depth for the

development of slickensides below a presently existing
surface is in the order of 10 to 12 ft (3 to 3.5 m). Buried

50

surfaces can thus be recognized by the presence of
slickensides at depths greater than these.

In most places, the meander ridges, in addition to their
locally prominent but not ubiquitous meandering stream
patterns, display a microrelief in the form of small shallow
undrained depressions and pimple mounds.

Much of both the gilgai topography of the paleo-flood
basins and the undrained depressions and pimple mound of
the paleo-meander ridges has disappeared in the past
century under the onslaught of row-crop tillage, pasture
improvement, ditching for drainage, land-leveling and
levee construction for rice cultivation, and logging
operations. Maps, such as the 1916 1-ft contour interval
series, and successive air photographs from the early 1930s
record the progressive disappearance of these forms of
micro-relief in the Houston area.

In the Upper Texas Coast region, these depositional
patterns are illustrated in Bernard and LeBlanc (1965:
Figure 5); Van Siclen and Harlan (1965: Plate 1), and the
Environmental Geology maps in Fisher et al. (1972, 1973)
and McGowen et al. (1973).

On a regional to local scale, the pattern of the meander belt
ridges is anastomosing. These paleo-courses were not all
active at the same time--only one was active at any one
time. The interconnectedness is the result of avulsions and
stream captures as channels overflowed during floods into

51

adjacent lower flood basins, some with previously existing
minor drainage.

Most of the fluvial and deltaic sands in the Beaumont,
except, perhaps, some of those deposited by the paleoColorado, -Brazos, and -Mississippi rivers, are fine to very
fine, and in most places, are silty and clayey. The high
clay, silty clay, and sandy clay content of the Beaumont, as
seen in surface exposures and described in the logs of water
wells and geotechnical boreholes, suggests that it is largely
the product of suspended-load streams (Galloway and
Hobday 1983: 68-75).

The fluvial and deltaic sands of the Beaumont can be seen
only in deep sand pits or in the form of well cuttings or
cores. Exposures in road cut or shallow sand pits are rare.
In most places, including the meander belt ridges, the sands
are covered by drapes, 10 ft to 30 ft (3 m to 10 m) thick, of
overbank clays, silty clays, sandy clays and clayey loams.
These were probably laid down by floodwaters of
subsequent, adjacent active meanderbelts. Some of these
finer-grained deposits may also be the upper parts of
upward-fining sequences of point-bar deposits.

This contemporaneous blanketing of the previous meander
belts deposits was probably the first stage in the loss of
detail of the original depositional topography. Factors in
the subsequent progressive "homogenization" of the surface
might include lateral and vertical displacement of surface
material by mass-wasting, by sheet flood erosion and
deposition, by wind erosion and deposition during episodes

52

of aridity, by the small-scale but cumulative effects of
burrowing organisms, by tree root expansion, and later
decay of roots, and by windthrows.

The areas of fluvial deposition assigned to the several
paleo-streams

depositing

the

Beaumont

have

been

identified by the scale and orientation of relict fluvial
depositional patterns that are displayed on much of the
Beaumont surface and by some characteristic soils.

In the study area, most of the Beaumont was deposited by a
paleo-Brazos River from the western part of the outcrop to
Galveston Bay; the part adjacent to the San Jacinto River
on the west and the remainder of the study area east of the
river, was deposited by a paleo-San Jacinto; a small portion
of the study area which lies east of Cedar Bayou was
placed by a paleo-Trinity River. A small-scale map in
Galloway

(1982:

Figure

2)

shows

these

regional

relationships.

The areal segregation of meander belt versus flood basin
soils, the areally varying degrees of local drainage of each
of these groups and the differences of grassland versus
forest vegetation have generated a complex pattern of soils.
As a broad generalization, the delineations of non-vertisols
in the study area are all potential places for site formation;
the delineations of vertisols are unlikely places other than
strictly surface occurrences. The principal vertisols are the
Beaumont, Garner, Lake Charles, and Vamont soils [Moore
1995b (II): 33-37].

53

It was further asserted in the wastewater predictive report that the paleo-Brazos flood
basins underlain by vertisol clays form portions of inland Harris County that are essentially
devoid of prehistoric settlement (Moore 1995a). These portions of Harris County were grossly
depicted on the General Soils Map of Harris County, Texas as the Lake Charles-Bernard and
Midland-Beaumont soils associations (Wheeler 1976). This hypothesis was initially tested by
contrasting the occurrence of sites along four drainages within inland Harris County: White Oak
and Greens bayous, situated mostly on the ancient meander belt ridges, and Brays and Sims
bayous, which are situated mostly on the ancient flood basin vertisols.

The results of this test were striking: White Oak Bayou boasts 44 sites and Greens Bayou
has 81, while only one site is recorded on Sims Bayou and one site on Brays Bayou. The Sims
Bayou site is the only recorded inland site situated within clay soils, with its matrix described as
“gumbo.” The site produced a dart point fragment and a few pieces of lithic debitage. No
information on the depth of the cultural material is available. The single Brays Bayou site
(41HR579) is situated outside the Lake Charles-Bernard association on a circumscribed band of
the Aldine-Ozan association which extends upstream from the mouth of Brays Bayou. An
examination of the site form (and of the site itself) reveals that the cultural stratum is a thin
surface remnant of Aldine fine sandy loam.

It might be argued that the paucity of sites on the vertisol surfaces is the result of
insufficient survey work in those areas. While that might have been the case a few years ago,
sufficient intensive surveys have taken place on these surfaces to at least suggest that the bias in
the site record is real. Moore Archeological Consulting has surveyed a total of 1152 acres in the
form of floodwater detention basins along Brays and Sims bayous (Moore 1994; W. Moore
1993; R. Moore and Moore 1994a, 1994b, 1994c; Moore et al. 1994a, 1994b). No prehistoric
materials were observed on the surface or collected from any of a total of 637 shovel tests
executed in the course of these surveys. Similar results have been obtained from surveys on
vertisol surfaces elsewhere in the county.

54

Certain implications were derived regarding the assessment of the appropriate level of
archeological investigation for specific elements of future sewer (as well as other development)
projects within the City of Houston on the basis of the inland settlement model testing. These
implications are summarized as follows:

1. The evidence seems incontrovertible that inland sites
will be found overwhelmingly in areas with sandy and
loamy soils and much less frequently in areas where
vertisols predominate. Thus it is recommended that,
with regard to prehistoric sites, no field investigation is
necessary on the vertisol surface away from stream
channels unless it can be demonstrated that natural
sandy mounds are preserved away from water sources
on these surfaces. Mounds, however, are very
vulnerable to land-leveling associated with agricultural
and urban development and are unlikely to be preserved
in urbanized contexts.

2. Intensive field investigations in vertisol areas adjacent
to streams should be restricted to those areas where
sandy stream-fringing deposits are expected. These
sandy deposits are generally sufficiently large in scale
to have been mapped on the county soils survey.

3. The existence of naturally buried sites on the upland
vertisol surfaces are discounted as virtually impossible.

4. Cultural strata overlain and hidden by natural clay
deposits will be extremely infrequent in most inland
contexts within Harris County. These sites (none of
which has yet been found) might exist only along

55

streams with broad floodplains and extensive Holocene
alluvial deposition, streams like Spring Creek and the
San Jacinto River which were for the most part outside
the boundaries of the wastewater report study area.

That is not to say that buried sites do not exist within
Harris County. On the contrary, many sites have no
surface expression and are found most frequently
through the agency of shovel testing. The buried sites
are, however, covered by sandy or loamy deposits very
similar to the matrix of the underlying artifact
producing stratum. Thus backhoe trenching outside
significant areas of Holocene alluvial deposition need
only penetrate to the base of these loams and a short
distance into the underlying clays.

56

Application of the Land Use Study, Preferred Alignment Survey, and Settlement Model to
the Alternatives Analysis

The generally negative results of the survey of the Proposed Preferred Alternative of
Segment E of the proposed Grand Parkway supports the contention that the waterless inland
prairie portion of Harris County is a very low probability area for prehistoric settlement.
Undisturbed stream crossings must, however, continue to be regarded as more likely locales for
such settlement. Thus the potential impact ranking of the project alternative alignments reflects
largely the extent to which such streams are crossed.

Following is the results of the application of the land use study, the survey results, and
the archeological predictive model for the five alternative alignments of the proposed E Segment
of the Grand Parkway in Harris County, Texas.

The historical land use study found that western Harris County was sparsely
inhabited during most of the last 175 years. Its use has been agricultural, initially cattle
raising and later rice and truck farming. Therefore, any built environment (and hence
historical archeological sites) would have been associated with various agricultural
endeavors, including cattle raising and rice-farming. The density of historic settlement
can thus be expected to be quite low. The probability of encountering significant historic
archeological remains within any of the five alternative alignments is hence, likewise,
quite low. Further, the intensive agricultural use of the Project Area region - especially
for rice farming which requires land leveling alterations - significantly decreases the
probability of encountering intact archeological deposits over the majority of the length
of each of the alternative alignments.
With one significant exception the outcome of the cultural resource survey of the
proposed Preferred Alignment was negative. This result is consistent with expectations
derived from the historic land use study and the predictive site location modeling. The
low regional density of historic occupation and the observed scarcity of sites on prairie
soils in Harris County lead to the classification of the proposed Segment I-2, Preferred

57

Alignment tract as a low probability area for prehistoric sites. The absence of cultural
manifestations on the surface or in most of the shovel tests supports this interpretation
and thus comprises a successful test of the predictive model for site location. Further, the
survey observations confirm that the impact of agricultural use of the alignment on the
ground surface has been substantial. Thus it is reasonable to expect that the results of this
survey can to a large extent be extrapolated to the five other alternative alignments.

The single exception to the negative outcome of the preferred alignment survey is
significant both in itself and in its implications for the broader predictive model.

An analysis of the computerized site data on Harris County strongly suggests that
site probabilities may be expected to be very low on portions of the alignments which
traverse prairie soils away from natural sources of water. Previously recorded prehistoric
sites on prairie soils are virtually absent within the relevant portions of the county, and
the probability of encountering unrecorded sites away from streams on the prairie is
likewise quite low. This hypothesis is fully supported by the results of the intensive
archeological survey of the Segment E Preferred Alignment. Much of the proposed
Preferred Alignment traversed the aforementioned prairie soils, and no sites were
identified away from streams on the alignment.

The probability dichotomy between portions of the proposed Alternative
Alignments in proximity to water versus those portions at a distance from water in
prairies soils contexts permits the ranking of the five proposed alignments with regard to
the potential for encountering unrecorded archeological remains. Further refinement of
the ranking is made possible by an examination of the topography of each stream. The
ranking from lowest to highest probability for impact to archeological deposits is as
follows:

Alternative 4 is currently the preferred alternative, but cultural
resource occurrence is known to be positive for this alignment since
a prehistoric site (41HR796) was discovered during the survey

58

conducted by Moore Archeological Consulting.

The other four alternatives are ranked from highest to lowest
probability for cultural resources as follows: 5, 3, 2, 1.

Alternative 5 offers the highest probability due to (1) being the
most downstream of all the alignments, suggesting a greater flow
rate and a wider floodplain, hence greater availability of water and
riverine resources; (2) the crossing at Cypress Creek appears to
pass through a relatively sizable area of forest (as indicated on the
1971 topo map), which may mean a lack of disturbance; (3) the
Cypress Creek crossing passes near Mallard Lake, which may be in
part a natural water body. The fact that the lake is a named water
body could indicate that it was a feature on the landscape at the
time of initial settlement of the area. More importantly, its sinuous
southern boundary appears to be an abandoned channel of the
creek; (4) a relatively lengthy stretch of South Mayde Creek would
be affected due to the angle of the crossing.

Alternative 3 is a distant second in terms of cultural resource
probability. Factors making this alignment a medium-probability
alternative are (1) it is more downstream than alternatives 1 and 2;
(2) it crosses Bear Creek at an acute angle, meaning that more of
the creek would be affected. Arguments against the detection of
cultural resources on this alignment include the fact that it avoids
the confluence of South Mayde Creek and one of its tributaries.

Alternatives 2 and 1 are both low probability for cultural resources.
This is due to (1) their being the most upstream of all alternatives;
(2) large modern ponds north of Cypress Creek have drastically
impacted the landscape, destroying whatever sites may have been

59

there; (3) the channel of Cypress Creek appears to have been
artificially straightened in this area, with attendant impacts on the
surface. There is little to distinguish between the sub-alternatives
2A and 2B, which cross only upland reaches of the Project Area.

Any built environment (and hence historical archeological sites) there would have
been associated with various agricultural endeavors, including cattle herding and ricefarming. The density of historic settlement can thus be expected to be quite low. The
probability of encountering significant historic archeological remains within any of the
five alternative alignments is hence likewise quite low. Further, the intensive agricultural
use of the study area region - especially for rice farming, which requires land leveling
alterations - significantly decreases the probability of encountering intact archeological
deposits over the majority of the length of each of the alternative alignments.

The outcome of the cultural resource survey of the Preferred Alignment was negative
except for the discovery of 41HR796. This result is consistent with expectations derived from the
historic land use study and the predictive site location modeling. Moreover, 41HR796 meets at
least the first five criteria for site location preference. Field observations confirm that the impact
of agricultural use of the alignment on the ground surface has been substantial. Thus it is
reasonable to expect that the results of this survey can to a large extent be extrapolated to the
four other alternative alignments.

60

Additional Comments Regarding Site 41HR796

Site 41HR796 raises some interesting, if highly tentative, questions regarding settlement
in the upper reaches of the Cypress Creek watershed. It is fairly well-established that site
frequency is low on the prairie portions of the Cypress Creek watershed upstream from stream
mile 30 (Freeman and Hale 1978). However, Moore Archeological Consulting projects in this
portion of the drainage have resulted in the discovery of two aceramic sites: 41HR796 and site
41HR755 (Moore 1995c). Unfortunately, temporally diagnostic artifacts were found in neither
case. However, each site was investigated with sufficient intensity that it is unlikely that the
absence of ceramics at the sites is an accident of sampling error. Thus it is considered highly
probable that both sides are Late Archaic or older. While negative evidence is fraught with
dangers, neither survey resulted in the identification of any Ceramic period sites. The Freeman
and Hale (1978) 20 percent sample survey likewise found no sites producing ceramics upstream
from Cypress Creek stream mile 30. Each of the five sites (41HR328, 41HR329, 41HR330,
41HR331 and 41HR332) within this upper portion of Cypress Creek produced only lithic debris.

Sites of the Early Ceramic period and later are common on the lower reaches of Cypress
Creek. If indeed sites 41HR755 and 41HR796 are Archaic in age, their presence in the sparsely
prehistorically occupied upper reaches of Cypress Creek suggests a couple of interpretations.
First, there may have been a shift in resource utilization at the end of the Archaic which made
settlement on the prairie portion of Cypress Creek less attractive. Any examination of resource
utilization on the prairie should consider the periodic movements of bison into and out of the
region since the terminal Pleistocene.

The movement of bison on the Southern Plains has been reconstructed by Dillehay
(1974) based on a synthesis of data from 160 archeological and paleontological sites in Texas,
New Mexico and Oklahoma (including sites within the study area). Dillehay has utilized data
from these sites and made the assumption that the consistent absence of bison from archeological
sites implies its physical absence from the region. Dillehay has thus inferred the following
sequence of periods of bison presence and absence within the Southern Plains:

61

Presence Period I:

10,000 to 6000-5000 B.C.

Absence Period I:

6000-5000 B.C. to 2500 B.C.

Presence Period II:

2500 B.C. to A.D. 500

Absence Period II:

A.D. 500 to 1200-1300

Presence Period III:

A.D. 1200-1300 to 1550

Dillehay speculates that Absence Period I coincides with the ‘dry and warm’
interpretation of the controversial Altithermal Period (5500-2000 B.C.). It is conceivable that
sites 41HR755 and 41HR796 owe their presence on the upper Cypress Creek watershed to the
presence of bison in the vicinity during Presence Period I. If this conjecture is correct then we
should find that the sites date to 5000 B.C. or earlier.

Differential site preservation and accessibility may also offer a partial explanation for the
presence of seven aceramic and possibly Archaic period sites on upper Cypress Creek. Lower
stream energies within the upper portion of the watershed may have resulted in more stable land
surfaces within which older sites are much more likely to be preserved. These same lower
energies would prevent the burial of older sites at depths which are not accessible to
conventional archeological survey. Whatever the valid explanation, it is obvious that the upper
portion of the Cypress Creek watershed constitutes an area of potentially high research
significance for further survey and excavation.

62

Recommendations

One new archeological site (41HR796) was encountered during the cultural resource
survey of the proposed Preferred Alignment of the E Segment of the Grand Parkway. This
prehistoric midden and lithic scatter is located on the north side of Cypress Creek and spreads
across the entire ROW on the highest terrace, extending north a short distance into a formerly
cultivated field. Based on shovel test results, this site may be eligible for nomination to the
National Register of Historic Places. Formal testing is recommended to determine the site's age,
number of components, and integrity.

It is recommended that construction be permitted to proceed in all parts of the Preferred
Alignment, except in the vicinity of 41HR796. However, the possibility remains that a very
localized cultural occurrence may be found during construction. In this event, the client is
advised to cease operations in that area and contact the Department of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, for guidance and assistance.

63

REFERENCES CITED
Ambler, J. Richard
1973 Excavations in the Trinity River Delta: The Lost River Phase.
Unnumbered report, Texas Archeological Survey, University of Texas,
Austin.
Ashburn, J. Foster
1934 Ashburn’s Official Road Map of Harris County, Texas. Map on file,
Houston Metropolitan Collection, Houston Public Library, Texas.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1979 Indians of the Upper Texas Coast: Ethnohistoric and Archeological
Frameworks. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Texas,
Austin.
1983

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press, New York.

Barnes, V. E. (editor)
1975 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Corpus Christi Sheet. Bureau of Economic
Geology, University of Texas, Austin.
Bernard, H. A., and R. J. LeBlanc
1965 Resume of the Quaternary Geology of the Northwestern Gulf of Mexico
Province. In The Quaternary of the United States, edited by H. E. Wright,
and D. G. Frey, pp. 137-186. Princeton University Press, Princeton, New
Jersey.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974 Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern Plains. Plains
Anthropologist 19(65): 180-196
Ensor, H. Blaine (editor)
1991 Archeological Survey of Cypress Creek from Spring Branch to
Kuykendahl Road, Harris County, Texas. Archeological Surveys Number
8, Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A & M University, College
Station.
Ensor, H. Blaine, John E. Dockall, and Frank Winchell
1991 National Register Eligibility Testing and Assessment at the Al Soloman I
and Al Soloman II Sites, Cypress Creek, Harris County, Texas. Report of
Investigations Number 12, Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas
A&M University, College Station.

64

Fields, Ross C., Martha Doty Freeman, and Steven M. Kotter
1983 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at Addicks Reservoir,
Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations Number 22, Prewitt &
Associates, Inc., Austin, Texas.
Freeman, Martha Doty, and Thomas H. Hale
1978 A Reconnaissance Survey and Assessment of Prehistoric and Historic
Resources: Cypress Creek Watershed in Harris and Waller Counties,
Texas. Report prepared by the Texas Archeological Survey for the United
States Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District, University of Texas,
Austin.
Galloway, William E.
1982 Depositional Architecture of Cenozoic Gulf Coastal Plain Fluvial
Sediments. Geological Circular 82-5, Bureau of Economic Geology,
University of Texas, Austin.
Galloway, W. E., and D. K. Hobday
1983 Terrigenous Clastic Depositional Systems, Applications to Petroleum,
Coal, and Uranium Exploration. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Harris County Engineers
1917 Harris County, Texas, Highway Map. Map on file, Houston Metropolitan
Collection, Houston Public Library, Texas.
Hatcher Drafting Company
1924 Map of Harris County, Texas. Map on file, Houston Metropolitan
Collection, Houston Public Library, Texas.
Immigration and Development Company of Harris County, Texas
1892 Map of Harris County. Map on file, Houston Metropolitan Collection,
Houston Public Library, Texas.
Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962 The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a Preliminary
Definition of the La Harpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 32:141-284.
Keeley, L.
1980

Experimental Determination of Stone Tool Uses: a Microwear Analysis.
Prehistoric Archaeology and Ecology Series. University of Chicago Press.

65

Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula (editors)
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document.
Cultural Resource Management Report Number 3,
Department of Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
Hayes, C. W., and W. Kennedy
1903
Oil Fields of Texas-Louisiana Gulf Coastal Plain: Bulletin 212, US
Geological Survey, Washington, D.C.
Moore, Roger G.
1981 An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Missouri Pacific Railroad
Crossing of Cypress Creek, Harris County, Texas. Prepared for
Environomics, Inc., Houston, Texas, by Heartfield, Price, & Greene, Inc.,
Monroe, Louisiana.
1985a An Archeological Survey of Proposed Extensions of Cypresswood Drive
and Cutten Road, Northern Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations
Number 1, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.
1985b An Archeological Survey of Proposed Improvements within the Mercer
Arboretum, Northern Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations
Number 4, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.
1985c A Re-Analysis of Prehistoric Settlement Data on the Cypress Creek
Watershed. Journal of the Houston Archeological Society 83:2-15.
1987

An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Mason Road Crossing of South
Mayde Creek, Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations Number 14,
Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.

1988

An Archeological Survey of the Proposed Cypress Creek Golf Course
Project, Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations Number 7, Moore
Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.

1990

An Archeological Survey of Harris County, Precinct 4, Burroughs Park
Tract, Northern Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations Number
29, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.

1991a A Preliminary Cultural Resources Assessment of the Proposed 750-Acre
Cullinan Park, City of Houston, Fort Bend County, Texas. Report of
Investigations Number 34, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.

66

1991b A Preliminary Archeological Assessment of the 10,000-Acre BahrKirkpatrick Tract, Montgomery County, Texas. Report of Investigations
Number 54, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.
1992a An Archeological Survey of the Telge Road Park Tract, Harris County,
Texas. Report of Investigations Number 61, Moore Archeological
Consulting, Houston, Texas.
1992b An Archeological Survey of the Timber Lane Park Tract, Harris County,
Texas. Report of Investigations Number 64, Moore Archeological
Consulting, Houston, Texas.
1994

An Archeological Survey of a 70-Acre Brays Bayou Regional Detention
Basin (D500-06-00) in South Harris County, Texas. Report of
Investigations Number 122, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.

1995a An Empirical Analysis of Elements of Prehistoric Site Location and
Formation in Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations Number
149, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.
1995b The Mossy Grove Model of Long-Term Forager-Collector Adaptation in
Inland Southeast Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, Rice University, Houston, Texas.
1995c An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Browning-Ferris Industries 347acre Katy Prairie Wildlife Refuge, Harris County, Texas. Report of
Investigations Number 133, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.
1996

An Archeological Survey of the 237-Acre Upper Bear Creek Regional
Detention Basin (HCFCD Unit U502-01-00) in Western Harris County,
Texas. Report of Investigations Number 119, Moore Archeological
Consulting, Houston, Texas.

Moore, Roger G., and Saul Aronow
1994
A Geomorphological and Archeological Assessment of the Proposed
Spring Lake, the Woodlands, Harris and Montgomery Counties, Texas.
Report of Investigations Number 98, Moore Archeological Consulting,
Houston, Texas. [draft]

67

Moore, Roger G., and Guusje Zimmerman Moore
1991 Cypress Creek and Northern Harris County: A History. In Archeological
Survey of Cypress Creek from Spring Branch to Kuykendahl Road, Harris
County, Texas, edited by H. Blaine Ensor, pp. 12-32. Archeological
Surveys Number 8, Archeological Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Moore, Roger G., and Robert P. Daigle
1994 An Archeological Survey of a 50-Acre Mitigation Bank on an Unnamed
Tributary of Cypress Creek in West-Central Harris County, Texas. Report
of Investigations Number 126, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.
Moore, Roger, G., James Thomas Dureka, and Robert Daigle
1995 An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Browning-Ferris Industries 347Acre Katy Prairie Wildlife Refuge, Harris County, Texas. Report of
Investigations Number 133, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.
Moore, Roger G., William E. Moore, and Ann Mesrobian
1994a An Archeological Survey of a 143-Acre Little Cypress Creek Detention
Facility (L500-02-00) in Northwest Harris County, Texas. Report of
Investigations Number 101, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.
Moore, Roger G., Ann Mesrobian, and Saul Aronow
1994b An Archeological Survey of an 110-Acre Regional Detention Basin on
Brays Bayou (D500-06-00) in Southern Harris County, Texas. Report of
Investigations Number 131, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.
Moore, Roger G., and James Thomas Dureka
1996 Archeological Investigations at the Proposed 46.6-Acre Bear Creek
Diversion Channel Harris County Flood Control District in Addicks
Reservoir, Harris County, Texas (HCFC U102-00-00). Report of
Investigations Number 160, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.
Moore, Roger G., and William E. Moore
1991 An Archeological Survey of the Proposed 750-Acre Joseph S. and Lucie
H. Cullinan Park, Fort Bend County, Texas. Report of Investigations Number
50, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas.

68

1994a An Archeological Survey of the 110-Acre Proposed Floodwater Detention
Basin (C547-01-00) in South Harris County, Texas. Report of
Investigations Number 108, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.
1994b An Archeological Survey of the 297-Acre Proposed Blue Ridge
Floodwater Detention Basin (C500-01-00) in South Harris County, Texas.
Report of Investigations Number 109, Moore Archeological Consulting,
Houston, Texas.
1994c An Archeological Survey of a 22-Acre Brays Bayou Regional Detention
Basin (D500-06-00) in South Harris County, Texas. Report of
Investigations Number 110, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston,
Texas.
Moore, William E.
1989 Archeological Bibliography for the Southeastern Region of Texas. Special
Report 31, Office of the State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
1990

Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1988. Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology 1, Department of Archeological Planning and
Review, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

1991

Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1987. Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology 2, Department of Archeological Planning and
Review, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

1992a Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1990. Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology 3, Department of Archeological Planning and
Review, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1992b Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1991. Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology 4, Department of Archeological Planning and
Review, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
1993

Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1989. Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology 5, Department of Archeological Planning and
Review, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

1994

Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology 1992. Abstracts in Texas
Contract Archeology 6, Department of Archeological Planning and
Review, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

69

Moore, William E., and Roger G. Moore
1986 Historical Archaeology in Texas: A Bibliography. Guidebooks in
Archaeology Number 2, Center for Archaeological Research, University
of Texas, San Antonio.
1996

A Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 29.99 Acre Detention Pond
Site on Cypress Creek in Harris County, Texas. Report of Investigations
Number 174, Moore Archeological Consulting, Houston, Texas. DRAFT

Patterson, Leland W.
1976 Technological Changes in Harris County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 48:171- 188.
1979

A Review of the Prehistory of the Upper Texas Coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 50:103-123.

1983

Prehistoric Settlement and Technological Patterns in Southeast Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 54:253-270.

1989

A Data Base for Inland Southeast Texas Archeology. Report Number 6,
Houston Archeological Society, Houston, Texas.

1995

The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 66:239-26.

1996

Bibliography of the Upper Texas Coast. Special Publication Number 6,
Houston Archeological Society, Houston, Texas.

Ricklis, Robert A.
1996 The Karankawa Indians of Texas: An Ecological Study of Cultural
Tradition and Change. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Ricklis, Robert A. and Kim A. Cox
1993 Examining Lithic Technological Organization as a Dynamic Cultural
Subsystem: The Advantages of an Explicitly Spatial Approach. American
Antiquity 58(3):444-461.
Ryder, Roberta Wright
1991 Applauding the Past of Katy, Texas. Ms. on file, Clayton Genealogical
Library, Houston Public Library, Texas.
Sayles, E. B.
1935 An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers Number 17, Austin,
Texas.

70

Shafer, Harry J.
1975 Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 46:249-254.
Shafer, Harry J., Edward P. Baxter, Thomas B. Sterns, and J. Phil Dering
1975 An Archeological Assessment of the Big Thicket Preserve. Report Number
19, Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Snead, J. I., and R. P. McCulloh (compilers)
1984 Geologic Map of Louisiana. Louisiana Geological Survey, Baton Rouge,
Louisiana.
Story, Dee Ann
1981 An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas. Plains Anthropologist
26(92):139-156.
Story, Dee Ann, Janice A. Guy, Barbara A. Burnett, Martha Doty Freeman, Jerome C.
Rose, D. Gentry Steele, Ben W. Olive, and Karl G. Reinhard
1990 The Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal Plain. Arkansas
Archeological Survey Research Series Number 38, Fayetteville, Arkansas.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 25:63-109.
Texas General Land Office
1879 Map of Harris County, Texas. Map on file, Houston Metropolitan
Collection, Houston Public Library, Texas.
1896

Map of Harris County, Texas. Map on file, Houston Metropolitan
Collection, Houston Public Library, Texas.

1941

Abstract of All Original Texas Land Titles Comprising Grants and
Locations to August 31, 1941: Vol. 1. Texas General Land Office, Austin.

Tyler, Ron, and eds.
1996 The New Handbook of Texas. Vol. 6. Texas State Historical Association,
Austin, Texas.
United States Geological Survey
1915 Katy Quadrangle, Harris County. Map on file, Houston Metropolitan
Collection, Houston Public Library, Texas.
1916

Swanson Quadrangle, Harris County. Map on file, Houston Metropolitan
Collection, Houston Public Library, Texas.

71

Van Siclen, D. C., and R. W. Harlan (editors)
1965 The Deltaic Coastal Plain Guidebook. Houston Geological Society,
Houston, Texas.
Wheat, Joe Ben
1953 The Addicks Dam Site, An Archeological Survey of the Addicks Dam
Basin, Southeast Texas. Number 4, Part 1, River Basin Survey Papers,
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
Wheat, Patricia, and Richard L. Gregg (editors)
1988 A Collection of Papers Reviewing the Archeology of Southeast Texas.
Report 5, Houston Archeological Society, Houston, Texas.
Wheeler, F. F.
1976 Soil Survey of Harris County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service,
Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.

72

Appendix
Shovel Test Log
For exact locations, please refer to Figure 2, A-E. Except where noted, shovel test results were
negative. Depths are in centimeters below surface. The following abbreviations are used
throughout the shovel test log: ST (shovel test), TS (temporary site), cm (centimeter), and bs
(below surface).
1. South side of Bear Creek; near west edge of ROW
0-49
light brownish-gray silt loam; friable; few iron oxide concretions
49-66
light grayish-brown loam with some orange mottling; increasing
compaction with depth; over 100 iron oxide concretions
2. South side of Bear Creek; inside west edge of ROW; about 200 iron oxide concretions
0-28
grayish-brown sandy loam; loose
28-59
orangish-brown sandy loam; compact
59-72
orangish-brown sandy clay
72-76
orangish-brown slightly sandy clay
3. South side of Bear Creek; 10 m south of cutside; 40 m east of ST 2
0-37
brownish-gray sandy loam
37-66
light brown sandy loam; compacted; some orange mottling; moderate iron
oxide concretions
66-72
orangish-brown sandy clay; heavy iron oxide concretions
4. South side of Bear Creek; 30 m east of ST 3; about 200 iron oxide concretions throughout
0-11
light grayish-brown sandy loam
11-17
grayish-brown sandy loam; compact
17-32
brown sandy loam; more compact
32-50
light brown sandy loam
50-60
light brown sandy clay
5. South side of Bear Creek; near chinaberry tree cluster; about 100 iron oxide concretions
throughout; one plastic pill bottle, several brown plastic or bakelite bits, smoked glass
windshield sherds found and discarded
0-41
brownish-gray sandy loam
41-55
light brownish-gray silt
59-77
light grayish-brown sandy clay; increasing clay content with depth

73

6. South side of Bear Creek; near eastern edge of ROW; on slight slope of inside curve of
meander about 18 m south of cutside; topsoil has apparently been scraped off and/or washed
down
0-17
medium brownish-gray sandy clay
17-51
light brown sandy loam; compacted; some orange mottling; moderate iron
oxide concretions
51-55
orangish-brown sandy clay; firm; heavy iron oxide concretions
7. North side of Bear Creek; near western edge of ROW; 10 m inland from dredge
spoil pile
0-13
grayish-brown sandy loam; some chunks of
clay ad mixed
13-79
orangish-brown sandy loam; about 100 iron
oxide concretions
79-80
mottled orange and light brown loamy clay
8. North side of Bear Creek; 30 m east of ST 7
0-24
grayish-brown sandy loam; one interior chunk of non-local
chert discarded
24-32
grayish-brown sandy loam
32-84
orangish-brown sandy loam; about 100 iron oxide concretions
84-94
mottled orange and light brown loamy clay
9. North side of Bear Creek; 10 m inland from dredge spoil pile; 30 m east of ST 8; 1 broken
chert gravel; several bits of black pipeline tar; test ends at top of east-west running steel
pipeline
0-80
mixed light grayish-brown sandy loam, silt
and sandy clays
10. North side of Bear Creek; 30 m east from ST 9
0-11
grayish-brown silty loam; loose
11-38
same but more compact; about 100 iron oxide concretions
38-51
light brown silt
51-73
light brown silty clay; increasingly compact with depth
11. North side of Bear Creek; 30 m east of ST 10
0-32
grayish-brown sandy loam
32-80
light brown sandy loam
80-84
light brown silty clay
12. North side of Bear Creek; near east edge of ROW; 18 m north of drop-off; in woods
0-21
mixed loamy clays; introduced fill
21-79
medium light grayish-brown sandy loam; natural soil
79-81
orangish-brown loamy clays

74

13. In field; 50 m north of ST 11
0-18
gray silty loam
18-48
grayish-brown sandy loam
48-67
brown clay loam
67-72
brown loamy clay
14. In field; 50 m north of ST 8
0-18
light brownish-gray sandy loam
18-73
grayish-brown loam
73-76
brownish-orange sandy clay; some light gray mottling
15. In field; 5 m south of ST 2
0-21
light brownish-gray sandy loam
21-77
light grayish-brown loam; about 150 iron oxide concretions
77orangish-brown sandy clay
16. In open field; 50 m south of ST 4; about 100 iron oxide concretions throughout
0-13
light grayish-brown sandy loam
13-27
brown sandy clay loam
27-39
orangish-brown loamy sand
39-62
mottled gray and brown slightly loamy clay
17. In fallow field; 30 m south of Longenbaugh Road; less than 50 iron oxide concretions
throughout
0-20
light grayish-brown silty loam
20-51
brown clayey silt
51-64
grayish-brown silty clay loam; compact
64-67
mottled orange and gray clay
18. In fallow field; 100 m south of Longenbaugh Road
0-17
brownish-gray loam
17-51
grayish-brown slightly clayey loam
51-57
orangish-brown sandy clay
19. South side of Cypress Creek; west edge of ROW; on narrow mid-level terrace
0-12
medium brownish-gray loamy sand
12-31
light brown sand
31-43
brown sand
43-85
light orangish-brown sand; a few chunks of brown clay
85-97
orangish-brown sand; a few chunks of brown clay
97-109
light gray silt; a few chunks of brown clay

75

20. South side of Cypress Creek; east edge of ROW; on very narrow mid-level terrace remnant
near a 16-in diameter hackberry
0-11
light brown sandy loam
11-16
medium dark brownish-gray clay loam; buried A horizon
16-31
medium grayish-brown clay loam; mottled; sticky
21. South of the old fish hatchery lakes south of Cypress Creek; near operating well
0-29
medium brownish-gray clay loam with limestone chunks and white clay
intermixed; introduced fill
29-40
mixed yellowish and white clay; introduced fill
40-67
brown silty clay loam; increasing clay content with depth
22. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. 40 m west of east edge of ROW; on north side of
Cypress Creek
0-16
medium grayish-brown silty clay loam
16-38
medium grayish-brown silty loam
38-99
medium brown sand; approximately 50 concretions
99-106
brownish-gray slightly sandy clay; compact
Artifact distribution:
70-75: 1 flake
23. Negative, but within site boundaries of MAC 96-32-TS 1. 10 m east of ST 22, 3 m north
of Cypress Creek Cutside; 3 m south of conspicuous dredge berm
0-18
mixed clays: dredge spoil
18-78
dark brownish gray sandy loam; few concretions
78-101
brownish-gray sandy silt; compacted, more so with depth, few concretions
24. North side of South Mayde Creek; approximately 45 m east of centerline; mid-level terrace
between dredge spoil berm and creek channel
0-11
dark brown sandy loam
11-42
brown sandy loam
42-51
brown sandy clay
25. North side of South Mayde Creek; 30 m west of ST 24; mid-level terrace
0-5
dark brown clay loam
5-25
medium brown loamy clay; saturated
26. North side of South Mayde Creek; atop broad circular rise inside meander of creek
0-22
brownish-gray sandy loam
22-67
medium light brown sandy loam; several hundred iron
oxide concretions
67-83
light brown silt

76

27. 28 m at 70° from ST 26, on same landform
0-15
dark brownish-gray sandy loam
15-68
medium light brown loam; hundreds of iron oxide concretions
68-87+
light brown silt; dry; compact
28. South side of South Mayde Creek; on high terrace about 3 m south of cutside
0-54
mixed brown sandy loam and whitish and orangish clays; mixed dredge
spoils and sandy alluvium
54-94
dark brownish-gray sandy loam; lightens with depth
94-100+
light brown silt
29. South side of South Mayde Creek; 25 m west-northwest of ST 28; 1.5 m from outside edge
of cutbank; in young forest
0-28
dark brownish-gray sandy loam
28-57
brown sandy loam; increasing clay and red iron oxide bits with depth
57-71
brown loamy clay, somewhat sandy; plastic; sticky; numerous red iron
oxide bits
30. In apparently never-cultivated pasture northeast of historic farmstead north of House and
Hahl Road; on small low rise
0-80
medium brown very fine sandy loam; saturated
80-90
medium brown very fine sandy loam with slight mix of orange sandy clay;
saturated
31. In apparently never-cultivated pasture 100 m east of closest barn within historic farmstead
north of House and Hahl Road; on somewhat elevated ground 15 m east of centerline near station
2174+00
0-39
dark brownish-gray sandy loam
39-89
medium light brown sandy loam
89-103
medium light brown sandy clay loam with iron oxide concretions and
common orange mottles
32. In leveled pasture south of House and Hahl Road; near station 2186+00; standing water all
around
0-27
medium dark grayish-brown sandy loam; saturated; hole abandoned due to
water influx
33. On broad rise north of South Mayde Creek; 25 m inland from dredge spoil berms
0-26
medium dark brownish-gray sandy loam
26-50
medium brown slightly clayey sandy loam
50-80
light brown sandy clay loam with moderate orange mottling; increasingly
clayey with depth

77

34. On same rise as ST 33; 15 m to the northeast
0-29
medium dark brownish-gray sandy loam
29-66
light brown slightly clayey sandy loam
66-77+
light brown sandy clay loam with orange mottling; increasing clay content
with depth
35. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. North of Cypress Creek; 20 m north of ST 24
0-17
dark brown sandy loam, admixed with some whitish and orange clay
17-65
dark brown sandy loam; increasingly saturated with depth; test
terminated due to water in hole
Artifact distribution:
0-20 1 flake
40-50 2 flakes
36. 10 m north of ST 35; north of Cypress Creek
0-70
medium gray brown silty loam--very moist
70-84
light brown gray silt; caliche bits increasing in density and size very
quickly with depth
37. High terrace remnant, south side of Cypress Creek; 20 m east of centerline
0-6
mixed light brown and dark grayish-brown clay loam
6-38
dark grayish-brown clay loam; hard screening
38-92
medium brownish-gray silt loam; compact; tough digging; caliche pebbles
start at 88 cm bs, increase with depth
38. On slumped landform on the edge of Cypress Creek’ almost 2 m north of creek; 10 m south
of ST 22, on lower terrace
0-20
medium grayish brown sandy loam
20-100
tan loamy sand; saturated
39. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. About 8 m east of ST 23; high terrace on the
north side of Cypress Creek; on defunct E-W fence line, 1.5 m west of fence corner and 2 m
north of cutbank
0-46
dark grayish-brown sandy loam
46-101
light grayish brown sandy loam
101-106
light grayish-brown slightly clayey sandy loam with few orange mottles
and concretions
Artifact distribution:
0-15: 1 piece unburned bone
70-75: 1 tertiary chert flake (same depth as flake in ST 22)

78

40. North of Cypress Creek, on mid-level terrace, 2 m east of old fence and about 7 m east of ST
39; about 4 m west of dirt road leading down to creek
0-6
humus
6-50
medium gray brown sandy loam
50-100
light brown sand, becomes slightly loamy with depth, with some orange
mottling
41. North side of Cypress Creek; 10 m @ 250° from ST 23 on mid-level terrace
0-21
medium brown clay loam
21-47
medium brown gray clay loam
47-100
light gray silt
42. About 6 m north of ST 36; in dense baccharis (old cultivated field)
0-59
dark brownish-gray slightly clayey loam
59-81
medium gray compact silt with caliche nodules increasing with depth
43. North side of Cypress Creek; 12 m east of two-track road leading south to creek;
immediately north of dredge spoil berm
0-22
brown clay loam
22-40
gray sandy clay
40-60
very compact, light gray silty clay
44. On Elevated surface about 20 m Southeast of STP 45, about 20 m North of Cypress Creek
cutbank
0-60
mixed gray and orange clays and brown sandy loam (dredge spoil)

45. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. On southern edge of elliptical mound 30 m
north of Cypress Creek; between centerline and western edge of ROW. One biface medial
fragment (possible dart point fragment), 25 chert flakes (including 1 blade and several utilized
flakes), 59 pieces of burned and unburned bone, and one tooth fragment were recovered. Some
rounded chert pebbles and a few s mall pieces of charcoal were also encountered. Test did not
reach sterile soil by 100 cm bs.
0-100
dark brownish-gray loamy sand
Artifact distribution:
20-30: 1 flake
30-40: 7 flakes
40-60: 5 flakes
60-80: 4 flakes
80-90: 3 flakes
90-100: 6 flakes

79

46. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. 25 m at 270° from ST 45; just west of rise
hosting ST 45; at edge of woods; charcoal noted from 0 to 60 cm bs
0-21
dark brownish-gray sandy loam
21-65
brown sandy loam; very slightly clayey
65-75
brownish-gray silt; dry; very compact
Artifact distribution:
40-50: 2 flakes
50-60 2 flakes; 1 burned bone
47. 540 m north of Franz Road; in active pasture; near fence line; on a slightly sloping landform
0-14
mixed gray and tan loamy sand
14-57
brownish-gray clay loam
57-59
light brown clay with orange clay mottling
48. 830 m north of Franz Road; in pasture near fence corner; a little charcoal encountered in top
10 cm
0-22
medium dark brownish-gray sandy loam
22-51
medium gray loam; increasing iron concretions; compact
51-71
medium gray silty clay loam; orange clay mottles and concretions
increasing with depth; becoming mostly grayish-orange by base of test
49. 40 m north of Morton Ranch Road; in soybean field
0-70
grayish-tan clay loam with orange mottling; increasing clay content and
compaction with depth
50. 100 m south of Morton Ranch Road; in overgrown field (probably formerly cultivated);
many young tallow and baccharis trees to 20 ft high; a little charcoal at top of test
0-11
medium dark brownish-gray slightly clayey sandy loam; moist;
many roots
11-61
medium brownish-gray sandy clay loam; orange clay mottling starts at 40
cmbs and increases with depth; very sticky and hard to screen; concretions
increase with depth
51. 150 m north of Clay Road in previously plowed field
0-22
grayish-brown silty loam; slightly clayey
22-57
grayish-brown silty clay loam

80

52. 250 m north of Clay Road; in active bermuda grass pasture; old furrows in area indicate
previous cultivation; 20 m south of lower, saturated area (not depicted as a wetland on project
aerial photos)
0-18
very dark brownish-gray sandy loam
18-52
dark grayish-brown very fine sandy clay loam; few concretions; orange
clay mottles increasing with depth
53. 150 m north of Beckendorf Road on a high linear amidst several small ponds; fallow land
south of an active rice field; about 100 m east of transmission lines
0-16
mixed light gray and orange clay; dry
16-56
light brownish-orange fine sand
56-58
gray and orange clay

54. 350 m north of Beckendorf Road; east edge of ROW; in fallow land 40 m south of active
rice field; on surface of average elevation; in grass; clay pigeons scattered about; occasional
pebbles and clay lumps found throughout matrix
0-24
mixed light gray and orange clay and light brown silt; disturbed
24-41
medium dark brownish-gray sandy silt
41-79
light grayish-brown sandy silt; increasing compaction with depth
79-83
light gray and orange clay
55. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. 12 m north of ST 45, on north edge of low broad
rise; at edge of forest
0-90
dark brown sandy loam
90-100
dark brown, slightly clayey sandy loam
Artifact distribution:
10-20: 3 flakes
30-40: 3 flakes
40-50: 1 flake
60-70: 2 flakes; 1 piece charcoal
70-80: 3 flakes
80-90: 1 flake, 2 burned bone
90-95: 3 flakes
56. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. 10 m east of ST 45; SE edge of low broad rise
0-29
medium dark grayish-brown sandy loam
29-102
grayish-brown loamy sand; becoming slightly clayey at base
Artifact distribution:
60-80: 3 flakes; 2 pieces of charcoal

81

57. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. 8 m at 190° from ST 45; between dredge spoil
berm possible paleochannel of Cypress Creek; charcoal pieces lightly scattered throughout
matrix
0-20
dark brown loamy clay
20-116
light brown sandy loam; some orange mottling at 50 cm bs
Artifact distribution:
50-60: 2 flakes
60-70: 1 possible flake
70-80: 2 flakes
90-100: 1 flake
100-110: 2 flakes
58. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. 10 m east of ST 55; east edge of apparent swale
or paleochannel of Cypress Creek
0-16
dark brownish-gray sandy loam
16-48
brownish-gray sandy loam
48-96
brownish-gray loamy sand; wet
96-99+
medium dark sandy clay loam; plastic; moist; possible buried A horizon
Artifact distribution:
20-50: 4 flakes (1 is utilized) and 2 charcoal bits
59. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. 10 m east of ST 58; on dredge spoil berm;
2.5 m east of centerline
0-37
mixed gray and orange clays; dredge spoil
37-72
dark brownish-gray sandy loam
72-104
brownish-gray sandy loam
104-110
medium brownish-gray sandy loam; possible buried A horizon
Artifact distribution:
50-70: 4 flakes; 1 utilized flake
90-110: 2 flakes (one is red, possibly heat-treated)
60. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. 10 m north of ST 55; in overgrown cultivated
field; out of riparian forest dominating TS 1 site area
0-35
dark brownish-gray sandy loam
35-71
brownish-gray slightly clayey loam
71-80
brownish-gray sandy clay loam with orange clay mottling and caliche bits
increasing with depth
Artifact distribution:
50-70: 2 flakes

82

61. Positive; site number MAC 96-32-TS 1. On top of same rise as ST 45, 8 m to the west.
This very dark, midden-like matrix yielded an artifact recovery considered to be extremely high
for a shovel test: 48 flakes and expedient tools, 3 tooth fragments, 144 fragments of burned and
unburned bone (16 of which appear to be turtle shell), and 2 pieces of charcoal. Shovel test did
not reach sterile soil.
0-103
very dark brownish-gray sandy loam
103-110
dark brownish-gray sandy loam; wet
Artifact distribution:
0-20: 7 flakes
20-30: 2 flakes; 1 bone
30-40: 1 bone
40-50: 21 flakes; 6 bone
50-60: 1 flake; 1 bone
60-80: 2 flakes; numerous bone bits
80-90: 1 flake; bone bits
90-100: 6 flakes; bone bits
100-110: 8 flakes; bone bits
62. North side of Cypress Creek on mid-level terrace; 20 m south of ST 57; about 1 m lower in
elevation than top of dredge spoil berm
0-44
dark brown clay loam
44-90
light brownish-orange loamy sand
63. 10 m north of ST 60; in overgrown cultivated field; out of riparian forest dominating TS 1
site area
0-28
dark brown loamy clay
28-80
light brown sandy loam
64. In upland pasture about 200 m south of Highway 290
0-26
medium dark grayish-brown sandy loam
26-46
medium brown slightly clayey sandy loam
46-50+
medium brown sandy clay loam with orange mottling

83

84

