A Cultural Resource Survey
of a Proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2 Location and
an Associated Pipeline Replacement Alignment,
Matagorda County, Texas
Permit Application No. SWG-03-12-039
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District
Antiquities Permit No. 3272
MAC PN 03-149

By
Roger G. Moore, Ph.D.
(Principal Investigator)

Prepared for
The Caney Creek Municipal Utility District
Sargent, Texas

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Report of Investigations Number 375
December, 2003

A Cultural Resource Survey
of a Proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2 Location and
an Associated Pipeline Replacement Alignment,
Matagorda County, Texas
Permit Application No. SWG-03-12-039
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District
Antiquities Permit No. 3272
MAC PN 03-149

By
Roger G. Moore, Ph.D.
(Principal Investigator)

Prepared for
The Caney Creek Municipal Utility District
Sargent, Texas

Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc.
Report of Investigations Number 375
December, 2003

Abstract
This report presents the results of a cultural resources survey in Matagorda
County, Texas (MAC PN 03-149). The project was conducted by Moore Archeological
Consulting, Inc. (MAC) in response to a request issued by the Caney Creek Municipal
Utility District in order to comply with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers regulatory
requirement for Permit Application No. SWG-03-12-039. The project area consists of
two elements: (1) a 0.25-acre proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2 location and (2) an
approximately 3000-ft pipeline replacement alignment associated with the above water
plant. The general location of the project within Matagorda County is depicted in Figure
1. The water plant site and pipeline replacement alignment are presented on a portion of
the Sargent Quadrangle on Figure 2. This dual Federal and State jurisdiction project was
also carried out under Antiquities Permit No. 3272 after consultation with the
Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission. The work was carried out by
Roger G. Moore of Moore Archeological Consulting, Inc., Houston, Texas, on November
13, 2003.
The current field survey included both surface and subsurface (shovel test)
examination of the Project Area. These conventional archeological investigations were
supplemented by archeological monitoring of geotechnical core boring and by analysis of
geotechnical boring logs. No previously recorded sites were identified in the existing
state site files. No cultural resource sites were located via pedestrian survey of the
proposed project and geotechnical information indicated that the potential for deeply
buried remains is slight. In view of the negative outcome of the survey, it is
recommended that no further cultural resource management investigations be required
prior to construction of the proposed project. In the unlikely event that buried cultural
resources are exposed during construction, work should be suspended in the immediate
area of the find. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District and the
Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission should be notified
immediately.

i

Table of Contents
Abstract

i

Table of Contents

ii

List of Figures

iii

List of Tables

iii

1. Introduction

1

2. Archeological and Historical Background

1

3. Project Area Description and Environmental Background

1

4. Field Methods

5

5. Results of the Archeological Survey Investigation

5

5.1. Geotechnical Data Results and Interpretations

8

7. Conclusions and Recommendations

10

References Cited

10

Attachment: Geotechnical Boring Logs

11

ii

List of Figures
Figure 1.

General location of the proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2 and pipeline
replacement project within Matagorda County, Texas.

Figure 2.

Location of the proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2 and pipeline
replacement project on the Sargent, Texas, USGS Quadrangle.

Figure 3.

Overview of the proposed Water Treatment Plant vegetation and topography.

Figure 4.

Overview of the proposed pipeline replacement alignment topography and
previous disturbances.

Figure 5.

Shovel Test locations within the proposed Water Treatment Plant as depicted
on the Sargent, Texas USGS Quadrangle.

Figure 6.

Geotechnical drilling trailer in operation at Boring No. 1 location.

Figure 7.

Geotechnical Boring locations within the proposed Water Treatment Plant as
depicted on the Sargent, Texas USGS Quadrangle.
List of Tables

Table 1. Shovel Test Log.

iii

1.0 Introduction
This document reports the results of a cultural resources survey in Matagorda
County, Texas (MAC PN 03-149). The project was conducted by Moore Archeological
Consulting, Inc. (MAC) in response to a request issued by the Caney Creek Municipal
Utility District in order to comply with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers regulatory
requirement for Permit Application No. SWG-03-12-039. The project area consists of
two elements: (1) a 0.25-acre proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2 location and (2) an
approximately 3000-ft pipeline replacement alignment associated with the above water
plant. The general location of the project within Matagorda County is depicted in Figure
1. The water plant site and pipeline replacement alignment are presented on a portion of
the Sargent Quadrangle on Figure 2. This dual Federal and State jurisdiction project was
also carried out under Antiquities Permit No. 3272 after consultation with the Archeology
Division of the Texas Historical Commission.
2.0 Archeological and Historical Background
The Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at the University of Texas at
Austin responded to a request for a records search on this project on November 4, 2003.
This review disclosed that there are a number of recorded archeological sites in the
general project vicinity. Most of these sites are situated on the west (opposite) side of
Caney Creek and are closely associated with current or former channels of the creek. The
closest site, 41MG26, the historic Sargent Cemetery, in on the east side of Caney Creek
and is located approximately 500 meters south-southwest of the water plant site.
The historic Sargent Cemetery is commemorated by Texas Historic Marker No.
4593. Further south, Texas Historic Marker No. 1024 records the Confederate defenses
at the mouth of Caney Creek. These are the only Texas Historic Markers situated within
the Caney Creek Municipal Utility District jurisdictional area (Neill 2003).
3.0 Project Area Description and Environmental Background
The proposed Water Treatment Plant is a small section of a large, level pasture
fronting on a paved county road (Figure 3). The tract is approximately 5 feet above sea
level, and slopes very slightly to the south. The water plant tract is vegetated solely with
coastal hay grasses, and ground visibility is generally poor. The water pipeline
replacement alignment parallels the paved county road on its south side. The proposed
alignment is within a pre-existing utility easement and was confirmed as severely
disturbed as described below (Figure 4). There are no structures within the project area.
Caney Creek is the closest reliable, natural freshwater source to the project area.
This stream is approximately 470 meters west of the water plant site. Jackson Ditch, an
intermittent, minor tributary to Caney Creek, is situated approximately 605 meters
northwest of the tract. The Gulf of Mexico lies approximately 5.4 kilometers southeast of

Figure 1.

General location of the proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2 and
pipeline replacement project within Matagorda County, Texas.

Figure 2.

Location of the proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2 and pipeline
replacement project on the Sargent, Texas, USGS Quadrangle.

Figure 3.

Overview of the proposed Water Treatment Plant vegetation and
topography.

Figure 4.

Overview of the proposed pipeline replacement alignment topography and
previous disturbances.

the project area. The entire project area is situated within the 100 year flood area Zone
A12 (EL 11) as depicted on the FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map, Matagorda County,
Texas Panel 450 of 775. Climatic data from the nearby Palacios Municipal Airport for
the period 1961 to 1990 indicates a mean annual precipitation of 44.7 inches, a
maximum temperature of 97 F, and a minimum temperature of 9 F (Neill 2003:6).
Soils, hydrology, and geology are aptly summarized in the Revised Draft
Environmental Assessment (Neill 2003:5) for the proposed water plant and pipeline
project:
The general soil series within the proposed project area is
Surfside (saline, clayey coastal uplands and bottomlands).
Specific soil types within the project area include Aa (Asa
silt loam, rarely flooded), Az (Asa silty clay loam, saline,
occasionally flooded), Cm (Clemville silty clay loan, rarely
flooded), and Sr (Surfside clay, occasionally flooded) [U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and
cooperating agnecies, 1979 aerial sheet numbers 48 and 49,
Matagorda County, Texas, identification legend revised
January 12, 1993].
Groundwater for the proposed project is to be obtained
from the Chicot Aquifer. The Chicot Aquifer of the Gulf
Coast Aquifer consists of the Lissie, Willis, Bentley,
Montgoery, and Beaumont formations, and overlying
alluvial deposits, some or all of which may be present at the
proposed well site [Texas Water Development Board
Report 345, Aquifers of Texas, John B. Ashworth and Janie
Hopkins, November, 1995].
4.0 Field Methods
Preliminary telephone coordination with the Corps of Engineers, Galveston
District, archeologist, Ms. Tiffany Terneny, revealed that field investigation approaches
appropriately differed between the two tracts given prior disturbance to the pipeline
alignment. The specifics of these divergent field methods will be discussed below.
5.0 Results of the Archeological Survey Investigation
Roger G, Moore met project engineer George Neill in Sargent on the morning of
November 13, 2003. Mr. Neill conducted Moore to the proposed Water Plant project
area, as well as showed him the proposed pipeline alignment. Geotechnical coring was
fortuitously just getting underway as Moore arrived. He was therefore able to monitor
the whole process of Boring No. 1 drilling. The geotechnical information is valuably
complementary to the shovel test and surface observation archeological data collected
during this survey.

“Standard” pedestrian cultural resources surveys (with shovel testing) was
employed at the proposed water treatment plant, covering 100% of the 0.25-acre tract.
The field survey was conducted by the Principal Investigator. Survey methods differed
for the pipeline since the new line will replace an existing line following along an
existing roadside ditch. This pipeline replacement was therefore projected to be confined
to previously disturbed deposits. This estimation was confirmed by observations during
the archeological survey. The banks of the ditch along the entire pipeline alignment were
examined for archeological deposits and features. No such features, intact or disturbed,
were noted.
Pedestrian surface transect examination failed to disclose any cultural materials
within the proposed Water Plant footprint. Shovel testing within the water plant tract was
conducted as outlined in the Scope of Work to identify buried archeological deposits,
features, and sites. Two shovel tests were excavated within the 0.25-acre tract, a figure
that by itself exceeds the stipulations mandated by the Texas Historical Commission
Survey Standards for small projects. Shovel Test locations are depicted on Figure 5. The
shovel test results were significantly augmented, however, by the geotechnical data as
discussed below.
Shovel tests were excavated in 10-cm arbitrary levels. (See Table 1, Shovel Test
Log.) Each shovel test was documented by an individual form including information on
location, soil profile and cultural yield. Soil fill from these tests were impossible to
screened due to the heavy plastic nature of the uniformly clay soil matrix. Excavated
materials were thus broken apart manually and examined for cultural materials. No
cultural materials were located in either shovel test. The shovel tests were back-filled
immediately.

Table 1. Shovel Test Log.
ST No

Zone

Easting

Northing

NAD

1

15

241489

3189386

NAD 27

2

15

241466

3189363

NAD 27

Positive/
Observations
Negative
Negative 0-45 CMBS: 10YR4/2
heavy, plastic clay.
Had to halt excavation
at 45 cm due to
extreme stickyness and
firmness of clay.
Negative 0-40 CMBS: 10YR4/2
heavy, plastic clay

Figure 5.

Shovel Test locations within the proposed Water Treatment Plant as
depicted on the Sargent, Texas USGS Quadrangle.

Ms. Terneny and Mr. Baker concurred that backhoe trenching appeared not to be
necessary for this project. This evaluation is strongly supported by the geotechnical data
presented below.
5.1 Geotechnical Data Results and Interpretations
Two geotechnical cores (boring logs attached) were drilled within the proposed
Water Plant footprint. The cores were taken using a spiral (Archimedes-style) auger drill
mounted on a small trailer (Figure 6). The auger drilling technology permitted
archeological observation of the cuttings for the entire drill column for Boring No. 1.
Sample and cutting recovery from both Borings 1 and 2 were confined almost exclusively
to heavy, plastic clays. The boring locations are depicted on Figure 7. The only
departures from this column of uniform clays were sand pockets between six (6) and
twelve (12) feet below surface. The water table was reached at approximately 6 feet.
Most importantly, no shell (and therefore, potentially shell midden) zones or loamy
stratigraphic zones were encountered during the drilling, nor were any other evidence of
cultural deposits noted. Both borings were taken to an ultimate depth of 40 feet below
surface. Data from the geotechnical coring thus reinforces the negative results of the
archeological survey, as well as suggests that there is little potential for deeply buried
archeological deposits.

Figure 6.

Geotechnical drilling trailer in operation at Boring No. 1 location.

Figure 7.

Geotechnical Boring locations within the proposed Water Treatment Plant
as depicted on the Sargent, Texas USGS Quadrangle.

7.0 Conclusions and Recommendations
No cultural resource sites were identified in the survey of the proposed Caney
Creek Municipal Utility District, 0.25-acre proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2
location and the associated pipeline replacement alignment. It is thus recommended that
no further cultural resource investigations be required for the issuance of federal permits,
since no sites listed as potentially eligible for inclusion on the National Register of
Historic Places will be affected by the proposed project.
In the event that deeply buried archeological deposits should be encountered
during project construction, the client and its contractors should cease work in the area of
the discovery and immediately contact the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston
District and the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission.
References Cited
Neill, George H.
2003 Revised Draft Environmental Assessment For: Caney Creek Municipal Utility
District, Proposed Water Plant No. 2. George H. Neill & Associates, Inc.
Stafford, Texas.

Attachment:
Geotechnical Boring Logs,
Caney Creek Municipal Utility District,
Proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2

Note: QC Laboratories, Inc., the geotechnical company conducting the drilling operation
for the Water Treatment Plant No. 2 project, was simultaneously conducting borings for
another, unrelated Caney Creek Municipal Utility District project. The company merged
the boring numbering system for both Caney Creek Municipal Utility District projects.
MAC has, for convenient reference in this report, re-numbered the boring logs for the
Proposed Water Treatment Plant No. 2 project as Boring Numbers 1 and 2. The original
QC Laboratories, Inc., boring numbers for these logs, appearing in the following well
logs, are Boring Numbers B-6 (referred to as Boring Number 1 in this report) and B-7
(herein referred to as Boring No. 2).

