THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS
AND NORTHEASTERN MEXICO:
Selected Writings of Thomas Nolan Campbell

This page intentionally left blank.

THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS
AND NORTHEASTERN MEXICO:
Selected Writings of Thomas Nolan Campbell

T. N. Campbell

Published by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
with the cooperation of the Department of Anthropology
the College of Liberal Arts
and the Institute of Latin American Studies

The University of Texas at Austin

Printed 1988
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin
Balcones Research Center
10100 Burnet Road
Austin, Texas 78758-4497
Publishers who have generously given
permission to use copyrighted works are
listed in the appropriate chapters.
Printed in the United States of America
This publication is supported in part by a
grant from the Potts and Sibley Foundation,
Midland, Texas.
Printed on acidjree, 60-pound Cougar
Opaque Vellum Offset (Dynawhite) paper.

Table of Contents
List of Figures ........................................................................................... v
List of Tables ............................................................................................ v
Dedication and Acknowledgments (Thomas R. Hester) ............................................ vii
Foreword (Wm. W. Newcomb, Jr.) ................................................................. ix
Special Introduction (Glen L. Evans) ................................................................ xi
Systematized Ethnohistory and Prehistoric Culture Sequences in Texas ........................... 1
Cabeza de Vaca Among the Indians of Southern Texas .............................................. 7
The Coahuiltecans and Their Neighbors .............................................................. 39
Espinosa, Olivares, and the Colorado River Indians, 1709 ........................................ 61
Name All the Indians of the Bastrop Area ............................................................ 71
Indians of the San Antonio Missions .................................................................. 79
The "Cabras Indians" of Southern Texas .....................-........................................ 95
The Payaya Indians of Southern Texas ............................................................... 97
Ethnic Identities of Extinct Coahuiltecan Populations: Case of the Juanca Indians ........... 117
Ethnohistoric Notes on Indians Groups Associated with Three Spanish Missions ............ 127
The Cacaxtle Indians of Northeastern Mexico and Southern Texas ............................. 173
Bibliography ............................................................................................ 185

List of Figures
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.

Map of Southern Texas ........................................................................ 10
Territory of the Coahuiltecans and Their Neighbors .......................................... 40
Plan of Mission San Francisco de la Espada at San Antonio, Texas ....................... .42
Title Page and Questions from a Church Manual.. ........................................... .46
Carrizos ............................................................................................ 54
Map of the Central Texas Colorado River Area ............................................... 62
Bastrop Area Map ................................................................................. 71
Missions of Texas and Northern Mexico ................................................... 80
The San Antonio Area During the Spanish Colonial Period ................................. 81
The Missions of San Antonio ................................................................. 82
Key Cacaxtle Locations in Northeastern Mexico and Southern Texas .................... 176

List of Tables
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Probable Coahuilteco Speakers ................................................................ 47
Indian Groups Seen along the Colorado River by the 1709 Expedition .................... 67
Indian Groups Associated with the Bastrop Area ............................................. 73
Indian Groups at Missions of the San Antonio Missions National Historical Park ....... 90
Source Areas of Park Mission Indian Groups ................................................. 91
Probable Linguistic Affiliations of Indian Groups at the San Antonio Park Missions .... 92
Indian Groups Represented at Guerrero Missions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130
Maps Bearing the Name Caicache .......................................................... 182

v

This page intentionally left blank.

Dedication and Acknowledgments
Historical Association; Paul Ward, Chairman
of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association, and Evelyn Lewis, the editor of La
Tierra, the Association's journal; and Wm.
G. Reeder, Director of the Texas Memorial
Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.
Appreciation is also owed to various individuals and offices of The University of
Texas at Austin who assisted in the publication of the volume: Robert D. King, Dean
of the College of Liberal Arts; Joel Sherzer,
Chairman of the Department of Anthropology; Richard N. Adams, Director of the
Institute of Latin American Studies; and
Carole Smith, Administrative Associate of the
Department of Anthropology.
While we have not aimed for complete
consistency in editorial style and bibliographic referencing, an attempt has been made to
harmonize the form of the republished articles, so that this volume appears to the reader
as a unit. Although now compiled in a single
bibliographic section, the references have
been mainly left as first published with a few
regularities imposed: ( 1) punctuation has
been made uniform; (2) the original capitalization, use of diacritical marks, and spelling of ancient writings have been allowed to
stand; and (3) the title formats of each
modem foreign-language article or book have
followed the style appropriate to the language
in question. In these matters the recommendations of The Chicago Manual of Style (13th
edition) are adhered to. Also, the placement
of diacritical markings on authors' names
accompanying works in Castilian (whatever
their date of publication) follows modern
Spanish usage, as is the editorial custom in
Mexico (e.g., "Ximenes" rather than "Ximenes").
Finally, it has to be noted that the happy
event that triggered this volume was T. N.
Campbell's 80th birthday on July 3, 1988.
We hope that he will be pleased with this
birthday gift, which has been prepared in full
expectation that there will be more papers yet
to come from his continuing research.
iFeliz cumpleaiios, Professor Campbell!

THIS VOLUME IS A SELECTION OF

papers authored by Professor Thomas N.
Campbell reflecting his research on the Indian groups of southern Texas and northeastern Mexico. His daughter, Tommy Jo
Campbell, was a collaborator and the junior
author on two papers published herein. It is
our desire, with the publication of this
volume, to honor Professor Campbell (without his prior knowledge or consent) for his
many years of devoted studies. Additionally,
by gathering these papers together under one
cover, students of Texas Indian ethnohistory
will be yet further served by Tom Campbell's
incomparable work.
There are many people to thank for their
help in preparing this publication. Michael
B. Collins produced the idea, and Solveig A.
Turpin provided additional encouragement
for the effort. Dee Ann Story advised on
many aspects of the volume. Wm. W. Newcomb, Jr., and Glen L. Evans quickly accepted invitations for their contributions and
came through promptly with manuscripts.
Frank A. Weir kindly prepared the cover art.
E. Mott Davis and LeRoy Johnson, Jr., read
and commented upon the draft; Lee's contribution in preparing a combined bibliography is greatly appreciated. Thanks are also
due the librarians at the Barker Texas History
Center and the Nettie Lee Benson Latin
American Collection for help with archival
and rare book references. The preparation of
the camera-ready manuscript was done, and
carefully so, by Carolyn Spock, who was
graciously aided by Beth 0. Davis and by the
Texas Memorial Museum and its Materials
Conservation Laboratory.
Every person contacted about permission
to reprint the various papers responded with
enthusiasm. We especially thank Jack D.
Eaton, Acting Director of the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio; Teddy Lou Stickney,
President of the Texas Archeological Society;
Ives Goddard, Managing Editor of the
Handbook of North American Indians,
Smithsonian Institution; Thomas Brayshaw,
Assistant Curator at the Thomas Gilcrease
Museum, Tulsa, Oklahoma; Davis McAuley,
Bulletin Editor of the Sayersville (Texas)

Thomas R. Hester, Director
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
vii

----~---------------------

This page intentionally left blank.

Foreword
Wm. W. Newcomb, Jr.
with a child's shovel in hopes of unearthing
buried coins. Even when the quest is successful-when a mission document yields up
a coin in the form of a name of a hitherto
unknown native group, or when the report of
some barely literate Spanish explorer describes a.previously unknown custom of an
obscure people-the task has barely begun.
Such information then must be evaluated for
its integrity, related to the appropriate cultural
context, compared with whatever prior information is available, and the whole set forth
in a perceptive and thoughtful way. Perhaps
the most difficult part of such labors is
loosening the cold, dead grasp that traditional
ignorance and misinterpretation have frozen
onto the old image of these native Americans.
Campbell has gone far in melting this icy
hold.
It might be argued that the scattered hunters and gatherers of south Texas and northeastern Mexico, who lived on what wild animals and plants were available in their less
than bountiful environment, were so different
and far removed from twentieth-century
Americans, that attempting to reconstruct their
cultures is both an exercise in futility and of
small consequence. The argument is flawed.
Campbell demonstrates in these writings that
such efforts are fruitful, and although it is
accurate to locate these Indians at the far end
of the cultural spectrum from modern America, the cultural distance enhances rather than
diminishes their significance. In broad terms
they represented the kind of existence that has
characterized all of mankind throughout most
of the species' existence. Any light that can
be cast on one version of that life-style deepens understanding of our forerunners and
most likely addresses deep-seated characteristics of modem men. It is of equal or greater
significance that a comprehension of those
cultures that are small, structurally rather simple, and whose internal interrelations are fairly
easily grasped can become a steppingstone to
a surer, more accurate appraisal of modem,
technologically sophisticated nations. As a

UNTIL RELATIVELY RECENT YEARS THE

native peoples of southern Texas and northeastern Mexico were all but ignored by anthropologists, and when their existence was
acknowledged it was to disparage their cultures and by implication to deny its peoples
their essential humanity. To be charitable, the
Indians of the region vanished before anthropologists arrived on the scene in the last
decades of the nineteenth century. No direct
observation and description of their cultures
were possible. Understandably, anthropological interest was focused on the spectacular native civilizations that lay to the south
in Mexico and on the natives of adjacent
regions in the United States, particularly the
Plains and the Southeast, all of which have
persisted at least in some form up to the
present day. Also, few anthropologists had
more than a nodding acquaintance with or
concern for the history of the region, and the
relatively few historical records known to
them were apt to be relied on without very
much critical insight. To historians intent on
relating the European and American struggles
to explore, appropriate, and settle the region,
its ill-known natives generally have played a
minor, shadowy role, better swept into a dim
comer of history than to be directly addressed
as hapless victims.
The result has been a warped, poorly defined picture of savage cannibals infesting the
Gulf coast and interior wastelands of an unimportant, best-ignored "cultural sink." Even
when efforts later were made to correct the
older stereotype, the lack of data led to
sketchy and perhaps over-generalized views
of the region's natives.
Fortunately, a diligent and determined
scholar, Thomas N. Campbell, has undertaken the monumental task of seeking out
every scrap of information that might reveal
the natives of this region in a deeper and
more meaningful light. The magnitude of
such archival research is difficult to comprehend. Perhaps it is best likened to excavating a sand dune of unknown dimensions

IX

x

knowledge of the anatomy and physiology of
"lower" animals is essential to the biologist in
understanding their "higher" brethren, so too
is a knowledge of hunters and gatherers basic
to the comprehension of complex societies.
The hunters and gatherers of the earth have
been disappearing for centuries, the natives
of southern Texas and northeastern Mexico
being but obscure casualities in that genocidal
progression. The progression is ending; the

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

last of them will soon be extinct. If profit is
to be realized from the wreckage, it is to salvage every scrap of information that can be
gleaned from their remains. And the aboriginal peoples of southern Texas and northeastern Mexico represent one of the most difficult challenges to the ethnohistorian of any
area of North America. That challenge has
been accepted, and as this volume illustrates,
it is being mastered.

Special Introduction
Glen L. Evans
special camping trip in the lower Pecos River
Canyon. It wasn't just the impressive rock
shelters of ancient dwellers of the region,
which we regarded with much interest from a
distance, or the sumptuous breakfast featuring boiled coffee and a fine flathead catfish,
but the long hours that passed too swiftly of
uninterrupted conversation by a companionable campfire that made this a particularly
memoriable occasion.
On these excursions, we covered much
land so devoid of natural graciousness and
scenic appeal that most people would have
considered it too utterly drab to warrant a
second glance. But Tom took it all in impartially, with evident interest and pleasure. To
him that land was not just a matrix of desolate
real estate, enclosing here and there much
smaller desirable segments. He saw it for
what it was, a viable habitat capable of
bringing forth and nourishing particular kinds
of plant and animal life adapted to its particular conditions. And, being an anthropologist, he must have also reflected on aboriginal cultures which from time to time in the
near and distant past also lived and foraged
there. Anyway, that's how I interpret Tom's
feelings for the land, perhaps in part because
I have similar feelings. And it is one of the
reasons why I have always found him an
expecially desirable traveling companion.
It seems to me that the following excerpt
from a paper of his in the Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society, Volume 43,
October, 1972, tells us something about the
quality of Tom Campbell's scholarship-for
he is a scientist who practices what he
preaches:
... I would add my impression that
much of the ethnohistoric research thus
far done in the greater Texas area has
been a cream-skimming operation. The
effort has gone principally into finding
documents of high data yield .... I also
believe that there has been general
neglect of low-yield documents, whose
number is phenomenal.

WHEN ASKED TO WRITE AN INTRODUC-

tion for this volume, I accepted gladly and
without hesitation because that would give
me an opportunity to say some things I've
been wanting to say about Tom Campbell. If
I had paused to reflect on what a dilemma that
would put me in, I might not have been so
hasty. For though Tom is always grateful for
constructive criticisms of his work, he is
embarrassed by any compliment, however
richly deserved, and is inclined to reject it out
of hand. I can't think of anyone more
deserving of praise-or anyone who resists it
so stoutly. This is why I now find myself in
something of a bind, for there really isn't
much you can say about him, if you 're
honest, that is not complimentary. I nevertheless shall make the effort, even though I
may understate his virtues out of reluctance to
embarrass a staunch friend of 50 years.
Most readers of this book will be familiar
with Tom's solid contributions to his science
as educator, author, department chairman,
and editor of professional journals. So I will
confine what I have to say largely to such
other matters as may help explain why he has
been so effective in bringing his achievements to fruition, and why he is so widely
admired and respected as a gentleman as well
as a scholar.
Despite having been a city dweller virtually
all his adult life, Tom is an authentic man of
the earth-and I say this not merely because
he is a dedicated home gardner, though that is
a very good way of keeping in touch with it.
He feels a real kinship and profound respect
for the land as a whole, which is a very
different matter from caring only for those
isolated segments of it that contribute to economic gains or to some physical or aesthetic
pleasure.
We have been on field trips together in
such places as the Gulf coast, the lower Rio
Grande Valley, the south Texas brush
country, the Llano Es tac ado, and the High
Plains in westernmost Oklahoma. And we
once had what was for me a short but very

X1

xii

I shift here from Tom's cream-skimming
metaphor to one I like better, for the analogy
between researching documents and prospecting for placer gold seems almost irresistible. Whether rich or lean, both documents and placers must be carefully worked
in order to determine their worth, and both
sometimes contain easily overlooked "dust"
of greater cumulative value than the rarer but
much more obvious nuggets-it does take a
great deal more patient panning to recover the
"dust."
In those placers scholars call archives,
Professor Campbell doesn't leave much sand
unwashed. His well-worn pan frequently
yields nothing more than a "color" or two
which have value only as "leads" to possible
richer ground upstream. But like all dedicated prospectors for intellectual or mineral
gold, he follows the leads-and he sometimes makes a "strike."
Just as the gold seeker sometimes turns up
an unexpected little treasure, such as a crystal
of fine topaz, in his pan, Tom occasionally
comes upon some unexpected gems of
knowledge. But here the analogy must end,
for Tom shares all the gleanings of his pan
with the interested public. His report on the
pioneer tree-ring work of Jacob Kuechler,
published in The Tree-Ring Bulletin, January, 1949, is an example of one such important record he stumbled upon and salvaged
from oblivion.
But it takes more than a high standard of
scholarship to make the kind of outstanding
teacher that he is. Some fine scholars can't
teach simply because they can't communicate
effectively, except perhaps with others of
their own profession and at their own level of
learning, and they often seem to dislike
associating with students. Tom, however,
communicates willingly and well and he
clearly enjoys mingling with others of similar
interests-not just with students and colleagues in anthropology, but almost anyone
with a lively interest in the world and with the
wit to express an opinion or two about it.
Because it's not so much the literal
meaning of words as how we perceive the
reliability of their author that gives them
significance, people pay particular attention to
Tom when he has something to say on a
serious subject. His innate sincerity and
profound respect for that elusive quality

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

called Truth give his words weight quite
beyond their generally accepted meaning.
And that, I think, is a major reason why he is
such a successful teacher and author.
On two occasions while I was assisting
him in a minor way on his summer
archeological field schools, I observed at first
hand how successfully he worked with
students. What impressed me most, I think,
was the way he maintained authoritywithout fanfare and without appearing authoritative. It was the natural authority based
on deserved respect-the kind that inspires
the best efforts, and provokes the least abuse,
from all civilized people.
Working cooperatively with the students in
a kind of benevolent crew-chief capacity, he
taught by example excavation techniques and
procedures better, quicker, and more agreeably than they can be learned by any amount
of oral or written instruction. His verbal
teaching seemed largely confined to informal
and lively round-table discussions in the
evenings and other leisure intervals.
The excavating was a hot, sweaty, and
dirty business, yet the students seemed to
find it both interesting and enjoyable. That
was due in part, no doubt, to the excitement
inherent in the expectation of finding artifacts
or other scientifically important objects. But
I think the fine example Tom set for them
was a more important factor. By taking his
science seriously but without being grim
about it, and maintaining an unfailing sense
of humor while conducting even the tedious
aspects of his work, he projected the distinct
impression that one can be an outstanding
anthropologist without sacrificing his zest for
living.
Among my valued friends are several of
Tom's former students who have earned
well-deserved prominence as professional
archeologists. I seem to see in them some of
his sterling qualities-freedom from ostentation, integrity, intellectual honesty, respect
for scholarly excellence. I don't know
whether Tom's influence had something to
do with implanting those virtues. He would
deny it; I suspect that those former students
would not.
But Tom's good influence is by no means
limited to his students and members of his
profession, and it sometimes manifests itself
in an unexpected manner. I will cite a

SPECIAL INTRODUCTION

personal instance of this-and will take
certain liberties in the telling. Once while
hospitalized with an internal ailment and a
seemingly unshakable case of the doldrums, I
received a letter from Tom dated December
17, 1964. After an expression of sympathy,
ending with " ... we can at least suffer along
with you until you get up and start being
mean and pugnacious again," the letter
continued:
Some of the primitives had an interesting theory about illness, namely,
that it could, by use of the proper
techniques, be transferred to animals or
even to other men, and the patient
would immediately recover. It seems to
me that this merits scientific inquiry.
While I am working on the problem,
you might be thinking about appropriate
transfers. Since you love animals, they
are out; but you must know a lot of
people who deserve serious consideration.
I did indeed know a lot of such people.
And since Tom's farcical proposal tickled my
fancy, I decided at once to go along with it.
Even now, I told myself, he could be on the
verge of perfecting his New Improved Ailment Transfer Technique and almost ready to
get on with the transfer operation. So I had
better get busy and find a suitable transferee.
That seemed simple enough until I started
wondering about the Technique's effective
working range. Would I have to have the
victim physically at hand-or could we zap
him from some considerable distance?
Would he have to meet certain requirements,
such as age, social standing, or ethnic affiliation, in order to qualify? It soon became
clear that the only way to make sure of
having somebody suitable at the required time
and place was to make a comprehensive list
of all possible candidates.
And that was when I discovered that
recalling unavenged grievances and listing
names of the offenders was a wonderfully
stimulating experience. The hours sped
swiftly by as the list kept growing and
growing-and the longer I worked on it, the
better I felt ....
They called my recovery "phenomenal,"
and released me from the hospital next day.
The staff seemed so pleased with the
wonders of their medical science that I hadn't

X1ll

the heart to explain that it wasn't medicine but
Tom's stimulating suggestion that set the
recovery process in motion.
Could it be, I wonder, that Tom suspected
that reviewing old grudges and savoring the
thought of revenge would have a positive
therapeutic effect on me? And if so, was his
seemingly casual suggestion about illness
transference actually a clever ploy to involve
me in this efficaceous self-treatment process?
Some years ago I was mildly criticized for
"lack of objectivity" in an appreciative essay I
wrote about another esteemed friend of mine.
It's true that I didn't discuss any professional
imperfections he may have had, preferring to
leave that to someone who understands just
what constitutes Perfection and is therefore
capable of judging how far others have
deviated from it.
Nevertheless, I want to forestall a possible
similar charge of partisanship from some
reader of these lines, and hereby assert that I
am not trying to portray Tom Campbell as
some paragon of science who never, never
takes lightly any feature of his profession. In
fact, I have managed to recall an actual
instance when he may have done just thatwhen he responded with what could be called
a snap-judgement opinion to a question concerning an interesting archeological discovery.
This came about back in 1951, when he
and I were visiting at the home of Grayson
and Dorothy Meade in Lubbock, Texas. On
that particular evening Grayson had something of special interest to show us-a human
burial he had excavated from a shallow cave
in the wall of Yellowhouse Canyon, some
twelve miles east of Lubbock. (This discovery was subsequently reported by Wm.
W. Newcomb, Jr., in Volume 26 of the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society,
October 1955.)
The burial was still partly encased in its
plaster cast, but neatly laid out on Grayson's
army cot with the overlying earth removed to
expose its contents. It consisted of a wellpreserved and nearly complete skeleton of a
young man, and a number of significant
articles that had been buried along with it.
These associated items included typical
Plains Indian beaded moccasins in place on
the foot bones, a partially preserved cloth
breast plate adorned with more than 80 well-

xiv
formed bone beads, a flaking tool made from
an antler tine, and a piece of red cinnabar-a
favored Indian body paint. But there were
also various articles of U.S. Army equipment, including saddle bags, a brass army
belt buckle and a fully loaded .44-caliber cap
and ball revolver. Another piece of army
equipment worth mentioning here was a
small brass bucket somewhat bent out of
shape as if from a considerable blow, resting
at the foot of the burial.
Tom, being the anthropologist among us,
was asked how he would interpret all of this.
But only after making a careful inspection of
the flexed skeleton and its accompanying
burial items did he venture a preliminary
opinion. It seemed possible, he said, that
this was the remains of one of the Indian
scouts who served with and was equipped by
U.S. Army troops in their campaigns against
hostile Plains Indians during the third quarter
of the nineteenth century.

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

This was the kind of careful scholarly
deduction all had come to expect from him,
so I was understandably taken aback when he
responded in a most positive tone and without a moment's hesitation to the following
question. Having seen no indication of how
the Indian could have met his end, I asked,
"What do you suppose caused his death?"
"Why, he kicked the bucket--<>bviously,"
Tom rejoined gleefully, while pointing to the
bent brass vessel still reposing at the foot of
the burial.
This admittedly is not much of an
imperfection, but it is about the best one can
do to demonstrate objectivity in a discussion
of Tom Campbell.
Readers will find no snap judgements in
his solid professional papers which comprise
this book. They will find, instead, carefully
worded results of the most thorough ethnohistoric research ever done on little known
tribes of south Texas and northeast Mexico.

Systematized Ethnohistory and Prehistoric Culture
Sequences in Texas*
T. N. Campbell
of men develop sociocultural extensions that
permit them to live acceptably in their chosen
landscape arenas and maintain themselves
through time.
How does the specialty known as ethnohistory relate to this limited objective of sequence recognition and the more distant objective of defining and explaining ecological
processes? As I conceive it, ethnohistory is
initially a set of operations that one performs
on observational data recorded in written
documents to achieve definition, description,
and chronological ordering of specific manland associations. It involves difficult feats
of information retrieval, analysis of refractory
and often incomplete data, and eventually
involves cross-examination of the ordered
data to arrive at interpretive and explanatory
statements about the nature of interactions
between groups of men and between these
human groups and their respective natural
environments.
Although prehistoric archeologists and
ethnohistorians seem to have common objectives concerning relations between man and
nature, it is unrealistic to ignore certain differences which tend to inhibit communication
between them. Archeologists who develop
cultural sequences are accustomed to dealing
with residues of human behavior from which
they must make inferences about actual behavior. Ethnohistorians, on the other hand,
are accustomed to working with verbally
recorded observations of human behavior
and, despite various kinds of bias that enter
written records, are somewhat closer to the
phenomena being studied. Archeologists
deal with evidence of apparently slow behavioral change over very long periods of
time, whereas ethnohistorians are more or
less boxed in by a short span of time determined by availability of written documents,
less than 500 years in the Texas area. Furthermore, ethnohistorians must consider behavioral changes in a context of massive and

N 0 ATTEMPT IS MADE HERE TO

present specific ethnohistoric data on any
part of Texas or adjoining areas. This paper
is essentially a brief critical appraisal of past
and current ethnohistoric studies as aids to
prehistoric archeology in the Texas area,
accompanied by suggestions as to how these
ethnohistoric studies may be made more pertinent and useful to archeologists.
Today many archeologists profess to be
interested in ecological processes of the past,
particularly those in which man is involved.
These archeologists are very much aware that
for any given sample of the earth's landscape
it is essential to identify and describe specific
human population units, determine the approximate boundaries of their environmental
exploitation, and then arrange these man-land
associations in chronological order. With
much effort, and perhaps with a certain
amount of good fortune, it is sometimes possible to achieve such an ordering for a relatively small section of the earth's surface.
This achievement is commonly referred to as
a local cultural sequence. Unfortunately, the
human groups involved can rarely be defined
with precision, and it is equally difficult to
chart their former territorial ranges. However, these difficulties do not seem to deter
archeologists, who are sustained by the hope
that greater precision and refinement will
eventually emerge from continued study and
that this procedure may be extended to larger
and larger portions of the earth's surface. It
is generally believed that these sequences
provide a realistic setting for study of the
various processes that operate when groups

* This paper was originally published in the Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 43:1-11 (1972).
It is a slightly modified version of a paper with the
same title presented at the 74th Annual Meeting of
the Texas Academy of Science, Nacogdoches, Texas,
March 12, 1971. Courtesy of the Texas Archeological Society.
1

2
often rapid acculturation, evasive or enforced
migration, and frequent ethnic extinctions
connected with intense competition of European and aboriginal populations for living
space and exploitable resources.
These disparities tend to reduce effective
cooperation of prehistoric archeologists and
ethnohistorians to a short span of time in any
given area, namely, just before and shortly
after the initial entry of Europeans. This is
dictated by the archeologist's desire to link
his late prehistoric groups with named native
groups recorded by the earliest travelers and
explorers before the native cultures began to
be extensively modified and also before postEuropean population pressures induced
habitat shifts. This focuses attention on the
truly aboriginal groups of any given area,
meaning those who were there before various
kinds of chain reaction developed. The ethnohistorian may be inclined to rebel against
this restriction, for it forces him to concentrate on his earliest and generally his least informative written documents. I regard this as
a healthy situation because ethnohistorians,
like many archeologists, are attracted to the
richer bodies of data and tend to pass quickly
over obscurities. If the ethnohistorian is to
meet this specific challenge, he must put far
more effort and analytical ingenuity into
study of the earlier documents. For example,
in central, southern, and western Texas the
ethnohistorian finds himself faced by the
complex problem of identifying, locating,
and describing innumerable obscure Indian
groups who were later swept away by multidirectional pressures from aggressive
Apaches, Comanches, and Spaniards. In
such areas it is small wonder that the
archeologist is discouraged from making
greater use of ethnohistoric data for the purpose of extending his prehistoric sequences
into the historic period. As things now
stand, in these areas the archeologist is faced
by an apparently meaningless jumble of small
ethnic groups, for which there is minimal information on geographic range, on linguistic
affiliation, and on distinctive behavior patterns. Since he can find few satisfactory
statements of what ethnic unit was where,
when, and how related to other units, he
cannot be expected to show much enthusiasm
about tracing cultural continuities into the
historic period. He might, however, force

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

the ethnohistorian's hand by finding and excavating more settlements attributable to the
Apache, Comanche, and Spanish invaders.
Specialists who share an interest in certain
problems tend to expect too much from each
other, but mutual prodding often gets results
and eventually leads to beneficial cooperation.
It is only fair to make clear that my views
about the relationships of ethnohistory to
prehistoric archeology have developed as the
result of unorthodox behavior. As an archeologist with an interest in Texas and adjacent
areas, I have recently been doing a limited
amount of ethnohistoric research. It now
seems to me that archeologists who deal with
late prehistoric and early historic materials
tend to make minimal and often ineffective
use of ethnohistoric data mainly because
those data have not been presented in a form
that can be quickly found and readily used.
What archeologists really want is more systematically organized ethnohistoric information, and with more of it organized with
archeological problems in mind. Perhaps one
way to inject more archeological bias into
ethnohistory is for more archeologists to try
their hands at ethnohistoric research and see
what emerges. The first objection that archeologists will voice is that the professional
archeologist is likely to be no more than an
amateur ethnohistorian at best, and this is a
valid objection. I must admit that my experience thus far has not always been satisfying,
mainly because my archeological training
failed to prepare me for even the most elementary ethnohistoric research. But there is
nothing inherently mysterious or difficult
about ethnohistoric research, any more than
there is about archeological research. I
would say that any archeologist can do his
own ethnohistoric research if he really wants
to and is willing to devote enough time to it.
Some of my archeological colleagues and
students have questioned the value of further
ethnohistoric studies connected with Texas
and adjoining areas in both the United States
and Mexico, particularly for the early historic
period. One question has to do with the
scope of the search for ethnohistoric data.
Have historians and cultural anthropologists
found most of the extant documents that are
pertinent? The answer to this is an emphatic
No. Thus far the search has been confined

SYSTEMATIZED ETHNOHISTORY

largely to the massive and better known
archival collections, principally those in the
great document-storage centers of Spain,
France, Mexico, and the United States.
Archival materials in many provincial capitals
and lesser administrative centers for both
church and state have been only spottily
searched, and relatively little attention has
been paid to specialized institutional records,
such as those of old families, Christian missions, early mining companies and landed
estates that used Indian labor, and court
records that pertain to land inheritance and
sale, marriages, and various kinds of crime.
The same question is sometimes phrased
in another way. Is it possible that the search
thus far has revealed most of the basic information about former native populations and
that further effort will be merely a minor,
mopping-up operation? My limited experience thus far forces me to be cautious in trying to answer this question. For some Indian
populations we will never find much information simply because they were never actually seen by any European who put something down on paper. These populations are
known only through hearsay from other
Indians. But for other groups that were frequently observed and recorded over a
considerable span of time the possibility of
data recovery increases in proportion to the
number of recorded observations retrieved.
It all boils down to the fact that we will never
know just how much information exists until
we search. The situation is not greatly
different from that faced by an archeologist
who begins an excavation program in a
poorly known area. He will never know
what can be learned until he has excavated.
My stance here is that the ethnohistorian
should continue his search until he is satisfied
that he has exhausted the possibilities and
appears to have reached a point of rapidly
diminishing returns. To this I would add my
impression that much of the ethnohistoric research thus far done in the greater Texas area
has been a cream-skimming operation. The
effort has gone primarily into finding documents with high data yield, and I suspect that
a substantial number of these may have been
found. But I also believe that there has been
general neglect of low-yield documents,
whose number is phenomenal. Here, I think,
lies the greatest opportunity. It is in these

3

low-yield documents that one often finds
critical information on population size, seasonal range of hunting-and-gathering groups,
migrations, intergroup economic cooperation
or conflict, earliest introduction of European
trade goods, and non-linguistic evidence of
linguistic affiliation. This potential is what
makes me insist that what we most need now
is a painstaking, dragnet operation through
the innumerable documents that have never
been examined for isolated detail or have
been passed over as insignificant. This of
course is a major undertaking, but I see no
reason for anyone to be overawed by its
magnitude. Few archeologists seem to be
overwhelmed by the amount of work that
must be done before their major objectives
are achieved.
An imposing mass of information has been
assembled and published on various historic
Indian peoples in Texas. Much of this can be
labeled as ethnohistory in a broad sense, but
the Texas area is incompletely covered and
the smaller population units rarely receive
adequate individual attention. One has only
to inspect a few special studies, such as
Gatschet (1891) on the Karankawans,
Ruecking on the C oahuiltecans (1953,
1954a, 1954b, 1955a, 1955b ), Sjoberg
(1953a, 1953b) on the Lipan Apaches and
Tonkawas, Newcomb and Field (1967) on
the Wichita groups, and Swanton (1942) and
Griffith (1954) on the Caddoans, to appreciate the wide range of approaches to the data
as well as the variety in structured presentations. Failure to focus attention on the
smaller ethnic units through both time and
space sometimes results in misunderstanding,
as in the case of the Ervipiame, always
identified as a Tonkawan group linguistically
and culturally. However, it is easy to demonstrate by documents that the Ervipiame
migrated shortly after 1700 from northeastern
Coahuila and vicinity to east-central Texas
and there became associated with Tonkawan
groups. They seem to represent assimilation
of a Coahuiltecan group in a new social
setting.
The first serious attempt to present ethnohistoric information on all the known groups
in Texas was connected with the preparation
of the Handbook of American Indians, edited
by F. W. Hodge and published between 1907
and 1910. Basically this is an encyclopedia,

4

consisting of a series of summarizing essays,
one for each known Indian group, arranged
in alphabetic sequence by name. These
essays were written by the best qualified
individuals of the time, and the dominant
contributor for the Texas area was an historian, H. E. Bolton, who had specialized in
colonial Spanish Texas and had examined
thousands of unpublished documents bearing
on Indian populations. His brief essays
cover hundreds of Texas groups, particularly
those noted for relative obscurity.
The most notable deficiency of the Handbook is that it is inadequately structured for
effective information retrieval. It is name
structured and difficult to use unless you begin with a known Indian group name. It is
not place or time structured in any convenient
way, nor is it structured for categories of
cultural information. For instance, if you
want to find the names of all the Indian
groups known to have lived in southern
Texas during the seventeenth century, or if
you want to determine which groups had
rabbit drives, cultivated maize, or used
peyote ceremonially, you must read or scan
some 2,000 double-column pages. This
inadequacy could have been minimized by
including a detailed name and topic index, but
what the Handbook needed most was a series
of integrative essays. However, this early
Handbook does grapple effectively with the
problem of name variants, one of the
fundamental issues in ethnohistory, and it
presents useful bibliographies.
Later publications can sometimes be used
to supplement the Handbook. Swanton's
The Indian Tribes of North America (1952) is
place structured, but its scope is so broad that
any particular subarea receives only schematic treatment. More generalized syntheses,
such as Newcomb's The Indians of Texas ...
(1961), provide orientation and perspective,
but are of little help on the smallest
identifiable ethnic units.
What is needed today, and especially by
archeologists, is a more ambitious and better
organized handbook. For maximum usefulness all known ethnic groups, large or small,
well-known or obscure, should receive individual essay treatment and be arranged in alphabetic order. Each essay should summarize what is presently known about the Indian
group in question. For groups with a wealth

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

of recorded observational detail, the essays
will have to be compressed. The poorly
known groups, however, should get special
attention because of previous neglect. Each
essay should be accompanied by an alphabetized list of all name variants and a bibliography that will guide the user to all the truly
informative sources. I would insist that all
ethnic name variants should be entered in alphabetic order along with the essays and that
the name variants be linked with essays by
cross reference. This is the only realistic approach, since the handbook user will always
start with a name, which may or may not be
readily recognizable as equivalent to a name
which has been standardized by frequent usage in anthropological literature. Since some
name variants are less demonstrable than
others, the handbook user is entitled to know
in each case how good the evidence for
equivalence actually is. If earlier errors were
made in name linkages, he is also entitled to
know who made the errors and the probable
reasons for error. Hence all name variants
should be accompanied by specific bibliographic citations.
A properly systematized ethnohistoric
handbook should have a section that would
permit one to begin with a specific landscape
unit, such as a general geographic area or a
physiographic, biotic, or archeological province, or even some smaller subdivision of
these, and readily find alphabetized lists of
Indian groups associated with these units
during various phases of the historic period.
This should be designed to separate the apparent aboriginal groups from groups known
to have immigrated from adjoining or more
distant areas. There should also be a special
section on Spanish missions that will identify
Indian groups known to have been represented there, with dates of entry and departure, if known. The list might even be subdivided on the basis of the areas of population origin. For example, the surviving
records of Mission San Antonio de Valero
(the Alamo) of San Antonio indicate that individuals and families from over 100 Indian
groups were represented there at some time
or other. No one has yet systematized this
long list in any meaningful way.
Another section should be devoted to the
earliest European explorers and the Indian
groups they encountered and reported by

SYSTEMATIZED ETIINOHISTORY

name. Much more critical work needs to be
done on the delineation of routes because the
correct placement of many Indian populations
depends upon the maximum precision in
route determination. Thus far too many
routes have been traced with too little firsthand knowledge of the terrain traversed and
without making full use of ecological data.
Hence some of the older route studies now
seem naive or even ludicrous. Recent studies
that have led to greater precision include
Krieger's (1961) review of the route of
Cabeza de Vaca across southern Texas and
northern Mexico, Schroeder's (1962) revision of the routes followed by Coronado and
Oft.ate across the southern High Plains, and
Williams' (1962) remarkable paper on the
route of Dominguez de Mendoza from El
Paso eastward into the Edwards Plateau region of central Texas. The last, the study by
Williams, has radically altered Bolton's
(1916:313-343) widely accepted earlier interpretation by on-the-spot observation of
landmarks and unique ecological niches
mentioned in Mendoza's itinerary. As a
consequence of this route correction, it is
now possible to identify a considerable number of Indian groups who ranged over a large
part of the Edwards Plateau before being displaced by southward movement of the
Apaches. At last the archeologist can begin
to find the answer to an old question: just
who were the aborigines of the Edwards
Plateau?
For the archeologist a good ethnohistoric
handbook should pay more attention to
European observations of the natural environment, particularly those that indicate environmental changes during the past 400 years.
My modest foray into the document jungle
has forced me to realize that some documents
are rich in observational detail and give important cues to both archeologists and cultural
anthropologists. I suspect that we can learn
as much about the environment and its
changes as we can learn about the distribution
of native groups and their behavior. An opportunity is being neglected when ethnohistorians continue to ignore basic environmental information that is available for collation, analysis, and ecological interpretation.
The richest sources, of course, are the
records of earlier travelers, which are far
more numerous than the publications by his-

5

torians have led us to believe. Some European travelers were remarkably close observers of the landscape and sometimes took
the trouble to record much detail on vegetation patterns and animal distributions. Occasionally they actually described specific ecological niches, and few failed to note vegetation dominants in areas traversed. Since
weather limited early travel, European travelers often recorded excessive rainfall, massive
floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, and sometimes
even commented on erosion and deposition in
stream valleys. I believe that by segregating
certain kinds of information and noting
changes recorded through time we can better
document gradual changes in soils and vegetative cover, such as, for instance, the early
spread of thorny brush vegetation in southern
Texas and northeastern Mexico. It may also
be possible to document shifts in migratory
animal distribution, such as the variable
southern margin of the bison range during
winter. It may also be possible to document
changes that affected the irregularly distributed resources of special interest to mansurface water (springs, ponds, lakes), firewood, grass, salt, flint and other siliceous
stones, and minerals used for pigment.
This is probably enough to provide some
idea of the potential of systematized ethnohistoric data. In conclusion, I would like to
comment on areas that are notably weak in
ethnohistoric data. Certain parts of Texas are
poorly known because Europeans rarely went
there prior to 1800. This is particularly true
of numerous small areas in which archeologists become interested. As an example we
may cite the area around the mouth of the
Pecos River, where so much archeological
research has been done during the past
decade. When you search the documents,
published or unpublished, you find practically nothing aboUt early Europeans actually
encountering natives in this area, which had
no resources that attracted Europeans and did
not lie on routes to places of special interest.
This does not mean, however, that we can
never learn anything about the earliest historic
inhabitants of the area. The approach here
must be indirect, that is, one must search the
records of the nearest Spanish settlements for
information recorded by travelers who skirted
the lower Pecos area or who talked with
Indians who had been there or otherwise had

6
some knowledge of the area. In this case,
one learns that missionaries based in
Coahuila traveled northward in the 1670s,
crossed the Rio Grande, and penetrated the
southwestern part of the Edwards Plateau just
east of the Pecos (Bolton 1916:283-309;
Figueroa Torres 1963). These missionaries
identified a considerable number of huntingand-gathering groups whose seasonal range
must at times have included the lower Pecos
area. Similarly, records at Parral in Chihuahua reveal several lists of Indian groups
reported as ranging north of the Rio Grande
or along the Rio Grande from present
Presidio, Texas, to the mouth of the Pecos.
One document of 1693 (Griffen 1969:93-94)

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

clearly points to the lower Pecos area as the
winter-season, bison-hunting range of a
considerable number of named groups who at
other times of the year ranged both sides of
the Rio Grande upstream from the mouth of
the Pecos River. As a result of this indirect
approach, it is possible to say something
specific about the attractiveness of the lower
Pecos at certain times of the year. It also tells
us something about distances which huntingand-gathering peoples traveled to get at especially abundant food resources. Thus by
careful analysis it is possible to identify a
substantial- number of native groups who
with high probability exploited the lower
Pecos area.

Cabeza de Vaca Among the Indians of Southern Texas*
T. N. Campbell and T. J. Campbell

tion of travel controls the placement of
Cabeza de Vaca's prickly-pear collecting
grounds, and this in turn controls the placement of certain Indian groups in or near the
Choke Canyon target area.

THE STORY OF CABEZA DEV ACA,

treasurer of the Narvaez expedition to Florida
(1528), is well known. When Spanish ships
failed to return to northwestern Florida for
members of this expedition, five large barges
were built, and the Spaniards proceeded
along the northern coastline of the Gulf of
Mexico, expecting to reach Panuco, a settlement near present Tampico, Mexico. All five
barges were blown ashore at various points
on the coast of present Texas. Cabeza de
Vaca's barge was wrecked late in 1528 on the
beach of an island called Malhado which has
sometimes been identified with Galveston
Island, but which is more commonly identified with what is now an elongated peninsula that parallels the mainland just west of
Galveston Island. After living with Indians
on the island and with other Indians on the
nearby mainland, Cabeza de Vaca in 1533
made his way on foot westward along the
Texas coast to Indians known as Mariames
who, for the greater part of each year, lived
along a "river of nuts." It is now generally
agreed that this "river of nuts" corresponds to
the present Guadalupe River of Texas.
The lower Guadalupe River is the last locality on Cabeza de Vaca's route in Texas that
is not controversial. Hence it is necessary to
describe the basic Cabeza de Vaca documents
and to call attention to internal evidence that is
judged to be critical for determining the direction of Cabeza de Vaca's travel after leaving the lower Guadalupe River. The direc-

BASIC CABEZA DE VACA
DOCUMENTS
There are two basic sources of information
on the Indians encountered by Cabeza de
Vaca while traveling in Texas: (1) Cabeza de
Vaca's personal narrative, and (2) a similar
narrative, prepared by the historian Oviedo y
Valdes, based on a joint report made by the
few Narvaez expedition survivors.
It is not certain just when Cabeza de Vaca
completed his personal narrative, often referred to as Naufragios (shipwrecks), but
records of the Hernando de Soto expedition
indicate that Cabeza de Vaca had appeared at
the Spanish Court with a written account
some time prior to April 1538. It thus appears that Cabeza de Vaca's narrative, at least
in some form, was written less than three
years after he had left southern Texas, at a
time when the experience was still fresh in
his memory and when he was less than 48
years of age. So far as is now known, the
narrative was first published in 1542 at
Zamora, Spain. The original manuscript
does not seem to have survived. Wagner
(1924:29-30) has argued that the 1542 edition may have been an unlicensed pirated
edition, but no copy of an edition published
prior to 1542 has been found. A second and
slightly altered edition was published at
Valladolid, Spain, in 1555. Both editions
have been translated into English and published in the United States (Bandelier 1905;
Hodge 1907; Smith 1851). These have been
reprinted one or more times.
After reaching Mexico City in 1536 and
before arriving in Spain in 1537, Cabeza de

* This article is excerpted from: Historic Indian
Groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and Surrounding Area, Southern Texas, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Choke Canyon Series, Vol. 1:3-40 (1981).
It is a study of historic Indians of the Three Rivers
area of Texas, part of a larger series of research reports
centering on the Choke Canyon Reservoir at the confluence of the Frio, Nueces, and Atascosa rivers.
Courtesy of the Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.
7

-------------------------~-------

8

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Vaca and his associates prepared a report on
the Narvaez expedition for the Audiencia de
Espanola (Santo Domingo). This document
is commonly referred to as the Joint Report,
or the Oviedo account. A presumably
amended version of this, believed to have
been prepared in 1543 or 1544, was eventually published in Oviedo y Valdes' Historia
General y Natural de las Indias (1853, tomo
III). The Oviedo account agrees with that of
Cabeza de Vaca in narrative and descriptive
detail, sometimes supplementing the Cabeza
de Vaca account, but one notable difference is
the absence of names for Indian groups. It is,
however, relatively easy to correlate the information on Indian groups given in these
two documents. English translations of
Oviedo's account have been published by
Davenport (1924) and Hedrick and Riley
(1974). Some students of Cabeza de Vaca's
travel across southern North America have
either been unaware of or have ignored the
Oviedo account
A brief, truncated version of a third report,
apparently written by Cabeza de Vaca, has
also been published (Nunez Cabeza de Vaca
1870), but this contains nothing which does
not also appear in the longer accounts of
Cabeza de Vaca and Oviedo.

ROUTE OF CABEZA DE VACA IN
SOUTHERN TEXAS
Interpretations of Cabeza de Vaca's general route of travel after coming ashore on the
Gulf coast of Texas have been numerous and
varied, ranging from briefly stated guesses to
lengthy presentations accompanied by scholarly, well-disciplined argument. The basic
approach has been to search the Cabeza de
Vaca documents for recorded detail on terrain
features (islands, bays, rivers, mountains),
plants, and animals, and then to use these in
determining where Cabeza de Vaca was at the
time of each successive observation. This
approach has not always been pursued with
rigorous objectivity. Some route interpreters
have neglected to note that similar terrain
features and biotic phenomena may be found
in other areas through which Cabeza de Vaca
may have passed. Contradictory evidence
seems at times to have either been overlooked

or ignored. In some cases it is obvious that
Cabeza de Vaca has been made to go where
the route interpreter wanted him to go, not
where Cabeza de Vaca rather plainly indicates
that he went. The cultural data recorded for
Indian groups have seldom been used as
criteria for route interpretation. Some Indian
groups have been placed in areas that are
not compatible with descriptions of their
cultures. The total evidence to be found in
the Cabeza de Vaca documents has not always been properly utilized in route interpretation.
The various interpreters of Cabeza de
Vaca's route have managed to make him traverse nearly all the major sections of Texas.
It is not feasible here to identify each route
interpreter and present a critical review of his
contribution. An excellent but still unpublished review of the more important route interpretations has been prepared by A. D.
Krieger (1955) as part of a doctoral dissertation submitted to the Universidad Nacional
Aut6noma de Mexico. A copy of this dissertation may be seen at the Barker Texas History Center, The University of Texas at
Austin.
The only route interpretations which can
be given serious consideration fall into two
categories: (1) those which interpret the route
as proceeding from the lower Guadalupe
River westward in slightly different directions to pass across Texas at its widest part,
and (2) those which interpret the route as
proceeding from the same river southwestward to cross the lower Rio Grande into
northeastern Mexico before turning westward
toward the Pacific coast of northern Mexico.
The trans-Texas route is more popular and
some version of it has been widely accepted
by historians of Texas, although the transMexico route is supported by much more of
the evidence recorded in the Cabeza de Vaca
documents. The trans-Mexico route has been
convincingly demonstrated by Krieger in his
doctoral dissertation (1955) and in a short
article written in English but published in
Mexico (Krieger 1961). There is nothing
revolutionary about Krieger's interpretation,
for it is essentially a refined version of the
interpretation published much earlier by
Davenport and Wells (1918-1919). Krieger
was able to take advantage of better information on the landscape of northern Mexico and

CABEZA DEV ACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

on its Indian populations during the Spanish
Colonial period.
In order to justify our view that Cabeza de
Vaca did not pass westward from the lower
Guadalupe River across Texas, we will
summarize certain kinds of evidence, derived
mainly from the Cabeza de Vaca documents,
which support the interpretation that Cabeza
de Vaca passed southwestward across southern Texas into northeastern Mexico before
turning westward (Fig. 1). We accept that
part of Krieger's interpretation which pertains
to southern Texas, although we disagree with
his location of Cabeza de Vaca's prickly-pear
collecting grounds.
Those who interpret Cabeza de Vaca's
route as passing across Texas at its widest
part pay minimal attention to Cabeza de
Vaca's repeatedly stated initial objective,
which was to reach the nearest known Spanish settlement, Panuco, near present
Tampico. When Narvaez and his men, after
building five barges, left what is now northwestern Florida in 1528, their plan was to
follow the coastline of the Gulf of Mexico
and thereby reach Panuco. In 1519 Pineda
had mapped the Gulf coast from Tampa Bay
to Panuco, and the leaders of the Narvaez
expedition had seen this map and knew
where Panuco was. Narvaez himself had
been at Veracruz during the time of Cortes'
conquest of Mexico. After two of the barges
were wrecked on Malhado Island, some of
the more sturdy survivors were sent ahead to
walk along the coast to Panuco, which they
never reached. Later, when Cabeza de Vaca
himself had moved farther down the Texas
coast and had joined the Mariames on the
lower Guadalupe River, he began to plan for
the last four survivors to escape from their
Indian captors, the Mariames and Yguazes,
when they were gathering prickly-pear fruit
in an inland area to the southwest that was
nearer to Panuco than the lower Guadalupe
River. If the prickly-pear collecting area was
not notably nearer to Panuco, then the escape
would have been made from the lower
Guadalupe area. This is what makes it evident that the prickly-pear area was not due
west or northwest of the lower Guadalupe
River, as has been suggested by Krieger.
The Oviedo account appears to confirm
this direction when it describes a communal
deer hunt made by the Mariames when they

9

were on their way to the prickly-pear area.
Deer were taken by being driven into the water of a coastal bay whose shores were being
skirted. This was probably Copano Bay,
whose long inland shoreline averages 18
miles from the open Gulf and is near a direct
route from the lower Guadalupe River to the
lower part of the Nueces River west and
northwest of Corpus Christi Bay, where later
sources indicate a localized superabundance
of prickly-pear fruit.
Cabeza de Vaca's escape plan involved the
Spaniards leaving their Indian captors at the
end of summer when the Indians were about
to return to their winter range on the lower
Guadalupe River and vicinity. Thus the
Spaniards would escape and move in a
southerly direction while the Indians were
moving in the opposite direction. The
Spaniards evidently assumed that the Mariames and Y guazes would not reverse their
course and pursue the escapees.
The escape plan worked, and the four Europeans moved "forward" in the direction of
Panuco, that is, generally southward; and it
was not until later, when they had crossed a
large river and had seen their first mountains,
that they decided to alter the original plan and
move westward along a route that eventually
took them across most of what is now northeastern, northern, and northwestern Mexico
before turning southward again.
The lower Guadalupe River is identifiable
as the "river of nuts" for several reasons.
Local records indicate that native pecan trees
have long been abundant along this river,
growing almost to the head of San Antonio
Bay. Those who have identified the "river of
nuts" as the Colorado River neglect to note
that Cabeza de Vaca places his "river of nuts"
west of what is now Matagorda Bay and at
least 30 leagues (78 miles) northeast of the
prickly-pear collecting grounds. The Colorado River is too far east on the coast to
satisfy these locational and distance requirements.
The placement of Cabeza de Vaca's
prickly-pear collecting grounds near the
lower Nueces River is based on (1) the
recorded distance from the lower Guadalupe
River, (2) Oviedo's account of communal
deer hunting on a coastal bay while the Mariames were en route to the prickly-pear collecting grounds, (3) Cabeza de Vaca's re-

10

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

 SAN ANTONIO

TARGET AREA
VICTORIA

TEXAS

0

/

~/

... ,,

~/

,,

(J., /

.::."' /

7 /
/

~/

FALFURRIAS


CJ I

...
-

"J
'--.......

I
I
AREA 3
I
I
I

.,

/

/

/

/

I _,.

~-1,.-

.......

""G-:~/,o

'

NUEVO LEON'

"".s>

<~~-000

' ........ --,

I

Figure 1. MAP OF SOUTHERN TEXAS.

Shown are the Three Rivers target area, Cabeza de
Vaca's probable travel route, and three areas with which most of Cabeza de Vaca's named Indian groups can be
associated.

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

peated statement that he and his men were
initially moving in the general direction of
Panuco, and (4) nineteenth-century observations on concentrations of prickly pear in
southern Texas.
On a map, Krieger (1961 :Fig. 1) has
shown two routes from the lower Guadalupe
River to the prickly-pear area visited by
Cabeza de Vaca and the Mariames. One of
these is Krieger's preferred route; the other is
designated as "alternative." The location of
the Mariames' prickly-pear area on the preferred route is at least 70 miles distant from
the prickly-pear area on the alternative route,
although both areas are more or less equidistant from the lower Guadalupe River and
agree with the distances of 30 or 40 leagues
(78 or 104 miles) given respectively in the
Cabeza de Vaca and Oviedo accounts.
Krieger's preferred route takes the Mariames generally westward, actually more
northwestward, to a prickly-pear concentration in present southern Atascosa and northern McMullen counties ("perhaps 30 or 40
miles south of ... San Antonio" [Krieger
1961:466]). This would place the pricklypear collecting grounds of the Mariames and
other groups over 100 miles inland from the
nearest portion of the outer shoreline of the
Gulf of Mexico.
The alternative route of Krieger passes
southwestward from the lower Guadalupe
River, paralleling the coast at a distance of
less than 50 miles from the open Gulf, to a
prickly-pear collecting area west of Corpus
Christi Bay, this area being marked on the
map. This prickly-pear area would be in the
general vicinity of Alice in Jim Wells County
and would probably include adjoining parts
of western Nueces County and eastern Duval
County.
Krieger's alternative route is strongly supported by the Oviedo account, which indicates that, while traveling to the prickly-pear
area, the Mariames stopped at one of the bays
to take deer in considerable numbers by
driving them into the sea to drown. The
northwestern shore line of Copano Bay, with
about 25 miles of beach, parallels this alternative route and is less than 20 miles from the
route as designated by Krieger. This route, as
noted, would place the Mariames' collecting
grounds west of Corpus Christi Bay, some
50 miles inland from the open Gulf. Its

---------------------

------

11

position is more in accord with Cabeza de
Vaca's stated aim of taking advantage of
Indian seasonal movements to move toward
the Spanish settlement of Panuco. Thus
Krieger's alternative route seems much more
reasonable than his preferred route, which
implies that the Mariames went southwestward to hunt deer on a coastal bay while on
their way to a prickly-pear area located
northwest of the lower Guadalupe River.
A number of nineteenth-century travelers
refer to prickly-pear concentrations along the
lower Nueces River and just south of it.
Wrightman (Helm 1884:181), who at times
(1824-1841) traveled south of the lower
Nueces River, described much of the area as
prairie with localized thick brush and prickly
pear. The prickly pear is described as "immensely large and branching through which
nothing can pass ... acres covered with
them ... no man, no beast will attempt to
penetrate them." In referring to the same
area, Holley (1836:79-80) noted that prickly
pear grew "in great abundance and forms in
places impenetrable thickets higher than a
man on horseback. It produces an immense
quantity of fruit .... " In 1842, while traveling
from San Antonio to Laredo, Hendricks
(1919:122) first encountered prickly-pear
thickets near the Nueces River somewhere in
present La Salle County: "I for the first time
beheld vast ramparts and towers of prickly
pear that seemed to form walls and mountains
in their terrible array." A few years later
Bollaert (1850a) noted that the prickly pear
was especially abundant along Santa Gertrudis Creek somewhere south of present-day
Alice, Texas.
At various times over 60 years ago,
Davenport (Davenport and Wells 19181919:209-211) collected information on
prickly-pear concentrations in southern Texas
by interviewing numerous pioneers who had
been in the area between 1860 and 1899,
when a severe freeze greatly reduced pricklypear stands. His informants were in agreement that formerly the prickly-pear plant
grew in great profusion just south and west
of the lower Nueces River in an area that includes parts of Live Oak, Duval, Jim Wells,
Nueces, and Kleberg counties. Farther south,
in the Sand Plain south and southwest of
Baffin Bay, prickly pear was said to be relatively scarce. Davenport's informants also

----------

------

12
indicated that still farther south, or just north
of the Rio Grande in Cameron, Hidalgo, and
Starr counties, the prickly pear grew in even
greater profusion than along the lower Nueces River. Bray (1901:379), a botanist who
worked in southern Texas shortly after the
freeze of 1899, mentions that in the lower
Nueces Valley prickly pear "attains gigantic
size, being said to exceed the height of ten
feet."
These nineteenth-century observations are
especially significant. They support the
placement of Cabeza de Vaca's prickly-pear
collecting grounds near the lower Nueces
River, and they also indicate that his pricklypear collecting grounds were not unique.
They show that prickly-pear concentrations
existed farther to the west and also farther to
the south. Cabeza de Vaca's prickly-pear
concentration was evidently located on the
northeastern edge of a large area that had
similar localized concentrations. As will be
noted later, this strongly suggests that the Indian groups encountered by Cabeza de Vaca
in his prickly-pear collecting grounds went
there in summer from winter ranges that were
located to the east and especially to the northeast of the lower Nueces prickly-pear concentration. When Cabeza de Vaca and his
three associates escaped from the Mariames
and Yguazes in the prickly-pear area and
passed on to the Arbadaos and Cuchendados,
they were proceeding in accordance with their
plan to take an inland route southward toward
Panuco in order to avoid further contacts with
shoreline groups. The treatment which various Spanish shipwreck survivors had received from shoreline Indians, from the
Quevenes to the Camoles, explains why
Cabeza de Vaca and his companions initially
planned to follow an inland route toward
Panuco. Among those shoreline peoples, as
well as among the Mariames and Yguazes,
the Spaniards who had survived hunger and
cold had been enslaved and made to do
women's work. They had been slapped,
cuffed, and beaten with sticks. They had
been stripped of their clothing. Mud was
sometimes thrown on them and their beards
jerked out. For trying to escape, they had
also been threatened with death, arrows had
been shot into their limbs, and sometimes
they had been killed outright. Some had also
been killed because of native dream omens,

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

and all the famished and weakened survivors
of the Tellez-Penalosa barge had been
slaughtered. No Spanish survivor relished
the thought of walking to Panuco through
additional groups of shoreline Indians.
Cabeza de Vaca's route after escaping
from the Mariames in the prickly-pear area
seems to have been more southwestward than
southward, striking the Rio Grande in the
vicinity of present Falcon Lake, as Krieger
has argued. This direction was probably
taken to avoid a distinctive area sometimes
called the Sand Plain, with localized dune
fields, that lies between Baffin Bay and the
Rio Grande delta. This Sand Plain embraces
most of Kenedy and Brooks counties, as
well as the eastern part of Jim Hogg County.
In the Cabeza de Vaca narrative the references
to terrain, vegetation, and surface water do
not suggest that any part of the Sand Plain
was traversed. Two groups, Arbadaos and
Cuchendados, were encountered before
reaching the Rio Grande, and these groups
probably ranged over parts of the area just
west of the Sand Plain. This general location seems to be confirmed by Cabeza de
Vaca's clear statement that the first mount~ins were seen shortly after crossing the
nver.
The large stream crossed before seeing
mountains was undoubtedly the Rio Grande,
not the Colorado River, as claimed by most
of the interpreters who prefer a trans-Texas
route for Cabeza de Vaca. The same interpreters have identified the first mountains
(sierras) seen by Cabeza de Vaca with the
low hills along the eroded margin of the Edwards Plateau (Austin-San Antonio sector)
instead of certain mountain ranges of northeastern Mexico, which Krieger has identified
with the Cerralvo area of northern Nuevo
Le6n. On clear days the Cerralvo ranges are
visible from the Falcon Lake area. Cabeza de
Vaca cannot be charged with being careless in
describing mountainous terrain. He grew up
in southern Spain where the coastal ranges
east of Jerez de la Frontera, his birthplace,
rise to heights of 6,000 feet; and before
writing his narrative Cabeza de Vaca had seen
some of the highest mountains of western
and southern Mexico. It is preferable to believe, as Krieger has stated, that Cabeza de
Vaca was referring to elevations of greater
magnitude than the hills of central Texas,

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

which rise only a few hundred feet above the
adjacent coastal plain.
Cabeza de Vaca and his associates carried
the dread of shoreline Indians with them until
they had crossed the Rio Grande and reached
the mountains of northern Nuevo Leon. After leaving the Mariames and Y guazes, the
Spaniards had passed through inland territories whose inhabitants had treated them well,
primarily because of the Spaniards' success
in curing Indian illness. South of the Rio
Grande food was more plentiful than it had
been in southern Texas. It was when the
Spaniards were at the foot of the mountains
that a change in travel plan was made: they
decided to travel westward before turning
southward to Spanish settlements in lower
Mexico.
Many route interpreters have Cabeza de
Vaca turning westward and away from the
coastal region at the prickly-pear grounds to
cross Texas north of the Rio Grande, which
is very difficult to reconcile with the evidence
contained in the basic documents. Cabeza de
Vaca gives a plausible explanation for the
change of direction when he was at the foot
of the mountains. The change was made in
order to avoid skirting the mountains southeastward and having to face shoreline Indians
again. The Spaniards decided to go westward among Indians who were treating them
well and seemed to have plenty of food.
Furthermore, Cabeza de Vaca indicated that
by traveling westward the Spaniards would
have an opportunity to discover new lands
and return to Spain with important information.

LOCATING CABEZA DE VACA'S
INDIAN GROUPS
It will, of course, never be known precisely where Cabeza de Vaca encountered
each Indian group in southern Texas. Today
the best that can be done is to search the documents carefully for every detail that in some
way seems pertinent to group location, and
then to make full use of these details. For
each group, one or more hypothesized locations can be tested by noting how much of
the recorded detail confirms each location and
how much contradicts it. It is especially im-

13

portant to maintain maximum objectivity
concerning the interpretation of Cabeza de
Vaca's general travel route and not to stray
too far from internal evidence found in the
documents.
As noted previously, ethnic group names
are given in the narrative of Cabeza de Vaca
but are omitted from the Oviedo account, although the descriptive information contained
in the two documents is essentially the same.
These names are 23 in number, and all of
them can be linked with the outer part of the
Texas coastal plain, extending from the
vicinity of Galveston Island to the vicinity of
Falcon Lake, an overland distance of some
300 miles. From the Indian groups with
which he lived at various times, Cabeza de
Vaca must have learned the names of many
groups that he failed to record. No group
names are given by Cabeza de Vaca for the
remainder of his travel route, a large part of
which was across northern Mexico. It must
be realized that, after being shipwrecked,
Cabeza de Vaca lacked writing materials and
could not keep a journal. It is regrettable that
he failed to record at least some of the native
group names for northeastern Mexico. If he
had done so, a trans-Texas route probably
would not have been suggested by anyone.
The most solid information on the relative
locations of Indian groups is found in Chapter 26 of Cabeza de Vaca's narrative, in
which he names 19 groups and arranges them
in geographic order, beginning with Malhado
Island and continuing westward along the
coast to the lower Guadalupe River, then
southwestward in the direction of Panuco. A
distinction is made between groups that lived
along the shoreline and groups that lived immediately inland. A further ordering principle links each shoreline group with one or
more groups that lived on the adjacent mainland. Elsewhere in the narrative, four additional group names appear that are not given
in Chapter 26, making a total of 23 separate
groups.
Fortunately, one anchor point on Cabeza
de Vaca's route can be keyed into his group
distribution record: the "river of nuts" or the
Guadalupe River, along the lower part of
which the inland Mariames lived. Beyond
the Guadalupe River in the direction of
Panuco, all except two of the named Indian
groups are connected with the prickly-pear

14
collecting area. This makes it rather clear that
the relative locations indicated in Chapter 26
refer to the fall, winter, and spring territories
of these seasonally migrating groups.
As the principal interest here is confined to
groups that were nearest to the Choke Canyon Reservoir, no attention will be paid to six
groups that lived east of the lower Guadalupe
River. The six ignored groups consist of Capoques, Chorruco, Doguenes, Han, Mendica, and Quevenes. It cannot be established
that any of these normally ranged west of
either the lower Guadalupe River or the San
Antonio Bay into which that river flows.
Ignoring these eastern groups makes it possible also to ignore the various groups later
recorded by French chroniclers of the La
Salle expedition (1685) in the Matagorda Bay
area.
Cabeza de Vaca has provided names for a
total of 17 Indian groups that appear to have
been distributed from the lower Guadalupe
River southwestward toward the Rio Grande.
The following excerpt from Chapter 26
(Valladolid edition) refers to this part of
Cabeza de Vaca's route:
. . .Mas adelante, en la costa, estan los
quevenes, y enfrente de ellos, dentro en
la Tierra Firme, los mareames; y yendo
por la costa adelante, estan otros que se
llaman guaycones, y enfrente de estos,
dentro en la Tierra Firme, los iguaces.
Caho de estos estan otros que se llaman
atayos, y detras de estos, otros, acubadaos y de estos hay muchos por esta
vereda adelante. En la costa viven otros
llamados quitoles, y enfrente de estos,
dentro en la Tierra Firme, los avavares.
Con estos se juntan los maliacones, y
otros cutalchiches, y otros que se
Haman susolas, y otros que se Haman
comos, y adelante en la costa estan los
camoles, y en la misma costa adelante,
otros a quien nosotros llamamos los de
los higos ... (Nuiiez Cabeza de Vaca
1971:68).
Cabeza de Vaca's 17 groups can be
assigned to three areas (Fig. 1):
Area 1 -Four groups that lived along
the shores of coastal bays and islands:
Camoles, Fig People, Guaycones, and
Quitoles;
Area 2 - Eleven inland groups that lived
most of the year between the lower

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Guadalupe and lower Nueces rivers but
moved southwestward in summer to the
prickly-pear collecting grounds: Acubadaos, Anegados, Atayos, Avavares,
Coayos, Comos, Cutalchuches, Maliacones, Mariames, Susolas, and
Yguazes;
Area 3 - Two inland groups that lived
southwest of the prickly-pear collecting
grounds and not far from the Rio
Grande: Arbadaos and Cuchendados.
Area 2 is of major interest because its inland groups are relatable to the Three Rivers
target area. The groups of all three areas,
however, will receive the same kind of treatment. It is hoped that this will reduce some
of the confusion that has long prevailed concerning the relative locations of Cabeza de
Vaca's Indian groups. In the sections that
follow, all of the recorded information about
each Indian group in these three areas is
summarized. Failure to segregate, analyze,
and synthesize this information has, in the
past, led to a number of faulty generalizations
about the earliest known Indian peoples of
southern Texas .
It is not possible to link all of the cultural
description in the Cabeza de Vaca documents
with specific Indian groups. In Chapters 2426 of Cabeza de Vaca's narrative, much cultural description is presented in a generalized
way. It is referable, as noted above, to various Indian groups that lived along a section
of the Texas coastal plain some 300 miles
long, extending from the vicinity of Galveston Island to the vicinity of Falc6n Lake on
the Rio Grande. It does not appear reasonable to assume that every group encountered
shared all the customary behavior described
in these generalizing chapters. Only when Cabeza de Vaca elsewhere in his narrative links
some of the generalized behavior with specific groups can it be sorted out. The residue of
generalized information has lesser value and
must be used with proper caution, that is, always labeled for what it is. It is unfortunate
for our purposes that Cabeza de Vaca economized and presented so much of his cultural
information in an impressionistic manner.

Area 1
Cabeza de Vaca's narrative gives the
names and relative locations of only four

------------------------

-----

- - - - - - -

---

15

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

shoreline groups distributed southward from
the lower Guadalupe River and San Antonio
Bay. In order from north to south, these are:
Guaycones, Quitoles, Camoles, and Fig
People. After leaving the winter territory of
the Mariames, Cabeza de Vaca traveled
mainly inland, and his narrative does not report encounters with any of these shoreline
Indian groups.

Guaycones
According to Cabeza de Vaca's statement
on relative locations, the Guaycones were a
coastal people who lived between the
Quevenes and the Quitoles, with the Yguazes
being their nearest inland neighbors. This
would seem to place the Guaycones on the
coast more or less south of the mouth of the
Guadalupe River, which flows into the upper
part of San Antonio Bay. Thus the most
plausible location for the Guaycones is along
the shoreline of the present Aransas National
Wildlife Refuge and adjacent parts of Matagorda and St. Joseph islands (Aransas and
Calhoun counties). Few writers have speculated about the location of the Guaycones.
Baskett (1907:260-261) places the Guaycones in the area suggested here. Coopwood
(1899-1900:122) suggests northern Hidalgo
County, but this is much too far south to
agree with Cabeza de Vaca's statements, as is
also Lynn et al.'s (1977:Fig. 16) placement
of the Guaycones on Baffin Bay. Davenport
and Wells (1918-1919:136) equate the
Guaycones with the "Guapites" (Coapites),
which appears to be a guess based on slight
similarity in the names and which cannot be
taken very seriously. As the documents
record nothing specific about the Guaycones
culture, all that can be said is that if they lived
on the coast, they were obviously adapted to
a shoreline environment.

Quitoles
Cabeza de Vaca's statement on relative locations indicates that the Quitoles (this name
is also rendered as Quitoks) were the next
coastal people south-southwestward of the
Guaycones, and that farther along the coast in
the same direction were the Camoles. Our
estimates lead us to place the Quitoles between the Copano and Corpus Christi bays,

an area that includes the mainland shores of
southern Aransas County and eastern San
Patricio County, as well as the adjacent parts
of two offshore islands, St. Joseph and
Mustang. This is where Baskett (1907:204)
places them. Lynn et al. (1977:Fig. 16) put
them near Baffin Bay, which seems too far
south to agree with the evidence recorded by
Cabeza de Vaca about neighboring groups.
Nothing further is recorded about the
Quitoles.

Camoles
The Camoles (or Camones), according to
Cabeza de Vaca's group distribution statement, were the next coastal people after the
Quitoles, and beyond them farther southward
were the Fig People. It is recorded that the
Camoles killed the survivors of the TellezPeiialosa barge that was blown ashore in
1528. Spanish clothing and weapons were
evidently traded to inland groups, for Cabeza
de Vaca saw some of these items among the
Anegados in 1534. It has been generally
agreed that the Camoles lived in the vicinity
of Corpus Christi Bay. Some route interpreters place the Camoles north of the bay
(Baskett 1907:264; Castaneda 1936,I:59),
and others place them just south of the bay
(Lynn et al. 1977:Fig. 16). The Camoles
probably ranged all the shoreline of Corpus
Christi Bay, as well as much of Mustang
Island and the northern part of Padre Island.

Fig People
A Spanish name, Los de los higos (those of
the figs), was used for the last and southernmost coastline group named by Cabeza de
Vaca, who reported that they lived farther
along the coast toward Panuco than the
Camoles, who probably lived around Corpus
Christi Bay. He learned from the Avavares
that two Spanish shipwreck survivors had
been seen among the Fig People, and this
seems to indicate that these Fig People did
not live very much farther down the coast
than Corpus Christi Bay. Baskett (1907:263264) places the Fig People on both sides of
the Nueces River near its mouth on Corpus
Christi Bay, but this is because he mistakenly
assumes that the name Fig People refers to all
the Indians who went inland to gather prickly-

16
pear fruit. Cabeza de Vaca certainly does
not imply this. Bishop (1933:107) guesses
that the Fig People may have lived near the
mouth of the Rio Grande. It seems more
reasonable to assign the Fig People to the
coast somewhere not too far south of the
Camoles, perhaps just south of Corpus
Christi Bay. If this is correct, their territory
may have included nearby portions of Padre
Island. Placement of the Fig People any
farther south than this makes it more difficult
to explain their apparent contacts and
communication with the inland A vavares.
After leaving the Avavares, the four Spaniards seem to have followed a route that took
them too far inland to learn about coastal
groups between Baffin Bay and the mouth of
the Rio Grande.

Comment
Very little about these four shoreline
groups can be learned from the Cabeza de
Vaca documents. How far inland they may
have ranged is uncertain, but it is perhaps
significant that Cabeza de Vaca encountered
no shoreline groups in the prickly-pear collecting grounds. Apparently food was
plentiful along the coast in summer, and
prickly-pear fruit did not attract them. No
hostilities between shoreline and inland
groups are mentioned. There is indication of
friendly contacts between inland groups and
shoreline groups, with the inland groups
(Anegados and Avavares) apparently visiting
the coastal groups. Trade between Camoles
and Anegados is implied. These contacts
suggest that the groups involved may have
had adjoining territories.
Area 2
The 11 groups of this area, as already
stated, are referred to in connection with
seasonal migration to the prickly-pear
collection grounds; and of all of Cabeza de
Vaca's named groups, these lived closest to
the Three Rivers target area. Far more is
recorded about the Mariames and Avavares
because Cabeza de Vaca actually lived with
these two groups and knew more about them.
In the following pages these groups are
treated roughly in the order of their locations
along a northeast-southwest axis.

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Mariames
Cabeza de Vaca was among the Mariames
for at least 18 months during the years 15331534; and another Spanish shipwreck
survivor, Andres Dorantes, was among the
Mariames even longer, about four years. In
the two basic documents, the Mariames are
the best described of all the Indian groups
encountered by Cabeza de Vaca and his
fell ow travelers.
In English translations of the Cabeza de
Vaca account, the original lengthy paragraphs
have been br_oken up into shorter ones, and
this has introduced a certain amount of ambiguity into the Mariame record. The lead sentences of two paragraphs (see Hodge
1959:65) contain the name Yguazes, making
it appear that the cultural description that follows in each paragraph refers to the Yguazes,
although it actually refers to the Mariames.
Cabeza de Vaca lived among the Mariames,
not among the Yguazes; and all of his cultural
data in the two paragraphs refer to the Mariames, except where he notes that both groups
practiced female infanticide. The internal
documentary evidence indicates that Cabeza
de Vaca's narrative at this point is describing
the culture of the Mariames and merely includes a few statements about the Yguazes,
some of which do not even refer to cultural
characteristics. It is this unfortunate paragraphing change that has misled many students of the Cabeza de Vaca narrative (Coopwood 1899-1900:230-231, 240; Hallenbeck
1940:64; Hodge 1910, 11:997; Krieger
1961:464; Newcomb 1961:37, 40-41, 46,
49).
The documentary evidence on the territorial range of the Mariames is so clear that
most writers associate these Indians, for
about nine months of the year, with the lower
Guadalupe River valley, particularly in the
vicinity of its junction with the San Antonio
River (Baskett 1907:260, 264; Bishop
1933:87; Davenport and Wells 19181919:142, 211; Krieger 1955:Fig. 5 and
1961:466; Termer, in Nunez Cabeza de Vaca,
1963: 156). Krieger has them ranging from
the lower Guadalupe River eastward, but this
is because he assumes that Cabeza de Vaca's
Mariames were the same people as the Aranamas of the later mission period, which is
very doubtful, as will be shown later. The

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

documents lend little support to Mariames
ranging very far east of the lower Guadalupe
River. Two other placements cannot be taken
seriously: that of Coopwood (18991900: 122), which locates the Mariames in
northern Hidalgo County not far from the Rio
Grande; and that of Covey (1961:69-70),
which puts them on the lower Colorado
River.
Cabeza de Vaca who, along with Andres
Dorantes, learned to speak the language of
the Mariames, says that it was different from
that of the Quevenes, who lived on the
nearby coast. He also says that the language
of the Mariames was different from that of
the A vavares who lived in or near the pricklypear collecting grounds. Some writers have
speculated that the Mariames may have spoken a Tonkawan language (Davenport and
Wells 1918-1919: 138-139; Swanton
1940:136 and 1952:226), but no linguistic
evidence has been found to substantiate this.
Cabeza de Vaca says little about the
physique of the Mariames, but he does note
that they were not as big (grande) as their
coastal neighbors, the Quevenes. In one
household in which Cabeza de Vaca lived, all
the individuals (at least five specified) were
said to be blind in one eye. Nothing else is
said about this puzzling phenomenon.
All of the recorded evidence indicates that
the economic system of the Mariames was
based upon hunting, fishing, and collecting
wild plant products. Cabeza de Vaca states
that no plants were cultivated.
The Mariames spent approximately nine
months of the year (fall, winter, spring)
along the lower Guadalupe River in an area
that probably includes at least parts of three
present-day Texas counties: Calhoun (northwestern), Refugio (northeastern), and Victoria (southern). The Oviedo account indicates that the Mariames frequently moved
their encampments up or down the wooded
river valley, but it never specifies just how
far up or down the river they ranged. Hunting parties now and then penetrated the
prairie lands on each side of the wooded
floodplain.
The remainder of the year (summer) the
Mariames occupied a distant area where
prickly-pear plants grew in great profusion
and whose fruits became a summer staple
food. This area was probably in parts of

17

Duval and Jim Wells counties west of the
Nueces River. Since there is no clear indication that the Mariames ranged widely over the
prickly-pear area, it seems reasonable to conclude that they confined themselves to some
portion of it that was nearest to their
Guadalupe River homeland, possibly the area
north and northwest of present Alice, Texas.
Placement of their prickly-pear collecting area
this far south is supported by Oviedo's account, which indicates that their route to
prickly-pear country took them close to a bay
where the Mariames killed quantities of deer
by driving them into saltwater. The long
northwestern shoreline of Copano Bay is adjacent to the most direct route from the lower
Guadalupe River to the postulated pricklypear collecting grounds. Oviedo states that
after killing the deer the Mariames left saltwater and proceeded inland, presumably
continuing in a southwesterly direction. According to interview data presented by Davenport and Wells (1918-1919:209-211) from
individuals who had lived in southern Texas
as early as 1860, the greatest concentration of
prickly-pear plants nearest to the Mariames
was in Duval and Jim Wells counties, particularly between San Diego and Alice on the
north and Falfurrias on the south. For these
reasons it is believed that the Mariames did
not go to get prickly-pear fruits in Atascosa
and McMullen counties, as claimed by
Krieger, but farther to the south, which was
in the direction of Panuco, Cabeza de Vaca's
planned destination.
The documents thus seem to indicate that
the Mariames, as well as some of their
neighbors, exploited the food resources of
two discrete inland areas separated by a distance of at least 80 miles. The space between
the two areas was exploited only to the extent
of foraging along a narrow corridor of travel
twice a year. Bilobate territories of this sort,
with a time differential in exploitation, and
not always occupied exclusively by a single
group, are obviously too complex to be
shown on a conventional ethnographic map.
For the Mariames, both Cabeza de Vaca
and Oviedo comment on intermittent food
shortages and hunger. It is said that during
the winter season these people sometimes
went three or four days without food, and it
was not unusual for them to search for food
from dawn to dusk. Yet it is of interest to

18
note that these sources never refer to individuals among the Mariames as being debilitated
by malnutrition or dying as the result of it.
Cabeza de Vaca, in commenting on all the
Indians he knew in present southern Texas,
says that they were good at enduring hunger,
thirst, and extremes of temperature. It appears that the Mariames, like hunting-andgathering populations elsewhere in the world,
were well adjusted to an alternation of abundance and scarcity of natural foodstuffs.
It is possible that, when Cabeza de Vaca
was among the Mariames in 1533-1534, annual rainfall was considerably below the
present average for their Guadalupe River
area; in other words, a drought may have
been involved. The Mariames may have
ranged up and down their river valley simply
because the prairies on each side of the river
were too dry at the time to support much
game. Although Cabeza de Vaca mentions
bison, he describes no bison-hunting parties.
Just before joining the Mariames, Cabeza de
Vaca asked the nearby Quevenes about the
inland area to the west of them, and he was
told that there was nothing to eat and the
country was thinly occupied by people. The
documents do not seem to be describing
southern Texas at a time when rainfall was
normal or above normal.
Several factors may have operated to prevent overpopulation among the Mariames. It
is clearly stated that female infanticide prevailed. At birth, female children were abandoned (to be eaten by dogs, Cabeza de Vaca
says). When questioned by Spaniards about
female infanticide, the Mariames rationalized
the custom. As they were ethnically exogamous, they did not want female children to
grow up and marry enemy males, which
would increase enemy populations. Apparently the Mariames regarded many surrounding groups as either enemies or potential
enemies.
Although the number was small, some
male children were killed because of dream
omens (discussed later). Another factor was
a form of birth control. Cabeza de Vaca
states that, among all the Indians he knew
in present southern Texas, men refrained
from sexual intercourse with their wives from
the time of conception until the child was
about two years of age. Among the Mariames this would refer only to male c hil-

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

dren, as female children were not permitted
to live.
The surviving documents say little about
Mariame population size. Dorantes is quoted
by Oviedo as saying that on one occasion he
saw 60 males, presumably all adults, engaged in shoreline hunting. Since the context
suggests that all of the Mariames were in the
same place (they were on their way to the
summer prickly-pear harvesting grounds), it
is possible to estimate the total population as
not exceeding 200 individuals, allowing for
female infanticide. No reference is ever made
to more than- one local group of Mariames.
Cabeza de Vaca, in referring to a family with
which he lived, says that it consisted of a
man, his wife, his sons (number unspecified), and one other individual (possibly a
relative). This particular household thus
consisted of at least five individuals. If it is
assumed that this family was of average size,
it may be estimated that the Mariames, when
all were in one place at the same time, may
have had less than 40 houses in a temporary
settlement.
The poorly described houses were probably round in floor plan, since the framework
is said to consist of four poles (areas),
apparently flexible, because both ends of
each pole were set in the ground. This
presumably domed framework was covered
by mats (esteras). House size is not recorded.
The poles and mats were transported when
encampments were moved, which is said to
have happened every two or three days.
Nothing is said about garments except that
some robes (mantas) and moccasins (zapatos)
were made of bison skins, the former from
skins of immature bison, the latter from older
bison. Ornaments are implied by the statement that in males one nipple and a lip were
perforated. As similar forms of bodily mutilation were described earlier by Cabeza de
Vaca for a coastal population over 100 miles
east of the lower Guadalupe River, it may be
inferred that similar forms of ornaments were
inserted in the perforations by Mariames. In
the eastern group the nipple was perforated
horizontally for insertion of a section of cane
or bone (cafia) some 20 inches long and
about 1.5 inches in diameter. In the lower lip
a similar perforation held a piece (pedazo) of
cane or bone said to be half the size of a human finger.

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

Firewood and water were readily available
in the valley of the Guadalupe River, but
these were said to be scarce in the adjacent
prairie lands. This is implied by Cabeza de
Vaca's statement that, on occasional two-day
hunting trips into nearby grasslands, firewood and water were transported for
overnight use. In the prickly-pear collecting
grounds, where there were few perennial
streams, it is said that the Mariames drank
ponded rainwater or, when this was not
available, prickly-pear fruit juice.
Cabeza de Vaca makes it clear that the
Mariames were plagued by three kinds of
mosquitoes during the warm months, particularly at night, and that they built smudge
fires around their sleeping places when it was
feasible. In order to produce smoke, wet decayed wood was added to the fires from time
to time. Cabeza de Vaca himself was sometimes forced to keep such fires going at night
and was awakened by blows if he fell asleep
and let the smoke get too thin. He notes that
the Indians' bodies were at times so inflamed
by mosquito bites that they appeared to have
leprosy.
Cabeza de Vaca implies that bison sometimes came as far south as the winter territory
of the Mariames, since he describes bison at
the close of his section on the Mariames. It
seems evident from his remarks that bison
were not particularly important as a food resource, although he does say that bison skins
were used for robes, footgear, and shields.
The presence of bison in the Mariames' winter range is confirmed by documents of the
La Salle expedition of 1686-1687, which indicate that the French colonists killed bison in
considerable numbers just north of present
Lavaca Bay, or less than 40 miles east of the
lower Guadalupe River (Stiles 1906:passim).
The basic sources seem to agree that deer
(venados) were obtained for food only now
and then. Deer are not specifically mentioned
in connection with Mariame prickly-pear fruit
collecting in summer, and few deer seem to
have been available elsewhere in mid-winter.
It is said that so many other Indian groups
came to the Guadalupe River valley to collect
nuts that they killed off or frightened away all
large game in the area.
Several approaches to deer hunting are
described. Perhaps the most common one
was for a male individual to run a deer long

19

enough for the animal to become exhausted.
It is said that a man could keep a deer on the
run all day and finally run it to the ground or
overtake it with a short burst of speed just
before it fell exhausted. Burning vegetation
in open prairie country was used to control
movements of the deer, forcing the animals to
seek food in certain unburned areas where
they could be more easily killed. This would
have had to be done when grass was dry
enough to bum.
Special two-day hunting trips for deer and
other unspecified animals were made two or
three times a year. Such trips involved leaving the wooded river valley and going out
into the adjacent grasslands. Wood and water, as noted above, were carried for this
overnight trip. The hunting parties evidently
went out in spring and fall, because the wood
was used not only for cooking fires but also
for smudge fires to keep off mosquitoes.
The Oviedo account describes a different
approach to deer hunting that was used when
the Mariames skirted a coastal bay on their
way to the prickly-pear collecting grounds in
early summer. It may be surmised that the
locale was along the northwestern shoreline
of Copano Bay in Refugio County. It is said
that this locality was not occupied by other
Indians and that deer were sometimes
numerous there. When an offshore breeze
was blowing, males spread out and drove
deer into the bay, keeping them there until
they drowned and the carcasses were washed
ashore. Krieger (1956:54) states that canoes
were used to keep the deer from coming
.ashore, but the documents do not mention
use of canoes for this purpose. The Mariames were on their way by land to the
prickly-pear collecting territory and would
not have taken canoes with them. Although
this kind of deer hunting seems to have been
done but once a year, it sometimes yielded a
large number of animals. Oviedo cites
Andres Dorantes as saying that the Mariames
had varying degrees of success. Sometimes
no deer were taken, or only a few, but at
other times the number was quite large. One
specific statement is made about an occasion
when 60 men took 200 to 300 deer. Another
statement mentions 500 deer taken, but the
number of hunters is not given.
Fish were obtained from the Guadalupe
River, but nothing is said about methods of

20
fishing. Small nets are mentioned, although
not in connection with economic activity.
Apparently fish were eaten in quantity only during the April-May flood season, when
they were obtained from shallow floodplain pools after floods had subsided. Fish
bones were saved, ground to powder, and
eaten.
Other life forms were consumed as food,
including rats and mice, the former said to be
especially numerous between the rivers, apparently meaning between the Guadalupe and
San Antonio rivers above their junction near
San Antonio Bay. Snakes were eaten, including the rattlesnake; bones of snakes, like
those of fish, were saved, pulverized, and
eaten. Snails were eaten when the Mariames
were in the prickly-pear grounds. Cabeza de
Vaca does not mention snails as food in his
account, but that of Oviedo notes that pricklypear fruits and snails were the main foods in
the summer season at the prickly-pear
grounds. The snails, Oviedo says, were
searched for carefully. Insects of various
unspecified kinds were eaten, some in larval
form, and ant eggs are mentioned. Other
animal foods, especially in the lower Guadalupe River area, were frogs, lizards, salamanders, and spiders. The Mariames had
dogs, mentioned in connection with female
infanticide, but nothing is said about dogs
being eaten. Other "foods," mentioned as
being eaten when food of any kind was
scarce, include earth (tierra), wood (madera),
and deer droppings (estiercol).
Pecans, referred to as walnuts in the documents (in Cabeza de Vaca's time a specific
word for pecan had not yet come into the
Spanish language), constituted the dominant
foodstuff for one to two months in the fall
season, but only when trees produced nuts in
abundance. The trees, said to be large and
numerous along the Guadalupe River, did not
produce in quantity every year. When the nut
crop was good, it is mentioned that ethnic
groups (none except Susolas identified by
name) came from considerable distances, up
to 50 or 75 miles, to eat pecans. Undoubtedly pecans were eaten separately, but
Cabeza de Vaca says that nut meats were
ground with small seeds (granillos) of some
sort and eaten. No mention is made of storage of excess pecan nuts for later use. The
Mariames, along with other groups, appar-

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

ently ate their way through the pecan groves
when nuts were available.
No mention is made of Mariames eating
prickly-pear fruits while in the Guadalupe
River valley. The prickly-pear collecting
grounds are said to have been some 30 to 40
leagues (78 to 104 miles) from the Guadalupe
River. Cabeza de Vaca states that the
Mariam.es went to the same locality in each of
the two summer seasons he spent with them.
The duration of the fruit-ripening season is
given as three months by Cabeza de Vaca and
one and one-half to two months by Oviedo.
Cabeza de Vaca's statements clearly place the
season between late May or early June and
late in August. He describes the pears as
hen-egg in size and either black or bright red
in color. The fruit was commonly eaten
while it was being picked or shortly thereafter
in the encampment. It is stated, however,
that prickly-pear fruits were dried for consumption during the return journey to the
Guadalupe River. The juice of the fruit was
squeezed out, the fruits opened, dried in the
sun, and thereafter carried in some kind of
flexible container. It is also said that the
peelings of fruit were ground to a powder.
When water was not locally available in the
prickly-pear area, the Mariames expressed
fruit juice into a hole in the earth and drank it
as a water substitute. Cabeza de Vaca comments on its sweet taste.
Roots of unidentified plants were an
important source of food during the winter
months, when many other foodstuffs were
not available. Cabeza de Vaca says that the
Mariames could not have survived in winter
without roots. "Two or three" kinds of roots
were dug by women. Plants with edible
roots were thinly distributed, hard to find,
and difficult to dig out. It is said that women
searched areas around an encampment for
distances of two or three leagues (five to
eight miles), beginning the search at
daybreak:. Roots were cooked for two days
in some sort of oven, probably a shallow pit
oven. Women spent considerable time each
night preparing ovens for baking roots.
Some roots are described as being very bitter
and causing the abdomen to swell.
Although no tools are named or described,
several kinds may be inferred: flint flakes,
knives, and scrapers for skinning, butchering, and processing animal hides; digging

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

sticks for collecting roots; and mortars and
pestles for mashing pecan nutmeats with
added small seeds, for pulverizing bones of
fish, snakes, and other small animals, as well
as dried prickly-pear fruit peelings.
One kind of net is described as being one
fathom (about 5.5 feet) in both length and
width. Its function is not given, but it could
have been used for transporting roots or for
dipping small fish from floodplain overflow
pools. Much matting must have been made,
since it was used to cover house frames.
Pottery was evidently not made because it
is said that prickly-pear fruit juice was
collected in holes in the ground for lack of
suitable containers. Water was transported
by women, but no mention is made of the
kind of containers used. Dried prickly-pear
fruits were carried in some kind of woven
bag or flexible basket (sera).
The only weapon referred to is the bow
and arrow, and some bows are said to have
been acquired through trade with the
Avavares when the Mariames were in the
prickly-pear collecting area. The Mariames
are said to have had small shields or bucklers
(rode/as) made from the hides of mature bison.
Little information is recorded on food processing and cooking. Details have already
been presented and will merely be summarized here. Juice was expressed from pricklypear fruits, but the tools used are not described. Prickly-pear fruits were sometimes
preserved by sun-drying. Although the
mortar and pestle are not specifically mentioned, various statements indicate substances
that were mashed or pulverized. Roots were
cooked in ovens (hornos) that are not described, but some phrases suggest a form of
pit oven.
A few details on sexual division of labor
among the Mariames are recorded with minimal ambiguity. Males hunted large game
(deer specified), fought enemies, and old
males were permitted to carry burdens.
Women collected and transported firewood
and water, carried most of the burdens, dug
roots in winter, and processed and cooked
foods. Cabeza de Vaca comments on the
amount of work done by women, saying that
in the winter, when roots were heavily relied
on for food, they sometimes got no more
than six hours of sleep at night.

21

Some information is recorded about the
individual life cycle among the Mariames.
Cabeza de Vaca, in one of his chapters summarizing behavior he had observed among
the various Indians of southern Texas, states
that all of them continued breast feeding of
children until they were about 12 years of
age. He also cites their rationalization of this
practice: that it insured the health of children
in a land where food was not always plentiful. The Mariames probably had a taboo
against male association with menstruating
women, since Cabeza de Vaca implies in a
general summarizing statement that all the Indians he knew had such a taboo. He says
that menstruating women could not search for
or prepare foods for anyone but themselves.
Since female infanticide was the rule
among the Mariames, it is evident that Mariame males obtained wives from surrounding
ethnic groups, but no group names are specified in the documents. Cabeza de Vaca says
that wives came from "enemy" groups. It is
thus apparent that all females among the
Mariames were non-Mariames. The "bride
price" was said to be a good bow and two
arrows or, in lieu of these, a net. It seems reasonable to assume that Mariame males often
chose mates during the ~an- and prickly-pear
collecting seasons, when there was maximum
interaction with other Indian groups.
Grounds for divorce are not indicated,
although said to result from "dissatisfaction."
In one of his summarizing chapters, Cabeza
de Vaca states that among the groups known
to him divorce did not occur if there were
children. Nothing is said in the documents
which suggests that males had more than one
wife at the same time. Female infanticide and
ethnic group exogamy indicate a patrilineal
descent system among the Mariames.
In an oblique way Cabeza de Vaca refers
to homosexuality among the Mariames by
saying that some of them "sinned against
nature." For southern Texas as a whole, he
refers to pairs of males who sometimes lived
together, one playing the role of female. He
implies that this was observed more than
once in that general area.
No data on death and burial custom are
recorded for the Mariames, other than
Oviedo's statement that male children were
sometimes killed (dream motivation) by being
buried alive.

22
Cabeza de Vaca briefly describes a dispute
between two adult males over a woman.
This happened while the Mariames were in
the prickly-pear collecting grounds. The only
details given indicate a fight between the two
men in which fists and sticks were used.
After the fight, each man dismantled his
house and left the encampment. Later in his
account Cabeza de Vaca refers to similar disputes among various unspecified groups of
the general area. Here he notes that in such
cases the bow and arrow were never used.
After anger subsided, the disputants returned
to the encampment and forgot about the matter. However, it is also said that if the disputants were unmarried, each went to live
with a neighboring Indian group for a while,
sometimes a hostile one, where he was well
received and was showered with gifts. The
motive for such gift-giving is not stated, but
some sort of reciprocal relationship is implied. Eventually the man returned to his
own community. It is not certain how much
of this generalized information can be attributed to the Mariames.
Little specific information on trade with
other groups is recorded. It is mentioned that
the Mariames sometimes obtained bows from
the Avavares when both groups were in the
prickly-pear collecting area. A. C. Fletcher
(in Hodge 1907,I:118) states that with the
Avavares the Mariames also traded for bones
which they "ground and used for food," but
this detail does not appear in the documents.
Bows, arrows, and nets were given by the
Mariames to neighboring groups for wives,
and occasionally a male child might be
bought from a neighboring group by the
Mariames, but no group name is given.
Perhaps it should be noted that Cabeza de
Vaca's experience as a free- lance trader
among the Indians refers to an area farther
east in coastal Texas. This trading was done
before Cabeza de Vaca reached the Mariames
along the lower Guadalupe River. In no
primary document is there any indication that
Cabeza de Vaca had previously visited any
Indian group west or southwest of the lower
Guadalupe while trading. It appears that
those who have written about Cabeza
de Vaca's wide travel as a trader among
Indians have not read the documents carefully
enough to become aware of this negative
evidence.

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Cabeza de Vaca makes a few brief statements about the Mariames that are difficult to
evaluate. He says that they were great liars
but says nothing about lying in any specific
behavioral context. He also states that they
were great thieves, and here notes that, although they shared things with each other,
things were taken from relatives (sons, fathers) when backs were turned. Just what
kinds of things were taken is not stated.
Very little is recorded about warfare. It is
said, as previously noted, that the Mariames
regarded all surrounding groups as enemies
or at least potential enemies, but only one
group, the Anegados of the prickly-pear area,
are mentioned as having fought the Mariames
and concluded a peace. Cabeza de Vaca, in
two short chapters (Chapters 24 and 25),
summarizes warfare for the area in Texas
known to him, but this contains nothing
about motivations for warfare. Some details
in these chapters may pertain to the Mariames, but these cannot be confirmed by internal evidence. One defensive practice is of
some interest because it may eventually be
confirmed by archaeological excavation.
This refers to a pit (joso) dug near an Indian
encampment, when an attack was anticipated,
for use as an ambuscade. The size of this pit
is not indicated, but it was evidently large
enough to contain a number of bowmen. The
pit was covered with sticks, but openings
were left for shooting arrows outward. Such
pits were apparently dug mainly near
encampments in wooded areas, although it is
said that they were also dug at encampments
on the prairies. Women and children did not
sleep in the houses when an attack was expected, but in a dense part of the woods.
Fires were kept burning in or near the houses
to mislead the enemy.
It is evident from both Cabeza de Vaca and
Oviedo that, among the Mariames, some behavior was motivated by dreams, which were
a source of omens. Oviedo records a statement by Andres Dorantes that, during the
four years Dorantes was with the Mariames,
11or12 male children were killed or buried
alive because of dream omens. Some light
on this comes from Dorantes, as reported by
Cabeza de Vaca, who said that Hernando de
Esquivel was killed by the Mariames because
a woman had dreamed that one of her sons
would kill Esquivel. Mendez, another Span-

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

iard, is also said to have been killed by the
Mariames because of a dream.
No descriptive detail is recorded about
ceremonies, although it is clearly stated that
some behavior involved group dancing and
feasting. According to Cabeza de Vaca, ceremonial activities went on despite winter food
shortages and reached a peak during the
summer season spent in the prickly-pear area.
One brief allusion to an intoxicating beverage
suggests that it may have been used in a ceremonial context. This is based on a statemen t that the Mariames were great drunkards (grand.es borrachos). Modem writers
have suggested that peyote may have been
involved, which is plausible, since peyote
grows in southern Texas near Laredo and
was widely used in later times by Indians
of southern Texas and northeastern
Mexico.
The equation of Cabeza de Vaca's Mariames with the Muruam recorded over 150
years later was suggested early in the present
century (A. C. Fletcher, in Hodge
1907,I:805), and this equation is strengthened by documents which place the Muruam
on the Guadalupe River east and northeast of
San Antonio (G6mez Canedo 1968:161, 244,
300, 306). Fletcher also suggested that the
Mariames may have been the same people as
the Mahuame of Mission San Juan Bautista
of northeastern Coahuila. This suggestion
can now be dismissed, because today it is
known that Mahuame is a misreading of
Chaguame, which is an orthographic variant
of the name Siaguan (Cuervo y Valdes
1701:8-9, 12-14).
Various writers have confidently equated
the Mariames with the Aranamas of the Goliad mission area (Castaneda 1936,1:64; Davenport and Wells 1918-1919: 138-139;
Krieger 1955:74; Newcomb 1961:49). The
basis for this lay in presumed similarity in
names and in the belief that both groups were
associated with the same section of the
Guadalupe River. Some doubt is cast upon
this equation by evidence recorded in the
baptismal, marriage, and burial registers of
Mission San Antonio de Valero of San Antonio (Valero Registers:passim). In these registers the two groups are carefully distinguished. Between the years 1722 and 1774
at least 42 Muruam individuals can be identified, and between the years 1748 and 1762 at

23

least eight Aranamas can be identified. All of
the Aranamas are designated by one name
variant, Jaraname; but the Muruam are
recorded by such variants as Mariame, Marian, Merhuan, Moroame, Moruame, Muruame, and Muriane. This seems to indicate
that the Aranamas and the Muruam at Mission
San Antonio de Valero represented two different ethnic groups whose names happened
to be somewhat similar. Other groups named
in southern Texas had similar names, such as
the Pacao and the Pacoa, but missionaries did
not confuse the two (Garcia 1760:title page).

Yguazes
As noted in the section on Mariames, ambiguity resulting from paragraphing changes
in English translations of Cabeza de Vaca's
account has led some writers to associate
Mariame cultural data with the Yguazes. In
the Handbook of American Indians (Hodge
1910,II:997), nearly all of the descriptive
detail given for the Yguazes should be transferred to the entry for Mariames.
Cabeza de Vaca's statement about the distribution of Indian groups in lower Texas indicates that the Yguazes lived inland and to
the west and southwest of the Mariames,
whose range, except for the summer season,
can be firmly placed along the lower Guadalupe River. In terms of present-day Texas
counties, the Yguazes probably occupied the
greater part of Refugio County and perhaps
part of southern Goliad County. Their nearest coastline neighbors were the Guaycones.
Krieger (1955:63-64) places both the Mariames and Yguazes east of the Guadalupe
River, but this does not agree with the evidence given by the Cabeza de Vaca and
Oviedo accounts. Coopwood (18991900:240), who locates the Yguazes along
both sides of the lower Rio Grande in
extreme southern Texas and northern Tamaulipas, can be disregarded.
Two shipwreck survivors, Alonso del
Castillo and Estevanico, a Black (el negro)
from the Atlantic coast of Morocco, were inland with the Yguazes in 1534 and 1535 and
accompanied them to the prickly-pear collecting grounds each summer. Except for the
seasonal migration to obtain prickly-pear fruit
for food and the practice of female infanticide, little can be said postively about the

24

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

culture of the Yguazes. Presumably the territory of the Yguazes, like that of the Mariames, was bilobate in form, but with a
somewhat shorter corridor of travel between
winter and summer ranges.
In 1708 Espinosa recorded a long list of
names for Indian groups which he said still
lived in a general easterly direction from the
missions near the Rio Grande at present
Guerrero, northeastern Coahuila (Maas
1915:36-37). This would place most of these
groups in what is now southern Texas. No
localization of any named group is indicated.
Among the names listed is "Oaz o Nuezes."
The name Oaz is phonetically similar to
Yguaz, the singular form of Yguazes. Nueces (Spanish for nuts but better translated as
pecans in a southern Texas context) may be a
Spanish synonym for the native name Oaz.
On this same list, the name "Moroame" also
occurs, which suggests, but does not prove,
that Cabeza de Vaca's Yguazes andMariames
were still known by the same names at the
beginning of the eighteenth century. Although the earliest documents do not say that
Yguazes collected pecan nuts in or near the
Mariames' territory along the lower Guadalupe River, they do identify the Yguazes and
Mariames as neighboring groups and also
indicate that ethnic units from nearby areas
came to the lower Guadalupe River to eat
pecans (nueces) in autumn.
It is possible that the name Aguastaya,
recorded in eighteenth-century records, refers
to the same Indian group as the names
Yguazes and Oaz. Little is known about the
Aguastaya other than that, because of Apache
pressures, they were among several Indian
groups of southern Texas who entered Mission San Jose y San Miguel de Aguayo
shortly after it was established at San Antonio
in 1720 (Forrestal 1931:20; Haggard
1942:77; Morfi 1935a:98; Rivera y Villal6n
1945:111, 123; Sandoval 1734:153).
The name "Jagavans," given as a separate
entry in Hodge (1907,I:628), appears in a
context which shows that it is an extreme
distortion of the name Yguazes (Harris
1705,I:802).

Atayos
Cabeza de Vaca's statement on the distribution of Indian groups indicates that the

territory of the Atayos adjoined that of the
Yguazes, and it may be deduced from the order of name presentation that the Atayos lived
inland southwest of the Yguazes. Baskett
(1907:264) placed them in the general vicinity
of Bee County, which appears reasonable,
but we are inclined to be more specific
and place the Atayos along the Mission River
and some of its tributaries in the inland
portion of Refugio County, perhaps extending into southern Bee County. In
summer the Atayos evidently moved
southwestward to the prickly-pear collecting
grounds, f0r they were seen by Cabeza
de Vaca when he was among the Avavares
in 1534--1535. The Atayos were said to be
collecting prickly-pear fruit in an area
near several other groups: Avavares,
Coayos, Cutalchuches, Maliacones, and Sus o las. With the Susolas the Atayos were
said to have been at war, shooting arrows at
each other nearly every day, but how long
this went on, or for what reason, is not
stated.
Early speculation about the Atayos equated
them with the Adai, a Caddoan group of
northwestern Louisiana, and with the Toho,
who lived somewhere north of Matagorda
Bay in the 1680s (Hodge 1907,I:12 and
1910,II:771, 1029, 1030, 1152; Powell
1891:46; Smith 1851:133n and 1871:127n;
Swanton 1940:136and 1942:29). These linkages, based entirely on presumed phonetic
resemblances in the names, are not demonstrable and today appear strained. Davenport
and Wells (1918-1919:230) noted the absence of the Anegados from Cabeza de
Vaca's distribution roster and suggested that
the name Atayos may refer to the Anegados.
Nothing in the record supports this suggestion, which perhaps was motivated by a
desire to make the records tidy and account
for every group named.
Phonetically similar to Atayos are two Indian group names, Etayax and Ataxal, which
were recorded during the years 1689-1690,
over 150 years after the time of Cabeza de
Vaca(G6mez Canedo 1968:160; Le6n y otros
1961:219). These are connected with an area
southwest of San Antonio, Texas, at least
140 miles from the area where Cabeza de
Vaca saw the Atayos. Etayax and Ataxal are
probably variants of a single name, but at
present no evidence can be cited which links

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

them convincingly with Cabeza de Vaca's
Atayos.
The only recorded features of Atayo culture, as noted above, are seasonal migration
to obtain prickly-pear fruit and use of bow
and arrow in warfare. They probably had a
bilobate territory, but because they were
nearer to the area of prickly-pear concentration the corridor of travel must have been
much shorter than that of the Mariames and
Yguazes.

Acubadaos
The only record of the Acubadaos, also
rendered as Decubadaos, is found in the
Cabeza de Vaca narrative, which merely
gives their location relative to some of their
neighbors. Apparently none of the Spanish
shipwreck survivors ever lived among the
Acubadaos, but probably heard of them
through the Mariames or Yguazes. Cabeza
de Vaca identifies the Acubadaos as an inland
group that lived adjacent to the Atayos but
farther inland, which would place them
somewhere west of the Yguazes. It is here
suggested that the Acubadaos may have lived
along the upper tributaries of the Aransas and
Mission rivers in the southern half of Bee
County. Since the Acubadaos are not reported as seen in that part of the prickly-pear
area visited by the Spaniards, it is possible
that the fruit was sufficiently abundant where
they lived or that they moved a short distance
westward and collected fruit from an area
north of where the Spaniards were, perhaps
in southern Live Oak County.
Hodge (1907,I:74) equates the Acubadaos
with the Arbadaos, presumably on the basis
of similarity in the names, but this is untenable. As will be noted later, the recorded
evidence indicates that the Acubadaos were
separated from the Arbadaos by a distance of
at least 100 miles.

Avavares
In the earliest edition (1542) of the Cabeza
de Vaca narrative, the Avavares are also referred to by another name variant, Chavavares. Cabeza de Vaca and his three associates lived with the Avavares for approximately eight months, or from September
1534 to May or June 1535. They remained
with the Avavares because winter was ap-

25

proaching, and they had received discouraging reports on the availability of foods
southward in the direction of Panuco.
It is difficult to determine the probable
range of the A vavares because there is no
clear distinction between their winter and
summer ranges. Such evidence as is
recorded suggests that the A vavares winter
range was either in or adjacent to their summer range in the prickly-pear area and that
their movements were not neatly geared to the
seasons or restricted to any part of their entire
range. Cabeza de Vaca's statement on relative locations of Indian groups appears to indicate where each of the named groups lived
most of the year, ignoring movements by
some groups to the prickly-pear collecting
grounds in summer. On this basis the
Avavares and four other groups, (Comos,
Cutalchuches, Maliacones, and Susolas) may
be placed inland from the coastal Quitoles in
the area between Lake Corpus Chris ti and
Copano Bay. Most of this territory lies between the Aransas and Nueces rivers, mainly
in San Patricio County, but perhaps including
adjacent parts of Bee and Refugio counties,
all of it northwest of Corpus Christi Bay.
This general location seems to be supported
by the fact that the A vavares lived close
enough to the Mariames to learn to speak the
Mariame language. How far southwestward
the Avavares and their neighbors moved
during the summer prickly-pear season, or
even during the winter, cannot be determined
from the two primary documents, but as a
guess, possibly as far as Benavides in eastcentral Duval County.
This difficulty with locational data on the
Avavares is reflected in the interpretative literature on Cabeza de Vaca's travel route in
Texas. The Avavares have been assigned to
various localities in a very large area that extends from the hill country north of San Antonio southward to Hidalgo and Zapata
counties near the Rio Grande, a distance of
over 200 miles. Those who have placed the
Avavares at least as far north as the latitude of
San Antonio are Castaneda (1936,I:70-72),
Sauer (1971:117), Terrell (1962:172, 176),
and Williams (1939:45), and those who have
placed the Avavares near the Rio Grande are
Coopwood (1899-1900:131) and Davenport
and Wells (1918-1919:216). All of these
placements seem to be contradicted by inter-

26
nal evidence in the two basic documents.
The remaining route investigators place the
Avavares on both sides of the lower Nueces
River in parts of Duval, Jim Wells, and San
Patricio counties (Baskett 1907:264, 266,
269; Bishop 1933:107; Krieger 1961:Fig. 1;
Lynn et al. 1977:Fig. 16). This placement
best accommodates two recorded facts: (1) in
1535 the Avavares ranged far enough south
to be fairly close to the Arbadaos, and (2) the
Avavares had visited the coastal Fig People,
among whom they had seen two Spanish
shipwreck survivors. The Fig People, the
last and southernmost coastal group to be
named by Cabeza de Vaca, probably lived
somewhere not far south of Corpus Christi
Bay.
Cabeza de Vaca makes it clear that the language of the Avavares was different from the
languages of several other groups named,
among them Cutalchuches, Maliacones, and
Mariames. In addition to their own language,
the Avavares could speak the language of the
Mariames, for the Spaniards used the Mariame language to converse with them at the
first encounter.
Avavares houses are said to have been like
those of the Mariames, which consisted of
bent-pole framework covered by mats; and it
is stated that when the Avavares moved their
encampments, the houses were dismantled
and transported. Since the four Europeans
were divided into pairs, and each pair quartered in the house of a shaman (fisico ), it is
possible that the houses of shamans were
somewhat larger than other houses. The
A vavares are said to have been collecting
prickly pears near the Cutalchuches, Maliacones, and Susolas in 1535, but there is no
indication that any of these populations
shared the same encampment. Individuals
from the three groups, however, visited the
A vavares encampment, but only to ask the
Spaniards to come and cure their sick individuals.
The Avavares evidently wore little or no
clothing, since Cabeza de Vaca remarked that
the Spaniards went about naked like these
Indians. No garment of any kind is mentioned.
Cabeza de Vaca, in describing the
Avavares during the winter of 1534-1535,
says that the lands around them contained no
fish, acorns, or nuts. With regard to fish,

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

however, there is a discrepancy. A few sentences earlier Cabeza de Vaca refers to one of
the seasons recognized by the A vavares as
the time when fish die (en tiempo que muere
el pescado ). This may refer to spring floods
which leave fish to die when floodplain pools
dry up, as would occur along the lower Nueces River. Cabeza de Vaca goes on to say
that, during six of the eight months spent
with the A vavares, the Spaniards and their
Indian hosts suffered from hunger. He notes
that in winter the A vavares had an even
harder time getting food than the Mariames
along the lower Guadalupe River.
Deer were hunted by the A vavares, for
Cabeza de Vaca says that, for curing sick
A vavares individuals, the four Spaniards
were given more venison than they knew
what to do with. Since Cabeza de Vaca mentions that the Spaniards covered themselves at
night with deer skins, it may be inferred that
the Avavares did likewise.
The evidence seems to show, as noted
earlier, that the Avavares lived in or near the
prickly-pear area throughout the year. They
are referred to as searching for the fruit after
other groups have left the area. In September
they are reported as searching for late ripening prickly pears. On one occasion they
searched five days without finding ripe fruit,
and then shortly thereafter found a locality
where fruit was abundant. They served
prickly-pear fruits as hospitality food when
the Spaniards first arrived among them, and
they also gave the Spaniards fruit in partial
payment for curing services.
Cabeza de Vaca mentions that, on one occasion (early autumn), the Avavares had for
several days searched in vain for prickly-pear
fruits and then went to a stream valley to
gather seed pods from trees whose pods are
described as like hieros (vetches or lentils).
This tree has been plausibly identified as the
Texas ebony, P ithecellobium flexicaule
(Benth.), which holds its seed pods into the
winter season. Today this tree is common
along the lower Rio Grande, but rare elsewhere northward on the coastal plain as far as
the latitude of Corpus Christi Bay (Correll
and Johnston 1970:769; Turner 1959:28,
30). Its seeds are edible and have at times
been eaten locally in southern Texas (Bourke
1931:93). Coopwood (1899-1900:129) records a fairly good stand of Texas ebony on

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

Los Olmos Creek in southeastern Duval
County, where in the 1890s seeds were
occasionally boiled for food or roasted and
used as a coffee substitute by MexicanAmericans. This or some similar locality
could have been visited by the Avavares.
Oviedo indicates that during winter the
Avavares ate mainly roots (none described),
which Cabeza de Vaca apparently confirms
when he says that the Spaniards dug their
own food when living with the Avavares.
The only tool recorded is a long flint knife
mentioned in a legend that will be paraphrased later. The bow and arrow are specified as payment to Spaniards for curing
Avavares individuals, and it is also said that
Avavares traded bows to Mariames when the
latter were in the prickly-pear country.
The only reference to trade is Cabeza de
Vaca's twice-made statement that Avavares
traded bows to Mariames. Presumably some
special kind of wood especially suitable for
making bows was available to the Avavares
but not to the Mariames. No mention is made
of what the Avavares received in exchange
for bows. Fletcher (in Hodge 1907,I:118)
states that the A vavares "bartered bones,
which the Mariames ground and used for
food .... " This is an error, for neither Cabeza
de Vaca nor Oviedo says anything about
Avavares dealing in bones.
There were at least two shamans among
the Avavares. Cabeza de Vaca mentioned, as
noted earlier, that the four Spaniards were
as signed quarters in the houses of two
shamans. The Spaniards themselves "cured"
Avavares of ailments vaguely referred to as
disorders affecting the head and alimentary
tract. Spanish treatment was the same for all
Indian groups: breathing on the patient,
praying, and reciting bits of church ritual.
Cabeza de Vaca notes that all the sick
Avavares claimed that they were completely
cured by the Spaniards. Gifts or payment for
Spanish curing, previously noted, consisted
of prickly-pear fruits, pieces of venison, and
bows and arrows.
Brief mention is made of ceremonial activity. Just after the Spaniards had arrived
among the Avavares and had treated some
sick individuals, the Avavares began to dance
and sing in the evening. This continued until
sunrise and was repeated on the second and
third nights. It is possible that this refers to a

27

customary three-day ceremony. Cabeza de
Vaca says that the Avavares and other Indian
groups nearby, after being cured of their
maladies, claimed the Spaniards were truly
children of the sun (hijos de/ Sol), which
suggests the concept of the sun as a deity.
While among the Avavares, the Spaniards
were told a legend which Cabeza de Vaca
summarizes. The action described in the legend was recounted as a relatively recent event
which Cabeza de Vaca thought referred to a
time some 15 or 16 years earlier, in 1519 or
1520. It was about a man called Mala Cosa
("bad thing"), who was small of body and
wore a beard. Since he had a beard and was
seen only at night, his facial features had
never been clearly viewed. The Avavares said
that when they saw him, their head hair stood
up and they shook all over. He would approach a house carrying a torch, enter, and
select a man upon whom he performed two
surgical operations with a flint knife said to
be as wide as a human hand and about 16
inches long. In the first operation he made
three large cuts in one side of the man's abdomen, reached in with his hand, and pulled
out the intestines. A section of intestine about
eight inches long was cut off and thrown into
the fire. In the second operation Mala Cosa
made three cuts at an elbow and severed the
arm at this joint. Then he passed his hand
over the separated parts and the arm came
together again, healing instantly. Presumably
the same hand passing was done over the
abdominal cuts, but this is not stated.
Mala Cosa did other things. He sometimes picked up a house, took it high into the
air, and then rode it down to earth. Sometimes he came to Avavares ceremonies, appearing as either a male or a female. It is said
that he was offered food but never accepted
any. When asked where he lived, he pointed
to a crack in the earth and said that his home
was underground. When the Spaniards made
fun of this legend, the A vavares produced
individuals who had scars on abdomen and
elbow. This same legend, according to Cabeza de Vaca, had also been told the Spaniards by other unspecified Indian groups.
The three operational "cuts," as well as ceremonial activity on three successive nights,
suggest that in the Avavares belief system the
number three had a special symbolic significance.

28

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Cabeza de Vaca states that the Avavares
paid no attention to phases and movements of
moon and sun in keeping trace of time. Their
main interest was in the succession of seasons, when various kinds of foodstuffs became available, and he implies that they
associated seasons with the movements of
certain constellations. At star gazing, he
says, the Avavares were quite accomplished
(diestros y ejercitados).

Anegados
This name may be incorrect, since in the
earliest known edition of Cabeza de Vaca's
narrative the name is given as Ganegados
(compare Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, 1542 and
1555). Smith (1871:112) introduced the
variant Lanegados, which is evidently a misreading of Ganegados in the first edition (the
initial G is indistinctly printed). Hodge
(1907,I:57) noted that anegado is a Spanish
word, meaning flooded or overflowed,
which seems to have introduced an irrelevance into the literature. The name Anegados
does not appear in Cabeza de Vaca's distribution statement, and some have suggested
that it may be synonymous with Atayos
(Davenport and Wells 1918-1919:230), for
which no evidence seems to exist.
The Anegados are known only for a very
short period in the early autumn of 1534
when they were in the prickly-pear collecting
grounds, and it is uncertain where they were
at other times of the year. It is recorded that,
while in the prickly-pear area, the Anegados
had been fighting with the Mariames but had
just concluded a peace. It is also said that the
Anegados had traded with the coastal
Camoles for Spanish clothing and weapons,
which the Camoles had taken from slaughtered survivors of the barge commanded by
Tellez and Penalosa, which was driven
ashore in 1528. The Anegados told the
Spaniards that remains of the barge could still
be seen on the coast, which implies that the
Anegados' winter range was immediately inland from the Camoles and that some of the
Anegados had visited the shipwreck locality.
Baskett (1907:264, 266) places the summer range of the Anegados near the Nueces
River in southwestern San Patricio County,
but the winter range he puts in the vicinity of
northeastern Karnes County, for which there

is no evidence in the primary documents.
Surprisingly, Lynn et al. (1977:Table 2)
assign the Anegados' winter range to a
distant area lying between the lower stretches
of the Brazos and Guadalupe rivers, for
which no evidence is adduced. Perhaps the
best that can be done, since Cabeza de Vaca
left the Anegados off of his distribution
roster, is to suggest that their trading
relationship with the Camoles points to a
winter residence somewhere in southern
Nueces County, which is not very far east of
the area of prickly-pear concentration where
they were eneountered by Spaniards.

Cutalchuches
This name is now known by at least 18
orthographic variants, most of them occurring in translations of the Cabeza de Vaca
narrative into various European languages.
In the earliest Spanish edition (1542), the
name is rendered in two ways, as Cuthalchuches and Cultalchuches, which may
be closer to native phonemes than Cutalchich,
the variant chosen for use by Hodge
( 1907 ,I:374 ).
Cabeza de Vaca briefly encountered the
Cutalchuches in the summer of 1535. They
were in the prickly-pear collecting grounds
and were eating fniit in the same locality as
the A vavares, Maliacones, Coayos, Atayos,
and Susolas; the encampments of at least
some of these groups were close enough to
each other for individuals to visit back and
forth. It is clear that the Cutalchuches' winter
range was elsewhere because Cabeza de Vaca
wrote that, shortly after his encounter with
the Cutalchuches, they returned to their own
country (location unspecified). It seems evident that their country was not southward in
the direction of Panuco, the Spaniards'
planned destination at the time. Cabeza de
Vaca's statement on Indian group distributions, however, places all these Indian
groups except the Atayos inland from the
coastal group known as Quitoles, who seem
to have occupied the Ingleside-Aransas PassRockport section of the coastline. This suggests that the Cutalchuches' winter range was
in or near the area covered by northwestern
Nueces County and southwestern San
Patricio County. This is not incompatible
with Krieger's (1961:Fig. 1, No. 3) place-

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

ment of the summer range of the Cutalchuches and their neighbors in the northern
portions of Duval and Jim Wells counties.
Baskett (1907:264) places the Cutalchuches'
summer range farther north, in central Live
Oak County, just below the junction of the
Frio and Nueces rivers.
Although Cabeza de Vaca is not entirely
clear about the language spoken by the Cutalchuches, it seems to have been different
from the languages spoken by the Avavares
and Maliacones, which at least points to linguistic diversity among the Indians who went
to the prickly-pear collecting area.
Relatively little is recorded about the culture of the Cutalchuches. They of course ate
prickly-pear fruit in season. Cabeza de Vaca
mentions that, at the end of the pear season,
they gave the Spaniards all the ripe pears they
had on hand, not keeping a single one. At
the same time the Cutalchuches also gave the
Spaniards something else to which they (the
Cutalchuches) attached great value, large flint
knives. The number of knives is not indicated, but one knife may have been given to
each of the four Spaniards. These knives had
a length of about 12 inches (palmo y medio; a
palmo at that time was equivalent to 8.23
inches, according to Haggard 1941:81). It is
possible that these large flint knives were
valued by the Cutalchuches because of some
ceremonial use.
It has been speculated that the Cutalchuches were the same as the Guachichil of
north-central Mexico (Ruecking 1955a:275276) or may have been a Tonkawan group
(Mayhall 1965:251). No evidence has been
found which supports either of these speculations.

Maliacones
Cabeza de Vaca met the Maliacones (or
Malicones) shortly after leaving the Avavares
in 1535. The four Spaniards, apparently
traveling south-southwestward in the general
direction of Panuco, went on to an encampment of the Maliacones. This involved one
day of travel, the distance said to be seven
leagues, or about 18 miles. With these Maliacones the Spaniards then traveled on in the
same direction (distance not given) to an Arbadaos encampment, and the Maliacones then
returned to their previously mentioned camp.

29

This at least places the Maliacones on one
occasion roughly south of the Avavares and
north of the Arbadaos, possibly in the general
vicinity of San Diego and Alice of Duval and
Jim Wells counties respectively. But Cabeza
de Vaca's Indian group distribution statement, which seems to reflect winter ranges,
places the Maliacones among the groups that
lived inland from the Quitoles, or somewhere
near the lower Nueces River.
Krieger (1961:Fig. 1) apparently considered the Maliacones to have been native to the
lower Nueces area, but Baskett (1907:264)
puts them farther north, in central Live Oak
County. It is difficult to understand Covey's
(1961:91) unexplained placement of the Maliacones on the lower Colorado River, some
125 miles northeast of the lower Nueces
River and the nearby prickly-pear area.
Cabeza de Vaca indicates, as noted above,
that the Maliacones, Avavares, and Cutalchuches spoke different languages. The Maliacones ate prickly-pear fruits in the collecting area, as well as seeds from certain
trees found farther south, which it is said
they ate for 10 or 12 days while waiting for
prickly pears to ripen in early summer.
These seeds may be those of the Texas ebony
(see Avavares).
Coopwood (1899-1900:136) and Newcomb (1961:60) suggest that Cabeza de
Vaca's Maliacones may have been the Malaguitas or Malaguecos of the lower Rio
Grande, known from the middle eighteenth
century. This is possible, but there is nothing which relates the two sets of people except some similarity in names and location in
areas not greatly distant from each other.
Hodge (1907,I:795, 800, 845) suggests that
Cabeza de Vaca's Maliacones may have been
the same as the Meracouman of Joutel and the
Manico of Mazanet. The Meracouman linkage does not seem reasonable, since in 1687
Joutel reported Meracouman northeast of
Matagorda Bay (Stiles 1906: 126). The Manico linkage is somewhat more plausible because in 1690 Mazanet reported Manico in
what is now Frio County (Gomez Canedo
1968:160), or about 100 miles northwest of
where Cabeza de Vaca's Maliacones are believed to have been seen. In 1708 Espinosa
reported "Manicu" as still living somewhere
in what is now southern Texas (Maas
1915:36-37). These data have suggestive

30

CAMPBEl.L: INDIANS

value but do not actually demonstrate that the
names Maliacones and Manico refer to the
same Indian population.

Susolas
These were seen by Cabeza de Vaca in
1534-1535 when he was living among the
Avavares. His account is somewhat ambiguous about their territorial range. In giving the relative locations of Indian groups, he
places the Susolas in the vicinity of the
Avavares, Comos, Cutalchuches, and Maliacones, whose winter locations seem to have
been near the lower Nueces River. Elsewhere he notes that the Susolas were near the
Atayos and Coayos in the prickly-pear collecting area. In still another place, he mentions that he had first encountered the Susolas
when he was living with the Mariames on the
lower Guadalupe River. There he had treated
some of them for illness and had been paid in
pecans and animal skins. Thus, of all the
groups said to have converged on the
Guadalupe River to collect pecans in the autumn, only the Susolas are noted by name.
Students of Cabeza de Vaca's travel route in
Texas have shown little interest in locating
the Susolas, and only Coopwood (18991900: 132) and Castaneda (1936,I:72) noted
the reference to Susolas on the Guadalupe
River. Possibly the best that can be done
with the Susolas is to place their principal
range on the lower Nueces River, from
which they went westward or southwestward
for prickly-pear fruit in the summer and
northeastward to the lower Guadalupe River
for pecans in the fall.
A few descriptive details on the Susolas'
culture are recorded. Houses are mentioned
but not described. It is said that when a death
occurred in a house it was immediately tom
down. Hunting may be inferred from the
bow and arrow and the reference to animal
skins. Prickly-pear fruit was eaten in ripened
form, and mention is also made of pricklypear fruit that had been pounded, presumably
after being dried. Prickly-pear fruit was
given to the Spaniards in payment for curing
services. The Susolas also ate pecans, but
only when they were foraging in the lower
Guadalupe River area, as noted above.
The bow and arrow are referred to in two
contexts: warfare and payment for Spanish

medical treatment. Matting was made but
only one use is recorded, as a shroud for
corpses. Baskets were also made, three such
containers being mentioned as holding
prickly-pear fruit.
Hostilities between the Susolas and Atayos
are mentioned. No reason for fighting is
stated, but it is said that the two peoples were
exchanging shots daily when the Spaniards
were in the prickly-pear area. The only life
cycle data recorded have to do with death. A
dead person was covered with a mat, his
house tom down, and relatives wept. The
only curing- practices recorded refer to
Spaniards treating sick persons among the
Susolas. When Cabeza de Vaca was among
the Avavares, some of the Susolas came to
the Avavares encampment and asked him to
treat a wounded man and a number of sick
individuals, one of whom was said to be at
the point of death. Cabeza de Vaca goes into
considerable detail about the man who was
said to be dying. He found this man apparently already dead; he was covered with a
mat, and his house had been tom down.
Cabeza de Vaca could detect no pulse but
went ahead with his curing routine. Later
he was told that the "dead" man had recovered.
Hodge (1907,I:511) has suggested that the
Susolas may have been the same as the
Gueiquesales and Guisoles reported in
northeastern Coahuila and the adjoining part
of Texas in the late seventeenth century. It is
now known that the names Gueiquesales and
Guisoles are variants of the same group
name, but it is grasping at phonetic straws to
relate Cabeza de Vaca's Susolas to the
Gueiquesales, whose rather well-recorded
range was some 250 miles farther west and
northwest (Bolton 1916:285, 299, 301-308;
Figueroa Torres 1963:58, 69, 89, 103-119;
Steck 1932:fr-7, 9-13, 19-21, 24-26).

Comos
This name appears only in Cabeza de
Vaca's group distribution statement, in which
the Comos are said to be closely associated
with A vavares, Maliacones, Cutalchuches,
and Susolas, and this is the basis here for assigning the Comos to an area near the lower
Nueces River northwest of Corpus Christi
Bay. Baskett (1907:264) places the Comos

31

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

just south of the junction of the San Antonio
and Medina rivers, or not far south of the city
of San Antonio. This seems unreasonable,
as does the placement by Lynn et al.
(1977:Table 2) near the coast between the
Brazos and Guadalupe rivers. The pertinent
data in the Spanish records rather clearly
indicate a location not very far inland but
west, not east, of the Guadalupe River.
The Comos are sometimes equated with
the Coayos (Baskett l 907:264n; Davenport
and Wells 1918-1919:221, 231) because
each name is given by Cabeza de Vaca in a
context which closely associates it with Cutalchuches, Maliacones, and Susolas. This
has suggestive value, but does not constitute
proof. Davenport and Wells (ibid.) say that
the names Comos and Coayos probably refer
to the same population and that this population may be identical with either the Como se
Llamas or the Comecrudos reported in the
middle eighteenth century as living along
both sides of the lower Rio Grande in southern Texas and northern Tamaulipas. These
suggested linkages, which are based entirely
on similarity in names, now seem farfetched.
If the Comos can be related to any group
recorded in later times, a somewhat better
case can be made for the group known as
Arcahomos, first recorded in 1737 at one of
the San Antonio missions. The Arcahomos
were said to be closely associated with the
Tacames, who, in the first half of the eighteenth century, were occupying an inland area
lying between the lower sections of the San
Antonio and Nueces rivers (Bolton, in Hodge
1910,II:435-436, 666-667). This would put
the Arcahomos close to the presumed Comos
territory. The difficulty is that by this late
date the Arcahomos, a very poorly documented group, could have been displaced
from some other area.

Coayos
The Coayos are not named in Cabeza de
Vaca's statement of group distribution, but
they are mentioned elsewhere as collecting
prickly-pear fruit in the summer of 1535
close to four other groups: Atayos, Cutalchuches, Maliacones, and Susolas. Thus
there is no evidence of where the Coayos
lived during other seasons, unless it is
assumed that by a slip of memory Cabeza de

Vaca recorded the Comos as Coayos (see
Comos for brief discussion).
Later records (1689-1707) contain three
names that have varying degrees of similarity
to Coayos. These are Cauya, Coaxa, and
Cuajin, all associated with areas farther west,
and each is so poorly recorded that it is not
possible to demonstrate any relationship to
Cabeza de Vaca's Coayos (G6mez Canedo
1968:160; Le6n y otros 1961:219; San Francisco Solano Baptisms, No. 288).

Comment
Three Rivers and the nearby Choke Canyon Reservoir are approximately 85 miles
from the nearest portion of the outer shoreline
of the Gulf of Mexico. According to the interpretation of the Cabeza de Vaca route used
here, at least 11 of his named groups ranged
over Area 2, which lies between Three Rivers
and the Gulf coast It is believed that Cabeza
de Vaca's general line of travel from the
lower Guadalupe River to the prickly-pear
area passed within 50 miles of Three Rivers.
One group, the Acubadaos, may have ranged
within 30 miles of Three Rivers. The center
of the prickly-pear collecting grounds was
probably about 50 miles south-southeast of
Three Rivers.
The 11 groups of Area 2 appear to have
ranged over an inland area of some 5000
square miles. This area extended from the
valley of the lower Guadalupe River southwestward perhaps as far as Santa Gertrudis
Creek, an intermittent stream that flows into
Baffin Bay. The maximum length of Area 2
was at least 110 miles, and its greatest width
probably did not exceed 75 miles. This area
included the inland parts of present-day
Aransas, Nueces, Refugio, and San Patricio
counties and parts of Bee, Calhoun, Duval,
Goliad, Jim Wells, Kleberg, Live Oak, and
Victoria counties.
The Cabeza de Vaca narrative seems to indicate that Area 2 was not characterized by
linguistic uniformity. It is not possible,
however, to determine the nature of the linguistic units represented. Several dialects of
one language may have been spoken; or dialects of two or more languages, either related or unrelated, may have been spoken; or
each group may have spoken a language unrelated to any of the others.

32
In the latter part of his narrative, Cabeza de
Vaca (see Hodge 1959:107) mentions that the
four Spanish survivors had learned to speak
six different "languages" during their six to
seven years in the lower part of Texas. He
does not identify the groups whose languages
were learned, but it may be inferred from the
length of time the Spaniards spent with various Indian groups that the six languages were
probably those spoken by Capoques, Chorrucos, Quevenes, Mariames, Yguazes, and
Avavares. Of these, only the last three can be
placed in Area 2.
Only three native Indian words are recorded by Cabeza de Vaca, and not one of
these is linked with the name of a specific
ethnic group. Cabeza de Vaca does say in
various passages, however, that two or more
groups spoke either the same language or
different languages. The Avavares, Cutalchuches, and Maliacones apparently spoke
different languages. The Avavares are said to
have spoken their own language, as well as
that of the Mariames. It is thus possible to
claim that at least four different dialects or
languages are obliquely reported by Cabeza
de Vaca for Area 2: Mariames, A vavares,
Cutalchuches, and Maliacones. Beyond this,
all statements about dialects or languages and
their broader affiliations must remain speculative.
It has been customary for nearly a century
to relate the languages of some of Cabeza de
Vaca's more westerly Indian groups to several languages for which samples were collected long after the time of Cabeza de Vaca,
particularly Karankawa, Tonkawa, and
Coahuilteco. This is often done without due
regard for the fact that the recorded language
samples obviously do not represent all the
languages once spoken in the general area. It
can be argued, with some degree of plausibility, that the Quevenes may have spoken a
dialect of the language now known as
Karankawa, but it is much more difficult to
argue that the Mariames spoke a dialect of
Tonkawa or that other groups spoke dialects
of Coahuilteco. This speculative categorizing
should be accompanied by clear statements
about the assumptions made and about the
tenuous nature of the linguistic evidence in
each case.
As the cultures of the various groups are
so unevenly described, it is difficult to deter-

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

mine just how many cultural features were
probably shared. If the languages varied
considerably, there may have been a corresponding variation in other aspects of the
cultures. Most of the recorded cultural information pertains to Avavares and Mariames, whose ranges except in summer seem
to have been at opposite ends of Area 2.
These two groups did share a number of
cultural characteristics. Groups ranging between the Avavares and Mariames may also
have shared some of the same characteristics.
It is fairly clear that all groups of Area 2
were hunters- and gatherers, and enough evidence is available to suggest rather strongly
that they shared a distinctive foraging pattern.
These inland peoples relied heavily on the use
of two foodstuffs, pecan nuts and pricklypear fruits, that were naturally produced in
considerable quantities but became edible at
different times. The main sources of these
two foodstuffs were separated by a considerable distance, requiring travel in early summer (for fruits) and in autumn (for nuts). At
other times of the year foods consisted of
whatever was available in the traditional territories. This particular pattern does not seem
to be indicated for other groups encountered
by Cabeza de Vaca.
For one group, the Mariames, there is
sufficient recorded information to give an
impression of the size and shape of their total
foraging territory for a single year. The
Mariames ranged over two rather widely
separated areas that were joined by a narrow
corridor of travel. If plotted on a map, this
territory may be described as bilobate. The
maximum distance between the outer ends of
the lobes may have been as great as 110
miles. Cabeza de Vaca shows that the
Yguazes had a similar foraging range, and
other groups west and southwest of the
Mariames and Yguazes must have had similar
ranges but with shorter corridors of travel
between lobes.
The documents provide no estimates of
total population size for any Indian group of
Area 2. Bits of quantitative data recorded for
the Mariames suggest that this group may
have consisted of no more than 200 individuals during Cabeza de Vaca's time. In
the documents there is no reference to any
group being notably larger or smaller than
another group. It is clear that the settlements

CABEZA DEV ACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

of all groups were temporary and were
moved when foods available in a locality became scarce, or when important foods became seasonably available in restricted areas
elsewhere. No group of Area 2 is mentioned
as living in two or more settlements at the
same time. The limited information on houses
indicates only one type, a circular, domeshaped structure with bent-pole framework
covered by mats. When an encampment was
moved, houses were dismantled and carried
to the new location. As this type of house is
recorded for Avavares and Mariames, it was
probably also used by the nine other groups
of this area.
The only large game animals mentioned
are deer and bison. Deer were hunted in
several ways: one hunter overtaking a single
animal by running until it became exhausted;
burning of dry grasses to localize herds of
deer; and communal driving of deer into salt
water.
In his narrative Cabeza de Vaca states that
he had seen bison only three times, but he
never says where he was when he saw them.
Apparently he saw some bison when he was
living with the Mariames, for he briefly describes bison at the end of his section on the
Mariames. Yet he never indicates that he actually saw Mariames hunting bison. He next
refers to bison after he and his companions
had crossed into what is now northeastern
Mexico and had reached northern Coahuila,
but he does not mention seeing bison hunts
there. He merely refers to bison hides and
their uses. It thus appears that Cabeza de
Vaca's route across North America skirted
the southern edge of the bison range at that
time.
It is puzzling to note that Cabeza de Vaca
never refers to rabbits and rabbit hunting
among the Indian groups of southern Texas.
Rabbit hunts are mentioned only when he
describes Indian groups of Coahuila. Other
small animals, such as rats and mice, frogs,
snakes, as well as certain insects, mentioned
for the Mariames, were probably eaten at
times by all the groups of Area 2.
The use of fish for food among these inland groups must have been minimal, the
documents seeming to indicate only the use
of fish that were collected from overflow
pools of river floodplains during rainy seasons. There is no indication that any of these

33

groups went to the Gulf coast for saltwater
fish or shellfish, and no specific mention of
bartering with coastline groups for these sea
foods. It thus appears that in Cabeza de
Vaca's time there was notable contrast in
subsistence patterns between inland and
coastal populations.
It is sometimes assumed that, while in the
prickly-pear collecting area in summer, the
Indians ate nothing but prickly-pear fruit for
several months. This reflects careless or selective reading of the documents. The Oviedo
account indicates that snails were collected
and eaten-in quantity, and the Cabeza de Vaca
narrative states that while in the prickly-pear
area the Spaniards sometimes received venison as payment for curing services.
The size and density of prickly-pear stands
may have been increased by Indian harvesting activity. If prickly-pear thickets were as
dense as those described in nineteenth-century sources, it must sometimes have been
necessary for Indian individuals to take sticks
and beat out passages into the thickets to get
additional fruit. Any prickly-pear intemode
that lies on the ground can develop roots and
begin upward growth. It is less likely that
prickly-pear plants were spread by means of
fruit seeds that passed unaltered through the
human alimentary tract. Birds would undoubtedly find, consume, and digest most of
these voided seeds.
It is sometimes assumed (for example, see
Kelley 1952a:142-143) that Cabeza de Vaca's prickly-pear area was unique, and that it
was visited during summer by Indian groups
who came to it from all directions. Internal
evidence in the documents lends no support
to this assumption. It is not possible to link
any of Cabeza de Vaca's prickly-pear fruit
collectors with areas to the northwest, west,
southwest, or south of the collecting area described. The Arbadaos and Cuchendados,
who lived near the Rio Grande (Area 3), are
not identified by Cabeza de Vaca as being in
his prickly-pear collecting area. What is really unique about Cabeza de Vaca's pricklypear area is that it was located on the northeastern edge of a large region in southern
Texas and northeastern Mexico where there
were many localized concentrations of the
plant. Such evidence as is recorded in the
two basic documents indicates that Indian
groups came to Cabeza de Vaca's prickly-

34
pear collecting area from a specific nearby
area, located mainly between the lower
Guadalupe and lower Nueces rivers, where
the prickly-pear plant did grow but not in
great profusion. The summer trek to the
prickly-pear area was part of a special inland
subsistence pattern that involved making full
use of such foodstuffs as were seasonally
abundant. These Indian groups were close
enough to a large area of prickly-pear concentration to walk to it and live in it as long as
the fruit was still ripening in quantity. It is of
interest to note that the only kind of food
preservation mentioned is drying of pricklypear fruits, and this dried fruit was used only
during seasonal travel away from the collecting grounds.
Only the Mariames and Susolas can be
firmly connected with pecan harvesting along
the lower Guadalupe River, but there is some
evidence which suggests that the Y guazes
also went there for nuts. As the Oviedo account mentions that Indian groups came to
gather pecans along the Guadalupe River
from distances of 20 to 30 leagues (52 to 78
miles), it is probable that most of the groups
of Area 2 participated in the pecan harvest
when there was a good crop.
The collection of pecans is basically not
very different from the collection of pricklypear fruit in this area. There was a localized
seasonal abundance of both foodstuffs, and
Indians nearest to the sources of supply
moved in to exploit each kind of food as long
as it lasted. If any other kind of foodstuff had
been available in quantity, the Indians would
also have exploited it in the same way.
Seasonal migration to collect pecans and
prickly-pear fruit may have great time depth
in Area 2, and specialists in the archaeology
of that area may eventually find it reflected in
the distributions of distinctive styles of prehistoric artifacts.
Roots of unspecified plants are said to
have been critical in the winter diet of the
Mariames and are also reported as eaten in
winter by the A vavares. Roots of various
kinds were probably important winter foods
among other groups of Area 2. The Mariame
data link root baking with some kind of earth
or pit oven, traces of which may eventually
be found by archaeologists. It would be of
much interest to discover what plants of the
lower Guadalupe River area produce roots or

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

tubers that are nontoxic and nutritious after
being baked.
Dietary deficiencies may partially explain
the eating of pulverized bone, earth, wood,
and deer droppings by the Mariames.
Very little is recorded about clothing and
ornaments of the Indian groups of Area 2. Apparently very little or no clothing was worn
except in cold weather, skin robes and moccasins being mentioned for the Mariames.
Undescribed ornaments were inserted in the
perforated lips and nipples of Mariame males.
Information on handicrafts and the resulting artifacts is minimal. It seems clear, however, that bows and arrows were made and in
universal use. No pottery was manufactured,
but baskets or bags were made and used for
containers. Nets and mats were produced,
and the mortar and pestle may be inferred
from statements about Mariame food preparation.
No group in Area 2 is reported as being in
any way dominant over another group, nor is
any group referred to as a subdivision of another. If there was a tribal organization anywhere in Area 2 during Cabeza de Vaca's
time, it is not reflected by such data as have
been recorded. Political leaders of any kind
are not mentioned. The basic sociopolitical
unit may be thought of as the band, although
the descriptive information is so meager that a
more neutral term, "group," has been used in
this study. Hostilities between groups are
occasionally referred to, but little is said
about motivation or behavior when fighting.
It may be inferred that certain kinds of
customary behavior were present and possibly widespread in Area 2. Among these are
group exogamy, female infanticide, the menstrual taboo, and prohibition of sexual intercourse between man and wife for two years
after the birth of a child.
Shamans were probably universal in this
area, although their behavior is never described. Presumably the shaman's main
function was curing illness. It may be inferred from the curing activities of Spaniards
that shamans were paid or at least received
gifts when patients were treated.
Such ritual and ceremonial activity as is
mentioned involved dancing and feasting.
The Avavares appear to have had at least one
three-day ceremony. One passage implies
that the sun was regarded as a deity. One

35

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

legend recorded for the Avavares, and mentioned as known to other groups, involves a
supernatural figure who performed surgical
operations.
Very little is said about intergroup trade or
barter in Area 2. Bows were involved in
trade between Mariames and Avavares, and it
may be inferred that some groups of Area 2
obtained Spanish clothing and weapons in
trade from coastline groups of Area 1.
Cabeza de Vaca's experience as a traveling, freelance trader among the Texas Indians
has been greatly exaggerated. This trading
occurred while he was living among the
Chorruco east of the lower Brazos River.
The brief account of his trading activities
does not give the name of a single Indian
group with whom he traded when away from
his Chorruco base. He says that he went into
the interior as far as he chose, but he specifies no distances. He also says that he traveled along the coast 40 or 50 leagues (up to
130 miles), but no directions are indicated.
He does not describe any terrain he traversed
or refer to the cultural characteristics of any
Indians with whom he dealt. Later in his
narrative, after telling about his moving
westward along the coast to the Mariames, he
says nothing about having previously traded
with Mariames or any Indian group farther
west or southwest. Thus the record fails to
support those who have assumed that Cabeza
de Vaca had traded as far west as the pricklypear collecting grounds and beyond, or as far
north as the agricultural Caddoan groups of
eastern Texas.
Most of the Indian groups of Area 2 have
at times been referred to as "Coahuiltecans."
Originally this name was used to refer only to
certain groups that were believed to have
spoken the language now known as
Coahuilteco. In recent years the name Coahuiltecan has come to be rather loosely used
to refer to nearly all of the hunting-andgathering groups of southern Texas and
northeastern Mexico, who are assumed to
have had similar cultures. The widespread
similarities in culture have never been
demonstrated. As now commonly used, the
name Coahuiltecan has about the same connotation as the name Chichimec, which in
Mexico has long been used to refer to any
hunting-and-gathering group north of the
Valley of Mexico. It serves no useful pur-

pose to refer to the Indian groups of Area 2
as Coahuiltecans.
Failure to analyze the documents and
structure the information on geographic location and culture for each Indian group has all
too often led to unrealistic overgeneralizing
about Cabeza de Vaca's Texas Indians. The
following statement, selected because it is an
extreme example, overgeneralizes to the point
of absurdity:
It was the adventurer's misfortune to
be thrown among destitute nomadic Indians who were always on the edge of
starva~ion. They had no agriculture of
their own, but lived on fish, oysters
and the roots of water plants, except in
the autumn when they went inland to
gorge themselves on prickly pear, walnuts and pine-nuts. They got an occasional deer by infinite labour ... his little
company of four broke away from the
feast of the prickly pears somewhere
between the Sabine and Trinity
rivers ... (Brebner 1933:72-73).
This shows what can happen when the
time and place contexts of specific bits of information from the Cabeza de Vaca documents are ignored. The various hunting-andgathering groups distributed along the Texas
coastal plain from just east of the Brazos
River to the Rio Grande, and then westward
as far as northern Coahuila, are made to appear very much alike, all subsisting on the
same foods. The statement is made without
any evident awareness of the various environmental units involved. Cabeza de Vaca
carefully distinguishes between shoreline and
inland groups, and no shoreline group is said
to have gone inland for prickly-pear fruit, and
certainly not between the Sabine and Trinity
rivers in humid southeastern Texas. "Pinenuts" (pifi.6n) were not available in Cabeza de
Vaca's time and are not available today anywhere on the Texas coastal plain, but are
common in mountainous northern Coahuila.
The "occasional deer" taken by "infinite
labour" is not compatible with Oviedo's
mention of a single deer hunt that yielded 500
animals.

Area 3
In Area 3, near the lower Rio Grande,
Cabeza de Vaca encountered only two Indian

36

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

groups, the Arbadaos and the Cuchendados.
They appear to have lived northeast of Falc6n
Lake, either in or very near present-day Jim
Hogg County. It is clear that these two
groups were not seen by Cabeza de Vaca in
his prickly-pear area. They had prickly-pear
concentrations in their own area, and there
was no need for them to travel to the lower
Nueces River for fruit. It was after leaving
the Cuchendados that the Rio Grande was
crossed, and shortly thereafter the Spaniards
saw their first mountains in what is now
northern Nuevo Le6n.

Arbadaos
Cabeza de Vaca indicates that in the late
spring or early summer of 1535 he and his associates traveled with the Maliacones for one
day and came to a settlement of the Arbadaos,
the distance traveled being recorded as seven
leagues, or about 18 miles. The direction was
evidently southwestward, since the Oviedo
account states that the Arbadaos were first
seen some 17 to 20 leagues (44 to 52 miles)
from the river that is identifiable as the Rio
Grande. Negative evidence seems to indicate
that Cabeza de Vaca and his men passed west
of the Sand Plain that extends from the Gulf
coast westward into eastern Jim Hogg
County, and the most plausible location for the
Arbadaos is an area that centers in northwestern Jim Hogg County, or in the general vicinity of present Hebbronville. According to the
documents, the Arbadaos were seen in an
area where water was scarce and where dense
thorny vegetation is described, apparently
along intermittent stream courses. The Spaniards spent eight days with the Arbadaos.
It seems important to note that the Arbadaos were encountered more or less southwest of Cabeza de Vaca's prickly-pear concentration and that the Arbadaos are not mentioned as gathering fruit there, apparently because they had access to enough prickly-pear
thickets in their own area. No Indian groups
beyond the Maliacones, that is, to the south
and southwest, are identified as going northward for prickly-pear fruit.
Hodge (1907,1:74) equates the Arbadaos
with the Acubadaos, probably because the
name Arbadaos does not appear on Cabez.a de
Vaca's group distribution list, but this is not
acceptable because internal evidence in the

documents indicates that the Arbadaos and
Acubadaos were separated by a distance of at
least 100 miles. Placement of the Arbadaos
near San Marcos, Texas, by Castaneda
(1936,1:73) and by Terrell (1962:182) is untenable because, in addition to difficulties
with the direction of travel, the water resources and vegetation of the San Marcos
area do not agree with the Spanish descriptions. Lynn et al. (1977:Fig. 16) place the
Arbadaos on the Rio Grande in the vicinity of
Falc6n Lake, which is too far south for
Oviedo's citations of the distances traveled.
The language spoken by the Arbadaos is
said to have been the same as that spoken by
the Cuchendados, the next group encountered
after leaving the Arbadaos. Some cultural detail is recorded for the Arbadaos. House form
is not described, but it is stated that houses
were covered by mats. It is implied that these
mats were transported when a settlement was
moved. The Arbadaos had dogs, two of
which the Spaniards bartered for and ate, but
it is not stated that dogs were eaten by the
natives. At the time of Cabeza de Vaca's visit
the Arbadaos were suffering from hunger,
and practically all their waking hours were
spent in the search for something to eat.
Foods mentioned include meat of unspecified
animals; prickly-pear pads and fruit (the latter
eaten both green and ripe); and two kinds of
seeds, one of which may have been from the
Texas ebony. Cooking methods include
broiling (meat) and baking (green pricklypear fruits and stem pads apparently baked in
some sort of pit oven). Bows and arrows are
mentioned, as well as nets (uses unspecified). Hides were processed by scraping
(tools not described). Combs are also mentioned, but these were made by Cabeza de
Vaca and traded to the Arbadaos.
Newcomb (1961:60) has suggested that,
because of similarities in the names, the Arbadaos may be the same people as the Borrados later recorded in N uevo Le6n. This does
not appear to be reasonable, since Arbadaos
is an Indian name and Borrados a Spanish
name. Any resemblances in the names are
evidently fortuitous.

Cuchendados
This name does not appear in a descriptive
context in Cabeza de Vaca's narrative and is

37

CABEZA DEVACA AMONG THE INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

merely mentioned as the name of a group
which seems to have been the last one encountered in what is now southern Texas.
The name may not be correctly applied, but it
has often been interpreted as referring to a
nameless group with which Cabeza de Vaca
and his men spent about 15 days in the late
spring or early summer of 1535. It is clear
enough from the Oviedo account that these
people were first seen at least 20 to 25 miles
north of the river that is identifiable as the Rio
Grande. They lived about the same distance
from the Arbadaos. Their settlements are described as being in wooded localities, evidently along tributaries of the Rio Grande,
and there is no mention of water shortage.
Hodge (1907,1:370) implies that the Cuchendados lived on the Gulf coast, but no
evidence supports this. Lynn et al.
(1977:Fig. 16) place the Cuchendados on
both sides of the Rio Grande in the vicinity of
Falc6n Lake. Since the recorded travel distance indicates a location about 25 miles from
the river, it is possible to be more precise and
assign the Cuchendados to an area in or near
southwestern Jim Hogg County.
Some cultural detail is recorded for the
Cuchendados. The language spoken is said
to have been the same as that spoken by the
Arbadaos. Houses are not described, but
two settlements are mentioned, one consisting of two or three houses (ranchos), the
other of 40 to 50 houses. This is the first
reference in Cabeza de Vaca's narrative to
any group of southern Texas having been
seen in more than one settlement at the same
time. Foods mentioned include meat (animals unspecified) and prickly-pear stem pads
and fruits, the latter eaten both green and
ripe. Green prickly-pear foods were baked in
some kind of pit oven.
It is among these people that Cabeza de
Vaca first describes use of the mesquite bean
pod (mezquiquez) for food, but its use is
rather clearly indicated as part of a ceremony,
or at least a special social occasion. The seed
pods (green? dry?) were placed in a hole in
the ground (dimensions not stated) and
pounded with a wooden pestle over five feet
long and said to have the diameter of a human
leg. This pounding was done by an adult
male, not an adult female as might be expected if the operation was routine food preparation. In addition to earth that fell from

the walls of the pit, handfuls of earth were
added from time to time by the man who did
the pounding. The mixture of pod flour and
earth was taken from the hole and put into a
container said to be like a two-handled basket
(espuerta). Enough water was then added to
cover the materials, and additional earth was
added after repeated tasting. Then people sat
around the container and scooped out paste
with their hands, spitting out the hard-cased
seeds and other unpulverized bits, which
were put on an animal skin. Later these expectorated materials were returned to the
empty container and water added. The procedure was repeated three or four times.
Cabeza de Vaca referred to the occasion as a
"banquet" that continued intermittently as
long as the Spaniards were among these people. He also added that those who ate this
food ended up with distended abdomens.
Newcomb (1961:42-43) attributes this use of
mesquite to the Arbadaos instead of the
Cuchendados.
The Spaniards were asked to cure sick
persons and to place their hands on children.
Cabeza de Vaca noted that the Cuchendados
were the first people encountered along his
route who regarded Spaniards with such awe
that food was given to them even when it
meant that the Indians themselves had
nothing to eat

Comment
Although Cabeza de Vaca and his companions passed rapidly through Area 3, the
documents yield considerable information on
the two groups encountered. Area 3 is of
special interest because its two Indian groups
are said to have spoken the same language,
which apparently did not duplicate any language previously noted by Cabeza de Vaca.
These Indians must have had access to the
local concentrations of prickly pear reported
by Davenport's nineteenth-century observers.
Here the mesquite bean is first reported as
being used for food, which suggests that this
plant was not common farther north during
Cabeza de Vaca's time.
Settlements in Area 3 seem to have been
somewhat larger than those of Area 2 and the
Cuchendados are reported as living in at least
two settlements at the same time. Certain cultural features, however, seem to be no differ-

38
ent from those of Area 2, such as manufacture of basketry, use of some kind of pit oven,

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

and possibly the house type, since houses are
described as being covered with mats.

The Coahuiltecans and Their Neighbors*
T. N. Campbell
mid-nineteenth century Mexican linguists
(Orozco y Berra 1864:61-69; Pimentel 1862,
1865,11:409-413) designated some of the Indian groups as Coahuilteco because it was
believed that they had spoken various dialects
of a language known to have been spoken in
Coahuila and Texas. (Coahuilteco is a Spanish adjective formed from the name Coahuila.) This language is mainly documented
by published manuals prepared by two friars
for use in administering church ritual in one
native language at certain missions of southern Texas and northeastern Coahuila (Garcia
1760; Vergara 1965). Unfortunately, neither
these manuals nor other documents specify
the names of all Indian groups who originally
spoke Coahuilteco. Remnants of other linguistic groups also entered the same missions, and some of these had learned to speak
Coahuilteco because it had become the dominant language spoken by Indians at those
missions.
This inability to identify all the named Indian groups who originally spoke Coahuilteco has been a perennial stumbling-block in
efforts to distinguish them from their neighbors. After a few additional language samples became known for the region, linguists
concluded that these represented languages
related to Coahuilteco and grouped them in a
Coahuiltecan family (Powell 1891; Sapir
1920; Swanton 1940). This encouraged ethnohistorians and anthropologists to believe
that the region was occupied by numerous
small Indian groups who spoke related languages and shared the same basic culture. A
"Coahuiltecan culture" was constructed by
assembling bits of both specific and generalized information recorded by Spaniards at
various times for widely scattered and very
limited portions of the region (Ruecking
1953, 1954a, 1954b, 1955a, 1955b; see also
Wm. W. Newcomb 1961). Later, this belief
in a widespread linguistic and cultural uniformity was seriously questioned. In Nuevo
Leon evidence of at least one language not
relatable to Coahuilteco has come to light

* THE LOWLAND PORTION OF NORTH-

eastem Mexico and adjacent southern Texas
was originally occupied by hundreds of
small, apparently autonomous, distinctively
named local groups or bands of Indians,
most of whom seem to have lived by hunting
and gathering. During the Spanish colonial
period these groups were extensively displaced from their traditional foraging territories by Europeans from the south and by
Apaches from the north.
In their documents the Spanish immigrants
did not describe Indians in much detail, and
they had little interest in developing a formal
classification of the numerous ethnic units.
For these hunting-and-gathering peoples
there was no obvious basis for classification.
Major cultural contrasts were not noted, and a
tribal form of organization was not evident.
Few Europeans were able to recognize significant similarities and differences in the native
languages and dialects spoken. Each Indian
group was commonly referred to as a naci6n;
and when Spaniards referred to Indians collectively, it was usually done in practical but
superficial ways. The Indians were most often grouped on the basis of association with
major terrain features or with Spanish jurisdictional units; however, in Nuevo Leon certain Indian populations were linked on the
basis of shared cultural peculiarities, such as
styles of hairdress and body decoration. All
this has made it difficult for modem scholars
to achieve a sorting of these hunting-andgathering groups that reflects valid differences in language and culture.
The first attempt at classification, which
was based on language, came after most of
the Indian groups had become extinct. In the
*This paper appeared originally in the Handbook of
North American Indians 10:343-358 (1983). It is reprinted herein with the permission of the Smithsonian Institution and Dr. Ives Goddard, Managing
Editor of the Handbook. Figure 5 in the paper is
reprinted with the permission of the Thomas
Gilcrease Museum of Tulsa, Oklahoma.

39

40

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

(Gursky 1964 ), and linguists are beginning
to doubt that any of the other language samples recorded for the region are good enough
for demonstrating relationships with Coahuilteco (Goddard 1979). Thus, interpretive
opinion about the region as a whole is now in
a state of confusion, but it is becoming evident that the Coahuiltecan concept has been
extended beyond the bounds of credibility.

REGIONAL DEFINITION
The identifiable Coahuiltecans and many
of their numerous neighbors were associated
with an extensive coastal plain environment
in northeastern Mexico and Texas (Fig. 2).
This plain includes the northern part of what
in Mexico is called the Gulf Coastal Lowlands and the southern part of what in the
United States is called the Gulf Coastal Plain
(West 1964). Except on the northeast, this
region has clear-cut boundaries: the shore line
of the Gulf of Mexico on the east, the
northwest-trending mountain chain of Mexico
on the west, and the eroded southern margin
of the Edwards Plateau of Texas on the
north. East and southeast of San Antonio,
Texas, the boundary is somewhat arbitrary.
The southeastward course of the Guadalupe
River to the Gulf of Mexico is chosen here
because it marks certain changes in plant and
animal life, as well as in Indian languages
and culture. Thus the region as here defined
includes southern Texas, northeastern Coahuila, and the greater parts of both Nuevo
Le6n and Tamaulipas. Most of this region is
characterized by flat to gently rolling terrain,
particularly in Texas, but in Nuevo Le6n and
Tamaulipas several isolated mountain masses
occur east of the Sierra Madre Oriental. The
region is dominated by one drainage system,
that of the Rio Grande, which flows across
its middle portion and has a delta on the
coast. Important but smaller drainages are
found both north and south of the Rio
Grande. The coast line from the Guadalupe
River of Texas southward to central Tamaulipas is notable for its chain of elongated,
offshore barrier islands, behind which are
shallow bays and lagoons. The region's climate is best described as megathermal and
generally semiarid. Rainfall declines with

greater distance from the coast, but no part of
the region can be classified as true desert.
In this region horticulture among Indians
was confined to certain groups of southern
Tamaulipas; elsewhere hunting-and-gathering
subsistence techniques prevailed. The region
roughly coincides with the Tamaulipan Biotic
Province of biologists (Blair 1950; West
1964) which has a wide range of soil types
that fosters localized abundance of wild
plants yielding edible foodstuffs, such as
mesquite bean pods, maguey root crowns,
prickly-pear fruit, pecans, acorns, and various kinds of roots and tubers. The introduction of European livestock altered vegetation
patterns, and extensive grassland areas were
invaded by thorny brush vegetation.
The deer was the most widespread and
readily available large game animal. Bison
were confined mainly to southern Texas,
with one notable southward extension across
the Rio Grande into northeastern Coahuila.
Smaller game animals widely available included the peccary and armadillo, rabbits,
rats and mice, various birds, and numerous
species of snakes, lizards, frogs, toads, and
land snails. Fish were found in all perennial
streams, and both fish and shellfish were
available in saline waters along the Gulf
coast.

Figure 2. TERRITORY OF THE COAHUILTECANS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS.
Numbers refer to areas described at the end of the
chapter and in the synonymy.

41

COAHUILTECANS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS

Prior to European colonization this region
was known only from observations recorded
in documents pertaining to the travels of
Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca in 1534-1535.
The Mexican portion of the region was colonized over a period of approximately 150
years, beginning about 1590. The colonists
came by land from southern Mexico, principally by an inland route west of the Sierra
Madre Oriental, crossing the mountains by
easy passes west and northwest of Monterrey, Nuevo Leon. Effective colonization of
northern Tamaulipas and southern Texas
came relatively late, mainly in the eighteenth
century.
This is one of the most poorly known regions of Indian North America. The reasons
why it is so poorly known have never been
clearly stated. Since all its native Indian
groups are extinct, what can be learned about
each group must come from miscellaneous
observations sparingly recorded in various
kinds of documents written before its extinction. Early drawings and paintings by Europeans, artifact collections in museums, and
limited archeological excavations have yet to
yield much information that can be linked
with specific Indian groups of the historic
period. In the archives of Europe and
America the innumerable unpublished documents that pertain to this region have not been
thoroughly searched, and the information
collected has not been meticulously evaluated
and analyzed for the purpose of making, for
each identifiable Indian group, reliable statements about its earliest known territorial
range, the language originally spoken, and
the nature of its culture before displacement.
Little effort has been made to study group
names and their orthographic variants in order to reduce confusion about the actual
number of ethnic units present in the region.
Minimal attention has been paid to definition
of the major factors involved in Indian group
displacement, population decline, and extinction or absorption. After initial displacement,
the movements of very few Indian groups
have been painstakingly traced through dated
documents. Many groups were last recorded
as remnant populations associated with
Spanish missions, but little use has been
made of information recorded in mission
registers and censuses. Assessments of
group territorial range and population size,

both before and after displacement, have been
superficial, and there have been few attempts
to ascertain the extent of changes in language
and culture during the historic period. With
such limitations, it is evident that most statements about Indians of this region must be
general in nature and largely tentative.
In early attempts to define culture areas or
provinces in North America this region was
found to be difficult to categorize. Initially
parts of the region were assigned to other,
better-known cultural provinces. 0. T.
Mason (1896) divided the Texas portion between a Gulf Coast and a Plains area. Wissler (1917) assigned parts of the region to
three culture areas: Southeastern, Southwestern, and Nahua. Kroeber (1939) recognized
more unity when he designated a Northwest
Gulf Coast area, but this extended eastward
almost to the Mississippi River. Wm. W.
Newcomb (1956) defined a smaller Western
Gulf area that terminated at Galveston Bay in
southeastern Texas. These later conceptualizations recognized occupation of an exten.sive coastal plain by Indian peoples who
subsisted without benefit of horticulture and
who exhibited a relatively low level of
cultural complexity. It appears that more
cultural unity can be demonstrated for
Newcomb's Western Gulf province if its
northeastern boundary is moved westward to
the lower Guadalupe River of Texas. Even
with this modification, Newcomb's Western
Gulf is still not a sharply defined cultural
province.

DISPLACEMENT
One continuing theme throughout the
Spanish colonial period was displacement of
hunting-and-gathering groups, which resulted in fragmentation and population decline. This displacement phenomenon was
complex, and there has been no intensive
study of it in this region comparable to that of
Griffen (1969) for central northern Mexico.
The indigenous Indian groups were displaced
by two invading populations-Spaniards
from southern Mexico and Apaches from the
Plains area of northwestern Texas.
The best-documented displacements resulted from the slow, uneven northward ad-

42
vance of the Spanish settlement frontier. Displaced Indian groups tended to move northward away from a Spanish settlement, but
sometimes there were movements to the east
or west. As the frontier moved northward,
some groups that had been previously displaced were displaced again. In some areas it
is evident that European-introduced diseases,
such as smallpox and measles, had moved
ahead of the Spanish frontier and had reduced
the size of many groups before they were
initially displaced (Figueroa Torres 1963).
When Spanish settlers arrived in a new
area they often occupied the favored Indian
encampment localities. They brought livestock that competed with wild grazing and
browsing animals. Game animals were
thinned or driven away by Spanish hunters
with firearms. The Indians turned to livestock as a substitute for game animals, and
loss of livestock brought punitive action by
Spaniards. European goods that had come to
be desired by Indians were taken by theft, by
raids on isolated ranches, and sometimes by
attacks on Spanish supply trains. Frustration
and accumulated resentments led to poorly
organized Indian rebellions that were invariably followed by Spanish retaliation. Eventually most of the Indians left the immediate
area, although some chose to remain and coexist with Spaniards (Alessio Robles 1938;
Espinosa 1964; Le6n y otros 1961).
Displacement by Apaches occurred only in
the northern part of this region, where the
northward-advancing Spanish frontier converged with the leading edge of the southeastward expansion of Apaches from the
southern Plains. In the first half of the seventeenth century these Apaches acquired horses
from Spanish colonists of New Mexico and
soon dominated their southern Plains environment. In 1683-1684 Juan Domfnguez de
Mendoza traveled from El Paso eastward into
the western part of the Edwards Plateau of
Texas, and his itinerary clearly indicates
Apache dominance by that date (Mendoza, in
Bolton 1916; Williams 1962). This southeastward expansion seems to have been intensified by the Pueblo Indian Revolt of
1680, during which all Spanish colonists
were driven from New Mexico and the
Apaches lost their prime source of good
horses. Their attention was apparently drawn
to the Spanish settlements of Coahuila, where

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

horses were to be had. In his itinerary Dominguez de Mendoza recorded the names of
numerous Indian groups east of the lower
Pecos River who had been or were being
displaced by Apaches in 1683-1684. Variants of many of these group names were
found in later documents that pertain to
northeastern Coahuila and the adjoining part
of Texas, for example, Abau (found later as
Hiabu), Acani (Ocana), Humez (Hume), Papan (Papanac), Pucha (Patzau), Puguahian or
Paguachian (Pacuache), and Tojuma (Toamar).
By the middle eighteenth century the
Apaches themselves were displaced from the

Entrance

~__,------------@:

\

------------- .... :\
\

'

''
\

~-::::::-----,
.. __

I

' '

\ \

8

..'

Owen

Entrance -

,..--,
: Approximate site

convent
yard

il ~~~~c~d
l

''------'),?:::
8

'

'1'__'''1

1--,
'' ''
'' ''
'' ''
,,,

Arc,ed ent~nce A ~
r---~---r.c::::::J=
i ___
:
I

i_______

i==:!!:::!=!~!i!/

~ :

.
~

I

:' c3:'
A

Arched OOOrways

S

Bastions or bulwarks

'l---'

_Existing wOrks
___ Ruinec works

"'

100

Figure 3. PLAN OF MISSION SAN
FRANCISCO DE LA ESPADA AT SAN
ANTONIO, TEXAS. The Indian quarters built
of stone and mortar formed the walls of the mission
compound. The mission was one of the centers of
Indian activity during the eighteenth century until
after partial secularization in 1794, when it was
abandoned by the Indians and the field neglected
(Berlandier 1969:8). In 1762, 207 Indians lived in the
mission; by 1794 there were about 40 (Habig
1968:270).
[after Comer 1890]

COAHUILTECANS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS

highlands of central Texas by Comanches
and moved down onto the coastal plain of
southern Texas, where they were commonly
referred to as Lipan Apaches. These Apaches
in turn displaced the last Indian groups native
to southern Texas, most of whom ended up
at Spanish missions in San Antonio (Fig. 3)
(Campbell and Campbell 1981). By 1790
Spaniards were little concerned with the remnants of aboriginal hunting-and-gathering
groups and faced the problem of containing
various Apache groups in a large area that
extended from the Gulf coast of southern
Texas westward across northern Coahuila
and Chihuahua.
In one area the combined effects of Spanish and Apache displacements led to unusual
ethnic complexity: northeastern Coahuila and
the adjacent part of Texas. Here the Indian
groups native to the area were joined by
groups displaced from the south by
Spaniards, from the north by Apaches, and
from the west as a result of the SpanishIndian wars of the middle seventeenth
century in western Coahuila and Chihuahua
(Griffen 1969). Some groups, in order to
escape from both Spaniards and Apaches,
combined and migrated northeastward into
open areas east of the central Texas
highlands. Among those who are best
documented by records of travel across that
part of Texas are Ervipiame, Pamaya,
Sijame, Ticmamar (Tumamar), and Xarame
(Bolton 1970; Campbell 1975, 1979). Failure to chart the recorded movements of
displaced peoples in this especially complex
area has been the source of much confusion
in ethnic group identification and classification.

SPANISH MISSIONS
In this region Spanish missions were especially numerous. Although rationalized by
Europeans in a variety of ways, the Christian
missions of northeastern New Spain represented an institution that provided places of
refuge for remnants of displaced and declining Indian populations. Each mission was
established on the forefront of the advancing
Spanish frontier. New missions were built
as the irregular line of settlements moved

43

forward, and older missions were left behind
to decline in importance. Each mission was
agriculturally based and could not be maintained very long unless it continued to receive
recruits to replace its normally declining Indian population, which constituted the mission's labor force.
The missions were unevenly distributed.
Some were more or less isolated; others were
clustered, two to five in number, in relatively
small areas, as in northeastern Coahuila and
southern Texas, where the number of displaced Indian groups was large because of
combined Spanish and Apache pressures.
Clustered missions always had a nearby protective military garrison (presidio). Some
missions had a very short life span, lasting
only a few years, but others lasted as long as
a century. A few were moved one or more
times because of inadequate subsistence resources or because of desertion by their Indians. Eventually all missions were either
abandoned or transformed into parish
churches.
The evidence is limited, but it appears that
the total number of separate Indian groups
represented at particular missions throughout
their existence was highly variable, ranging
from less than 20 groups to as many as 100
(Hodge 1907, 1910, various mission entries;
Campbell 1979). Many Indian groups were
represented at a mission by less than 10 individuals, sometimes by one individual only.
Missions in existence the longest usually had
more groups represented, particularly in the
north. At no time does any mission Indian
village seem to have been notably large,
usually consisting of no more than a few
hundred Indians.
Each mission had a different mix of Indian
groups. Remnants of many groups came
from a relatively large area surrounding a
particular mission, but some remnants came
from distant areas, reflecting complex movement patterns of groups displaced at different
times over a large part of northern Mexico
and Texas (Campbell 1979). Sometimes all
surviving Indians of a single group seem to
have entered one particular mission, but individuals and families of a single ethnic group
might enter as many as five or six different
missions. The available evidence suggests
that remnants of some Indian groups never
entered a Spanish mission.

44
EXTINCTION AND ABSORPTION
Most groups lost their identities as freeunits during the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, their distinctive names
one by one, disappearing from written rec~
ords. The.i~ decline was the result of prolonged ~ttntion: deaths in periodic epidemics,
death.s m warfare (early rebellions against
Spamsh control, disputes with other local
gr~:mps.' and attacks by intrusive Apaches),
~gra!10n o~ remnants to other regions, punitive dispersion by Spaniards to work at dista~t plantations and mines, high infant mortality, and general demoralization (Alessio
Robles 1938; Bolton 1970; Campbell 1975;
Hoyo 1972; Le6n y otros 1961; Saldivar
194?>. Sm~l. remnants of some groups lost
theu identities by merging with larger
remnants of other groups. By 1800 the names
of very few ethnic units were noted in documents, and by 1900 the names of all Indian
groups native to the region had disappeared
(Swanton 1940).
The last bastions of ethnic identity were
Spanish i:n!ssions and small, unstable refugee
commumties near a few Spanish or Mexican
towns. The communities were tolerated because the Indians caused little trouble and the
communities were convenient reservoirs of
unskilled labor. In both missions and
refugee communities the original ethnic
names ~eased to be important because of intermamages. By ~e close of the eighteenth
century most missions had been terminated
and ~d.ian families were given small parcels
o~ mtss10n l~d. Eventually all surviving Indians passed mto the lower economic levels
of Mexican society. In 1981 descendants of
some aboriginal groups still lived in various
communities of Mexico and Texas, but
few attempts have been made to discover
individuals who can demonstrate this descent.
~oving

ETHNIC GROUP IDENTIFICATION
For this region and various areas immediately adjacent to it scholars have encountered
over 1,000 ethnic group names in documents
that cover a period of approximately 350

CAMPBEI.L: INDIANS

years. This remarkably large number of
names poses questions that have seldom been
asked. Does each recorded name signify a
separate and distinct ethnic unit or were
some units known by two or more' names at
the same time or at different times? Do these
names signify groups that were native to the
r~gion, or do some names refer to groups
displaced from adjoining regions? How
~any.of the names refer to groups that were
m .e.xistence at particular selected dates?
Cntical studies of ethnic group names have
barely begun, but those that have been made
show that the total number of recorded names
exceeds the number of actual ethnic units
possibly by as much as 25%. Group name~
are recorded very unevenly. Some names are
known from. a ~ingle document,. which may
or may not mdicate a geographic location.
Other names may appear in 10 or 12 documents, and still others may appear in
hundreds of documents, making it possible to
demonstrate ethnic continuity over a long
span of time. Sometimes documents clearly
indicate that two or more names refer to the
same ethnic unit. It has been shown that a
substantial number of names refer to Indian
groups that were displaced from adjoining
areas (Campbell 1979). Some groups evidently became extinct very early or later became known by different names.
One knotty problem in ethnic identification
arises when modem scholars misinterpret
orthographic .variants of the same group
n~.e. Phonencally complex names of native
ongm have been rendered by Spanish writers
i!l an astonishing number of ways, sometimes 50 or more. Some name variants are so
badly distorted that scholars have concluded
that they signify additional ethnic units. One
special study of name variants in southern
Texas indicates that 18 renditions of one
na~e had ~een mistakenly interpreted as refemng to six separate ethnic units instead of
one (Campbell 1977). Similar studies may
further reduce the total number of Indian
groups belie~ed to haye lived in this region.
~e best mformatton on the meanings of
native group names comes from Nuevo Le6n
do~uments, in which Spanish translations of
native names are often given (Hoyo 1960).
Over 60% of these names refer to localized
topographic and vegetational features.
Other names refer to specific plants and

COAHUILTECANS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS

animals and to body decoration. Group
names of Spanish origin are not numerous,
less than 10% of all recorded names, and
usually refer to physical characteristics,
cultural traits, and environmental details.
Although documentary evidence is hard to
find, there is enough to suggest that some
Spanish names duplicate native group names
already recorded.
Modern attempts to standardize the spelling of Indian group names for this region
have either been limited in scope (Hodge
1907, 1910) or impractical (Ruecking 1954a).
The pronunciation of ethnic group names of
native origin cannot be indicated with authority because all Indian groups are extinct
and samples of very few languages spoken
were ever recorded (Goddard 1979). Spanish writers rarely placed accent marks on
Indian names to indicate stress. In the twentieth century it has become customary to follow Spanish phonetics and place stress on the
next to last syllable when the native name
ends in a vowel or in N or S, and on the last
syllable when the name ends in other consonants.

Identifying Coahuiltecan Groups
There is no question about the reality of a
language known as Coahuilteco, but it is not
at present possible to identify all the Indian
groups who spoke dialects of this language.
Since cultural description is so limited, it is
not possible to identify groups as Coahuiltecans by using strictly cultural criteria.
Although far from satisfactory, the best
information on Coahuilteco-speaking groups
comes from statements made by two missionaries, Damian Mazanet and Bartholome
Garcia. In 1690 and again in 1691 Mazanet
traveled northeastward from a mission near
Candela in eastern Coahuila to the vicinity of
present San Antonio, Texas, and recorded the
names of 39 Indian groups encountered
(G6mez Canedo 1968). In his account of the
1691 journey Mazanet stated that a single
language was spoken throughout the area
traversed. This language was apparently
Coahuilteco, since some of the recorded and
translated place-names are identifiable as
Coahuilteco words (Goddard 1979). Coahuilteco was probably the dominant language
of the area, but some groups may have

45

spoken Coahuilteco only as a second language. By 1690 the area traversed by
Mazanet must have received some groups
displaced by Apaches, and for two groups
named by Mazanet, Jumano and Hape, there
is acceptable evidence of such displacement
(Campbell 1979). It is doubtful that the native language of all groups displaced southward by Apaches was Coahuilteco.
Garcia (1760), in a manual for the administration of church ritual in the Coahuilteco
language, listed the names of 18 Indian
groups at missions in southern Texas (San
Antonio~ and northeastern Coahuila
(Guerrero) who spoke dialects of Coahuilteco
(Fig. 4). It is evident from other documents
that some of the groups named did not
originally speak dialects of Coahuilteco, and
Garcia himself noted that in four groups only
the young people could speak Coahuilteco. It
is not surprising to find on Garcia's list no
more than three names that also appear on
Mazanet's lists of 1690-1691. Many groups
had lost their ethnic identities during the intervening years. The Garcia list is especially
informative because it identifies as Coahuilteco speakers a number of poorly known
groups who lived nearer to the Gulf coast of
southern Texas than the groups seen farther
inland by Mazanet
Table 1 contains the names of all groups
who probably spoke dialects of Coahuilteco
before being displaced, or at least before their
remnants entered Spanish missions. Most
names are derived from the lists of Mazanet
and Garcia; names of other groups are given
when various kinds of circumstantial evidence in documents suggest that they may
have spoken Coahuilteco. Some groups long
believed to have been Coahuilteco speakers
are excluded from Table 1 because of evidence that shows that another language was
spoken (Campbell and Campbell 1981; Goddard 1979).
This list of probable Coahuiltecans, which
is based on none too reliable information
about the language spoken by any specific
group, indicates that all the Indians who can
reasonably be designated as Coahuiltecans
were confined to southern Texas and extreme
northeastern Coahuila, with perhaps some
extension into northern Nuevo Le6n, as was
indicated by the nineteenth-century Mexican
linguists who created the term Coahuilteco.

46

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

o~~~~@l(.)~~ru:g~~o
@<)d>d:d:~~d>d:><t>~t~

~1MANUAL~$
~

~

;;~

Pnl::;i

~i.

!ill-fl

EUCHAR!STIA, EXTREMA-UNGION,
v Mh TRIMON!O:

-

DAR GF.ACIAS oEsPurs Dt Coi:mLGAR,
y

AYUDAR

~

B1rn

:'rrile a

~

~e

~Ct!~
~

frt.l

_MoRIRJ~025glii

A los [odios de las Ntctone~: Ptjalates, OrrJOoes,
~~ Pact0s, Pacoa.s, Tilijayu, Alfapas, Paufa~es, y oms
~:!: muchas dif~reates~ que fe_hallrn en las M1ffioa~s del
~:S Rio de Sao Aotoo10, y Rto Gn.ade, perrenec1eotes
el Colegio de la Saoti!lima Grn:r. de It Ciudad de
~ Quemaro, como fon: Los Pacukhes, Mefcales,
n
Pampopas, Tkames, Chayoptnes, Veo1dos, Pam~@ ques, y todt la Juveotud de Pihuiques, Borrados,

~

Saoipaos, y Manos de Pei:ro.

COMPUESTO

/

a-@

&::::::::

.~~

~

&

i~

f@

e-

~e

&w;



3:&



.

~~ ;::;::~:::~::1~~:.~~~~~:::~ lfZ

l'?t~ Doh >J1ii1de1.. 11 cu,u la. edit de hn huardo.7 cr'l,u1a1 de h l'ht.uch g.t<=!\.
:!~-A

tc cl Ygl1dor. Alio de

l]h

1~t~:

~o~<l><P~~~~~~~~<P'l'<M>~~~~~~~+~~~~~~Q~~~'(lig}
Ot9.JWW~~()~&.f!JW~ie.~:P.JO

- - - -------------~---

i

Japu-1

Es cu .Enteoato' Jap~m
m6m po e !
Es rn Enren2ra? Japa
him po e?

Hama;:o cm Heri,1m1a.
E; tu Hermrno m11.ir ! ,. Es tu HermacJ mrnor !
Jacu1nid.p po e (vd {n' J- J3pt'an po(;!
t:il p~.:?)
Es tu Hcrmano rnenor !
Es tu Hermana maror !
Jar51 poe?(v. jaquir~I poe:)
Jamicutz3o pof !
Pero preg111:tando al Herma110 mayor por d menor,

oal

co111rario, dicen afli.

~

'POR EL P. Fr. BARTHOLOME <f f!RCl.A, &~
;;;.?~ 'Prtdfr11dr .Afjlolico,.,J 4fl114J Mij/i11tt~ lit 111 g
~:& Mij/ioa dt N. S. P. S. Fr4Ktifto tit liicho Colegio,
~
j ' Rio tit S4n .A1rto1rio, t1' la Prc'f.li/UitJ
&
-fl
lit TtxaJ.

a,

Es tu Padra!1ro
ju3i po e?

PARA ADMINISTRAR

~~LOSSANTOSSACRAMENTOS!
@J DE PENITENCIA, f~

:.r;>:l\
.C;;l...

DEL SACRAMENTO

~

Es rn Hermano mayor! . Es tu I:Ierrnaoo men or!
po~ !
Jamatzaa po e?
Es cu Primo hermaco !
Es tu Prima hermaca !
Jam<m8upo~/.
Jamarnochampoc'1

Jajt":ll

r prrgrmta11do ala Herma11a mayor por la m~nor, oacl

I

contrario, dicen .ajfi.



Es tu Hermaoa mayor?
Es tu Hermanl menor?
1~ Ja~zutz~.ri_P?,~<(vdjarna
'%' tzucz.ao po e ! )

Jm:iafpoc?

Tics COii Sobrinos, rerno an St1egros, 'Y al cp;rtrario.
Es rn Tio pacerno ma

------

Es tu Sobrioo ! Jap':!i

po e'?
fa .ca Sobrio? Jap':!i
po~~
.
fa
-_:_____.

yor; Jacou po

e~

______

Figure 4. TITLE PAGE AND QUESTIONS FROM A CHURCH MANUAL.

Title page
(left) from a 1760 manual for administering the church sacraments to missionized Coahuilteco-speaking Indians,
and some of the questions (right) by which the priest could determine the kinship relations, if any, of couples
desiring to be married. Each Spanish question is followed by a Coahuilteco equivalent, but the arrangement,
basically according to Coahuilteco kinship categories, reveals a remarkable understanding of the structure of the
Indian system and its differences from the Spanish system. Reciprocal terms are given side by side in parallel
columns. The faint pencil marks on this copy were made by John R. Swanton while compiling his lexicon
(Swanton 1940:10-54).
[Garcia 1760:title, 78]

Because of inadequate information on various
other languages spoken in the surrounding
areas, it is not now possible to compile similar lists of Indian groups who spoke those
languages. The belief, under question, that
all the Indians of Newcomb's Western Gulf
province spoke languages related to Coahuilteco, is the prime reason why so many Indian
groups have been brought into the Coahuiltecan orbit. For some time it has been customary to assume that any Indian group of the
coastal lowlands that did not speak a Karankawa or a Tonkawa language must have spoken Coahuilteco (for example, see Wm. W.
Newcomb 1961; Ruecking 1953, 1954b;
Swanton 1940). Since the Tonkawans and

Karankawans were largely confined to areas
farther north and northeast, only one classificatory pigeonhole was available, and hence
most of the Indians of southern Texas and
northeastern Mexico came to be loosely
thought of as Coahuiltecans. Additional
studies are needed in order to demonstrate
whether this interpretation is essentially
correct or whether it is an oversimplification.

TERRITORY AND POPULATION
Inadequate documentation and displacement over such a long period make it difficult

47

COAHUILTECANS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS

Table 1. PROBABLE COAHUILTECO SPEAKERS.
Aguapalama
Aguastaya
Anxaua
Apaysia
Arcahomo
Ataxala
Cachopostal
Cauyaa
Chayopina
Geyera
Juancaa
Manicoa
Mescala
Mesquite
Ocanaa
Paaca
Paachiquia
Pacaoa

Pachala
Pachaquea
Pacoaa
Pacpula
Pacuachea
Pajalata
Pamayaa
Pampopaa
Papanaca
Pastalocaa
Pastia
Patacal
Pataguoa
Patumaco
Patzaua
Pausanea
Payayaa
Payuguana
Pitahaya

Pitalac
Pulacuama
Quema
Sacuache
Samampaca
Sampanala
Sanaquea
Saracuama
Semonana
Siaguana
Siquipil
Sonayana
Sulujam
Tacamea
Tilijaea
Tilpacopal
Tepacuache
Yori.ca

aNamed by Garcfa (1760) or Mazanet (G6mez Canedo 1968)

to determine the original territorial ranges of
most of the hunting-and-gathering groups of
this region. Few attempts have been made to
plot the locations of specific groups as indicated by a sequence of dated documents or to
identify the earliest location recorded for each
group. For any particular Indian group the
earlier European observers rarely recorded
the locations of two or more encampments,
and when they did it was usually for warm
seasons when Europeans did their traveling
on horseback. Winter encampments were
rarely recorded. This problem is further complicated by the fact that encampments were often shared by two or more separately named
Indian groups, which in many cases seems to
indicate associations of displaced groups. Detailed descriptions of individual encampments
have yet to be found in documents.
It appears naive to assume that each of the
Indian groups of this region once had an exclusive foraging territory and that, after prolonged research, it will eventually be possible

to compile a map showing the mosaic ofterritorial ranges. Some of Cabeza de Vaca's
south Texas groups, who were observed prior to European colonization, apparently had
exclusive territories during the winter, but in
summer they shared a distant area with other
groups because it was rich in foodstuffs
(Campbell and Campbell 1981). The Mariames, for example, ranged over two areas
separated by a distance of at least 80 miles.
If drawn on a map, the Mariame territorial
range might be described as bilobate in form,
the two lobes being connected by a narrow
corridor of leisurely travel on foot. Cartographers will find it frustrating to show such
oddly shaped, overlapping territories on a
map.
The summer range of the Payaya Indians
of southern Texas has been determined on the
basis of 10 encampments observed between
1690 and 1709 by summer-traveling Spaniards (Campbell 1975). Its maximum dimension was approximately 30 miles. Just

48
where the Payaya lived in winter remains unknown. Limited data for two other groups of
southern Texas, Pampopa and Pastia, indicate annual movement over a territory having
a length of at least 85 miles (Campbell and
Campbell 1981 ). These ranges suggest that
in southern Texas the annual food quest of
many groups covered an area of considerable
size. Comparable information for Indian
groups of northeastern Mexico has not yet
been found.
For this region few reliable statements can
be made about its total Indian population or
the sizes of its basic population units. It is not
now possible to determine with any precision
the number of valid ethnic groups for the region as a whole, nor is it possible to determine just which groups were in existence at
any selected date. For remarkably few single
ethnic units were population figures recorded
at any time. Although recorded population
figures appear to be fairly abundant, many of
these refer to aggregations of displaced group
remnants sharing the native encampment
locality or living in a mission Indian village.
Most population figures refer to the northern
part of the region, which became a refuge
area for groups displaced by both Spaniards
and Apaches. For impressions of group size
prior to European colonization one must
resort to scanty information given in the
Nunez Cabeza de Vaca (1542) documents.
Perhaps the most valuable information lies
in the largest figures recorded for specific
groups at any time, since these suggest an upper limit for groups of hunting-and-gathering
peoples in a generally semiarid region. Apparently the largest figure on record for a
single group is 512, reported by a missionary
in 1674 for Gueiquesal in northeastern
Coahuila (Steck 1932), but this figure may
have included remnants of other groups not
recognized by the observer. The Pacuache of
the middle Nueces River drainage of southern
Texas were estimated by another missionary
to number about 350 in 1727 (Campbell
1979). Many documents for the period 17471772 suggest that the Comecrudo of
northeastern Tamaulipas may have had a
population of at least 400. Thus very
few groups of the region at any time seem
to have had a population of more than
400. Limited figures for other groups

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

suggest that most units had populations ranging from 100 to 300. Scattered
bits of quantified data given by Cabeza de
Vaca for the Mariames in 1533-1534 indicate
a population of about 200 (Campell and
Campbell 1981).
Estimating the total population of the entire
region at any particular time is hazardous,
and the few estimates that cover the region,
or parts of it, have not been based on detailed
ethnohistoric research. Mooney (1928) estimated that in 1690 the "Coahuiltecan tribes"
of southern Texas had a total population of
15,000. Kroeber (1939) regarded Mooney's
estimate as too large and replaced it with
2, 000. This is not very realistic since in
1675 Bosque made a head count of 2,247
individuals in various Indian encampments
along his line of travel during a journey
from Monclova, Coahuila, northward into the
Edwards Plateau of Texas (Bolton 1916).
For the year 1690 Kroeber (1939) gave a
figure of 100,000 for the total Indian
population of nonagricultural "nor th eastern
Mexico," in which he included true
desertlands at least as far west as the Rfo
Conchos of Chihuahua. Kroeber did not
seem surprised by the fact that this figure
indicated a population density greater than
that given for any Indian agricultural area in
the United States. Kroeber was evidently
much impressed by the very large number of
Indian group names recorded for "northeastern Mexico" and was inclined to think of
them as representing groups that flourished at
the same time.
Ruecking (1953) compiled a list of 614
group names for northeastern Mexico and
southern Texas and referred to them collectively as Coahuiltecans. He believed that
he had found sufficient evidence to indicate
that those names represented groups having
an average population of 140, and by multiplication he obtained a total population of
approximately 86,000. Ruecking's estimate
was not linked wth any specific year or short
period and, like Kroeber, he assumed that all
these groups were in existence at the same
time. It seems reasonable to conclude that
not enough is presently known about this
region for anyone to do much more than
make an arbitrary statement about its
total Indian population at any particular
time.

COAHUILIBCANS AND Il-IEIR NEIGHBORS

CULTURE
For this entire region there are very few
reliable descriptions of Indian groups that
were written fairly early and that are sufficiently coherent and detailed to give informative impressions of what life was like among
some of the hunting-and-gathering groups
before their displacement. Two such descriptions, although dissimilar in scope and
separated by a century of time, are especially
valuable because they constitute important
primary evidence. Preoccupation with problems of linguistic and cultural classification
has obscured this value.
The first of these is Cabeza de Vaca's description of the Mariames of southern Texas,
among whom he lived for about 18 months in
1533-1534; the second is Alonso de Le6n's
(in Le6n y otros 1961) generalized description of various unspecified Indian groups he
knew as a soldier in Nuevo Le6n before the
year 1649, groups who ranged over or near
the area that extends from Monterrey and
Cadereyta northeastward to Cerralvo. These
two descriptions fortunately cover some of
the same categories of culture, particularly
material culture, and indicate notable differences in the cultures of groups separated by a
distance of at least 150 miles. The description of Le6n records significant differences
between the cultures of various Indian groups
associated with a restricted area. The two
descriptions, when considered together, suggest that those who have attributed so much
cultural uniformity to the Wes tern Gulf
province have overemphasized the generic
similarities in its hunting-and-gathering cultures and have paid little attention to the recorded evidence that indicates cultural differences.

Mariames
The Mariames (not to be confused with the
later Aranamas) appear to have been one of
11 Indian groups who occupied an inland
area between the lower sections of the
Guadalupe and Nueces rivers of southern
Texas (Nunez Cabeza de Vaca 1542; Oviedo
y Valdes 1853). These groups shared an
apparently unique subsistence pattern that
involved seasonal migration westward and

49
southwestward to harvest prickly-pear fruit in
an area west of Corpus Christi Bay (Campell
and Campbell 1981). Cabeza de Vaca provides much more descriptive detail for the
Mariames than for the other groups, and to
this day the Mariames remain the best
described single Indian group of northeastern
Mexico and southern Texas.
The Mariames spent about nine months of
each year (fall, winter, spring) ranging along
the valley of the Guadalupe River just above
its junction with the San Antonio River.
Summer was spent in an area some 80 miles
to the southwest, where prickly-pear cactus
thickets yielded fruit: in great profusion.
The population of about 200 individuals
normally lived in a single settlement that was
moved when the food resources of a locality
were depleted. The number of houses probably did not exceed 40. Each house was
round in floor plan and had a framework of
four flexible poles, both ends of each pole
being set in the ground. This domed framework was covered with mats, and both poles
and mats were transported when a settlement
was moved.
Unlike later times, bison were apparently
not common in Mariame territory during the
time of Cabeza de Vaca. Bison hunting is not
mentioned, but limited use of bison hides is
indicated. Deer were hunted in several ways.
A hunter might run a deer long enough for
the animal to become exhausted. In the Guadalupe River area special two-day hunting
trips for deer were made two or three times a
year. Such trips involved leaving the wooded valley and going out into the adjacent
grasslands. Wood and water were carried for
these overnight trips. Dry grass was set on
fire to control movements of the game. A
third method was more complex and was
used only when the Mariames were traveling
to the prickly-pear collecting grounds and
passed along the western shoreline of Copano Bay. When an offshore breeze was
blowing, hunters spread out and drove deer
into the bay, keeping them there until they
drowned and were beached by onshore
winds. Rats and mice were hunted, but rabbits are never mentioned. Snakes were eaten
and their bones were saved, pulverized, and
eaten. Land snails were collected and eaten
when the Mariames were in the prickly-pear
thickets. Insects of various unspecified kinds

50

were also eaten, some in egg or larval form.
Other faunal foods, especially in the Guadalupe River area, included frogs, lizards,
salamanders, and spiders. Earth, wood, and
deer droppings were sometimes eaten when
food was scarce.
Fish were obtained by unspecified methods from the Guadalupe River. Apparently
fish were eaten in quantity only during the
April-May flood season, when they were
taken from shallow pools after floodwaters
had subsided. Fish bones were also pulverized and eaten. Two plant foods can be identified as seasonal staples-pecans and the
fruit of prickly-pear cactus. In autumn pecans formed the dominant foodstuff when
Mariames were living along the Guadalupe
River. When the pecan crop was abundant,
other Indian groups came to the river for
nuts. Mashed nut meats were sometimes
eaten mixed with small seeds. The chief attraction of the prickly-pear area to the southwest was the presence of fruit in quantity
during most of the summer. When water was
locally unavailable there, the Mariames
expressed fruit juice in a hole in the earth and
drank it as a water substitute.
Roots of several unspecified plants were
the principal source of food in winter. Plants
with edible roots were said to be thinly distributed, hard to find, and difficult to dig.
Women searched areas around an encampment for distances of five to eight miles,
beginning the search at daybreak. Roots
were baked for two days in some sort of
oven, and women spent considerable time at
night preparing ovens and baking roots.
Some roots were bitter and caused the abdomen to swell.
Mariame clothing and ornaments are not
described, and little is said about handicrafts.
A net, said to have been about 5.5 feet
square, may have been used to carry bulky
foodstuffs. Much matting must have been
made, since it was used to cover house
frames. Pottery is never mentioned, and the
only container referred to is either a woven
bag or a flexible basket. The only offensive
weapon mentioned is the bow and arrow.
The Mariames had small undescribed shields
covered with bison hide.
Several factors seem to have prevented
overpopulation among the Mariames: female
infanticide was practiced; occasionally male

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

children were killed because of unfavorable
dream omens; and men refrained from sexual
intercourse with their wives from the first indication of pregnancy until the child was
about two years old.
Women continued breast feeding of children until they were about 12 years of age,
and there seems to have been a taboo against
male contact with any menstruating woman.
Since female infanticide was the rule, it is
evident that Mariame males obtained wives
from surrounding ethnic groups. The "bride
price" was said to have been a good bow and
two arrows or, in lieu of these, a net. No
Mariame male seems to have had two or more
wives. Divorce was permitted but no
grounds were specified other than "dissatisfaction." Female infanticide and ethnic group
exogamy indicate a patrilineal descent
system.
Cabeza de Vaca briefly described a dispute
between two adult males over a woman. A
fight ensued in which only fists and sticks
were used. After the fight each man dismantled his house and left the encampment. Very
little is said about Mariame warfare. Among
the Mariames some behavior was motivated
by dreams, which were a source of omens.
The documents cite 12 cases in which male
children were killed or buried alive because
of unfavorable dream omens. No descriptive
detail is given about ceremonies, although it
is clearly stated that some behavior involved
group feasting and dancing. This activity
went on despite winter food shortages and
reached a peak during the summer season in
the prickly-pear area.

Indians of Nuevo Leon
In an early history of Nuevo Leon that was
first published in 1649 appears a description
of the Indians of the area by Leon (Leon y
otros 1961; English translation in Davenport
1924). In the same volume Juan Bautista
Chapa listed the names of 231 Indian groups,
many of whom must be covered by Le6n 's
description. It is clear that some of the
groups described by Le6n were those collectively known to Spaniards by names such as
Borrados, Pintos, Rayados, and Pelones,
and that some of them spoke dialects of a
language designated as Quinigua (Hoyo
1960; Gursky 1964).

COAHUILTECANS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS

All the groups known to Alonso de Leon
subsisted by hunting, fishing, and gathering.
Foodstuffs were usually consumed shortly
after they were obtained. Sizes of foraging
territories are not indicated, but part of a territory might be shared with another group by
common consent if food was abundant.
Settlements, which were moved frequently, varied in size but most were relatively small. It is not stated how many different encampments were simultaneously occupied by the same ethnic group, although it
is said that one or more families might withdraw from an encampment at any time and
seek foodstuffs separately. One particular
settlement is described as consisting of 15
houses, which were arranged in a semicircle
with one offset house at each end. When
necessary, water was transported by women,
each woman placing 12 to 14 water-filled
prickly-pear pad pouches in a netted carrying
frame, which was placed on the back and
controlled by a tumpline. Ceramic containers
were not used. In summer prickly-pear fruit
juice was sometimes drunk as a water substitute.
Houses, presumably circular in floor plan,
were covered by cane or grass and had very
low entrances. In the center of each house
floor was a small hearth area, its fire said to
have been used mainly for illumination. Fire
was produced by a wooden hand drill. Occupants slept on the house floor, using grass
and deerskins for bedding. House materials
were not transported when a settlement was
moved. The number of individuals associated with each house was eight to 10 or
more. The settlement mentioned as consisting of 15 houses would thus have had a population of about 150.
All animals available in the environment
were hunted except toads and lizards. Animals actually mentioned include deer, rabbits,
rats, birds, and snakes. Deer was the most
important game animal; and when a deer was
killed, a trail from the kill site to the encampment was marked by the hunter, and women
were sent to bring the carcass home. The
man who killed a deer received only its hide;
the rest of the animal was butchered and portions distributed throughout the encampment.
Two weapons are specified, the bow and arrow and a curved wooden club. The club
seems to have been a multipurpose device,

51
serving variously as an aid in walking, as a
club, and as a handy tool for probing and
prying. At night each man kept his club in
easy reach while he slept.
Fishing, participated in by both sexes, was
done in several ways: shooting the fish with
bow and arrow at night by torchlight; use of
nets; and underwater capture by hand from
holes or pockets along steep or overhanging
stream banks.
Maguey root crowns and the roots and tubers of various unspecified plants were the
principal winter foods. In summer the most
important foods were prickly-pear fruits and
mesquite bean pods. Small fruits from other
plants were eaten as they ripened. Maguey
crowns were baked for two days in some
kind of oven. The fibers in this food were
not swallowed but expectorated in small
masses or quids. When there was a food
shortage, quids were sometimes salvaged,
pulverized, and eaten.
Both flowers and fruits of the prickly-pear
cactus were eaten. Green fruit was roasted,
and ripe fruit was eaten immediately or sundried on mats. The bean pods of mesquite
trees, said to have been abundant in the area,
were eaten both when green and when matured to a dry state. The dry pods were pulverized in a wooden mortar, and the flour,
either sifted or still containing the hard-cased
seeds, was temporarily stored in woven bags
or in prickly-pear pad pouches. The pod
flour was eaten either cooked or uncooked.
Salt was added to various foods, and the ash
of at least one plant was used as a salt substitute.
It is clear that in N uevo Leon there were
striking group differences in clothing, hairdress, and face and body decoration. Men
wore little clothing. No garment covered the
pubic zone, and sandals were worn only
when traversing thorny terrain. In some
groups men wore rabbitskin robes. Women
covered the pubic area with grass or cordage,
and over this some women at times wore a
slit skirt composed of two deerskins, one
skin in front, the other behind. To the rear
deerskin was attached an extension of deerskin long enough to drag on the ground, and
to its hem small sound-producing objects
were attached: beads, snail shells, animal
teeth, seeds, and small hard fruits. On special occasions some women also wore robes

52

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

of unspecified animal skins, or in some
groups a rabbitskin robe.
Sex differences in hairdress are not clearly
indicated. In general, hair was worn long
and allowed to hang free down to the waist,
deerskin thongs sometimes holding the hair
ends together at waist level. In some groups
(apparently the Pelones) hair was plucked out
in bands of varying width between the forehead and the top of the head. Ornaments
consisting of feathers, sticks, and bones were
inserted in perforations in ears, noses, and
breasts.
Ethnic identity seems to have been indicated by painted or tattooed patterns on the
face and body. On the face were various
combinations of undescribed lines; and
among those who had hair plucked from the
front part of the head, lines extended upward
from the root of the nose. Body patterns included broad lines, straight or wavy, that ran
the full length of the torso (probably giving
rise to the Spanish designations Borrados,
Rayados, and Pintos).
Although the descriptions of Cabeza de
Vaca and Alonso de Le6n are not strictly
comparable, they nevertheless give clear impressions of the amount of cultural diversity
that must have existed among the huntingand-gathering peoples of the region. Especially notable in these two descriptions are
differences in foodstuffs and subsistence
techniques, houses, containers, transportation devices, weapons, clothing, and body
decoration.

LOCATION OF INDIAN GROUPS
Most of the Indian groups recorded for
this large region can be associated with 15
areas. These areas do not correspond to
concentrations of Indian populations but to
places where locational information was most
often collected, as along routes of early travel
or near Spanish frontier settlements and missions. The 15 areas are numbered on the regional map (Fig. 2) and in the Synonymy.

Area 1
Area 1 includes the nonmountainous part
of northeastern Coahuila west of the railroad

that connects Eagle Pass, Texas, with Monclova, Coahuila, and extends northward
across the Rio Grande to the southern edge of
the Edwards Plateau in Texas. At least 49
groups linked with this area in the late seventeenth century cannot now be identified as
having been displaced from other regions. A
small sample of one language, Solano, has
been attributed to the Terocodame and associated groups (Goddard 1979). As the Solano sample was long believed to represent a
Coahuilteco-related language, many of the 49
groups listed have at one time or another been
considered as- Coahuiltecans.

Area 2
The core of Area 2 extends from the vicinity of Guerrero, Coahuila, northeastward toward San Antonio, Texas, as far as the Frio
River. It was frequently traversed by Spanish travelers during the late seventeenth century (G6mez Canedo 1968), and the names
of 33 Indian groups are recorded in the travel
records, most of them encountered near the
Rio Grande, Nueces, and Frio rivers. Some
of these groups at times ranged as far south
of the Rio Grande as the Rio Sabinas of
northeastern Coahuila. Many of the groups
Mazanet reported as speaking Coahuilteco
appear on the list for Area 2 (see Table 1).

Area 3
At least 19 Indian groups can be associated
with Area 3, which extends about 100 miles
southward from San Antonio, Texas. These
groups ranged over lands lying between the
upper half of the San Antonio River and the
two great bends of the Nueces River. Some
of the names appear in Table 1 as probable
Coahuilteco speakers, but for the remainder
there are no recorded indications of the language spoken.

Area 4
Area 4 lies between the lower sections of
the Guadalupe and Nueces rivers of southern
Texas. Because of a gap of some 150 years
in the records, the Indians of this area known
to Cabeza de Vaca are listed separately from
groups recorded in the eighteenth century.
Of Cabeza de Vaca's groups, only the Mari-

------------------------------

-------------------- ------- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

53

COAHUILIBCANS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS

ames can be clearly identified in the
eighteenth-century documents, where they
appear as the Muruam (Campbell and Campbell 1981 :21-22). The later groups include
some identified as probable Coahuilteco
speakers (Table 1), but the remaining groups
apparently spoke other languages.

Area 5
Area 5, which includes extreme northern
Nuevo Le6n and closely adjacent parts of
northeastern Coahuila, is given separate status because documents connected with a late
seventeenth-century mission at present Lampazos, Nuevo Le6n, refer to a number of
groups who spoke the same language (Espinosa in Maas 1915). This language may have
been Coahuilteco, but the evidence is not
conclusive. Most of the names do not appear
on the lists of Indian groups recorded by
Chapa for Area 6.
Area 6
Area 6 refers to the central part of northern
Nuevo Le6n and is based on the lists of Indian groups recorded by Chapa (Le6n y otros
1961), who is unique in that he attempted to
compile complete lists of Indian groups
known in specified areas. Some of his group
names are so similar that they may represent
duplications, but this is not certain. Those of
his groups that are recognizable as refugees
from other regions do not appear in the Synonymy for Area 6. In the Synonymy, names
without letter symbols are derived from other
sources, such as documents cited by various
historians of Nuevo Le6n (Cavazos Garza
1964, 1966a, 1966b; J. Gonzalez 1885,
1887; Hoyo 1960, 1963). Asterisks indicate
groups who may have spoken dialects of the
Quinigua language identified by Gursky
(1964) and Hoyo (1960). Alonso de Leon's
generalized description of N uevo Le6n
Indians undoubtedly covers many groups
named for Area 6.
Area 7
For the valley of the Rio Grande between
Mier and Laredo a few refugee groups were
recorded in the middle eighteenth century.
Most of the names are Spanish and appar-

-------------------~---

ently refer to amalgamated remnants of many
groups whose original native names cannot
now be ascertained. The name Carrizos
(Fig. 5) was often applied by Spaniards to
any Indians who lived in houses covered
with reeds or grass.

Area 8
Area 8 refers to a section of the lower Rio
Grande valley. The names, mainly of Spanish origin, refer to Indian groups represented
at the missions of Reynosa and Camargo
(about 1750) that cannot be linked with
other areas until later. The names probably
include some groups native to the area as
well as groups displaced from nearby parts
of Tamaulipas and Nuevo Le6n.
Area 9
At least 34 Indian groups are rather clearly
associated with the Rio Grande delta and its
environs. This delta, which consists of some
3,000 square miles, has its western apex near
Reynosa, Tamaulipas, and widens toward the
Gulf of Mexico to include some 75 airline
miles of shoreline that is about equally
divided between Tamaulipas and Texas. The
middle eighteenth-century documents refer to
abundance of wood, water, game, and fish,
and they also note the well-nourished
appearance of the Indians. One Spaniard
guessed that some 2,500 Indian families lived
in the delta area. Of the 34 groups, 21 are
said to have ranged mainly south of the Rio
Grande channel (Saldivar 1943). Some delta
groups are said to have spoken the same
language, which may have been Cotoname, a
sample of which has been recorded (Swanton
1940; Goddard 1979).
Area 10
For the decade 1750-1760 at least seven
Indian groups can be associated with the
lower Rio San Fernando and the nearby
shores of the Laguna Madre of northern
Tamaulipas. One group, the Pintos, may
have been displaced from some area to the
west. The Comecrudo, who seem to have
been more numerous than the others, are of
special interest because samples of their language were recorded in the nineteenth cen-

---------

- - - ---------------------

54

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

corded, and it is not known if the groups
were native to the area. Saldivar (1943)
suggests that they were closely related
linguistically and culturally but cites no
evidence.

Carri:nJ' /"~ i;-'4-r~ultb " ,,m;, ,,;.,,:;,~,( r"-7u' aah.n;M ,{,,/~,,; 4.lVT h i'07'2f J.u J{_,~ r-~-

Figure S.

CARRIZOS. The man wears a
breechclout and has a bow slung across his chest with
arrows in a quiver on his back. He holds a gun. The
woman wears a long dress of trade cloth. Watercolor
by Lino Sanchez y Tapia, 1834-1838.

tury, after their displacement to the north
(Swanton 1940; Goddard 1979).

Area 11
Area 11 includes the mountains that surround the town of San Carlos, Tamaulipas,
which is east-southeast of Linares, Nuevo
Le6n. It seems evident that, when first
known about 1750, the Indian groups
recorded for the area had already been displaced, and it is not possible to determine
which groups were native to the area. Since
most of the names are of Spanish origin,
some of the groups may have been recorded
elsewhere under native names. The Bocas
Prietas seem to have been the dominant group
numerically.
Area 12
Between 1747 and 1750 five groups were
recorded for the area around the mouth of the
Soto la Marina of the middle Tamaulipas coast. Descriptive details are not re-

Area 13
For the northern part of the Sierra de
Tamaulipas, east of Ciudad Victoria, 24 Indian groups were recorded during the middle
eighteenth century. Although displaced, most
of them being recorded only at Spanish
missions, many of the groups were probably
native to the general area. Of these 24
groups, five are identified as growing crops
(corn, beans, squash). Saldivar (1943),
without explanation, gives some names on
the list as synonyms for others, but documentary confirmation of this has not been
found.
Area 14
Ten groups can be associated with the
southern part of the Sierra de Tamaulipas,
and four of these are briefly described in the
middle eighteenth century as practicing horticulture and manufacturing pottery. In his attempt to define a hunting-and-gathering
"Coahuiltecan culture," Ruecking (1953,
1954b, 1955a, 1955b) drew heavily from
Santa Maria's (1929-1930) generalized
description for Indians of southern Tamaulipas without noting that some of Santa
Marla's informants were identified as Maratin, Mariguan, and Simariguan, all recorded
as horticultural groups in Area 14. A
short text recorded in the Maratin language has been analyzed by Swanton
(1940).
Area 15
Along the coast of southern Tamaulipas,
southward from the mouth of the Soto
la Marina, 11 Indian groups were recorded in the 1750s. About half of these
practiced horticulture, and some are said to
have made pottery and lived in houses with
mud walls and thatched roofs. Some of these
groups may have been displaced from the
Sierra de Tamaulipas immediately to the
west.

55

COAHUILTECANS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS

SYNONYMY
The following lists of group names are in
alphabetical order, separated by geographical
area, with the numbers corresponding to
those in Figure 2. In parentheses are some
synonymous names as well as badly distorted
variants. Some group names are omitted here
because of inadequate knowledge of their location.
Areal
Aquitadotdacam, Babane, Bibiamar (Baniamama), Bacora (Bacoram, Bacaranan,
Bascoram), Bagname (Baguame, Pagaiame),
Bibit (Vivit), Bobol (Babol, Babor, Baburi,
Boboram, Pabor, Vovol), Cacaxte (Cacaste,
Cataxtle), Coax.a, Cubsuvi, Dacacmuri, Doaquioydacam (Oydican), Ervipiame (Barbipian, Berttipame, Chivipane, Gueripiamo,
Hueripane, Hierbipiam, Yeripiame), Escaba,
Espopulam (Isipopolam), Gicocoge (Xicocoje, Xicocossi), Guariqueche, Guerjuadan
(Guergaida, Guerjuatida), Gueiquesal (Coetzal, Guericochal, Guisole, Huequetzal, Huisocal, Q.iesal), Guiguigoa, Heniocane (Ceniocane, Gioricane), Huhuygam, Hume (Lume,
Xomi, Yumi), Jicaragrande, Macapao, Manos Coloradas, Manos Prietas, Matuimi,
Maubedan, Obayo (Opaia), Piedras Chiquitas
(Piedras Chicas), Pinanaca, Piniquu, Saesse
(Ciaesier, Haeser, Siaexe, Siansi, Siausi,
Xaeser), Seromet, Sijame (Cijame, Hihame,
Injame, Jijame, Scipxame, Sixacama,
Tziame, Xixame), Teneinamar (Teneymama),
Terocodame (Hieroquodame, Perocodame,
Teodoran, Toxocodame), Tet, Tiltiqui, Toamar (Toarma, Tojuma), Tobocore, Tocamomon, Tumamar (Feimamar, Jaimamar, Ticmamar, Tuimama), Xiancocodam, Xupulame
(Sinpulame), Yerguiba, Yorica (Corica, Goxica, Hioma, lorica, Torica, Yoxica), Ysbupue.
Area2
Agualohe, Aguapalam, Apaysi (Apayi),
Ataxal (Atacal), Geyer (Geie, Heye, Jae),
Juanca (Huacacasa, Jaucar, Juamaca, Juampa, Juncata, Puncataguo, Tuamca), Manico
(Minicau, Mirrica, Muncu), Mescal (see also
Area 6), (Mescata), Momon, Ocana (Acani,
Cane, Ocam), Odoesmade, Paac (Pajaca,

Paxac), Paachiqui, Pachal (Pacgal, Pachan,
Pachat, Paschal, Pasteal, Patehal), Pacoa
(Pacoatal, Pacuq), Pacpul, Pacuache (Nacuache, Pacahuche, Pacuachiam, Pacuasin,
Pagnache, Puguahiam, Taguache ), Pamaya,
Papanac (Panac, Papani, Paponal, Popan),
Pastaloca (Pachaloco, Pastulac, Pataloco),
Pataguo (Patagu, Pataguaque, Patao, Patou)
Patzau (Paceo, Pacha, Pachaug, Pacho, Pasxa, Patzar, Psaupsau, Pucha), Payuguan
(Paiabun, Paiapan, Payahan, Payavan, Payoan), Piedras Blancas, Pitahay (Pitanay,
Piutaay, Putai), Quern, Sacuache, Samampac, Sampanal, Siaguan (Chaguan, Chanaguan, Choguan, Mahuame, Ohaguame, Siaban, Xhiahuan, Ziaban), Sonayan (Samioj,
Sanaian, Sanyau), Tepacuache, Xarame
(Charame, Charrom, Harame, Jalam, Jurame, Schiarame, Xalan).

Area3
Aguastaya, Anxau (Anna, Asau), Arcahomo (Acoma), Assar, Cachopostal (Cachopostate, Cachsaputal), Cauya (Cabia), Chayopin, Mesquite (see also Area 13), Pacao,
Pampopa (Campoa, Panpoc, Pumpoa), Pastia, Payaya, Pitalac (Alobja, Patalca), Pulacuam (Pulacman), Sanipao, Saracuam,
Semonan, Siupam, Sulujam (Chaadulam,
Chulajam, Juliam, Zolahan).
Area4
Cabeuz de Vaca's Groups, 1534-1535

Acubadaos, Anegados, Atayos, Avavares,
Camoles (coastal), Coayos, Comos, Cutalchuches, Fig People (coastal), Guaycones
(coastal), Maliacones, Mariames, Quitoles
(coastal), Susolas, Yguazes.
Eighteenth-Century Groups

Manos de Perro; Muruame; Orej6n; Pajalat; Pamaque, with the subdivisions Camasuqua, Sarapjon, Taguaguan, Tinapihuaya,
Viayan; Pasnacan; Patumaco; Pausane (Paisano, Pauxane, Paysan); Piguique (Pihuiques); Siquipil; Tacame (Tacames); Tilpacopal.
Areas
Alasapa (see also Area 6), Canua (Cana,
Cano, Canon), Catujan (see also Area 6),

56

Cenizo (Censoc, Saczo, Seniczo, Sinicu,
Sinixzo), Exmalquio, Jacao (Cacaje, Gacafe,
Xacaje), Milijae, Pasalve (Pajalve), Pastancoya (see also Area 6), Pita (Pittal), Pomulum (Molia, Mulian, Pamulian, Panulam),
Tacaguista, Tilijae (Alijae, Filixaye, Tilijayas,
Tiloja, Titijay, Tolujaa), Xantigui.

Area 6
Letters following group names below indicate on which of Chapa's four lists the name
was found: Ca, Cadereyta area; Ce, Cerralvo
area; M, Monterrey area; NL, Nuevo Leon in
general. Names without these symbols are
derived from other sources. Asterisks indicate groups who may be linked with the Quinigua language.
*Abasusiniguara NL, Acancuara NL,
Acatoyan M, Admitial Ca, Aguacero, Aguacoata, Aguana NL, Aguaque M, Aguamauguara NL, Aguata M (Ahuata, Agata), Aguatinejo, Aguica M, *Aguiniguara Ca and NL,
*Aguiquegua, Aguirtiguera NL, Aigual
(Aguial, Aygual), Ajuipiaijaigo NL, Alaoqui
M, Alasapa Ce (see also Area 5), Aleguapiame M, *Amacuaguaramara NL,
Amacuyero Ce, Amansu M, Amancoa Ca,
Amapoala Ce, Amaraquisp M, Amatam M,
Ameguara NL (cf. Amiguara), *Amiguara Ca
(cf. Ameguara), Amito Ce, *Amituaga Ce
(Amitagua),*Amiyaya, Amoama Ce (cf.
Amoguama), Amoguama Ce and M (cf.
Amoama), Anasgua NL, *Aiiiraniguara Ca,
Anquimamiomo NL, Aocola NL, Apamona,
Apitala M, Aquijampo NL (Aguijampo),
*Arichimamoica, *Ariscapana (cf. Iscapana),
Aristeti NL, Asequimoa NL, Axipaya,
Ayagua (Ajijagua), *Ayancuara, *Ayenguara
NL, *Ayeraguara, Ayerapaguana NL,
* Ayundiguiguira NL, Baquiziziguara Ca,
Batajagua M, *Bazaniguara NL (Bayaguaniguara), Boiguera NL (cf. Boquiguera)
(Boijero), *Boquiguera NL (cf. Boiguera),
Boquiniguera NL, Cabicujapa M, Cabyamaraguam, Cacamara, Cacamegua Ca, NL
(Cocamegua, Cacamacao, Cayacacamegua?,
Guacacamegua?), Cacapam, Caculpaluniame
Ce (Cacuilipalina), *Caguaumama, Caguayoguam Ce (Cayaguam), Cagubiguama M,
Caguchuarca M (cf. Caguchuasca), Caguchuasca Ce (cf. Caguchuarca), *Caguiamiguara Ca (cf. Cuaguijamiguara), Caguilipan Ce (Coquiapan), Caguiniguara NL (cf.

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Caguisniguara), Caguiraniguara Ca and NL,
*Caguisniguara Ca (cf. Caguiniguara), Cajanibi Ca, Cajapanama NL (Canapanama),
Caj aquepa Ce, Cajubama M, Calanchefi.o,
Calipocate Ce, Canabecuma M, Camacaluira
M, Camacuro Ce, Carnahan (Camasan),
Camaiguara Ca (cf. Camaniguara), Camalucano Ce, Camaniguara NL (cf. Camaiguara), Camatonaja Ca, Camayopalo Ca,
Cami-isubaba M, *Camiopajamara, Camisnimat NL, *Camuchinibara Ce, Canacabala
Ce, *Canaguiague Ca, Canaine Ce (cf.
Canayna), Canaitoca NL, Canamarigui Ca,
Canamau M; Canameo Ce, Cananarito NL,
Canapanama (cf. Guanapujamo), Canapeo
Ce (Canapu), Canaranaguio NL, *Canayna
Ca (cf. Canaine), Canbroiniguera NL,
Capache, Capae Ce, Capagui Ce, Capatuu
M, Capujaquin Ce, *Caramapana NL,
*Caramaperiguan NL, *Caramunigua NL,
Caraiia Ce, Casaga, Cataara Ce, Catareaguemara NL, Catomavo NL (see also Area
9) (Catomao), Catujano Ce and M (see also
Area 5), Caurame (Carbame, Caruama,
Coaruama, Guarama, Queroama), Cauripan
(Cauaripan), Cauyguama, Cayaguaguin Ce
(Cayaguaga), Cayague Ce (Guayagua),
Cayanaguanaja NL, Cayanapuro Ce, Cayupine NL, Cazulpaniale M, Coalimoje Ce,
Coapuliguan, Cocoaipara Ca (cf. Cocojupara), Cocojupara NL (cf. Cocoaipara),
Come Pescado, Comite Ce, Comocaura Ca,
Congue Ce, Conicoricho Ce, Copuchiniguara
NL, Cotipiniguara Ca, *Cotoayagua, Coyoquipiguara (Sanamiguara), Coyote Ce,
Cuaguijamiguara Ca (cf. Caguiamiguara),
Cuaquinacaniguara NL, Cuatache M
(Ayuguama, Coatae, Cojate, Cuatahe,
Suatae), *Cuatiguara Ca, Cuchinochi (Cuchinochil), Cuepane Ce, Cuiminipaco NL
(Quiminipao), Escabel Ce, Estecuenopo NL
(cf. Estiajenepo) (Estequenepo), Estegueno
M, Estguama M, Estiajenepo NL (cf.
Estecuenopo), Guacachina M, Guadepa,
Guagui Ce, Guajolote Ce (see also Area 11 ),
Gualegua Ce (Aquelegua), Guamepeje Ce
(cf. Guampexte), Guamoayagua M, Guampexte Ce (cf. Guamepeje), Guanapujamo Ce
(cf. Canapanama), Guampe Ce, *Guarastiguara Ca and NL, Guelamoye Ce,
*Gueyacapo NL (Cuyacapo), Guicopasico
NL, Guinaima Ce (Quinaimo), Guinala M,
Hualahuis Ca (Gualahuis), Icabia, Icaura
(Icuara, Incaura), Icuano (Iguana), Iguaracata

COAHUILTECANS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS

(Guaracata), Iliguigue Ce (Elixguegue,
Lisguegue), Imiacolomo NL, Imimule Ce,
Imipecte Ce, Incuero (Inquero), *Ipajuiguara
Ca (Opaguiguara, Upahuiguara), Iscapana
NL (cf. Ariscapana), Jacoquin, Janapas Ce,
J aq uiripamona NL, * Jiminiguara NL,
Jimiopa Ce (cf. Jiniapa) (Ximiapa), Jiniapa
Ca (cf. Jimiopa), *Jiniguara Ca (Jinipiguara),
Joqualan M (Juaquialan), Lespoama Ce,
Locaguiniguara NL, Lomotugua NL, *Maapiguara NL, Macacuy M, Macapaqui M,
*Macatiguin NL (Macatiguire), Macatu NL,
Maciguara Ce, Macomala Ce (Niacomala),
Macoraena Ca, Macuarera NL (Macorajora?),
Majanale Ca, Malicococa NL, Mal Nombre
(see also Area 7), Manunejo Ca, Mapaniguara NL, Mapili NL, *Maquispamacopini
NL (Maguipamacopini), Matahuinala, Matascuco Ce, Matatiquiri NL (Matetiguara),
Matolagua, Mayaguiguara, Mayajuanguara
Ca, Mayeguara, Michiaba M, Mimiola, *Minacaguapo NL, Miscal M (see also Area 2)
(Mezcal), Mohiguara, Moquiaguin Ce (Miquiaguin), Munapume NL, Nam, Nepajan
M, Noreo Ce, Oguecolomo, Pachizerco NL,
Paciguima Ca, Pajamara NL, Palaguin Ce,
Pantiguara Ca and NL (Paritiguara), *Pantipora NL (Patipora), Parajota Ca, *Passaguaniguara, Pastanquia M (see also Area 5),
Patoo NL, Paxalto (Pafalto), Peguampaxte
Ce (Teguampaxte), Pericaguera (Pelicaguaro,
Perico?), Pijiniguara Ca, Piograpapaguarca
NL, Pionicuagura NL, Pitisfiafuil, Plutuo
NL, Pomaliqui M, Popocatoque M, Pusuama
(Posnama), *Pueripatama NL (Puanipuatama), Quejanaquia Ca, Queremeteco, Quetapon Ce, Quiatolte M, Quibobima M, Quibonoa, Quien, Quiguantiguara NL, Quiguasguama Ce (Quiauaane?), Quimicoa, Quinegaayo Ce, Quinemeguete Ce, *Quiniapin,
Quinigual Ca, Quiniguio NL (Quiniquijo ),
Quinimicheco NL, Quiriquitiniguera NL,
Quitaguriaguilo NL, *Saguimaniguara NL
(Aguimaniguara, Xaguimaniguara), Sainipame NL, *Saratiguara NL, Sayulime Ce, Siamomo M, Soloagua Ca, Sologuegue Ce, Sucuyama (Cucuyama), Tacopate NL, Tacuanama Ce, Tancacoama Ce, Tapayotoque, Tascuache Ca, Tatoama Ce and M, Tatocuene
Ce, Teminaguico NL, Tiaquesco NL, Tochoquin M, Tociniguara Ca, Upaseppta Ca,
Y aquinigua Ca, Y echimicual Ce, Zalaia
(Zalai), Zimitagui.

57

Area 7
Cacalotes, Carrizos (applied to several
distinct groups; see also Area 10), Garza (see
also Atanaguaypacam in Area 9), Mal
Nombre (see also Area 6), Tepemaca, Tortugas.
Area 8
Como se Llamas, Cueros Crudos, Cueros
Quemados, Guape, Huaraque, Malaguita,
Narizes, Nazas, Pajaritos, Tampacua (Campacua, Tanpacuaze), Tareguano, Tejones,
Venados:
Area 9
Alcalerpaguet (Calexpaquet), Apennapem,
Aretpeguem, Atanaguaypacam ("sea people"
in Comecrudo; the same as the Garza found
later in Area 7) (Goddard 1979:369-370),
Auyapaguim, Auyapem, Clancluiguyguen
(Tlanchuguin), Concuyapem, Coospacam,
Cotoname (Catanamepaque, Cootajam, Cotomavo-see also Area 6), Goajopocayo
(Giajepocotiyo), Guiguipacam (Iguiguipacam), Gummesacapem (Comesacapem),
Inyopacan, Lugplapiagulam (Hueplapiaguilam), Manyateno, Masacuajulam (Assaca?, Ymasaquajulam), Mayapem (Mallopeme, Mauliapefio), Parampamatuju, Perpacug (Pezpacuz), Perpepug (Perpapug;
"white-head" in a language similar to
Comecrudo) (Goddard 1979:369), Peupuetam (Peumepuem), Samacoalapem (Sumagualapem), Saulapaguem (Alapaguem, Salaphueme, Talapaguem), Saulapaguet, Segujulapem, Segutmapacam, Sepinpacam ("salt
people" in Comecrudo) (Goddard 1979:369).
Sicujulampaguet (Sicajayapaguet), Tenicapem (Paniquiapem, Tanaquiapem), Tugumlepem (Tunlepem), Umalayapem, Unpuncliegut (Hunzpuzlugut), Uscapem (Usapam).
Area 10
Comecrudo (later, on the Rio Grande,
called Mulato and Carrizo) (Goddard
1979:369), Maquiapem, Pamoran, Pintos,
Quedejefio (Querejefio, Tedexefio), Quiniacapem (Canaguiapem, Guianapaqueno),
Quinicuan.

58

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Area 11
Antiguos; Bocas Prietas, with subgroups
Clanapan (Tlanapanam), Comeperros, Dienteiios, and Santiagueiios; Cadima; Chapulines; Comepescados; Cometunas (Comenopales); Guajolotes (see also Area 6); Malincheiios; Odamich (Damiche); Palmitos;
Politos (Ypolitos); Zacatil.

Area 12
Chapoteiios, Morales, Palmeiios, Sinacanai, Villegas.

Area 13
Ancashiguay (horticulture), Anichapanama, Aracate, Barrosos, Camaleones, Caribay (horticulture) (Aribay), Comecamotes
(horticulture), Conejeros, Conipigua, Inapanam (Manimapacan, Napanam), Inocoplo,
Matucapam, Mesquites (see also Area 3),
Molina, Monan, Mulatos, Ojos de la Tierra,
Pasita (horticulture), Picacheiios, Sarnosas
(Sainoscos), Sincoalne, Tagualillo (horticulture) (Tagualito), Tumapacam.

Area 14
Aracuay, Characuay (Taracuay), Maratfn
(horticulture) (Maratino, Martfn), Mariguan
(horticulture), Moraleiios, Palalgueque, Simariguan (horticulture) (Casimariguan, Chinarihuan), Trueiios, Vejaranos, Yamacan
(horticulture).

Area 15
Anacan (horticulture), Aretin (horticulture), Caramariguan (horticulture), Caramiguay (horticulture), Cataican (Caicana), Maporcan, Mapulcan (horticulture?), Panguay
(horticulture) (Tanguay), Pachima, Yecan
(Yacana), Zapoteros.

SOURCES
Most of the basic information on the Indians of this region is contained in documents of the major archives of Spain and
Mexico, especially Archivo General de

lndias, Seville, and Archivo General de la
Nacion, Mexico City. For northeastern
Mexico and Texas the best guide to these
documents is that of Bolton (1913). The first
attempt to compile a list of Indian group
names for Mexico was that of Orozco y Berra
(1864), who collected names from numerous
uncited documents and arranged them
according to their associations with the
various Mexican states. Hodge (1907, 1910)
listed and presented limited information on
many Indian groups of Texas and
northeastern Coahuila. Most of this information was provided by Bolton (1915,
1916), who sometimes failed to recognize
distorted group name variants and identified
more Indian groups than actually existed.
Bolton presented such information as he had
found on group locations, linguistic affiliation, and association with Spanish missions,
but he seldom included any cultural detail.
Despite these limitations, Bolton's entries
in Hodge are still very useful.
Although somewhat uneven in quality, a
number of formal histories have been published that contain unusual amounts of information on Indian populations and their interaction with Europeans. These vary in scope
but mainly cover Spanish colonial provinces
or the modem states of Coahuila, Nuevo
Le6n, Tamaulipas, and Texas. Some are organized collections of documents in various
archives (Alessio Robles 1938: Bolton 1915;
Castaneda 1936-1958; Espinosa 1964;
Figueroa Torres 1963; Gomez Canedo 1968;
Habig 1968; Hoyo 1972; Le6n y otros 1961;
Maas 1915; Morfi 1935; Oberste 1942;
Portillo 1886; Prieto 1873; Saldivar 1943,
1945: Santa Marfa 1929-1930; Weddle 1968,
1973). The best interpretation of the route of
Cabeza de Vaca across this region is that of
Krieger (1955, 1961).
The overwhelming number of Indian
groups recorded for this region has discouraged attempts to prepare maps showing their
locations at various times. Saldivar (1943)
has published an informative map that identifies localities where various Indian groups of
Tamaulipas were reported in the eighteenth
century. Jimenez Moreno (1944) extended
Saldfvar's map to cover northeastern Mexico,
but the number of Indian groups shown for
Coahuila and Nuevo Le6n is small because of
inadquate locational information. Ruecking's

COAHUILTECANS AND THEIR NEIGHBORS

(1955a) map covering the entire region follows Saldivar and Jimenez Moreno, but the
number of groups shown by Ruecking for
southern Texas is quite small. General maps
showing the distribution of North American
Indians, such as that of Driver and Massey

59
(1957), are not very informative for northeastern Mexico and southern Texas because
only a few group names appear out of hundreds that might have been included. The
various linguistic maps covering this
region are not very informative.

This page intentionally left blank.

F.spinosa, Olivares, and the Colorado River Indians, 1709*
T. N. Campbell
INTRODUCTION

to the west. The refugee groups, who had
come from diverse areas and who spoke a
variety of languages, were able to communicate with each other and with the grassland
natives by means of a well-developed sign
language.
As nearly all hunting-and-gathering Indian
populations began to decline after Europeans
appeared, the prevailing trend was for displaced remnants to merge with other remnants. Afterwards the smaller remnants lost
their ethnic identities, as well as their languages, and their names were no longer
recorded in European documents. This explains why, for any given area, the number
of recorded Indian groups became smaller
with the passage of time. It also indicates
that any hunting-and-gathering groups that
maintained an ethnic identity into the nineteenth century represented an amalgam of diverse groups over a long span of time.
Although the diary of the 1709 expedition
refers to 14 Indian groups encountered between the Rio Grande and the Colorado
River, only those groups seen near the Colorado will be considered here. The diary lists
the names of three groups living near what
appears to have been modem Wilbarger
Creek: Y ojuane, Simaomo, and Tusonibi;
but the presence of a fourth group, Cantona,
is implied by the name "Capitan Cantona,"
said to have been "captain of the Yojuanes."
As will be shown, Cantona was the name of
a fairly well documented Indian group known
to Spaniards prior to 1709. The principal aim
of this study is to establish some kind of
credible identity for each group and determine
if it was native to the area or if it was a migrant group displaced from some other area.
Before 1709, other Indian groups, mainly
seen in shared encampments, had been encountered by Spanish travelers at various localities between the Guadalupe River (New
Braunfels to Cuero section) and the Colorado
River (Austin to Columbus section). The
Spanish expedition of 1709 spent only two
days in the Austin to Bastrop section of the

ANIBAL GONZALEZ (1982) HAS REcently presented evidence which indicates that
the E Spinosa-Olivares-Aguirre expedition of 1709 to the Colorado River explored a
relatively short section of the river valley between present-day Austin and Bastrop (see
Fig. 6). This expedition has never received
much attention from historians, who have
assumed that it reached the Colorado River
farther downstream than the recorded facts
permit. Based on careful analysis of terrain
description given in the expedition diary,
supplemented by travel in the area, Gonzalez'
study leaves little doubt about where the
expedition went; this enables us to determine
the approximate location of an Indian encampment visited by the Spaniards in 1709.
The several Indian groups who shared this
encampment, and who ranged over a fairly
large area, will be discussed in this article.
By 1709, many hunting-and-gathering Indian groups had been displaced from their
traditional territories by the slow northward
advance of the Spanish settlement frontier in
what is now northeastern Mexico, and also
by the eastward and southeastward expansion
from the southern Plains of Apache bands
who had become aggressive after acquiring
horses from the Spaniards of New Mexico.
Remnants of certain groups displaced by
Spaniards and Apaches moved from several
directions into the long grassland strip lying
between the highlands of central Texas and
the heavily wooded portion of eastern Texas.
Here they usually found in abundance the bison they had always hunted, and, by living
together in fairly large encampments with
groups native to the grasslands, there was
enough manpower to resist the Apaches, who
by 1709 were in firm control of the highlands

* This article is reprinted from the Sayersville Historical Association Bulletin 3:2-6, 15-16 (1983),
through the courtesy of the Sayersville Historical
Association.
61

62

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

-;;;-

:.-

:~

..

->~,.

.......\..

\

i

_,. . ::v

Suggested Route of the
1709 Spanish Entrada

~l

\:

.

,.,,

fj

.i
,,.{ :\
~., "\~

{,rl

.......

\

\
\

\
\
\

\

\

I Spanish league = 2.6 miles.
__ _.Suggested route between the San Marcos
and the Colorado Rivers.

~ General Direction of route between the
~ Rio Grande and the San Marcos River.

0

10

20

30

40

Miles

Figure 6. MAP OF THE CENTRAL TEXAS COLORADO RIVER AREA.

The shaded
area on the left is the Edwards Plateau (over 656 feet); the dashed outline is the modern area of Bastrop County;
the star is the approximate location of the Indian Village visited in what is now eastern Travis County. The
western edge of Bastrop County is in the Blackland Prairie while the majority of the county is in the Post Oak:
zone; the edge of the Post Oak: belt runs from about the "g" in Elgin south to the point where a creek is shown
crossing the southwestern county line. Map adapted from A. Gonzalez 1982:6. Original by Margaret Campbell,
with the assistance of Anibal A. Gonzalez and Bob Parvin.

ESPINOSA, OLIVARES, AND THE COLORADO RIVER INDIANS, 1709
Colorado River. If this expedition had gone
farther downstream, other Indian encampments probably would have been recorded.
Between 1689 and 1709, Spanish documents
referred to quite a number of Indian groups
as living between the two rivers (Bolton
1916; Gomez Canedo 1968), particularly
Apayxam, Catqueza, Chaguantapam, Cava,
Emet, Manam, Muruam, Panasiu, Sana, Tohaha, and Toho. Some of these were probably native to the area, others not. Still other
groups were also encountered during this
same 20-year period: a known immigrant
group, Mescal, and hunting and trading parties from Indian groups then living in distant
areas, such as Caynaaya, Cholome, Cfbola,
and Jumano from western Texas and Hasinai
from eastern Texas. Thus, prior to 1709,
there is evidence of considerable ethnic complexity in the Colorado River area, and this
will be shown in more detail when the Yojuane, Simaomo, Cantona, and Tusonibi are
discussed below. Furthermore, at various
times after 1709 still other groups were
recorded for the same area, among them
Coco, Cumercai, Huyugan, Mayeye, Pamaya, Payaya, Sijame, and Tonkawa, not to
mention Apache and Comanche raiding parties of still later times. As the early documents do not record very much detail about
most of these Indian groups, scholars have
always found it difficult to make sense out of
the confusion.

THE COLORADO RIVER INDIANS
Yojuane
The commonly used name Yojuane has
been recorded in at least 35 different ways,
most of them readily recognizable, such as
Diujuan, Iojuan, Jojuan, Joyvan, Uojuan,
Yacovane, and Yuhuanica. The name appears in numerous documents, although few
of these specify localities where Yojuane settlements were actually seen by Europeans.
The Yojuane of Texas lost their ethnic identity by the latter half of the eighteenth century. No sample of their everyday speech
was ever recorded, and very little descriptive
detail on their culture can be found in documents.

63

For approximately 75 years, the Yojuane
have been regarded as Tonkawan in language
and culture, but this linkage of Yojuane with
the Tonkawa has never been proved. The
identification of the Yojuane as a Tonkawan
group originated with Herbert E. Bolton
(Hodge 1910,11:998-999), a much respected
historian who assumed that if the Yojuane
had at some time shared the same encampment with Tonkawa, or had entered the same
Spanish mission at approximately the same
time as some of the Tonkawa, then the Yojuane must have been a subdividion of the
Tonkawa~ Bolton was not fully aware of the
magnitude of Indian territorial displacement,
and he did not note that the Yojuane were often recorded as sharing the same native encampment, or entering the same Spanish
mission, with Indian groups known not to
have been Tonkawan. Furthermore, Bolton
believed that all the Indian languages formerly spoken in Texas were known to the
linguists of his time, and he sometimes arbitrarily assigned Indian groups to one or another of the languages then known. Linguists of today are well aware that relatively
few of the Indian languages spoken in Texas
are represented by recorded speech samples
(Goddard 1979). Bolton also overlooked
evidence that the Yojuane and Tonkawa,
when together, communicated by means of a
sign language. It now seems unfortunate that
Bolton's identification of the Yojuane as
Tonkawan was so positively stated that his
opinion has gone unchallenged for such a
long time. If he had continued his Indian
studies, Bolton probably would have altered
his interpretation of the evidence.
It has recently been learned, from a document that has either been overlooked orignored by historians, that the Yojuane first
became known to Europeans in 1601, when
Juan de Oiiate led a Spanish expedition from
New Mexico into the Great Plains (Newcomb
and Campbell 1982:32, 38). In this document, "Yuhuanica" is given as one of eight
local group names for Indians collectively
known as Aguacane, whom Ofiate erroneously referred to as Escanjaques. In 1601,
these Indians were living in what is now
west-central Oklahoma, and competent linguists think that all eight group names are
recorded in a Wichita dialect. The same document mentions "Tancoa" as enemies of these

64
Aguacane Indians. It thus appears that the
Yojuane were not originally native to the
Texas area and were not Tonkawan in language, but rather were Wichita-speaking Indians who were displaced southward some
time after 1650, probably as the result of
Apache and Osage intrusions into their
homeland.
In 1691, some of the Y ojuane were first
recorded as being in what is now Texas
(Casanas de Jesus Marfa, in Swanton
1942:251 ), and from this time until the middle of the next century Yojuane were recorded in various localities in the prairie and
post-oak belts, mainly between the Brazos
and Red rivers west of the pine woods of
eastern Texas. Their western boundary seems
to have been determined by various Apache
groups and, later, by Comanches.
In 1709, the Yojuane were evidently new
to the Colorado River valley. Documents
written prior to 1709 do not refer to any Yojuane as living along the Colorado River or to
the south of it. The diary of 1709 states that
"the Indian captain of the Yojuanes, called
Cantona, comes and goes to the Texas with
his people," (A. Gonzalez 1982:7) and this
indicates that these Yojuane were then ranging mainly to the north of the Colorado
River, where later eighteenth-century documents consistently place all Yojuane populations. In 1719, some of the Yojuane were
recorded on the Red River (Wedel 1971:74).
In 1727 some were reported on the Trinity
River northwest of the Hasinai (Wheat
1957,I:Map No. 115), in 1754 some were
living in a generally northerly direction from
the Spanish settlement of Nacogdoches
(Anonymous 1754:2), in 1759 some were
seen on one of the upper headwater branches
of the Trinity River (Newcomb and Field
1967:261-264), and in 1767 Yojuane were
also reported between the upper Sabine and
the Red River (Kinnaird 1958:map).
An especially informative reference to the
Yojuane was made in 1768 by Gaspar Jose
de Solis (Kress and Hatcher 1931:57-58),
who found Coco, Mayeye, Y ojuane, and
Tonkawa living in an area near the junction of
the Little and Brazos rivers of present-day
Milam and Robertson counties. Solis noted
the diversity of languages spoken in that area
and said that "all the nations have one thing in
common, that is the sign language, with

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

which they talk not only for hours but entire
days." Bolton, who believed that the Mayeye, Y ojuane, and Tonkawa all spoke the
Tonkawa language, did not recognize the
significance of Solis' statements about linguistic diversity and use of a sign language.
It seems very likely that each of the four
groups named by Solis spoke a different language. By 1768, it may be noted, other Wichita-speaking peoples of the Oklahoma area
had moved down into the same part of northern Texas, among them Kichai, Taovaya,
Tawakoni, and Yscani.

Simaomo
The name Simaomo, which appears in relatively few primary documents, is variously
rendered as Siamomo, Simaoma, Simaomo,
Simomo, Simono, and Sinaoma. Such evidence as has been recovered from documents
suggests that the Simaomo were not native to
the Colorado River valley, where some of
them were seen in 1709 by Espinosa and
Olivares, but represent a population remnant
that had been displaced from northeastern
Coahuila and the adjoining part of presentday Texas late in the seventeenth century.
The earliest record of the Simaomo in
Texas was made by Gregorio de Salinas
Varona, who had participated in the 1689 and
1690 expeditions of Alonso de Le6n in
search of La Salle's Fort St. Louis and
French captives held by Indians north of
Matagorda Bay. In 1692, Salinas Varona
wrote a letter to the Viceroy of New Spain in
which he suggested that the recently abandoned Spanish missions of eastern Texas
should be reestablished on the Colorado
River. In this letter, Salinas Varona indicated
that the Simaomo lived between Matagorda
Bay (G6mez Canedo 1968:277-307) and the
Colorado River to the north. He also said
that Simaomo was an alternate name for the
Indian group known as Cantona (ibid.:272273). This last statement, cited by Bolton as
the basis for identifying both Simaomo and
Cantona as Tonkawan groups because of
their association in 1709 with the Yojuane, is
now open to question.
In 1693, after becoming governor of
Coahuila, Salinas Varona led an expedition
from Monclova to eastern Texas and kept a
diary which until recently has not been avail-

ESPINOSA, OLIYARES, AND THE COLORADO RIVER INDIANS, 1709
able for study (ibid.:277-307). This diary,
apparently never seen by Bolton, recorded
observations of various Indian groups encountered between the Guadalupe and Colorado rivers and noted which groups shared
the same encampment. It said nothing about
Simaomo and Cantona being different names
for the same Indian group. The omission
probably indicates that Salinas Varona no
longer believed his statement of 1692 to be
true. His summarizing list of Indian groups
encountered between the two rivers includes
both the Simaomo and the Cantona, and
elsewhere in the diary, when indicating
which groups shared the same encampment,
the Simaomo and Cantona were not recorded
as living together. The Simaomo shared encampments with Mescal, Sana, and Tohaha,
as well as with Hasinai hunters from eastern
Texas and Jumano hunters and traders from
western Texas. It may also be noted that in
1693, Salinas Varona recorded no encounters
with Yojuane anywhere along his entire route
from Monclova to the Hasinai villages of
eastern Texas.
The Simaomo and one of their encampment associates, the Mescal, were first
known in an area that lies some 250 miles to
the southwest of the Colorado River, in
northeastern Coahuila and the adjacent part of
Texas just north of the Rio Grande. The
Simaomo were recorded there only once, but
numerous documents recorded the Mescal
between the years 1670 and 1691. The
names "Siamomo" and "Miscale" both occur
on a long list of Indian groups said to have
been living in a northerly direction from
Monterrey during the period 1650-1690
(Le6n y otros 1961:189). The better documented Mescal, prior to 1691, were associated with an area that extended from the Rio
Sabinasofnortheastern Coahuila as far
northeastward as the Frio River southwest of
San Antonio, Texas, and some of the Mescal
were still living at Mission San Juan Bautista
near the Rio Grande as late as 177 2
(Campbell 1979:23-24).
It thus seems reasonable to conclude that
some of the Simaomo and Mescal had migrated to the eastern part of central Texas
shortly before 1690, when Salinas Varona
saw Simaomo between Matagorda Bay and
the Colorado River. We hear nothing further
about the Simaomo after Espinosa and Oli-

65

vares saw them on the Colorado River in
1709. In 1716, some of the Mescal were
recorded as living in a large encampment near
the junction of the San Gabriel and Little
rivers in present-day Milam County (Tous
1930b:14, 16-17). In this same encampment
were remnants of many Indian groups who
had migrated from northeastern Coahuila and
vicinity. A few of the Simaomo may have
gone there with the Mescal. The visiting
Spaniards did not record names for all Indian
groups represented. One later source indicates that remnants of 22 different Indian
groups were at various times associated with
this particular encampment assemblage
(Wheat 1957,I:Map No. 115).
The earliest recorded location of the
Mescal, as well as statements made by early
missionaries about languages spoken in
northeastern Mexico and southern Texas,
suggests that the Mescal may have spoken a
dialect of the Coahuilteco language (Goddard
1979:364); and the Simaomo, who came
from the same area as the Mescal, could also
have spoken the same language. Bolton
(Hodge 1910,II:573), noting Simaomo association with Yojuane in 1709, thought that
this indicated a Tonkawan language for the
Simaomo. Such evidence as is now available
seems to indicate that the Simaomo and Yojuane came to the Colorado River area from
opposite directions, and today it appears
likely that neither of these groups was
Tonkawan in speech.

Cantona
The Cantona are known only from Spanish documents written between 1690 and
1750, and it is evident that in the second half
of the eighteenth century the Cantona declined in number and were absorbed by other
Indian groups. The name Cantona has been
rendered in at least 18 different ways, the two
principal forms of the name being (1) Cantona (Cantanual, Cantoma, Canttona, Canttuna, Cantu, Cantuan, Cantuna, Cantunal,
Contuna) and (2) Cantauhaona (Cantouahona, Cantouhaona, Cantujauna, Cantujuana, Cantujuna, Cautohaona, Cautouhaona). Documents that give specific locations for the Cantona before 1709 place them
between the Guadalupe and Colorado rivers.
This suggests that they may have been native

66
to that area, although it is possible that they
were displaced from the Edwards Plateau by
Apaches shortly before they became known
to Europeans. No recognizable form of the
name Cantona has been found in documents
that pertain to distant areas.
The Cantona first became known in 1690,
when Alonso de Le6n was searching for
French captives among Indians living north
of Matagorda Bay. Somewhere near the
Colorado River, Le6n visited an encampment
shared by Cantona, Cava, Emet, Sana, Tohaha, and Toho (Bolton 1916:384, 419).
The next year, 1691, Teran de los Rios encountered Cantona on the Guadalupe River
northeast of present-day San Antonio, and at
this time they were sharing an encampment
with a different set of Indian groups:
Catqueza, who were said to be native to the
area, and four groups from western Texas:
Caynaaya, Cholome, Cibola, and Jumano,
who had come eastward to hunt bison and to
trade (G6mez Canedo 1968:178, 240-241).
Then in 1692, as noted in the Simaomo
section above, Salinas Varona wrote that
Simaomo was another name for the Cantona,
apparently an error that he later abandoned.
The following year, 1693, Salinas Varona
reported Cantona in an encampment near the
Colorado River, in which there were also
some Jumano from western Texas and some
Hasinai from eastern Texas. Between the
Guadalupe and Colorado rivers Salinas
Varona also reported seeing two additional
groups: Saquita (probably a variant of the
name Catqueza) and Muruam, almost certainly descendants of the Mariames known to
Cabeza de Vaca some 150 years earlier
(ibid.:298, 306).
According to the diary of 1709, Capitan
Cantona was well known to Spaniards. He
was evidently the same Cantona leader who
guided Teran de los Rios to eastern Texas in
1691. He was probably also the "great Cantujuana" known to Jose de Urrutia as leader
of the Cantona, Emet, and Toho who lived
on the Colorado River. Urrutia, a soldier,
was severely injured in 1693 while returning
from eastern Texas, was befriended by the
Cantona leader, whose people nursed him
back to health, and lived with these Indians
for seven years (1693-1700), later boasting
that he was a great help to them in their battles with the Apaches (Dunn 1911 :239).

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

The last clear locational record of the
Cantona seems to have been made in 1716,
when Espinosa accompanied Diego Ram6n to
eastern Texas and noted that a few Cantona
were living with other Indians in the large encampment near the junction of the San Gabriel and Little rivers (Tous 1930b: 16-17).
It is no longer possible to agree with
Bolton's ideas about Cantona identity: that
they were the same people as the Simaomo,
or that they were linguistically and culturally
related to the Yojuane, whom Bolton regarded as Tonkawans but were almost certainly of Wichita affiliation. The diary of
1709 is the only known Spanish document
that links the name Cantona with Yojuane,
and no document has yet been found that
mentions Cantona encamped together with a
people designated by some variant of the
name Tonkawa. Today it is not possible to
determine what language was spoken by the
Cantona, for no sample of their speech was
ever written down. Damian Mazanet, a missionary who knew the Coahuilteco language,
made it clear that the Cantona did not speak
Coahuilteco (G6mez Canedo 1968:240). The
Cantona probably spoke one of the unrecorded Indian languages of Texas.

Tusonibi
So far as is now known, Espinosa and his
fellow travelers were the only Europeans
who ever saw and reported an Indian group
bearing the name Tusonibi. In various
sources this name has been rendered as Fusolabi, Fusolibi, Tasonibi, Tusolivi, and Tusonibi. It is possible that these Tusonibi
were the same as a people variously recorded
in northeastern Mexico as Juzan, Tuisoni,
Tusane, Tusonid, and Tuzan, and who in
relatively late times were included among
Indians collectively known by the Spanish
name Carrizo (Campbell 1979:51). This
possibility is somewhat strengthened by the
fact that remnants of two additional groups
from northeastern Mexico, Simaomo and
Mescal, had moved into the area lying between the Guadalupe and Colorado rivers
before the year 1709. If the Tusonibi of the
Colorado River were indeed the same as the
Tusan of northeastern Mexico, this lends little
support to Bolton's (Hodge 1910,11:854)
identification of the Tusonibi (he called them

--------- - - - - - - - - -

ESPINOSA, OLIY ARES, AND THE COLORADO RIVER INDIANS,

1709

67

Table 2. INDIAN GROUPS SEEN ALONG 1lIE COLORADO RlvER BY 1lIE 1709 ExPEDmON.
Name
Cantona

Homeland
Colorado River area
of Central Texas

Yojuane

North-Central Oklahoma
(north of the Red River)

Wichita

Simaorno

Northeastern Mexico

Unknown

Tusonibi

Northeastern Mexico

Unknown

Language Group
Unknown

Only one of the four Indian groups a Spanish expedition in 1709 reported along the Colorado River in the
Bastrop vicinity was possibly native to the area. There is no evidence that any of the four was a group related to
the Tonkawa, as earlier historians have believed.

"Tusolive") as Tonkawan in affiliation because they were encamped with Yojuane in
1709. Today the most important statement
that can be made about the Tusonibi is that
we do not know enough about them to determine their linguistic and cultural affiliations.
In summary, it may be said that Bolton
seems to have been so intent on identifying
various Indian groups in the eastern part of
central Texas as Tonkawan in affiliation that
it never occurred to him that Yojuane,
Simaomo, Cantona, and Tusonibi could have
originated in three widely separated areas and
came together near the Colorado River in
1709 because of displacement by Spaniards
and Apaches. It is no longer possible to follow Bolton and regard Simaomo and Cantona
as alternate names for the same Indian population; or to regard Simaomo, Cantona, and
Tusonibi as related to the Yojuane; or to regard all four groups as related to the
Tonkawa. The association of these groups
on the Colorado River in 1709 was incidental
to displacement and migration, and there is
no good reason for assuming that they shared
the same encampment because they spoke the
same language or had identical cultures.

CULTURAL DESCRIPTION IN THE
1709 DIARY
The diary of 1709 contains a substantial
amount of cultural description, but this is

---

-------

presented in a generalized way that makes it
virtually impossible to link the described behavior with specific Indian groups. This description occurs in two separate parts of the
diary. One part refers to about 50 unnamed
Indian groups of southern Texas and northeastern Mexico, among whom both Espinosa
and Olivares had served as missionaries. The
other part refers to the four Indian groups
encountered on the Colorado River. There is
no satisfactory way to determine if any descriptive passages of one part also pertain to
Indians specified in the other. The cultural
description in the second part refers collectively to the Youjuane, Simaomo, Cantona,
and Tusonibi, and here it is not possible to
tell if the behavior described is actually attributable to each of the four groups. As
these groups seem to have originated in different areas, and to have spoken diverse languages, it is doubtful if their cultures were
originally identical.
Espinosa and Olivares were able to observe the Colorado River Indians for only a
short period, actually less than two full days,
and thus did not have time enough to learn
very much about the Indians. It must be recognized that these men were missionaries,
not scientists, and were not motivated to ply
the Indians with questions about who they
were and how they lived, and then to put the
answers into a diary. After all, these missionaries had come to the Colorado River expecting to meet the Tejas Indians and to make
arrangements for reestablishing missions
among them. To them, the Colorado River

-~----~----

-----

- ----------------------------------

68

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Indians were a side issue. Yet, considering
how little was recorded about these Indians in
both earlier and later documents, the diary
turns out to be fairly informative.

Houses and Settlements
The Colorado River Indian encampment
visited by the Spaniards in 1709 is said to
have contained approximately 2,000 persons.
It is important to note that the Indian group
names recorded in the diary are linked, not
with this settlement, but with a group of 77
individuals from it who earlier had come into
the Spanish base camp. If, while actually in
the Indian encampment, the Spaniards had
asked for the names of all Indian groups represented there, additional ethnic group names
might have been recorded.
The Indian settlement visited was clearly a
temporary encampment, which is indicated
by use of the Spanish word rancherfa. The
diary of 1709 says nothing about the practice
of agriculture, which requires permanent settlements, and no documents pertaining to this
part of Texas refer to agriculture among the
Indians except at Spanish missions. The
documents now available show that, between
the years 1690 and 1709, all Indian groups
that lived between the Colorado and
Guadalupe rivers supported themselves by
hunting and gathering. These documents indicate that no group confined its food-getting
activities to an area as small as a modem
Texas county. The various groups, either
singly or in association, seem to have ranged
over areas equivalent in size to at least seven
or eight Texas counties.
Spanish documents tell us little about the
nature of the houses and settlements of specific Indian groups in this area. Spaniards
had little interest in systematic description of
"huts" and their arrangement in settlements,
particularly of hunting-and-gathering Indians.
This is well illustrated by the diary of 1709,
which reports a visit to an encampment of
some 2,000 people and says not one descriptive word about houses or the settlement plan.
This casual attitude is even more evident
when we note that, prior to visiting the occupied encampment, the Spaniards had passed
by an abandoned encampment, which they
did describe, although quite briefly. Yet
nothing was said about what Indian groups

had used this settlement. The Spaniards
could easily have found out by asking the Indians of the occupied settlement, which was
not very far away.
Nevertheless, the brief description of the
abandoned encampment is valuable because it
does tell us something about Indian housing
in that area. The Spanish party, before encountering any Indians in that area, came
upon the abandoned settlement, which consisted of about 150 houses Uacales) arranged
in a semicircular pattern. This was found a
little over one mile north of the river. The
houses are s-aid to have been large, well
made, and round in floor plan. Nothing is
said about building materials, other details of
house form, or distance between houses. In
the same locality the Spaniards saw four
graves covered with tree branches, and two
of these graves gave off an offensive odor
that indicated recent burial. This locality was
about 10 miles from the occupied settlement
later visited by the Spaniards. It would have
helped if the diary had noted that the occupied
encampment was similar to, or different
from, the abandoned encampment

Foods
The only foodstuff mentioned is bison
meat, but the diary of 1709 is unusually informative on the subject of bison. It gives a
brief but good description of the bison as an
animal, and it records interesting observations about the distribution of bison in the region traversed by the Spaniards. It is said
that no bison, or even their tracks, were seen
until the Spaniards approached the Colorado
River. Many herds were seen on both sides
of this river, and reference is made to deep
tracks and pathways at places where animals
had crossed the stream west of the more
thickly wooded part of present-day Bastrop
County. The absence of bison from the
western part of southern Texas at this time
was probably due to a regional drought, since
the diary notes that the Rio Grande was unusually low and that some streams to the
north of it were entirely dry. Apparently only
the larger, spring-fed streams that headed in
the Edwards Plateau had much water at this
time.
It thus seems reasonable to think that the
large Indian encampment visited by the

ESPINOSA, OLIVARES, AND THE COLORADO RIVER INDIANS,

Spaniards was made possible by an abundance of bison in the open grassland areas of
Bastrop and Travis counties. It was April
and the bison herds were evidently moving
slowly northward as the growing season advanced. The diary mentions that bison meat
was the most common food of Indians who
lived "in the neighborhood of the Tejas Indians," by which is probably meant those who
ranged the prairie lands west and southwest
of the Tejas or Hasinai Indians. The Spaniards were told that a few of the Tejas sometimes traveled southwestward as far as the
Colorado River to obtain bison meat. It is
further noted that bison meat was extensively
used by Indians "in the hills," obviously referring to the Apaches.

Clothing
The diary refers to Indian clothing, mainly
the lack of it. It is said that almost all of the
Indians were entirely nude, and that the remainder wore very little clothing. No garment is described, no ornaments mentioned,
and nothing is said about tattooing or body
painting.
Horses, Weapons, and Warfare
The Colorado River Indians had horses,
but no impression is given of how many they
had. In fact, horses are mentioned in only
two passages, both referring to leaders on
horseback. One allusion is made to the bow
and arrow, which were undoubtedly used in
both hunting and warfare. Nothing is said
about warfare other than that their principal
enemies were Apaches. The size of the encampment suggests that a population of at
least 2,000 was necessary to discourage
Apaches from attacking them.
Greeting Behavior
For the Yojuane and their associates, the
diary of 1709 describes a form of greeting
behavior that has not been recorded for other
Indian groups in the Texas area. This consisted of jovial shouting, embracing, and
profusive caressing of the face and arms.
The two missionaries were much impressed
when all the Spaniards received this treatment. It is possible that this custom was

1709

69

shared by other Indians of the area, and that it
was not recorded because Europeans were
not often considered eligible for such a close,
friendly relationship. One wonders if, in
this case, anxiety over their Apache enemies
to the west led these Indians to seek firm
friendship with the Spaniards.

CONCLUSIONS
The Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre expedition
to the CoJorado River in 1709 was, in terms
of its objective, a failure. Faulty information
had led Spanish missionaries to believe that
the Tejas or Hasinai Caddo Indians had migrated southwestward to the Colorado River,
and the purpose of the expedition was to meet
the Tejas there and arrange for missions to be
reestablished among them. The report of
Tejas migration was revealed as erroneous by
hunting-and-gathering Indians found encamped near the Colorado River, and the
disappointed missionaries returned to their
base in Coahuila. The expedition thus had no
great historical significance, but the dairy
which records this expedition has value because of the information it contains about
various Indian groups encountered by the
Spaniards, particularly those living near the
Colorado River in present-day Bastrop and
Travis counties.
The four Colorado River groups-Yojuane, Simaomo, Cantona, and Tusonibihave long been regarded as closely related to
each other and as Tonkawan in language and
culture. An examination of documents written both before and after 1709 reveals no
clear evidence of a Tonkawan affinity for any
of these Indian groups. The Cantona seem to
have been native to the Colorado River area,
but the three remaining groups appear to have
been population remnants displaced from distant areas. The Yojuane, now identifiable as a
Wichita-speaking group, originally lived north
of the Red River in what is now Oklahoma.
The Simaomo, and possibly also the Tusonibi, can be traced to an area in northeastern
Mexico. The languages spoken by the Simaomo, Cantona, and Tusonibi remain unknown. As the four Colorado River groups
of 1709 seem to have had diverse origins,
their cultural characteristics as described by

70
Espinosa and Olivares must be regarded as a
composite. It is illogical to think of these

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

cultural characteristics as being in any way
representative of early Tonkawa culture.

Name All the Indians of the Bastrop Area*
T. N. Campbell
In Figure 7 an enlarged "Bastrop area" is
enclosed by a lozenge-shaped figure. This
area lies between two major rivers, the Brazos and the Guadalupe, indicated by the wavy
lines forming the northeast and southwest
borders of the figure. The straight lines
forming the other two borders are arbitrarily
drawn, that on the northwest connecting New
Braunfels with Marlin, and on the southeast
connecting Victoria with Richmond. This enclosed area is characterized by alternating
grasslands (prairies) and woodlands (mainly
oak-hickory). Hunting-and-gathering Indians
found this area attractive because it was well
watered and had an abundance of food resources-bison in the prairies, deer in the
woodlands, and a wide variety of plants that
offered edible roots, shoots, fruits, and nuts.
The numbered arrows of Figure 7 indicate
the main sources of Indian populations, not
native to the Bastrop area, who either approached or entered the Bastrop area during
the historic period. Those who entered the
Bastrop area did so for various reasons: to

THE TITLE OF THIS ARTICLE READS

like a command that might be given in that
currently popular pastime known as Trivial
Pursuit. It is, however, not a good command
because no one knows all the names. For
one thing, we cannot know the names of
Indian groups who lived around Bastrop
before European travelers arrived and began
recording names. For another, the Europeans
did not record the names of all Indian groups;
they only recorded names for Indian groups
they actually encountered or heard about.
Nor did the Europeans say very much about
each of the Indian groups for which names
were recorded. All that can be done today is
read early documents, collect names, salvage
descriptive information, and make reasoned
inferences.
If you set out to collect Indian group
names for a specific area, you have to define
that area, that is, show its limits on a map. If
you make the area too small and have it include, say, only present-day Bastrop County,
you run into trouble immediately. Nearly
all of the Indian groups of the general area
were hunters and gatherers, each of whom,
on a seasonal basis, probably ranged over an
area larger than Bastrop County. As the
European documents are usually vague about
locations, you often cannot be sure whether
a particular Indian group was seen in Bastrop
County or in one of the nearby counties.
Thus you are forced to enlarge the Bastrop
area on the map in order to get at some
semblance of historical accuracy. A sensible
compromise is to enlarge the areas to include
other nearby counties whose terrain and
vegetative cover are similar. By doing
this you are more likely to collect names
of groups who, at one time or another, probably ranged over what is now Bastrop
County.

~3

4

~\

Figure 7. BASTROP AREA MAP. Num-

* This article was first published in the Sayersville
Historical Association Bulletin 7:7-10 (1986). It is
published herein courtesy of the Sayersville Historical
Association.

bered arrows indicate source areas of displaced Indian
groups who entered the Bastrop area during the
historic period. Map prepared by Beth Ogden Davis.

71

----

-----------------------

72

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

trade, to hunt, to raid, or to take up residence
there. Some merely traveled across the Bastrop area to reach other areas. In general,
most of this movement was in some way
connected with the disruption of Indian populations by European colonization in surrounding areas, as will presently be noted
In Table 3, listed in alphabetic order, are
the names of 60 Indian groups that can be
connected with the Bastrop area, mainly between the years 1685 and 1836. This list
cannot be regarded as complete, for it is clear
that all group names were not recorded. In a
travel journal it is not unusual to find a short
list of Indian groups encountered followed by
the phrase "and others." If you are astonished by the number of names listed in Table
3, consider also this fact: the list does not
include the names of Indian groups who were
recorded only as living near the boundaries of
the Bastrop area and may at times have
entered it. The Indian history of any particular area in Texas is much more complex than
even the best scholars have realized.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
As noted above, nearly all of the Indian
groups connected with the Bastrop area, and
especially those seemingly native to the area,
were small, independent groups who lived by
hunting and gathering, ranging over fairly
large territories in search of food. Historians
of Texas have often mistakenly referred to
these groups as tribes, or as subdivisons of
tribes, but in the earlier documents there is no
indication of a tribal type of organization.
Early Spanish travelers often referred to these
groups as "nations," a clear indication of independent status.
The history of the Bastrop area prior to
Anglo-American settlement in the early nineteenth century cannot be properly understood
unless one knows something about what was
happening elsewhere-in Europe, particularly in France and Spain, in Mexico, and in
New Mexico and the southern part of the
High Plains. The Bastrop area was a very
small part of a vast area in North America that
was being competitively colonized by Europeans. By 1680 Spain had a fair control of

what is now northern Mexico and New
Mexico, but had occupied little of what is
now Texas. In 1684 France sent La Salle to
establish a settlement near the mouth of the
Mississippi River, but La Salle's fleet overshot that river and landed on the Texas coast
near Matagorda Bay, where a small fort was
built that was occupied for only a few years.
This French gesture, the result of geographic
error, provoked Spain to establish small outpost settlements on the Texas coast and in
eastern Texas to halt further French expansion westward from the lower Mississippi
valley. As nearly all travel from Mexico to
eastern Texas thereafter either skirted or
passed across the Bastrop area, much of what
is known about its Indian history comes from
Spanish travel records.
There is another historical development
that is very pertinent to knowledge of the
Bastrop area. In the middle seventeenth
century Indians of the southern High Plains,
mainly groups later known as Apaches,
learned how to use the European horse in bison hunting and warfare, and became aggressive. Although the details are imperfectly
known, it is clear enough that various Apache
groups expanded eastward and southward,
displacing other Indian groups, some of
whom later turned up in the Bastrop area.
Interpretation of the documentary record
seems to show that, mainly between the years
1680 and 1750, the Bastrop area served as a
refuge for remnants of numerous displaced
Indian groups. Why did so many remnants
enter the Bastrop area? It was a good food
area and was not thickly populated, its native
Indians having declined in numbers because
of epidemics of European diseases. There
were a few Spanish outposts near the Bastrop
area but none deeply within it. The Apaches
controlled the highlands of the Edwards
Plateau to the west but did not occupy the
Bastrop area on a year-round basis. As more
refugee Indian groups moved into the Bastrop area, it became safer for them because of the manpower available for defense.
Consequently numerous remnant groups,
with diverse languages and cultures, moved
into the Bastrop area. There was no communication problem because a sign language
was in wide use. For close to 75 years the
Bastrop area was an ethnic melting pot in

73

NAME ALL THE INDIANS OF THE BASTROP AREA

Table 3. INDIAN GROUPS ASSOCIATED WITH THE BASTROP AREA.
Akokisa
Apache
Apayxam

Deadose
Delaware

Aranama

Ervipiame
Esquein
Estepisa
Guerjuatida
Hasinai
Huyuguan
Jumano
Karank:awa
Kickapoo
Mayeye
Menanquen
Mescal
Mesquite
Muruam

Patiri
Payaya
Sana
Saqui
Sijame
Simaoma
Siupam
Sulujam
Tawakoni
Tenu
Ticmamar
Tohaha
Toho
Tonkawa
Tueinzum
Tusonibi
Waco

Emet

Bidai
Cacaxtle
Caisquetebana
Camai

Cantona
Caocossi
Catqueza
Cava
Caynaaya
Chaguantapam
Cholome
Cibola
Coco
Comanche
Cujan
Cumercai

Naaman

Xarame

Pamaya
Panasiu

Yojuane
Zorquan

which remnants of various Indian groups
declined, merged, and lost their original
identities. Texas historians have not fully
understood this unusual development in the
Bastrop area.

INDIANS OF THE BASTROP AREA:
NATIVES VS. IMMIGRANTS
The procedure here will be to sort out the
Indian group names of Table 3 into two sets:
(1) those presumed to be native to the Bastrop area as defined in Figure 7, and (2) those
known to have migrated from the various areas indicated by numbered arrows in Figure 7.

Tohaha, and Toho. The registers of Mission
San Antonio de Valero of San Antonio record
four additional groups, not mentioned by
travelers, who seem to have come from the
Bastrop area because, when they arrived at
the mission, they were already married to Indians known from the Bastrop area. These
are: Camai, Tenu, Tueinzum, and Zorquan.
There is, however, a catch in this elimination
approach. We have very few records of early
European travel in the eastern part of the Edwards Plateau, and some of the groups presumed to be native to the Bastrop area may
have been displaced early from the Edwards
Plateau by the southeastward expansion of
Apaches.
Immigrants

Natives

Arrow 1

The only feasible approach to determining
which of the recorded Indian groups were
native to the Bastrop area is to identify and
eliminate all groups who were reported in
other areas before they were reported in the
Bastrop area. When we eliminate the immigrant groups, we are left with the following:
Apayxam, Caisquetebana, Cantona, Catqueza, Cava, C haguan tap am, Cumercai,
Emet, Mayeye, Menanquen, Panasiu, Sana,

Between 1700 and 1735 remnants of a
considerable number of Indian groups moved
into the western part of the Bastrop area from
northeastern Coahuila, northern Nuevo Le6n,
and the adjacent parts of Texas. These migrations resulted from the combined effects
of two pressures: the northward expansion
of the Spanish settlement frontier and the opposing southward and southeastward expansion of Plains Apaches. Spanish documents

74

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

identify some, but not all, of these groups by
name: Cacaxtle, Ervipiame, Guerjuatida,
Mescal, Mesquite, Pamaya, Saqui, Sijame,
Simaoma, Ticmamar, Tusonibi, and Xarame.
One Spanish map, compiled about 1728,
notes a large Indian encampment in the vicinity of modern Milam County that was occupied by unnamed remnants of 22 Indian
groups who had been displaced by Apaches.
It is records such as this that lead us to believe that we do not yet know the names of
many Indian groups who, at one time or another, migrated into the Bastrop area.

Arrow 2
In the 1690s representatives of several Indian groups from present-day Trans-Pecos
Texas annually made trips to the Bastrop area
for puposes of trade. Four group names
were recorded in Spanish documents as having been seen encamped near modern New
Braunfels: Caynaaya, Cholome, Cibola, and
Jumano. Various additional documents refer
to Jumano traders elsewhere in the Bastrop
area and also among the Hasinai Caddo of
eastern Texas.

Arrow 3
This indicates the southeastward expansion of various unnamed Apache groups of
the southern Plains toward the Bastrop area.
In the second half of the seventeenth century
Apaches moved into and established dominance in the Edwards Plateau region. By
1690 most Indian groups of southern and
eastern Texas were aware of Apaches, and
documents of the time briefly refer to conflicts. So far as we can determine no Apache
groups occupied any part of the Bastrop area
on a year-round basis, but they raided into it
at times. Later, after 1700, Comanches from
the Texas Panhandle area began pressuring
Apaches of the Edwards Plateau, and
eventually drove most of them southward to
the coastal plain south of San Antonio. Like
the Apaches, the Comanches merely raided in
the Bastrop area, but they figure prominently
in documents of the Anglo-American period.

Arrow 4
This indicates the southward movement
across the Red River of several Wichita-

speaking groups, such as the Tawakoni,
Waco, and Yojuane; and also the Tonkawa.
So far as is now known, all these groups
were not originally native to any part of
Texas. Their southward shift into Texas
seems to have occurred early in the eighteenth
century. The Tawakoni and Waco, who
lived by a combination of hunting and farming, had villages in the vicinity of modern
Waco. Most of the Yojuane seem to have
eventually been absorbed by the Tawakoni
and Tonkawa. The Tawakoni, and probably
also the Waco, made raids into the Bastrop
area as late a~ the early nineteenth century.
About the same time the Tonkawa, however,
ranged over the Bastrop area and became well
known to Anglo-American settlers.

Arrow 5
There was less displacement of Indian
groups from eastern Texas into the Bastrop
area because of less pressure from Europeans
and Plains Indians. Most Indian groups of
eastern Texas were farmers. Various documents mention small parties of Hasinai Caddoans hunting bison in grasslands of the
Bastrop area shortly before and after 1700.
In the late 1740s small groups of Akokisa,
Bidai, and Patiri entered the short-lived
Spanish missions of present Milam County.
Later, early in the nineteenth century, remnants of various Indian groups from the
United States entered eastern Texas, but few
of these were recorded as having been seen in
the Bastrop area (Delaware, Kickapoo).

Arrow 6
The arbitrary boundary line drawn between the Bastrop area and the Gulf coastal
zone poses problems because it is not clear
just how far north some of the coastal groups
ranged at times. Of the coastal groups, several were sometimes recorded well within the
Bastrop area, among them Aranama, Coco,
Muruam, and Naaman. The Karankawaspeaking Caocossi, known to the French of
La Salle's Fort as Clamcoch, are known to
have traversed the Bastrop area in the 1680s
to attack their Caddoan enemies in eastern
Texas. Two additional groups, believed to
have been from the coast, the Esquien and the
Estepisa, entered the Spanish missions of
Milam County in the late 1740s.

75

NAME ALL THE INDIANS OF THE BASTROP AREA

Arrow 7
After 1700, a few Indian groups of southern Texas, all associated with the valley of
the San Antonio River, were reported as
hunting in the Bastrop area. These included
the Payaya, Siupam, and Sulujam.
THE TONKAWA PROBLEM
Scholars of the first half of the present
century seem to have made a serious error
when they classified a considerable number
of Indian groups connected with the Bastrop
area as subdivisions of the Tonkawa. This
misconception developed in a curious way.
It was assumed that, as the Tonkawa ranged
over the Bastrop area after the first AngloAmerican settlers arrived, they must have
been native to the area and therefore were
probably related to other Indian groups of the
same area. More recent documentary studies
indicate that the Tonkawa were immigrants
who entered the Bastrop area from the north,
and it seems strange to claim that they were
ancestral, or otherwise related, to Indian
groups who were already in the Bastrop area.
Of the Indian groups named in Table 3, the
following have often been classified as
Tonkawan: Cantona, Catqueza, Cava, Emet,
Ervipiame, Mayeye, Menanquen, Sana, Sijame, Tenu, Tueinzum, Tohaha, Toho, Yojuane, and Zorquan. As noted in the preceding section, some of these groups were apparently native to the Bastrop area, but others
were immigrants from diverse areas. It cannot be claimed that any of these 15 groups
spoke dialects of the Tonkawa language, for
no words from their languages were ever
recorded. In late times small remnants of
some of these groups may have been absorbed by the Tonkawa, but this does not
mean that the absorbed remnants were originally Tonkawan in language and culture.
Disruption of Indian groups sometimes led to
strange amalgamations. Classification should
be based on convincing evidence, not on
guesswork.
The mistaken classification of many Bastrop area groups as Tonkawans has led

historians to claim that Tonkawa Indians
entered the Spanish missions of Milam
County and San Antonio in considerable
numbers. The surviving registers of those
missions contain the names of only a few
Tonkawa individuals, but they contain the
names of numerous individuals from the
groups misclassified as Tonkawa. It would
appear that the real Tonkawa were never interested in entering Spanish missions, which
in itself is an indication that they were different from the misclassified groups. It is unfortunate that so many unverified statements
have bee,n made, and continue to be made,
about the Tonkawa in Texas.

CONCLUSION
In the preceding sections it has been
shown that, during the historic period, European travelers recorded the names of at least
60 Indian groups that can be connected with
the Bastrop area. Some of these groups can
be identified as probably native to the area,
and others as immigrant groups displaced
from surrounding areas. Most of these Indian groups were small bands of hunters and
gatherers, and the large number of names
merely reflects their independent status. Although not much was recorded by European
travelers about each of these groups, it is
clear that they were authentic ethnic units and
that their relationships with each other were
complex. As time passed, each of these
groups declined in numbers. Some lost their
identities by merging with remnants of other
groups, and some lost their identities in the
Spanish missions of San Antonio and Goliad. Nearly all of them had disappeared
from the documentary record before the arrival of Anglo-American settlers in the Bastrop area. It seems reasonable to believe that
one of the last surviving groups, the immigrant Tonkawa, absorbed individuals and
families from the earlier populations. Whatever happened to the various Indian groups
associated with the Bastrop area, one thing
can be said about them: they left the natural
environment in a remarkably good condition.

76

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

A CHALLENGE
Below is appended a list of English translations of various French and Spanish documents that record travel across or near the
Bastrop area. It is hoped that some residents
of the Bastrop area will study these travel
records and, by using their knowledge of the
local terrain, arrive at more accurate route

TRAVEL DOCUMENTS:
Berlandier, Jean Louis
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830,
edited and introduced by John C.
Ewers. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C.
1980 Journey to Mexico During the
Years 1826 to 1834, translated by
Sheila M. Ohlendorf (two volumes). The Texas State Historical
Association and the Center for
Studies in Texas History, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1916 Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York (see
De Le6n-Massanet Expeditions,
pp. 347-423).
Bridges, Katherine, and Winston De Ville
1967 Natchitoches and the Trail to the
Rio Grande: Two Early Eighteenth-Century Accounts by the
Sieur Derbanne. Louisiana History 8(3):239-259.
Castaneda, Carlos E.
1926 A Trip to Texas in 1828, by Jose
Maria Sanchez. The Southwestern
Historical Quarterly 29(4).
Cox, Isaac J.
1905 The Journeys of Rene Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle. Allerton
Book Co., New York.

interpretations. The more accurate the route
interpretation, the more accurate the locations
of Indian encampments seen by travelers.
Most route interpretations by scholars are
based on map studies, not on first-hand
knowledge of the terrain. Copies of the
translations are available in the Barker Texas
History Center on the campus of The
University of Texas at Austin.

ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS
Delanglez, J. 
1938 The Journal of Jean Cavelier: The
Account of a Survivor of the La
Salle Texas Expedition, 16841688. Institute of Jesuit History,
Chicago.
Foik, Paul J.
1933 Captain Don Domingo Ramon's
Diary of His Expedition into Texas
in 1716. Preliminary Studies of
the Texas Catholic Historical
Society 2(5). Austin.
Forrestal, Peter P.
1935 Pena's Diary of the Aguayo Expedition. Preliminary Studies of
the Texas Catholic Historical
Society 2(7). Austin.
Hatcher, Mattie Austin, translator
1932 The Expedition of Don Domingo
Teran de los Rios into Texas
(1691-1692). Preliminary Studies
of the Texas Catholic Historical
Society 2(1). Austin.
Hoffmann, Fritz Leo, translator
1935 Diary of the Alarc6n Expedition
into Texas, 1718-1719, by Fray
Francisco Celiz. Quivira Society
Publications, Vol. V. Los Angeles.
1938

The Mezquia Diary of the Alarcon
Expedition into Texas, 1718.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly
41(4):312-323.

77

NAME ALL THE INDIANS OF THE BASTROP AREA

Kress, Margaret Kinney, and Mattie Austin
Hatcher
1931 Diary of a Visit of Inspection of the
Texas Missions Made by Fray
Gaspar Jose de Solfs in the Years
1767-1768. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 35 (1):28-76.
Shelby, Charmion C.
1923 St. Denis 's Declaration Concerning
Texas in 1717. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 26(3):165-183.
Stiles, Henry Reed, editor
1906 Joutel's Journal of La Salle's Last
Voyage, 1684-7. J. McDonough,
Albany.

Tous, Gabriel
1930a The Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre Expedition of 1709. Preliminary
Studies of the Texas Catholic
Historical Society 1 (3 ). Austin.
1930b Ram6n Expedition: Espinosa's
Diary of 1716. Preliminary
Studies of the Texas Catholic
Historical Society 1(4). Austin.

-----------

------

This page intentionally left blank.

Indians of the San Antonio Missions*
T. N. Campbell and T. J. Campbell
INTRODUCTION

who abandoned their former hunting-andgathering way ?f l.ife and ~ere transfo~ed
into settled mission Indians who raised
European livestock and practiced the Spanish
style of irrigation agric.ulture.
.
Few regions of Indian North Amenca are
so poorly.known a~ this one. As ~early all of
its numerous huntmg-and-gathenng groups
have been extinct for at least a century, what
can be learned about each of them must come
from limited information scattered through
miscellaneous documents, mostly still unpublished, that w~re ~itten by. Europeans
prior to Indian extmctlon. Archival records
pertaining to this region are abund~t, but
relatively few students of t~e Amencan I~
dian have examined these pnmary sources m
quantity. It cannot be said that basic research
on the Indian populations, language~, and
cultures of the region has been ~xtensiye, or
persistent, or notably systematic. It IS not
possible to identify a single s_chol'1! "".ho h~s
specialized in the study of this regio~ s Indians and made a lifelong career of It. Although a considerable number of indi~idu~s
have at one time or another worked m this
field of inquiry, many of these later shifted
their interest to other fields. Thus, few have
worked in this particular field long enough to
control the recorded minutiae and develop a
disciplined perspective.
Perhaps because ~e perti1_lent docum~nts
are widely scattered m archival collections
and usually contain little info~ation c;m the
basic ethnic units, monographic studies of
these units have not been published until recently, and these are still few in number.
Comparative studies of th~ numerous and
confusing group name v~ants have b~en
few and it is still not possible to determme
the total number of separate ethnic units or ~o
determine just how many of them were m
existence at any particular time. Displaced
Indian populations have seldom been carefully traced through documents and ~on
nected with groups recorded at the vanous
Spanish missions. Only recently has effec-

THE SAN ANTONIO MISSION AREA LIES
near the northern edge of a large coastal plain
that extends from the southern margin of the
Edwards Plateau of Texas southward across
the Rio Grande to the continuous series of
mountain ranges that diagonally cross the
Mexican states of Tamaulipas, Nuevo Leon,
and Coahuila. When first known to Europeans this region was occupied by hundreds
of sm~l, autonomous bands of Indians, most
of whom were hunters and gatherers. Agriculture was practiced only by certain Indian
groups near the Gulf coast of southern
Tamaulipas. Spanish Colonial settlements
began to be established in northeastern Me~
ico about the year 1590 and slowly spread m
a generally northward direction during most
of the following two centuries (Fig. 8~,
displacing the native Indian groups from therr
traditional foraging territories. North of the
Rio Grande this displacement was intensified
by the southeastward expansion o_f Apa~he
Indian groups from the southern High Plai.ns
in the middle seventeenth century. The displaced Indian groups were often fragmented,
and their populations declined. Some fragments chose to co-exist with Spaniards; other
fragments migrated to open areas north of 0-e
Rio Grande, from which they were later displaced by invading Apaches. Eventually,
remnants of numerous groups entered Spanish missions along the Rio Grande, and as far
north as San Antonio (Fig. 9). The story of
the San Antonio missions is, from an Indian
point of view, the story of refugee groups

* This paper is excerpted from: Indian Groups A~
sociated with Spanish Missions of the San Antomo
Missions National Historical Park, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio, Special Report No. 16:1-2, 22-23,
67-78 (1985). Permission to reprint courtesy of the
Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

79

80

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

MISSIONS SAN LORENZO ANO

CANDEL~RIA(j)
~CONES

GULF OF

MEXICO

0

40

160

60
KILOMETERS

SITE LOCATION DATA SOURCE'
SKEELS ( 1972, ."IG. 6)

FO~

Figure 8. MISSIONS OF TEXAS AND NORTHERN MEXICO.

1971

81

INDIANS OF TIIE SAN ANTONIO MISSIONS

Figure 9. THE SAN ANTONIO AREA DURING THE SPANISH COLONIAL PERIOD.
Adapted from a map drawn by Captain Don Luis Antonio Menchaca, dated 1764, and previously published in
Schuetz (1966:Fig. 2).

tive use been made of information recorded in
the mission registers that have survived. The
dearth of information on languages and
behavior has led to oversimplification in
modem attempts at linguistic and cultural
classification. Generalizations about the
region as a whole have sometimes been based
on uncritical use of data found in the primary
documents, and sometimes also on unstated
or unvalidated assumptions. Untested hypotheses and speculative opinion have not always been carefully distinguished from demonstrated fact. Hence much interpretive opinion has been premature. In short, much that
has been written does not stand up well under
close scrutiny.
In this study an effort is made to identify
the maximum number of valid Indian groups
represented at each of the four Spanish missions of the San Antonio Missions National
Historical Park. For each identified Indian
group an attempt is made to determine where
that group came from and also to summarize
briefly what is now known about its language
and culture prior to mission entry. As will be
seen, these objectives are not easily achieved
because the desired information must come
from documents written during the Spanish
Colonial period, and most of the documents
do not contain enough of the information desired. The following section will show how

the severe documentary limitations have affected the study of Indians associated with
the San Antonio missions.

THE STUDY OF MISSION
INDIANS: LIMITATIONS
Studies involving Indian groups of the San
Antonio missions have not been noted for
calling attention to the deficiencies of the
Spanish documents, or for explaining why it
is so difficult to make sense out of such information as happened to get recorded in
those documents. These studies sometimes
give the impression that scholars have already
solved most of the problems connected with
ethnic group identities, pre-mission territorial
ranges, specific groups represented at each
mission, the Indian languages spoken, and
cultural affiliations of the various Indian
groups. Few of these problems have yet been
satisfactorily solved. If non-specialists need
information about mission Indians for purposes of public education, they can be misled
by specialists who have not placed all their
cards on the table. A scholar's opinions are
much more valuable when they are preceded
by frank statements about the evidence used
in support of those opinions. In the follow-

82

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

SAN ANTONIO RIVER

1

THE

MISSIONS

OF
SAN

MISSION SAN JOSE

__;1"

r
Ii

0

Figure 10.

,

2

ANTONIO

MISSION SAN JUAN

CAPISTRANO

3.000

THE MISSIONS OF SAN

ANTONIO.

ing sections some of the major limitations of
mission Indian research are discussed.

The San Antonio Missions
The Spanish missions of San Antonio
were established relatively late in time and
reflect the late Spanish occupation of Texas
as compared with that of northeastern Mexico. As noted above, the first Spanish settlements of northeastern Mexico began about
1590, and it was not until 1718, or 128 years
later, that San Antonio began to be settled by
Spaniards.
Colonial Spanish San Antonio was unique
in that it was a mission center with a larger
number of missions than other centers of the
region. Five rather closely spaced missions
were built in what is now the southern part of
the City of San Antonio. A sixth mission was
authorized but never constructed. The location of San Antonio is the key to understanding this proliferation of missions. San Antonio was for some time on the northern edge
of the Spanish settlement frontier, and it was
also on the main travel route from Mexico to

eastern Texas, where the Spaniards were
attempting to halt French expansion from
Louisiana. Furthermore, San Antonio was
for several decades near a concentration of
displaced Indian groups who were demoralized by Spanish and Apache encroachments
and increasingly became willing to enter missions. The Spanish missionaries, many of
whom had worked in unsuccessful missions
elsewhere, recognized the potential of San
Antonio for Indian conversion and took advantage of it.
The five missions of San Antonio were
established at various times between 1718
and 1731. Their full names are San Antonio
de Valero (1718), San Josey San Miguel de
Aguayo (1720), Nuestra Senora de la Purfsima Concepci6n de Acuna (1731), San Juan
Capistrano (1731), and San Francisco de la
Espada (1731). For convenience these missions will hereafter be referred to by the
following shortened names: Valero, San
Jose, Concepcion, Capistrano, and Espada
(Fig. 10). All except San Jose had previously been in existence elsewhere, but they
had failed in their first locations and were
moved to San Antonio. Valero, first known
as San Francisco Solano, was originally established in northeastern Coahuila, where it
had been located at three different places.
Concepcion, Capistrano, and Espada were
established in eastern Texas for various
groups of Caddo Indians and were all moved
to San Antonio in the same year.
In this study attention is focused on Indian
groups represented at the four missions of the
San Antonio Missions National Historical
Park. Valero is not included in the park, and
its Indian groups will not be given detailed
consideration. It will be necessary, however,
to mention some of the Indian groups of
Valero because all of the San Antonio missions competed with each other for Indian
neophytes, and it is of special interest to
know the area or areas from which each mission drew its Indian populations.

Total Indian Population
at Each Mission
The limited information available indicates
that the total Indian population at each San
Antonio mission was at no time very large,
never exceeding 400 and rarely exceeding

83

INDIANS OF THE SAN ANTONIO MISSIONS

300. These figures are derived from a table
compiled by Schuetz (1980b: 128) that summarizes the best information now known. It
is of interest to note that these figures correspond roughly to the maximum figures given
for the largest native Indian encampments
recorded in pre-mission times.
The recorded mission figures fluctuated
from time to time. The mission population
increased notably when there was considerable displacement of Indian groups from
some part of the surrounding area. It declined during epidemics or when Indians deserted the missions. Desertion was more
common in the earlier days of each mission,
apparently because some groups found it
hard to adjust to mission discipline. They
seem, in most cases, to have gone back to
their former territories. Most of them were
eventually persuaded by missionaries to return to their missions. Some groups appear
to have become dissatisfied with living conditions in their mission and moved to another
mission. A few groups were characterized as
fickle by missionaries because they sampled
life at several missions before settling down
to one. There was also a certain amount of
seasonal desertion. During summer some
Indians left to collect traditional wild plant
foods, such as prickly-pear fruit, and perhaps
some of these were also motivated by a desire
to escape summer field work on mission
farmlands. With the passage of time, however, this pattern of desertion and return declined in importance, particularly after
Apache raids in the area became more common. The table compiled by Schuetz reveals
notable population decline in all missions after the year 1775. By that time not many
remnants of Indian groups native to the region still survived, and thus fewer were entering missions.

Indian Group Names
In the study of Indians who formerly lived
in southern Texas and northeastern Mexico,
the first objective must be to establish
identities for each of the basic hunting-andgathering units. In European documents the
most useful indicator of a specific ethnic
group is its recorded name. Indian group
names are exceedingly numerous in these
documents. Unfortunately, one cannot equate

every name with a separate ethnic unit. It
does not take much research to discover that
some names are not quite what they seem to
be. Two similar names may refer to the same
group or to two separate groups. Two dissimilar names may refer to the same group.
One group may be known by a name of
Spanish origin and also by one or more
native names. Several groups may be known
by different names, but all of them may also
be known by the same collective name. A
further complication results from the fact that
it is sometimes difficult to distinguish a native
personal name from a native group name. In
many cases the documentation is so poor that
overlapping names cannot be demonstrated.
It is not commonly realized how much
confusion has resulted from the fact that European documents sometimes spell the name
of a specific Indian group in many different
ways, sometimes 50 or more, depending
upon the phonetic complexity of the name.
Some names are so badly distorted that
scholars at times have regarded two or more
variants of the same name as names of separate Indian groups. This has led to recognition of more Indian groups in the region than
actually existed (Campbell 1977). Detailed
comparative studies of name variants, thus
far few in number, are badly needed, as is
well illustrated by the difficulties encountered
by Schuetz (1980b) in linking name variants
with valid Indian groups recorded in the registers of Mission Valero.
Primarily because the basic research is incomplete, modem scholars have not yet
agreed on a set of standardized names for use
in referring to Indian groups of this region.
The first concerted effort to do this was during preparation of the Handbook of American
Indians North of Mexico (Hodge 1907,
1910). Numerous errors were made that are
only now beginning to be corrected. In this
report we follow, whenever feasible, the
spelling of group names given in the Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico
(ibid.).

Number of Indian Groups
at Each Mission
It cannot be assumed that remnants of all
Indian groups of the region entered a Spanish
mission somewhere. Many group names

84
have been recorded for which there is no evidence that links them with any Spanish mission, either at San Antonio or elsewhere.
What happened to each of these non-missionized groups remains uncertain. Some
groups probably lost their identities very
early, before many missions had been established.
Although it is difficult to cite good cases,
there is enough evidence to show that, prior
to mission entry, a small remnant of one displaced group sometimes merged with another
ethnic remnant much larger in size and
thereby lost its identifying name. This suggests that a fairly large group recorded as
bearing a certain name may actually have
been an amalgamation of two or more displaced groups who were earlier known by
different names. These hidden effects of extensive displacement undoubtedly account for
the disappearance of some ethnic group
names from later documents. These considerations further suggest that population figures recorded in the early eighteenth century
for some of the larger Indian groups, either
prior to or after mission entry, may be misleading. Such groups may have been larger
simply because they were accretions. In later
times it is also possible that some group remnants chose to join their overwhelming enemies, the Apaches, rather than to enter Spanish missions.
It also cannot be assumed that all remnants
of a particular Indian group went to one particular mission. Comparative studies have already shown, for example, that some groups
entered only one of the San Antonio missions, and other groups entered two or more
of the San Antonio missions. Some of the
latter also entered missions elsewhere, as
along the Rio Grande in northern Tamaulipas
and northeastern Coahuila, or at Goliad and
Refugio near the Texas coast. Remnants of
the same group did not, however, enter various missions simultaneously. They entered
at various times, and this seems to indicate
that progressive fragmentation and population
decline governed these decisions.
It is important to realize that the total number of Indian groups represented at each of
the San Antonio missions will never be
known precisely because of inadequate records. The best sources of information are the
baptismal, marriage, and burial registers that

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

were kept at all Spanish missions. These indicate the ethnic affiliation of many Indian
individuals, particularly those who accepted
Christianity. Unfortunately, all of these registers have not survived, or at least have yet
to be found. Of the San Antonio missions,
the registers of Valero have survived in fairly
good condition; the early marriage register of
Concepci6n has survived; for the remaining
San Antonio missions there are only register
fragments from the latter part of the mission
period, when ethnic affiliation was less
commonly recorded.
It is not a- simple matter to analyze the
mission registers and determine the names of
all bona fide Indian groups that were represented at a mission. Some register pages are
missing or are damaged in various ways and
cannot be fully read. The handwriting is not
always easy to read, and each group name is
spelled in various ways by the missionaries
who made the register entries. The same Indian individual may be identified in various
entries by two, three, or even four ethnic
group names. Sometimes the correct identification can be determined by analysis of the
appropriate register entries, sometimes not.
Those who have searched mission registers for Indian group names have usually paid
little attention to each others' efforts. Lists of
Indian groups have been compiled for each
mission, and comparisons of these lists reveal many discrepancies. For example, Bolton (in Hodge 1910,11:428) published a list
of group names which he had obtained from
the Valero registers. Santos (1966-1967)
also compiled a list of Valero groups, but he
used only the burial register. Thus, Santos
missed group names that appear only in the
baptismal and marriage registers. As Santos
did not compare his list with that of Bolton, a
reader who does not know of Bolton's list
may think that Santos has identified all groups
recorded at Valero. Schuetz (1980b:52-54)
has recently compiled a list based on analysis
of all three Valero registers, but she does not
compare her list with the lists of Bolton and
Santos. Confusion results because discrepancies in the three lists are not noted and
explained. Bolton's list has names which
Schuetz apparently did not find in the
registers, and Schuetz's list has names which
Bolton appears not to have seen. It is evident
that there are pitfalls in the matter of

INDIANS OF THE SAN ANTONIO MISSIONS

identifying Indian groups recorded in mission
registers, and that each compiler is obligated
to explain discrepancies. Otherwise a complex matter is made to appear deceptively
simple.
When mission registers are lacking, other
kinds of documents must be used to discover
the names of Indian groups represented at
each mission, and such records usually mention only the names of groups that were represented by fairly large numbers of individuals. As additional documents come to light, it
may be expected that the list of Indians
represented at each mission will slowly increase in length.
As the record now stands, it would appear
that far more Indian groups were represented
at Valero than at each of the four missions of
the historical park, but analysis of the documentary record shows that this disparity is
more apparent than real. We have much better records for Valero than for the other San
Antonio missions.
It is instructive to compare the records of
Valero with those of San Jose, two missions
that were established at San Antonio about
the same time (1718 and 1720, respectively).
For San Jose we have no register information
prior to the year 1771. The list of Indian
groups recorded for Valero is about four
times as long as the list compiled for San
Jose. Missions Concepci6n and Espada were
established at San Antonio in the same year
(1731 ), but the list of Indian groups recorded
for Concepci6n has, until recently, been
about twice as long as the list for Espada.
The difference is best explained by the fact
that the early marriage register of Concepci6n
has survived. It may therefore be concluded
that the number of identified Indian groups
for a given mission is smaller when some or
all of its registers have been lost.

Size of Mission Indian Groups
Most Indians probably entered missions
because displacement, fragmentation, and
population decline had made them deeply
discouraged about the prospects of survival
elsewhere. Most of the San Antonio missions contained remnants of many specific
Indian groups, and these remnants varied
considerably in size. Approximate figures
for group size can be determined by analysis

85
of mission registers when these are available.
It must, however, be realized that the registers sometimes failed to record the ethnic affiliation of an individual, and also that many
Indian individuals at missions were never
recorded because they refused to be baptized
into the Christian faith. Despite inadequate
records, it is reasonably clear that at each
mission a few Indian groups were represented by far more individuals than others.
Most groups were represented by relatively
small numbers of individuals. When mission
registers are available, as at Mission Valero,
it is evident that some Indian groups were
represented by one individual only, or by no
more than two, three, or four individuals (see
tables compiled by Schuetz 1980b:49-55).
Historians have sometimes made statements
which imply that each group whose name can
be associated with a given mission was represented by a substantial number of individuals. It is best to be cautious and base statements on such concrete figures as are available. It seems obvious that if a mission had
no more than 300 individuals at any one time,
and if 20, 30, or more Indian groups were
represented, most groups could not have
been represented by very many individuals.
In general, it may be said that the remnants
of specific Indian groups who entered missions during the earlier part of the mission
period were larger in size than they were
later. As time passed, the population fragments became smaller in size, and there were
fewer individuals to enter missions.

Pre-Mission Location
of Indian Groups
It must be stressed that the Spanish documents do not satisfactorily indicate where all
Indian groups represented at the San Antonio
missions lived before entering the respective
missions. For some groups nothing is recorded except the identifying name; for other
groups the documents sometimes yield clues
which suggest association with some general
area. The recorded statements about location
are usually few in number and refer to one
particular time or to a relatively short period,
making it difficult to assess how much
displacement was involved. It is, thus, not
often that the aboriginal territory occupied by
a group can be positively identified. In the

86

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

ethnohistoric literature of this region, the
tendency has been to assume that most of the
recorded group locations indicate aboriginal
locations. This has obscured the dynamic
aspects of Indian group displacement.
Those who have written about the Indians
of southern Texas and northeastern Mexico
have sometimes presented maps purporting to
show group locations. Such maps show the
locations of some groups but not of others;
this fact is not clearly indicated by map titles
or by accompanying explanations. When
these maps are checked against written documents, it is found that some groups are
placed in areas where they were never reported to be living, and the relative positions
of groups shown in a restricted area usually
cannot be confirmed. The documents are not
sufficiently informative about group locations
to permit compilation of reliable maps for any
particular date or period.

Indian Languages
Cultural classification of the numerous Indian groups of southern Texas and northeastern Mexico has been based mainly on
linguistic classification. This procedure works
best when languages are still spoken and can
be studied in detail, but for this particular
region all of the Indian languages formerly
spoken are now extinct. Hence all that can be
said about linguistic relationships must be
based upon speech samples (vocabularies and
texts) that were written down by Europeans
before the languages became extinct. In this
region few languages were documented, and
some of the samples are small, sometimes
consisting of vocabularies that total less than
25 words. Except for a few missionaries,
Spaniards of the Colonial period lacked the
skills and motivation needed for collecting
language samples.
It is not now possible to compile a list of
Indian groups who spoke the language or dialect represented by each recorded sample.
Occasionally Spanish documents refer to two
or more Indian groups who spoke the same
language, or to two groups who spoke different languages, but they seldom say enough
to permit identification of the languages involved. For the majority of Indian groups
whose names appear in documents, nothing
is recorded about language.

Classification of Indian languages in this
region is a modern phenomenon and did not
begin until the middle nineteenth century,
when the language known as Coahuilteco
was first recognized by linguists. Coahuilteco is by far the best documented language
of the region primarily because two missionaries prepared manuals in this language for
use in the administration of church rituals
(Garcia 1760; Vergara 1965). Neither these
manuals nor other documents specify the
names of all Indian groups who originally
spoke Coahuilteco. Remnants of other linguistic groups also entered the same missions, and some of these had learned to speak
Coahuilteco as a second language because it
had become the dominant Indian language
spoken in the missions.
After a few additional language samples
had become known for the region, linguists
concluded that these represented languages
related to Coahuilteco (Powell 1891; Sapir
1920; Swanton 1940). This conclusion led
ethnohistorians and anthropologists to believe
that the region was occupied by numerous
small groups who spoke related languages
and, thus, probably also shared the same basic culture.
Detailed comparative studies of language
samples from this region began with Swanton (1915), who later published vocabularies
for the languages designated as Coahuilteco,
Solano, Comecrudo, Cotoname, Maratino,
Araname, and Karankawa (Swanton 1940).
The vocabularies were compared for evidences of linguistic relationship. Although
he found the evidence far from satisfactory,
Swanton expressed the opinion that the three
best documented languages, Coahuilteco,
Comecrudo, and Cotoname, were probably
related. He further suggested that these languages might be more distantly related to the
Karankawa and Tonkawa languages. Other
linguists, apparently not bothered by the
problem of inadequate sampling, accepted
Swanton's opinions, which were in vogue
for several decades.
The first indication that all languages of the
region were not related to Coahuilteco came
when Eugenio del Hoyo (1960), a Mexican
historian, collected a lengthy list of words
and phrases, which were accompanied by
their meanings in Spanish, from documents
in the archives of Nuevo Le6n. These were

INDIANS OF THE SAN ANTONIO MISSIONS

later analyzed by Gursky (1964), a linguist,
who considered them to represent a new language, Quinigua, which he was unable to relate in any way to Coahuilteco.
More recently Ives Goddard (1979), a linguist who has specialized in North American
Indian languages, has re-examined the linguistic materials presently available for
southern Texas and the adjoining part of
northeastern Mexico. The languages inspected include Tonkawa, Coahuilteco, Karankawa, Comecrudo, Cotoname, Solano,
and Aranama. After applying the more rigorous analytical techniques of modem linguistics, Goddard failed to find enough evidence to demonstrate that any of these languages are related. This does not mean that
they are definitely not related, merely that no
one can convincingly prove them to be
related. Goddard also pointed to statements
made by early Spanish observers which indicate that still other languages were spoken in
the same area, languages that were never
documented by vocabularies or texts. He
further suggested that the area was probably
characterized by linguistic diversity, not by
the widespread linguistic uniformity envisioned by earlier linguists. This reversal in
linguistic interpretation calls for a re-examination of previous conclusions about a
widespread uniformity of culture.

Indian Cultures
As noted in the preceding section, cultural
classification for this region has been based
on linguistic considerations. It has not
grown out of detailed studies of similarities
and differences in cultural characteristics
recorded for specific Indian groups associated with particular areas.
Only those who have extensively searched
the archival collections for recorded information on culture seem to realize how little was
recorded for the Indian groups of the region.
For Indians associated with the four missions
of the historical park, the recorded information on culture is notably minimal. Very few
of the early European observers were sufficiently interested in specific Indian groups to
describe their behavior in detail. Most observers apparently believed that the various
hunting-and-gathering groups were all very
much alike and that there was no point in

87
showing how one group differed from another, or how groups in one area differed
from groups in a nearby area. Most of what
these observers recorded was incidental to
other interests and appears to be random, that
is, without definite aim, purpose, or reason.
A substantial amount of cultural description
was generalized for Indian groups of a restricted area without any specific group
names being mentioned. Hence the same
kinds of cultural information were not recorded for many specifically named groups,
and this has made it even more difficult to
ascertain valid similarities and differences.
Furthermore, in the early documents there are
inconsistencies and contradictions which
scholars have not always recognized. These
various documentary deficiencies have too
often been ignored by most writers, who
seem to follow the early observers in believing that Indian groups of the region shared
the same culture.
The concept of a widespread "Coahuiltecan culture" was developed in the early
1950s by F. H. Ruecking, Jr. (1953, 1954b,
l 955b ). It was predicated on the belief that
the Coahuilteco language was spoken over a
very large area in southern Texas and northeastern Mexico, and that all other languages
documented for the same region were closely
related to Coahuilteco. As noted in the preceding section, recent linguistic studies have
rendered this belief questionable. The Coahuiltecan culture as described by Ruecking is
a composite of miscellaneous descriptive details that were recorded over a period of
several hundred years. The recorded bits of
information pertain to miscellaneous Indian
groups, some not even identified by name,
who lived in limited portions of the region.
Ruecking included everything he could find
in the published literature (he did no archival
research), but he failed to recognize that some
of the generalized cultural information came
from southern Tamaulipas and is in part
referable to certain Indian groups who
practiced agriculture. He made no allowances for cultural change through time and
ignored the recorded differences between
Indians of certain areas.
It is now apparent that no single Indian
group of the region could have had a culture
that included all of the features of Coahuiltecan culture described by Ruecking. His lack

88

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

of discrimination in the use of recorded cultural information has led to gross oversimplification and considerable error. Ruecking's
dragnet collecting of cultural information resulted in a useful compilation for the area as a
whole, but it is no longer possible to use his
concept as the basis for identifying most of
the Indian groups as Coahuiltecan in culture.
If language is to be used as the basis for cultural classification, one must, in each case,
produce evidence that the Coahuilteco language was spoken before inferring a Coahuiltecan culture. According to the evidence
now available, less than 60 Indian groups can
be identified as probable speakers of the
Coahuilteco language (Campbell 1983a), and
most of these can be assigned to an area
restricted to southern Texas and parts of
northeastern Coahuila. Much of what Ruecking included in his description of Coahuiltecan culture was not recorded for any of
these Coahuilteco speakers.
For Indian groups associated with the
historical park missions, some categories of
culture are either missing from, or sparingly
recorded in, documents. Little detail is given
about how artifacts were made and used;
about the methods of hunting, fishing, and
plant food collection; or about how various
kinds of foodstuffs were processed and
cooked. There is also very little detail
recorded about Indian religious concepts and
rituals, perhaps because Spaniards of the time
were so strongly committed to evangelical
Catholicism. This dearth of information
makes it virtually impossible to comment on
specific changes in the cultures of Indians
while they were in the San Antonio missions.
It is gratuitous to speculate about new ways
of doing things that were introduced when
one or more Indian groups entered a mission
for the first time, or to speculate about the
times when various elements of the Indian
cultures disappeared at missions. One must
be careful not to read things into the record.

CONCLUSIONS
It now appears quite clear that we do not
know the names of all Indian groups who
were associated with each of the park missions. In the absence of complete mission

registers, we are forced to rely on other kinds
of documents that refer to Indians in missions. The documentary potential for the region is tremendous, and it will take years of
search to find additional documents that contain relevant bits of information.
Here it may be of interest to compare our
tabulation of names for each mission with
that of Schuetz (1980b).

Mission
Concepci6n
San Jose
Capistrano

Espada

Schuetz
29

Camp bells

20
14

33
21
20

6

25

It may be noted that the figures for Concepci6n and San Jose are much the same, but
our figures for Capistrano and Espada, particularly the latter, are considerably larger.
Our larger figures are best explained as the
result of chance. We happened to find a few
documents that Schuetz evidently had not
seen.
As shown in Table 4, a total of 68 Indian
group names can be linked with the four
missions of the historical park. It would be
naive, however, to assume that 68 valid ethnic units were represented at the missions.
Without question, some names in Table 4
overlap others. A few names, as has been
suggested, may tum out to be variants of
other names on the list. It is known that
some names were used collectively. Pamaque, for example, is known to be a collective name used in referring to Camasuqua,
Sarapjon, Taguaguan, Tinapihuaya, and Viayan. The names Pasnacan and Piguique are
also known to have been used collectively,
but documents do not identify the component
units of each. Thus some names entered in
Table 4 probably represent specific groups
that were collectively designated by the
names Pasnacan and Piguique. Spanish descriptive names also used for collective designation, such as Borrado, Carrizo, and
Pinto, may overlap other names on the list,
some cases of which have been noted. The
collective names Apache, Comanche, and
Tejas pose no special problems because so
few of these seem to have entered the park
missions. In short, we are forced to conclude that inadequate documentation thwarts
efforts to determine the actual number of authentic Indian groups at the missions.

----------------------------------------------------------

INDIANS OF THE SAN ANTONIO MISSIONS

The tabulation below indicates the number
of group names associated with one or more
of the park missions:
48
1 mission only
2 missions
10
3 missions
8
4 missions
2
These figures do not mean very much because of the lack of uniformity in the
recorded information. They do show, however, that the majority of names are associated with a single mission. It seems likely
that this reflects the fact that Indians of many
groups entered a mission in small numbers
and preferred to live together at that mission.
Presence at two or more missions may in
some cases indicate that the group remnant
was of considerable size and that some individuals and families may have preferred not
to live in the same mission with the others.
Dissatisfaction with one mission and moving
to another is known to have occurred in some
instances. There are also a few recorded
cases of individuals who could not find mates
in their mission and went to another nearby
mission to live with their spouses.
In Table 5 the Indian groups of the park
missions are assigned, whenever possible, to
various areas where they seem to have been
living prior to entering missions. The areas
cannot be defined with precision, but the
procedure is useful because it indicates that
the major Indian groups came to San Antonio
from areas generally south of San Antonio,
some of them coming from the more northerly portion of northeastern Mexico, particularly along the south bank of the Rio Grande
as far upstream as Laredo. Very few groups
came from northeastern Coahuila and the
adjacent part of Texas. Indians from that area
went to Mission Valero. For the park missions we are unable to identify any Indian
groups who originally lived east and northeast of San Antonio. These also entered Mission Valero.
Two factors seem to have influenced Indians from the south to enter San Antonio
missions: (1) the massive Spanish colonization of northern Tamaulipas, which reached a
peak about 1750, and (2) the movement, after
1750, of Apache groups from the Edwards
Plateau down onto the coastal plain of
southern Texas. It seems likely that the in-

89
creasing dominance of Lipan Apache in
southern Texas during the second half of the
eighteenth century induced the surviving remnants of native groups to enter missions at
San Antonio and Goliad.
In Table 6 are listed eight languages that
appear to have been spoken by various Indian
groups represented at the park missions.
These are Apachean (Athapaskan), Aranama,
Caddo (Caddoan), Coahuilteco, Comanche,
Cotoname, Karankawa, and Tonkawa.
Named Indian groups are assigned to these
languages on the basis of recorded language
samples and credible statements about language made in various documents. If no
credible information on the language spoken
by a specific group has been found, the name
is placed in a category labelled "Languages
Unknown."
The majority of these languages were
probably spoken by relatively few individuals
at the park missions. Such population figures as are available suggest that this is true
for the Apachean, Aranama, Caddo, Comanche, Karankawa, and Tonkawa languages. Two of the languages, Apachean
and Comanche, are linked with invading
populations who originally lived in distant
areas, and few Apache and Comanche individuals seem to have entered park missions.
The Eyeish and Tejas, Caddo-speakers from
eastern Texas, seem to have been present in
very small numbers at Mission San Jose.
The few Aranama-speakers entered only
Mission San Jose. The Coapite, Copan, and
Cujan, presumed to be Karankawa-speakers,
although no language samples have ever been
recorded, were represented by less than two
dozen individuals at Mission Concepci6n. If
the Tonkawa language was spoken by any
Indians of the park missions, it would have
had to be spoken by the two Yojuane individuals recorded in the Concepci6n marriage
register.
The names listed under the heading
Coahuilteco refer to Indian groups that appear
to have been identified as Coahuilteco-speakers by Vergara (1965), Garcia (1760), and
Mazanet (G6mez Canedo 1968:240) and
about which Goddard (1979) has expressed
no doubts. The identification of specific
groups as Coahuilteco-speakers by Garcia is
subject to some question. What Garcia does
not make clear is whether the Indian groups

90

he identified as Coahuilteco-speak:ers in missions actually spoke Coahuilteco before entering missions. He published his manual in
1760, or some 30 years after Concepci6n,
Capistrano, and Espada were established at
San Antonio, and by that time some of the
Indian groups who originally spoke other
languages could have become Coahuiltecospeak:ers because Coahuilteco had become the
dominant native language spoken in the missions. Coahuilteco probably became domi-

CAMPBElL: INDIANS

nant because it was the language spoken by
many groups who entered missions in fairly
large numbers when the missions were established, or shortly thereafter.
It is our impression that Coahuilteco was a
language originally spoken over a large inland area south and southwest of San Antonio, extending into northeastern Coahuila,
extreme northwestern Tamaulipas, and perhaps a small part of northern N uevo Le6n.
We are inclined to agree with Goddard that

Table 4.

INDIAN GROUPS AT MISSIONS OF THE SAN ANTONIO MISSIONS
NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.

[l=Concepci6n; 2=San Jose; 3=Capistrano; 4=Espada]
Pasnacan ........................................ 3
Aguastaya ....................................... 2
Pastia ............................................ 2
Apache ........................................... 1
Patalca ........................................... 1
Aranama ......................................... 2
Arcahoma ........................................ 4
Patumaco ........................................ 1
Payaya ........................................... 1
Assaca ........................................... 4
Peana ............................................ 3
Borrado ................................. 1,2,3,4
Cacalote .......................................... 4
Piguique ...................................... 1,3
Caguaumama .................................... 4
Pinto ............................................. 2
Pitalac ........................................... 3
Camama ......................................... 2
Pootajpo ......................................... 4
Camasuqua ................................ 1,3,4
Can a .............................................. 2
Queniacapem ................................... 2
Saguiem ......................................... 4
Carrizo ........................................... 4
Sanipao .......................................... 1
Cayan ............................................ 4
Sarapjon ................................... 1,3,4
Chayopin .................................. 1,2,3
Coapite ........................................... l
Saulapaguem ................................... 2
Siguipan ......................................... 4
Comanche ....................................... I
Siquipil.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Copan ............................................ 1
Cujan .......................................... 1,2
Sulujam ......................................... 2
Eyeish ............................................ 2
Tacame ................................. 1,2,3,4
Gegueriguan .................................... 4
Taguaguan ..... ~. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1, 3, 4
Guanbrauta-Aiaquia ............................ 3
Tejas ............................................. 2
Tenicapem ...................................... 2
Huaraque ........................................ 4
Tilijae ......................................... 1,3
Lipan Apache ................................ 1,2
Malaguita .................................. 1,3,4
Tilpacopal ....................................... 1
Tinapihuaya ............................... 1,3,4
Manos de Perro ................................. I
Mayapem ........................................ 2
Toaraque ........................................ 1
Tuarique ......................................... 4
Mesquite ...................................... 2,4
Orej6n ......................................... l,3
Uncrauya ........................................ 4
Pacao .......................................... 1,4
Venado ....................................... 1,3
Pachalaque ...................................... 1
Viayan ..................................... 1,3,4
Pajalat. ........................................ 1,3
Xarame .......................................... 1
Xauna ........................................... 2
Pamaque ................................... 1,3,4
Pampopa ......................................... 2
Yojuane ......................................... 1
Zacuestacan ..................................... 4
Pana .............................................. 3

91

INDIANS OF THE SAN ANTONIO MISSIONS

Table 5.

SOURCE AREAS OF PARK MISSION INDIAN GROUPS.

Southern Plains-Edwards Plateau
Apache
Comanche
Lipan Apache

Central Northern Texas
Yojuane

Eastern Texas
Eyeish
Tejas

Texas Coast: Central Section
Aranama
Coapite
Copan
Cujan

Texas Coast: Southern Section
Malaguita
Manos de Perro
Piguique

Between Lower Courses of the
San Antonio and Nueces Rivers
Arcahomo?
Camasuqua
Chayopin
Orej6n
Pacao
Pachalaque
Pajalat
Pamaque
Pasnacan
Patalca?
Patumaco
Pitalac?
Sarapjon
Siquipil
Tacame
Taguaguan
Tilpacopal
Tinapihuaya
Viayan

Source Areas Unknown
Rio Grande Delta and Vicinity
Mayapem
Queniacapem
Saulapaguem
Tenicapem

Rio Grande Valley: From Delta
Upstream to Laredo
Cacalote
Cana?
Carrizo
Venado

Northeastern Coahuila and
Adjacent Part of Texas
Tilijae
Xarame

San Antonio Area Southward to
Great Bends of Nueces River
Aguastaya?
Mesquite?
Pampopa?
Pastia
Payaya
Sulujam

Assaca
Borrado
Caguaumama
Camama
Cay an
Gegueriguan
Guanbrauta-Aiaquia
Huaraque
Pana
Peana
Pinto
Pootajpo
Saguiem
Sanipao
Siguipan
Toaraque
Tuarique
Uncrauya
Xauna
Zacuestacan

92

CAMPBEU..: INDIANS

Table 6. PROBABLE LINGUISTIC AFFILIATIONS OF INDIAN GROUPS AT THE
SAN ANTONIO PARK MISSIONS.
Apachean
(Athapaskan)
Apache
Lipan Apache

Cotoname
Mayapem
Saulapaguem
Tenicapem

Arana ma
Aranama

Karankawa
Coapite
Copan
Cujan

Caddo
Eyeish
Tejas
Coahuilteco
Pacao
Pachalaque
Pajalat
Pampopa
Pastia
Patumaco
Payaya
Siquipil
Sulujam
Tacame
Tilijae
Tilpacopal
Xarame
Comanche
Comanche

Tonkawa
Yojuane?
Languages Unknown
Aguastaya
Arcahomo
Assaca
Borrado
Cacalote
Caguaumama
Camama
Camasuqua
Cana
Carrizo
Cay an
Chayopin
Gegueriguan
Guanbrauta-Aiaquia
Huaraque

east of the area where Coahuilteco was spoken, that is, nearer to the Gulf coast, other
languages were spoken that were never documented.
Only three names are listed under the
heading Cotoname, and the evidence for this
is largely circumstantial. It is based upon association of these three groups with the Cotoname and sharing a few recorded cultural
traits.
In Table 6 about 60% of the group names
appear under the heading "Languages Unknown." The names are so placed because
the documents examined contain no useful
information about the languages spoken.
Some groups on this list probably spoke
Coahuilteco, and others Cotoname, but we
are unable to cite credible documentary evidence. Many of these groups undoubtedly
spoke some of the undocumented languages
of southern Texas. It can only be hoped that,

Malaguita
Manos de Perro
Mesquite
Orej6n
Pamaque
Pana
Pasnacan
Patalca
Peana
Piguique
Pinto
Pitalac
Pootajpo
Queniacapem
Saguiem
Sanipao
Sarapjon
Siguipan
Taguaguan
Tinapihuaya
Toaraque
Tuarique
Uncrauya
Venado
Viayan
Xauna
Zacuestacan

as new documents are found, some will contain information about the languages spoken.
Unfortunately, the documents contain very
little detail about the cultural characteristics of
groups represented at the four park missions,
particularly those who can be reasonably
identified as Coahuilteco-speakers. The documents do indicate that practically all of the
Indian groups represented at these missions
were originally hunting-and-gathering
groups. No Indian groups of southern Tamaulipas, where native agriculture is documented, came to these missions. The Caddoan Indians of eastern Texas were agricultural, but the Caddoan Eyeish and Tejas of
Mission San Jose were evidently too few in
number to have affected mission Indian
farming methods. What the mission Indians
learned about agriculture was taught to them
by Spaniards, whose methods of irrigation
agriculture are well known and clearly indi-

----------~~----~--------------

INDIANS OF THE SAN ANTONIO MISSIONS

cated by mission-related documents as well
as by archaeological excavations at the San
Antonio missions.
It does not appear to be reasonable to assume that, despite all the displacement and
the societal disintegration that resulted from
displacement, remnants of Indian groups
who entered these San Antonio missions
somehow managed to retain their aboriginal
cultures intact. It is not commonly realized
that disruption of the stable conditions necessary to maintain hunting-and-gathering
populations had profound effects on their

93
cultures. As might be expected, Spanish
documents do not say very much about such
changes in Indian cultures. Hence caution
must be used when making statements about
the elements of aboriginal culture that may
have survived among remnants of diverse
Indian groups represented at each of the four
park missions. It is especially important to
avoid attributing specific cultural traits from
Ruecking's description of "Coahuiltecan
culture" to these Indians without checking the
data against primary documents. Errors
should be corrected, not perpetuated.

--------------------~----------

This page intentionally left blank.

The "Cabras Indians" of Southern Texas*
T. N. Campbell
IN RECENT YEARS THE UNIVERSITY OF

Texas at San Antonio has conducted a series
of archaeological investigations at the site of
Rancho de las Cabras, which is near the town
of Floresville, Texas, and about 30 miles
southeast of the city of San Antonio, Texas
(Ivey and Fox 1981; Ivey 1983; Jones and
Fox 1983). The reports of these investigations contain an impressive amount of information about a ranch that was operated by
Mission San Francisco de la Espada of San
Antonio in the second half of the eighteenth
century. These reports do not, however, call
attention to certain bits of published misinformation that have never been formally
corrected:
1) that the ranch was located on the San
Antonio River near Goliad;
2) that it was operated by one of the
Goliad missions and protected by
Presidio La Bahia;
3) that in 1777, it was populated by
Indians known to the Spaniards as
Cabras;
4) and that these Cabras Indians were
previously known to the French of the
La Salle expedition ( 1685-1687) by
the name Kiabaha.
It is perhaps time for a correction notice.
Here an attempt will be made to explain how
these misconceptions developed and thereby
lay a few restless ghosts from the scholarly
past.
The errors identified above seem to have
been initiated nearly a century ago by the
historian Hubert H. Bancroft (1886:629),
who made a faulty inference from data recorded by Juan Agustin Morfi at San Antonio

* This article is excerpted from: Rancho de las Cabras and the "Cabras Indians" of Southern Texas: Correction of Minor Historical Errors, Center for Archaeological Research, Thi! University of Texas at San
Antonio, Archaeological Survey Report No. 155:5053 (1985). It is reprinted with the permission of the
Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

95

in 1777. Bancroft had obtained a copy of
Morfi's manuscript, Memorias para la Historia de Texas, in which the names of six
ranches in southern Texas were listed and
their populations given (see English translation, Morfi 1935a:102). One of these was
Rancho qe las Cabras, said to have a population of 26. As Morfi placed this list of
ranches immediately after his description of
the Goliad missions, Bancroft concluded that
the ranches must have been located near the
Goliad missions, which are near the San Antonio River but are some 85 miles southeast
of San Antonio. Bancroft's conclusion was
logical, but it is contradicted by Morfi's
original census table of 1777, which has
since been found and published (Morfi
1935b:277). This table makes it clear that the
ranches were located in the San Antonio area.
It does not actually specify that the ranches
were operated by San Antonio missions, but
this is well demonstrated by numerous later
documents. Morfi's census table of 1777
contains additional statistical information. Of
the total of 26 individuals at Rancho de las
Cabras, Morfi identifies 13 as adults (nine
males, four females), and 13 as children
(seven males, six females). The four adult
females suggest that no more than four fami, lies were living on the ranch.
When the Handbook of American Indians
North of Mexico was being compiled early in
the present century, Alice C. Fletcher was
assigned the task of preparing entries for
certain Indian groups recorded by French
chroniclers of the La Salle expedition to the
Texas coast. One of Fletcher's assigned
groups was Kiabaha, recorded by Henri
Joutel (1713: 182, 289), the principal French
chronicler. In casting about for similar Indian group names later recorded by Spaniards
as living near the Texas coast, Fletcher came
upon Bancroft's reference to Rancho de las
Cabras as being near the Goliad missions.
Evidently not knowing enough Spanish to
recognize Cabras as the Spanish word for
"goats," Fletcher supposed that the 26 in-

96
habitants of that ranch were Cabras Indians.
To her the names Kiabaha and Cabras
seemed to be phonetically similar, and she
equated the two. In the Handbook there is no
separate entry for Cabras. This name appears
in the entry for Kiabaha (Hodge 1907,I:681),
but in the synonymy section (ibid., Hodge
1910,II:1034) one finds the entry "Cabras =
Kiabaha." It is hardly necessary to point out
that Cabras and Kiabaha are names derived
from two unrelated languages and that any
phonetic resemblances that may be noted are
purely fortuitous. As yet no Spanish documents have been found that identify any Indian group of southern Texas by the name
Cabras.
This leaves us with a question that has
seldom been asked, namely, who were the 26
individuals recorded by Morfi as living at
Rancho de las Cabras in 1777? Were they
all Spaniards, or all Indians, or a combination
of both? It is well known that most of the
labor connected with San Antonio mission
farms and ranches was done by Indians
(Habig 1968), and it seems reasonable to
assume that nearly all of the 26 individuals at
Rancho de las Cabras were Indians from
Mission San Francisco de la Espada. If we
can determine what Indian groups were still
represented at Mission Espada as late as
1777, we can at least specify some that might
have been represented at Rancho de las Cabras.
As the early mission registers (baptismal,
marriage, and burial) of Mission Espada have
never been found, it is not possible to use
these for determining just which Indian
groups were represented at this mission in
1777, when Morfi recorded the population of
its ranch. In various documents that date
from 1731, when Mission Espada was established at San Antonio, until well into the

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

nineteenth century, the names of 26 Indian
groups represented at Espada have thus far
been found (Campbell and Campbell
1983:69-76). Undoubtedly still other Indian
groups were represented whose names have
yet to be noted in documents. Fortunately,
one document is especially helpful because it
identifies the Indian groups represented at
Espada between the years 1753 and 17 67.
This was written in 1767 by the Espada
missionary Acisclos Valverde, and it lists the
names of 11 Indian groups represented at
Mission Espada during that period It is clear
that Valverde obtained these names from the
mission registers. The list includes Assaca,
Cacalote, Caguaumama, Carrizo, Cayan,
Gegueriguan, Huarique, Saguiem, Siguipan,
Tuarique, and Uncrauya. Valverde states that
the Caguaumama were particularly numerous
at Mission Espada (hay muchos en esta
misi6n). Although remnants of other Indian
groups may have entered Mission Espada
between 1767 and 1777, it appears likely that
some of the 26 individuals at Rancho de las
Cabras belonged to one or more of the 11
groups named by Valverde. The most
interesting thing that can be said about these
11 groups is that, so far as is now known,
none of them originally lived in the San Antonio area or spoke the Coahuilteco language.
Most can be identified as Indian groups that
were native to a more southerly area, specifically extreme southern Texas and the adjoining part of what is now the Mexican state
of Tamaulipas. Their presence at Mission
Espada during the period 1753-1767
strongly suggests that they were remnants of
Indian groups that had been displaced by
Spanish colonies established by Jose de Escand6n shortly before 1750 at various places
along the Rio Grande downstream from
Laredo (Bolton 1915:290-302).

The Payaya Indians of Southern Texas*
T. N. Campbell
eludes the city of San Antonio. What is presented here is based on such data as have
been discovered thus far about the Payaya. It
should be regarded as an advanced progress
report, since many documents that may contain information on the Payaya have yet to be
examined, and it should also be regarded as
an effort to demonstrate that such tedious and
time-consuming studies are worth doing.
The last word on the Payaya is not likely to
be written for some time to come.
In considering southern Texas and its Indian populations during the latter part of the
seventeenth century, when the natives began
to be better known to Europeans, it should
not be assumed that the Indians were fully
representative of peoples who lived there
during the late prehistoric period. In the
closing years of the seventeenth century the
Indians of southern Texas already knew
much about the Spaniards of northeastern
Mexico, who had been established there for
at least a full century. Many Indian groups of
northeastern Mexico had been broken up by
European-introduced diseases and wars with
colonizing Spaniards, and some of the remnants of such groups had moved across the
Rio Grande into present-day Texas. Furthermore, the Spanish frontier of northeastern
Mexico was not the only frontier that affected
the Indians of southern Texas. There was
also a southward- and southeastward-moving
Athapaskan or Apache frontier. By 1684
there is clear evidence in the itinerary of
Dominguez de Mendoza (Bolton 1916:321,
331-333, 335-338; Williams 1962) of aggressive Apache movements from the southern Plains into the western part of the Edwards Plateau. Mendoza had to leave the
plateau earlier than he had intended because
the Apaches were making off with too many
of his horses.
In 1690 Mazanet, who accompanied
Alonso de Le6n from Coahuila northeastward
to the Hasinai of eastern Texas, mentioned
that parties of Apaches had already reached
the grasslands north of the Colorado River

INTRODUCTION
DOCUMENTS WRITTEN BY EUROPEANS

who first explored and then later established
settlements in the southern part of Texas,
particularly south of the Edwards Plateau,
contain formal identifying names for a remarkably large number of American Indian
groups. Most of these were hunting-andgathering peoples who have come to be referred to loosely as Coahuiltecans, which
implies linguistic and cultural relationships
with numerous formally named groups m
adjoining northeastern Mexico. For any particular one of these Indian groups, either in
northeastern Mexico or in southern Texas, it
is difficult to make meaningful statements
because relatively little effort has been made
to collect, collate, analyze, and interpret the
information available in European documents, many of which have yet to be published. The reasons for this minimal effort
are varied. The first Europeans were not
sufficiently interested in any one of these
groups to record very much about them; what
Europeans did record was incidental to other
interests and is now widely scattered in numerous documents; and most modem students seem to assume that not enough information was recorded to make a data recovery
effort worth while. Despite the handicaps, it
is premature to characterize the Coahuiltecans
as a whole until each one of the presumed
constituent units is given individual research
attention.
The following essay represents an attempt
to focus attention on one such group, the
Payaya, who in the late seventeenth and the
early eighteenth centuries were most frequently associated with the area that now in-

* This article was originally published as Southern
Texas Archaeological Association, Special Publication No. 1 (1975). It has been reprinted courtesy of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association.
97

98
downstream from Austin but had not penetrated the wooded area farther east (G6mez
Canedo 1968:161). Mazanet also said that
Apaches were living west of the Hasinai but
gave no further details. The next year, 1691,
Casanas, a missionary among the Hasinai,
confirmed Mazanet's last remark by saying
that the Hasinai already knew several Apache
groups and had fought with them (Casanas,
in Swanton 1942:251). After 1700 the increasingly dominant theme in the more
northerly part of southern Texas was Apache
pressure, for eventually the entire Edwards
Plateau became another Apacheria. Such
successes as the San Antonio missions had
after 1718 were largely due to the territorial
encroachments of the Apaches. In 1727 the
missionary Vergara (in Haggard 1942:77)
wrote that the Payaya and other Indians who
came to the first two San Antonio missions
"were converted for fear of the Apaches."
So far as the area west and southwest of
San Antonio is concerned, the general picture
is fragmentation of native populations between northward-moving Spaniards and
southward-moving Apaches, with a consequent squeeze that induced remnants of many
peoples to move farther eastward. This partially explains why so many ethnic groups
were initially recorded in the lower section of
Texas. San Antonio became the first Spanish
settlement of southern Texas in part because
it was a good place for missionary work
among disturbed Indian populations, most of
whom, when weighing Spaniards against
Apaches, seem to have regarded Spaniards as
the lesser of two evils. It is not surprising to
read, in Spanish documents of the time, that
the first Indians seen around San Antonio
were "docile" and well-disposed toward
Spaniards. They were docile for very good
reasons.
The preceding paragraphs, which attempt
to show a contrast between the late prehistoric Indians and the late seventeenth century
Indians of southern Texas, also serve to
show a contrast between the Indian world of
at least a part of southern Texas as pictured
by Cabeza de Vaca (1527-1535) and the Indian world of the late seventeenth century.
Despite Cabeza de Vaca's inability to conceive of his Indians as well-adjusted to their
local environments, it is evident from his accounts that these Indians were able to solve

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

most of their problems and survive biologically. One gets the impression that Cabeza de
Vaca was describing an ecological equilibrium. His Indians were not yet having to
face serious encroachment by foreign populations, either European or American Indian.
By the end of the seventeenth century the Indians of southern Texas were already beginning to face what most hunting-and-gathering
peoples of the world have had to face: population decline, territorial displacement, segregation and ideological pressure, loss of
ethnic identity, and absorption by invading
populations. -Southern Texas is a good area
for studying the decline and fall of fragile
hunting-and-gathering societies.

BASIC PAYAYA SOURCES
The primary sources which yield information on the Payaya Indians cover a period of
approximately 100 years-from 1688, when
their name seems to have first been recorded,
to 1789, when their ethnic identity was lost
during the last days of one of the San Antonio missions, San Antonio de Valero. The
documents which tell the most about their
pre-mission life were written prior to 1730,
and the best ones prior to 1718. Of these, the
most informative sources are those which
record eyewitness accounts of Payaya in
specific localities at specific times, and even
these are disappointingly lean in descriptive
detail. After 1730 nearly all that can be
learned about the Payaya is found in missionrelated documents, which reflect rapid acculturation in a segregated mission environment
In the later baptismal, marriage, and burial
records of Mission San Antonio de Valero
they eventually cease to be referred to as
Payaya individuals and are merely recorded
as Indians (indios), to distinguish them from
Europeans and genetically mixed individuals
whose names also occur in the same records.

PAYAYA NAME VARIANTS
As the result of fairly common usage over
a period of some 75 years, Payaya has come
to be accepted as a standardized orthographic

THE PAY AYA INDIANS OF SOUTIIERN TEXAS

99

form for the name of one ethnic group in
southern Texas. Its meaning remains unknown. With stress on the second syllable, it
seems to represent reasonably well the
sounds heard by Europeans, mainly French
and Spanish, when Payaya individuals repeatedly uttered an identifying name for
themselves. Assuming some knowledge of
both French and Spanish phonetics, most of
the orthographic variants found in written
records are readily recognized as being related to the form Payaya.
Below is given an alphabetized list of
Payaya name variants which I have thus far
encountered in Spanish sources and their
English translations. These are acceptable
through contextual analysis and comparisons
of various documents. Both singular and
plural forms, if actually used in the sources,
are included. Bibliographic citations are not
feasible because well over 100 separate
sources are involved.

Some of the above variants are undoubtedly distortions arising from bad handwriting
in original documents and from carelessness
among the early professional copyists, not to
mention modem carelessness and clerical and
printing errors. Modem students often express impatience with long lists of synonymous group names, which is understandable;
but it should be realized that lists of authenticated variants are essential for developing reliable identities for all those poorly known
Indian peoples whose names in documents
are rendered in such confusing variety.
Only two variants, Pailhailles and
Paillailles, appear in the French sources
examined. These obviously record essentially
the same sounds as indicated by most of the
Spanish variants.
In the Handbook of American Indians
(Hodge 1910,11:218, 1118) four name variants linked with the Payaya should be corrected. Three of these-Payaga, Payasa, and
Payayasa-are misprints that should all be
read as Payaya; the fourth, Payseyas, refers
to the Pausay, not to the Payaya.

Mepayaya (Mepayayas)
Nepayaya
Paia
Paiaia
Paiaies
Paialla
Paiaya (Paiayas)
Pajaja
Pa11alla
Pallalles
Pallaya
Papayo
Payaes (Payaez)
Payagua (Payaguas)
Payai (Payaies)
Payaia
Payaja
Payalla
Payas
Payatas
Payay
Payaye (Payayes)
Payayos
Paytay
Pazaga
Peyaya
Peyaye (Peyayes)
Piyai
Tilpaya
Tilpayai
Tilpayay (Tilpayayaes)

PREVIOUS PAYAYA STUDIES
The first summarizing statement on the
identity, territorial range, and known ethnohistory of the Payaya Indians was prepared
for the Handbook of American Indians
(Hodge 1910,11:217-218). Written by H. E.
Bolton, an able and scholarly historian who
was especially interested in the northern
frontier of colonial Spanish North America, it
consisted of some 215 words, accompanied
by a bibliography of nine sources, mostly
unpublished manuscripts, and a list of 15
names considered to be orthographic variants
of the name Payaya. Bolton's brief article
was historically oriented and said nothing
specific about Payaya culture, not even that
the Payaya were originally hunting-andgathering Indians. The Payaya were, of
course, mentioned in other Handbook articles, all written by Bolton, but these mainly
referred to the Payaya role in missions
(Hodge 1907,I:844-845, 847; 1910,11:9293, 183, 209, 354, 424-426, 569-570,
980). Since 1910 little has been added to
Bolton's statement, although Ruecking

100

(1955a:349-350) has paraphrased Bolton and
sought to relate the Payaya to other Indian
groups of the same area, a matter to be
discussed later. Ruecking (1953, 1954b,
1955a, 1955b) also attempted to develop a
composite ethnography for Coahuiltecan Indians. This was based primarily on published data for groups that ranged south of
the Rio Grande, and very little Payaya information was used. In recent years a number of new documents have become available, adding appreciably to what may be said
about the Payaya.

EUROPEAN OBSERVATIONS OF
PA YAYA SETTLEMENTS
The reports of Europeans who actually
visited Indian settlements in southern Texas
usually indicate or at least imply that these
were temporary settlements or encampments,
and such settlements are often referred to as
rancherfas. Sometimes settlements are reported as being inhabited by individuals attributed to a single ethnic group, but more
frequently the reports specify occupation by
two or more ethnic units, or what may be
called shared encampments. This variation in
ethnic composition provokes another question: under what circumstances did individuals from a single population unit camp alone,
and under what circumstances was an encampment shared? Unfortunately, no European ever asked an Indian such a question; or
if so, the answer was never recorded.
Since it is difficult to conceive of any ethnic group wanting to maintain exclusive encampments under all circumstances, it appears reasonable to assume that both unshared and shared settlements have always
been characteristic of the hunting-and-gathering peoples of southern Texas, even in the
prehistoric period. What seems to be especially significant is the relatively high frequency of shared encampments during the
early historic period. Perhaps this is explainable as the result of disturbances produced by
well-organized invading populations, such as
Spaniards and Apaches. If the population of
a native group was still large enough for the
people to feel secure, at least temporarily, its
settlements might be unshared at times; or its

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

numerical strength might attract individuals
and families from one or more nearly extinct
remnant groups. However, if a given area
was being ranged by small remnants of
several groups, these would feel safer in a
shared encampment.

Mazanet-Jarri, 1688-1689
The earliest record of the Payaya appears
to be under the names Tilpayai and Piyai,
which occur in documents pertaining to a
mysterious Frenchman captured by Spaniards
in 1689. This man, known to Spaniards as
Juan Jarri (in French probably Jean Gery)
was evidently a deserter from the La Salle
expedition (1685-1687) who made his way
westward from La Salle's Fort St. Louis near
Matagorda Bay on the Texas coast. The records suggest that Jarri acquired considerable
influence, religious as well as political, over
many Indian groups in southern Texas, particularly south of the Edwards Plateau. It is
fairly clear that he was captured in the general
vicinity of Guerrero, Coahuila, some 30
miles down the Rio Grande from Eagle Pass,
Texas.
We first learn of Jarri through the missionary Mazanet, who in 1688 was serving at
Mission Caldera (near modern Candela,
Coahuila). Mazanet heard of Jarri from Indians at the mission and persuaded a Pacpul
Indian leader to go northward and find out
just where Jarri was then living. The Pacpul
returned and reported that the Frenchman was
seen north of the Rio Grande near the Sierra
de Sacatsol in an encampment shared by
Indians representing at least eight named
groups-Mescal, Yorica, Chomen (Jumano),
Machomen, Sampanal, Pacuache, Tilpayai
and Ape (Hape) (Bolton 1916:356-357;
G6mez Canedo 1968:8-9).
According to Mazanet, the Indian encampment near the Sierra de Sacatsol was some 20
leagues (about 52 miles) north of the Rio
Grande and some 60 leagues north of Mission Caldera. Bolton (1916:297n) thought
that the Sierra de Sacatsol may have been the
present Anacacho Mountains of southwestern
Kinney County, an isolated elevation some
six miles long. It is doubtful if the word
sierra would have been used for such a short
ridge. It seems more likely that the Sierra de
Sacatsol referred to the heavily eroded south-

THE PAYAYA INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

101

em margin of the Edwards Plateau, which is
a short distance farther north. When approached from the south, the margin of the
plateau looks like an elongated range of low
mountains with a serrated crest. It is of
course impossible today to determine the
longitude of Jarri's Sierra de Sacatsol settlement. However, when Jarri was later
taken into Spanish custody in 1689, he was
then in an encampment near Guerrero and the
names of four Indian groups present were
recorded, three of which were also present at
the camp near the Sierra de Sacatsol. These
were Mescal, Jumano, and Hape (Bolton
1916:389-390). All this suggests that the
Pacpul crossed the Rio Grande near Guerrero
and that the Sierra de Sacatsol camp was
probably somewhere just south of the Edwards Plateau margin in either Kinney or
Uvalde County of today.
The Tilpayai recorded by Mazanet have
long been identified as Tilijae instead of
Payaya (Hodge 1910,11:750, 1156), which is
not phonetically justifiable. When the name
Tilpayai is compared with over 30 recorded
orthographic variants of Tilijae, it will be
seen that not one of the Tilijae variants contains the letter P. The equation of Tilpayai
with Payaya is reinforced by a list of 19 Indian groups known to Juan Jarri and obtained
from him after he was captured and later interviewed by Spaniards in Mexico (Leon y
otros 1961:219). On this list is the name
Piyai and no other name that even remotely
resembles Tilijae. The difference between the
recordings of Tilpayai and Piyai may be explained by the fact that Tilpayai was obtained
from the Pacpul Indian and Piyai from Juan
Jarri.

erary, both translated by Bolton (1916:353423). When Mazanet's letter to the Conde de
Galve is used in conjunction with the original
map showing Leon's route to eastern Texas
(reproduced by Bolton 1916, facing page
370), the result is a substantial increase in
knowledge of the territorial ranges of Indian
groups in southern Texas as of the year
1690. Mazanet reports six Indian groups on
the Medina River: Tilpayai, Cauya, Semomam, Saracuam, Pulacuam, and Anxau (G6mez Canedo 1968:160). According to Le6n's
itinerary (Bolton 1916:408), the Medina was
crossed twice, on April 19 and again on April
20. Although Mazanet is none too clear about
the six Medina groups sharing the same encampment, they probably did because he
refers to them as los indios que viven en dicho puesto. Prior to G6mez Canedo's publication of this letter, five of the six names
were known only from an official summarizing report of 1716 (Velasco 1958:318)
which simply listed all the Indians reported in
1690 by Mazanet as living between Coahuila
and eastern Texas, but did not indicate where
each was encountered. Bolton and later writers on the Payaya did not know of Mazanet's
informative letter to the Conde de Galve and,
as a consequence, errors have been perpetuated that grew out of speculation about the
territorial ranges of many Indian groups.
If we note the Medina River as shown by
the detailed route map of Leon's 1690 expedition to eastern Texas, it will be seen that the
locality where Mazanet's six Indian groups
were reported was along that section of the
Medina River which flows from west to east
near the present boundary between Medina
and Bexar counties. Since this is the area
where the Payaya were reported as living at
various times during the next two decades,
the synonymy of Tilpayai and Payaya becomes even more acceptable.

Mazanet, 1690
In 1690 the Tilpayai were again recorded,
this time in a letter written by Mazanet to the
Conde de Galve, recently published for the
first time by Gomez Canedo (1968:159165). This document specifies locations for
numerous Indian groups south of the Edwards Plateau that were encountered by
Alonso de Leon's expedition of 1690 to
Matagorda Bay and to the Hasinai country of
eastern Texas. Few of these groups were
mentioned in the letter of Mazanet to Carlos
de Sigtienza and in Alonso de Leon's itin-

Mazanet, 1691
The first eyewitness accounts of the
Payaya under that name occur in documents
of the Teran de los Rfos expedition to eastern
Texas in 1691-1692, particularly in the diaries of Teran and Mazanet (Gomez Canedo
1968:176-177, 238-239; Hatcher 1932:14,
54-55). In mid-June, 1691, this expedition
visited a Payaya settlement on the San Anto-

102

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

nio River at a point somewhere within the
present limits of the city of San Antonio.
Although today a precise location cannot be
firmly established, historians continue to discuss the matter. I am inclined to accept the
argument of Habig (1968:160) that the Payaya encampment was near Mission San Juan
Capistrano. At any rate, this is the only unquestioned record of Payaya along the San
Antonio River until the first mission was established at San Antonio in 1718.
This Payaya settlement was described as
being in a wooded area near the river. It is
of interest to note that Mazanet referred to the
Payaya encampment as a rancherfa, whereas
Teran used a plural form, ciertas rancherfas,
which suggests that he was the better observer, that is, he saw the clustering of shelters dictated by natural open spaces in a
wooded locality. The records do not actually
refer to housing of any kind, and the only
reference to population size is Mazanet's remark, which may not necessarily refer to this
particular settlement alone, that the Payaya
constituted a large group (es naci6n muy
grande). From this about all that can safely
be concluded is that the Payaya were probably among the more populous Indian groups
in Coahuila and Texas then known to
Mazanet.
After Mass was performed in the encampment, European goods were distributed
among the Payaya: rosaries, glass beads,
various kinds of knives, and tobacco. Mazanet also presented a horse to the Payaya
head man. Although this is the first record of
horses and European "trade goods" among
the Payaya, it should not be assumed that
European horses and artifacts had never been
seen before. As noted earlier, Spanish colonists had been living in northeastern Mexico
for at least a century prior to 1691.

Salinas Varona, 1693
On his return to Coahuila from a trip to
eastern Texas in 1693, Gregorio de Salinas
Varona encountered three Payaya encampments some 30 miles southwest of modern
San Antonio (G6mez Canedo 1968:302-303,
306). His diary makes it possible to say that
the three settlements were all west of the
Medina River in what is now southeastern
Medina County. After leaving the Medina

River, Salinas Varona visited these encampments in rather close sequence along his route
southwestward, and he passed the third and
last one before he crossed lower Hondo
Creek just above its junction with the Frio
River. No population estimates for the three
rancher(as were recorded, nor were any descriptive remarks made other than that the
first settlement encountered was near a
spring. The time was summer, the first two
settlements being visited on July 1, the third
on July 2. When Salinas Varona had earlier
passed through this same area he saw no Indians of any kind between Hondo Creek and
the upper San Antonio River (May 15-20).
These Payaya encounters probably explain
the origin of a Spanish place name, El Arroyo
de los Payayas, first mentioned in documents
some 25 years later. On April 21, 1718,
Martin de Alarc6n, on his way from Coahuila
to San Antonio, crossed El Arroyo de los
Payayas six leagues (about 15 miles) before
he reached the Medina River (Hoffmann,
1935:47; 1938:316). This is where Salinas
Varona saw Payaya Indians in early July,
1693. The records of the Alarc6n expedition
do not mention Indians of any kind being
seen on or near El Arroyo de los Payayas.
However, it appears likely that by 1718 the
Payaya had largely abandoned the more exposed western part of their range because of
Apache attacks. Some of the Payaya entered
Mission San Antonio de Valero of San Antonio in that year. Nine years later, in 1727,
Pedro de Rivera, the great frontier inspector,
followed Alarc6n's route and on August 1
recorded a stream with the same name in the
same area (Rivera y Villal6n 1945: 111 ).
Rivera also saw no Indians along El Arroyo
de los Payayas, but he did say that the locality was much favored by the Payaya (su mas
continua habitaci6n). It is very doubtful if
this last remark applies to the year 1727, for
by that time most of the surviving Payaya had
taken up residence at Mission San Antonio de
Valero, having been converted to Christianity, as the missionary Vergara so frankly
stated, because they feared the Apaches.
My own interpretation is that El Arroyo de
los Payayas, as recorded by the Alarcon and
Rivera documents, received its name in the
latter part of the seventeenth century and is
probably derived from the experience of
Salinas Varona and possibly other Spanish

THE PAY AYA INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

103

travelers whose movements were never officially recorded. I think that El Arroyo de los
Payayas refers to the most prominent of the
southeastward-flowing headwater tributaries
of San Miguel Creek, namely, the stream
which on recent maps is designated San
Francisco Perez Creek. If archeologists want
to find early historic artifacts at least in part
attributable to the Payaya Indians, the area
covered by the upper headwaters of San
Miguel Creek is one good place to begin the
search. The entire San Miguel drainage has a
total airline length of some 75 miles and
empties into the Frio River in northern McMullen County. Just how far down the San
Miguel drainage the Payaya ranged in the late
seventeenth century remains problematical.
In his Handbook article Bolton wrote of
the Payaya as "... living in the latter part of
the seventeenth century on the San Antonio
River.... In 1691 Father Massanet...passed
through their village .... " This was written
before Bolton knew that Salinas Varona's diary had recorded visits to three Payaya settlements just west of the Medina River. Unfortunately, Bolton's statements have led
some writers to assume that the Payaya
originally lived only along the San Antonio
River, that their population was so small that
all of them normally lived in one settlement,
and that their San Antonio "village" was a
permanent settlement. These assumptions,
now that we have the Salinas Varona diary,
obviously need modification.

Payaya were probably either on the upper
San Antonio River or near the Medina River
where Salinas Varona had seen them ten
years before (Mendoza 1703:77-78; summarized in Weddle 1968:68-70).

Mendoza, 1703
In 1703 Felipe de Mendoza, who came
from Spanish Florida by way of French
Louisiana, wandered lost afoot and alone in
Texas for some time. In a statement made
later in Mexico Mendoza claimed that, after
crossing the Colorado River, he moved on
farther westward and reached a settlement of
"Paillailles" where he spent eight days.
Among these Payaya he found a man who
spoke both Spanish and Mexican (Nahuatl)
and who directed Mendoza to Presidio San
Juan Bautista on the Rio Grande, which he
reached after wandering about uncertainly for
eleven days. If this statement is reliable, and
it seems to be, since Salinas Varona interviewed Mendoza and authenticated his geographic knowledge of Texas, then Mendoza's

Espinosa, 1709
In 1709 Isidro Felix de Espinosa, a missionary, recorded the journey of a small party
of Spaniards from San Juan Bautista on the
Rio Grande northeastward to a point on the
Colorado River not far downstream from
present-day Austin. On April 11 the Spaniards visited a small Payaya encampment on
the left bank of the Medina River southwest
of San Antonio (Maas 1915:52; Tous
1930a:4-5). From the descriptive details recorded it is evident that the Payaya were encamped on that section of the Medina that
flows due eastward, or somewhere near the
present boundary between Medina and Bexar
counties, where Mazanet had reported Tilpayai in 1690. This Payaya settlement was
said to be in a clearing in the woods along the
river. Here Espinosa inserted a statement that
along the Medina River were many pecan
trees whose nuts were used for food by all
the Indians who ranged its banks. Three
leagues farther on toward San Antonio an
unspecified number of Payaya individuals
was encountered, apparently from the encampment just visited. Still farther on the
Spaniards met five "Pampoa" (Pampopa)
who were said to be on their way to the
Payaya's Medina River camp. Shortly after
this, still traveling within sight of the Medina
River, the Spaniards came to a Pampopa encampment. This east-west section of the
Medina River is another good locality which
archeologists might profitably search for artifacts attributable to an early historic Payaya
occupation.
Espinosa, 1716
On June 12, 1716, when the Ram6n expedition was on its way to re-occupy eastern
Texas, a large Indian encampment known as
Rancheria Grande was visited near the junction of Little River with the Brazos River in
Milam County (Foik 1933; Tous 1930b).
Bolton has collected data on the Rancheria
Grande phenomenon (in Hodge 1910,11:354;

104
Bolton 1915:42-44, 142-150) and has
shown that it was primarily an Indian refugee
encampment. In 1716 this Rancherfa Grande
had an estimated population of 2,000 Indians, mainly from northeastern Coahuila and
the adjoining part of Texas, who had left an
intolerable situation in an area increasingly
dominated by Spaniards from the south and
Apaches from the north. The list of Rancherfa Grande groups named by Espinosa
(Tous 1930b:l 7) includes Cantona, Ervipiame, Mescal, Mesquite, Pamaya, Payaya,
Sijame, Ticmamar, and Xarame, and additional groups were undoubtedly also represented. Except for the Cantona, apparently a
local Tonkawan group, all these Indians were
from the area south of the Edwards Plateau,
both in Coahuila and Texas. With Ram6n
when he visited Rancherfa Grande in 1716
were nine Spanish missionaries, some of
whom had served at the Rio Grande missions
below present Eagle Pass, and these friars
recognized individual Indians they had
known personally on the Rio Grande. Some
of these Indians were labeled as former frontier trouble-makers; others were identified as
runaway neophytes and apostates from the
Rio Grande missions.
Just how many Payaya were present at
Rancherfa Grande in 1716 we do not know,
but perhaps not very many, since Espinosa
used the phrase "some Payaya." It should be
pointed out that a similar aggregation had
been visited before, in 1707, at which time it
was on the Colorado River somewhere downstream from modem Austin; but Payaya were
not reported there. Rancherfa Grande does
not add much to the Payaya record, but it
does reveal something about the tensions in
southern Texas in the early eighteenth century.
The Ramon expedition documents mention
horses and dogs at Rancheria Grande, and
they also say enough to indicate that Rancherfa Grande was associated with a wooded
stream valley in the Blackland Prairie region,
originally a tall-grass prairie, where bison
were reported to be numerous. This helps to
explain the subsistence base for a settlement
of some 2,000 Indians. This relatively large
population in tum provided some protection
from the Apaches who by 1716 were in firm
control of the hill country of central Texas
just west of the Blackland Prairie.

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Derbanne-St. Denis, 1717
In 1717 Louis Juchereau de St. Denis led a
small party of Frenchmen, later joined by a
few Spaniards and 26 Hasinai Indians, from
Natchitoches southwestward through the
Hasinai country to present San Antonio and
on to Presidio San Juan Bautista on the Rio
Grande. After crossing the Brazos River and
fighting off an attack by Apaches, the Hasinai
returned to their own villages and the Europeans went on to encounter a few Payaya in a
grassland area. The recorded itinerary data
(Derbanne) indicate that the encounter must
have been somewhere east or northeast of
what is now Austin (Bridges and De Ville
1967; Margry 1888,VI:206). These Indians
took the party to a nearby encampment, at
which the travelers spent one day and two
nights. This Payaya camp was said to be six
leagues (about 15 miles) north of the Colorado River, possibly in present northeastern
Travis County, which lies in the north-south
oriented strip of dark soils marking the
Blackland Prairie region. Some of the
Spaniards in the party traded for dressed bison skins, which suggests that the Indians
were there for a spring bison hunt (the month
was April).
All of the above comes from the Derbanne
diary of the journey. Later in the same year,
171 7, in a declaration recorded by Spaniards
in Mexico (Shelby 1923: 176-177), St. Denis
gave additional information about the encampment. "For a time" said St. Denis,
"there reside on the banks of the San Marcos
(present Colorado River) the following nations, La Payaya-Pamaya-Tzato6-EmeeTziames." These four groups, the last two of
which have composite names, are readily
identifiable as Payaya, Pamaya, Sana and
Toho (Tzato6), and Emet and Sijame (EmeeTziames ). Farther on in the same declaration
St. Denis added this statement: "These four
wander from this river (the Colorado) to the
Medina, always as vagrants."
The remarks made by St. Denis seem to
indicate that Derbanne simplified the picture
by reporting only the name of the numerically
dominant group, the Payaya, in this encampment north of the Colorado River. Derbanne's account is a day-by-day record, and
he mentions no other Indian groups encountered in the area. In other words, the proba-

THE PAY AY A INDIANS OF SOUTIIERN TEXAS

105

bility is high that the reported Payaya encampment was one which the Payaya were
sharing with Pamaya, Sana, Toho, Emet, and
Sijame. This seems especially reasonable
when it is recalled that the St. Denis party had
fought off Apaches only a short time before.
This joining of forces for better protection
against Apaches is compatible with the historical context of the time. It may also be
noted that St. Denis 's statement about the
territorial range of the Payaya agrees well
with information on their range as reported in
earlier documents.

an attack on Mission Solano by unidentified
hostile Indians, apparently not Apache (Olivares 1700:49). All of this suggests that the
Payaya normally ranged too far east for many
of them to seek protection at the Rio Grande
missions. Nearly all of the recorded Payaya
settlements were east of lower Hondo Creek,
which is some 175 miles from the average
location of the Solano mission (this mission
was moved three times during its existence in
Coahuila). But it also indicates that shortly
after 1700 at least some of the Payaya were
beginning to feel insecure enough to take
refuge in -a mission protected by the soldiers
of Presidio San Juan Bautista, which was
founded in 1703.

PAYAYA AT SPANISH MISSIONS
In the preceding section attention was focused on the Payaya outside of missions.
Here an attempt will be made to summarize
the leading facts about the Payaya at three
missions: San Francisco Solano, San Antonio de Valero, and Nuestra Senora de la
Purfsima Concepcion de Acuna (Mission
Records).

San Francisco Solano
Payaya were present at Mission San Francisco Solano of extreme northeastern Coahuila, which was founded in 1700, and
which in 1718 was transferred to San Antonio, where it became known as Mission San
Antonio de Valero. But the Payaya were
evidently an insignificant element in the
recorded Indian population at Solano. Of
some 45 ethnic groups identifiable in the surviving but incomplete mission records (baptisms, marriages, and burials), the Payaya
group is represented by only two individuals.
One of these was Marcela, a female said to be
about 25 years of age, baptized in 1706; and
the other was Antonio, a male of unspecified
age, baptized in 1707. The largest group
represented at Solano during the 18-year
period of its existence was Xarame, with
some 90 identifiable individuals. However,
of the approximately 475 individuals recorded at Solano, a substantial number, 131,
cannot be identified as to ethnic origin. Some
of these may have been Payaya. This is
reinforced to some extent by a reference in
1700 to 14 Payaya males who were killed in

San Antonio de Valero
Most of what can be learned about the
Payaya experience in Spanish missions is
connected with Mission San Antonio de
Valero of San Antonio, founded in 1718.
This is the only long-lived mission in southern Texas for which reasonably complete
baptismal, marriage, and burial records have
survived. These three kinds of records were
kept separately, the entries being serially
numbered and dated. Beyond that the entry
format varies considerably through time.
Some numbered entries are illegible and others are either missing or do not specify ethnic
identity. Sometimes errors in ethnic identification, often correctable, were made by the
various missionaries responsible for the entries, and this is undeniably shown by internal evidence when successive entries for the
same individual are compared. It is relatively
simple to cross-check the ethnic identities of
many Payaya individuals, since their names
were repeatedly recorded, not only when they
and their children were baptized, married,
and buried, but also when they were designated as godparents for children baptized or
as witnesses at marriages. Despite the inadequacies, Valero has the best basic mission
records available, and from these it is possible to ferret out various kinds of information,
mainly demographic, selected aspects of
which will be presented here.
At Valero, Payaya was the largest ethnic
group represented. If one constructs a mission census through analysis and comparison
of all entries, it is possible to identify at least

------

----------------

-----------

106

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

184 individuals as Payaya. According to the
missionary identity rule, all children of a
Payaya father were considered to be Payaya
and were so recorded, although at times
erroneously. The only exception to this rule
was when the father of an occasional illegitimate child was unknown to the missionaries,
in which case the child of a Payaya mother
was identified as Payaya.
The earliest identifiable Payaya entry is for
the year 1719; the latest, a somewhat doubtful case, is for the year 1789, which gives a
time range of 70 years. Santos (19661967:158), who used only burial records,
obtained a Payaya population count of 122 at
Valero, allowing for a few ethnic group
names which he apparently misread as
"Papayo." This indicates that many Payaya
individuals were baptized and married at
Valero but were not buried there; and it also
shows the value of using, when available, all
three types of records in mission census construction. The Valero proportions-122 for
burial records (given by Santos) and 184 for
all records combined (given here)-suggest
that burial records, if used alone, give only
about 66% of total mission population for a
lengthy period. It must be realized, of course,
that a Payaya who came to the mission but
left before being baptized or married might
never appear in mission records. There is no
way to control this factor.
The figure of 184 identifiable Payaya represents the entire 70-year period. Just how
many Payaya were present at Valero in any
one year cannot be stated very precisely.
However, an impressionistic answer can be
obtained by carefully checking the records for
standard census decade-years and tallying the
individuals for whom there is documentary
proof of their living presence during each of
those years. The following tabulation presents the results of such an effort:
172026
173041
1740 .. 39
1750 .. 37
176031
17705
1780 ............... 2

Payaya
Payaya
Payaya
Payaya
Payaya
Payaya
Payaya

After making generous allowance for record inadequacies, it seems likely that in any
particular year the total Payaya mission pop-

ulation never exceeded 60. In the tabulation
it may be noted that after 1760 there is a notable decline. This reflects two things: (1) decline in the general mission population because of a high death rate (discussed below)
and little or no replacement by outside recruiting, and (2) loss of interest by the missionaries in recording ethnic-group identity.
After 1760 the missionaries gradually began
to identify many Indians as merely indios,
and they rarely entered adequate detail on
parentage, which is essential for carrying
ethnic identities forward in time.
The V aleoo records provide information on
the life expectancy of Indians in San Antonio
missions. In these documents the recording
of age is somewhat spotty, and the only reliable age figures are for individuals who were
born in the mission and were shortly afterward baptized there, and who also died in the
mission. For individuals, particularly adults,
who were not born in the mission, estimated
ages are sometimes given.
For 80 Payaya individuals of both sexes
there are fairly good figures for age at time of
death. Of these, 36 are males and 44 are females. The age at death of males ranges from
a few days to 80 years, and for females from
a few days to 71 years. But the average age
at death of the males is 15 years, and of females 10 years. In other words, it seems that
the average Payaya at Valero barely managed
to reach early adolescence. Since there are no
comparable figures for Payaya during the
pre-mission period, it is not possible to say
whether mission life shortened or lengthened
life expectancy.
If one concentrates on the first 10 years of
the individual life span, it is evident that
childhood was the critical period. Of the 184
Payaya individuals recorded for the entire 70year period, at least 61 died before reaching
the age of 10 years. And of these 61 cases,
41 were children who died before reaching
the age of two; 14 died between the ages 3-5;
and six died between the ages 6-10. Thus it
appears that as many as one out of every
three Payaya individuals may have died before he was 10 years old.
The Valero records rarely indicate causes
of death. Two Payaya males were reported
killed by Apaches (1746, 1752), and one was
killed by unspecified Indian enemies (1765).
Whatever the causes of death, it is clear

THE PAY AYA INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

107

enough that Mission San Antonio de Valero
was a decidedly lethal place for the Payaya
and other Indian inhabitants.
Only a limited amount of information on
Payaya marriages can be extracted from the
Valero records. Data on age at first marriage
are scarce and not very reliable. About all
that can be said is that both sexes seem to
have married as soon after puberty as mates
could be found, and one gets the definite impression that females found mates more
readily than males. Widows and widowers
usually remarried, if mates could be found,
and such remarriages sometimes occurred
within a few months after the death of a
spouse. In a few cases, if a person lived
long enough, there might be a succession of
spouses. The largest number of spouses
recorded for any one individual is four. Divorces were of course never recorded, since
divorce was not sanctioned by the church.
In his various Handbook articles on missions and mission Indians, Bolton sometimes
argued that the earliest records at a mission
often refer to specific intergroup marriages
prior to mission entry, and that such premission marriages signified group intermarriage preferences in a presumably aboriginal
context, thereby suggesting especially close
relationships between certain groups, particularly among the Coahuiltecans. This is not
supported by the Payaya records at Valero.
What really controlled group intermarriages
during the mission period, and also apparently for at least two decades preceding mission foundation, was availability of mates
during a period of marked population decline.
Both outside and inside the mission the
Payaya most frequently intermarried with
nearby groups having the largest populations
at the time. During the entire 70-year mission
period Payaya married individuals from at
least 25 other ethnic groups represented at
Valero, mainly groups considered to be
Coahuiltecans, but also including, especially
later in time when Coahuiltecan mates were
scarce, Karankawans (Coco and Karankawa), Tonkawans (Mayeye), and Athapaskans (Lipan Apache and other unspecified
Apaches), not to mention groups of unknown
linguistic affiliation.
In the Valero records it is possible to identify 48 Payaya males who lived long enough
to be married, but only 33 of these had chil-

dren that can be identified. The average number of children per Payaya family was four
(figure rounded). The number of children per
family ranged from one child (10 cases) to 10
children (one case).
Practically nothing is found in the Valero
records that throws light on the Payaya premission kinship system and family structure,
nor on any facet of native sociopolitical organization. The Payaya mission families were
essentially Spanish-type families, which is
indicated by the limited genealogies that can
be constructed and also by the naming system. In mission records all Payaya are identified by Spanish names. More commonly
these are single or double given names, such
as Brigida or Damian, Juana Marfa or Pablo
Mauricio. Family names, as Miguel Hernandez Arc6n or Marfa Josepha de Lamas,
become more frequent with the passage of
time. Occasionally a name recorded by the
missionaries will signify proficiency in some
skill or activity, for example, Jacobo el
Carpintero (carpentry) or Manuel el Cantor
(singing). In the mission Indian village a
simplified set of Spanish-type civil officials
performed such duties as were necessary
and, since the Payaya were relatively numerous, Payaya males often held such offices
as gobernador, alcalde,fiscal, and oidor.
The missionaries invariably recorded the civil
office held by any male.

Nuestra Senora de Ia Purisima
Concepcion de Acufia
With one exception, no Payaya individuals
were recorded at any of the San Antonio
missions other than San Antonio de Valero.
This exception is Mission Nuestra Senora de
la Purfsima Concepci6n de Acuna, usually
referred to as Mission Concepci6n, which
was moved from eastern Texas and established at San Antonio in 1731. Only the marriage records of Mission Concepci6n have
survived, and these carry the name of one
Payaya woman, Josepha, a widow said to be
from the nearby Mission San Antonio de
Valero, who in 1739 married Juan Baptista, a
Patumaco Indian who was formerly an alcalde in the Concepci6n Indian village. This
single entry reveals the ambiguity of Bolton's
statement (in Hodge 1910,II:93) that the
Concepci6n marriage records indicate the

108

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

initial entry of Payaya at this mission in
1739, implying that other Payaya individuals were later married there, which is
not the case.Evidently Payaya individuals rarely transferred from the San
Antonio mission of their original choice,
Valero.

PAYAYA LINGUISTIC
AFFILIATION
Although it is generally accepted that the
Payaya spoke the language now known as
Coahuilteco (Swanton 1940:55), the evidence
which supports this judgment has never been
summarized.
Only two words of probable Payaya origin
have been recorded. One of these is the ethnic group name, Payaya, whose meaning is
unknown. However, it is possible that a clue
to its meaning lies in the recorded Comecrudo
word, payauya'p, "brave or wild" (Swanton
1940:90). Comecrudo is regarded as a Coahuilteco dialect. The other word is yanaguana (or yanawana), which was recorded by
Mazanet in 1691 (Gomez Canedo 1968:238).
Yanaguana refers either to the San Antonio
River (Bolton's interpretation, in Hodge,
1910,II:217, 245) or to a specific locality
along that river within the present limits of
the city of San Antonio. Chabot (1931:15),
who wrote extensively on the early history of
San Antonio, referred to yanaguana as the
name of the Payaya "village" visited by Mazanet, but this does not seem to be acceptable
because all known Payaya "villages" were
only temporary settlements or encampments . The name more likely refers to the
locality where a Payaya settlement happened
to be at the time. Habig (1968:160) has recently stated that yanaguana means "refreshing waters," which may be true, but he
does not identify the source of his information and I have not been able to
confirm the translation. In his study of
recorded Coahuilteco speech samples from
southern Texas and northeastern Mexico, Swanton (1940:5, 55) noted Mazanet's
linkage of this name with the Payaya, but
after making many detailed lexical comparisons, he did not suggest even a probable
basic meaning for yanaguana. However,

Swanton never expressed any doubt about
Payaya and yanaguana being Coahuilteco
words.
The best evidence for the Coahuiltecan
affinity of Payaya speech lies in several specific statements made by missionaries who
had served in northeastern Coahuila and
southern Texas and undoubtedly knew
something about native languages. In his diary of 1691 Mazanet said that, after leaving
the Payaya settlement on the San Antonio
River, his party of Spaniards traveled northeastward to a stream that seems to be the
present Cibolo Creek, which now forms the
boundary between Bexar and Comal counties. At this point in his diary Mazanet noted
that all the Indian groups encountered between Mission Caldera (near present Candela, Coahuila) and this stream (Cibolo
Creek) spoke the same language. This appears to receive support from the fact that
with Mazanet was a Christianized Pacpul Indian from northeastern Coahuila who explained to the Payaya, apparently in his own
language, the significance of the Mass performed in their village on the San Antonio
River (Gomez Canedo 1968:238). Further
confirmation is provided by Espinosa
(1964:758), who in 1746 wrote that the
Payaya of Mission San Antonio de Valero
spoke the same language as the Indians at
Mission San Francisco Solano, near the Rio
Grande in northeastern Coahuila, where
some of the Payaya had formerly been in
residence.
All this is further reinforced by statements
made in 1760 by another missionary, Joseph
Guadalupe de Prado, in Bartholome Garcfa's
Manual for administering Catholic rituals in
the Coahuilteco language (Garcfa 1760:iv-v;
also cited in Troike 1959:1), to the effect that
Coahuilteco was the most common language
spoken by Indians from Candela northeastward to the San Antonio River and that it was
used by friars in Franciscan missions of that
region. Fray Joseph, it may be noted, had 22
years of missionary experience in Coahuila
and Texas. This indirect evidence is not as
satisfactory as having a significant recorded
sample of Payaya speech for analysis and
comparisons, but it seems good enough to
support the statement that the Payaya
Indians probably spoke a dialect of Coahuilteco.

THE PAY AYA INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

PAYAYA TERRITORIAL RANGE
When we review the data from documents
that report the Payaya in native-style temporary encampments, it will be seen that between 1688 and 1717 ten such settlements
were recorded. The first point to note is that
the encampment localities are all distributed
along the route commonly used by Spaniards
in traveling from Coahuila northeastward to
the Caddoan area of eastern Texas and vicinity. If the Spaniards had used other routes in
addition to this one, particularly routes that
passed farther to the north or to the south of
San Antonio, other Payaya settlements might
have been recorded and thus would provide
something more informative than the present
linear distribution of Payaya settlements.
Linked with this route bias is the fact that
all the precisely dated observations of settlements (eight cases) were made during warm
seasons, specifically between April 9 and
July 2. Since Europeans of the time normally
traveled by horseback, and horses needed
water and grass, travel was timed for spring
and early summer warmth and rainfall. The
records involved do not report droughts in
southern Texas, either local or wide-spread.
Hence there are no records of where the
Payaya camped during the late summer, fall,
and winter phases of their seasonal subsistence round; or where they camped in times
of climatic stress, such as droughts. At other
times of the year the Payaya may have sometimes been in very small, widely dispersed
encampments because of food shortages; or,
when food was locally abundant, in fairly
large aggregations appropriate for certain social and ceremonial activities. The diary covering the earlier, eastward-bound portion of
Salinas Varona's trip of 1693 indicates that at
times the Payaya could not be seen at all
along the commonly used European travel
route.
It may also be noted that eight of the 10
encampments can be linked with fairly specific localities, and that between 1690 and
1709, a period of nearly 20 years, five of the
eight encampments are associated with a
compact area in modem Medina and Bexar
counties. In this area, except for the one dubious case of Pampopa visitors to a Payaya
encampment in 1709, the Payaya apparently
did not share their camps with other groups.

109

But before 1690 the Payaya shared encampments from the Medina River westward, and
after 1709 they were sharing encampments
well to the northeast of San Antonio. The
settlement sample is so small that one hesitates to attach too much significance to patterns that may be detected, but such data as
are available suggest that between 1690 and
1709 the Payaya near the Medina and upper
San Antonio rivers were fairly numerous and
were able to exploit the resources of that area
without being too seriously threatened by
Apaches. If this was actually the case, an
explanation can be offered for the relative
freedom from Apache attacks. In the San
Antonio area during this period there was no
reservoir of Spanish horses and other loot to
attract Apaches. The missions and other settlements of eastern Texas were abandoned by
the Spaniards in 1693 and, although re-occupation was being considered by 1709, nothing was accomplished until 1716. According
to this hypothesis, the Payaya before 1690,
because they lived too far to the east, were
minimally affected by the unrest connected
with Spanish settlements near the Rio Grande
in northeastern Coahuila, and afterward had a
relatively quiet time for about two decades,
which eventually ended with the formal reestablishment of Spanish settlements in eastern Texas in 1716 and the founding of San
Antonio in 1718. After 1716, with supply
trains going to and from eastern Texas, there
were horses to be had by Apaches along the
entire Spanish travel route, and this attraction
was intensified by the beginnings of a livestock industry around San Antonio.
It may further be noted that the Payaya
settlements are confined to a relatively narrow
strip of territory, consisting mainly of grasslands and fairly open woodlands well suited
to grazing and browsing animals, that extends from the upper San Miguel Creek
drainage in southeastern Medina County
northeastward to eastern Travis County or, if
the limited presence of Payaya at the
Rancheria Grande is included, to eastern
Milam County. If the recorded settlements
are plotted on a map which shows the major
geographic regions of Texas (for example,
Anonymous 1975), it will be seen that the
Payaya were most closely associated with
parts of two formally named regions-the
southern part of the Blackland Prairie and the

110

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

northeastern part of the South Texas Plain.
These settlement localities are all near the
eastern and southeastern margins of the Edwards Plateau region. Since the Blackland
Prairie between San Antonio and Austin is
notably narrow, the Payaya settlements were
also not far from the western and southwestern margins of the Post Oak Belt, which parallels the Blackland Prairie. The positions of
recorded Payaya settlements with respect to
these regions indicate access to a wide variety
of ecological niches.
The same conclusion may be drawn when
one plots the Payaya settlements on Blair's
map showing biotic provinces of Texas (Blair
1950:98). The Payaya had access to the
plants and animals of three such provincesTamaulipan, Balconian, and Texan. Whether
or not the Payaya actually exploited their full
environmental potential remains unknown.

PAYAYA CULTURE
As is all too evident, the documents which
record observations of Payaya settlements
during the period 1688-1717 reveal disappointingly little descriptive detail on the aboriginal Payaya culture. Such information as
is available will be summarized here and amplified by inferences made from other data
considered to be pertinent.
The Payaya were unquestionably a hunting-and-gathering people who lived only in
temporary settlements. Some of their encampments were unshared, but others were
shared with individuals and families from one
or more other distinctively named groups.
Reports of unshared encampments need to be
cross-checked for reliability whenever possible, for a single report of an unshared encampment is not as convincing as several
such reports, and each case is strengthened
when there is agreement between the reports
of two observers of the same encampment on
the same occasion.
We know nothing specific about the length
of time any Payaya encampment was occupied before being abandoned, or its population size, or the internal space allocations
when Payaya and non-Payaya shared the
same camp. Nor do we have any satisfactory
information on housing, such as house type

and form, construction materials, and number
of families or individuals commonly associated with a single housing unit. The records
do indicate that Payaya encampments were
near a water supply (springs and streams)
and also near a wood supply (natural open
spaces in a wooded area). Use of nuts from
pecan trees evidently drew encampments to
certain stream valleys in autumn, when nuts
were harvestable. Salinas Varona (1693)
recorded three Payaya settlements which
were simultaneously occupied in early July
and which seen to have been irregularly distributed along his travel route for a distance
of less than 25 miles, thus providing at least
some impression of settlement density in
summer. Another source refers to a Payaya
encampment close enough to a Pampopa encampment for exchange of visits.
Although the earlier documents never
actually mention the Payaya hunting specific
animals, they frequently refer to the abundance of game in the area, especially bison,
and in precisely the same localities where
Payaya settlements were encountered between 1690 and 1709. For example, in 1691
Mazanet repeatedly recorded bison seen along
the route of the Teran expedition (Hatcher
1932:54-55). On June 11, after crossing
Hondo Creek above its junction with the Frio
River and reaching the headwater tributaries
of San Miguel Creek, he wrote that "on this
day there were a great number of buffaloes."
The next day, June 12, in the general vicinity
of the Medina River he reported " ... a beautiful prairie where there were great numbers of
buffaloes and deer." Then on June 13,
shortly before arriving at the Payaya encampment on the San Antonio River: "On
this day there were so many buffaloes that the
horses stampeded and forty head ran away."
Mazanet continued to refer to frequency of
the same game along the route northeast of
San Antonio. This circumstantial evidence
makes it difficult to avoid the conclusion that
the Payaya must have made use of bison for
food and artifacts when the animals were
available. Later sources, as previously noted
(accounts of Espinosa, 1716 and DerbanneSt. Denis, 1717), indicate or imply bison
hunting by Payaya in the grasslands between
the Colorado and Brazos rivers northeast of
San Antonio, and the processing of bison
hides is also mentioned.

Il-IE PAY A YA INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

111

The only Payaya food-gathering activity
specified in the documents is collecting nuts
from pecan trees. This was recorded by Espinosa in 1709 in connection with his observation of a Payaya encampment on the
Medina River. He referred to the abundance
of pecan trees along the river and stated that
the nuts provided a common foodstuff for all
the Indians who at times encamped along its
course (Tous 1930a:4). Later in the same
document (pp. 10-11) Espinosa described
the resources of the entire region traversed
(Rio Grande to Colorado River) and presented informative details on the pecan and its
uses. As at least one-half of his route lay
within the maximum known Payaya territorial
range, it can be safely inferred that what he
says applies to the Payaya. Espinosa's brief,
generalized statement is an important source
of information on the probable role of the
pecan in the subsistence patterns of various
indigenous groups in southern Texas.
The earlier Spanish documents consistently refer to pecans in Texas as walnuts, but
it is clear enough that Espinosa refers to what
is now known as the pecan, for he describes
the nut as elongated and notes that it varies
considerably both in size and shell hardness.
According to Espinosa, the Indians of the
area gathered pecans in great quantities.
Some of the nuts were shelled and eaten
shortly after being collected, but large
amounts were also stored, evidently unshelled, in underground pits of unspecified
sizes. Espinosa says that pecans were used
for food the greater part of each year and also
that some were consumed the following year.
This may reflect the well-known fact that
pecan trees in a given locality, because of
variations in spring frost timing, do not have
uniform yields every year. The implication is
that the Indians may have been aware of this
and stored more nuts in years of heavier
yield, anticipating a possible lighter yield the
next year.
These Indians were said to be skilled in
removal of the nut shells without breaking the
paired nut meats. If such nut meats were not
eaten at once, they were not stored but temporarily contained in two different ways.
The meats were placed in small skin bags or
pouches or, less commonly, perforated and
then threaded on long pieces of string. Although Espinosa does not so indicate, these

methods of containing small amounts of a
rich, concentrated food are very compatible
with travel.
The various activities associated with collection, storage, and preparation of pecans
for consumption, as described by Espinosa,
should be of interest to archeologists because
they open new vistas in the recovery and
interpretation of data. Will it be possible for
archeologists to recognize former pecanshelling activity areas by fragments of shells
fortuitously preserved by carbonization in
fires and by clusters of certain kinds of tools
that may have facilitated pecan shelling without breaking nut meats or perforation of nut
meats, likewise without breakage? Just where
in or near a given archeological site could
pecans be cached to best advantage, and can
former storage pits now be recognized
through careful excavation? What kinds of
tools were used for digging pits? Is it possible to find evidence that storage pits were
lined with certain kinds of identifiable materials to protect the nuts from excessive soil
moisture? Could empty storage pits sometimes have been used for flexed burials? And
of some significance to settlement pattern
theory is whether a tendency to store large
quantities of pecans near the sources of
supply along streams was a factor partially
controlling the frequency of temporary settlements in valleys as opposed to uplands; or,
whether certain sites would be occupied
longer or be more frequently revisited during
one annual seasonal round because excess
food was stored there.
Horses are rarely mentioned in documents
pertaining to the Payaya, and it may be inferred that they probably had few horses until
some time after 1700. This is suggested by
the record of Mazanet's gift of a horse in
1691 to a Payaya leader in the San Antonio
encampment, along with his failure to mention horses among any Indian groups seen
between the Rio Grande and the San Antonio
River. If the Payaya had been rich in horses
at that time, the document probably would
have mentioned it, as well as raids on the
Payaya by horse-hungry Apaches. It appears
likely that the Payaya began to acquire more
horses after Spanish expeditions again became more common after 1700. By the time
of Ram6n's visit to Rancheria Grande in
1716, the Payaya there probably owned some

112

of the horses reported among the assembled
refugee groups. Increasing interest in horses
is certainly indicated by an incident that occurred in 1718 when Alarc6n's party was on
the Guadalupe River, apparently near modern
Seguin. Alarc6n's Payaya guide absconded
with the Spanish horse he was riding
(Hoffmann 1935:59). After this the Payaya
were of course involved with livestock at the
San Antonio establishments.

RUECKING'S PAYAYA-CLUSTER
CONCEPT
In the 1950s Frederick H. Ruecking, Jr.,
made a pioneering attempt to impose more
order on the rather amorphous body of published data concerning the early historic Indian groups of southern Texas and adjoining
northeastern Mexico. One of his major objectives was to identify all groups that were
probably Coahuiltecan in language and culture and sort them out in space as well as in
time. He became particularly interested in
identifying sets of Coahuiltecan groups which
seem to have been associated with specific
areas when those areas first became known to
Europeans and before extensive population
displacements occurred and missions were
established. For this he used a simple concept which he called "band-cluster." Ruecking defined band-clusters as "groups of bands
(that) can be isolated... by (1) historic association, (2) geographic proximity, (3) cultural similarity, (4) linguistic affiliation, and
(5) similarities in band names" (Ruecking
1954a:l).
Our concern here is with one of Ruecking's band-clusters, thePayaya-cluster, which
he conceived of as a set of Indian groups
who ranged over a roughly circular area centered on present San Antonio, Texas (Ruecking 1955a:Map 6, p. 27). In this Payayacluster Ruecking placed eight Indian groups:
Aguastaya, Camama, Mesquite, Pakawa,
Payaya, Sijame, Siupam, and Ticmamar
(Ruecking 1954a:4-5). His basis for selecting these eight groups is indicated by the
following statements: "This cluster is based
upon repeated references to the association of
three bands, the Meskitexa (Mesquite),
Awastaya (Aguastaya), and Payaya proper.

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

All (other) bands in this cluster are mentioned
with one or all of these (three) bands. All
Payaya-cluster bands were found in the same
geographic locale" (Ruecking 1955a:24).
Here an attempt will be made to test the
validity of the Payaya-cluster by critically reviewing, for each of the seven groups linked
with the Payaya, the data used or not used by
Ruecking. If a Payaya-cluster actually existed in the San Antonio region, it should be
clearly demonstrable by data from European
documents written before 1718, when the
first mission was established at San Antonio.
These pre-mission documents should indicate
at least some interaction between the various
groups forming the cluster, such as cooperation in subsistence activities or mutual visiting between encampments, something to indicate that they were in contact over a
considerable span of time. If the documents
indicate that some groups were recent migrants or refugees from another area, the
cluster concept is appreciably weakened.
Since Ruecking identified three basic or
core associations-Aguastaya, Mesquite, and
Payaya-the Aguastaya and Mesquite may be
considered first. For the Aguastaya no premission data exist and, to my knowledge, no
document has been found which indicates an
aboriginal range. The earliest observation recorded is that of Pedro de Rivera ( 1945: 111,
124), which refers to the year 1727. At that
time a number of Aguastaya, along with
some Mesquite and Payaya, and undoubtedly
many others whose group names Rivera did
not bother to mention, were said to be
congregated in two settlements near the San
Antonio missions then in existence, San
Antonio de Valero and San Jose. Ruecking
evidently assumed that the settlements noted
by Rivera were native-style encampments
instead of Spanish-induced mission villages
which Rivera's account unquestionably
indicates. In pre-mission times the Aguastaya may have been associated with the
immediate San Antonio area and with the
Payaya, but this cannot be proved by documentary evidence now available.
In addition to the Rivera document noted
in the preceding paragraph, Ruecking linked
the Mesquite with the Payaya on the basis of
Espinosa's account of 1716 (erroneously
given by Ruecking as 1709), which reported
individuals from both groups in the large en-

THE PAY AYA INDIANS OF SOUTHERN TEXAS

113

campment known as Rancheria Grande. As
previously noted, Rancheria Grande included
a large number of refugee groups from
northeastern Coahuila and the adjoining part
of Texas, some of whose group names had
been known to Spaniards since 1675.
Ruecking regarded the Mesquite of Rancheria
Grande as unrelated to the Mesquite farther to
the southwest, and he even coined a new
name, Meskitexa, to indicate this separate
status. This is not justifiable, since the
Mesquite were earlier reported as ranging an
area more or less midway between San
Antonio and the Eagle Pass-Laredo section of
the Rio Grande (Maas 1915:37). Otherwise
the only known associations of Payaya and
Mesquite were in the San Antonio missions.
Ruecking's "repeated references to the
association" of Aguastaya, Mesquite, and
Payaya in the San Antonio area actually tum
out to be mainly repeated citations of one
misinterpreted source, the account of Rivera,
and the core association emphasized by
Ruecking consequently loses much of its
significance.
This leaves five groups for consideration-Camama, Pakawa, Sijame, Siupam,
and Ticmamar. All references to the Camama
are obviously derived from a single primary
source, a report of the Soli's inspection of
Texas missions in 1767, almost 50 years after the first mission was established at San
Antonio. In this report the Camama are listed
among eight Indian groups-Aguastaya,
Camama, Cana, Mesquite, Pampopa, Pastia,
Tacame, and Xauana-for which Mission
San Jose was said to have been established at
San Antonio in 1720. The SoHs report has
been translated several times into English, in
whole or in part, and some of the translations
are misleading in that they give the erroneous
impression that the Indian groups named all
lived in the immediate vicinity of the mission.
For example, Kress and Hatcher (1931:51)
translate as follows: "The nations among
whom this mission ... was founded ... ,"
whereas the original Spanish text reads Las
naciones con que se fund6 esta Misi6n ...
(SoHs 1767:280). Solis said nothing about
the pre-mission territorial ranges of any of
these groups. In fact, the only evidence we
have for the actual existence of the Camama
is the bare mention of the name by Solis. It
appears likely, since no other European

seems to have referred to a Camama group in
southern Texas, that Camama is a distortion
by SoHs of some other name which he saw in
the San Jose records. To say, as Ruecking
does, that the Camama may be placed in a
Payaya constellation is going far beyond the
evidence.
Ruecking (1955a:333-334), following the
Handbook of American Indians, disregards
evidence that the Pacao and Pacoa were
probably separate groups with similar names
(Garcia 1760:title page) and combined the
two under the name Pakawa. He seems to
have placed his Pakawa in the Payaya-cluster
because he gave a literal interpretation to Espinosa's remark that when Mission San
Francisco de la Espada was established at
San Antonio in 1731 there were "in sight" (a
la vista) three Indian groups: Pacao, Pajalat,
and Pitalac (Espinosa 1746:459). Bolton (in
Hodge 1910,11:435) long ago pointed out that
Espinosa's statement is misleading because
the three groups named were then ranging the
lower Frio and Nueces rivers south and
southwest of San Antonio. It is difficult to
understand how Ruecking managed to accept
the Pacao (his Pakawa) for the Payaya-cluster
and at the same time to exclude the Pajalat
and Pitalac. The Pajalat tum up in his Orej6n-cluster, and the Pitalac end up with no
cluster association at all. Such inconsistencies do not strengthen the case for a Payayacluster.
Initially Ruecking (1954a:4-5, 20) included the Sijame in his Payaya-cluster without qualification, evidently because he then
believed that the Sijame were first known
from an account of 1709 (Tous 1930a:5, 13)
which reported them as sharing an encampment with Siupam and Sulujam at present
San Antonio. But in 1955 Ruecking
(1955a:367-368), after becoming aware that
the Sijame were at missions in northeastern
Coahuila as early as 1698 (Morfi 1856:367368; Portillo 1886:277, 440, 448; Rivera y
Villal6n 1945:131) and that the Sijame at San
Antonio in 1709 were refugees from Coahuila and adjoining Texas, did not entirely
abandon his earlier position, saying that "they
may have been associated with the Payayacluster." In Ruecking's defense it may be
said that his record on the Sijame is better
than that of Bolton in his Handbook article on
the Sijame (in Hodge 1910,11:569-570).

114

Bolton ignored the Coahuila evidence, failed
to note the Sijame at San Antonio in 1709,
and first picked up the Sijame at Rancherfa
Grande in 1716. Bolton even suggested that
the Sijame may have been a Tonkawan group
of central Texas, which today seems quite
far-fetched.
As for the Siupam, Ruecking apparently
placed these in his Payaya-cluster solely because in 1709 they were seen with the Sijame
and Sulujam near present San Antonio, as
noted above. But doubts are raised by other
sources (not seen by Ruecking) which place
the Siupam considerably to the southwest of
San Antonio, and one of the sources refers to
the preceding year, 1708 (Griffin 1969:166;
Maas 1915:36-37). The only link of
the Payaya with the Siupam is apparently
through an overlapping of territorial
ranges after some displacement of the Siupam.
Ruecking was unable to cite any European
observations of Ticmamar anywhere in the
San Antonio area prior to establishment of
missions there. His association of the Ticmamar with the Payaya is based on the fact
that in 1716 both were present, along with
other refugee groups, at Rancherfa Grande.
As noted above, many of the refugees, including the Ticmamar, were from northeastern Coahuila and vicinity, where they had
been known by Spaniards since 1675. For
some reason Ruecking considered the Ticmamar of Rancherfa Grande as unrelated to
the Ticmamar of the Coahuila area, a position
which cannot be defended.
The preceding review indicates that the
Payaya-cluster concept does not stand up
very well when the documentary evidence is
subjected to critical scrutiny. Of the seven
groups presumed to be associated with the
Payaya in the San Antonio area, two
(Aguastaya and Camama) cannot be definitely
linked with the San Antonio area at all, and
the remaining five are peoples displaced from
areas farther west and southwest who did not
appear in the San Antonio area until after
1700. The records do not confirm actual
contact of the Payaya with any of these
groups except in later times well to the
northeast of San Antonio and in the San
Antonio missions. If the seven dubious associates are removed from the Payaya-cluster, the Payaya alone remain.

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Perhaps the time has come to assess
Ruecking's Payaya-cluster for what it really
is, the result of an innovative but largely unsuccessful effort to grapple with the complex
demographic and historical realities of the
San Antonio area. It is based upon the questionable assumption that the late seventeenthand early eighteenth-century documents refer
to fairly stable populations in an area still
largely insulated from the disruptive effects
of Spanish and Athapaskan expansion.
Ruecking's argument is marred by uncritical
use of published documentary sources. Despite its defi9iencies, Ruecking's work nevertheless has value because it gives point to
one fundamental issue, namely, that a time
and place identity must be very carefully
constructed for each named Indian population
unit before interacting groups can be recognized in a given area during a given period. These critical remarks are directed
to the Payaya-cluster only, not to other
clusters proposed by Ruecking. Each cluster
must be evaluated separately on the basis of
such documentary evidence as can be
found.
The nearest thing to a Payaya-cluster, in
Ruecking's sense, consists of the six groups
reported by Mazanet in 1690 on the Medina
River: Tilpayai (Payaya), Cauya, Semomam,
Saracuam, Pulacuam, and Anxau. Ruecking,
of course, could not have known about this
particular association, since Mazanet's letter
was still not available at the time of his research. However, so little is known about
the last five of the six Medina River groups
that no useful purpose can be served by
speaking of the set as a Payaya-cluster.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this monographic presentation an attempt has been made to view the Payaya Indians in as broad a perspective as data recovered from written records will permit. The
amount of data recovered from documents
thus far has turned out to be greater than was
anticipated when the search began, and to this
extent the effort has been satisfying. It is
now possible to say more about the Payaya
than could be said earlier, but there are still
great information gaps that at present can be

THE PAY AYA INDIANS OF SOUTIIERN TEXAS

115

filled only by hypotheses and restrained
speculation.
In this study emphasis has been placed on
the unfortunate position of the Payaya and
their neighbors with respect to the collision
courses of two advancing frontiers, Spanish
and Athapaskan or Apache. The southern
and southeastern margins of the Edwards
Plateau roughly mark the zone of SpanishAthapaskan confrontation in the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries. The
Payaya and other more northerly Coahuiltecans, caught between the two, and probably
already reduced in population size by epidemics of European diseases, were no longer
able to maintain themselves satisfactorily as
hunters and gatherers amid so much confusion and uncertainty. The Payaya remnant,
along with remnants of other groups,
eventually gave up its former way of life and
accepted Spanish protection in missions.
Some Payaya may have joined their enemies,
the Apaches, or even Indian groups farther
east in Texas, but on this subject the documents are silent. If one cares to speculate, it
may be interesting to ask how much longer
the Payaya would have lasted in the San Antonio area if Apaches of the southern Plains
had not acquired horses from Spanish
colonists in New Mexico and expanded into
central Texas, and if the French had not
moved into the lower Mississippi valley, inducing the Spaniards to colonize Texas earlier
than they might have otherwise.
Since so much of the basic information is
connected with European observations of
Payaya native-style temporary settlements, a
careful effort has been made to summarize all
the significant data recorded, and also to give
reasons for specific interpretations made in
connection with each observation. However,
it was not feasible to present detailed arguments for judgments made about the routes
followed by various European traveling parties. This would have required too much citation of geographic observations recorded in
the documents, and these arguments will
have to be presented elsewhere.
Perhaps the most valuable part of the settlement observation summary is the inclusion
of new records that enlarge the known
territorial range of the Payaya and show that
the core area was not along the upper San
Antonio River, as has been supposed, but

southwest of the city of San Antonio along
the Medina River and the upper watershed of
San Miguel Creek, an area with a maximum
dimension of some 40 miles, partly in the
South Texas Plain and partly in the Blackland
Prairie region. With more precision in the
location of known Payaya settlements, it becomes possible for archeologists to select localities where the residues of Payaya occupations are more likely to be found, and these
are localities not yet covered by large urban
settlements.
The settlement observations also introduce
the problem of interpreting unshared and
shared settlements, and it has been hypothesized that shared encampments became more
common as population declined in size and
Apache threats increased
The value of mission baptismal, marriage,
and burial records as sources of information
on specific Indian groups has been demonstrated, and their regular use is recommended, particularly for recovery of demographic data. However, these records must
be processed in various ways before valid
information can be extracted. Only by use of
such records was it possible to discover that
the Payaya had the largest mission Indian
population at San Antonio de Valero and that
the principal reason for Payaya population
decline in that mission was a high mortality
rate among children. It was somewhat surprising to learn how few historians of missions in southern Texas have made serious
use of these basic mission records. Although
the missions were frontier institutions designed for displaced Indians, historical studies are not notably informative about the Indian groups represented at each mission, and
these same studies reveal little understanding
of the especially traumatic adjustments that
had to be made by hunting-and-gathering
peoples who entered those missions.
Thus far it has not been possible to recover
very much information on Payaya premission culture, mainly a few details concerning settlements and indirect evidence of
the roles of bison and the pecan in the subsistence system. Espinosa' s consistently
overlooked description of pecan nut collection, storage, and preparation for consumption as food has special significance for archeologists now working in southern Texas,
and this has been noted. The data on Payaya

116

culture, although minimal, raise questions
about Ruecking's composite description of
Coahuiltecan culture, which is based principally on data drawn from northeastern
Mexico. The Payaya data suggest that perhaps more caution should be displayed in extrapolating data from one large, better known
area (northeastern Mexico) to an equally large
but more poorly known area (southern Texas).
Little is known about the Payaya language,
but the evidence which suggests that the
Payaya probably spoke a dialect of Coahuilteco has been summarized. An up-dated list
of authenticated Payaya name variants has
been presented as an aid to those who may
have occasion to read the primary documents,
either in the original language or in English
translation. This list may also be helpful to
those who read the works of local and regional historians, in which there is sometimes
confusion about the identity and cultural relationships of Indian population units.
One regrettably destructive aspect of this
study of the Payaya has been the generation
of serious doubts about the validity of
Ruecking's concept of a Payaya-cluster.
This presumed association of Coahuiltecan
groups in the San Antonio area does not meet
the requirements of the major criteria upon
which it is said to be based, that is, historic
association and geographic proximity. The
Payaya-cluster merely identifies groups,
other than the Payaya, whose territorial
ranges cannot be established by documentary
evidence or who were displaced from other
areas and only entered the San Antonio region at various times after 1700.
One residual question, the question of
Payaya origin, has to be approached speculatively. When they became fairly well known
to Europeans, the Payaya were associated
with a stretch of territory along the inner edge
of the coastal plain near the south-southeastern margin of the Edwards Plateau. They
could always have occupied this same area
and hence be thought of as representing a
continuity from the prehistoric period. If so,
the demonstration must come from detailed
archeological studies. The Payaya could also
have come from some other area prior to
1688 and have displaced or merged with ear-

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

lier populations native to this area. Here it is
perhaps pertinent to note that the pre-1688
documents which contain names of Indian
groups seen or heard of in surrounding areas
never include a name that can be recognized
as a variant of the name Payaya. This negative ethnohistoric evidence leaves the Payaya
still associated with the same area.
Since their recorded settlements were so
near the margin of the Edwards Plateau, it
seems plausible to think that the Payaya range
must have included at least some lands on the
plateau, particularly that portion referred to as
"hill country'! northwest of San Antonio, access to which may eventually have been denied to them by invading Apache groups.
The only documentary evidence which even
suggests this is a place name was recorded in
1756. In that year Bernardo de Miranda was
sent from San Antonio to inspect the San
Saba mines, presumably located somewhere
along the lower Llano River. His route took
him through what he called Payaya Pass
(Puerto de los Payayas), which he said was
10 leagues or roughly 25 miles from San
Antonio (Hackett 1934,II: 126-127). This
probably refers to the passage of upper Cibolo Creek out of the Edwards Plateau, now
followed by a modem highway. We do not
know how long before 1756 this place name
came into local Spanish use and therefore cannot put much emphasis on its significance.
All it does is suggest that at some time the
Payaya may have used the pass on hunting or
food-collecting trips into the plateau. It thus
appears that the answer to the Payaya origin
question, if indeed it can be answered, rests
in the hands of imaginative archeologists.
As the record now stands, of all the presumed Coahuiltecans who at some time or
other were observed by Europeans in the
vicinity of San Antonio, the Payaya have the
strongest claim to being the principal indigenous Indian group. If it is possible to determine the approximate territorial range of
the Payaya at the close of the seventeenth
century, it should also be possible to do the
same for other Indian peoples of southern
Texas, particularly those whose names are
frequently mentioned in the primary written
documents.

Ethnic Identities of Extinct Coahuiltecan Populations:
Case of the Juanca Indians*
T. N. Campbell
INTRODUCTION
WHEN SPANISH-SPEAKING EUROPEANS

first came to the area now embraced by
southern Texas and northeastern Mexico
they found it loosely occupied by numerou~
small groups of Indians who subsisted by
hunting, fishing, and wild plant food coll~cti1:1g operations. Each group had a dist~n~tlve name and a territorial range suff1c1ently large for seasonal subsistence needs.
The foraging territories seem not to have been
mutually exclusive, for territories overlapped
and often two or more groups at times shared
the same territory (Campbell 1975). So far
as is known today, neither the Indians
themselves nor the early Europeans had a
collective name for these peoples, although
the earliest written records indicate that many
of these groups spoke dialects of the same
language. No collective name was in common use until the nineteenth century, when
s~h<;>lars be&an referring to the aggregate of
s1rmlarly onented peoples as Coahuiltecan
and to their language as Coahuilteco. Both
words are derived from Coahuila, the name
of a Spanish colonial province that included
lands extending from modern Saltillo
Coahuila, northeastward to the Medina-Sa~
Antonio river valley of Texas.
After European settlements began to be
established in northeastern Mexico in the late
sixteenth and early seventeenth century, the
more southerly Coahuiltecan groups began to
decline in numbers, the initial decline being
largely the result of new diseases brought by
Europeans. As European frontier settlements
moved slowly northward and northeastward
into present-day Texas, there was a simulta-

* This article was originally published as Texas
Memorial Museum, Pearce-Se/lard Series, No. 26
(1977). Permission to reprint was kindly granted by
the Texas Memorial Museum.

neous southward and southeastward expansion of mounted Apache Indians from the
southern High Plains. The combination of
slow pressures from two opposed directions
led to further population decline and territorial
displacement among the Coahuiltecans. Fragments of many displaced Coahuiltecan peoples eventually congregated at various Spanish frontier missions of southern Texas and
adjoining parts of northeastern Mexico. When
these missions were finally phased out by
Spaniards in the late eighteenth century, the
few surviving Coahuiltecan Indians were absorbed by the local Spanish-speaking populations. All formally named Coahuiltecan
Indian groups can now be regarded as extinct.
Those who thus far have given much attention to the numerous and widely distributed Coahuiltecan Indian populations have
been principally historians, linguists, cultural
anthropologists, and archeologists. All of
these specialists have been frustrated by the
paucity of information and also by the refractory nature of such information as has
been assembled to date. Even though the investigators have not always been explicit, it is
evident that a need has been felt for organized
presentations of three kinds of basic information: (i) identity information-a reliable
list of all formally named Coahuiltecan or
presumed Coahuiltecan Indian groups whose
separate existence can be successfully demonstrated by documentary evidence; (2) territorial range information-summarizing
statements about the location of each named
group based primarily on European eyewitness reports prior to displacement of Coahuiltecan groups by Europeans and nonCoahuiltecan Indians; and (3) behavioral information--collation and synthesis of data
from all European records that refer to the
linguistic and cultural behavior of each named
Coahuiltecan group, particularly outside of
Spanish mission contexts.

117

118

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Some progress has been made in acquiring
these kinds of basic information, but much
remains to be done because not all of the potential sources of information have been
searched. Furthermore, known sources of
information have sometimes been inadequately or uncritically used. Most of the
sources, known or unknown, are available
mainly in archives, and relatively few of
these sources have ever been published.
The combined work of H. E. Bolton, J. R.
Swanton, and F. H. Ruecking, Jr., has resulted in the accumulation of a long list of
names for presumed Coahuiltecan Indian
groups. Newcomb' s (1961) generalized
study of Texas Indians was not concerned
with the minutiae of ethnic sub-group identities. Even the most cursory examination of a
Coahuiltecan master list raises doubts about
its reliability. Some names are so much alike
that one immediately wonders if perhaps they
may represent end products of confusion resulting from both phonetic and orthographic
distortion of a single group name. If one examines the written documents in which these
similar names were successively recorded by
early European observers, this doubt is
intensified. The results of one attempt to test
this distortion hypothesis are presented here.

THE JUANCA PROBLEM
The effort began when analysis and comparison of certain documents led to the
suspicion that a substantial number of recorded names actually refer to one particular
ethnic group. These names seem to share
certain basic phonetic elements and to refer to
a people here designated as Juanca who, in
the late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries, ranged that part of the South Texas
Plain which lies south of the Edwards
Plateau. The basic problem was to find
enough clarifying information to confirm or
deny the suspicion.
Although it was originally longer, the list
of "suspects" was reduced to the 18 names
given below. Most of these names appear in
the earlier Spanish documents, but a few are
found only in more recent secondary sources.
They are listed below in alphabetic order un-

der three headings which identify localized
information sources and the time ranges involved. Plural forms are also given in
parentheses if they actually appear in documents.

Vicinity of Frio County, Texas, 1691
Vanca

Mission San Bernardo, near presentday Guerrero, northeastern Coahuila,
1708-1772
Juamca
Juanca
Tuamca
Tuanca (Tuancas)

Mission San Antonio de Valero
San Antonio, Texas, 1723-1754
Huacacasa
Juampa
Janca (Jancas)
Juanca (Juancas)
Jancae
Juncata (Juncatas)
Jaucar
J uncataguo
Jaucas
Puncataguo
Juamaca
Quanataguo
Juamca
Eight names are omitted from the above
list because they are specially created modern
phonetic variants of names that already appear on the list. These were produced by
Ruecking (1954a:l4, 17, 22; 1955a:276,
308, 384, 390, 397) and include Hunkata
and Xunkata (Juncata), Hwakakasa (Huacacasa), Kwanatagwo (Quanataguo), Twamka
and Twampka (Tuamca), Vanka (Vanca), and
Xwamaka (Juamaca).
Since most of the 18 names appear in the
writings of Bolton, Swanton, and Ruecking,
it is pertinent to indicate what each of these
investigators has said about ethnic identities.
Bolton contributed 11 of these names to the
Handbook of American Indians North of
Mexico, as follows (numbers refer to pages
in Hodge 1910,11): Huacacasa (426), Jancas
(782), Jancae (426, 1067), Juamaca (426),
Juanca (426), Juampa (426), Juncata (426),
Juncataguo (426), Quanataguo (333), Tuanca
(426), and Vanca (182, 879). He had encountered these names in various unpublished sources, including the baptismal, marriage, and burial records of Mission San Antonio de Valero at San Antonio. For most of
the names given in the Handbook the question of ethnic identity was ignored. Tuan ca

119

ETHNIC IDENTITIES ... JUANCA INDIANS

and Vanca were identified as representing
separate Coahuiltecan groups, and Jancas and
Jancae were somewhat uncertainly identified
as variants of the name Tonkawa. Bolton,
however, did call attention to phonetic similarities in two sets of names, Juamaca and
Juampa, Juncata and Juncataguo, although
no specific statements were made about
probable ethnic identity.
Without presenting any discussion,
Swanton (1940:134-136; 1952:310-311) included five of the 11 Handbook names on a
list of Indian groups believed by him to be of
Coahuiltecan linguistic affiliation. The five
names are Huacacas a, J uamaca, J uncata,
Quanataguo, and Tuanca. The remaining six
Handbook names were not mentioned.
Ruecking followed Swanton, but added
one Handbook name, Vanca, to Swanton's
list of probable Coahuiltecan groups.
Ruecking went farther, however, and, on the
basis of phonetic similarities in names, attempted to reconcile the Handbook names of
Bolton with those of Swanton's list. Ruecking equated Juncataguo with Juncata (Ruecking 1954a:14; 1955a:282, 397); Janca, Juanca, and Juampa were equated with Tuanca
(Ruecking 1954a:22; 1955a:283, 384). He
also equated the name Gincape with Juncata,
but this is doubtful because the few Gincape
at San Antonio were at Mission San Jose and
did not appear there until 1784, when they
arrived with other Indian refugees from the
Rio Grande delta region (Hodge 1907,I:955).
The name Gincape itself is probably a variant
of Inocoplo, which refers to a group first
recorded in central Tamaulipas in the middle
eighteenth century (Saldi'.var 1943:map).
For the sake of completeness, mention
should be made of The Handbook of Texas,
edited by Webb (Vols. I-II, 1952). As
nearly all information on Coahuiltecan Indian
groups is taken directly from Hodge's Handbook, a review of the Texas Handbook's
Juanca-related entries would be unnecessarily
repetitious. The work of Santos (19661967) should also be mentioned, although he
was not primarily concerned with the broader
issues of ethnic identification. In an effort to
compile a list of Indian groups represented at
Mission San Antonio de Valero, Santos made
an analysis of the burial records. In the
burial register, of the 18 names under
consideration here, Santos found only J aucar

and Puncataguo, represented by one individual each. He would have found others if
he had similarly analyzed the baptismal and
marriage records.
To summarize, it may be said that, so far
as ethnic identities are concerned, the combined work of Bolton, Swanton, and Ruecking resulted in association of most of the 18
names with six separate Coahuiltecan groups
and the Tonkawa Indians. The principal criterion used for linking two or more names
was phonetic similarity, and this criterion
was used with commendable caution.
In order to go beyond the phonetically
based categories of Bolton, Swanton, and
Ruecking it was necessary to have additional
primary information on the 18 names in
question. The following review of pertinent
documentary sources will show that considerable information useful for determining
ethnic identities has been overlooked.

REVIEW OF DOCUMENTARY
SOURCES
The Vanca of the Frio County Area
The name Vanca is known only from
Mazanet's* diary of the Teran de los Rios
expedition from Coahuila to eastern Texas in
1691. Mazanet has recorded a summer encounter (June 10) with individuals from 13
named Indian groups on or near the rio
Jondo, evidently the present-day Frio River.
As nearly as can be determined from recorded
data on route direction, distances traveled
each day, and the streams successively
crossed, the locality seems to have been
somewhere in the northwestern part of modem Frio County. According to Mazanet, the
Spaniards had stopped for a day of rest, and
during this day their camp was visited by Indians identified as "Sanpanal, Patchal, Papanes, Parchiquis, Paquachiam, Aguapalam,
Samampac, Vanca, Payavan, and Patavo." In

* The name Mazanet is also variously rendered as
Manzanet, Massanet, and Masanet. Mexican scholars
seem to prefer Mazanet or Masanet. Here Mazanet is
used except when a cited Spanish source has the form
Masanet

120
the evening visitors from three additional
groups came to the Spanish camp: "Putaay,
Apayie, and Patsau" (Gomez Canedo
1968:236; Masanet 1957:356; English translation, Hatcher 1923:52). Tobacco and
Spanish goods (knives, glass beads, and rosaries) were distributed among these Indians.
It cannot be determined if all these groups
shared a nearby Indian encampment, but it is
evident that they were at least temporarily
living in some sort of localized friendly
association, possibly for better protection
from Apaches of the Edwards Plateau area to
the north (Campbell 1975:1-2, 23-24).
What is particularly important here is to
note that in the late seventeenth and early
eighteenth century Spanish documents of the
area under consideration, the initial U and V
of words are often indistinguishable when
handwritten (Haggard 1941:Appendix C).
What Mazanet heard and was undoubtedly
recording is better rendered as U anca, which
phonetically differs from Juanca only in the
absence of the initial J. Since the phonetic
value of V in English does not occur in
Spanish, it is confusing to continue using the
variant Vanca.

The Juanca of Mission San Bernardo
Documents that refer to Indian populations
represented at Mission San Bernardo of
northeastern Coahuila are relatively rare. So
far as is known, the baptismal, marriage, and
burial records of San Bernardo have not survived. This mission was officially established in 1703, but the earliest document
recording the presence of Juanca Indians
there is apparently the report of Garza Falcon, written in 1734, which lists resident Indian families. Only one individual, Martin, is
identified as of Nacion juanca. His wife,
Marfa Sapopa, is not ethnically identified
(Garza Falcon 1734a:22).
The next reference to Juanca is in the
Diego Ximenes report of 1762, nearly 60
years after the mission was founded. The
Ximenes report gives the names of nine Indian groups known at San Bernardo, and it
clearly indicates that many other Indian
groups were also represented there in small
numbers. This report survives in two versions (Ximenes 1762a, 1762b), one of which
contains the name "Juamca," the other the

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

name "Tuamca." There is nothing extraordinary about this apparent orthographic inconsistency, since in the Spanish handwriting of
the time the principal distinction between J
and T, both lower case and capital, is
the crossbar identifying the T (Haggard
1941:Appendix C). Any absent-minded
writer could cross a J or fail to cross a T, and
the difficulty of distinguishing handwritten M
from N is always a troublesome matter.
The next document is the Rodriguez report
of 1772, which includes a census of the
Indians at Mission San Bernardo taken that
year (V. Rodriguez 1772a:65-73). In this
census some 238 Indian individuals representing at least 22 different ethnic groups are
identified. One woman, Onofra, is identified
as a "Juanca" Indian.
Then in 1777 Juan Agustin Morfi visited
Mission San Bernardo and commented on its
resident Indians in his diary (Morfi 1856:442;
1935b: 203). Apparently Morfi did not see
the Rodriguez census list noted above, since
he did not record the name Juanca. His
statement about the mission Indians is an almost verbatim copy of a passage from the
Ximenes report of 1762. He altered Tuamca
to Tuanca, however. In the middle nineteenth century Orozco y Berra (1864:303)
copied from Morfi, and nearly all later writers
who refer to the San Bernardo Indians have
copied or followed either Morfi or Orozco y
Berra. Hence the name Tuanca, given by
Morfi and copied by Orozco y Berra, has
through frequent usage come to be "accepted"
as the name of a distinctive Coahuiltecan
group at Mission San Bernardo, whereas the
primary records show three additional name
variants-Juamca, Juanca, and Tuamca.
Weddle (1968:272) is the first twentiethcentury writer to make use of the Ximenes
report and note the name Tuamca. Sherzer
has pointed out to me that "... Spanish cannot
have the sound M before the sound K. In
fact, in most languages, including Amerindian languages, N and not M is found before K. Thus the spelling Juamca or Tuamca
would be quite strange and, I think, suspicious" (Joel Sherzer, typescript comments,
April 5, 1976). The evidence cited leaves little doubt that the four name variants now
known from records pertaining to Mission San
Bernardo all refer to a single population unit,
one that was initially referred to as "Juanca."

----~~

------------~-----------

121

ETHNIC IDENTITIES ... JUANCA INDIANS

What is left dangling is the approximate
date when some of the Juanca first entered
Mission San Bernardo. This probably occurred sometime after 1708, because Espinosa (1708:37) did not list them among the
Indian groups who had appeared there. The
evidence, such as it is, suggests that the
Juanca population, which may not have been
very large when first recorded in 1691, had
declined to a low level before any of them
moved into Mission San Bernardo.
It now appears reasonable to conclude that
the Vanca/Uanca of the Frio County area, reported by Mazanet in 1691, are the
same people indicated by the variants
Juamca/Juanca/Tuamca/Tuanca recorded in
documents pertaining to Mission San Bernardo in Coahuila. This is also reinforced by
the fact that of the 12 groups associated with
the Vanca/Uanca in Mazanet's diary, three
were recorded at San Bernardo as late as
1772. As will be noted later, seven of the
Frio County groups were represented at Mission San Antonio de Valero, where a few
Juanca individuals also took up residence.

The Juanca at Mission San Antonio
de Valero
Mission San Antonio de Valero of San
Antonio Texas, was established in 1718 and
was in existence as a formal mission for
some 75 years. Most of its basic recordsbaptisms, marriages, and burials-have survived and are fairly well preserved (Mission
Records). Since many individual Indians are
repeatedly identified by ethnic group names
in the various mission registers, it is possible
to draw certain conclusions about recorded
names and their orthographic variants. The
first point that becomes evident in studying
the Valero records is that multiple variants of
the same ethnic group name are quite
common. Such variations may be explained
to some extent. At Valero there was a heavy
turnover in missionary personnel through the
years. Such biographical data as have been
summarized seem to indicate that perhaps as
much as 60% of the missionaries spent less
than two years at Valero, and the majority of
these actually spent less than one year (Habig
1968:234-256; 1973; Schmitt 1901). Any
new missionary needed time to learn his mission Indian populations, which themselves

were constantly changing because of a high
death rate and because recruits from new
ethnic groups arrived from time to time. In
such a fluid situation it is not very surprising
to find orthographic variations, expecially for
Indian groups that were represented by only a
few survivors. Although it is difficult to
demonstrate, some missionaries, when in
doubt about the spelling of an ethnic group
name new to them, must have referred to
earlier registry entries for a precedent. In
such instances they may have misread the
handwritten names. The main task today is
to reduce-the confusion in names as much as
possible without at the same time creating
new errors.
Although Bolton obtained many ethnic
group names from the Valero records, he did
not systematically attempt to correlate group
names with the personal names of Indians
who resided at Valero. He was, however,
fairly thorough in listing name variants and
did not alter the record by suppressing ethnic
group names that were notably different. As
neither Swanton nor Ruecking analyzed the
Valero records, they were unable to go very
far beyond Bolton. So far as the documents
are concerned, it may be said that the baptismal, marriage, and burial records of Mission San Antonio de Valero constitute a court
of last resort for reviewing the ethnic identities of many Indian population remnants.
These records are not good enough to resolve
all the identity problems, but they do help to
reduce the number of such problems. The
best information comes from identifiable individuals whose ethnic group names are frequently recorded.
Bolton (in Hodge 1910,11:426) claimed to
have seen the name Juamaca in the Valero
records. In my search for ethnic group
names in these same records I failed to find
the name Juamaca; and Santos (1966-1967),
although he searched burial records only,
also failed to note its presence. It seems reasonable to conclude that Juamaca is the result
of a modern error either in transcription or in
printing. It is most likely to be a slight
distortion of the name Juamca, which occurs
in the Valero records. This absence from the
Valero records leaves no real basis for referring to Juamaca as the name of a separate
Coahuiltecan group, as has been done by
both Swanton and Ruecking.

---

--~--

-~

-----

122
The names Jancas and Jancae were also
reported by Bolton (in Hodge 1910,11:426,
782, 1067) as occurring in the records of San
Antonio de Valero, and he considered them
as probable variants of the name Tonkawa.
Both names are evidently Bolton's readings
of what I have read as Jaucas and Jaucar,
names which were recorded between the
years 1728and1738. Santos (1966-1967: 158)
also found Jaucar in his search of the burial
records. In the Valero records no recognizable Tonkawa name variant can be found
until the year 1759, when six "Tancague"
were identified in seven baptismal and two
burial records, all dated between November
25 and December 8. No other Tonkawa
name variants occur thereafter. It thus seems
unlikely that Bolton's Jancas and Jancae are
variants of the name Tonkawa. A better case
can be made for identifying them, however
the names are read, as variants of the name
Juanca.
Bolton (in Hodge 1910,11:333) likewise
reported the name Quanataguo as occurring in
the Valero records, and he specifically cited
Burial No. 87 (in 1728). It turns out that the
ethnic group name in this entry is very faint
because of moisture damage to the document
The less legible first half of the name can be
read either as "Quana" or as "Juana." It does
not matter too much which way it is read,
since both Quanataguo and Juanataguo are
similar to the name Juncataguo, which occurs
11 times in the Valero records; and another
similar name, Puncataguo, occurs four times.
The name Quanataguo (or J uanataguo) is
connected with a woman named Ana whose
daughter, Rosa, was buried in 1728. Unfortunately, the same Ana (there were other
Anas at this mission) cannot be identified in
other entries. It is persuasive to note, however, that between 1728 and 1736 there are at
least 10 records of the names Juncataguo and
Puncataguo. Prior to Bolton the name Quanataguo does not seem to have been recorded
anywhere. On such slender evidence it is difficult to maintain that Quanataguo is acceptable as the name of a specific group of Coahuiltecan Indians, despite its unquestioned
acceptance by Bolton, Swanton, and Ruecking.
The next names to be examined include
Juampa, Juanca (Juancas), Juncataguo, Juncata (Juncatas), and Puncataguo. In consid-

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

ering these five names, the most informative
dossier is that of a woman recorded by the
Spanish personal name Alfonsa (sometimes
Ildefonsa) and also by the native personal
name Taumama. From a total of 19 separate
Valero entries between the years 1730 and
1754 it can be deduced that Alfonsa was
married three times and had at least nine
children. Her first husband was a Payaya,
and her second and third husbands were both
Siaguan. Her ethnic affiliation is variously
specified as Juampa (twice), Juanca (twice),
Juncataguo (10 times), and Puncataguo (three
times). In two entries no ethnic name is
recorded. This can be supplemented by the
dossier of a second woman, Clara de la Candelaria, who is identified in two entries (1730
and 1737) as Juncatas and Juncataguo. Clara
was married to a Payaya. These two dossiers, when combined, provide the basis for
arguing that the five names in questionJuampa, Juanca, Juncata, Juncataguo, and
Puncataguo-are variants of the name
Juanca, here suggested as a standard name
for a single Coahuiltecan group. It seems
more cogent to regard these five names as
variants of Juanca than to think of two contemporaneous individuals (Alfonsa and
Clara) as being mistakenly identified with at
least four separate ethnic groups, only one of
which, Juanca, can be validated by documents other than the Valero registers. The
name Puncataguo is probably a misreading
by a missionary of earlier entries recorded as
Juncataguo. Puncataguo evidently was not
noted by Bolton, but I found it in the Valero
registers, and so did Santos (19661967:158).
For the three remaining names-Huacacasa, Jaucar, and Jaucas-the evidence is
less satisfactory. It is reasonably clear that
Huacacasa and Jaucas are identical, since
both names are associated with the same individual, Lorenzo, when his daughter, Nicolasa, was baptized ( 1727) and when she was
buried (1728). Jaucas and Jaucar have already been noted as probably being the
names which Bolton read as Jancas and Jancae. In relating Jaucar and Jaucas to Juanca
and its more obvious variants, one is faced
with the suppression of M or N and the
transposition ofUA to AU. As both changes
quite frequently occur in the name variants
of other groups recorded at Valero, this

ETIINIC IDENTITIES ... JUANCA INDIANS

presents no great difficulty. It also helps to
be able to say that the names Huacacasa,
Jaucar, and Jaucas are not known to occur in
primary documents other than those of
Mission San Antonio de Valero. It is for
these various reasons that the three names are
here interpreted as variants of Juanca.
The variants recorded by Mazanet and by
documents connected with Mission San
Bernardo are so similar to many of the Valero
names that not much doubt remains that reference is being made to one original ethnic
group, the Juanca Indians. It is also pertinent
to add that of the 12 groups associated with
the Vanca/Uanca ofMazanet's diary of 1691,
seven are represented in the basic records of
Mission San Antonio de Valero between the
years 1723 and 1754.
In brief, substantial evidence can be cited
in support of the contention that the 18 listed
names all refer to a single ethnic unit, for
which Juanca is proposed as a standard name
to be used hereafter. It is suggested that the
names Huacacasa, Juamaca, Juncata, Quanataguo, Tuanca, and Vanca no longer be accepted as valid names for separate and distinct Coahuiltecan Indian groups, and that the
names Janca (Jancas) and Jancae be dissociated from Tonkawa.

THE JUANCA INDIANS:
A SUMMARY
If the foregoing interpretation of Juanca
identity is acceptable, then it may be said that
this obscure Indian group can be traced
through scattered records covering a period
of about 80 years. In 1691 the Juanca were
first recorded somewhere in present Frio
County, Texas, under the name Vanca or
Uanca. Thereafter they were recorded under
a variety of phonetically similar names at two
Spanish missions, San Bernardo in northeastern Coahuila and San Antonio de Valero
in southern Texas. At San Bernardo the
record extends from some unspecifiable date
after 1708 up to the year 1772, and the last
identifiable Juanca individual was Onofra,
whose husband was Bernardo, a Pastaloca,
and whose son, Damassio, according to the
mission patrilineal descent system, was not a
Juanca but a Pastaloca. The last Juanca indi-

123
vidual at San Antonio de Valero was also a
woman, Alfonsa (or Ildefonsa), whose name
disappears from the Valero records after
1754. Since none of her three successive
husbands was a Juanca, none of her children
was recorded as Juanca. Thus, such evidence as is available leads to the conclusion
that during the period of record, that is,
1691-1772, the Juanca population was very
small and its identity was lost through population decline at two Spanish missions during
the second half of the eighteenth century.
Since the Juanca were observed and
recorded in a native context only once, as the
Vanca or Uanca of 1691, few positive statements can be made about their original
territorial range. The report of 1691 appears
to place them in the vicinity of modem Frio
County, Texas. At that time the Juanca were
associated with 12 other named groups, some
of which are known from additional reports
to have ranged the same general area, and
from this it may be inferred that at least in the
latter part of the seventeenth century Frio
County was included in the Juanca' s
customary range. The Frio County observation locality is approximately 90 miles from
Mission San Bernardo, which some of the
Juanca entered after 1708, and about 60 miles
from Mission San Antonio de Valero, where
a few Juanca were recorded after 1723. This
conclusion also seems to be supported by the
fact that no recognizable variant of the name
J uanca appears in earlier documents ( 16731690) that pertain to northeastern Coahuila
and the adjacent part of Texas. It may be
noted further that there is no indication of
Juanca individuals at any time entering other
missions of northeastern Mexico or southern
Texas. All this suggests that the early Juanca
territorial range probably was a fairly large
area on the South Texas Plain about midway
between San Antonio and Eagle Pass.
So far as is now known, no specifically
designated samples of Juanca speech were
ever recorded, and for this reason none of the
names here considered to be synonyms of
Juanca appears on checklists of North
American Indian tribes and languages, such
as that recently published by Landar (1973).
"Juanca" is, presumably, the name by which
the Juanca people customarily identified
themselves. As initially recorded by Spaniards, it seems to fall within the phonemic

124
range of Coahuilteco as determined by Troike
(1959:1~4) from an analysis of Coahuilteco as represented in Garcia's Manual
(1760). Swanton (1940:23), in his Coahuilteco-English vocabulary, lists the word
xuankam ("to be ashamed, to have shame"),
which may be related to the name "Juanca,"
but this relationship does not appear to be
demonstrable at present.
Taumama, the native name of Alfonsa, the
thrice-married Juanca woman at Mission San
Antonio de Valero, is probably a Coahuilteco
word. Swanton (1940:51) lists mama as one
of three Coahuilteco words for "father." In
1691 Mazanet gave a native name for the r{o
Jondo or Frio River, Guanapajao (or Guanapajac ), saying that en lengua de los indios se
llama Guanapajao (G6mez Canedo
1968:236). Presumably los indios refers to
the 13 Indian groups he identified and not to
Indian guides who accompanied the Spanish
party, but the guides also seem to have been
Coahuilteco-speakers. Although Mazanet, who had learned to speak Coahuilteco,
sometimes gave Spanish translations of native place names, he did not do so in this instance.
The argument for Coahuiltecan linguistic
affiliation of the Juanca has to be based
mainly on the following indirect evidence: (1)
Frio County, where the Juanca were observed under native conditions, lies within an
area where Coahuilteco seems to have been
the only language commonly spoken until the
arrival of the Athapaskan-speaking Apaches;
(2) one of the groups associated with the
Juanca in the Frio County area, the Pacuache,
is listed among speakers of Coahuilteco
named in the Manual of Bartholome Garcia
(1760:title page); and (3) according to several
missionaries, most of the Indian groups that
initially entered the missions of San Bernardo
and San Antonio de Valero spoke dialects of
the same language, the language now known
as Coahuilteco (Garda 1760:iv-v; G6mez
Canedo 1968:240).
All that can be safely said about Juanca
culture has to do with mode of subsistence,
which can be inferred from the Mazanet report of 1691(Masanet1957). Since no early
Indian groups between San Antonio and Eagle Pass were ever seen practicing horticulture, it seems acceptable to characterize the
Juanca as a hunting-and-gathering people.

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

Mazanet said nothing about specific subsistence activities, but his 1691 diary mentions a
number of animals and plants that could have
been sources of Juanca foods. Along the
route between the Nueces and Medina rivers
Mazanet several times reported bison as being
abundant, and deer were mentioned when the
Spanish party was near the Medina. Nearly
every perennial stream crossed was said to
contain many fish, which Mazanet said the
Spaniards frequently caught and ate. Among
the plants having edible products, Mazanet
repeatedly mentioned mesquites, pecans
(nogales), live oaks (encinos), mulberries
(altos morales), and grapes (G6mez Canedo
1968:235-237). Unless new documents can
be found, this is about all that can be said today about the Juanca Indians.

CONCLUSIONS
The case of the Juanca appears to be an
informative example of what could happen to
the identifying name of a small hunting-andgathering population in the written records
that cover the period of its decline and
disappearance. When such a population had
been reduced in numbers and the remnants
had entered one or more European-style
Christian missions, the mission record keepers became increasingly careless in the
written rendition of the ethnic group name.
The name variants were further distorted by
mission inspectors and miscellaneous
travelers, and sometimes even by later
writers. Eventually an assortment of similar
names became fossilized in the various written records.
When ethnohistorians study such recorded
group names, they are initially confused by
this cumulative distortion. If there are many
name variants and some of these are badly
distorted, it is likely that several ethnic
groups will be distinguished when actually
only one population unit is involved. As in
the case of the Juanca, it is sometimes possible to reduce the number of discrete ethnic
groups believed to have lived in a given area
by clearing up some of the confusion in
recorded names. The deciding factor in such
successes is usually the quantity and quality
of the written records available for use.

125

ETHNIC IDENTITIES ... JUANCA INDIANS

In such studies a critical issue is whether
sufficient evidence can be found to show that
phonetically similar group names in the
records of one particular mission are synonymous name variants that refer to a single
original ethnic group. What is most needed
is external corroborative evidence, such as
the appearance of similar names in premission documents, or in the records of
another mission, preferably both, as in the
case of the J uanca. If a series of similar
names occurs in the records of one mission
only, this is a severe handicap and reduces
the argument to phonetic evaluation. One
situation can cause unusual difficulty: when
two demonstrably different ethnic groups had
similar names. Fortunately, only a few cases
of this are known.
The stance taken here is that one must seriously grapple with these identity problems
in order to reduce the confusion as much as
possible. Any method or approach is justifiable if it gives verifiable results. It does not
seem very courageous to throw up the hands
and claim that each ethnic Humpty Dumpty is
now so badly fragmented that it cannot be put
together again. And for those who would
like to have a hand in this ethnic identity
game, there is an exhilaration that comes
from "killing off' entire Indian populations

that never existed except in the minds of previous ethnohistorians.
This study indicates that general reference
works containing information on Coahuiltecan Indian groups should be used with
some degree of caution. This is particularly
true of Hodge's Handbook of American Indians North of Mexico, upon which so many
other reference works are based. This remark
should not be taken as a sweeping indictment
of all Coahuiltecan entries in the Handbook.
But here and there, in many of them, there
are misleading statements that reflect either
incomplete use or misinterpretation of the
primary sources. When reference volumes
are used, if there is any doubt, the best
procedure is to go back to the primary documents and re-evaluate the evidence.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The following individuals, whose names
are listed alphabetically, read the manuscript
critically and made suggestions which I think
led to considerable improvement: Tommy Jo
Campbell, Jan Z. Dymond, Thomas R.
Hester, Wm. W. Newcomb, Jr., Joel F.
Sherzer, and Dee Ann Story. Their assistance is gratefully acknowledged.

This page intentionally left blank.

Ethnohistoric Notes on Indian Groups Associated with
Three Spanish Missions*
T. N. Campbell
INTRODUCTION
THREE SPANISH MISSIONS, SAN

Francisco Solano, San Juan Bautista, and
San Bernardo, were established near the Rio
Grande at present Guerrero, northeastern
Coahuila, during the years 1700-1703.
Remnants of at least 88 distinctively named
Indian groups at various times crune to live at
one or more of these missions. In 19751976, the Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas San Antonio, supported by funds from the National
Endowment for the Humanities and the
Kathryn O'Connor Foundation, conducted
archaeological excavations at two of these
missions, San Juan Bautista and San Bernardo. Since the cultural debris recovered
from excavations is attributable to Indians as
well as Europeans, I was asked to examine
Spanish colonial documents and assemble
and interpret such ethnohistoric information
as could be found on the various Indian
groups represented at the three Guerrero
missions.
To the final report on the Guerrero
investigations I have contributed a chapter
entitled "Resident Indian Populations at the
Guerrero Missions." In that chapter I identified the known Indian groups represented,
indicated certain areas from which they had
come, and made statements about their linguistic and cultural affiliations. Considerable
information was collected that could not be
presented in detail. In the following pages I
*Originally published as: Ethnohistoric Notes on
Indian Groups Associated with Three Spanish
Missions at Guerrero, Coahuila, Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San
Antonio, Archaeology and History of the San Juan
Bautista Mission Area, Coahuila and Texas, Report
No. 3 (1979). Reprinted herein courtesy of the
Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

present summaries of the information collected on each of the 88 Indian groups.
Some of this information is new in the sense
that attention has never been called to its existence.
Presentation of critical summaries of data
collected for each of the Guerrero mission
Indian groups is probably the most effective
way of establishing a boundary between what
is known and what is not known. Much of
what is known consists of miscellaneous bits
of information, often trivial in nature, haphazardly recorded by Europeans who varied
in native intelligence and educational background. It is not wise to take each bit of
recorded information at face value; it must be
challenged in various ways before being accepted. What the following summaries glaringly show is how little can be positively
stated about the culture of most of the Indian
groups under consideration. As the same
kinds of information were rarely recorded for
many groups, it is not easy to establish notable similarities and differences. With such
scant and poorly controlled data it is very
difficult to make plausible generalizations.
The information on each group is segregated and arranged in alphabetical order by
group nrune. More detail is given, if it exists,
for Indian groups that are less well known.
For groups that have already received special
study, the pertinent publications are merely
cited. It must be emphasized that the Indian
groups covered are merely those who are
known to have been represented at the
Guerrero missions. Many Indian groups of
the surrounding area were not reported at
these particular missions. Some Indian group
nrunes recorded in documents pertaining to
the Guerrero missions have not been previously reported in modem ethnohistoric literature. Whenever appropriate, attention is
called to this.
Since recorded information on the
Guerrero mission Indian groups is meager

127

128
and widely scattered in documents, an attempt is made to identify key pages in the
more important sources, both published and
unpublished. The information found in primary sources can sometimes be interpreted in
different ways, and the serious inquirer may
want to evaluate the evidence independently.
Secondary sources are frequently cited,
especially when they contribute to interpretation of primary sources or contain stultifying errors. Numerous secondary sources,
however, are not cited because, when written, they added little to what had already been
said about the Guerrero mission Indians.
Variants of Indian group names that appear
in the Guerrero mission registers and censuses, as well as in certain other key documents, are included, but no attempt is made
to present complete lists of known name
variants for all groups. Sample lists are frequently included, primarily to show range of
name variation and to call attention to various
kinds of error.
In studies of the numerous distinctively
named Indian groups of northeastern Mexico
and southern Texas there has always been
confusion about group names. This confusion can be greatly reduced by very detailed
comparisons of names recorded in numerous
documents, but the confusion cannot be
eliminated entirely because some names were
too infrequently recorded. There is always a
residue of uncertainty. In this study of
groups represented at the Guerrero missions
attention is called to errors that appear in the
Handbook of American Indians (Hodge
1907, 1910). Some group names in the
Handbook are invalid because it can be demonstrated that they are variants of other group
names with separate entry status. The following 14 names should no longer be regarded as names of separate and distinct ethnic groups: Guisoles, Haeser, Hihame, Morbana, Ohaguames, Pachaloco, Pacuachiam,
Pas teal, Psaupsau, Putaay, Quesal, Sinicu,
Taimamares, and Tusonid.
In the following summaries, information
on the Indian groups at San Francisco Solano
is presented in a special way that requires
brief explanation. Solano was the first mission to be established at Guerrero (1700), but
it remained there only about five years. In
1705, because of a water shortage problem, it
was moved to a locality called San Ildefonso,

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

some 40 miles west of Guerrero, near present
Zaragoza, Coahuila. Sometime in 1708 it
was moved again, this time to San Jose,
some eight miles up the Rio Grande from
Guerrero. Ten years later, in 1718, it was
transferred to what is now San Antonio,
Texas, where it became known by a new
name, San Antonio de Valero (Solano Registers). The surviving mission registers make
it possible to determine which Indian groups
entered San Francisco Solano at each of its
successive locations. Segregation of data
according to mission locale, which is done in
the summaries, permits tentative conclusions
to be drawn about the pre-mission ranges
of some of the more obscure Indian groups.
As so many of the Indian groups represented at the Guerrero mission were also
represented at other missions of northeastern
Mexico and Texas after 1690, these missions
are identified. Inclusion of this information
helps to document the magnitude of the disorganization and the fragmentation produced
by the combined effects of Spanish and
Apache displacement in this area. Some
groups at the Guerrero missions were represented at as many as five, six, or even seven
different missions. Fragments of the groups
represented at the Guerrero missions were
present at a total of 23 additional missions,
mainly in northeastern Coahuila and Texas.
Approximately 25% of the Guerrero groups
entered other missions of northeastern
Coahuila, and about 40% entered one or
more of the five missions established at San
Antonio, Texas, after 1718. Only 6% were
represented at missions of northern Nuevo
Le6n and northern Tamaulipas.
Because one of the original objectives of
the study was determination of where each of
the various Guerrero mission Indian groups
lived before it was displaced, special attention
is given to reports of where specific groups
were reported as seen or otherwise said to be
living under native conditions prior to mission entry.
Although population figures for specific
groups rarely occur in documents, three kinds
are included: (1) occasional head counts
made by Spaniards in native encampments,
(2) population estimates made by missionaries that refer either to Indian groups in
missions or groups still living under native
conditions, and (3) population figures com-

129

ETIINOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

piled from mission registers and censuses
(see Table 7). Some population figures, erroneously reported in ethnohistoric literature,
are corrected.
Group intermarriage as indicated in
Guerrero mission registers and censuses is
noted, but frequency figures are not included.
Since all mission groups were remnants of
displaced populations, caution is advised in
inferring aboriginal associations from these
intermarriages, which were recorded at various times over a period of at least 72 years.
For relatively few Indian groups represented at the Guerrero missions is it possible
to make positive statements about the language spoken prior to mission entry. Several
dialects of one language, Coahuilteco, are
known to have been spoken at San Juan
Bautista and San Bernardo, and some speakers are identified by group names (Garcia
1760:title page). It can be inferred, from remarks made by one of the early missionaries,
Damian Mazanet (G6mez Canedo 1968:240),
that certain other groups may have spoken
dialects of the same language. Beyond this,
all is pure conjecture. Hence, in the following summaries, linguistic affiliation of a
specific group is mentioned only when
enough evidence is available to warrant some
kind of statement. If nothing is said about
the linguistic affiliation of a group, this may
be taken to mean "language unknown." Although they have minimal linguistic value
because meanings are not given, the few
native personal names recorded in mission
registers and censuses are included.
Cultural information is included only when
it can be safely attributed to a specific ethnic
unit. No attempt is made to relate the summarized cultural information to Ruecking's
"Coahuiltecan ethnography," which is a
demonstrably invalid construct (Ruecking
1953, 1954b, 1955b).

GUERRERO MISSION INDIANS
Achoj
In the census taken at Mission San Juan
Bautista in 1772, three adult males are identified as "Achoj," one adult female as "Achogtatal," and one adult male as "Ochayal"

(V. Rodriguez 1772b:125-127, 129). Evidently, the five individuals arrived at San
Juan Bautista sometime after the census of
1734, which failed to record them. These
names may refer to one, or two, or even three
ethnic units. Only in documents of southern
Coahuila are somewhat similar names recorded. These southern Coahuila documents
were written mainly between 1600 and 1640
and include such names as Oche, Ooche, and
Ocho (Griffen 1969:164, 171; Martinez del
Rfo 1954:54). This suggests that the group
(or groups) represented by these Achoj,
Achogtatal, and Ochayal individuals may
have originally lived somewhere in southern
Coahuila.

Achogtatal
See Achoj.

Aguayan
This name, also twice rendered as "Aguayam," appears only in the census taken at
Mission San Bernardo in 1772 (V. Rodriguez
1772a:65, 68-73). The Aguayan population
at that time consisted of 11 individuals: six
adult males, two adult females, and three
children, one male, two females. An identity
for this population has yet to be established.
Earlier documents of this and adjoining areas
do not refer to an ethnic group with a name
similar to Aguayan. It may be a late distortion of the name Payuguan, which was not
recorded in the 1734 and 1772 censuses of
San Bernardo. Espinosa (1746:483), however, mentions that some Payuguan were at
San Bernardo in its earlier years. Whoever
the Aguayan were, they evidently arrived at
San Bernardo sometime between 1734 and
1772.
Apache
The Apache were enemies of most of the
Indian groups represented at the Guerrero
missions, and the few Apache individuals reported were probably captives taken by either
Indians or Spaniards during the pre-mission
and early mission periods. Of the seven
Apache individuals indicated in the San
Francisco Solano records, three are children,
ages three to nine, without parents (Solano

130

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Table 7. INDIAN GROUPS REPRESENTED AT GUERRERO MISSIONS.
Population Figures Compiled from Registers and Censuses.
San Francisco Solano
Registers
1700-1718

1 Achoj
2 Aguayan
3 Apache
4 Babor
5 Bacorame
6 Borrados
7 Cabezas
8 Cachopostal
9 Campacuas
10 Canua
11 Catujan
12 Cenizo
13 Chapamo
14 Coax.a
15 Cohabita
16 Colorados
17 Cucusa
18 Dedepo
19 Ervipiame
20 Gavilan
21 Guachichil
22 Gueiquesal
23 Guerjuadan
24 Hape
25 Hume
26 Jacao
27 Jfcaragrande
28 Juanca
29 Julime
30 Jumano
31 Macapao
32 Macocoma
33 Malaguita
34 Mamuqui
(personal name)
35 Manico
36 Manos Frietas
37 Matuimi
38 Maubedan
39 Maurb
(personal name)
40 Mauyga
(or Manygua)
41 Mescal
42 Mesquite
43 Muruame
44 Ocana

-

-

-

7
30
8

-

1

-

4

'

-

6

1
1
1
10
Present
3
14
1
2
1
1
1

3

2
16
1
1
1
1
1
2
2

-

11

-

2

-

-

-

4
14

-

-

-

2
2

4
5

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2

1

Present
Present

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

10

-

-

-

8

1

-

-

-

2

4

5

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

17

27

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

-

-

5

-

-

12

-

-

Present

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

5
2
3
1

-

-

-

10

-

-

-

-

San Bernardo
Censuses
1734
1772

-

-

-

-

ISan Juan Bautista
Censuses
1734
1772
5
-

-

9

6

131

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

Table 7 (cont.)
San Francisco Solano

Registers
1700-1718
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90

Ocora
Oydican
Paac
Pachal
Pachana
Pacoa
Pacuache
Pamajo
Pamasu
Pampopa
Papanac
Pastaloca
Pastancoya
Patacal
Pataguo
Patzau
Pausane
Pausaqui
Payaya
Payuguan
Piedras
Chiquitas
Piniquu
Pita
Pitahay
Pitalac
Pomulum
Pomuzeno
Samioj
Siaguan
Siausi
Sijame
Tejas
Tepehuan
Terocodame
Tilijae
Tlascalteco
Toboso
Tripas Blancas
Tumamar
Tusan
Tuteneiboica
Uracha
Viddaquimamar
Xarame
Yorica
Yujan

Totals

17
-

-

ISan Juan Bautista

Censuses
1772
1734

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

-

2
2
9
Present
1

26
6
5
85
2
Present

-

-

6

-

20
14

2

-

5
15
8
6
4
3
2

3
9
5
13
-

-

3

1

2

6
Present

-

-

-

-

-

24
1
6
73
1
1
20
18
3
-

-

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

4

-

-

1

-

1

4
17

-

-

-

3

-

1

1

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

435

46

Present
3

156

1

1

3

-

-

Present

-

7

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

-

-

1

-

1

-

1

-

-

Present

-

11
98
1

-

31

-

3
1

5
24

-

-

-

3
21

-

6
3

-

-

-

-

Censuses
1734
1772
4
-

11

-

2

San Bernardo

-

-

-

-

135

238

132

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Registers). The single Apache identified in the
1734 census taken at San Juan Bautista was
an elderly female (Garza Falcon 1772b: 18).
All these persons are identified simply as
"Apache," without any indication of affiliation with a specific Apache sub-group.

Babor
At least 30 individuals can be identified as
Babor in the San Francisco Solano baptismal
register for the years 1706-1707, when the
mission was at San Ildefonso, some 40 miles
west of Guerrero. These are referred to by
three names, "Babor;' "Bobor," and ''Pabor,"
all presumably synonymous. One individual
is listed in one entry as "Babor" and in
another as "Bobor" (Solano Registers).
Hodge (1910,11:182) has referred to these
under the name "Pabor." Of the 30 individuals, nine are adult males, seven are adult
females, and 14 are children, seven male and
seven female, the ages ranging from one to
nine years. Few spouses are ethnically identified: other''Babor" or ''Bobor," "Juman" (Jumano), and "Terocodame."
Circumstantial evidence seems to indicate
that the Babor of San Francisco Solano were
the same people as those frequently referred
to in other documents as "Bohol." A number
of similar names are probably synonymous,
among them Babel, Babola, Baboram, Baburi or Babury, Bobo, Boboram, Bovol, and
Pabori. The presumed population was known
at least as early as 1665, and for some 30
years thereafter was occasionally reported at
various localities in northeastern Coahuila
and the closely adjoining part of Texas, but
particularly along the Rfo Sabinas and the Rio
Grande west and northwest of present-day
Guerrero. Maps prepared by Jimenez Moreno
(1944) and by Driver and Massey (1957)
show "Boboles" within the area designated
here, but the map of Ruecking (1955a) places
the "Bobole" so far to the south in eastern
Coahuila that they are not near the Rio
Grande or north of it. One reason why the
Babor are so frequently mentioned in documents is that prior to 1700 they were usually
friendly toward Spaniards and sometimes
joined them on exploratory and punitive expeditions northward toward the Rio Grande
and beyond. Most of the details can be found
in the following published sources: Alessio

Robles (1938), Bolton (1916), Castaneda
(1936,I), Figueroa Torres (1963), Griffen
(1969), Leon y otros (1961), Portillo (1886),
and Steck (1932).
TheBaborenteredothermissions, but none
of these were located to the east of Guerrero
in southern Texas and northern Nuevo Leon.
All were in the vicinity of modern Monclov a, the principal ones being San Miguel
de Aguayo and Santa Rosa de los
N adadores (Griffen 1969:56-57; Portillo
1886:247, 251). At least 49 "Bohol" were
still living at San Miguel de Aguayo as late as
1762. The Babor thus seem to have gone to
missions that were nearest to their original
territory.
Some cultural information can be gleaned
from several sources (Bolton 1916:305;
Figueroa Torres 1963:67, 104-107, 114-115;
Leon y otros 1961:147-149). Most of the
details involve both the Babor and various
groups associated with them. Settlements
were temporary and were placed near springs
and flowing streams, usually in a wooded
spot. Most encampments were shared with
other groups. House form is not described,
but one structure, apparently built by Indians
for missionary use as a chapel, is said to have
been made of poles covered with grasses. It
is specifically stated that horticulture was not
practiced. Fruits and roots were gathered,
including the root crown of the maguey plant
Deer and bison were hunted, the latter
especially north of the Rio Grande. Fishing
was done in the Rio Grande and other
perennial streams of the area. A limited
amount of cannibalism is said to have been
connected with warfare. In smallpox
epidemics at early temporary missions, the
Babor and their associates reacted by
dispersing themselves in the surrounding
area.

Bacorame
In 1706, when San Francisco Solano was
located at San Ildefonso, some 40 miles west
of Guerrero, eight individuals (three families)
were identified as Bacorame (written once as
"Barocame," evidently the result of transposing consonants). Of these eight persons,
two are recorded as adult males, three as
adult females, and three as male children,
ages two to five. Spouses are identified as

ETIINOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

other Bacorame (Solano Registers). These
Bacorame appear to be the same people as
those who, in earlier documents (16741688), are referred to by such names as Bacora, Bacaran, Bacaranan, Bascoram, Basioram, Bocora, and Bocore (Alessio Robles
1938:219, 232; Bolton 1916:305-306;
Figueroa Torres 1963:61-62, 77-78, 119;
Griffen 1969:38, 53, 88, 156). The Bacorame can be attributed to an area that extended
northward from Monclova to the vicinity of
present-day Del Rio, Texas, but especially
between the Rio Sabinas and the Rio Grande
east of the mountain front. In 1675 Bosque
visited a "Bacora" encampment that by actual
head count included 150 individuals-62
men and 88 women and children (Bolton
1916:305-306). The camp was said to have
been in a wooded area near springs and also
near a stream called "Nueses," which Bolton
suggested might be the modem Rio de San
Diego of northeastern Coahuila. The encampment locality was probably somewhere south
of Del Rio.
A few details on the culture of the Bacorame are given by Figueroa Torres (1963:77~
His "Basioram" (possibly a misreading of
handwritten "Bascoram") and their associates
(16 groups named) were said to eat roots,
acorns, and bison meat. A clue to housing is
provided by a missionary's statement that for
over 100 years these Indians had kept a cross
in a round hut (choza) covered by dressed
bison hides. The details imply extensive bison hunting, which helps to identify their
area with northeastern Coahuila east of the
mountains, where the earliest documents report bison hunting by both Indians and
Spaniards. Other sources (Griffen 1969:53,
58) indicate that the Bacorame participated in
various Indian rebellions of central Coahuila,
and there are references to horse theft and
death attributed to witchcraft by a specified
"Bacorame" male. One Indian enemy group is
identified, the "Irbipia," evidently the Ervipiame.

Borra dos
In 1767 Borrados were mentioned as being represented among the 33 families of Indians then living at Mission San Juan
Bautista (Kinnaird 1958:187). This is confirmed by two "Borrado" individuals, both

133

adults, one male, the other female, noted in
the census of 1772 taken at that mission (V.
Rodriguez 1772b:128-129).
The Borrados of San Juan Bautista almost
certainly came from the southeast. Borrados
is a Spanish word, probably best translated
here as "smeared with ink," that was used in
Nuevo Leon and parts of Tamaulipas to refer
to Indians who painted or tattooed their bodies in patterns that involved closely spaced
parallel lines (Hoyo 1972:2). In Spanish
documents a specific group was sometimes
referred to by the Spanish name alone,
sometimes by the name Borrados in conjunction with a native group name. A pparently no one has yet attempted to compile
a list of native-named groups that were also
referred to as Borrados. Such a list would be
helpful.
Groups referred to as Borrados seem to
have been extensively displaced by Spaniards
during the eighteenth century. Remnants entered numerous missions in Nuevo Leon and
Tamaulipas, but some moved northward
across the Rio Grande to live near the coast in
southern Texas. It was some of these coastal
Borrados who entered San Antonio missions,
particularly Nuestra Senora de la Purisima
Concepcion de Acuna and San Francisco de la
Espada (Concepcion Marriage Register 1767;
Cabello 1780b:37-38; Dolores 1762a:52 and
1762b:171, 178b).
The name Borrados was also used by
Spaniards in southern and western Coahuila,
as well as in Chihuahua (Griffen 1969:57,
156, 172-174), but apparently the Borrados
of San Juan Bautista and the San Antonio
missions were not of western origin.

Cabezas
The name Cabezas is Spanish for "heads."
The census of 1734 at San Juan Bautista
identifies four individuals, a man and his
three children, as "Cavezon" or "Cavezos"
(indistinct handwriting), almost certainly a
variant of the name Cabezas (Garza Falcon
1734b:l6). Griffen (1969) has summarized
data from numerous documents that pertain to
the Cabezas and has given their pre-mission
territory as probably southern Coahuila, particularly between Monclova and Parras. It is
evident that by 1700 the Cabezas were represented only by remnants that had survived the

134

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

extensive Spanish-Indian hostilities of seventeenth-century Coahuila

Cachopostal
Nearly all references to the Cachopostal
can be traced back to a single documentary
source, the report of Sevillano de Paredes
(1727:42-43), which was written in 1727
during his inspection of missions near the
Rio Grande at modern Guerrero. In this report the "Cacho Postal" are said to be few in
number and living very close to the Pampopa
on the Nueces River some 55 to 60 miles east
of the Rio Grande missions. Direction, distance, and identification of the river suggest
that in 1727 these Indians were living in the
area now covered by eastern Dimmit and
western La Salle counties, Texas. Since
most secondary sources have combined
"Cacho Postal" into "Cachopostal or
"Cachopostale," the combined form is used
here. Clerical and typographical errors have
led to two additional variants: "Cachopostate" (Powell 1891:69) and "Cacahapostal" (Webb 1952,1:263).
So far as is now known, the Cachopostal
entered only one Spanish mission, San Juan
Bautista, for which the census of 1772
identifies four individuals: two adult males,
one adult female, and one male child
(V. Rodriguez 1772b:123-127). In this census the name is rendered in two slightly
different forms, "Cachsaputal" and "Cachsopotal." The adult female, it may be noted,
was married to a Pampopa. The suggestion
(Branda 1976:132) that the Cachopostal may
have been the same as the Postito recorded at
Mission San Jose y San Miguel de Aguayo of
San Antonio, Texas, may be disregarded.
Postito seems better interpreted as an Hispanicized diminutive form of the name Pastia.
Close association of the Cachopostal with
the Pampopa, who are believed to have spoken a dialect of Coahuilteco, suggests that the
Cachopostal may also have spoken the
Coahuilteco language.

Campacuas
The name Campacuas, also rendered as
"Campaguas," "Canpacuas," and "Canpaguas," appears in the San Juan Bautista census report of 1772, in which 14 individuals

are so identified (V. Rodriguez 1772b:124126, 128-129). Of these, two are adult
males, eight are adult females, and four are
children, one male and three female. Identified spouses include "Panpopa" (Pampopa),
"Pataloco" (Pastaloca), and "Payaya." Records pertaining to the area west of Guerrero
contain no similar group names, but records
connected with areas farther east, dating after
1780, refer to a group whose name is
variously rendered as Campacues, Campaquases, Tanpacua, Tanpaquazes, Tanpaqueces, and Tompacuas, for which Hodge
(1910,11:687) has used the name "Tanpacuazes." The Guerrero names and the eastern
names undoubtedly refer to the same ethnic
group.
In 1780 Cabello (1780a:37) wrote that the
"Tanpacauses" were one of 10 Indian groups
then ranging an area near the Texas coast
between the Nueces River and the Rio
Grande. Some of these survived well into
the nineteenth century in northern Tamaulipas. In 1834 Berlandier (MS,llI:843-846)
reported "Campacues" still surviving near
Reynosa, Tamaulipas, and stated that they,
along with other ethnic group remnants of the
area, lived by hunting and gathering, particularly during the summer months. Foodstuffs mentioned include deer, rats, roots,
prickly-pear fruits, and mesquite beans. In
1853 "Tanpaquash" and "Carcese" (Carrizo)
were said to be raiding settlements north of
the Rio Grande somewhere downstream from
Laredo (Winfrey and Day 1966,llI:261263). In 1886 Gatschet found that the
"Tampakua" were remembered by surviving
speakers of the Comecrudo language living
near Camargo, Tamaulipas (Swanton 1940:5,
103).
Until recently this ethnic group name survived in two place names of Hidalgo County,
extreme southern Texas: "Tompacuos," a
town, and "Tampaguas," a lake (MacManus
1885:map; Trowbridge 1923:map). Parisot
and Smith (1897:39) have referred to "Campacuas" as a name recorded in the registers of
unspecified San Antonio missions, but this
has yet to be verified. Gatschet (1891:44,
50-51) once suggested that the name "Tampacua" may have referred to the Karankawa,
a connection that has not been substantiated.
The bulk of the evidence indicates that the
Campacuas of San Juan Bautista were ref-

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

ugees from an area that extended northward
an unknown distance from that section of the
Rio Grande which lies downstream from
Camargo (Tamaulipas) and nearby Rio
Grande City (Texas). It does not appear that
this group ranged very far south of the river.
Canua
The Canua, also recorded by such similar
names as Cana or Canna, Cano, Canoa, and
Canon, appear to have ranged over a fairly
large area that included the more easterly
portion of northeastern Coahuila, northern
Nuevo Leon, and adjoining parts of the
South Texas plain across the Rio Grande.
The earliest reference to the Canua is provided by Cuervo y Valdes (1700a:ll, 16),
who identified "Canua" as one of five Indian
groups represented at the foundation of Mission San Felipe (or Santiago) de Valladares in
1700 near present Candela of eastern Coahuila. Three years later, when Mission San
Bernardo was established near present Guerrero, the name "Canuas" was entered on a list
of 12 Indian groups recorded as present
(Ximenes 1762a:112-113; Morfi 1935b:231 ~
In 1708 Espinosa cited the name "Canoas"
on a long list of Indian groups then living
across the Rio Grande in a generalized easterly direction from Mission San Bernardo
(Maas 1915:36). In the same year San Buenaventura y Salazar (ibid.:23), evidently referring to a time several years prior to that
date, listed "Canoas" as one of nine groups,
all speaking the same language (not identified), that lived along the Rio Grande both
upstream and downstream from present-day
Laredo, and frequently visited and traded at
Mission Nuestra Senora de los Dolores near
modem Lampazos of northern Nuevo Leon.
These records of 1708 show that in the early
eighteenth century some of the Canua were
still living under aboriginal conditions on
both sides of the Rio Grande well downstream from Guerrero.
In a document of 1713 the name "Canos"
appears on a list of four Indian groups from
the north side of the Rio Grande that had
been persuaded to enter Mission San Bernardino de la Candela near present Candela,
Coahuila (Bolton 1913:423; Rivera y Villalon
1945:126,131). At some unspecified time after 1720 "Canas" are said to have entered

135

Mission San Jose y San Miguel de Aguayo of
San Antonio, Texas (Forrestal 1931 :20;
Morfi 1935a:98). The Duran map, compiled
prior to 1744, is probably based on information derived from early eighteenth-century
sources. On this map the designation "los
Canas," which may refer to the Canua, is
entered in an area southwest of San Antonio
(Duran 1744).
It is not known just how many Canua became residents of the various Spanish missions noted above. The only informative records are the Mission San Bernardo censuses
for the years 1734 and 1772. The census of
1734 identifies only one Canua individual, an
adult male named Antonio, who is referred to
as a "Canon" (Garza Falcon 1734a:21). The
census of 1772 identifies four "Canoa,"
two adult males and two adult females, one
of the males being named Antonio, possibly
the same Antonio earlier referred to as a
"Canon" (V. Rodriguez 1772a:65-66, 72).
A number of errors pertaining to the Canua
require correction. The Canua of Mission San
Bernardo are given as "Cahuas" by A. L.
Velasco (1897,XIX: 14) and as "Camisas"
by Naranjo (1934:56), both evidently errors of transcription or printing. Hodge
(1910,II:1035) gives the name "Cana" as a
synonym of Sana, but no evidence has been
found which supports this judgment. Martin
(1947:26) has mistakenly equated Canua with
Ocana. Spanish documents consistently make
a distinction between Canua and Ocana, both
names sometimes appearing on the same
compiled list of Indian groups.
Although the record, as summarized
above, seems sufficient to establish an identity for the Canua, this ethnic unit seems to
have been overlooked by many modern
scholars. Hodge, as noted, considered the
name "Cana" to be synonymous with Sana.
Since Swanton (1940, 1952) and Ruecking
(1954a, 1955a) followed the lead of Hodge,
they paid no attention to the Canua.
Catujan
In various documents the name Catujan
occurs in a number of readily recognizable
variants: Catujane, Catujano, Catajane, Catjuano, Catujan, Catuxan, Catuxzan, and
Cotujan. Nearly all early references to the
Catujan, beginning about 1650, place them

136
south of the Rio Grande in extreme northeastern Coahuila and northern Nuevo Leon
(Alessio Robles 1938:199, 232, 238, 249,
272; Bolton 1916:304; Cavazos Garza
1964:190; Figueroa Torres 1963:102, 105,
122; Leon y otros 1961:189-190; Rivera y
Villalon 1945:126). In 1675, however, one
missionary reported some of the Catujan
north of the Rio Grande, apparently in a general northerly direction from Guerrero
(Figueroa Torres 1963:105), and this may
mark the northern boundary zone of their premission territorial range. Near the CoahuilaNuevo Le6n boundary, just west of Lampazos, Nuevo Le6n, is the Mesa de Cartujanos
(or Catujanos), which is said to derive its
name from the Catujan Indians (Alessio
Robles 1938:199; J. Gonzalez 1885:252253). The maps of Jimenez Moreno (1944)
and Ruecking (1955a) place the Catujan
within the area described above.
The Catujan have been identified with the
foundation of Mission San Bernardo in 1703
(Ximenes 1762a:l 12), and this is confirmed
by the censuses of 1734 and 1772. In the
1734 census two "Catujan" are identified at
San Bernardo: an adult male and his threeyear-old daughter (Garza Falcon 1734a:21).
In the census of 1772 (V. Rodriguez
1772a:67-68), five "Catujan" and "Catujam"
are identified: two adult males, one adult
female, and two male children. The spouses
are given as other "Catujan" and "Ocan"
(Ocana). Some Catujan were also at other
missions south and southwest of Guerrero:
San Bernardino de la Candela of eastern
Coahuila (Rivera y Villal6n 1945: 126) and
San Miguel de Aguayo near Monclova,
Coahuila (Portillo 1886:251).

Cenizo
The ethnic name Cenizo is evidently of
Spanish origin, its basic meaning being "ash"
or "ashes." A native name for this Indian
group may appear in Spanish documents, but
as yet no linkage clue has been found. A
widely distributed shrub in northeastern
Mexico and southern Texas is known by the
Spanish name ceniza (or cenizo), known in
Texas as Texas silverleaf or purple sage
(Gould 1962:80). It is doubtful if there is
any etymological connection between the
Spanish name for the plant and the ethnic

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

name Cenizo. Hodge (1910,II:509) has alluded to a possible relationship between the
ethnic name and the "white goose-foot," a
plant also said to be known as cenizo.
Such evidence as is available indicates that
the pre-mission territorial range of the Cenizo
was in extreme northern Nuevo Le6n and the
adjoining part of northwestern Tamaulipas,
particularly between Lampazos, Nuevo Le6n,
and the Rio Grande both above and below
modem Laredo, Texas (Maas 1915:16-23).
How far north of the Rio Grande the range
may have extended is unknown.
The Cenizo seem to have been first
recorded in 1698 as one of five Indian groups
represented at Mission San Antonio Galindo
Moctezuma when it was founded (Portillo
1886:265-269). This mission was some 25
miles north of Monclova, near the junction of
the Coahuila and Nadadores rivers. All five
groups were said to be refugees from the
northern frontier of Nuevo Leon who had repeatedly fled from an encomendero of that
region. The mission did not last very long
because of pressure from local Spanish settlers and attacks from hostile Coahuila Indians identified as Toboso (Alessio Robles
1938:372-373; Morfi 1856:424--425).
Six "'.Z.enizo" are identified in the baptismal
register of San Francisco Solano for the year
1706, when this mission was located at San
Ildefonso. Included are two adult males and
four children, one male and three female,
ages four to 10. Spouses of the adult males
are listed as "Gabilan" and "Ocana" (Solano
Registers).
A few Cenizo ended up at Mission
San Antonio de Valero, San Antonio, Texas.
In various mission register entries between
the years 1720 and 1739 four individuals are
identified by group names that appear to be
variants of the name Cenizo (Valero Registers). These are alphabetically listed below:
Senixso
Ceniso
Ceniza
Senixzo
Senizo
Censoc
Sinico
Censoo
Sinicu
Saczo
Siniczo
Senicso
Sinixzo
Seniczo
'.Z.enizo
Seniso
Hodge (1910,II:70, 426) identified one of
these, "Sinicu," as the name of a separate In-

--------~--

137

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... IlIREE SPANISH MISSIONS

dian group, and this was followed by Swanton (1940:135) but not by Ruecking (1955a).
Remnants of the Cenizo survived in
northeastern Mexico well into the latter half
of the eighteenth century. In 1752 Cenizo
were noted in northwestern Tamaulipas near
the present Falc6n Reservoir on the Rio
Grande (Saldivar 1946:88-89), and in 1777
some were recorded in northern Nuevo Le6n
near modern Vallecillo (J. Gonzalez
1885:256-257).

Chapamo
This name appears only in the report of the
1772 census taken at Mission San Juan
Bautista. Two individuals are identified as
"Chapamo," a man and his adult son (V. Rodriguez 1772b:127). A similar name, "Chapamaco," is mentioned in a document of
1708 written by Espinosa (Maas 1915:3637), who includes it on a list of Indian
groups said to be living north of the Rio
Grande but in an easterly direction from the
Guerrero missions. Although the documents
are separated by more than 60 years, the two
names are probably synonymous.
Bolton (in Hodge 1910,11:426) reported
"Chapamaco" as occurring in the registers of
Mission San Antonio de Valero at San Antonio, Texas. Inspection of these registers
reveals that a woman known both as Rosa
Maria and Juana Rosa, who lived at San Antonio de Valero between 1732 and 1748, was
identified as Chapamaco twice and as Secmoco seven times (Valero Registers). This
suggests that Chapamo, Chapamaco and
Secmoco may be variants of the same group
name. Hodge (1910,11:426, 494, 575-576,
1136), Swanton (1940), and Ruecking
(l 955a) are probably incorrect in assuming
that the names Chapamaco and Secmoco refer
to separate groups.
All that can be said about the Chapamo is
that their territorial range, as indicated by
Espinosa, was somewhere in lower Texas
east of Guerrero and south of San Antonio.
The name Chapamo superficially resembles
the name Siupam, but the two names evidently refer to separate ethnic units, since
Espinosa's list of south Texas groups in
1708 includes both "Chapamaco" and
"Xipam," the latter almost certainly referring
to the Siupam.

Coax a
One Coaxa individual, a four-year-old female, was baptized at San Francisco Solano
in 1707, when the mission was located at San
Ildefonso (Solano Registers). The pre-mission territory of the Coaxa remains uncertain,
but association with San Francisco Solano at
its San Ildefonso location suggests an area
northwest of Guerrero. Coaxa might be a
variant of the name Cuaguila (Coahuila), a
term often used by Spaniards to refer collectively to Indians of that province (Griffen
1969:159).
Two somewhat similar names appear in
Spanish records, but the evidence is insufficient to relate them to Coaxa. Each name
is known from a single primary document.
The first is Coayo, the name of a group
briefly encountered by Nunez Cabeza de
Vaca (1542:38a) in the prickly-pear fields of
southern Texas in 1535, about 170 years before the name Coaxa was recorded at San
Francisco Solano. The second is Cuajin, the
name of an Indian group known to Juan Jarri
(Jean Gery), a Frenchman who deserted the
La Salle expedition (1685-1687) and made
his way westward from Matagorda Bay to
live among the Indians of southern Texas.
He was taken into custody by Spaniards
north of present-day Guerrero in 1688 (Leon
y otros 1961 :219). Just where in southern
Texas this Frenchman encountered the Cuajin
cannot be determined.

Cohabita
One adult male "Cohabita" is identified in
the baptismal register of San Francisco
Solano in 1707, when the mission was at San
Ildefonso. This man is listed as a Christianized Indian who was in charge (en su
poder) of a five-year-old Apache girl that was
being baptized, presumably a captive he had
adopted (Solano Registers). The name Cohabita is referable to a population, elsewhere
recorded as Cocobipta and Cucubipi, that
originally ranged over parts of northern
Coahuila and northeastern Chihuahua. In the
late seventeenth century this group is named
among others that habitually crossed the Rio
Grande below the mouth of the Pecos River
to hunt bison in winter (Griffen 1969:88, 9394, 158-159, 177; Hackett 1926,11:395;

138
Portillo 1886:77-78). In 1793 Revilla Gigedo (1966:60) reported "Cocobipta" as still
present in one or more unspecified Coahuila
missions.

Colorados
In 1706, when San Francisco Solano was
at San Ildefonso, one adult female was identified as "Colorados" in the baptismal register. She was married to a "Cucusa" (Solano
Registers). Griffen (1969:passim) has described the role of the Colorados in various
Indian rebellions of western Coahuila during
the seventeenth century and considers their
range to have been in central Coahuila, particularly the area southwest of Monclova
(ibid.:140). Some of the Colorados entered
other missions in Coahuila prior to 1700.
They were at Parras (as early as 1629), at
San Buenaventura de las Cuatro Cienegas
near modem Cuatrocienegas, and at San
Miguel de Aguayo of Monclova (Alessio
Robles 1938:269-270, 305, 530; Griffen
1969:157-158; Portillo 1886:251, 405-406).
They seem to have maintained an ethnic
identity in Coahuila missions as late as 1767
(Kinnaird 1958:154).
One female referred to as de la naci6n
Colorado, married to a "Payaya," is recorded
(1720) in the baptismal register of Mission
San Antonio de Valero of San Antonio,
Texas (Valero Registers). The Spanish name
of this group is most often recorded in the
plural form and is perhaps best translated as
"reddish people." The Colorados of Coahuila
may or may not be the same as the Colorados
of the Rio Conchos in Chihuahua.
Cucusa
Ten Cucusa individuals are recorded in the
baptismal register of San Francisco Solano
for the years 1706-1707, when the mission
was at San Ildefonso (Solano Registers). Of
these, three are adult males, one is an adult
female, and six are children, three male, three
female, whose ages range from one to 10
years. The six children are linked with the
adult males. A native name, Ysmague, is recorded for one female child. Spouses are
identified as "Colorados," "Macocoma," and
'Terocodame." These Cucusa of San Francisco Solano are probably the same people re-

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

ferred to as "Cocuytzam," who in 1674 were
listed as one of many groups known to
Spaniards of central Coahuila (Alessio Robles 1938:232). Such evidence as is available
suggests that the Cucusa lived somewhere
to the west or northwest of modem Guerrero.

Dede po
The registers of San Francisco Solano do
not identify any Dedepo, but Espinosa (Maas
1915:35; Weddle 1968:54) clearly stated that
some Dedepo were present when that mission
was located at San Ildefonso. Various accounts of Indian raids and rebellions suggest
that originally the Dedepo (the name is occasionally rendered as Idedepo) lived somewhere in central Coahuila (Alessio Robles
1938:232; Cuervo y Valdes 1698:6; Griffen
1969:33, 88, 90).
Ervipiame
The name Ervipiame, which appears in
both Spanish and French documents, has
been rendered in an astonishing number of
ways. At least 84 orthographic variants have
been collected, among which are Barbipian,
Berttipane, Chivipane, Erbipiamo, Etiepen,
Gueripiamo, Heruipiane, Hierbipiam, Hyerbipiana, Irripian, J erbipiam, Yeripiame,
Yrbipia, and Yurbipian.
The Ervipiame became known to
Spaniards during the period 1670-1688,
when they were reported as being hostile to
Spaniards and other Indian groups of northeastern Coahuila and the adjacent part of
Texas (Bolton 1916:297; Griffen 1969:19,
88, 90, 160). In 1700 a short-lived mission,
San Francisco Xavier, was established for
about 200 "Yerpiames" near present Villa
Union, Coahuila (Bolton 1913:422; Cuervo y
Valdes 1700a:12, 16; Portillo 1886:269271 ). In the same year Ervipiame were said
to be causing trouble for Mission San Juan
Bautista (Weddle 1968:42-43), indicating
that some Ervipiame probably had not entered
San Francisco Xavier.
In 1706, when Mission San Francisco
Solano was at San Ildefonso, three "Hyerbipian" were identified in the baptismal register: one adult male, one adult female, and
one male child, age three (Solano Registers).

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

Two years later, in 1708, Espinosa reported
"Yervipianos" as one of the Indian groups
then living north of present Guerrero, somewhere between the Rio Grande and the
southern margin of the Edwards Plateau
(Maas 1915:3fr..37). Apparently sometime
after 1708 most of the Ervipiame migrated
northeastward to east-central Texas, although
a few may have entered San Juan Bautista.
One adult male "Yorivipramo" is identified in
the San Juan Bautista census of 1734 (Garza
Falc6n 1734b: 15).
As noted above, the Ervipiame, along with
remnants of various groups from northeastern Coahuila and vicinity, moved into the
area northeast of present Austin, mainly between the Colorado and Brazos rivers. This
move seems to have been prompted by a desire to escape from both Spanish and Apache
pressures. After 1708, Spanish and French
traveling parties often passed through the
new Ervipiame territory, and some documents refer to a large aggregation of Indians
known as Rancheria Grande, made up of the
migrants and some Indian groups native to
that area (Bolton 1914:329-331 and
1915:143-145; Hodge 1910,II:354). The
Ervipiame seem to have provided leadership
for the Rancheria Grande assemblage.
By 1720 at least some of the Ervipiame
were willing to enter a mission at San Antonio. In 1722 a new mission, San Xavier de
Naxera, was initiated at San Antonio, primarily for the Ervipiame and their associates
from Rancheria Grande, who were led by a
chief known as Juan Rodriguez. They were
assembled at the locality where Mission
Nuestra Senora de la Purisima Concepci6n de
Acuna was later established in 1731. The
Indians remained at this locality until 1726,
being served by missionaries from nearby
Mission San Antonio de Valero, and this is
indicated by a separate set of registers which
cover the period from March 12, 1721 to
April 20, 1726 (Valero Registers). As no
structures were ever built at San Xavier de
N axera, the Indians were incorporated into
the Valero establishment (Bolton 1907:298301, 303 and 1915:144; Forrestal 1935:10,
18, 61; Hodge 1910,II:354, 458). In the
combined registers of San Antonio de Valero
and San Xavier de Naxera at least 101
Ervipiame individuals can be identified between the years 1720-1770. The registers

139

make it clear that many of these Ervipiame
were from Rancherfa Grande.
In 1748 Mission San Francisco Xavier de
Horcasitas was established as one of three
missions on the San Gabriel River of present
Milam County, Texas, which was within the
range of the earlier Rancheria Grande Indians
(Bolton 1914). In a mission census of 1750
(Dolores 1750:48-49), 36 "Hierbipian" were
identified at San Francisco Xavier. Some of
these may have been at San Antonio earlier,
but it appears that others were Ervipiame who
had never left Rancherfa Grande. By 1752
this mission had begun to disintegrate, and it
was finally abandoned in 1755. Some of its
Indians went to San Antonio missions, but
others remained in the area and afterward
were occasionally referred to as Ervipiame
associated with Tonkawa.
Bolton (in Hodge 1910,II:778) assumed,
but did not prove, that the Ervipiame spoke a
Tonkawan language, and this has been widely accepted (Hoijer, in Webb 1952,II:778;
Sjoberg 1953b:281-282, 300-303). No sample of Ervipiame speech seems to have survived, and Bolton's argument for Tonkawan
affiliation is debatable. It is doubtful if the
linguistic status of the Ervipiame will ever be
determined.

Gavilan
In the baptismal register of San Francisco
Solano, mainly for the years 170fr..1707,
when the mission was at San Ildefonso, 14
individuals are identified as "Gabilan" (Solano Registers). Gavilan is a Spanish name
("sparrow hawk"). Of these 14 Gavilan, two
are adult males, 10 are adult females, and two
are children, both male, ages two and six.
Two female names may be of native origin,
Masuriba and Masudradre, the latter
indistinctly written. Spouses are identified as
other "Gabilan," "Mauyga" (or "Manyga"),
"Terocodame," "Ticmamar" (Tumamar), and
"Zenizo" (Cenizo). Griffen ( 1969:passim)
has summarized Gavilan-Spanish relations in
the seventeenth century and places the original Gavilan territory in western Coahuila and
closely adjacent parts of Chihuahua and
Durango. The Gavilan of San Francisco Solano seem to represent remnants displaced
eastward that managed to survive into the
early eighteenth century. The presence of

140
Gavilan at San Francisco Solano is confirmed
by other documents that refer to the earliest
years of the mission (Maas 1915:25, 35;
Weddle 1968:54-55).

Guachichil
In 1716, when San Francisco Solano was
located at San Jose, about eight miles from
Guerrero, one adult male was identified in the
marriage register as a "Guacacil." At the time
he was serving as governor of the mission
Indian village (Solano Registers). In 1772 at
least 12 individuals were identified as "Huacacil" and "Guachasil" in the census report
for Mission San Bernardo (V. Rodriguez
1772a:65-66, 69-70, 72). Of these, three
are adult males, two are adult females and
seven are children, four male and three female. Spouses are listed as "Aguayan,"
"Paco" (Pacoa), "Parnulien" (Pomulum), and
"Paquachi" (Pacuache).
The presence of a few Guachichil at these
northeastern Coahuila missions is not surprising. The Guachichil (this name is also
variously rendered as Cuachichil, Guaxchil,
and Huachichil) originally occupied a large
area that extended from southern Coahuila
and southern Nuevo Le6n southward to the
northern boundary zone of Mesoamerica
(Jimenez Moreno 1944:map; 1958). These
Guachichil were broken up as the Spanish
frontier moved northward in the sixteenth
century, and surviving remnants also moved
northward with the Spaniards or ahead of
them. Early records of both Coahuila and
N uevo Le6n indicate presence of Guachichil
in various parts of northeastern Mexico
(Alessio Robles 1936; Cavazos Garza 1966a,
b; J. Gonzalez 1885, 1887; Hoyo 1963,
1972; Le6n y otros 1961; Portillo 1897).
Although the Guachichil language has frequently been classified as Uto-Aztecan, this
is not based on studies of recorded speech
samples, and opinions about its status have
been varied, as is shown by the following
sources: Gursky (1964); Jimenez Moreno
(1958); Johnson (1940); Le6n (1901); Mason
(1940); and Swadesh (1959, 1967).
Gueiquesal
This name has been rendered in at least 42
different ways, some of which are evidently

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

abbreviated forms. The following sample
indicates the range of variation: Cacxal, Coetzal, Guericochal, Huequetzal, Huisacal,
Quechal, and Quetzal. At San Francisco
Solano two individuals were identified in
1706-1707, when the mission was at San
Ildefonso. These were listed as "Quesal" and
"Quizal," one an adult male, the other an
adult female, and both are said to have formerly been at Mission Santa Rosa de
Nadadores of the Monclova area. The female
was married to a "Tepeguan" (Solano Registers).
Between 1674 and 1708 the Gueiquesal
were most frequently reported as ranging
over northeastern Coahuila east of the mountain front and also northward across the Rio
Grande as far as the southern margin of the
Edwards Plateau (Alessio Robles 1938:279280, 536; Bolton 1916:285, 299, 301-308;
Figueroa Torres 1963:58-69, 89, 103-119;
Griffen 1969:33, 35, 38, 53, 87-90, 103,
117, 126, 132, 155-168; Steck 1932:6-7, 913, 19-21, 24-26). An account of 1708,
however, reported "Cacxales" in northern
Nuevo Le6n east of present Larnpazos (Maas
1915:23). The maps of Jimenez Moreno
(1944) and Swadesh (1959) show the earlier
range of the Gueiquesal accurately, but the
maps of Driver and Massey (1957) and
Ruecking (l 955a:"Kesale") place them too
far west in Coahuila.
Gueiquesal also entered other missions in
Coahuila. "Cotzales" and "Quechales" were
present at Santa Rosa de N adadores when it
was founded in 1677 (Bolton 1916:287;
Orozco y Berra 1864:302), and this is confirmed by the San Francisco Solano records
noted above. "Coetzales" were at El Dulce
Nombre de Jesus de Peyotes when it was
founded in 1698 near present Villa Union
(Morfi 1856:433-434; Portillo 1886: 187).
Some also entered San Miguel de Aguayo of
Monclova, 26 individuals being reported
there as late as 1762 (Portillo 1886:251).
Demographic and cultural information on
the Gueiquesal may be found in the various
sources cited above. At one of the early,
temporary missions in northeastern Coahuila
a total of 512 "Guyquechales" was said to be
present in 1674, and shortly afterward Spaniards observed a war party of 98 Gueiquesal
males at a locality north of the Rio Grande. It
is said that the Gueiquesal, like all of their

141

ETIINOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

associates in the area, did not practice
horticulture. Foods included various unspecified roots, root crowns of the maguey
plant, fish, and deer and bison flesh. In
common with other Indian groups of the
same area, the Gueiquesal sometimes killed
bison north of the Rio Grande and carried
dried meat back to encampments south of the
river.
Warriors in the party of 98 mentioned
above were described in missionary reports.
Each man wore a breechcloth of deerskin and
a headdress that is confusingly described but
seems to have consisted of an encircling band
of reed or cane to which were attached
mesquite and other leaves as well as multicolored feathers. The warrior's face and body
were painted, the designated colors being
red, yellow, and white (derived from ochre
and clays). The painted face was said to resemble a mask, but the arms, shoulders, and
chest had designs formed by lines or stripes.
Each man carried a bow, arrows, and a
leather-covered shield. Entry into battle began with "yelling." In the described battle
seven or eight enemy warriors were killed
and four women and three children taken
captive before the enemy fled. One document
mentions an adopted Spanish boy captive
which the Gueiquesal said had been obtained
from "Cabezas." The boy's face and body
were marked, probably by tattooing, but it is
uncertain whether the designs should be attributed to the Cabezas or to the Gueiquesal.
According to Bolton's translation (1916:301),
there was "a black streak on his face running
from the forehead to the nose, and two on the
cheeks, one on each, like O's, and many
rows of them on the left arm and one on the
right."
A "ball game" (five men on each team)
was once played-Gueiquesal against Tobosos-for custody of a Spanish missionary.
The Gueiquesal were friendly to Spaniards
and wanted to keep the missionary alive; the
Tobosos wanted his "head" for use in a ceremony. The Gueiquesal lost the game but
did not keep their word. They fought the
Tobosos, who outnumbered them, and won.
In another document mention is made of the
Gu~iql_lesal performing a "dance" in honor of
a IIllSSIOnary.
Hodge (1907,I:5 ll, 512; 1910,II:339) has
given separate group status to "Guei-

-----------------------

quesales," "Guisoles," and "Quesal," but
these are now considered to be variants
which refer to a single ethnic unit.

Guerjuadan
In 1707, when San Francisco Solano was
located at San Ildefonso, one Guerjuadan, a
five-year-old girl, was baptized (Solano
Registers). Two similar names, Guergaida
and Guerjuatida, were recorded for one individual, an adult female, at Mission San
Antonio de Valero of San Antonio, Texas
(Valero Registers, entries of 1721 and 1727).
This individual was said to have come from
"Rancheria Grande," which refers to an aggregation of refugee groups, many of them
from northeastern Coahuila, located northeast
of San Antonio between the Colorado and
Brazos rivers (Hodge 1910,II:354). All three
names may refer to the same ethnic unit.
Circumstantial evidence suggests that the
Guerjuadan once lived west or northwest of
Guerrero.
Hape
The Hape have been recorded under at
least 23 similar names, among which are
Aha, Ape, Gaapa, Heape, Iape, Jeape, Xape,
Xapoz, and Xiapez. Documentary evidence
seems to indicate that the Hape originally
lived near the Jumano in west-central Texas,
particularly in the San Angelo area, until both
groups were displaced southeastward by
Apaches.
Missionaries from New Mexico worked
among the Jumano of west-central Texas in
1629 and reported that the "Iape" (also recorded as "Jape" and "Xapi") were neighbors
of the Jumano (Ayer 1916:63, 165, 278;
Forrestal 1954:62-63, 165; Hodge et al.
1945:95-96, 164, 195, 318-319). In 1675
Bosque (Bolton 1916:296) encountered
"Jeapa" some 10 or 12 miles north of the Rio
Grande, apparently not far from present
Eagle Pass, Texas. They were then living
south of the Rio Grande but had crossed the
river to hunt bison. In 1684 Dominguez de
Mendoza (Bolton 1916:339-340), who was
guided by Jumano, met or heard of "Abas" in
the western part of the Edwards Plateau. In
the years 1689, 1690, and 1691 "Apes,"
"Apis," and "Rapes" were reported at various

---

-------~--

--

142
localities both north and south of the Rio
Grande in the Guerrero-Eagle Pass sector,
usually associated with groups that included
the Jumano (Bolton 1916:356; G6mez
Canedo 1968:8-9, 91, 134, 160; Weddle
1973: 177). In one encampment that included
Hape, J umano, and Mescal, not very far
south of Guerrero, Spaniards in 1689
observed a tall pole to which were attached
16 heads of slain enemies.
In 1699, when Mission San Juan Bautista
was first established on the Rfo Sabinas of
northeastern Coahuila, some Hape were
present (Rios 1959:106), and some of these
appear to have gone with the mission when it
was moved northward to Guerrero in 1701
(Maas 1915:30). Thereafter no Hape were
recorded at this mission. One "Jape" female
was identified at Mission San Francisco
Solano in 1705 when it was still at Guerrero.
This woman was married to an "Xarame"
(Solano Registers). In 1727 Rivera y Villa16n (1945:126) noted the presence of a few
"Apes" at Mission San Bernardino de la
Candela near modem Candela in eastern
Coahuila. After this no more is heard of the
Hape.

Hume
The Hume are known by some 11 similar
names, among them Jume, Jumi, June,
Lume, Xomi, Xume, and Yume, some
representing errors made in transcription.
Espinosa (Maas 1915:30) stated that some
"Jume" were at Mission San Juan Bautista
prior to 1708, but the censuses of 1734 and
1772 do not identify any group with a similar
name. One "Xume" (adult female) was
recorded at San Francisco Solano in 1708,
when this mission was at San Ildefonso
(Solano Registers). The pre-mission territory
of the Hume was mainly north to northwest
of Guerrero, between the Rio Grande and
the southern margin of the Edwards Plateau
of Texas, where they were variously
recorded as "Humez," "Jume," and "Jumee"
in records of 1675 and 1684 (Bolton
1916:298, 308, 339-340). Their range
probably also extended southward across the
Rio Grande. Some Hume were included in
delegations which visited the Spaniards of
Monclova in 1675 (Portillo 1886:81, 96). At
least two Hume can be identified in the

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

registers of Mission San Antonio de Valero
of San Antonio, Texas, where in 1719 they
were listed as "Jume" and "Jumi" (Valero
Registers).
The documents contain a few details on
Hume warfare: some women were seen carrying bows and arrows; children were taken
captive, presumably for adoption; and there is
mention of cannibalism connected with warfare.

Jacao
This name, along with several obvious
variants, is known only from the two censuses taken at Mission San Bernardo. In the
census of 1734 (Garza Falc6n 1734a:20, 23)
five Jacao are listed under the names "Jacajo"
and "Xacajo." Two families are involved,
and the identified Jacao include two adult
males, one with two children, the other with
one child (sex of children not specified). The
wives of the two men are not ethnically identified. In the census of 1772 (V. Rodriguez
1772a:65-66, 68) eight Jacao are identified
as either "Jacao" or "Jaco." These eight individuals are associated with six families, and
the Jacao reported consist of two adult males,
four adult females, and two children, one
male, the other female. Spouses are identified as "Chaguan" (Siaguan), "Paco" (Pacoa),
"Paquachi" (Pacuache), and "Paxac" (Paac).
The name Jacao and its variants (Jacajo,
Jaco, and Xacajo) are all known from the
year 1734 or later. They probably refer to an
ethnic unit recorded in earlier documents
(1670-1703) by such plural forms as Acafs
or Acafes, Cacages, Cacajes, Decafes, Garafes, Jacafes, Xacafes, and Xacajes. This
unit can be linked with an area that includes
extreme northeastern Coahuila and the adjoining part of northern Nuevo Le6n (Alessio
Robles 1938:232, 238, 351-352, 371, 385386; Cuervo y Valdes 1700:11, 16; J. Gonzalez 1885:268; Griffen 1969: 159; Portillo
1886:64, 205). In 1693 Salinas Varona
(G6mez Canedo 1968:306) encountered "Cacages" on the Rio Grande in the same locality
where the Guerrero missions were established a few years later.
An early published suggestion (Hodge
1907,I:731) that the "Acafes and Cacafes" of
Spanish writers may be identified with the
Kuasse and Akasquy reported by chroniclers

143

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

of the La Salle expedition ( 1685-1687)
should be disregarded.

Jicaragrande
Three adult females, identified as "Jicaragrande" and "Hicaragrande," were recorded
at San Francisco Solano in 1706-1707, when
the mission was at San Ildefonso (Solano
Registers). The name is Spanish and is
probably best translated as "large gourd cup."
One of the women is identified by a native
personal name, Macacura, and she is said to
have been married to a "Ticmamar" (Tumamar) who at the time was serving as leader
(capitan) of the Terocodame. Another woman was married to a Terocodame. The name
Jfcaragrande has not been found in other
Spanish documents, but the recorded associations with Terocodame suggest that the
Jfcaragrande may have originally lived on
both sides of the Rio Grande northwest of
Guerrero.

Juanca
Two Juanca individuals were recorded at
Mission San Bernardo, one adult male in the
census of 1734 (Garza Falcon 1734a:22) and
one adult female in the census of 1772 (V.
Rodriguez 1772a:70). A few Juanca were
also recorded in the registers of Mission San
Antonio de Valero at San Antonio, Texas,
under a variety of names similar to Juanca
(Valero Registers). Information on the Juanca
has recently been summarized by Campbell
(1977). The Juanca pre-mission range seems
to have centered around present Frio County,
Texas, southwest of San Antonio.

Julime
Two adult Julime females were recorded in
the baptismal register of San Francisco
Solano in the years 1706-1707, when the
mission was at San Ildefonso (Solano Registers). One entry in the register identifies the
person as "Julimes o Juribes." Spouses are
not ethnically identified. In 1708 Espinosa
(Maas 1915:35) mentioned that Julime were
present at San Francisco Solano.
The Julime, sometimes also referred to as
Julimeiio, were not native to northeastern
Coahuila. They were refugees from much

farther west, particularly along the Rio Conchos of present northeastern Chihuahua
(Forbes 1959, 1960; Hackett 1926,II; Kelley
1952b, 1953; Sauer 1934). Although poorly
documented, a considerable number of Julime seem to have moved into northeastern
Coahuila in the middle eighteenth century.
For a time they lived in a "pueblo" at or near
Mission San Francisco Vizarr6n, which was
established at present Villa Union, Coahuila,
in 1737(Bolton1913:89;Kinnaird 1958:150-151, 188; Morfi 1856:435-436; Revilla Gigedo 1966:61; Weddle 1968:299-300, 306,
330, 333-334). In Coahuila these Julime
were friendly with the Mescalero and other
Apache and may have been absorbed by these
Apaches in the latter part of the eighteenth
century. It is generally believed that the Julime spoke a Uto-Aztecan language, although
no sample of the language appears to have
survived.
Santos (1966-1967:138) has claimed that a
few Julime were at Mission San Antonio de
Valero of San Antonio, Texas, but this is in
error. He evidently confused the records of
San Antonio de Valero with those of San
Francisco Solano, which are housed together
in the San Fernando Archives of San Antonio.

Jumano
Documents pertaining to the Jumano of
western Texas and northern Chihuahua have
been intermittently studied over a period of
some 75 years and considerable information
has been presented in publications by Bolton
(1911, 1912), Forbes (1957, 1959a, 1960),
Hodge (1910), Kelley (1965), Sauer (1934)
and Scholes and Mera (1940). These indicate
that the problem of Jumano identity is complex and that the documentary evidence can
be interpreted in various and sometimes contradictory ways. The concern here is with
evidence of Jumano presence at the Guerrero
missions and in the surrounding area near the
end of the seventeenth century, prior to the
time when the name Jumano was also used to
refer to certain Wichita groups of the Red
River region.
In earlier documents the name Jumano appears in a least 30 recognizable forms, including Auman, Chaumen, Chomen, Chouman, Humana, Iumana, Jaman, Lumano,
Shuman, Tuman, Umano, Xoman, Xumana,

144
and Jumana. In northern Chihuahua the Jumano were also known to Spaniards by
several variants of the name Patarabueye.
A point of special interest is that as early as
1684 there is good evidence of Apache displacement of Jumano from the southern
Plains and western Edwards Plateau regions
of Texas, particularly in the report of
Dominguez de Mendoza's expedition from
the El Paso area eastward into the Edwards
Plateau (Bolton 1916:313-343). After this
the Jumano were repeatedly encountered by
Frenchmen connected with the La Salle
expedition of 1685-1687 and by Spaniards
connected with successive attempts to occupy
Texas and thereby halt further French intrusion. In the documents published by Gomez
Canedo (1968:index) Jumano are repeatedly
reported in the area lying between the Rio
Sabinas of northeastern Coahuila and the
Guadalupe River northeast of San Antonio,
Texas. Remnants of these same Jumano were
recorded at Guerrero missions.
At least 16 individuals were identified as
"Juman" in the baptismal register of Mission
San Francisco Solano during the period
1706-1708, when the mission was at San
Ildefonso (Solano Registers). Included are
four adult males, six adult females, and six
children (two male, four female, ages two to
10 years). Two personal names of children
may be of Indian origin: Mueracuba (female)
and Yquia (male). Spouses are identified as
"Babor" and other "Juman." Santos (19661967:158) has reported "Juman" at Mission
San Antonio de Valero at San Antonio,
Texas, but this is the result of confusing the
registers of Valero with those of Solano.
Evidently Jumano never entered the missions of northeastern Mexico and southern
Texas in any numbers. In 1708 Espinosa
(Maas 1915:33) mentioned that "Yomines"
were then present at Mission San Juan
Bautista, but the censuses of 1734 and 1772
do not record any Jumano. Other Jumano
who survived into the eighteenth century may
have joined relatives along the lower Rfo
Conchos of northern Chihuahua or have been
absorbed by their former Apache enemies.

Macapao
One adult female Macapao is recorded in
the San Francisco Solano baptismal register

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

for the year 1706, when the mission was at
San Ildefonso (Solano Registers). Her husband is listed as a "Siaban" (Siaguan). This
is the only known record of the Macapao.
Ruecking (1955a:312) has equated Macapao
with Macapaqui, the name of a group reported in the vicinity of Monterrey, central
Nuevo Leon, prior to 1650 (Leon y otros
1961:189). This linkage, which is evidently
based only on similarity in the names, has yet
to be demonstrated. Since so many western
and so few eastern groups came to San Francisco Solano when it was at San Ildefonso,
the Macapao-probably lived somewhere west
of the Guerrero mission center.

Ma coco ma
An adult female Macocoma was present at
San Francisco Solano in 1706, when the
mission was located at San Ildefonso (Solano
Registers). It has sometimes been assumed
that Macocoma and Cocoma are synonymous
names (Hodge 1910,II:426; Ruecking
1955a:261, 302, 312, 313), which appears
reasonable on the basis of such information
as is available. In 1741 two individuals, one
a Macocoma (also rendered as Mecocoma)
and the other a Cocoma, were recorded at
Mission San Antonio de Valero at San Antonio (Valero Registers). The Cocoma seem to
be recorded under several similar names
(Cocomaque, Cocomate, and Cocuma) for a
large area that extends from the Rio Conchos
of Chihuahua eastward to the northern side of
the Rio Grande not far from Guerrero
(Bolton 1916:299; Griffen 1969:88,158;
Hackett 1926,II:395 and 1931,I:138-139;
Portillo 1886:78; Revilla Gigedo 1966:60).
Malaguita
This name has been rendered in at least 25
different ways, including Maguyalita, Malagueco, Malaguito, Malaquit, Maraguita, Marahuiayo, Maraquita, and Marhita. So far as
the Guerrero missions are concerned, the
Malaguita were a late increment from the east.
During the eighteenth century they were recorded at various localities along the Gulf
coast, extending from the Nueces River of
Texas southward across the Rio Grande into
northern Tamaulipas (Benson 1950:30; Bolton 1915:97, 104-106; Cabello 1780a:37-38

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... IlIREE SPANISH MISSIONS

and 1780b:78-79; De Villiers du Terrage et
Rivet 1919:415; Saldfvar 1943:map). During
this period Padre Island (lower Texas coast)
was sometimes referred to as La Isla de los
Malaguitos.
The Malaguita were represented at two
Guerrero missions, San Bernardo and San
Juan Bautista, for which they were recorded
only in the census of 1772 (V. Rodriguez
1772a:67, 69 and 1772b:124-126, 128-129).
At San Bernardo there were two "Malaguite,"
one an adult male married to a "Paco" (Pacoa), the other a male child, an orphan. At
San Juan Bautista were 10 "Maraquite": five
adult males, four adult females, and one male
child. Spouses were identified as other "Maraquite," "Mescal," "Patacalo," and "Passtacalo" (Patacal).
Malaguita entered other missions east of
Guerrero. At San Antonio, Texas, Malaguita
were represented at three missions, all established after 1731: N uestra Senora de la
Purfsima Concepcion de Acuna, San Francisco de la Espada, and San Juan Capistrano
(Cabello 1780a:37 and 1780b:77-78; Dabbs
1940:9; Dolores 1762a: 52; Habig 1968: 175,
218; Santos 1966-1967:157). At Mission
Refugio of present Refugio, Texas, Malaguita were still being recorded as late as 1819
(Bolton 1913:447; Oberste 1942:271, 398).
On the south bank of the Rio Grande in
northern Tamaulipas, remnants of the Malaguita entered two missions after 1750: San
Agustin de Laredo at Camargo and Senor San
Joaquin del Monte at Reynosa (Bolton
1913 :450-451; Castaneda 1938,III: 159;
Troike 1962:Table l); and in eastern Nuevo
Le6n the Malaguita were also present in at
least two missions (Kinnaird 1958: 195). It is
evident that the massive colonization of
Tamaulipas in the middle eighteenth century
led to extensive displacement of the Malaguita.

Mamuqui
The name Mamuqui occurs once in the San
Francisco Solano baptismal register. This is
for the year 1706, when the mission was at
San Ildefonso (Solano Registers). Although
it has been accepted as an ethnic group name
(Hodge 1910,II:733; Swanton 1940:134),
the context in which it appears in the Solano
register suggests that it is probably the native

145

personal name of an adult female. This conclusion receives some support from the fact
that in documents of the surrounding areas no
ethnic group name has been found which
closely resembles Mamuqui.

Manico
The Manico, also known by several similar name variants (Manicu, Minicau, and Minicu), were first recorded in 1690 by Mazanet, who encountered them on what is now
the Frio River, apparently in or near presentday Frio County, Texas (Gomez Canedo
1968:16(}). In 1704 at least one "Minicau"
individual, a female of undesignated age, was
baptized at Mission San Francisco Solano
when the mission was still at Guerrero (Solano Registers). In 1708 Espinosa listed the
"Manicu" among Indian groups then living
north of the Rio Grande in a generalized
easterly direction from the Guerrero mission
center (Maas 1915:36-37). Some of the Manico thereafter entered Mission San Bernardo. In the census of 1734 five "Minicu" were
identified: two adult males and their three
children (Garza Falcon 1734a:21-22); and in
the census of 1772 four "Minicu" were recorded: one adult male, two adult females,
and one male child (V. Rodrfguez 1772a:68,
71). Spouses are listed as other "Minicu,"
"Paco" (Pacoa), and "Paquachi" (Pacuache ).
After this the Manico disappear from the
record.
In Hodge (1910,II:256,1091) the name
"Piniquu" is listed as a synonym of "Minicau," but this does not seem to be phonetically reasonable; furthermore, in 1704 "Minicu" and "Piniquu" individuals were distinguished in the baptismal records of Mission
San Francisco Solano (see also Piniquu).
Hodge (1907,I:795, 800, 845) also speculated that the Manico may have been the same
people as the "Maliacon" encountered by
Nunez Cabeza de Vaca in 1535 and also the
same as the "Meracoumen" recorded in 1687
by Henri Joutel, chronicler of the La Salle
expedition to Texas. This speculation is based
on presumed similarities in the names, two of
which are recorded in Spanish, the third in
French. Some plausibility is attached to the
Maliac6n-Manico linkage, since Krieger
(1961) has presented evidence which supports placement of the Maliac6n inland on the
South Texas plain somewhere south of the

146

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

lower Nueces River, possibly in the area of
present Duval and Jim Wells counties, which
could be within the greater territorial range of
the Manico as known some 150 years later.
The Meracoumen-Manico linkage seems farfetched, since Joutel (Stiles 1906: 126) makes
it clear that the Meracoumen were encountered while a French party was traveling
northeastward from Matagorda Bay to the
present Colorado River. The probability is
low that the Meracoumen of 1687 would
have moved, only three years later, some 175
miles westward to become Mazanet's Manico
of 1690.

Manos Prietas
This name is Spanish ("dark hands"), and
no native name for this group has ever been
identified. The Manos Prietas were most
frequently reported as living in northeastern
Coahuila along and east of the mountain front
but not ranging as far east as Guerrero
(Griffen 1969:88-89, 160, 162). It is clear
that at times they ranged north of the Rio
Grande in modem Texas, particularly to hunt
bison (Steck 1932:14-15, 21). An even
wider range is suggested by the Marin report
of 1693 (Hackett 1926,11:395), which noted
Manos Prietas on the lower Rfo Conchos of
northeastern Chihuahua.
In 1706, when San Francisco Solano was
located at San Ildefonso, one adult female,
married to a "Terocodame," was identified as
Manos Prietas. The register entry states that
this woman had previously been baptized at
Mission Santa Rosa de Nadadores (Solano
Registers). The Manos Prietas apparently
never entered the missions of San Juan
Bautista and San Bernardo, and they were
not reported at other missions farther east.
Hodge ( 1910,11:426) indicated that some
Manos Prietas were at Mission San Antonio
de Valero of San Antonio, Texas, but this
represents confusion of the Valero records
with those of San Francisco Solano. In 1674
some Manos Prietas gathered at the early but
temporary mission of San Ildefonso de la
Paz, located between the Rio Sabinas and the
Rio Grande, possibly near present-day Zaragoza, Coahuila (Figueroa Torres 1963:77,
115). Some were also at Santa Rosa de Nadadores, north of Monclova, as early as 1675
(Alessio Robles 1938:269, 279; Figueroa

Torres 1963:67). Manos Prietas were also
recorded (1698-1701) for missions of the
Parras area of southern Coahuila (Griffen
1969:162, 172-174). Still others entered
Mission San Miguel de Aguayo at Monclova,
where 25 individuals were reported still in
residence as late as 1762 (Portillo 1886:251).
One account of 1675 reported the Manos
Prietas as numbering 232 individuals (Alessio Robles 1938:242-243). Recorded cultural
details include absence of horticulture, eating
of unspecified wild roots and fruits, fishing,
hunting deer and bison with bow and arrow,
joint dances -with other groups, and formal
exchange of bows and arrows to symbolize
peaceful relations (Bolton 1916:306; Figueroa Torres 1963:67, 104; Steck 1932:14-15).

Matuimi
Two Matuimi individuals are identified in
the baptismal register of San Francisco Solano for the year 1708, when the mission was
at San Ildefonso. One is an adult male, the
other his one-year-old son. The man's wife
is listed as a "Terocodame" (Solano Registers). As the name Matuimi has not been
found in other Spanish documents, its
recording at San Francisco Solano with the
names of so many groups of western origin
suggests that the Matuimi may have originally
lived west and northwest of the Guerrero
mission center.

Maubedan
Two Maubedan individuals, a father and
his four-year-old son, are identified in the
baptismal register of San Francisco Solano in
1706, when this mission was at San Ildefonso. The man's wife is listed as a "Terocodame" (Solano Registers). R uecking
(1954a:17; 1955a:315) has erroneously rendered this name as "Manbedan." Maubedan
as a group name has not been found in other
Spanish documents. Such information as is
available suggests that the pre-mission territorial range of the Maubedan was probably
west and northwest of Guerrero.

Maurb
In the 1734 census taken at Mission San
Juan Bautista, one adult male is identified as

E1HNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

"Miguel Maurb" (Garza Falcon 1734b: 15).
"Maurb" here may be merely part of the personal name, or it may be an ethnic group name
which through oversight was not set off by
punctuation. Since neither Maurb nor any
similar name has been found in other documents, it appears more reasonable, at least for
the present, to interpret Maurb as part of the
personal name, probably of native origin.

Mauyga (or Manyga)
In the baptismal register of San Francisco
Solano for the years 1706-1707, when this
mission was at San Ildefonso, 10 individuals
(four families) are recorded as either Mauyga
or Manyga (U and N when handwritten, are
often difficult to distinguish). Of these 10
individuals, two are adult males, two are
adult females, and six are children, four
male, two female, whose ages range from
one to nine. Spouses are identified as "Gabilan," other "Mauyga," "Tepehuana" (Tepehuan), and "Terocodame." The second name
of one male child (his mother was a Tepehuan) appears to be of Indian origin: Andres
Pabotasona (Solano Registers).
The names Mauyga and Mauiga are entrenched in the literature (Hodge 1910,11:733;
Ruecking 1954a:18 and 1955a:320; Swanton
1940:134), but it now appears that the missionaries at San Francisco Solano were actually recording the names as Manyga. Griffen
(1969:76-77, 171) has found a series of
group names similar to Manyga in Parras
records (southern Coahuila) for the period
1605-1635. These names include Managua,
Manague, Managui, Manahua, Manahue,
Manaue, and Manave. Griffen considers
these to be variants of the same name and
suggests that the ethnic group involved may
have been a subdivision of the Guachichil of
Zacatecas and parts of certain closely
adjoining states (Durango, Coahuila, Nuevo
Leon, and San Luis Potosi). It may be noted
that one Guachichil individual was present at
San Francisco Solano, and 12 Guachichil
were also recorded at Mission San Bernardo
in 1772.

Mescal
Mescal is an Hispanicized Nahuatl word
that originally referred to various species of

147

the maguey plant. In Spanish documents that
pertain to the area surrounding Guerrero the
Indians known as Mescal were consistently
distinguished from all other ethnic groups
with native names. The name has been rendered in at least 18 different ways, including
Mefcal, Mescata, Messcal, Mexcal, Mezcal,
Miscal, Mixcal, and Mizcale. These Mescal
Indians are not to be confused with the
Mescalero Apache, who appeared in the area
after the Mescal were well known (Schroeder
1960,Ill:12-13).
The pre-mission territorial range of the
Mescal is-fairly well documented It extended
from the Rfo Sabinas in northeastern Coahuila north-northeastward to the Guerrero
sector of the Rio Grande, and then northeastward to the vicinity of San Antonio,
Texas. The Mescal were most frequently seen
near three rivers which cross this territory,
the Rio Grande, the Nueces, and the Frio.
The most informative sources on territorial
range are Bolton (1916:354-358, 389-390,
406), Gomez Canedo (1968:xiii,8-9, 72, 75,
88, 90-91, 134, 160, 173, 232, 280, 289,
305-306, 356), and Weddle (1973:132-147,
174-178). After missions were established at
Guerrero, some of the unmissionized Mescal
migrated farther northeastward to an area near
the junction of the Little and Brazos rivers in
east-central Texas and were part of an aggregation of refugees and local groups known to
Spaniards as Rancherfa Grande (Hodge
1910,11:554; Tous 1930b:l4, 16-17).
The Mescal were well represented at San
Juan Bautista at its two locations. Some
were present when the mission was first established on the Rfo Sabinas in 1699 (San
Buenaventura y Salazar 1699:45), and when
the mission was moved to the Guerrero area
in 1701, some of the Mescal followed. In
1727 Sevillano de Paredes (1727:42) reported the Mescal as still present, and in the
census of 1734 (Garza Falcon 1734b: 15) 17
"Mescale" individuals are identified: six adult
males and their 11 children. Spouses are not
ethnically identified. A document of 1738,
cited by Portillo (1886:283), records 81
Mescal at San Juan Bautista, but the census
of 1772 (V. Rodriguez 1772b: 123-128)
indicates only 27 Mescal individuals: 12 adult
males, five adult females, and ten children,
six male, four female. Spouses identified include "Cachsaputal" (Cachopostal), "Mara-

148
quito" (Malaguita), ''Pacoa," ''Panpopa" (Pampopa), "Passtalaco" (Pastaloca), "Patacal,"
and "Sixama" (Sijame).
Five Mescal are identified in the baptismal
register of San Francisco Solano for the year
1706, when this mission was at San Ildefonso. These include an adult male and his
four children, two male and two female, ages
one to eight years. The second names of two
boys are probably of native origin, Comaranaucos and Terocupan (Solano Registers).
Some Mescal were recorded at Parras in
southern Coahuila, 1719-1721 (Griffen
1969:163, 173-174). A few Mescal were
also present at San Antonio de Valero of San
Antonio, Texas, but only one individual is
identified (1728) in the records (Valero Registers). This person probably came from
Rancherfa Grande. Most of the Mescal who
chose to enter missions went to San Juan
Bautista.
From various records cited above a few
details on Mescal culture may be gleaned:
encampments usually shared with other
groups; absence of horticulture; frequent
shifting of settlements in order to obtain
foodstuffs; seasonal gathering of wild plant
foods, including fruit of the prickly pear; bison hunting with bow and arrow; grasscovered houses (possibly round in floor plan,
since it is stated that the houses resembled
haystacks); tattooing; and heads of recently
slain enemies attached to a tall pole. To these
may be added other details connected with
Spanish capture of a Frenchman who had
become a revered leader of the Mescal and
their close associates. European influence is
obvious. The list of recorded traits includes:
large structure for the French leader, apparently consisting of a wooden framework
(form undescribed) covered with bison hides;
inside the structure was a platform for the
leader, with chairs, cushions, and rugs, all
involving use of bison hides; interior of
structure said to be "decorated"; honor guard
(42 warriors); attendants removed perspiration from leader's body, fanned him with
feathers, and burned incense consisting of
animal fat and other unspecified substances.
The language spoken by the Mescal has
been identified as Coahuilteco by Garcia
(1760:title page), and this receives support
from Mazanet's early statement about the

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

prevailing language spoken in the area ranged
by the Mescal (Gomez Canedo 1968:240).

Mesquite
Some confusion is connected with Mesquite as an ethnic group name. Mesquite was
used by Spaniards in referring to several
apparently unrelated Indian groups in three
areas: northeastern Chihuahua, southern
Texas, and central Tamaulipas. The Mesquite recorded at Guerrero missions were
probably the Mesquite of southern Texas, for
which Ruecking (1955a:323) has coined a
special name, Mesquitexa.
In a document of 1670 (Griffen 1969: 156),
the name "Biay" is listed among the troublesome Indian groups living somewhere considerably to the north of Monterrey. In 1708,
while working at one of the Guerrero missions, Espinosa (Maas 1915:36-37) reported
"Bioy o Mesquites" as living an unspecified
distance east of Guerrero, meaning somewhere in southern Texas. This seems to
identify "Bioy" as the native name of a group
also known as Mesquite. The two names,
"Biay" and "Bioy," may refer to the people
who were recorded in 1754 as "Viayan" and
"Biayan" and said to be a subdivision of the
Pamaque (Guadalupe 1754b: 179). The Pamaque can be linked with an area near the
Gulf coast between the San Antonio and
Nueces rivers.
In 1716, when San Francisco Solano was
located at San Jose, about eight miles up the
Rio Grande from Guerrero, two adults, one
male, the other female, were identified as
Mesquite (Solano Registers). The male,
however, was also identified as "Mesquite o
Lagaun." If "Lagaun" here is a native name
for the Mesquite, it would appear that the
Mesquite at San Francisco Solano were not
the same as the Mesquite-Bioy of Espinosa,
and this suggests that these Solano Mesquite
may have come from northeastern Chihuahua
(see Hackett 1926,II:395; Reindorp 1938:12,
26). This evidence is tenuous and should be
approached with caution.
The Mesquite of southern Texas entered
several missions at San Antonio: San Antonio de Valero (the Valero registers identify 28
Mesquite individuals between the years 1720
and 1761), San Francisco de la Espada, and
San Jose y San Miguel de Aguayo (Habig

149

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

1968:214; Kress and Hatcher 1931:51; Sandoval 1733:165, 168-169). Apparently the
Mesquite of southern Texas were the same as
the Mesquite reported (1716) in the refugee
encampment known as Rancherfa Grande,
located near the junction of the Little and
Brazos rivers in east-central Texas (Tous
1930b:8, 16).
The Mesquite of central Tamaulipas
(Saldivar 1943:30) appear not to have been
displaced very far northward from the area
where they were first reported.

Muruame
Three "Muruame" are listed in the baptismal register of San Francisco Solano in
1707, when the mission was at San Ildefonso. These represent a single family: man,
wife, and male infant (Solano Registers). In
1708 Espinosa (Maas 1915:36-37) stated that
the "Moroamo" lived at an unspecified distance eastward from the Guerrero missions
and north of the Rio Grande. The Muruame
were later well represented at Mission San
Antonio de Valero of San Antonio, Texas, in
whose registers at least 42 Muruame individuals can be identified between the years 1721
and 1775, the group name being variously
rendered as Mariame, Marueana, Merguan,
Merhuam, Moroame, and Moruane (Valero
Registers).
The pre-mission territorial range of the
Muruame is consistently reported to have
been along and between the Colorado and
Guadalupe rivers east and southeast of San
Antonio (G6mez Canedo 1968:161, 244,
300, 306). They have often been equated
with the "Mariames" of Nunez Cabeza de
Vaca, a group which seems to have been associated with the lower Guadalupe River in
the early sixteenth century. This equation is
plausible, although some 170 years separate
the two bodies of information.
Hodge (1907,I:943) recognized "Morbanas" as the name of a separate ethnic group,
but comparison of documents clearly shows
that Morbana is a variant of the name Muruame. The equation of Meracouman and Menenquen with Muruame should be disregarded (Hodge 1907,I:845and1910,II:1089). As
no sample of Muruame speech seems to have
been recorded, Swanton's (1940:136) speculation that the Muruame language "may have

been Coahuiltecan or Tonkawan" cannot be
tested. It could just as well have been some
other language that has not been recorded.

Ocana
The Ocana are known by several similar
names, including Acani, Cane, Ocam, Ocan,
and Ocano. They seem to have been first recorded in 1670 as one of many Indian groups
from the north that occasionally raided farm
and ranch settlements in the vicinities of
Monterrey and Saltillo (Bolton 1916:284;
Griffen 1969:163). Fray Manual de la Cruz,
during missionary work north of the Rio
Grande in 1674, recorded "Ocanes" at a
locality about eight miles north of that river,
possibly in present Maverick County, Texas
(Figueroa Torres 1963:105). The next year,
1675, the Bosque-Larios expedition heard of
"Ocane" in the same area (Bolton 1916:296297, 308). Dominguez de Mendoza also met
or heard of "Acanis" in 1684, when he was
in the western part of the Edwards Plateau in
Texas (Bolton 1916:339). In 1691 and again
in 1693 Mazanet encountered "Ocan" and
"Ocanas" on both sides of the Rio Grande
in the Guerrero sector (G6mez Canedo
1968:235, 280; Hatcher 1932:52). Most of
the pre-mission records thus place the Ocana
along the Rio Grande in the Eagle PassGuerrero area.
In 1700, when Mission San Felipe de
Valladares was established near present Candela, eastern Coahuila, the "Ocanes" were
named as one of five groups present (Cuervo
y Valdes 1700:11). At least one Ocana female was at Mission San Francisco Solano in
1706, when it was at its San Ildefonso location (Solano Registers). Three of her children were baptized on the same day, and it is
recorded that the father of her children was a
"Zenizo" (Cenizo).
Documents of a later time which refer back
to the foundation of Mission San Bernardo in
1703 agree that the Ocana were present when
the mission was formally established (Espinosa 1964:756; Morfi 1935b:321; Ximenes
1762a:112-113 and 1762b:108-109). In
1708 Espinosa (Maas 1915:33) referred to
the Ocana as one of the groups well represented at San Bernardo. In the census of
1734 taken at Mission San Bernardo, nine
individuals are identified as "Ocam": three

----------

----

150

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

adult males and their six children (Garza Falcon 1734a:21-22). Six "Ocan" and "Ocam"
were still there in 1772, the census for that
year (V. Rodriguez 1772a:66-68) indicating
the presence of six persons: three adult
males, two adult females, and one male child.
Spouses are listed as "Catujan," "Pachal,"
and "Paquachi" (Pacuache ). A few Ocana
also found their way to Mission San Antonio
de Valero at San Antonio, Texas. Two adult
females died there in 1728, and one of these
was married to a "Siaguan" (Valero Registers). Mazanet's observations on languages
spoken in southern Texas suggest that the
Ocana spoke Coahuilteco (Gomez Canedo
1968:240).

Ochayal
See Achoj.

Ocora
In the San Bernardo census of 1734
(Garza Falcon 1734a:20) four "Ocora" are
listed, an adult male and his three children.
Apparently the name refers to the same ethnic
group recorded as "Cora" in 1674, who were
named on a list of 17 Indian groups said to be
represented at a temporary mission known as
San Ildefonso de la Paz (Figueroa Torres
1963:77). This mission was in northeastern
Coahuila between the Rio Sabinas and the
Rio Grande west or northwest of Guerrero,
possibly near modem Zaragoza, Coahuila.
In 1708 Espinosa (Maas 1915 :36-3 7) referred to "Cocore" in a list of groups at that
time said to be living across the Rio Grande
north of the Guerrero missions. If the names
Ocora, Cora, and Cocore are accepted as
synonymous, the original Ocora range must
have extended from the Rio Sabinas northward across the Rio Grande, perhaps as far
as the southern margin of the Edwards
Plateau. Hodge (1907, 1910) does not have
entries for any of these names. According to
sources cited by Figueroa Torres, the "Cora"
and groups associated with them ate roots,
acorns, and bison meat.

Oydican
Seventeen "Oydica" and "Oydican" can be
identified in the baptismal register of San

Francisco Solano for the years 1706-1707,
when the mission was at San Ildefonso (Solano Registers). Of these, seven are adult
males, two are adult females, and eight are
children, four male, four female, whose ages
range from two months to nine years. Bolton
(Hodge 1910,11: 180) has stated that the Oydican intermarried with the Terocodame at
this mission, but no spouses are ethnically
identified in the baptismal register. The second names of two children are probably of
Indian origin: Simon Cupiol and Clara
Hay uni.
Oydican may be a shortened form of the
name Doaquioydacam, which occurs on a list
of 24 groups said to have submitted to Spanish authority in Coahuila by the year 1674
(Alessio Robles 1938:232). The pre-mission
territorial range of the Oydican was probably
somewhere northwest of Guerrero. Santos
(1966-1967:158) has reported that four Oydican are recorded in the burial register of
Mission San Antonio de Valero of San Antonio, Texas, but my inspection of the register
failed to confirm this report.

Paac
The Paac appear to have been first recorded under the name "Pahaque" in a document of 1675 (Portillo 1886:175) which lists
the names of 18 Indian groups that sent representatives to Monclova, Coahuila. These
Indians, it is said, were interested in having
missions established in the region northeast
of Monclova. Eight additional names on this
1675 list are identifiable as those of Indian
groups that later entered missions at Guerrero.
Mazanet observed "Paac" sharing encampments with other Indian groups in 1690
and 1691 (Gomez Canedo 1968:160, 235;
Hatcher 1932:52). In 1690 the Paac were
named as one of nine groups seen on the
Nueces River in what is now central Zavala
County, Texas. In 1691 they were named as
one of six groups encamped on arroyo de
Caramanchel, believed to be present Comanche Creek, also in Zavala County. Since
the Indian encampment was said to be about
eight miles from a locality bearing the name
Guanapacti, recorded as meaning in Spanish
arroyo de Dos Aguas, it seems plausible to
locate the encampment eight miles above the

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

junction of Comanche and Chaparrosa creeks
in southwestern Zavala County. Thus, as of
1690-1691, the Paac can be associated with
the area between the Nueces River and the
Rio Grande that lies northeast of Guerrero. In
1707 Diego Ramon (1707:57) encountered a
temporary settlement of 21 "Pacque" in the
same area but east of the Nueces River, apparently in the vicinity of present Big Wells
in northeastern Dimmit County, Texas
(Hester and Hill 1975:21).
The 1734 census taken at Mission San
Bernardo (Garza Falcon 1734a:21) identifies
three "Pajaca" (one man and his two children), and the 1772 census at the same mission (V. Rodriguez 1772a:68) identifies five
"Paxac" and "Paxaguis": one adult male, three
adult females, and one female child. Paac
spouses are identified as "Jacao" and "Paquachi" (Pacuache). The Paac, so far as is
now known, were not recorded at other
Spanish missions of southern Texas and
northeastern Mexico. Mazanet's statements
about languages spoken in southern Texas
suggest that the Paac spoke Coahuilteco
(Gomez Canedo 1968:240).

Pachal
At least 18 names, some of which represent various kinds of recording error, refer to
the Pachal: Pacal, Pacgal, Pachale, Pachan,
Pachat, Pachol, Pacuchal, Paischal, Paschal,
Pasteal, Patcal, Patchal, Patehal, Patzal, Patshal, Pauchal, Paxchal, and Paszchal.
The Pachal were represented at Mission
San Juan Bautista when it was established in
1699 at its first location on the Rio Sabinas
north of Candela, eastern Coahuila (Esteves
1699:40; Weddle 1968:21-25), but when this
mission was transferred northward to the
Guerrero locality the Pachal apparently did
not move with it. Instead they entered Mission San Bernardo in 1703 (Weddle 1968:53),
where they formed one of its more numerous
Indian groups. Sevillano de Paredes
( 1727 :49) noted their presence at San
Bernardo in 1727. The censuses taken late
indicate 21 Pachal in 1734 and 24 in 1772.
The 21 Pachal of the 1734 census (Garza
Falcon 1734a:21-23) are variously recorded
as "Pachal," "Pacuchal," "Paischal," and
"Pauchal." Included are 10 adult males and
11 children of unspecified ages and sexes.

151

The wives of the adult males are not ethnically identified. The 24 Pachal identified in
the census of 1772 (V. Rodriguez 1772a:6570, 72) are all recorded under one name,
"Pachal," indicating name standardization by
that late date. Of these 24 persons, nine are
given as adult males, four as adult females,
and 11 as children, five male, six female.
Spouses are identified as "Aguayan," "Canoa" (Canua), "Ocan" (Ocana), "Patacal,"
and "Paco" (Pacoa). Two "Pachal," an adult
male and his young daughter, are recorded in
the baptismal register (1732) of Mission San
Antonio .de Valero at San Antonio, Texas.
This male was married to a "Terocodame"
(Valero Registers).
The recorded pre-mission territory of the
Pachal extended from the Rio Sabinas of
northeastern Coahuila (vicinity of present
Lago de Don Martin) northward to Guerrero
and across the Rio Grande to the Nueces and
Frio rivers north and northeast of Guerrero
(Gomez Canedo 1968:160, 236; Maas
1915:36-37). Guerrero seems to have been
fairly close to the center of the Pachal's
known territorial range. One cultural detail
has been recorded. When San Buenaventura
y Salazar (1699:45) was working at San Juan
Bautista at its initial location on the Rio Sabinas, he noted that the Pachal and their
associates gathered prickly-pear fruits from
the surrounding area. The observations of
Mazanet on languages spoken in southern
Texas suggest that the Pachal spoke Coahuilteco (Gomez Canedo 1968:240).
In connection with the Pachal, several
published errors need correction: (1) Bolton
(in Hodge 1910,11:208) identified "Pasteal"
as the name of a separate and distinct ethnic
group of the Coahuila-Texas area. This error
has been perpetuated by Ruecking (1954a:19;
1955a:342-343 ), Swanton (1940: 135;
1952:310), and Webb (1952,11:344). Pasteal
is actually a misreading of Patcal, which is a
variant of Pachal (compare Dr. Velasco
1958:318 and Gomez Canedo 1968:160);
(2) in the synonymy section of Hodge
(1910,11:1117), Pastia is erroneously equated
with Pasteal (see above); (3) in Branda
(1976:708), I mistakenlyequatedPasteal with
Patacal. The name Pasteal should be struck
from the record as the name of a separate
group and also as a synonym for Pastia and
Patacal; (4) Bolton (in Hodge 1910,11:183)

152

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

referred to Pachaloco as "evidently a division
of Pachal," but this cannot be demonstrated.

Pachana
One adult male is identified by this group
name in the census taken at mission San Juan
Bautista in 1734 (Garza Falcon 1734b: 17).
As no closely similar name has been found in
other Spanish documents of the general area,
the name may be a distortion of some better
known name, possibly Pausane (two "Paysano" individuals are recorded in the San
Bernardo census of 1734).

Pacoa
Garcia (l 760:title page) listed "P acaos"
and "Pacoas" as names for separate groups of
the San Antonio and Guerrero missions that
spoke Coahuilteco dialects. Cyrus Thomas
(in Hodge 191O,II:191-192) ignored this
distinction and equated the two in his article
entitled "Pakawa." Data from the 1734 and
1772 censuses of the Guerrero missions,
which were not available to Thomas, make it
very clear that the "Pacao" and "Pacoa" were
indeed separate and distinct ethnic units. The
"Pacao" were represented only at San Antonio missions (mainly San Francisco de la Espada, with a few at San Antonio de Valero
and Nuestra Seiiora de la Purlsima Concepcion de Acuiia), and the "Pacoa" were represented only at the Guerrero missions (San
Bernardo and San Juan Bautista).
The Pacoa seem to have been first
recorded in 1699, under the name "Pacco," in
a report on the re-establishment of Mission El
Dulce Nombre de Jesus de Peyotes in northeastern Coahuila, near modem Villa Union
(Cuervo y Valdes 1699:230-234). The "Pacuq" encountered in 1707 by Diego Ramon in
what is now Dimmit County, Texas (east of
Guerrero) were probably Pacoa (Ramon
1707:68-69; Hester andHill 1975:21), since
in 1708 Espinosa listed "Paco" as one of the
Indian groups then living north of the Rio
Grande and east of the Guerrero missions
(Maas 1915:36).
The most informative statements about
Pacoa territorial range were made in 1727 by
Sevillano de Paredes (1727:49, 50, 55).
When he was inspecting the Guerrero missions, Sevillano de Paredes was told that

there had been a recent "revolt" of the "Paco"
and "Pantascoyas" (Pastancoyas ). These two
groups moved down the Rio Grande about
40 miles to a place called El Carrizo, which
evidently was about midway between Guerrero and Laredo, or somewhere in the vicinity
of modem Hidalgo, Coahuila. When Sevillano de Paredes was inspecting Mission
Nuestra Seiiora de los Dolores de la Punta,
near present Lampazos, Nuevo Leon, he
learned that the "Pacoa" were a numerous
"nation" with a population over 300 and that
they were then living about 78 miles north of
the mission.  This distance would place the
Pacoa in the area of El Carrizo noted above.
Thus the available data suggest that the premission range of the Pacoa was east and
southeast of Guerrero in extreme northeastern
Coahuila and the adjoining part of Texas, especially Dimmit and Webb counties.
Various accounts of mission foundations
indicate that no Pacoa were present at either
San Juan Bautista or San Bernardo when
they were first established at Guerrero. No
Pacoa are reported in the census of 1734 at
San Juan Bautista, but in the 1772 census (V.
Rodriguez 1772b: 123-127) 10 individuals
are identified as "Pacoa" and one as "Pacoatal," probably a variant of the name Pacoa.
Included among the 11 individuals are six
adult males, two adult females, and three
children, one male, two female. Spouses are
identified as "Coyota" (Spanish-Indian hybrid), "Messcal," "Panpopa" (Pampopa), and
"Pastalacto" (Pastaloca).
At San Bernardo the Pacoa are identified in
both censuses. In the 1734 census (Garza
Falcon 1734a:21-24), six individuals (five
adult males and one male child) are identified
as "Pacos," "Pacuas," and "Paquas." The
census of 1772 (V. Rodriguez 1772a:6570) shows a notable increase in numbers, 26
individuals, all identified as "Paco." Included
are eight adult males, 12 adult females, and
six children, two male, four female. Spouses
are listed as "Chaguan" (Siaguan), "Huacicil"
(Guachichil), "Jacao," "Malaguito," "Minicu"
(Manico), "Pachal," "Paquachi" (Pacuache),
"Papanac," and "Passtaloc" (Pastaloca).

Pa cu ache
The name Pacuache has been recorded in
at least 45 different ways, some of them

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

clearly the result of clerical and typographical
errors. The range of forms is illustrated by
the following: Nacuache, Pacahuche, Pacuachiam, Pacuasian, Pacuazin, Pacuche,
Pagnache, Paguachi, P ajuache, Paquachi,
Paquasian, Paquatche, Pascuache, and Taguache.
The pre-mission territorial range of the
Pacuache, which is fairly well documented,
was confined to an area north and northeast
of Guerrero across which flow the Nueces,
Leona, and Frio rivers (Foik 1933:9-10; G6mez Canedo 1968:8-9, 160, 236, 281-282,
306; Hoffmann 1935:44-45 and 1938:314;
Maas 1915:34, 51; Sevillano de Paredes
1726:40-41; Shelby 1923: 177; To us 1930b:6;
Wheat 1957,I:Map No. 115). In 1684 Dominguez de Mendoza (Bolton 1916:340)
either met or heard of "Puguahianes" when
he was in the western part of the Edwards
Plateau of Texas. This suggests that at times
the Pacuache ranged northward into the
Edwards Plateau, possibly for seasonal bison
hunting. Two groups, Sacuache and Tepacuache, known only from a single source of
1693 (G6mez Canedo 1968:282), were seen
near Pacuache on the Nueces River northeast
of Guerrero and may be subdivisions of the
Pacuache.
Some of the Pacuache entered various
missions of Coahuila and Texas, but most of
them preferred San Bernardo of the Guerrero
area. Two Pacuache are recorded in the baptismal register of Mission San Francisco
Solano for the years 1712 and 1716, when
the mission was at San Jose. One of these is
an eight-year-old girl identified as a "Paquasia." The other is an adult female, married
to an "Xarame," identified in one entry as a
"Paquasia" and in another as a "Paquache"
(Solano Registers).
The Pacuache seem to have been the
dominant group at Mission San Bernardo
during the 1720s. In 1727 Sevillano de
Paredes (1727:50) stated that some 350
Pacuache had left the mission because of a
food shortage. The census of 1734 (Garza
Falc6n 1734a:23), however, suggests that
few of the Pacuache had returned. This census records only five Pacuache individuals,
three adult males and two children listed as
"Paquachi" and "Pacuache." After this the
Pacuache evidently returned to San Bernardo
in considerable numbers, for in the 1772

153

census (V. Rodriguez 1772a:66-73) 85 persons are identified as either "Paguachi" or
"Paquachi." Of these, 37 are adult males, 28
are adult females, and 20 are children, 14
male and six female. Spouses include
"Aguayam" or "Aguayan," "Canoa" (Canua),
"Huacacil" (Guachichil), "Jacao," "Minicau"
(Manico), "Ocam" (Ocana), "Paco" (Pacoa),
other "Paquachi," "Passtancoya," "Patacal,"
and "Paxac" (Paac).
Some Pacuache entered Mission San Antonio de ValeroatSanAntonio, Texas, whose
registers permit identification of at least 13
Pacuache-individuals between the years 1722
and 1766 (Valero Registers). One of these
was previously at San Francisco Solano. A
few of the Pacuache from San Antonio de
Valero were briefly (1749-1755) at Mission
San Ildefonso in present Milam County
northeast of Austin, Texas, serving as teachers and interpreters (Bolton 1915:202;
Gilmore 1969:49-50).
Enough evidence has been recorded to indicate that the Pacuache, when first known to
Europeans, had a population of about 400.
In 1708 Espinosa (Maas 1915:34) stated that
the Pacuache population at that time totalled
more than 300 individuals, and in 1727
Sevillano de Paredes, as noted above, wrote
that about 350 Pacuache had been at San
Bernardo. Garcia (l 760:title page) named the
Pacuache on a short list of groups who spoke
dialects of the Coahuilteco language. A few
details on Pacuache culture appear in various
sources cited above: hunting of bison, deer,
rats, and mice; use of bow and arrow;
temporary settlements, usually shared with
other groups, in wooded areas near streams;
one house form (poorly described), apparently a lean-to, made of branches covered
with grasses, open on one side; hides processed by women and decorated with designs
in red and yellow paint; smoke signaling;
horses stolen at night from a Spanish travel
party; decorated hides and other unspecified
items traded to Spaniards and Indians at the
Guerrero mission center.
In Hodge (1910,II:183, 191-192, 1115)
the Pacuache have received very confused
treatment. "Pacuaches" and "Pacuachiam" are
erroneously given as names of two separate
Indian groups, and various group names and
name variants are also erroneously equated,
either directly or indirectly, with 'Pacuaches":

154

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Paachiques, Pacaos, Pachagues, Pachao,
Pachaques, Pachoches, Pacoas, Pacos, Pacuas, Paikawa, Paik:awan, Pakawa, Pakawai,
Parchaques, and Tompacuas.

Pamajo
The census taken in 1734 at San Bernardo
identifies two individuals as Pamajo, a man
and his young daughter (Garza Falc6n
1734a:21). The man's wife is not ethnically
identified. No identical or even closely similar group names have been found in other
documents, and at present there is not enough
evidence to relate it to somewhat similar
group names, such as Pamache and Pamaque.
Pamasu
In 1727 Sevillano de Paredes (1727:49)
gave the name Pamasu on a list of five Indian
groups then represented at Mission San
Bernardo, but the censuses of 1734 and 1772
do not identify any Pamasu at this mission.
A document of 1675 (Portillo 1886:175),
written at Monclova, Coahuila, lists the
names of 18 Indian groups who had sent
representatives to confer with Spanish officials. One name on the list is Pamafeo,
which may be a misreading of Pamaseo
(handwritten f and s of that period are similar). If so, Pamasu and Pamaseo may refer
to the same Indian population. Another possibility is that Pamasu may be equivalent to
Pomuzeno, the name of a group represented
by one individual at nearby Mission San Juan
Bautista in 1772. Little can be said about the
probable aboriginal location of the group or
groups represented by these names.

Pampopa
The name Pampopa has been recorded in
at least 16 different ways, including Campoa,
Pampo, Pampoa, Pampoca, Pampoja, Pamposa, Pampoja, Panpoc, Pompopa, and
Pumpoa. The pre-mission territorial range of
the Pampopa is fairly well documented, and
extended from the Medina River near San
Antonio southward and southeastward almost
to the Rio Grande. They were most commonly reported as living along the Frio and
Nueces rivers, particularly in the area now

covered by Dimmit, La Salle, and McMullen
counties (Maas 1915:36-37; Sevillano de
Paredes 1727:42-43, 48; Shelby 1923:177179; Tous 1930b:4-5; Wheat 1957,I:Map
No. 149).
The Pampopa entered missions at Guerrero (San Juan Bautista) and at San Antonio
(San Jose y San Miguel de Aguayo). In the
San Juan Bautista census of 1734 (Garza
Falc6n 1734b: 17-18), six Pampopa (three
adult males and three children) are listed under three name variants: "Campoa," "Pampoa," and "Pumpoa." Portillo (1886:283) cites
a document which indicates the presence of
nine Pampopa at San Juan Bautista in 1738.
The San Juan Bautista census of 1772 (V.
Rodriguez 1772b:123-129) indicates the presence of 31 "Panpopa": 14 adult males, eight
adult females, and nine children, five male
and four female. Spouses are identified as
"Achoj ; "Achogtatal," "Cacsaputal" (Cachopos tal ), "Campacuas," "Messcal," "Pacoa,"
"Pita," "Pachsa" (Patzau), other "Panpopa,"
and "Coyota" (Spanish-Indian hybrid).
Little is known about the number of Pampopa who entered Mission San Jose y San
Miguel de Aguayo at San Antonio. They
seem to have entered this mission when it
was founded in 1720 (Dabbs 1940:8; Forrestal 1931:20-21; Habig 1968:83, 85, 271).
Sevillano de Paredes (1727:42-43, 48)
estimated that about 500 Pampopa were still
living along the Nueces River in 1727, but
this figure may include remnants of other
groups associated with the Pampopa. Garcia
(1760:title page) listed the Pampopa among
the groups that spoke dialects of the
Coahuilteco language. Very few cultural details were recorded for the Pampopa, but the
following may be cited: frequently moved
temporary encampments and gathering and
storage of pecans for food (Campbell
1975:18-19; Tous 1930a:4-5, 10-11).

Papanac
At least 23 variants of the name Papanac
occur in various documents. Those found
only in primary sources include Panac, Papan, Papanac, Papanaca, Papanacam, Papanaque, Papani, Papanico, Paponaca, Paponal, and Popan. The remainder, all similar
to the preceding, represent errors made in
secondary sources.

-------

----------~~-----

155

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

Papanac individuals and families were
present at two of the Guerrero missions, San
Francisco Solano and San Bernardo. It is
clearly indicated that some Papanac were
present when San Francisco Solano was established at Guerrero in 1700 (Cuervo y
Valdes 1700b:24-27; Weddle 1968:31).
Later, in 1706-1707, after this mission had
been moved westward to San Ildefonso,
three Papanac individuals were recorded in
the baptismal register. All were adult females, two of them having Xarame husbands
(Solano Registers). In 1708 Espinosa (Maas
1915:37) reported that some of the Papanac
were still living under native conditions
somewhere north of the Guerrero mission
center.
Identified in the census taken at San
Bernardo in 1734 (Garza Falc6n 1734a:20,
23) are five Papanac individuals, two adult
males and their three children. One of the
men was serving as governor of the mission
Indian village in that year. In the census report of 1772 at the same mission (V.
Rodriguez 1772a:65) three Papanac adults
appear, two males and one female. Their
spouses are listed as "Aguayan," "Paco"
(Pacoa), and "Jalam" (Xarame).
Some Papanac also entered Mission San
Antonio de Valero at San Antonio, Texas. In
the various mission registers covering the
years 1727-1764, at least 19 different Papanac individuals are identified (Valero Registers); and a document of 1772 (Leutenegger
1977:26-26, 28) indicates that three Papanac
individuals, all male, were still living at this
mission. One female, who was buried at San
Antonio de Valero in 1739, is said to have
been baptized at San Francisco Solano, indicating that at least some Papanac followed
San Francisco Solano to its fourth and final
location, at San Antonio, where it was renamed San Antonio de Valero. It would appear from the evidence summarized above
that not many Papanac took up permanent
residence at missions.
The most informative pre-mission records
of the area place the Papanac along the
Nueces, Leona, and Frio rivers between
Guerrero and San Antonio, particularly in the
area now embraced by parts of Dimmit,
Zavala, and Frio counties, Texas (G6mez
Canedo 1968:160, 236; Hatcher 1932:53;
Mazanet 1957:356). It is probable that, prior

to Apache expansion southeastward, the Papanac also at times ranged northward into the
Edwards Plateau, since in 1684 Dominguez
de Mendoza met or heard of "Papanes" when
he was in the western portion of the plateau
(Bolton 1916:339-340; Williams 1962). It is
also probable that the Papanac at times ranged
southward across the Rio Grande into northeastern Coahuila, but the only indicator of
this is a document of 1675 published by Portillo (1886:175). The observations of Mazanet on languages spoken in southern Texas
suggest that the Papanac were among those
who spoke a Coahuilteco dialect (G6mez
Canedo 1968:240).

Pastaloca
Documents pertaining to the Guerrero
missions make it possible to clear up some of
the confusion that surrounds the Pastaloca.
Pastaloca and Pachaloco have usually been
regarded as names for two separate ethnic
groups (Branda 1976:682, 707-708; Hodge
1910,II:183, 204; Swanton 1940:135 and
1952:310). Ruecking (1954a:4, 19 and
1955a:332, 342, 346-347) listed Pastaloca as
a synonym for Pachaloco but did not specify
any reasons for making such a judgment. I
have re-analyzed the evidence, some of
which Ruecking did not use, and it now appears that his apparently intuitive judgment is
correct. Since the documentary sources are
relatively abundant for the name Pastaloca
and rare for Pachaloco, it is here suggested
that Pastaloca be used as the primary name
and that Pachaloco be regarded as a synonym. Actually, as will be shown below,
Pachaloco is an erroneous distortion of the
name Pastaloca that entered the record relatively late in time and was repeated so often
thereafter that it came to be regarded as the
name of an Indian group separate from
Pastaloca.
The pertinent evidence has to do with the
orthography of Indian group names associated with Mission San Juan Bautista. Basic
documents, to be cited later, of the years
1708, 1727, 1734, and 1738, all refer to the
Pastaloca as a major group represented at this
mission. Pachaloco first occurs in a document of 1762. Later, in a census of 1772,
Pastaloca returns to the record in nine recognizable name variants. Finally, during an in-

156
spection trip of the northern provinces in
1777-1778, Morfi saw at San Juan Bautista
the document of 1762, the only other document of the eighteenth century that contains
the name Pachaloco. Morfi's recording of
Pachaloco for San Juan Bautista was thereafter used in secondary sources, along with
Pastaloca, giving rise to the belief that two
ethnic groups bearing the names Pastaloca
and Pachaloco were represented at San Juan
Bautista.
No other name similar to Pachaloco seems
to have been recorded at other Spanish missions of the general area, with the possible
exception of a name recorded at Mission
Nuestra Senora de la Puri'.sima Concepci6n de
Acuna at present San Antonio, Texas. In the
fragmentary records of this mission, seven
"Pachalaque" individuals are identifiable between the years 1733 and 1756. Ruecking
(1955a:346-347) believed that Pachalaque,
Pachaloco, and Pastaloca were synonymous
names for the same Indian population. He
may again be correct, but as yet I have not
encountered enough evidence to demonstrate
a valid linkage of Pachalaque with Pachaloco/Pastaloca.
The Pastaloca were seen by Mazanet in
two shared encampments in 1690 and again
in 1691 (G6mez Canedo 1968:160, 235;
Hatcher 1932:52; Mazanet 1957:354). They
were recorded under the names "Pastaluc"
and "Pastulac." The locale in 1690 was the
central part of present-day Zavala County,
Texas. In 1691 it was arroyo de Caramanchel, considered to be present Comanche
Creek of Zavala County. Thus the Pastaloca
territorial range at this time included lands
between the Nueces River and the Rio
Grande northeast of Guerrero. All later records refer to Pastaloca at missions of Coahuila and Texas.
When Mission San Juan Bautista was
moved from the Rfo Sabinas to the Rio
Grande in 1701, it appears that no Pastaloca
were initially present. Some arrived shortly
before 1708, however, for in that year Espinosa (Maas 1915:33) reported that over 100
"Pastaloques" had recently entered the mission. In an inspection report of 1727, Sevillano de Paredes indicated that "Pastalocas"
were among the three most numerous Indian
groups represented at San Juan Bautista

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

(Sevillano de Paredes 1727:42; Weddle
1968:174).
In the census taken at San Juan Bautista in
1734, six "Pastaloca" were recorded: three
adult males, one of them having three children of unspecified sex (Garza F alc6n
1734b:15, 17-18). Portillo (1886:283) refers
to a document of 1738 which reported 71
"Pastalocos" at San Juan Bautista. The census of 1772 (V. Rodriguez 1772b:123-127,
129) identifies 20 individuals whose recorded
ethnic names are probably all variants of the
name Pastaloca: Passtacalo, Passtaculo,
Passtalaco, Passtalca, Passtaloca, Passtaloco,
Pastalacto, Pastaloco, and Pataloco. Of these
20 individuals, nine are adult males, five are
adult females, and six are children, three male
and three female. The spouses are ethnically
identified as "Campacua," "Maraquite" (Malaguita), "Messcal," "Messtiza" (SpanishIndian hybrid), "Pacoa," and "P atacalo"
(Patacal). One of the adult males was serving
as governor of the mission Indian village in
1772.
It was in an inspection report at San Juan
Bautista, written in 1762, that the name
Pachaloco was first used to refer to the
Pastaloca (Ximenes 1726b: 106), and Morfi's
almost verbatim phrasing drawn from this
1762 report reveals how the confusion concerning Pachaloco and Pastaloca was initiated
(Morfi 1856:440-441;0rozco y Berra
1864:303).
In the absence of primary documents on
the foundation of Mission San Bernardo in
1703, it cannot be established that any
Pastaloca were there from the beginning. In
1727 Sevillano de Paredes (1727:46; Weddle
1968: 175) listed "Pastalocas" among the five
principal Indian groups represented there.
The 1734 census taken at San Bernardo
identifies 15 individuals as either "Pastaloco"
or "Pactaloco." Included are five males, each
of whom had two children (sex unspecified).
Ethnic affiliations of wives are not recorded
(Garza Falc6n 1734a:21-22). The 1772
census identifies only nine individuals as
"Passtaloc" or "Pastaloc": three adult males,
four adult females, and two children, both
male (V. Rodriguez 1772a:67-73). Spouses
identified include "Aguayan," "Canoa" (Canua), "Chaguan" and "Chajuanahan" (Siaguan), "Juanca," and "Paco" (Pacoa).

157

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

Few Pastaloca seem to have entered the
San Antonio missions. Two "Pastaloca" females are identified (1733) in the records of
Mission San Antonio de Valero (Valero Registers). Mazanet's comments on languages
spoken between Guerrero and San Antonio
suggest that the Pastaloca spoke a dialect of
Coahuilteco (Gomez Canedo 1968:240).

Pastancoya
The Pastancoya seem to have been first
recorded in the middle seventeenth century
under the names "Pastanquia" and "Pestanquia" (Leon y otros 1961:189-190). Each
name appears on a long list of Indian groups,
one said to be native to the Monterrey area
(most likely northward from Monterrey), and
the other said to be native to the vicinity of
Cerralvo, an early Spanish mining settlement.
Cerralvo, which still exists as a community,
is northeast of Monterrey and about halfway
between Monterrey and the Falcon reservoir
on the Rio Grande. If the early Pastanquia
are the same as the Pastancoya of a period
some 50 years later, their original territorial
range was probably in northern Nuevo Leon
and adjacent parts of Texas. Orthographically
all later variants of the name closely resemble
Pastancoya.
Some doubt arises as to whether or not
any Pastancoya individuals and families were
actually at San Bernardo when this mission
was officially established in 1703. Nineteenth-century writers (Bancroft 1883,1:611;
Orozco y Berra 1864:303; A. L. Velasco
1897,XIX:14) list them as present, but the
eighteenth-century documents do not. In
1708 Espinosa (1708:42-43; Maas 1915:3637) did not mention any Pastancoya at San
Bernardo, but he included the name on a long
list of Indian groups which at that time were
living in an easterly direction from San
Bernardo. Apparently some of the Pastancoya first entered San Bernardo between
1708 and 1727, for in 1727 Sevillano de
Paredes reported that approximately 100 Indians, including some Pastancoya, had previously fled from the mission and were then
living about 40 miles down the Rio Grande at
a place called El Carrizo (Sevillano de Paredes 1727:49-50; Weddle 1968:175). The El
Carrizo locality must have been roughly
midway between modem Guerrero and

Laredo. The Pastancoya evidently had moved
in a direction which took them nearer to their
postulated homeland noted above.
After deserting San Bernardo sometime
prior to 1727, it does not appear that all of the
Pastancoya fugitives returned to the mission.
The census of 1734 (Garza Falcon 1734a:2021) identifies only eight Pastancoya (rendered
variously as "Pastancoiam," "Pastancoian,"
and "Pastancoya"): four adult males, two of
whom had a total of four children. The census of 1772 (V. Rodrfguez 1772a:69-71)
lists five Pastancoya: four adult males and
one female child. Thereafter the Pastancoya
disappear from primary documents.
Modem investigators who have been concerned with linguistic affiliation have suggested that the Pastancoya probably spoke a
dialect of Coahuilteco (Hodge 1910,II:208;
Powell 1891:69; Ruecking 1954a:19; Swanton 1940:135). As noted above, there is evidence which suggests that the Pastancoya
originally lived in northern Nuevo Leon, and
it is possible that they spoke another language
before being fragmented and displaced by
Spaniards, perhaps the Quinigua language
recognized by Hoyo ( 1960) and Gursky
(1964). The few Pastancoya at Mission San
Bernardo could have become bilingual as the
result of a half century of association with
Coahuilteco-speakers.
Patacal

The Guerrero mission documents permit a
better definition of the Patacal, whose name
has been confused with names and name
variants of other groups, particularly Pastaloca, Pasteal, and Patcal (Branda 1976:708;
Hodge 1910,II:208, 1117). Apparently the
Patacal did not enter any other missions.
The Patacal were first noted in 1727 by
Sevillano de Paredes (1727:42-43), who said
that "Patacales" had been at Mission San Juan
Bautista but had recently left and were living
south of the Nueces River some 55 to 60
miles east of the Guerrero mission center.
He placed the Patacal somewhat to the south
of the Pampopa who, he said, lived along the
Nueces River, probably in what is now eastern Dimmit and western La Salle counties,
Texas. From this it may be surmised that the
Patacal were at that time associated with one
or more southern tributaries of the Nueces

158

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

River in the two counties named. San Roque
Creek and Las Rafces Creek are possibilities.
Sevillano also said that the Patacal in 1727
numbered about 400. If this population estimate is reasonably accurate, it would seem
that the Patacal were still relatively numerous
as late as 1727.
Later records indicate that some of the
Patacal eventually entered two of the Guerrero missions, San Bernardo and San Juan
Bautista. In the San Bernardo census of
1734 (Garza Falcon 1734a:21 ), six "Patacal"
are identified: two adult males and four children of unspecified sex. In the 1772 census
at the same mission (V. Rodriguez 1772a:6670), 12 individuals are identified variously as
"Patacal," "Patacalh," and "Pattacal": six
adult males, one adult female, and five children, all male. Spouses are listed as "Pachal," "Paquachi" (Pacuache), and "Paxaguis" (Paac).
At San Juan Bautista no Patacal were
recorded in the 1734 census, but in the 1772
census (V. Rodriguez 1772b:123-124, 127129), 14 individuals are identified by the
following groups names: Pachtacal, Pachstacal, Paschtacal, Pasthtal, Patacal, and Patacale. Since the first four names resemble Patacal more than they resemble the group
names of other Indians at this mission, it is
assumed that they are variants of the name
Patacal. Of these 14 individuals, seven are
given as adult males, three as adult females,
and four as children, two of each sex.
Spouses are listed as "Messcal," "Passtalca"
(Pastaloca), and "Maraquita" (Malaguita).

later sources place the Pataguo along the
Nueces and Frio rivers northeast of Guerrero
(Bolton 1916:297;Figueroa Torres 1963:105;
Gomez Canedo 1968:160, 236; Griffen
1969:164; Hatcher 1932:53; Le6n y otros
1961:219; Maas 1915:36; Tous 1930b:7).
Most of the Pataguo who entered missions
went to San Antonio de Valero at San Antonio, Texas, in whose records at least 31
Pataguo individuals can be traced between
1720 and 1763 (Valero Registers). Small
numbers of Pataguo are identified in each of
the three missions established at Guerrero.
In 1707, when San Francisco Solano was at
San Ildefonso, one adult male "Pataguo" was
recorded; and in 1712 and 1716, when the
same mission was at its San Jose location,
two more adult males were recorded, one
designated as "Pataguo," the other as
"Pataguan." The latter was married to an
"Xarame" (Solano Registers). In the census
of 1734 at San Juan Bautista, two "Pato"
were identified, an adult male and his daughter (Garza Falc6n 1734b: 16), and in the San
Bernardo census of the same year four individuals were identified as "Pataguo": three
adult males and one male child (Garza Falc6n
1734a:22-23 ). The few Pataguo at the
Guerrero missions obviously could not
maintain an ethnic identity very long, and this
is supported by absence of Pataguo in the
1772 census reports.
Mazanet's statements about Indian languages spoken northeast of Guerrero suggest
that the Pataguo may have spoken a dialect of
Coahuilteco (G6mez Canedo 1968:240).

Pataguo

Patzau

In various documents the name Pataguo
occurs in at least 25 forms, the main variations appearing in the terminal syllables, as
shown by Patagu, Patagahu, Pataguac,
Pataguaque, Patahua, Patao, Patau, Patavo,
Pato, and Patou.
Swanton (1940:135) has listed "Patague"
and "Patou" as names for separate groups,
but no evidence has been found to support
this distinction. Such data as are available
indicate that the Pataguo pre-mission territory
was north of the Rio Grande, northwest,
north, and northeast of Guerrero. There
seems to have been an eastward shift, possibly the result of Apache pressure, since the

At least 40 variants of the name Patzau can
be found in Spanish documents and the range
is indicated by the following: Paceo, Pacha,
Pachao, Pachaug, Pacho, Paisau, Pazagual,
Pasajo, Pasxa, Pattsou, Patzar, Pauchau,
Paza, Pazajo, Psaupsau, and Pucha. Swanton (1940:135) and Ruecking (1955a:344347) have listed "Pachaug," "Psaupsau," and
"Patzau" as names of three different Indian
groups, ignoring Hodge's (1910,11:1114,
1123) equation of the three names. Analyses
of mission records reveal that the three names
are synonymous.
Pre-mission records of the Patzau are few
in number, but clearly place them in Texas

159

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

northeast of Guerrero, particularly between
the Nueces and Frio rivers (G6mez Canedo
1968:160, 236; Hatcher 1932:53; Mazanet
1957:352). The name "Pucha" was recorded
in 1684 when Dominguez de Mendoza was in
the western part of the Edwards Plateau
(Bolton 1916:339-340), which suggests that
the Patzau may at times have ranged northward onto the Edwards Plateau.
In 1708 Espinosa stated that "Pazaguales"
were present at San Bernardo (Maas
1915:33), and this is confirmed by the census
of 1734 in which three individuals are identified as "Pacsagual" and "Pasagual": two adult
males and one male child (Garza Falc6n
1734a:22). One female "Pazhajo" was baptized at Mission San Francisco Solano in
1712, when this mission was located at San
Jose (Solano Registers). Three "Pachsa" appear in the 1772 San Juan Bautista census
report: an adult male and his two children,
one male, the other female (V. Rodriguez
1772b: 124). Most of the Patzau who entered
missions went to San Antonio de Valero at
San Antonio, Texas, whose registers permit
identification of at least 48 individuals between the years 1720 and 1765. One Patsau
male at San Antonio de Valero is, in various
register entries, recorded as Pachajuen,
Pachcagua, Pacsau, Pazahu, Pazajo, and
Pazau (Valero Registers).
Locational data and Mazanet's observations on languages spoken in southern Texas
suggest that the Patzau spoke Coahuilteco.

Pausane
Some 15 variants of the name Pausane
have been encountered in Spanish documents, among them Paisano, Paufane, Pauxane, Paysan, and Pauzano. The Pausane premission territory is not clearly recorded, but
at various times after 1700 they were said to
be living at localities in a fairly large inland
area between the lower San Antonio River
and the Rio Grande, and also extending a
short distance across the Rio Grande into
present northern Tamaulipas (Escand6n
1751:19-20; Maas 1915:36-37; Sevillano de
Paredes 1727:49-50, 55).
In 1708 Espinosa stated that some
"Paisanos" were present at Mission San
Bernardo but that others were still living under native conditions east of the Guerrero

missions in the lower part of southern Texas
(Maas 1915:33, 36-37). Later, in 1727,
Sevillano de Paredes (1727:49-50, 55) said
that about 100 "Pausanes" were in southern
Texas, and farther along in the same document he referred to the Pausane as numbering
about 300 and living somewhere on the lower
San Antonio River of Texas. Few of the
Pausane seem to have remained very long at
San Bernardo, for the census of 1734 (Garza
Falc6n 1734a:23) identified only two adult
"Paysano," and that of 1772 identified none.
In 1723 one "Paisan" was baptized at
Mission San Antonio de Valero of San Antonio (Valero Registers). Many of the Pausane
of lower Texas were persuaded by missionaries to move westward and enter Mission
San Francisco Vizarron de los Pausanes in
northeastern Coahuila when it was established in 1737 near present Villa Union (Guadalupe 1754b: 173-183; Morfi 1856:435-436).
In 1778 the Pausane at this same mission
were said to be living in a village consisting
of 12 houses (Anonimo 1778:202-203). It is
the presence of Pausane at Mission San
Francisco Vizarr6n which earlier led me to
assume that the Pausane were native to
northeastern Coahuila (Branda 1976: 711712).
After 1750 some of the unmissionized
Pausane entered Mission San Augustin de
Laredo near Camargo, Tamaulipas. Escandon (1751:20) stated that 18 "Paysanos"
were present there in 1751 and that they had
come to this mission from both sides of the
Rio Grande.
Garcia (1760:title page) indicated that
"Pausanes" were among the missionized
groups that spoke a dialect of Coahuilteco.
Whether they originally spoke Coahuilteco or
had learned it in missions cannot be determined.

Pausaqui
Two Pausaqui individuals were recorded
at San Francisco Solano in 1713 when the
mission was located at San Jose. They consist of an adult male and his newly born son;
the wife is listed as a "Paiuguan" (Payuguan). Hodge (1910,II:426) does not have
an entry for Pausaqui and merely gives the
name on a list of Indian groups said to have
been represented at Mission San Antonio de

-------------------------------

160

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Valero of San Antonio. The name Pausaqui
does not appear in the Valero registers, and it
seems evident that the records of Valero were
confused with those of Solano. The only
known occurrence of the name Pausaqui is in
the baptismal register of San Francisco Solano (Solano Registers). Swanton (1940:135),
however, has listed Pausaqui as the name of
an ethnic group. Ruecking (1965a:347) has
equated Pausaqui with the name Pausay, but
no evidence is cited in support of this
equation. Pausaqui is undoubtedly a variant
of some better known group name, such as
Paachiqui, Pachaque, or Pausay, but at
present not enough evidence is available to
establish a linkage.

Payaya
Some Payaya were present at Mission San
Francisco when it was still located at Guerrero, as is indicated by Olivares (1700:49),
who reported that in 1700 at least 14 Payaya
males were killed in an attack on the mission
by unidentified hostile Indians. Later, after
this mission was moved to San Ildefonso,
two "Payaya" were baptized in 1706-1707:
two adults, one male, the other female (Solano Registers).
For Mission San Juan Bautista, one
"Payaya," an adult male, was reported in the
census of 1734 (Garza Falcon 1734b: 17),
and in the census of 1772 (V. Rodriguez
1772b: 125), two "Payaya" were reported: an
adult male and his son, the man listed as
married to a "Canpacuas." For Mission San
Bernardo no Payaya were reported until the
census of 1772 (V. Rodriguez 1772a:68, 73):
six individuals, two adult males and four
children, two male, two female. Most of the
Payaya entered Mission San Antonio de
Valero at San Antonio. At least 184 Payaya
individuals can be traced through the Valero
records between the years 1719 and 1789
(Valero Registers).
The known pre-mission range of the
Payaya extended from the vicinity of San
Antonio southwestward to the Frio River,
but after 1700 a few Payaya were reported
to be living northeast of San Antonio near
the junction of the Little and Brazos rivers.
Most of what is now known about the
Payaya has been summarized by Campbell
(1975).

Payuguan
Approximately 40 forms of the name
Payuguan appear in Spanish documents, and
the range of variation is suggested by the
following sample: Paiabun, Paiugan, Paiapan, Pajuguan, Pallugan, Payagua, Payahan,
Payavan, Payoan, Payuhuan, and Poyoguan.
Although not abundantly documented, the
pre-mission range of the Payuguan apparently covered a rather large area in extreme
northeastern Coahuila and the adjoining part
of Texas, extending from the Rfo Sabinas
below present Lago de Don Martin northward
across the Guerrero section of the Rio
Grande and then north-northeastward across
the Nueces and Frio rivers (Bolton
1916:339-340; Gomez Canedo 1968:160,
236;Hatcher 1931:53; Maas 1915:16, 18, 23,
29, 36-37; Weddle 1968:31-32, 108-109).
The size of this territory seems to be reflected
in the recorded presence of Payuguan at so
many Spanish missions. The Guerrero locality was probably not far from the geographic
center of the Payuguan territorial range.
Some Payuguan were represented at San
Juan Bautista when it was initially established
on the Rfo Sabinas south of Guerrero in 1699
(San Buenaventura y Salazar 1708: 15), and
in the same year other Payuguan were reported at Mission El Dulce Nombre de Jesus
de Peyotes west of Guerrero near present
Villa Union, Coahuila (Cuervo y Valdes
1699:230, 233-234). When San Juan Bautista was moved to Guerrero in 1701, the Payuguan moved with it (San Buenaventura y
Salazar 1708: 17), but the censuses of 1734
and 1772 reported no Payuguan at San Juan
Bautista. A few Payuguan are said to have
entered San Bernardo (Espinosa 1746:483),
but no date is indicated and the censuses of
1734 and 1772 reported no Payuguan there.
Various documents establish the presence
of Payuguan at San Francisco Solano when it
was founded at Guerrero in 1700 (Cuervo y
Valdes 1700b:24-27; Maas 1915:35-37),
and the mission registers later identify nine
Payuguan: four at the Guerrero location,
three at San Ildefonso, and two at San Jose.
These include three adult males, five adult
females, and one female child, variously
identified as "Paiuguan," "Payuhuan," and
"Payuguan." Spouses are given as "Pausaqui" and "Xarame" (Solano Registers).

161

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

Payuguan also entered still other missions:
Nuestra Senora de los Dolores de la Punta at
Lampazos, northern Nuevo Le6n (Maas
1915:18-23), San Bernardino de la Candela
of eastern Coahuila (Bolton 1913:243, 427),
and San Antonio de Valero at San Antonio,
Texas (10 individuals are identified in the
Valero registers between 1720and1745).
A few details on Payuguan foodstuffs
have been recorded: rats, prickly-pear fruits,
and unspecified roots and fruits. Mazanet's
statements on languages spoken within the
Payuguan range suggest that they spoke a dialect of Coahuilteco (G6mez Canedo
1968:240).

Piedras Chiquitas
This name, also rendered as Piedras Chicas, is Spanish ("little stones"). In 1698 the
group was mentioned by Cuervo y Valdes
(1698:6) in a context which suggests that
they originally lived somewhere in northern
Coahuila. The name does not appear in registers of Mission San Francisco Solano, but
San Buenaventura y Salazar (Maas 1915:5455; Weddle 1968:54-55) noted that some of
the Piedras Chicas were at this mission when
it was located at San Ildefonso. As the name
is missing from the Solano registers, it
is possible that the Spanish name refers
to one of the groups listed by a native
name.
Piniquu
One Piniquu female of unspecified age
was recorded at San Francisco Solano in
1704, when the mission was still at Guerrero
(Solano Registers). The name occurs in no
other Spanish documents, although it is mistakenly said to occur in the baptismal records
of Mission San Antonio de Valero of San
Antonio, Texas (Hodge 1910,II:426).
Bolton (in Hodge 1910,II:256) equated
Piniquu with Minicau (Manico), but this is
evidently based upon the slight similarity in
names. He failed to note that Piniquu and
Minicau individuals were baptized on the
same day at San Francisco Solano. Absence
of the name from documents referring to
areas east of Guerrero suggests a more westerly placement of the Piniquu territorial
range.

Pita
Establishing a clear identity for the group
recorded as Pita is difficult because of certain
complications. Pita occurs as the first two
syllables in two other recorded group names
of the same general area, Pitahay and Pitalac,
and this suggests that Pita may at times have
been a contracted form of either Pitahay or
Pitalac. Pita is also a Spanish word with
several meanings, one of which is the name
for the maguey or century plant, an important
food and fiber resource in both aboriginal and
modem Mexico. Thus it is possible that Pita
is not a name of Indian origin but a name
given to a specific Indian group by Spaniards.
The population here referred to as Pita was
probably first recorded in 1708 by San Buenaventura y Salazar (Mass 1915:23), who
listed "Pittales" as one of nine Indian groups
that spoke the same unidentified language and
lived along both sides of the Rio Grande in
an easterly direction from Mission Nuestra
Senora de los Dolores de la Punta near present-day Lampazos, northern Nuevo Le6n.
Individuals from these nine groups, he
wrote, came to Dolores to visit relatives and
trade. The "Pittales" of this document could
have been the Pitalac, but Pita seems to be the
better identification, since the Pita are mentioned in this and later documents as being
represented in the mission Indian population
of Nuestra Senora de los Dolores. Elsewhere
(in Branda 1976:736) I have identified these
"Pittales" as Pitalac, but this interpretation
now seems to be untenable.
Just where the nine groups were living on
the Rio Grande cannot be determined with
precision. If the phrase por partte del Oriente
is taken literally, map study shows that the
section of the Rio Grande east of Lampazos
includes stretches of the river both upstream
and downstream from modern Laredo,
Texas. This would place the "Pittales" (Pita)
and their associates in an area that includes
parts of northeastern Coahuila, extreme
northern Nuevo Le6n, and the northwestemmost extension of Tamaulipas, as well as
adjacent parts of Texas, mainly Webb County
but possibly also western Zapata County.
In 1727 Sevillano de Paredes (1727:5455) visited Mission Nuestra Senora de los
Dolores and reported that its Indian popula-

162
tion at that time consisted of 50 individuals
which he identified as "Pitas" and "Pajalves."
These Pita must therefore have entered Dolores sometime between 1698, when the
mission was established, and 1727, the year
of Sevillano's mission inspection. In 1708
San Buenaventura y Salazar had failed to indicate if any Pita were then living at the mission, but he did specify the presence of several groups previously said to be associated
with the Pita.
Few Pita were recorded at missions north
of Lampazos. In 1727 one adult male "Pita"
was baptized at San Antonio de Valero of
San Antonio, Texas (Valero Registers).
Portillo (1886:283) quotes from a document
of 1738 which indicates that two families of
"Pitas" were then living at San Juan Bautista,
and the census of 1772 identifies one adult
male "Pita" still living at the same mission
(V. Rodriguez 1772b: 123). In 1793
Lafora ( 1939: 196-197) listed the names of
Indian groups represented at nine missions of
Coahuila, and the name "Pitas" appears on
the list. Among the Coahuila missions he
visited was San Juan Bautista. This is the
last reference to living Pita that has been
found.

Pitahay
The Pitahay are known in Spanish documents by at least eight notably similar names:
Pitahaya, Pitajaya, Pitanay, Pitijaya, Piutaay,
Putai, Putaay, and Putay. This name may
have been given to the group by Spaniards or
it may be a native Indian name that fortuitously resembled the Spanish word pitahaya
("night-blooming cereus"). The earliest
known references to the Pitahay are provided
by Mazanet who, while traveling in 1690 and
again in 1691, encountered them on the present Frio River, evidently in or near Frio
County, Texas, where "Putaay" were associated with 15 differently named Indian groups
(G6mez Canedo 1968:160,236; Hatcher
1932:53; Mazanet 1957:356).
In the year 1708, Espinosa (Maas 1915:3637)1isted "Pitijayas" among the Indian groups
then said to be living across the Rio Grande
in a generalized easterly direction from the
Guerrero missions, apparently in the same
area indicated earlier by Mazanet. In 1713 an
unspecified number of Pitahay families from

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

the "north" were persuaded to enter Mission
San Bernardino de la Candela of eastern
Coahuila (Bolton 1913:423), but nothing
further seems to have been recorded about
these Pitahay. Thereafter a few Pitahay entered Mission San Bernardo, for in the
census of 1734 (Garza Falc6n 1734a:21, 23)
two families consisting of four individuals
(two adult males, each with one young son)
are identified as "Putai" and "Putay." The
spouses are not ethnically identified. Apparently the Pitahay at San Bernardo lost their
ethnic identity prior to the Rodriguez census
of 1772, which records no Pitahay at San
Bernardo. Candela and San Bernardo are the
only Spanish missions with which the Pitahay have been linked.
From the scant documentary record it
would appear that the pre-mission territorial
range of the Pitahay was entirely north of the
Rio Grande. Mazanet's remarks on languages spoken in that area suggest that the
Pitahay may have spoken a dialect of
Coahuilteco (G6mez Canedo 1968:240).
A number of errors concerning the Pitahay
should be corrected. Hodge (1910,II:264,
331) lists "Putaay" as the name of an Indian
group separate and distinct from the Pitahay,
which is not verifiable. This error has been
perpetuated by Swanton (1940: 135) and by
Webb (1952,II:382, 421). The Pitahay, as
interpreted by Ruecking (1955a:347, 354,
356), should be disregarded, since through
an apparent clerical error he gave data on
"Pitahaya" under the heading "Pita," and also
equated "Putaay" with "Pausay," for which
no supporting evidence has been found.
Ewers (in Berlandier 1969:10ln) has suggested that "Pitales," a misreading of "Pitalac" is synonymous with Pitahay, but this is
not supported by any evidence now available.

Pitalac
The name Pitalac is not mentioned in premission documents of the general Guerrero
area and is recorded only once, relatively late
in time, in connection with one Guerrero
mission. In the San Juan Bautista census of
1772, one adult, unmarried male is identified
as "Pitalac" (V. Rodriguez 1772b:129). This
individual probably came from one of the San
Antonio missions. According to various
documents, the Pitalac were at least initially

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

associated with three missions that had been
moved from eastern Texas to San Antonio in
1731: Nuestra Senora de la Purfsima Concepcion de Acuna, San Francisco de la Espada, and San Juan Capistrano. Three Indian
populations said to total about 1,000 individuals (an estimate that is probably exaggerated) were persuaded to enter these San Antonio missions, the group names being designated as Pacao, Pajalat, and Pitalac or Pitalaque (summarized by Bolton in Hodge
1910,11:92-93, 191, 435-436).
One source (Perez de Mezqufa 1731 :36)
indicates that the Pitalac were also known by
an alternate name, Alobja. Bolton's summary states that the three Indian groups came
from the Frio and Nueces rivers, presumably
meaning somewhere near the junction of the
two streams. Two sources not cited by
Bolton indicate that prior to 1731 the three
groups lived west of the lower San Antonio
River in the area now embraced by Bee and
Goliad counties, which is not far from the
junction of the Frio and Nueces rivers
(Sevillano de Paredes 1727:49; Wheat 1957:
Map No. 115).
Except for the Concepcion marriage register, the early basic records of the three San
Antonio missions have not survived. Eight of
the Concepcion register entries, dated 17331759, refer to four individuals (two males,
two females) as "Patalca" (Concepcion Marriage Register). Since the Pitalac were linked
with Concepci6n in documents of 1731, it
appears reasonable to equate the two names.
If this interpretation is accepted, it is no
longer necessary to consider Patalca as the
name of a separate ethnic group of southern
Texas, as has been customary for some time
(Hodge 1910,II:93, 182-183; Branda
1976:709; Ruecking 1955a:344). One alternative remains, however: Patalca could be a
variant of the name Patacal; but the evidence
cited above better supports the equation of
Patalca with Pitalac. There appears to be no
basis for equating Patacal with Pitalac.

Po mu Ium
The Pomulum were recorded under at least
13 additional names, all recognizably similar:
Molia, Muliam, Pamoliam, Pamuliam, Pamulan, Pamulian, Pamuliem, Pamulien, Pamulies, Pamulis, Pamulum, Panulam, and

163

Pomuluma. Hodge (1910,II:278) referred to
them as "Pomuluma" and, at the time of
writing, knew them from only one source
(Orozco y Berra 1864:303). The Pomulum
seem to have first become known to Europeans in 1670 as one of numerous Indian
groups from the "north" that occasionally
raided Spanish settlements in the Saltillo and
Monterrey areas (Griffen 1969:164). Their
native territorial range appears to have covered parts of extreme northeastern Coahuila,
extreme northern Nuevo Le6n, northwestern
Tamaulipas, and the closely adjoining portions of Texas. Traveling Spaniards never
reported visits to specific Pomulum encampments, and the Pomulum are known principally from documents written at Spanish
missions of northeastern Coahuila and northern Nuevo Leon.
It is clear that some of the Pomulum were
among the Indian groups that entered Mission
San Bernardo when it was officially established in 1703 (Ximenes 1762a.:112-113;
Morfi 1935b:321). In 1708 Espinosa (Maas
1915:36-37) listed "Pamulies" among the
groups then living across the Rio Grande in
an easterly direction from modem Guerrero;
and in the same year, although referring to an
unspecified earlier time, San Buenaventura y
Salazar (Maas 1915:23) also mentioned
"Pamulies" as one of nine groups from the
Rio Grande who spoke the same unidentified
language and who visited relatives and traded
at Mission Nuestra Senora de los Dolores
near present Lampazos in northern Nuevo
Le6n. The nine groups were said to be living
along the Rio Grande east of that mission,
which would place them in the Laredo area.
Apparently very few Pomulum remained
long at Mission San Bernardo. The census
of 1734 identifies one adult male "Pamuliem"
(Garza Falc6n 1734a:22), and the census of
1772 identifies one "Pamulien," an adult female married to a "Huacacil" (Guachichil) (V.
Rodriguez 1772a:70). Some "Pamulies" are
known to have entered Mission San Miguel
de Aguayo, founded in 1675 near Monclova,
but the time of mission entry is not recorded
(Portillo 1886:251).

Pomuzeno
In the 1772 census taken at San Juan
Bautista, one adult male, a widower, is iden-

164

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

tified as a "Pomuzeno" (V. Rodriguez
1772b:127). This name may refer to the
same group as the Pamasu reported at nearby
San Bernardo in 1727, but there is not
enough recorded information to establish
such an identity. See also Pamasu.

Samioj
In the 1734 census of the Indians at Mission San Bernardo, one adult male and his
three children (sexes unspecified) are listed as
de naci6n Samioj (Garza Falc6n 1734a:21).
The name Samioj, as written by Garza Falcon, probably should have been rendered as
"Sanioj," which is similar to the group name
"Sonayan," also rendered in various excerpts
from the same primary document as
"Sanaian," "Sanyau," and "Sonayau." In
1690, and in the locality where Mission San
Bernardo was later established, Mazanet encountered "Sanyau" with five other named
Indian groups (Gomez Canedo 1968:160; see
also Dr. Velasco 1958:318).
If this equation of Samioj and Sonayan is
accepted, it may be said that their late seventeenth-century territorial range was probably
along both sides of the Rio Grande in the area
immediately surrounding Guerrero. No similar names have been found in other reports
of the various Spanish expeditions that traveled northeastward from Monclova before or
after 1690.
Hodge (1910,II:165) has suggested that
the "Sonayan" (actually a misreading of Sonayau) may have been identical with the
Kouyam (or Kouayon) recorded in 1687 by
Henri Joutel, chronicler of the La Salle expedition to Texas. This suggestion is best disregarded, not only on phonetic grounds but
also because Joutel (in Stiles 1906: 126)
placed the Kouyam northeast of Matagorda
Bay, over 250 miles from the Sanyau location recorded by Mazanet three years later.

Siaguan
Over 50 variants of the name Siaguan can
be found in various documents both published and unpublished. A number of these
are the result of clerical and typographical errors. The range of forms is shown by the
following abbreviated list: Chaguan, Chamaguan, Chauhan, Chiaguan, Choguan, Ma-

huame, Ohaguame, Sciaguan, Siaban, Tziaban, Xhiahuan, Xiguan, and Ziaban. The
original Siaguan territory extended from the
Rfo Sabinas of northeastern Coahuila (below
Lago de Don Martin) northward across the
Rio Grande to the Nueces River northeast of
Guerrero. On the east the Siaguan sometimes
ranged as far as the Laredo area (Cuervo y
Valdes 1701:8-9; Gomez Canedo 1968:160,
235; Hatcher 1932:52; Maas 1915:16, 23-24;
Mazanet 1957:354).
Some "Chaguan" were at San Juan
Bautista in 1699 when this mission was first
established on the Rio Sabinas (Cuervo y
Valdes 1700a:12, 16; 1701:8-9, 12-14), but
few of these seem to have followed the mission when it was moved to Guerrero in 1701.
The 1734 census (Garza Falcon 1734b: 18)
recorded only one adult male "Chaguan," and
none was recorded in the census of 1772.
At San Bernardo, however, more Siaguan
were reported. The 1734 census report (Garza Falcon 1734a:20-22) identifies 17 "Chaguan": seven adult males and 10 children
(sexes unidentified). The census of 1772 (V.
Rodriguez 1772a:65-68) shows seven individuals as "Chaguan" and "Chajuanahan."
Included are three adult males, two adult
females, and two children. Spouses are listed
as "Jacao," "Paco" (Pacoa), and "Pastaloc."
At least 24 "Ciaban," "Siaban," and "Siaguan" are identified in the baptismal register
of San Francisco Solano (Solano Registers).
Ten of these can be linked with the mission at
its Guerrero location (1704); the remainder
(14) can be linked with its San Ildefonso
location (170~ 1707). Of the 24 individuals,
15 are adult males, four are adult females,
and five are children, three male, two female,
ages one to 10 years. Only two spouses are
identified: "Macapao" and "Xarame."
Siaguan also entered other missions:
Nuestra Senora de los Dolores de la Punta at
present Lampazos, northern Nuevo Leon
(San Buenaventura y Salazar 1699:44), San
Miguel de Aguayo at Monclova, Coahuila
(Portillo 1886:251), and San Antonio de
Valero at San Antonio, Texas. At least 49
Siaguan individuals can be traced through the
San Antonio de Valero registers from 1720
until late in the century, the group name being
variously rendered as Chiaguan, Sciaguan,
Siaban, Siguan, Tziaban, Xhiahuan, and
Zhiaguan (Valero Registers).

--------------

EIBNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

Only one cultural detail has been recorded
for the Siaguan: the use of prickly-pear fruit
as food (Maas 1915:23-24). Mazanet's observations on languages spoken in southern
Texas suggest that the Siaguan spoke a dialect of Coahuilteco (G6mez Canedo
1968:240).
Hodge (1910,II:lll, 563)has given
"Ohaguames" and "Siaguan" as names of two
separate Indian groups, and in this he was
followed by Swanton (1940:134-135) and
Ruecking (1955a:329, 366). It is now known
that "Ohaguames" is a misreading of "Chaguames." "Mahuames" is listed by Hodge
(1907,1:805; 1910,II:1085) as a synonym for
"Mariames," but again "Mahuames" is a
misreading of "Chahuames."

Siausi
One "Siausi" individual, a two-year-old
girl, possibly an orphan, was baptized at San
Francisco Solano in 1707, when the mission
was at San Ildefonso (Solano Registers).
This is one of 10 similar ethnic names which,
without much question, all refer to the same
group: Ciaefier, Ciaesier, Haeser, Saesse,
Siaexe, Saeser, Siansi, Siausi, and Xaeser.
As considerable confusion surrounds these
names, it is here suggested that Saesse be
selected as the standard name for future use
because it occurs in the earliest document
(1675) and better represents the central orthographic tendency. The confusion arises
from the fact that Hodge has presented "Haeser" and "Siansi" as names of two different
groups (Hodge 1907,I:619; 1910,II:664).
This error has never been corrected (see
Branda 1976:367, 878; Ruecking 1954a:7,
21; 1955a:274, 359, 363, 365; Swanton
1940: 134, 135).
Such records as have been found i ndicate that between the years 1675 and 1708
the Saesse (Siausi) ranged both sides of the
Rio Grande between Eagle Pass and Del
Rio, Texas, the area extending from the
Coahuila mountain front northeastward
across the Rio Grande at least as far as
the southern margin of the Edwards Plateau of Texas (Alessio Robles 1938:232;
Bolton 1916:299; Maas 1915:36-37). This
would place the Saesse generally west,
northwest, and north of the Guerrero mission
center.

165

Hodge (1910,11:426, 546) and Santos
(1966-1967:158) have reported "Siansi" and
"Siausi" individuals at Mission San Antonio
de Valero of San Antonio. This is in error.
"Siansi" is a misreading of "Siausi," which
occurs only in the records of San Francisco
Solano.

Sijame
The name Sijame has been recorded in at
least 25 different ways, including Ciajame,
Cijame, Hihame, Injame, Jijame, Scijame,
Scipxame, Sicame, Sicxacama, Sixama,
Syame, Tziame, Xixame, and Zixame. The
census of 1772 for Mission San Juan Bautista (V. Rodriguez 1772b:123) identifies one
"Sixama," an adult male, married to a
"Messcal," but this group is known to have
been at other missions of northeastern
Coahuila west of Guerrero. At El Nombre de
Jesus de Peyotes, near present Villa Uni6n,
Coahuila, 76 "Sixames" were reported in
1734 (Zelis 1734:8-9). This mission had
been founded in 1698. When San Francisco
Vizarr6n was founded nearby in 173 7, Sijame were present, and the same missionary
report renders the name as both "Sijames"
and "Hijames." It is said that the name
means pescado, Spanish for "fish that have
been caught for food" (An6nimo 1778:202203; Morfi 1856:433-434).
The names Sijame and Hijame, noted
above, have led to some confusion. Hodge
(1907,I:549; 1910,II:569-570) ambiguously
refers to Sijame and Hihame as representing
two separate groups and also designates the
two names as synonymous. Swanton
(1940:134, 136) later listed them as separate
groups, but Ruecking (1955a:367-368) regarded the two names as synonymous.
The available information seems to indicate
that the pre-mission Sijame territorial range
was along the Coahuila mountain front west
of Guerrero (Orozco y Berra 1864:302-303).
Some Sijame who chose not to enter missions in northeastern Coahuila, along with
other local groups, migrated northeastward,
and between the years 1709 and 1716 were
reported in the area that extends from San
Antonio northeastward to the lower San
Gabriel River in Texas (Shelby 1923: 17 6177; Tous 1930a:5; 1930b:16-17). It is this
secondary location which has led to the sug-

166
gestion that the Sijame may have spoken a
Tonkawan language (Hodge 1910,11:569570; Swanton 1940:136), which no longer
seems plausible. After 1~1~ some of the~e
Sijame migrants entered Mission San Antonio
de Valero at San Antonio, whose records
permit identification of at least 39 Sijame individuals between the years 1719 and 1763
(Valero Registers).

Tejas
Three "Teja" individuals, a man ~d his
two children (his wife is not ethnically
identified), are recorded in the 1734 census
report for San Juan Bautista (Garza Falc6n
1734b: 15). "Tejas" is an alternate name for
the Hasinai a Caddoan-speaking assemblage
of central 'eastern Texas (Griffith 1951;
Swanton 1942). As Guerrero was at the time
on the main route of travel from Coahuila to
the Spanish missions and settlements of eastern Texas this family probably came to San
Juan Bautista with Spaniards returning from
that area. They may have gone back to their
home territory shortly after this census was
taken.
Tepehuan
Six Tepehuan can be iden~fied in the baptismal register of San Francisco Solano for
1706-1707, when the mission was at San
Ildefonso (Solano Registers). The group
name is variously rendered as "Tepeguan,"
"Tepehuana," and "Tequeguan." Included
are one adult male, three adult females, and
two female children, ages two and six years.
One of the children has a personal name that
is probably of Indian origin, Guaparamana.
Spouses are listed as "Mauyga" (or
"Manyga"), "Mescal," and "Quesal" (Gueiquesal). The Tepehuan originally lived ~n
Durango, but after their first major revolt m
1616-1618 (Bancroft 1884, I:319-329;
Dunne 1936' Saravia 1937), some of them
moved northeastward into Coahuila and
Nuevo Le6n, where they were noted as
early as 1626 (Cavazos Garza 1966a:190,
199, 276-277). The Tepehuan of San
Francisco Solano were probably a small
remnant that survived later rebellions in
the Bols6n de Mapimi'. area (Griffen
1969:passim).

CAMPBEU...: INDIANS

Terocodame
In various documents the Terocodame are
referred to by at least 25 similar n~mes, ~f
which the following are representative: Hierquodame, Hyroquodame, Hyroquodame,
Iedocodame, Perocodame, Teocodame, Teodoran Terrodan, Texocodame, Thezoccodame' and Toxocodame. Their original
territ~ry is difficult to define but app~ars to
have been a fairly large area on both sides of
the Rio Grande north, west, and southwest
of present Eagle Pass, Texas (Bolton
1916:288, 2 99-300; Figueroa Torres
1963:118-11~; Griffen 1969:38-39, 56, 5961, 89, 95, 97, 166).
The earliest reference to the Terocodame
seems to have been under the name
"Teodoran" in 1675 (Bolton 1916:299-301).
The Bosque-Larios expedi.tio~ of tha~. year
encountered them, along with Xoman (Jumano), "Teaname," and "Teimamar" (T1;1mamar), some 25 miles north of the R10
Grande, apparently somewhere north of
present Eagle Pass, Texas. The four groups
were encamped near a stream r~ferred to ~y
unspecified Indians as Ona, which they said
meant "salty." The Spaniards made a head
count of the total population, which was
1172 (425 males and 747 women and children). A few cultural details were reco~ded
in connection with gifts which the Indians
gave to the Spaniards: ~i~ces of tallow and
hides (animals not specified, but the. Spaniards reported bison as numerous m the
vicinity). The hides were said to have b.een
used by the Indians for clothing and beddmg.
In 1688 and ~gain in 1694, Teroc?'1ame
were mentioned in documents concemmg Indian rebellions of central Coahuila that were
put down by Spanish soldiers (Griffen
1969:38-39, 95). Missionary reports of
1701 indicate an expectation that the large
(mui crecida) Terocodame group would enter
San Juan Bautista, but this did not happen
(Sarmiento 1701:72; Weddle 1968:46-47).
Instead they eventually entered Mission San
Francisco Solano after it was moved from
Guerrero to its San Ildefonso location near
modem Zaragoza, Coahuila.
.
..
At least 73 individuals can be 1dentif1ed as
"Terocodame" or "Theroquodame" in the
baptismal register of San Francisco Solano.
All except five of these were recorded for the

ETIINOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

years 1706-1708, when the mission was at
San Ildefonso. The remaining five were recorded for the year 1712, when the mission
was at San Jose. Of the 73 persons, 30 are
adult males, 15 are adult females, and 28 are
children (16 male, 12 female, ages ranging
from four months to eight years). Most personal names are Spanish, but a few seem to
be of native origin: male-Cocossi, Gaguimo, Manomo, Taramo; female-Vidguadan. Spouses are identified as "Bobor"
(Babor), "Cucusa," "Gavilan" (Gavilan),
"Hicaragrande" (Jfcaragrande), "Juman" (Jumano ), "Manos Prietas," "Matuimi," "Maubedan," "Mauyga" (or "Manyga"), other
"Terocodame" (five cases), "Ticmamar" (Tumamar), "Tuteneiboica," "Viddaquimamar,"
and "Xarame" (Solano Registers). Most of
the groups named on this spouse list are of
western origin, that is, from Coahuila west of
the Guerrero area, and were not represented
at either San Juan Bautista or San Bernardo.
In 1718 San Francisco Solano was moved
from its San Jose location to San Antonio,
where it became known as Mission San Antonio de Valero. Very few Terocodame followed the mission to its new location. Only
four Terocodame individuals can be found in
the Valero registers: one adult male, two adult
females, and one male child (1719-1732).
Santos (1966-1967:158) has reported 23
"Texocodame" at San Antonio de Valero, but
inspection of the records does not confirm
this. The Valero records were evidently confused with those of San Francisco Solano.
After San Francisco Solano moved from
its San Ildefonso location, most of the Terocodame there may have moved southward
to enter Mission Santa Rosa de N adadores
northwest of Monclova. In documents of
1714-1722, the Terocodame of Nadadores
were sometimes mentioned in reports of minor raids and rebellions in central and western Coahuila (Griffen 1969:56, 59-61, 6566, 97-98). It is probably the Terocodame
of Nadadores who are referred to in documents of 1724-1728, 1762, and 1767 as being among the Indian groups still present at
Coahuila missions (Kinnaird 1958:154; Portillo 1886:251; Rivera y Villal6n 1945:131).
The Terocodame seem to have been last reported in a document of 1786, which indicates that sometime before that date the Indians at N adadores had revolted and few had

167

returned. After that the few Terocodame
survivors were probably absorbed by the
Mescalero and other Apache groups that had
moved into northern Coahuila.
Swanton (1940:5, 54-55) has published a
list of 21 words "from a dialect spoken near
the Mission San Francisco Solano" and said
to have been recorded between 1703 and
1708. This list had been discovered by H. E.
Bolton. Nothing is said about which Indian
group or groups spoke the dialect represented, which Swanton recognized as being
different from Coahuilteco as recorded by
Garcia (1-760). Goddard (MS) has recently
examined the manuscript of Swanton's
publication and reports that it contains an insert that was not published. According to
this insert, Bolton had found the word list
near the end of the baptismal register of San
Francisco Solano and regarded it as a sample
of Terocodame speech. No reasons for this
judgment appear in the insert. A point at issue here is the fact that two Indian groups
were numerically dominant at San Ildefonso,
where the word list was probably assembled.
These were the Terocodame and the Xarame,
and of the two the latter outnumbered the
former. Bolton's basis for selecting the Terocodame may never be known, but I am inclined to agree with his selection for the following reason. The Xarame were a more
easterly group and were already known to the
missionaries who worked at San Francisco
Solano, whereas the Terocodame and their
associates were new. The Terocodame dialect or language, which Goddard now refers
to as the Solano dialect, was more likely to
have been recorded by the missionaries.

Tilijae
The name Tilijae is known by at least 45
recognizable orthographic variants, among
them Alijae, Filixaye, Teloja, Thiloja, Tilofaya, Titijay, and Tolujaa. In 1708 Espinosa
(Maas 1915:33) wrote that about 60 "Titijayas" had recently entered Mission San Juan
Bautista but that most of them were away at
the time of writing. In 1727 Sevillano de
Paredes (1727:42-43) identified the "Filijayes" as one of the three most numerous
groups represented at San Juan Bautista, the
total Indian population at the mission then
being about 240. These Tilijae must have left

168

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

the mission during the next few years because the mission census of 1734 (Garza
Falcon 1734b:16) recorded only one adult
male "Tilihay." Some had returned by 1738,
when 37 "Tilijayas" were reported (Portillo
1886:283). Thereafter the Tilijae seem to
have left San Juan Bautista for good. One
individual is mentioned in a document of
1754 (Guadalupe 1754b: 178), but the census
of 1772 reported no Tilijae.
The Tilijae who abandoned San Juan
Bautista may have gone to other missions.
Some "Tilijai" were at San Francisco Vizarron shortly after its foundation in 1737
near present Villa Union, Coahuila, west of
Guerrero (Guadalupe 1754b: 178). Others
entered missions at San Antonio, Texas, after
1731. In the marriage register of Nuestra
Senora de la Purlsima Concepcion de Acuna
one "Tiloja" is recorded for 1733 (Concepcion Marriage Register), and "Thelojas"
were said to be present at this mission in
1743 (Santa Ana 1743:69). At least 20 "Thelojas" were present at Mission San Juan
Capistrano in 1737 (Habig 1968:164).
In 1675, before permanent missions were
established in the area, the Tilijae apparently
ranged mainly over northeastern Coahuila,
particularly in the more easterly section
(Bolton 1916:304). "Tilalajais" were at Mission San Bernardino de la Candela of eastern
Coahuila at or shortly after its foundation in
1690 (Alessio Robles 1938:272, 385-386).
After 1700, however, Tilijae were reported
north of the Rio Grande in southern Texas,
especially in the Nueces River valley east of
the Guerrero missions. In 1727 Sevillano de
Paredes (1727:43) estimated that 300 "Tilixes" were living along the Nueces River
below the Pampopa.
Garcia (1760:title page) identified "Tilijayas" as one of the mission groups that
spoke dialects of Coahuilteco.

Tlascalteco
One "Tlascalteca" male, Pedro de la Cruz,
was identified as the godfather of a Terocodame child baptized at San Francisco Solano
in 1712, when this mission was located at
San Jose (Solano Registers). The Tlascaltecans, a Nahuatl-speaking group of southern
Mexico (east of Mexico City), aided Cortez in
the conquest of Mexico and thereafter had a

most-favored status among the Indians of
Mexico. They were used by Spaniards in
exploration, warfare, and colonizing (Gibson
1953; Simmons 1964). Christianized Tlascaltecan families were sometimes settled at
newly founded missions of northeastern
Mexico to serve as models for the huntingand-gathering Indians.

Toboso
One Toboso female, said to be 80 years of
age, was recorded at San Francisco Solano in
1706, when the mission was at San Ildefonso
(Solano Registers). Griffen's (1969:73-103)
studies indicate that the original Toboso territory was probably in southeastern Chihuahua, but that by the middle seventeenth
century they had been displaced and were
ranging widely over the Bols6n de Mapimi
area of eastern Chihuahua and western
Coahuila. They were greatly reduced in
Spanish-Indian wars, and by the latter part of
the century not very many were left. The
name Toboso was at times loosely used by
Spaniards to refer to the Toboso and other
closely associated refugee groups of the Bols6n de Mapimi desert. As the Toboso were
traditionally hostile to Spaniards, very few of
them entered missions anywhere. The elderly female at San Francisco Solano may
have been a captive or the sole survivor of
one of the small refugee groups. Griffen
(1969: 142) has discredited the belief, long
held, that the Toboso were either Apache or
pre-Apache Athapaskan speakers.

Tripas Blancas
For the period 1706-1708, when Mission
San Francisco Solano was at San Ildefonso,
20 Tripas Blancas (Spanish for "white bellies") are recorded in the baptismal register.
Included are five adult males, two adult females, and 13 children (10 males, three females, ages five months to seven years).
Except for one "Vitdemamar" (Viddaquimamar), all spouses are listed as other "Tripas
Blancas" (Solano Registers). The presence
of Tripas Blancas at San Francisco Solano is
also confirmed by Espinosa (Maas 1915:35)
and by San Buenaventura y Salazar (1708:25).
The pre-mission territorial range of the Tripas
Blancas cannot be clearly specified, but

------------------------

--

--~-------------

169

ETHNOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

records of participation in raids and rebellions
suggest a western location, possibly central
Coahuila (Alessio Robles 1938:417-418,
550; Bolton 1913:423; Griffen 1969:54, 60,
103, 168; Hodge 1910,II:819; Wheat
1957,I:Map No. 115).

Tuma mar
This name occurs in about 30 different
forms, among which are Feimama, Jaimamar, Lumamar, Taimamar, Tasmamar,
Teimamar, Ticmamar, Timama, Trasmama,
Tuimamar, and Tunmamar. Some variants
are obviously the product of bad handwriting. In Hodge (1910,11:672, 837) there are
separate entries for "Taimamares" and "Tumamar," but in the synonymy section the two
are consistently equated.
The pre-mission territory of the Tumamar
is not easily defined but seems to have been a
large area in northern Coahuila and the
closely adjoining part of Texas just north of
the Rio Grande, all of it west and northwest
of the Guerrero mission center (Alessio
Robles 1938:232, 255; Bolton 1911:79;
1916:299; Figueroa Torres 1963:77, 118;
Griffen 1969:xii, 93-93).
In the baptismal register of Mission San
Francisco Solano, 20 individuals are identified as "Ticmamar," "Trimamar," and "Tumamar." Included are seven adult males, six
adult females, and seven children (four male,
three female, ages one to six years).
Eighteen were baptized at San Ildefonso
(1706-1707) and two at San Jose (1713).
Spouses are listed as "Gabilan," "Terocodame," and other "Ticmamar." The personal
name of one female, rendered in two ways, is
probably of Indian origin: Jurgaquadan,
Terguejuadan (Solano Registers).
One "Tumamar'' is recorded in the census
of 1734 taken at San Juan Bautista (Garza
Falc6n 1734b:l5). Some of the Tumamar
migrated northeastward after 1700 and lived
at the refugee encampment known as
Rancherfa Grande, near the junction of the
Little and Brazos rivers of east-central Texas
(Hodge 1910,11:354). Some of these migrants eventually entered Mission San Antonio de Valero at San Antonio, in the registers
of which at least 15 "Tumamar" are identifiable after 1722. In various entries one indi-

vidual is identified as "Tamamare," "Ticmama," and "Timamar" (Solano Registers).

Tusan
In 1762 Ximenes (1762b: 106) reported
that some Tusan had arrived at Mission San
Juan Bautista in the preceding year, and he
expressed disappointment over the fact that
only five individuals had agreed to receive
religious instruction. In copies of the Ximenes report, the name Tusan was misread
as "Juran" and "Turan." Ximenes also stated
that these Tusan had come from the east and
that they were also known by another name,
Carrizo. During the second half of the
eighteenth century, the name Carrizo was
often used collectively to refer to remnants of
various Indian groups living along both sides
of the Rio Grande between Laredo and the
Gulf coast. At times the name was used to
refer to both Comecrudo and Cotoname,
possibly because in that area carrizo (Spanish
for "cane") was commonly used in Indian
house construction (Gatschet 1891:38; Kress
and Hatcher 1931:35; Wheat 1957,I:Maps.
No. 115, 149; Wilcox 1946:349, 355-356).
The name Tusan appears only in documents pertaining to San Juan Bautista and
was probably the native name for one of the
more westerly "Carrizo" groups. The name
"Tuisoni," which identifies an adult female in
the San Juan Bautista census report of 1772
(V. Rodriguez 1772b), is evidently a variant
of Tusan.
Hodge (1910,11:841, 854) has distinguished between "Tusanes" and "Tusonid,"
but these are now best regarded as names for
the same Indian group. The sources cited by
Hodge indicate that both names originated at
San Juan Bautista during the period 17621772, and his "Tusonid" is probably the
same as "Tuisoni" of the 1772 census report.
Hodge's distinction between Tusanes and
Tusonid was followed by both Swanton
(1940:136) and Ruecking (1955a:384).
Some of the figures given for the Tusan
population at San Juan Bautista are erroneous. Hodge (1910,11:841) refers to the
presence of 213 "Tusanes" at San Juan
Bautista in 1761. This figure refers not to the
Tusan alone but to the entire mission Indian
population of 1761. Ruecking (1955a:18,

170
384) cited Hodge's figure of 213 on one page
but on another gave a figure of 102.
The name Carrizo continued in use until
the middle of the nineteenth century, when
the assemblage of remnants known by that
name lost its identity in northeastern Mexico
and southern Texas (Berlandier 1969:51, 62,
85, 165; Nance 1964:233, 470, 540, 552;
Winfrey and Day 1966,III:261-262). Goddard (MS:3, 15-17, 19) is currently making a
study of "Carrizo" speech samples recorded
in the nineteenth century.

Tuteneiboica
In the baptismal register of San Francisco
Solano, two Tuteneiboica individuals are
identified for the year 1706, when the mission was at San Ildefonso. The pair consists
of a man and his one-year-old daughter; the
wife is listed as "Terocodame" (Solano Registers). Hodge (1910,II:732, 733, 856) has
an entry for the Tuteneiboica, but he also has
a separate entry for a similar name, Tetanauoica, which cites a statement by Bolton
that an Indian (apparently male) of that group
was buried at San Francisco Solano in 1707.
I have been unable to find this in the San
Francisco Solano burial register, which may
now have some entries missing. It is possible
that Tuteneiboica and Tetanauoica are merely
variants of the same group name and that the
population originally lived in southern Coahuila. Griffen ( 1969: 167, 172) found records of "Tetonbopoca" and "Tetenobapar" in
Parras documents of 1636-1638.
Uracha
Documents pertaining to the Guerrero
missions do not contain the name Uracha, but
the baptismal register of Mission San Antonio
de Valero at San Antonio identifies an Uracha
(or Urache) family: man, wife, and newly
born female child. This family is said to have
formerly lived at San Juan Bautista on the
Rio Grande. The entry date is 1765 (Valero
Registers). Two similar ethnic group names
occur in earlier documents: Uraca, southern
Plains, about 1630 (Vetancurt 1971:96) and
Orancho, western Edwards Plateau, 1684
(Bolton 1916:340). Scanty and unreliable
information, as well as lengthy time gaps
between the several documents, discourage

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

further attempts to relate these recorded group
names.

Viddaquimamar
Eleven Viddaquimamar (the name also
rendered as "Biddaquimamar" and "Vitdemamar") are identified in the baptismal
register of San Francisco Solano for the years
1706-1707, when the mission was at San
Ildefonso (Solano Registers). Of these 11
individuals, two are adult males, four are
adult females, and five are children (four
males, one female, with ages ranging from
three months to eight years). Two of the
women are listed as married to "Terocodame"
males and one to a "Pabor" (Babor). The
Viddaquimamar seem to have been displaced
from central Coahuila during the seventeenth
century. They may also be recorded under
such names as Biamoma, Biamomama,
Bidamamara, and Bimama (Griffen 1969:90,
156, 174).
Xarame
In Spanish documents the Xarame are referred to by at least 25 similar names, and the
range of variation is indicated by the following list: Arame, Charame, Charrom, Harane,
Jalam, Jarame, Jurame, Sarame, Schiarame,
Xalan, Xaram, Xharame, and Zarame.
Xarame is sometimes confused with the name
Aranama and its variants, which refer to a
different ethnic group that ranged much farther to the east, near the Gulf coast of Texas.
The pre-mission territorial range of the
Xarame is not clearly defined, but such evidence as is available indicates an area that
extended from the Rfo Sabinas of northeastern Coahuila northeastward across the Guerrero section of the Rio Grande to the Frio
River southwest of San Antonio, Texas
(Bolton 1916:307-308; Leon y otros
1961:219; Tous 1930a:4).
Some Xarame were at Mission San Juan
Bautista when it was first established on the
Rfo Sabinas of northeastern Coahuila in 1699
(San Buenaventura y Salazar 1699:45) but
few of these seem to have followed the mission when it was moved to Guerrero in 1701
(Morfi 1856:440-441). No Xarame were
counted in the San Juan Bautista census of
1734, but three "Jalam" were identified in the

171

ETIINOHISTORIC NOTES ... THREE SPANISH MISSIONS

census of 1772 (V. Rodriguez 1772b:127): a
man and his two daughters. Only two
Xarame are recorded for Mission San
Bernardo, an adult male "Jalan" in 1734
(Garza Falcon 1734a:22), and an adult female
"Jalam" in 1772 (V. Rodriguez 1772a:65).
It was to San Francisco Solano that the
Xarame went in considerable numbers, and
its registers indicate the presence of at least
98 individuals: 44 adult males, 34 adult females, and 20 children (nine male and 11 female). Of these 98 persons, 25 can be associated with San Francisco Solano at its Guerrero location, 21 at its San Ildefonso location,
and 52 at its San Jose location (Solano Registers). In most entries the group name is
given as "Xarame," but in a few entries it is
given as either"Xaram" or "Jarame." Spouses
are identified as "Jape" (Hape), "Mesquite o
Lagaun," "Papanac," "Paquache" (Pacuache), "Pataguan" (Pataguo), "Payuguan,"
"Siaban" (Siaguan), "Theroquodame" (Terocodame), "Thimamar" (Tumamar), and other
"Xarame" (21 cases).
When San Francisco Solano was moved to
San Antonio in 1718 and was renamed San
Antonio de Valero, many Xarame transferred
to the new mission location. In the registers
of Mission San Antonio de Valero, 15 5
Xarame can be traced through the remainder
of the century (Valero Registers). It is thus
evident that the Xarame preferred Mission
San Francisco Solano and were present in
considerable numbers at all four of its successive locations.

Yorica
The name Yorica, often misread, occurs in
at least 13 forms, among which are Corica,
Giorica, Gioma, Gorica, Goxica, Hiorna,
Lorica, Orica, Torica, and Yoxica. In documents which date from 1674 to 1691, the
Yorica are repeatedly identified with the area
that extends from the Rfo Sabinas of northeastern Coahuila northward across the Eagle
Pass-Guerrero section of the Rio Grande to
the southern margin of the Edwards Plateau
in Texas (Bolton 1916:296-297, 307-308,
356; Figueroa Torres 1964:104; G6mez
Canedo 1968:8-9, 160, 232, 306; Steck
1935:14-15).
The Yorica were listed among the groups
at San Juan Bautista when it was initially es-

tablished on the Rfo Sabinas in 1699 (Espinosa 1964:753), and they were also identified as being at San Juan Bautista after it
had been moved to Guerrero in 1700 (Maas
1915:18, 30, 33). The censuses taken at San
Juan Bautista, however, include no Y orica
individuals. In 1704, one Yorica, an adult
female, was recorded in the registers of San
Francisco Solano when it was still located at
Guerrero (Solano Registers). At least three
Yorica can be identified in the records of San
Antonio de Valero at San Antonio (17231730), and one of these is said to have come
from Mis-sion San Juan Bautista on the Rio
Grande (Valero Registers). As so few Yorica
individuals were recorded at the various missions, they may have rapidly declined in
numbers before 1700, perhaps as the result
of epidemics sometimes mentioned by advance missionaries of 1674-1675 (Steck
1932:15).
A few features of Y orica culture can be
assembled, mainly from documents of 16741675. The Yorica are said to have had no
horticulture and moved about in search of
animal and plant foods. Deer and bison were
hunted for meat and hides. Bison meat was
sometimes dried at the scene of the kill and
transported on human backs to encampments,
occasionally at considerable distances. Two
important plant foods were maguey root
crowns and fruit of the prickly pear. The
bow and arrow was used in hunting and
warfare. The Yorica took boy captives, ate
enemy flesh on occasion, and had "peace"
ceremonies that involved body painting,
dancing, and exchange of bows and arrows
(Bolton 1916:296, 307-308; Figueroa Torres
1963:104, 118-119; Hatcher 1932:50; Steck
1932: 15). Mazanet's linguistic observations
suggest that the Yorica spoke a dialect of
Coahuilteco (Gomez Canedo 1968:240).
Ruecking (1955a:274-275, 399), who
made use only of published data, failed to
note that "Giorna" is a variant of the name
Y orica and lists the two as separate group
names.

Yujan
In the census taken at Mission San Juan
Bautista in 1772 (V. Rodrfguez 1772b: 123,
127, 129), three individuals, all adults (one
male, two female) are identified as "Yujan"

172
and "Yugana," the latter given for a female
married to a "Pastaloco." Yujan and Yugana
probably refer to the group given by Hodge
(1907,1:574) as "Huanes," who were among
the Indian groups that entered Mission San
Jose y San Miguel de Aguayo of San Antonio, Texas, after 1731 (Forrestal 1931:20;
Kress and Hatcher 1931:61). The Huane of
Mission San Jose are also recorded variously
as Xamas, Xanas, Xauanaes, Xauanaos, and
Xuanes. No documents have been found
which indicate a pre-mission location, but
circumstantial evidence suggests southern
Texas, probably inland between San Antonio
and the Rio Grande.

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

In 1684 Dominguez de Mendoza met or
heard of "Juanas" when he was in the western part of the Edwards Plateau (Bolton
1916:339), but the evidence is not good
enough to establish a relationship between
these "Juanas" and the Huane of San Jose or
the Yujan of San Juan Bautista. Although the
name Yujan resembles Yojuane, the name of
a group in eastern central Texas usually classified as a Tonkawan people, there is probably no connection. A few Yojuane were
recorded at other missions in San Antonio
(Valero and Concepci6n), but not at San
Jose, whose Indian groups came mainly from
southern Texas.

The Cacaxtle Indians of Northeastern Mexico and
Southern Texas*
T. N. Campbell
been seen by Spaniards in southern Texas
after Cabeza de Vaca traversed that area in
1535. Historians have phrased this in military terms, pointing out that in 1665 the Cacaxtle were attacked by the first Spanish military expedition to pass northward across the
Rio Grande and that these hostilities represent
the first clearly recorded battle between
Spaniards and Indians in what is now southern Texas (Bolton 1916:284; Castaneda
1931:9 and 1936,1:212; Weddle 1968:5).
These historical "firsts" probably explain
why the name Cacaxtle, or some recognizable
variant of it, has appeared so often on maps
that omit the names of many better documented Indian groups.
Limited knowledge of the Cacaxtle Indians
has led to divergent opinions about who they
were and where they were living when encountered by Spaniards in 1663 and 1665.
The principal objectives of this essay are (1)
to present such information as was recorded
about the Cacaxtle in the 30-year period
(1663-1693) during which they were actually
seen by Europeans; (2) to evaluate this information and try to place it in a clearer historical perspective; and (3) to correct what
appear to be errors in previously published
statements about Cacaxtle ethnic identity and
territorial range.

A LARGE AREA IN PRESENT-DAY

northeastern Mexico and southern Texas was
originally inhabited by numerous distinctively
named Indian groups who subsisted by
hunting and gathering. After European colonists, mainly Spanish, arrived in the latter
part of the sixteenth century, the fragile
economies of these Indian groups were
disrupted, their populations declined, and
their ethnic identities were eventually lost.
Most groups were sparingly recorded in
European documents, and it is now difficult
and time-consuming to retrieve such information as happened to get recorded. Although hundreds of Indian group names are
known, there have been very few monographic studies of specific ethnic units. It
seems to have been assumed that limited
documentation renders such studies unprofitable. This attitude is difficult to defend, for
such studies constitute a logical and
necessary step toward sorting the various
Indian groups into meaningful categories
based on territorial range, language, and culture, and toward elucidating not only interaction between any two Indian groups but also
interaction between various Indian groups
and the Europeans. The Indians of this region as a whole remain poorly understood
primarily because of this failure to focus attention on specific groups (Campbell 1983a).
. Cacaxtle is an imported name that Spaniards gave to one of these hunting-andgathering groups. The Cacaxtle are known
mainly from accounts of two Spanish military
expeditions, one made in 1663, the other in
1665. Although the two accounts do not reveal very much about the Cacaxtle, these
people have received special attention because, so far as the record shows, they were
the first Indians identified as actually having

ORIGIN OF THE NAME CACAXTLE

* This article was originally published in La Tierra
11(1):4-20 (1984). It is reprinted herein courtesy of
the Southern Texas Archaeological Association.

173

It is doubtful if Cacaxtle was the name that
these Indians used in referring to themselves.
Cacaxtle is one form of a word that Spaniards
in colonial Mexico borrowed from the Nahuatl language. It was used to designate various devices made by Indians for the purpose
of carrying loads on their backs and shoulders, particularly a kind of carrying frame or
backpack (Santamaria 1974:174). A netted
carrying frame made of wood is known to

174
have been used by unspecified Indian groups
of northern Nuevo Le6n in the early
seventeenth century (Campbell 1983a:352).
It is possible that another name for the Cacaxtle Indians is recorded in Spanish
documents without indication of its being
synonymous with Cacaxtle. Unless documents are found that shed light on this matter,
we will probably never know any more than
we do now. The name Cacaxtle may have
been used by Spaniards of northeastern
Mexico to refer to more than one ethnic
group, but the information now available
seems to indicate that it was used to designate
only one specific group.

SPANISH-CACAXTLE CONFLICT
No primary documents (official reports,
diaries, journals, etc.) connected with the
Spanish military expeditions of 1663 and
1665 have yet been found. Information on
these expeditions comes from the exasperatingly brief accounts of Juan Bautista Chapa,
who wrote a history of Nuevo Le6n covering
the years 1650-1690 (Le6n y otros 1961:142143, 147-149). Chapa, who died in 1695,
lived in northeastern Mexico during the period about which he wrote. In effect, this
secondary source has become the primary
source of information. All other secondary
sources are based on Chapa. The most complete secondary source in English is Casta:iieda (1936,I:211-213), who paraphrases
Chapa's descriptions. In some secondary
sources statements occasionally appear which
cannot be confirmed by careful reading of
Chapa's accounts of the two expeditions.

Frontier Indian Raids
It is evident from statements made by
Chapa that Indian raids on Spanish frontier
settlements north of Monterrey and Saltillo
were fairly common during the midseventeenth century. He indicates that in the
1660s most of the raiding was done by
various Indian groups living to the north of
the Spanish settlement centers and that some
of the raiding Indians came from localities as
far north as the Rio Grande. In terms of
present-day maps, these various Indian

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

groups were living in northeastern Coahuila
and northern Nuevo Le6n, and the territorial
ranges of some of them must have extended
across the Rio Grande into the adjoining part
of Texas. Apparently Spaniards at this time
did not keep routine records on the number of
raids, and there is no way to determine how
many raids were made during any particular
year. It is disappointing to find that Chapa
does not specify the names of various Indian
groups involved in raids occurring in the
1660s.
These raids seem to have been mainly
small-scale operations in which Indian parties
waylaid unescorted travelers on roads or
attacked small outlying farms and ranches
where armed Spaniards were few and risks
were minimal. It seems reasonable to assume
that the Indians usually approached by stealth
and attempted to achieve surprise. It is said
that they sometimes merely took horses and
mules from herds pastured at some distance
from a Spanish settlement and that there were
no casualties.
The rhetoric used by Chapa is similar to
that found in documents pertaining to Indians
on other European settlement frontiers in
North America. Chapa referred to a series of
raids in any locality as an uprising or rebellion. He said that innate malice and depravity
led Indians to attack Spaniards. When Indians made off with any kind of Spanish property, the act was labeled as theft or robbery.
When Indians killed Spaniards, it was murder; but when Spaniards killed Indians it was
part of a pacification program designed to
lead Indians into civilized life. From this
rhetoric little can be learned about Indian motives for raiding.
Some of the Indians must have previously
been displaced from their homelands by
Spaniards, and these Indians may have been
motivated to some extent by a desire for revenge. Chapa emphasized deaths of Spaniards during raids, but he implied that the
Indians had economic motives for making
raids. Chapa did not name many items taken
by raiding Indians, but these Indians evidently wanted horses, mules, and goods of
European manufacture, such as tools, utensils, and weapons, as well as textile clothing
and ornaments. They preferred, possibly
because of accumulated resentment, to obtain
these things by raiding instead of trading.

CACAX1LE INDIANS OF NORTIIEASTERN MEXICO AND SOUTIIERN TEXAS

According to Chapa, it was routine, after a
raid or a short series of raids, for Spaniards
of Monterrey and Saltillo to send out a party
of 25 or 30 soldiers and frontier militiamen to
find the Indians and punish them. Apparently
the guilty Indians were not often found, and
there must have been some cases of mistaken
identity in which the wrong Indians were
punished, which would increase Indian resentment. In the early 1660s this ad hoc
policy was not reducing the number of raids,
and it was decided that larger Spanish forces
should be sent out to campaign extensively in
the northern area and teach all the raiding Indians a lesson. It is against this raiding
background that two such military expeditions will be reviewed, one in 1663, the other
in 1665, during which Spaniards encountered
a group of Indians referred to as Cacaxtle.
The dates of the military expeditions of 1663
and 1665 have sometimes been erroneously given as 1653 and 1655 (e.g.,
Bolton 1916:284; Forbes 1959b:205
and 1960: 155).

Expedition of 1663
Chapa's account of the Spanish expedition
of 1663 is quite brief and contains less descriptive detail than his account of the 1665
expedition. In 1663 the Spanish party was
led by an experienced frontier soldier, Juan
de la Garza. It consisted of over 100 men
from Monterrey and Saltillo (see Fig. 11 ).
The Saltillo contingent included a few Tlascaltecan Indians, originally from southern
Mexico, who were living in a village near
Saltillo. The party, which took along 800
horses and 80 pack loads of food and other
essentials, left Monterrey on October 1,
1663, and returned in March of the following
year.
Although the direction of travel is not
specified, it can be deduced that it was
northward, since the stated purpose of the
expedition was to punish the raiding "nations
of the north." Without mentioning anything
that happened along the way, the account
states that after traveling for a distance of 70
leagues, or about 180 miles, the Spaniards
found a large encampment of Indians identified as Cacaxtle. This encampment was attacked, 100 Indians were killed, and 125 captured. There were no serious Spanish casual-

175

ties, and it is said that the captives were later
taken to Zacatecas for work in the silver
mines.
This laconic account leaves several questions unanswered. One of these is why the
Spaniards apparently traveled 180 miles
northward without meeting any Indians. If
any Indians other than the Cacaxtle were encountered and were punished, it would seem
that this should have been mentioned in the
account, for it would enhance the record of
success. It is possible that this area was not
occupied by any Indians during the winter
months..If, however, Indians were present,
the most plausible explanation of why none
were encountered is that the Spanish party
was unusually large for the time; it traveled
slowly because so much baggage was carried; it was visible at considerable distances
in the open country traversed after leaving the
mountains immediately north of Monterrey;
and the Indians simply kept out of sight, perhaps passing the news on to other Indians
along an obvious northward line of Spanish
travel. In other words, the Indians were
there and saw the Spaniards, but Spaniards
did not see the Indians. The Spanish leaders
kept traveling northward because they were
evidently unwilling to return and report that,
after some five months in the field, no Indians could be found. This would have been
hard to explain to authorities at Monterrey
and Saltillo.
Another question is whether or not the
Spanish party crossed the Rio Grande before
encountering the Cacaxtle. In the account of
the 1665 expedition it is said that the Rio
Grande was crossed, and some historians
have assumed that the expedition of 1663
must also have crossed that river. This is
going beyond the recorded evidence, and it
seems best to assume that the expedition of
1663 did not cross the river into present-day
Texas. Approximately 180 miles due north
of Monterrey is the modem town of Guerrero
(northeastern Coahuila), which was the site
of Presidio San Juan Bautista, founded
shortly after 1700. Guerrero is about five
miles from the Rio Grande, on which there is
a closely spaced series of fords that later
Spanish expeditions used for crossing into
Texas (Weddle 1973:137n). As will be
pointed out again later, a remnant group of
Cacaxtle Indians was seen in the Guerrero

176

CAMPBEIL: INDIANS

Figure 11. KEY CACAXTLE LOCATIONS IN NORTHEASTERN MEXICO AND
SOUTHERN TEXAS. A, Known territorial range of the Cacaxtle, 1663-1693; B, Area of northwestern
Coahuila misidentified as Cacaxtle range by Jimenez Moreno (1944); C, Salinas sighting of five Cacaxtle
Indians in 1693; D, French map ofKaikache location (Delisle 1718).

CACAX1LE INDIANS OF NORTIIEASTERN MEXICO AND SOUTHERN TEXAS

locality in 1693, suggesting that this was in
the area originally ranged by the Cacaxtle.
Still another question is why, if other Indian groups evaded the Spaniards, the Cacaxtle did not also evade them. It may have
been because the Cacaxtle had never been involved in frontier raiding, although this appears unlikely. They may have believed that
they were so far from Monterrey and Saltillo
that the Spaniards would not come that far.
Apparently the earlier and smaller Spanish
military parties had not gone that far north.
On the other hand, the Cacaxtle may have felt
confidence in their numbers and in their ability to withstand a Spanish attack. Unfortunately, there is no information that helps to
explain why the Cacaxtle chose to stand their
ground in 1663 and again in 1665.

Expedition of 1665
The expedition of 1663 seems to have had
little effect on the number of raids made on
the Spanish frontier, for in 1665 another expedition was sent out from Monterrey with
the same objective as the first expedition.
This was led by Fernando de Azcue of
Saltillo and involved 103 Spaniards, 73 from
Saltillo and 30 from Monterrey. The party
had 800 horses and 70 pack loads of provisions and supplies. This expedition was accompanied by 300 Bohol Indians from
Coahuila. It is not certain that all of the
Bohol were males; some may have been
women. The Bohol had heard of the expedition and had asked the Spaniards if they
might go along. Azcue seems to have had
doubts about Bohol motives and reliability,
but finally agreed to their proposal. Thus the
expedition of 1665 consisted of at least 400
individuals. Nothing is said about time of the
year or how long this Spanish-Bohol party
was in the field.
In the account of the 1665 expedition there
is again no specific statement about the direction of travel, but there can be no doubt about
northerly movement because mention is made
of crossing the Rio Grande. Unfortunately,
the distance from Monterrey to the Rio
Grande crossing is not recorded by Chapa.
All we know is that, after crossing the river,
the party in six days traveled 24 leagues, or
about 60 miles, to find the Cacaxtle. Again
nothing is said about encountering other In-

177

dian groups along the route. As Chapa wrote
both accounts, and says nothing about a different route being taken, it seems reasonable
to conclude that the expedition of 1665 followed essentially the same route as that of
1663.
It may be assumed that the Cacaxtle knew
of the Spanish approach, because they had
taken refuge in a dense thicket of thorny vegetation and had built a rudimentary defensive
structure. It is not clear whether or not the
Cacaxtle had dug trenches, but the account
plainly describes a rampart that had been
constructed around their position. This consisted of piled-up tree trunks, tree branches,
and quantities of prickly-pear pads. The
Spaniards and their Bobol allies found it
difficult to approach the Cacaxtle, and it took
an entire day to breach the defens es and
subdue the Cacaxtle. It is said that while the
Cacaxtle men were fighting, an elderly
woman encouraged them by playing on a
flute (jlauta ). The account refers to 100
Cacaxtle killed and 70 captives taken. No
allusion is made to the number of Cacaxtle
who managed to escape or to what was afterward done with the captives. In this battle
22 Spaniards were wounded. It is mentioned
that two Bohol Indians were killed, but
nothing is said about the number wounded.
The role of the Bohol in the expedition of
1665 is of some interest. One wonders if
perhaps the Bohol and Cacaxtle were traditional enemies. It is possible that the Bobol
knew where the Cacaxtle were and led
Spaniards to them. This presumed enmity
may be reflected in Chapa's description of a
post-battle episode. The Bohol asked that the
flute-playing woman be turned over to them
for use in a victory ceremony that involved
cannibalism. This request was refused by the
Spaniards, but the Bobol leamed that one of
the boy captives was a relative of the fluteplaying woman. This boy was spirited away
and some of his flesh was eaten in the
ceremony. Chapa's account is apologetic
about this turn of events, but says nothing
could be done about it, implying awareness
of the fact that the Spaniards were greatly
outnumbered by their Bohol allies. This
episode shows that ceremonial cannibalism
was present in the area and suggests that,
under similar circumstances, the Cacaxtle
might have eaten a Bobol captive.

178
There is not enough recorded information
to determine just where the Cacaxtle were
encountered by the Spanish expedition of
1665. We know only that they were found
60 miles beyond the Rio Grande in what is
now Texas. If we assume that the Rio
Grande was crossed somewhere in the vicinity of Guerrero, northeastern Coahuila,
where some of the Cacaxtle were seen later
(1693) and where were easy crossings of the
river, and if we further assume that the
Spaniards traveled on due northward, this
would place the Cacaxtle encampment in the
southern part of what is now Kinney County,
Texas (see Fig. 11). If, however, there was
a change in travel direction more to the
northeast, the Cacaxtle may have been found
in either Zavala or La Salle County. Or if
there was a change in travel direction more to
the northwest, the Spaniards would have
traveled up the valley of the Rio Grande,
which does not seem to be implied by the
record. It would have helped if Chapa had
mentioned whether or not the Spaniards had
crossed another river (the Nueces) before
finding the Cacaxtle.
The Kinney County location does not significantly contradict the views of historians
who have been interested in determining
where the Cacaxtle were when attacked by
Spaniards in 1665. These historians are in
general agreement on two points: (1) that
both Spanish expeditions traveled more or
less due northward from Monterrey, and (2)
that the expedition of 1665 crossed the Rio
Grande in the vicinity of modem Eagle Pass,
Texas, which is about 30 miles up the Rio
Grande northwest of Guerrero (Bolton
1916:284; Brewster 1903:340; Castaneda
1931:9 and 1936,1:211; Forbes 1960:155;
Horgan 1954:257-258; Steck 1932: 1;
Weddle 1968:5). In their writings, however,
these historians do not pause to comment on
deficiencies in the documentary record or to
specify the evidence that led them to their
conclusions.
Some writers have taken small liberties
with the facts recorded about Cacaxtle in the
two Chapa accounts. They sometimes state
that the Cacaxtle were the dominant raiding
people on the frontier north of Monterrey,
and that both expeditions were sent out with
specific orders to find the Cacaxtle and punish them. It is even said that in 1663 the Ca-

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

caxtle were "pursued" for a distance of 180
miles before being attacked. It is further said
that, after being soundly trounced by
Spaniards in 1663, the Cacaxtle continued
their raiding, which led to the expedition of
1665. These statements make good narrative
reading but cannot be confirmed when one
closely inspects the Chapa accounts. Actually what seems to have happened is that the
expeditions of 1663 and 1665 were sent out
to find some of the raiding Indian groups and
punish them, and in both instances the Cacaxtle happened to get caught. The Cacaxtle
have been made to appear more important
than they really were.

CACAXTLE AFTER 1665
There can be little doubt that the expeditions of 1663 and 1665 discouraged the Cacaxtle from further raiding, assuming that
they had indeed participated in raids; but
these expeditions seem not to have had the
desired exemplary effect on various other
raiding "nations of the north." This is indicated by Griffen (1969:155-169), who cites
a series of documents in the Parral Archives
naming 34 Indian groups said to have been
raiding Spanish settlements in Coahuila and
Nuevo Le6n shortly before 1670. As perhaps might be expected, the name Cacaxtle
does not appear, but most of the names can
be recognized as referring to Indian groups
who, after 1670, were recorded as living in
northern Nuevo Le6n, northeastern Coahuila,
and the adjoining part of Texas (see Fig.
llA). Among these one recognizes such
names as Aguapalam, Catujan, Heniocane,
Hierbipiame, Hume, Milijae, Ocana, Payuguan, Pomulum, Sampanal, and Siaguan.
The list of 34 groups probably includes many
of the raiding "nations of the north" that the
expeditions of 1663 and 1665 had set out to
find and punish but could catch only the
Cacaxtle.
Later documents prove that some of the
Cacaxtle survived the severe population
losses of 1663 and 1665. In a Coahuila document of 1674 the name "Cacastes" is found
on a list of Indian groups said to be living in
northeastern Coahuila and vicinity (Alessio
Robles 1938:232). The Cacaxtle were last

CACAXTLE INDIANS OF NOR1HEASTERN MEXICO AND SOU1HERN TEXAS

recorded in 1693 by Gregorio de Salinas
Varona, governor of Coahuila, in his diary
describing a journey from Monclova to eastern Texas (G6mez Canedo 1968:280, 289,
306). In May of that year, when he was just
south of the Rio Grande in northeastern
Coahuila, evidently near the site of presentday Guerrero, Salinas Varona was visited by
three groups of Indians identified as Cacaxtle, Ocana, and Piedras Blancas. The diary
does not indicate whether these three groups
were sharing the same encampment or were
living in separate encampments. Salinas
Varona thus saw Cacaxtle not far from where
it appears that they were first attacked by
Spaniards in 1663. Little is known about the
Piedras Blancas, but the Ocana are frequently
recorded in documents that pertain to northeastern Coahuila and the adjacent part of
Texas just north of the Rio Grande (Campbell
1979:26).
Two weeks later Salinas Varona saw five
Cacaxtle males, presumably hunters, between
the Guadalupe and Colorado rivers east or
southeast of present-day San Antonio, Texas
(see Fig. 1lC). He did not mention seeing a
Cacaxtle encampment in that area, and we
therefore cannot determine if the five men
were hunting out of a local or a more distant
encampment to the southwest near the Rio
Grande. It is known that Indians from surrounding areas went to grasslands along the
Guadalupe and Colorado rivers to hunt bison, and that some of these Indians came
from northeastern Coahuila and vicinity
(Campbell 1983b).
After 1693 the name Cacaxtle disappears
from known documents that are equivalent to
eyewitness accounts. Except for one vague
reference to C oahuila (Revilla G igedo
1966:60), no documents have been found
that record the presence of Cacaxtle individuals at any Spanish missions of northeastern
Mexico and Texas. This seeming reluctance
of Cacaxtle to enter missions is understandable when we consider the rough treatment
they received from Spaniards in 1663 and
1665. The Cacaxtle who survived after 1693
probably lost their ethnic identity by merging
with one or more Indian groups who had
survived in greater numbers. This loss of
identity must have occurred prior to 1708, for
in that year a missionary, Isidro Feliz de Espinosa, compiled a list of 49 Indian groups

179

said to be living at various localities north and
east of present-day Guerrero, Coahuila. No
recognizable variant of the name Cacaxtle appears on this list (Maas 1915:36-37).

INTERPRETATION OF THE
CACAXTLE RECORD

Territorial Range
The available evidence, both positive and
negative,- seems to indicate that during the
period 1663-1693 the Cacaxtle were associated with the large lowland area to the north
and east of the mountain front that passes diagonally across the Mexican states of Nuevo
Le6n and Coahuila. This lowland area extends from the mountain front northward
across the Rio Grande to the southern margin
of the Edwards Plateau of Texas. Within this
large lowland area the Cacaxtle can best be
linked with a more restricted area on both
sides of the Rio Grande in which today one
finds the communities of Guerrero, Coahuila,
and Eagle Pass, Texas (see Fig. 1 lA). As
has been argued above, the Spanish expeditions of 1663 and 1665 traveled directly
northward from Monterrey and encountered
Cacaxtle at two localities in this restricted
area. The key to association of the Cacaxtle
with this section of the Rio Grande is provided by Salinas Varona, who met Cacaxtle
encamped near modem Guerrero in 1693.
The significance of this bit of evidence has
gone unrecognized.
During the past 40 years several scholars
have compiled maps that place the Cacaxtle
much farther west than seems to be indicated
by Chapa's accounts of the Spanish military
expeditions and by the few documents that
record later Spanish contacts with Cacaxtle
Indians. As the maps are not supported by
commentaries, it is hard to assess the reasoning involved in these more westerly
placements.
Jimenez Moreno's map (1944) shows Cacaxtle on both sides of the Rio Grande in extreme northern Coahuila and the adjoining
part of Texas, and in Texas the Cacaxtle are
placed well to the west of the lower Pecos
River (see Fig. 1lB). On his map a dot-dash
line indicates presumed Cacaxtle movement

180
southeastward to make attacks on Spanish
settlements near Saltillo, Pesquerfa Grande
(present Garda, Nuevo Le6n), and Monterrey. Driver and Massey's map of 1957
follows the lead of Jimenez Moreno and
shows Cacaxtle in northwestern Coahuila
immediately east of the Texas Big Bend region. Maps by Swadesh (1959) and by
Griffen (1969) closely follow Driver and
Massey. It should be noted that only the map
of Jimenez Moreno specifically indicates the
extension of Cacaxtle territory northward into
present-day Texas.
All four maps place the Cacaxtle far to the
northwest of Monterrey, and at least 200
miles farther west than presently known documents seem to indicate. If we apply a yardstick provided by Chapa's account of the
1663 expedition, namely, 180 miles of travel
from Monterrey to the Cacaxtle, and assume
(as the mapmakers do) that the Spaniards
traveled northwestward instead of northward,
the Spanish expeditionary party would have
traveled little more than half the distance to
the Cacaxtle as shown on these maps. Griffen (1969:88, 157), who has reviewed ethnohistoric data from western Coahuila and
eastern Chihuahua, found the Cacaxtle mentioned only in documents that pertain to
northeastern, not northwestern or extreme
northern, Coahuila. If the Cacaxtle were so
far to the west, one wonders why the
expeditions of 1663 and 1665 did not leave
from Saltillo instead of from Monterrey. If
the Spaniards followed a northwestward
route, one also wonders why Chapa's accounts of the two expeditions say nothing
about rugged, mountainous terrain that would
have been traversed to reach the Cacaxtle. It
is difficult to avoid the conclusion that the
compilers of these four maps paid little attention to the topography of northern Mexico,
ignored Chapa's references to direction and
distance, and placed the Cacaxtle in the
wrong area.

Population
If we take at face value the obviously
round numbers given in the two expedition
descriptions, and assume that all, or at least
most, of the Cacaxtle were encamped together at that time, it would seem that prior to
1663 the Cacaxtle had a population not

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

greater than 500. This is near the upper limit
recorded for hunting-and-gathering groups of
their area (Campbell 1983a:350). In 1663 the
Cacaxtle population was reduced by 225 (100
killed, 125 captured and removed from the
area), and in 1665 the population was reduced by another 170 (100 killed, 70 captured and presumably removed as in 1663).
These figures account for a total of 395 Cacaxtle, but during both attacks some of the
Cacaxtle must have managed to escape. Later
documents (1674, 1693) confirm survival of
some of the Cacaxtle.
Some modern writers, who seem not to
have read the Chapa accounts thoughtfully,
have made it appear that the Cacaxtle were
responsible for all the Indian raids on the
frontiers of Coahuila and Nuevo Le6n in the
mid-seventeenth century. If the Cacaxtle
numbered no more than 500, including
women and children, it is hardly realistic to
think of them as terrorizing such a large area.
Other Indian groups must also have been involved in these frontier raids.
The case of the Cacaxtle has certain demographic implications. If the Spanish figures
can be trusted, during a period of three years
the Cacaxtle population was reduced by approximately 80% in two pitched battles. This
suggests that, under unusual circumstances,
the population of a hunting-and-gathering
group could be drastically reduced in warfare
with Europeans. So far as the records go, no
other Indian population in the same area
seems to have been substantially reduced in
pitched battles with Europeans. Hence it is
not possible to cite armed conflict with
Europeans as a major factor in the decline of
other hunting-and-gathering populations in
this area.

Language
As no identified samples of Cacaxtle
speech have been found in documents, there
is no satisfactory basis for determining what
language the Cacaxtle spoke. Some writers,
noting that the Cacaxtle seem to have lived in
an area where the Coahuilteco language was
widely spoken, have suggested that the Cacaxtle may have spoken that language
(Newcomb 1961:36; Ruecking 1955a:286;
Swanton 1940:134). It is now known, however, that other languages were spoken in the

181

CACAXTLE INDIANS OF NORTIIEASTERN MEXICO AND SOUTHERN TEXAS

same general area, and it is also clear that
Coahuilteco was not as widely spoken as was
once believed (Campbell 1983a:348; Goddard 1979:355-356, 380-381). Thus it
seems best to leave the Cacaxtle language
unclassified. Some writers have followed
this course (Driver and Massey 1957:map;
Jimenez Moreno 1944:131 and map; Swadesh 1959:25, 35), but this was probably a
consequence of their mistaken belief that the
Cacaxtle lived much farther to the west,
where no Coahuilteco-speakers have been
recognized.
It is of some interest to note that with
Azcue in 1665 was a man said to know most
of the languages spoken by Indians living
northward from Monterrey and Saltillo.
Thus Spaniards of the time appear to have
been aware that more than one language, or at
least more than one dialect, was spoken in
that relatively large area.

Culture
Very little is definitely known about Cacaxtle culture patterns. The account of the
Spanish expedition of 1665 refers to defensive ramparts and flute playing in connection
with warfare, and it may be noted that these
items are not recorded for any other Indian
group of the same area. The known meaning
of the name Cacaxtle suggests that these people made and used a special device for transporting loads on their backs. Beyond this it
may be inferred from a larger context that the
Cacaxtle were hunters and gatherers and used
the bow and arrow in hunting and warfare.
One indirect clue suggests that cannibalism
may have been involved in ceremonies connected with warfare. Forbes (1959b:205206) asserts that the Cacaxtle had acquired
horses by the year 1663, which seems
plausible in the light of the frontier raiding
described by Chapa. Yet Chapa says nothing
about horses among the Cacaxtle. Perhaps
they had some horses but not enough for use
in fighting or for evading the Spaniards. The
acquisition of horses by Indians in
northeastern Mexico and southern Texas
needs further study.
Through error the index to Volume 10 of
the new Handbook of North American Indians (Ortiz 1983) has entries identifying
various categories of Cacaxtle culture, such as

adornment, ceremonies, clothing, religion,
social organization, structures, subsistence,
technologies, and warfare. This is regrettable. The page citations in the volume index
refer to generalized cultural information for
an area in which Griffen (1983) mistakenly
placed the Cacaxtle. At present no documents can be cited that demonstrate linkage of
this cultural information with the Cacaxtle
Indians.

TH~

CAICACHE QUESTION

Caicache has long been regarded as the
name of a specific Indian group that lived in
what is now extreme southern Texas, that is,
within the angle formed by the lower Rio
Grande and the coastline of the Gulf of Mexico. This name has been rendered in slightly
different ways: Caikache, Carcache, Kaicache, Kaikache,Kankache,Kankacche, and
Kaskache. It is puzzling to find that no one
has ever called attention to the fact that the
names Caicache and Cacaxtle are phonetically
similar. Is it possible that the name Caicache
actually refers to the-Cacaxtle?
When this question is posed, doubts begin
to arise about a separate ethnic status for the
Caicache. One striking fact soon emerges:
no document has yet been found that records
any European having seen a Caicache Indian
in southern Texas, or anywhere else.
Spaniards of Coahuila and N uevo Le6n saw
and fought the Cacaxtle, but there is no
record of their contact with another group
known as Caicache. No eyewitness accounts
of Indians known by the name Caicache, or
by some recognizable variant of that name,
have been found in any documents-Spanish, French, or Anglo-American-that pertain
to travel and settlement along the entire Gulf
coast of Texas and Mexico; nor do the
surviving registers of Spanish missions in
Mexico and Texas have entries for individuals identified as Caicache Indians.
Where, then, does the name Caicache appear? It appears on various European maps
that were compiled between the years 171 7
and 1840 (Table 8) and thus has a purely
cartographic history. The name appeared
first on a French map of 1717 produced by
Vermale (Wheat 1957,I:Map 98). Another

----------

 - - - - - - - -----

182

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Table 8. MAPS BEARING THE NAME CAICACHE.
Cartographer
Vennale
Delisle
Jeffreys
Collin
Pichardo
Brue

Year
1717
1718
1775
1802
1811
1840

Name Variant
Kankache
Kaik:ache
Kaicache
Caikache
Carcache
Kaskache

and more widely known French map, compiled in 1718 by Delisle (Tucker 1942:Plate
XV), copied Caicache information from the
Vermale map, and later cartographers copied
from the Delisle map. The Caicache question
boils down to determination of where Vermale obtained his information on the Caicache. The further this matter is pursued, the
more likely it appears that Vermale's Caicache refers to the Cacaxtle of the Spaniards.
Here it becomes important to note that Caicache, when pronounced by a speaker of
French, is not greatly different from Cacaxtle
when it is pronounced by a speaker of
Spanish.
When the map of Vermale is closely examined, several recorded details strongly
suggest that his Caicache were the Cacaxtle
of the Spaniards. Along the southern coast
of Texas, south of either Baffin Bay or Corpus Christi Bay, the name "Kankache" is
written twice, one name placed due north of
the other, and with space between them. As
no other Indian group name shown in lower
Texas is duplicated in this way, Vermale
seems to be indicating that the more southerly
name refers to the Cacaxtle of 1663 and the
more northerly name to the Cacaxtle of 1665.
The most telling indication is a note, written
along the shoreline, stating that these people
made war against the Spaniards (font la
guerre aux Espagnols). The Vermale map
also indicates how the French must have obtained information from Spaniards about the
Cacaxtle. It shows the routes of two trips
(1714, 1716) made by Louis Juchereau de
St. Denis from Natchitoches in Louisiana to
Presidio San Juan Bautista on the Rio Grande
(Bridges and De Ville 1967; Swanton
1942:52-55). Wheat (1957, I:65-67) has
pointed out that Vermale was the first French
cartographer to make use of information de-

Published Copy
Wheat 1957, I
Tucker 1942
Martin and Martin 1982
Baudry des Lozieres 1802
Hackett 1934, II
Leclerc 1950

rived from the French outpost of Natchitoches, which was established in 1714.
The Delisle map of 1718 made certain alterations. The group name, rendered as
"Kaikache," was written only once, and it
was placed farther inland just north of the Rio
Grande (see Fig. 1 lD). Delisle repeated Vermale's note about these people having made
war against Spaniards. It seems clear enough
that Delisle copied from Vermale, and it is
also clear that later cartographers followed
Delisle rather than Vermale. The later cartographers made slight alterations in the name
Caicache, corrected stream courses, and
moved the name Caicache a little farther to the
north, making it appear that these Indians
ranged over much of the area lying between
Baffin Bay and the delta of the Rio Grande.
Recognition of the Caicache as a separate
Indian group was codified by the original
Handbook of American Indians, but this was
done on the basis of surprisingly little research. The brief entry for the Caicache is
quoted below in its entirety.
Caicache. A tribe said to have lived on
the coast of Texas, but to have become
extinct by 1850. Bollaert in Jour.
Ethnol. Soc. Lond., II, 265, 280, 1850
(Hodge 1907,I:186).
The sole source of information is William
Bollaert, an Englishman who traveled extensively in the Republic of Texas in 1842-1844
(Hollon and Butler 1956) and who later
wrote an article on its Indians. In the article
Bollaert said of the Caicache that
...These roamed at a very early date on
the shores of Texas. At present none
exist (Bollaert 1850b:280-281).
This vague statement does not tell us where
Bollaert got his information, but he undoubtedly obtained it from one of the maps listed in
Table 8. We know of no other source he

CACAX1LE INDIANS OF NORTHEASTERN MEXICO AND SOUTHERN TEXAS

could have seen, and it is doubtful if he was
told of the Caicache by anyone he met in
Texas in the 1840s. That Bollaert learned
nothing new about the Caicache is revealed
by his absurd statement that the Caicache,
along with several other Indian groups (he
specifies Adai, Aranama, and Tejas), were
probably remnants of the Natchez Indians
... formed after the dispersion of the
greater part of that nation in 1528 when
Narvaez, one of the lieutenants of Fernando Cortez, who, after crossing the
Rio Grande, marched easterly through a
part of the Natchez country ... to the
banks of the Mississippi.
Panfilo de Narvaez led no such expedition
across Texas and never saw the Natchez,
who maintained their ethnic integrity until the
French-Natchez wars that began in 1716
(Swanton 1911:186-257).
In retrospect, it would appear that, although phonetically similar, the names Cacaxtle and Caicache have not been linked or
equated because of the circumstances under
which each name was initially recorded. Cacaxtle became known from Spanish accounts
of Indian raids on the northern frontiers of
Coahuila and Nuevo Le6n, and Caicache became known from a French map that
recorded it for an Indian group thought to be
associated with an area in extreme southern
Texas near the Gulf coast. Recording of the
name in two different European languages
and an apparent geographic separation tended
to compartmentalize thought. Further geographic separation was introduced by certain
modem writers who mistakenly placed the
Cacaxtle in northwestern Coahuila and the
adjacent part of Trans-Pecos Texas. Thus
early maps placed the Caicache too far to the
east, and recent maps have placed the Cacaxtle too far to the west. It now seems appropriate to merge the two names and rejoin
what has been put asunder.

CACAXTLE SYNONYMY
If the preceding interpretations are accepted, the 20 names listed below in alphabetical order can be regarded as synonyms of
the name Cacaxtle. These name variants have
been taken from maps and from handwritten

183

or printed documents that originated between
the years 1663 and 1983. Some name variants taken from printed secondary sources are
clearly the result of modem clerical and typographical errors. If new primary sources
come to light, additional name variants may
be expected.
Caxcaxtle
Cacaste
Cacastle
Cocaxtle
Escabaca-Cascaste
Cacaxte
Kaicache
Caicache
Kaikache
Caikache
Kakahtle
Carcache
Kakaxtle
Casastle
Cascaste
Kankac
Kankacche
Cascastle
Kaskache
Cataxtle

CONCLUSIONS
The recorded information, although limited, confirms the Cacaxtle as one among
many hunting-and-gathering groups of their
area. When first seen in 1663, the Cacaxtle
seem to have had a population about as large
as that recorded for any of their neighbors.
This population was drastically reduced in
two pitched battles with Spaniards. The Cacaxtle never recovered from this shock, and
their ethnic identity was lost, sometime between 1693 and 1708, by merging with remnants of other Indian groups. As the record
now stands, they were the only people of
their area to be virtually wiped out in warfare
with Spaniards.
Very little descriptive detail on Cacaxtle
culture was recorded, but two distinctive
features (construction of defensive ramparts
and flute playing during battles) have not
been noted in documents that refer to other
Indian groups of their area. Although it
seems likely that the Cacaxtle had at least
some horses taken in raids on the Spanish
settlement frontier of northeastern Mexico,
the absence of firsthand observational records
makes it impossible to determine to what extent this animal may have been integrated into
their culture. The language spoken by the
Cacaxtleremainsunknown.
This critical review of documentary evidence and interpretive opinion concerning the

184

Cacaxtle Indians reveals some of the difficulties connected with study of specific ethnic
units in a large area dominated by huntingand-gathering populations, all of whom have
long been extinct and, when known, were
sparingly recorded.
It now seems reasonably clear that much
of the confusion concerning the Cacaxtle
stems from misconceptions about where
these Indians were living when attacked by
Spaniards in 1663 and 1665. The information recorded by Chapa and Salinas Varona
indicates that the Cacaxtle were encountered
in an area lying along both sides of the Rio
Grande more or less due north of Monterrey.
Two early French cartographers, Vermale
and Delisle, who apparently relied on poorly
understood information obtained orally from
Spaniards of northeastern Mexico, placed the
Cacaxtle some 200 miles farther down the
Rio Grande in what is now extreme southern
Texas. This erroneous placement, along with
French renditions of the name Cacaxtle,
eventually led to recognition of a spurious
ethnic group in that area. Maps produced in
the present century have placed the Cacaxtle
some 200 miles farther up the Rio Grande
than the area indicated by Chapa and Salinas
Varona, making it appear that these Indians
ranged over an area in northwestern Coahuila
and the adjoining part of Trans-Pecos Texas.
This more westerly placement has caused the
Cacaxtle to be linked with a different complex
of hunting-and-gathering Indians, and this in
tum has skewed speculative thought about
their linguistic and cultural affiliations.
When scholars try to determine where a
poorly documented Indian group was living
at a particular time, it is evident that error may
sometimes arise from hasty judgment. Positive statements about location may be made

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

that cannot be confirmed when the available
sources of information are rigorously analyzed, evaluated, and cross-checked for consistency. Such a test may indicate that the
sources of information were not properly assessed. An error resulting from this procedural laxity may be perpetuated if it is
accepted without question by later scholars.
For well over a century Caicache was not
recognized as a variant of the name Cacaxtle,
and this illustrates how complications may
arise when information about one ethnic
group was recorded by individuals from two
different European nations. In this case one
set of name variants was recorded in Spanish
documents, another set on French maps. The
equation of the two name sets is revealed by
detailed analysis and comparison of successively dated early European maps, supplemented by information compiled by historians of North American cartography. One
ethnic unit, through error, came to be regarded as two different ethnic units. Fictive
proliferation of Indian groups is not uncommon for the region, but most of it is connected with especially numerous orthographic
variants of the same name in Spanish documents. Badly distorted variants of the same
name have sometimes been mistaken for
names of separate Indian groups (Campbell
1977). The net result of confusion about
names has been unwitting recognition of
more Indian groups than actually existed
in northeastern Mexico and southern Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Valued critical comment and helpful
stylistic suggestions were received from T. J.
Campbell, Wm. W. Newcomb, Jr., D. A.
Story, and B. Stross.

Bibliography
Because of the variety of serial publications in various languages, "No.," "Vol.," "num.,"
"tomo," and "tome" have been placed before the appropriate arabic or roman numerals, as in
the original. Any other practice would make it harder than necessary for the reader to find
these references in card catalogues or computer listings. For journals, however, archeological
editorial style has been followed: e.g., "10(2):221-229."
Alessio Robles, Vito
1936 Monterrey en la historia y en la
leyenda. Antigua Librerfa Robredo
de J. Porrua e Hijos, Mexico.
1938 Coahuila y Texas en la epoca
colonial. Editorial Cultura, Mexico
[reprinted 1978, Biblioteca Pomia,
tomo 70, Editorial Porrua, Mexico].
Almaraz, Felix D., Jr.
1979 Crossroad of Empire: The Church
and State on the Rio Grande
Frontier of Coahuila and Texas,
1700-1621. Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeology and History of the San
Juan Bautista Mission Area,
Coahuila and Texas, Report No. 1.
An6nimo
1778 Descripcion del Territorio del
Precidio de San Juan Bautista de
Rio Grande del Norte. Archivo
General de la Nacion, Historia
(The University of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2Q178, Vol. 348 [Vol.
29, Pt. 1:185-204]).
Anonymous
1754 Proceedings of Junta de Guerra y
Hacienda relating to French intrusion into Spanish dominions,
January 21-February 21, 1754.
Bexar-Archives Translations (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2C18, Vol. 26:50-84).

Ayer, Mrs. Edward E. (Emma Augusta),
translator
1916 The Memorial of Fray Alonso de
Benavides, 1630. Annotated by
Frederick Webb Hodge and
Charles Fletcher Lummis. Chicago [reprinted ca. 1965, Hom and
Wallace, Albuquerque].
Bancroft, Hubert H.
1883 The Works of Hubert Howe
Bancroft. Vol. I, Wild Tribes.
A. L. Bancroft and Co., San
Francisco.
1884 The Works of Hubert Howe
Bancroft. Vol. XV, History of the
North Mexican States, 1531-1800
(Vol. I). A. L. Bancroft and Co.,
San Francisco.
1886 History of the North Mexican
States and Texas (Vol. I). The
History Company, San Francisco.
Bandelier, Fanny, translator
1905 The Journey of Alvar Nunez
Cabeza de Vaca. A. S. Barnes,
New York.
Barrio Junco y Espriella, Pedro de
1763 Testtimonio de Superior Goviemo
y Guerra ... Archivo General de
Indias, Audiencia de Mexico (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2Q150, Vol. 102: 1294).

Anonymous
1975 TexasGeographic Regions. TSNL
Review 1(1):5. Texas System of
Natural Laboratories, Austin.

Baskett, James N.
1907 A Study of the Route of Cabeza de
Vaca, I. Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association
10(3):246-279.

185

-------------

186
Baudry des Lozieres, Louis Narcisse
1802 Voyage a la Louisiane, et sur le
continent de l'Amerique septentrionale,fait dans les anees 1794 a
1798. Dentu, Paris.
Benson, Nettie Lee, translator and editor
1950 Report That Dr. Miguel Ramos de
Arizpe ... Presents to the August
Congress on the Natural, Political
and Civil Conditions of The
Provinces of Coahuila, Nuevo
Leon, New Mexico, Nuevo Santander, and Texas.... University
of Texas Press, Austin.
Berlandier, Jean Louis
MS
Journey to Mexico During the
Years 1826 to 1834. Translated by
Sheila M. Ohlendorf, files of the
Texas Historical Association,
Austin.
1969 The Indians of Texas in 1830,
edited and introduced by John C.
Ewers. Smithsonian Institution
Press, Washington, D.C.
1980 Journey to Mexico During the
Years 1826 to 1834, translated by
Sheila M. Ohlendorf (two volumes). The Texas State Historical
Association and the Center for
Studies in Texas History, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Bishop, Morris
1933 The Odyssey of Cabeza de Vaca.
The Century Co., New York.
Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93117.
Bollaert, Wm.
1850a Observations on the Geography of
Texas. Read before the Royal
Geographical Society of London
on the 14th of January, 1850
[printed in 1851, Journal of the
Royal Geographical Society
20:113-135].

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

1850b Observations on the Indian Tribes
in Texas. Journal of the Ethnological Society of London 11:262-283.
Bolton, Herbert E.
1906 The Founding of Mission Rosario:
A Chapter in the History of the
Gulf Coast Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association
10(2):113-139.
1907

Spanish Mission Records at San
Antonio. Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association
10(4):297-307.

1911

The Jumano Indians of Texas,
1650-1771. Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association
15(1):66-85.

1912 The Spanish Occupation of Texas,
1519-1690. Quanerly of the Texas
State Historical Association
16(1):1-26.
1913 Guide to Materials for the History
of the United States in the Principal
Archives of Mexico. Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication No. 163. Washington, D.C.
1914 The Founding of the Missions on
the San Gabriel River, 1745-1749.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly
17(4):323-378.
1915 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth
Century: Studies in Spanish
Colonial History and Administration. University of California
Publications in History, No. III.
Berkeley.
1916 Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 1542-1706. Charles Scribner's Sons, New York.
1970 Texas in the Middle Eighteenth
Century: Studies in Spanish
Colonial History and Administration. University of Texas Press,
Austin.

187

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Bourke, John G.
1931 The Folk-Foods of the Rio Grande
Valley and of Northern Mexico.
Publications of the Texas Folklore
Society 9:85-117.
Branda, Eldon Stephen, editor
1976 The Handbook of Texas: A
Supplement. The Texas State
Historical Association, Austin.
Bray, Wm.L.
1901 The Ecological Relations of the
Vegetation of Western Texas.
Botanical Gazette 32:99-123, 195217, 262-291.
Brebner, John B.
1933 The Explorers of North America,
1492-1806. Macmillan Co., New
York.

1972

Systematized Ethnohistory and
Prehistoric Culture Sequences in
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 43: 1-11.

1975

The Payaya Indians of Southern
Texas. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, Special Publication No. 1. San Antonio.

1977

Ethnic Identities of Extinct Coa huiltecan Populations: Case of the
Juanca Indians. Texas Memorial
, Museum, The Pearce-Sellards
Series, No. 26. Austin.

1979

Ethnohistoric Notes on Indian
Groups Associated with Three
Spanish Missions at Guerrero,
Coahuila. Center for Archaeological Research, The University
of Texas at San Antonio, Archaeology and History of the San
Juan Bautista Mission Area, Coahuila and Texas, Report No. 3.

Brewster, Betty F.
1903 Expedition into Texas of Fernando
del Bosque. The National Geographic Magazine 14(9):339-348.
Bridges, Katherine, and Winston De Ville
1967 Natchitoches and the Trail to the
Rio Grande: Two Early EighteenthCentury Accounts by the Sieur
Derbanne. Louisiana History
8(3):239-259.
Cabello, Domingo
1780a Expediente. Cabello submits his
report concerning activities of
some citizens of Nuevo Santander
who buy and sell Indians. BexarArchives Translations (The University of Texas at Austin, Barker
Texas History Center Archives,
2C40, Vol. 96:33-39).
l 780b Letter Number 241, Cabello to de
Croix. Bexar-Archives Translations (The University of Texas at
Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2C41, Vol.
98:78-79).

1983a Coahuiltecans and Their Neighbors. In: Alfonso Ortiz, volume
editor, Handbook of North American Indians 10:343-358 (Wm. C.
Sturtevant, general editor). Smithsonian Institution, Washington,
D.C.
1983b Espinosa, Olivares and the Colorado River Indians, 1709. Sayersville Historical Association Bulletin
3:2-6, 15-16 [reprinted in 1983
under the same title in La Tierra:
Journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association 10(2):312].
1984 The Cacaxtlelndians of Northeastern Mexico and Southern Texas.
La, Tierra: Journal of the Southern
Texas Archaeological Association
11(1) 4-20.
1985

Campbell, Thomas N.
1949 The Pioneer Tree-Ring Work of
Jacob Kuechler. The Tree-Ring
Bulletin 15(3):16-20.

Rancho de las Cabras and the "Cabras Indians" of Southern Texas:
Correction of Minor Historical Errors. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas

188

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

at San Antonio, Archaeological
Survey Report No. 155:50-53.

1986 Name All the Indians of the Bastrop Area. Sayersville Historical
Association Bulletin 7 :7-10.
Campbell, Thomas N., and Tommy J.
Campbell
1981 Historic Indian Groups of the
Choke Canyon Reservoir and Surrounding Area. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Choke Canyon Series, Vol. 1.
1983 Indian Groups Associated with
Spanish Missions of the San Antonio Missions National Historical
Park. Report submitted to the U. S .
National Park Service [published
as Campbell and Campbell 1985].
1985 Indian Groups Associated with
Spanish Missions of the San Antonio Missions National Historical
Park, Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Special Report
No. 16.
Castaneda, Carlos E.
1926 A Trip to Texas in 1828, by Jose
Maria Sanchez. The Southwestern
Historical Quanerly 29(4).
1931

Earliest Catholic Activities in
Texas. Preliminary Studies of the
Texas Catholic Historical Society
1(8). Austin.

1936 Our Catholic Heritage in Texas,
1519-1936; Vol. I, The Missions
Era: The Founding of Texas,
1519-1693. Von BoeckmannJones, Austin.
1936- Our Catholic Heritage in Texas,
1958 1519-1936 (seven volumes). Von
Boeckmann-Jones, Austin.
1938 Our Catholic Heritage in Texas,
1519-1936; Vol. III, The Mission

Era: The Missions at Work, 17311761. Von Boeckmann-Jones,
Austin.

Cavazos Garza, Israel
1964 Cedulario autobiografico de pobladores y conquistadores de Nuevo
Le6n. Centro de Estudios Humanfsticos de la Universidad de
Nuevo Leon (Biblioteca de Nuevo
Le6n, tomo num. 2). Monterrey.
1966a Catalogo y sintesis de los protocolos del Archivo Municipal de
Monterrey. 1599-1700. Publicaciones del Instituto Tecnologico y
de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, Serie Historia, tomo num. 4
[reprinted 1973]. Monterrey.
1966b El municipio de Santa Catarina en
la historia. Humanitas: Anuario
de/ Centro de Estudios Humanfsticos, Universidad de Nuevo Leon
7:301-311. Monterrey.
Chabot, Frederick C.
1931 San Antonio and Its Beginnings.
Naylor Printing Co., San Antonio.
Concepci6n Marriage Register
n.d. [This register is in the San Fernanado Archives, San Antonio,
Texas (see Santos 1966-1967)].
Photostat and microfilm copies,
Texas Catholic Archives, Austin.
Conde de la Sierra Gorda
1772 El Conde de la Sierra Gorda
acompafia su Informe sobre el
nuevo methodo de Govierno para
las Misiones. Archivo General de
la Naci6n, Provincias Internas
(The University of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2Q212, Vol. 515 [Vol.
174:416-445]).
Coopwood, Bethel
1899- The Route of Cabeza de Vaca,
1900 Part I. Quarterly of the Texas State
Historical Association 3(2): 108140; 4(1):1-32.

189

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Corner, W.
1890 San Antonio de Bexar: A Guide
and History. Bainbridge and
Corner, San Antonio [reprinted
1977 by Graphic Arts, San Antonio].
Correll, Donovan S., and Marshall C.
Johnston
1970 Manual of the Vascular Plants of
Texas. Research Foundation,
Renner, Texas.
Covey, Cyclone, translator
1961 Cabeza de Vaca's Adventures in
the Unknown Interior of America.
Collier Books, New York.

Valle de la Zircunzision de Yndios
Gentiles de las naciones Sarames,
Papanac, P ayaguan, y Siaguan.
Archivo General de la Nacion,
Provincias Internas (The University of Texas at Austin, Barker
Texas History Center Archives,
2Q203, Vol. 466 [Vol. 28:2229]).
1701

Testimonio de la Fundacion de San
Juan afio de 1701. Archivo
General de la Nacion, Historia
, (The University of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2Ql 78, Vol. 348 [Vol.
29, Pt. 1:5-16]).

Cox, Isaac J.
1905 The Journeys of Rene Robert
Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle. Allerton Book Co., New York.

Dabbs, J. Autrey
1940 The Texas Missions in 1785. Preliminary Studies of the Texas
Catholic Historical Society 3(6).
Austin.

Cuervo y Valdes, Francisco
1698 Carta al Rey, Moncloba, 26 de
Agosto de 1698. Archivo General
de Indias, Audiencia de Guadalajara (The University of Texas at
Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q145, Vol.
72:5-7).

Davenport, Harbert, editor
1924 The Expedition of Panfilo de
Narvaez, by Gonzalo Fernandez
Oviedo y Valdez, Chapters IV and
V. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 27(4):276-304.

1699 Fundazion del Pueblo y Mision del
Nombre de Jesus en el Nuebo
Balle de San Bartolome de Yndios
Gentiles de las naziones Chantafs,
Pacco, y Payaguas. Archivo
General de Indias, Audiencia de
Guadalajara (The University of
Texas at Austin, Barker Texas
History Center Archives, 2Q136,
Vol. 17:225-236).
1700a Carta del Gobernador Don Francisco Cuervo de Valdes a S.M.
fha. en Santiago de la Moncloba a
23 de Junio de 1700. Archivo
General de Indias, Audiencia de
Guadalajara (The University of
Texas at Austin, Barker Texas
History Center Archives, 2Q136,
Vol. 20:10-17).
1700b Fundacion del Pueblo y Mision de
San Francisco Solano en el Nuebo

Davenport, Harbert, and Joseph K. Wells
1918- The First Europeans in Texas,
1919 1528-1536. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 22(2): 111-142;
22(3):205-259.
Delanglez, J.
1938 The Journal of Jean Cavelier: The
Account of a Survivor of the La
Salle Texas Expedition, 16841688. Institute of Jesuit History,
Chicago.
Delisle, Guillaume
1718 Carte de la Louisiane et du cours
du Mississipi.. .. The University of
Texas at Austin, Barker Texas
History Center map collection [reprinted 1982, in Contours of Discovery: Printed Maps Delineating
the Texas and Southwestern
Chapters in the Cartographic History of North America, 1513-

190

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

193 0, by Robert S. Martin and
James C. Martin. The Texas State
Historical Association, Austin].
De Villiers du Terrage, Marc, et Paul Rivet
1919 Les indiens du Texas et les expeditions fran~aises de 1720 et 1721
ala "Baie Saint-Bernard." Journal
de la Societe des Americanistes de
Paris, n.s., tome XI:405- 442.
Dolores, Mariano Francisco de los
17 50 Padrones de las Misiones del Rio
San Xavier (de la Provincia de
Texas) en 13 de Enero de 1750.
San Francisco el Grande Archives,
Mexico (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q249, Vol. 835
[Vol. V:47-55]).
1754 Carta de Fray Mariano Francisco
de los Dolores sobre Indios de la
Mision de San Juan Capistrano que
se refugieron en la de San Francisco Vizarr6n, San Antonio de
Bejar, Marzo 14, 1754. San Francisco el Grande Archives, Mexico
(The University of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2Q249, Vol. 835 [Vol.
V:156-157]).

the American Philosophical Society, n.s., 47(2):165-456.

Dunn, Wm. E.
1911 Apache Relations in Texas, 17181750. The Quarterly of the Texas
State Historical Association
14(3):198-274.
Dunne, Peter M.
1936 The Tepehuan Revolt. MidAmerica 18(1):3-14.
Duran, Migu~l
1744 Descripcion y Mapa de la Provincia
poblada de Barbaros que en la
America Septentrional se halla Situada en la Costa de el Seno Mexicano.... (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center map collection).
Escandon, Joseph de
1747 [Inspection of Nuevo Santander by
Escandon, 1746-17 50]. Arc hi vo
General de la Nacion, Provincias
Internas (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q212, Vol. 518
[Vol. 179, Pt. 1:215-295]).
1751

1762a Informe rendido por los Ministros
de las Misiones de el Rio de San
Antonio a Fr. Francisco Xavier
Ortiz. San Francisco el Grande
Archives, Mexico (The University
of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas
History Center Archives, 2Q256,
Vol. 835 [Vol. XXVII:38-76]).
1762b Fray Mariano de los Dolores ... a
Fray Francisco Xavier Ortiz, 6 de
Marzo, 17 62. Archivo General de
la Nacion, Historia (The University of Texas at Austin, Barker
Texas History Center Archives,
2Q177, Vol. 347 [Vol. 28:162183]).
Driver, Harold E., and Wm. C. Massey
1957 Comparative Studies of North
American Indians. Transactions of

Quaderno de las 18 Poblaziones
fechas por el General Don Joseph
de Escandon que en cada una de
ellas se hallan avecindadas. Archivo General de la Nacion, Provincias Internas (The University of
Texas at Austin, Barker Texas
History Center Archives, 2Q213,
Vol. 520 [Vol. 180:1-373]).

Espinosa, Isidro Felix de
1708 [Untitled report on Coahuila missions]. Archivo General de Indias,
Audiencia de Mexico (The University of Texas at Austin, Barker
Texas History Center Archives,
2Q146, Vol. 77:29-43).
1746

ChronicaApostolica y Seraphica de
todos los Colegios de Propaganda
Fide de esta Nueva Espana .... ,
parte primera. Viuda de D. Joseph
Bernardo de Hogal, Mexico.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

1964 Cr6nica de los colegios de propagandafide de la Nueva Espana.
Mexico, 1746. New edition with
notes and introduction by Lino G.
Canedo. Academy of American
Franciscan History, Washington,
D.C.
Esteves, Francisco
1699 Misiones de Coahuila. Archivo
General de Indias, Audiencia de
Mexico (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q145, Vol.
72:39-41).
Figueroa Torres, J. Jesus
1963 Fr. Juan Larios: Defensor de los
indios y fundador de Coahuila,
1673-1676. Editorial Jus, Mexico.
Foik, Paul J.
1933 Captain Don Domingo Ram6n's
Diary of His Expedition into Texas
in 1716. Preliminary Studies of
the Texas Catholic Historical
Society 2(5). Austin.
Forbes, Jack D.
1957 The Janos, Jocomes, Mansos and
Sumas Indians. New Mexico Historical Review 32:319-334.
1959a Unknown Athapascans: The Identification of the Jano, Jocome, Jumano, Suma, and Other Indian
Tribes of the Southwest. Ethnohistory 6(2):97-159.
1959b The Appearance of the Mounted
Indian in Northern Mexico and the
Southwest to 1680. Southwestern Journal of Anthropology
15(2):189-212.
1960 Apache, Navaho, and Spaniard.
University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.
Forrestal, Peter P.
1931 The Solis Diary of 1767.
Preliminary Studies of the Texas
Catholic Historical Society 1(6).
Austin.

191
1935 Pena's Diary of the Aguayo Expedition. Preliminary Studies of the
Texas Catholic Historical Society
2(7). Austin.
1954 Benavides' Memorial of 1630.
Publication of the Academy of
American Franciscan History,
Documentary Series 2. Washington, D.C.
Garcia, Bartholome
1760 Manual para administrar los santos
. sacramentos de penitencia, eucharistfa, extrema-unci6n, y matrimonio .... Imprenta de los Herederos de Dofia Marfa de Rivera,
Mexico.
Garza Falcon, Blas de la
1734a Pueblo y Micion de S. Bernardo de
el Rio Grande de el Norte. Archivo General de lndias, Audiencia
de Mexico (The University of
Texas at Austin, Barker Texas
History Center Archives, 2Q147,
Vol. 84:19-24).
1734b Yndios de la Micion. Archivo
General de Indias, Audiencia de
Mexico (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q147, Vol.
84:15-19).
Gatschet, Albert S.
1891 The Karankawa Indians, the Coastal People of Texas. Harvard University, Archaeological and Ethnological Papers of the Peabody
Museum 1(2). Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Gibson, Charles
1952 Tlaxcala in the Sixteenth Century.
Yale History Publications, Miscellany, No. 56. New Haven.
Gilmore, Kathleen K.
1969 The San Xavier Missions: A Study
in Historical Site Identification.
State Building Commission, Archeological Program, Report No.
16. Austin.

192

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Goddard, Ives
MS
The Languages of South Texas and
the Lower Rio Grande [published
as Goddard 1979].
1979 The Languages of South Texas and
the Lower Rio Grande. In: Lyle
Campbell and Marianne Mithun,
editors, The Languages of Native
America: Historical and Comparative Assessment:355-389. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Gomez Canedo, Lino
1968 Primeras exploraciones y poblamiento de Texas (1686-1694).
Publicaci6nes def I nstituto T ecno16gico y de Estudios Superiores de
Monterrey, Serie Historia, tomo
mim. 6. Monterrey.
Gonzalez, Anibal A.
1982 The Overlooked Expedition: The
Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre Expedition of 1709. Sayersville Historical Association Bulletin 2:4-7.
Sayersville, Texas.
Gonzalez, Jose Eleuterio
1885 Coleccion de notlc1as y documentos para la historia del estado
de Nuevo Leon corregidos y ordenados de manera que formen una
relaci6n sequida. In: Obras comp/etas de/ doctor Jose Eleuterio
Gonzalez (four volumes), 18851887, tomo m1m. II. Imprenta del
Gobierno en Palacio, Monterrey
[original edition 1867, Tipograffa
de Antonio Mier, Monterrey].
1887

culture Experiment Station, MP585. College Station.

Griffen, Wm. B.
1969 Culture Change and Shifting Populations in Central Northern Mexico. Anthropological Papers of the
University of Arizona, No. 13.
Tucson.
1983

Southern Periphery: East. In: Alfonso Ortiz, volume editor, Handbook of North American Indians
10:329-342 (Wm. C. Sturtevant,
general editor). Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

Griffith, Wm. J.
1954 The Hasinai Indians of East Texas
as Seen by Europeans, 1687-1772.
Philological and Documentary
Studies 2(3) [also listed as Middle
American Research Institute Publication 12:41-168]. Tulane University, New Orleans.
Guadalupe, Joseph
l 754a Memorial Precentado al Governador ...de la Prova. de Sn. Francisco de Coahuila. Archivo General de la N aci6n, Historia (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center Archives, 2Ql 78, Vol. 348 [Vol. 29,
Pt. 1:91-92]).
1754b Querella de San Juan Capistrano
por los Agravios y Dafios que le
Causa Vizarr6n. Archivo del Colegio de la Santa Cruz de Queretaro
(The University of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2Q23 7, Vol. 768: 172183 ).

Apuntes para la historia eclesiastica
de las provincias que formaron el
obispado de Linares. In: Obras
comp/etas de/ doctor Jose Eleuterio
Gonzalez (four volumes), 18851887, tomo m1m. III, pp. 225389. Imprenta del Gobierno en
Palacio a cargo de Viviano Flores,
Monterrey [original edition 1877,
Tipograffa Religiosa de J. Chaves,
Monterrey].

1754c Fr. Joseph de Guadalupe, Santiago
de la Moncloba, Junio 21, 1754....
San Francisco el Grande Archives,
Mexico (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q249, Vol. 835
[Vol. V:5-176]).

Gould, Frank W.
1962 Texas Plants, A Checklist and
Ecological Summary. Texas Agri-

Gursky, Karl-Heinz
1964 The Linguistic Position of the Quinigua Indians. International lour-

193

BIBLIOGRAPHY

nal of American Linguistics
30(4):325-327.
Habig, Marion A.
1968 The Alamo Chain of Missions: A
History of San Antonio's Five Old
Missions. Franciscan Herald
Press, Chicago.
1973

The Zacatecan Missionaries in
Texas, 1716-1834: A Biographical
Directory. Texas Historical Survey Committee, Office of the State
Archeologist, Report No. 23:107181. Austin.

Hackett, Charles W., editor
1926 Historical Documents Relating to
New Mexico, N ueva Vizcaya, and
Approaches Thereto, to 1773.
Carnegie Institution of Washington, Publication No. 330 (three
volumes). Washington, D.C.
1931

Pichardo's Treatise on the Limits
of Louisiana and Texas, Vol. I.
University of Texas Press, Austin.

1934 Pichardo's Treatise on the Limits
of Louisiana and Texas, Vol. II.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Haggard, J. Villasana
1941 Handbook for Translators of
Spanish Historical Documents.
The University of Texas (at Austin).
1942 Spain's Indian Policy in Texas:
Translations from the Bexar Archives. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 46(1):75-82.
Hallenbeck,, Cleve
1940 Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca: The
Journey and Route of the First
European to Cross the Continent of
North America. Arthur H. Clark
Co., Glendale, California.
Harris, John
1705 Navigantium atque Itinerantium
Bibliotheca. Or, A Compleat Collection of Voyages and Travels. T.
Bennet [etc.], London.

Hatcher, Mattie Austin, translator
1932 The Expedition of Don Domingo
Teran de los Rfos into Texas
(1691-1692). Preliminary Studies
of the Texas Catholic Historical
Society 2(1). Austin.
Hedrick, Basil C., and Carroll L. Riley
1974 The Journey of the Vaca Party: The
Account of the Narvaez Expedition, 1528-1536, as Related by
Gonzalo Fernandez de Oviedo y
Valdes. Southern Illinois University, University Museum Studies,
, No. 2. Carbondale.
Helm, Mary S.
1884 Scraps of Early Texas History.
Austin [reprinted 1985 by W. M.
Morrison, Austin].
Hendricks, Sterling Brown
1919 The Somervell Expedition to the
Rio Grande, 1842. Southwestern
Historical Quarterly 23(2): 112140.
Hester, Thomas R., and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1975 Some Aspects of Late Prehistoric
and Protohistoric Archaeology in
Southern Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Special Report No. 1.
Hodge, Frederick W., article editor
1907 The Narrative of Alvar Nunez
Cabe~a de Vaca. In: Jameson, J.
Franklin, general editor for "Original Narratives of Early American
History," Spanish Explorers in the
Southern United States, 15281543 (volume title):3-126. Charles
Scribner's Sons, New York.
1907, Handbook of American Indians
1910 North of Mexico. Smithsonian
Institution, Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 30 (two volumes). Washington, D.C.
1910

The Jumano Indians. Proceedings
of the American Association for the
Advancement of Science, n.s.,
10:249-268.

194
1959

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

The Narrative of Alvar Nunez
Cab~a de Vaca. In: Spanish Explorers in the Southern United
States, 1528-1543. Barnes and
Noble, New York [facsimile edition of Hodge 1907].

Hodge, Frederick Webb, George P. Hammond, and Agapito Rey
1945 Fray Alonso de Benavides' Revised Memorial of 1634. Coronado Cuarto Centennial Publication, 1540-1940, No. IV. University of New Mexico Press,
Albuquerque.
Hoffmann, Fritz Leo, translator
1935 Diary of the Alarc6n Expedition
into Texas, 1718-1719, by Fray
Francisco Celiz. Quivira Society
Publications, Vol. V. Los Angeles.
1938

The Mezquia Diary of the Alarc6n
Expedition into Texas, 1718.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly
41(4):312-323.

Holley, Mary Austin
1836 Texas. J. Clarke, Lexington, Kentucky.
Hollon, W. Eugene, and Ruth L. Butler
1956 William Bollaert's Texas. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Horgan, Paul
1954 Great River: The Rio Grande in
North American History (two volumes). Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York.
Hoyo, Eugenio del
1960 Vocablos de la lengua Quinigua de
los indios Borrados del noreste de
Mexico. Humanitas: Anuario del
Centro de Estudios Humanisticos,
Universidad de Nuevo Leon
1(1):489-515. U niversidad de
Nuevo Le6n, Monterrey.
1963

Indice del ramo de causas criminales del archivo municipal de
Monterrey (1621-1834). Publicaciones del lnstituto Tecnol6gico y

de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, Serie Historia, tomo m1m.
2. Monterrey.
1972 Historia del Nuevo Reino de Le6n
(1577-1723) [por Alonso de
Le6n]. Publicaciones del Instituto
Tecnol6gico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, Serie Historia,
tomo num. 13 (two volumes).
Monterrey.
Ivey, James E.
1983 Archaeological Testing at Rancho
de las Cabras, Wilson County,
Texas. Second Season. Center for
Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San
Antonio, Archaeological Survey
Report No. 121.
Ivey, James E., and Anne A. Fox
1981 Archaeological Survey and Testing
at Rancho de las Cabras, Wilson
County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio,
Archaeological Survey Report No.
104.
Jimenez Moreno, Wigberto
1944 Tribus e idiomas del norte de
Mexico. In: El norte de Mexico y
el sur de Estados Unidos: 121-13 3.
Tercera Reuni6n de Mesa Redonda
sobre Problemas Antropol6gicos
de Mexico y Centro America,
Sociedad Mexicana de Antropologia. Mexico.
1958 Estudios de historia colonial. Instituto Nacional de Antropologia e
Historia, Serie Hist6rica. Mexico.
Johnson, Frederick
1940 The Linguistic Map of Mexico and
Central America. In: The Maya
and Their Neighbors:88-114. D.
Appleton-Century Co., New York.
Jones, Courtenay J., and Anne A. Fox
1983 Archaeological Testing at Rancho
de las Cabras, Wilson County,
Texas. Center for Archaeological

195

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Century. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 27:47-58.

Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio, Archaeological
Survey Report No. 123.

1961
Joutel, H.
1713 Journal historique du dernier
voyage que M. de la Sal fit dans le
golf de Mexique. Redige par M.
de Michel, Paris.
Kelley, J. Charles
1952a Some Geographic and Cultural
Factors Involved in MexicanSoutheastern Contacts. In: Sol
Tax, editor, Indian Tribes of Aboriginal America:139-144. Proceedings of the 29th Congress of
Americanists, Chicago.
1952b The Historic Pueblos of La Junta
de los Rios. New Mexico Historical Review 27(4):257-297.
1953

The Historic Pueblos of La Junta
de los Rios. New Mexico Historical Review 28(1):21-51.

1955

Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in
Aboriginal Texas. American Anthropologist 57(5):981-995.

Kinnaird, Lawrence
1958 The Frontiers of New Spain:
Nicolas de Lafora's Description,
1766-1767. Quivira Society Publications, Vol. XIII. Berkeley.
Kress, Margaret Kinney, and Mattie Austin
Hatcher
1931 Diary of a Visit of Inspection of the
Texas Missions Made by Fray
Gaspar Jose de Solis in the Years
1767-1768. Southwestern Historical Quanerly 35(1):28-76.
Krieger, Alex D.
1955 Un nuevo estudio de la ruta seguida por Cabeza de Vaca, a traves
de Norte America. Doctor of
Science dissertation, Universidad
Nacional Aut6noma de Mexico.
Mexico.
1956 Food Habits of the Texas Coastal
Indians in the Early Sixteenth

--~

The Travels of Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca in Texas and Mexico,
1534-1536. In: Homenage a Pablo
Mart(nez del Rfo en el vigesimoquinto aniversario de la primera
edici6n de "Los or(genes americanos," pp. 459-474. lnstituto
Nacional de Antropologia e Historia, Mexico.

Kroeber, Alfred L.
1939 Cultural and Natural Areas of Native North America. University of
California Publications in American Archaeology and Ethnology,
No. 38. Berkeley.
Lafora, Nicolas de
1939 Relacion del viaje que hizo a los
presidios internos situados en la
frontera de la America septentrional
perteneciente al rey de Espana, con
un liminar bibliografico y acotaciones por Vito Alessio Robles.
Editorial Pedro Robredo, Mexico.
Landar, Herbert
1973 The Tribes and Languages of
North America: A Checklist. In:
Thomas A. Sebeok, editor, Current Trends in Linguistics. Vol.
10, Linguistics in North America: 1253-1446. Mouton, The
Hague.
Leclerc, Frederic
1950 Texas and Its Revolution. Translated from the original French by
James L. Shepherd III. A. Jones
Press, Houston.
Le6n, Alonso de, Juan Bautista Chapa, y
Fernando Sanchez de Zamora
1961 Historia de Nuevo Leon, con noticias sobre Coahuila, Tamaulipas,
Texas y Nuevo Mexico. Estudio
preliminary notas de Israel Cavazos Garza. Centro de Estudios
Humanfsticos de la Universidad de
Nuevo Le6n, Biblioteca de Nuevo
Le6n. Monterrey.

---------------

---

--

196

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Leon, Nicolas
1901 Familias lingtiisticas de Mexico.
Memorias de la Sociedad Cientfji.ca
"Antonio Alzate," tomo mim.
15:275-287. Mexico [reprinted
under same title, 1903, in Ana/es
del Museo Nacional, tomo num.
7:279-335, Mexico].

Martin, George C., editor
1947 Expedition into Texas of Fernando
del Bosque, Standard-Bearer of the
King, Don Carlos II, in the Year
1675, translated by Betty B.
Brewster. N. Brock, San Antonio.

Leutenegger, Benedict
1977 Inventory of the Mission San Antonio de Valero: 1772. Texas Historical Commission, Office of the
State Archeologist, Special Report
No. 27. Austin.

Martin, Robert S., and James C. Martin
1982 Contours of Discovery: Printed
Maps Delineating the Texas and
Southwestern Chapters in the Cartographic History of North America, 1513-1930. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

L6pez de la Camara Alta, Agustin
1758 Descripcion General de la Nueva
Colonia de Santander. Archivo
General de la Nacion, Historia
(The University of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2Q179, Vol. 358 [Vol.
53:2-187]).

Martinez del Rio, Pablo
1954 La Comarca Lagunera a fines del
siglo XVI y principios del XVII
segun las fuentes escritas. Publicaciones del Instituto de Historia,
Primera Serie, tomo num. 30.
Mexico.

Lynn, Warren M., Daniel E. Fox, and Nancy
O'Malley
1977 Cultural Resource Survey of
Choke Canyon Reservoir, Live
Oak and McMullen Counties,
Texas, with appendix by Marshall
C. Johnston and Deborah J. Darr.
Texas Historical Commission, Archeological Survey Report No. 20.
Austin.
Maas, P. Otto
1915 Viajes de misionerosfranciscanos
a la conquista del Nuevo Mundo:
Documentos del Archivo General
de Indias (Sevilla). Imprenta de
San Antonio, Sevilla.
MacManus, F. E.
1885 La Sal del Rey, or the King's
Salt.... Maltby, Jr., Brownsville.
Margry, Pierre
1888 Decouvertes et etablissements des
Franr;ais dan l'ouest et dans le sud
de l' Amerique septentrionale
(1614-1754): Memoires et documents originaux, partie 6. Imprimerie Jouaust et Sigaux, Paris.

Masanet (Mazanet), Damian
1957 Diario que hisieron los Padres
Misioneros que Principia en 16 de
Mayo y que Finaliza en 2 de
Agosto de 1691. Boletfn del Archivo General de la Nacion
28(2):349-475. Mexico.
Mason, J. Alden
1940 The Native Languages of Middle
America. In: The Maya andTheir
Neighbors: 52-87. D. AppletonCentury Co., New York.
Mason, Otis T.
1896 Influence of Environment Upon
Human Industries or Arts. In:
Annual Report of the Smithsonian
Institution for 1895:639-665.
Washington, D.C.
Mayhall, Mildred P.
1965 Indian Wars in Texas. Texian
Press, Waco.
Mendoza, Felipe de
1703 Declaracion de Felipe de Mendoza,
Mexico, Oct. 24, 1703. Archive
General de la Nacion, Provincias
Intemas (The University of Texas

197

BIBLIOGRAPHY

at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, Bolton Transcripts, 2Q203, Vol. 466 [Vol.
28:75-78]).
Mission Records
n.d. [Baptismal, marriage, and burial
records for missions San Francisco
Solano, San Antonio de Valero,
and Nuestra Senora de la Punsima
Concepcion de Acuna are in the
San Fernando Archives, San
Antonio, Texas (see Santos 19661967)]. Photostat and microfilm
copies, Texas Catholic Archives,
Austin.
Mooney, James
1928 The Aboriginal Population of
America North of Mexico, edited
by John R. Swanton. Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections 80(7).
Washington, D.C.
Morfi, Juan Agustin
1856 Viage de indios y diario del
Nuevo-Mexico. Documentos para
la Historia de Mexico, Tercera
Serie 1:305-487. Mexico.
1935a History of Texas, 1673-1779.
Translated with biographical introduction and annotation by Carlos
Eduardo Castaneda. Quivira Society Publications, Vol. VI (two
volumes). Albuquerque.
1935b Fray Juan Agusttn de Morfi y su
obra "Viaje de indios y diario del
Nuevo Mexico," con noticia bibliografica y acotaciones por Vito
Alessio Robles. Jose Pornia e
Hijos, Mexico.
Nance, Joseph Milton
1964 Attack and Counterattack: The
Texas-Mexican Frontier, 1842.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Naranjo, Leopoldo
1934 Lampazos: sus hombres, su tiempo, sus obras. Talleres J. Cantu
Leal, Monterrey.

Newcomb, Wm. W., Jr.
1956 A Reappraisal of the "Cultural
Sink" of Texas. Southwestern
Journal of Anthropology
12(2):145-153.
1961

The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Newcomb, Wm. W., Jr., and Thomas N.
Campbell
1982 Southern Plains Ethnohistory: A
. Re-Examination of the Escanjaques, Ahijados, and Cuitoas. In:
Don G. Wyckoff and Jack L.
Hofman, editors, Pathways to
Plains Prehistory: Anthropological
Perspectives of Plains Natives and
Their Pasts. Oklahoma Anthropological Society, Memoir 3:2943.
Newcomb, Wm. W., Jr., and Wm.T. Field
1967 An Ethnohistoric Investigation of
the Wichita Indians in the Southern
Plains. In: Robert E. Bell, Edward
B. Jelks, and Wm. W. Newcomb,
Jr., A Pilot Study of Wichita
Indian Archeology and Ethnohistory:240-395. Final report of
the Museum of the Great Plains
(Lawton, Oklahoma), the University of Oklahoma, Southern
Methodist University, and the
Texas Memorial Museum of The
University of Texas (at Austin) to
the National Science Foundation,
Grant GS-964. On file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
NUiiez Cabeza de Vaca, Alvar
1542 La relacion que dio Alvar Nunez
Caber;a de Vaca de lo acaescido en
las I ndias en la armada donde yva
por governador. ... Impresso por
Augustin de Paz y Juan Picardo,
Zamora (photostat copy, The University of Texas at Austin, Barker
Texas History Center Archives).
1555 La relaci6n y comentarios def governador Alvar Nunez Caber;a de

----- ------------------------- - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

198

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Vaca, de lo acaescido en las dos
jornadas que hizo a las Indias, con
privilegio.... F. F. de Cordova,
Valladolid.
1870 Relacion. Documentos Ineditos del
Archivo de las Indias, tomo
XIV :269-279.
1963

1971

Schiffbruche: Bericht uber die
U nglacksfahrt der NarvaezExpedition nach der Sudkuste
Nordamerikas, 1527-1536, Ubersetzung. Einleitung und wissenschaftliche Bearbeitung von Franz
Termer. Mtinchen.
Naufragios y comentarios (quinta
edicion). Espasa-Calpe, Madrid.

Oberste, Wm. H.
1942 History of Refugio Mission. Refugio Timely Remarks, Refugio,
Texas.
Olivares, Antonio de Santo Buenaventura y
1700 Carta del Padre Olibares del Rio
Grande (a Fray Felipe Galindo),
Die. 13, 1700. Archivo General
de la Nacion, Provincias Intemas
(The University of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2Q203, Vol. 466 [Vol.
28:48-51]).
Orobio y Bazterra, Prudencio
1737 (Auto) Nacogdoches Archives (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center Archives, 2Q292, Vol. 839 [Vol.
11:44-45]).

Oviedo y Valdes, Gonzalo Fernandez de
1853 Historia general y natural de las
I ndias, tomo III (MS written before 1542). Real Academia de la
Historia, 1851-1855 (three parts in
four volumes), Madrid.
Parisot, P. F., and C. J. Smith
1897 History of the Catholic Church in
the Diocese of San Antonio,
Texas. Carrico and Bowen, San
Antonio.
Perez de Mezqufa, Pedro
1731 Carta al Senor Marqs. de CasaFuerte, Virrey de esta Nueva Espana, Mayo 4 de 1731. Archivo
General de la Nacion, Provincias
Intemas (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q215, Vol. 531
[Vol. 236:35-40]).
Pimentel, Francisco
1862, Cuadro descriptivo y comparativo
1865 de las lenguas indfgenas de Mexico
(two volumes). J. M. Andrade y
F. Escalante, Mexico.
Portillo, Esteban L.
ca.1886 Apuntes para la historia antigua de
Coahuila y Texas, edited by Amado Prado. Tipograffa del Gobierno
en Palacio, Saltillo.
1897

Catecismo geografico, poUtico, e
hist6rico del estado de Coahuila de
Zaragoza (segunda edici6n).
Tipograffa del Gobierno en
Palacio, Saltillo.

Orozco y Berra, Manuel
1864 Geograffa de las lenguas y carta
etnograjica de Mexico. J. M. Andrade y F. Escalante, Mexico.

Powell, J. W.
1891 Indian Linguistic Families of
America North of Mexico. Seventh
Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology, 1885-86:1142. Washington, D.C.

Ortiz, Alfonso, volume editor
1983 Vol. 10, Southwest, Handbook of
North American Indians, Wm. C.
Sturtevant, general editor. Smithsonian Institution, Washington,
D.C.

Prieto, Alejando
1873 Historia, geograffa, y estad(stica
del estado de Tamaulipas .... Tipograffa Escalerillas, Mexico
[reprinted 1975, M. Porrua,
Mexico].

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Ram6n, Diego
1707 Diario de la Jornada que executo
Sergento Mr. Diego Ramon ....
Archivo General de la N aci6n,
Provincias Internas (The University of Texas at Austin, Barker
Texas History Center Archives,
2Q203, Vol. 466 [Vol. 28:5371]).
Reindotp, Reginald C.
1938 The Founding of Missions at La
Junta de los Rios. Supplementary
Studies of the Texas Catholic Historical Society 1(1). Austin.
Revilla Gigedo, Conde de
1966 lnforme sobre las Misiones, 1793,
e Instrucci6n Reservada al Marques de Branciforte, 1794, con
introducci6n y notas de Jose Bravo
Ugarte. Editorial Jus, Mexico [reprint of 1831 edition].
Rfos, Eduardo Enrique
1959 Life of Fray Antonio Margi/,
0. F. M., translated and revised by
Benedict Leutenegger. Academy
of American Franciscan History,
Washington, D.C.
Rivera y Villal6n, Pedro de
1945 Diario y Derrotero de lo Caminado,
Visto y Obcervado en el Discurso
de Visita General de Precidios,
situados en las Provincias Ynternas
de Nueva Espana .. ., textos y notas
por G. P. Munoz. Libreria Pom1a
Hermanos, Mexico [original edition 1736, Guatemala].
Rodriguez, Joseph Antonio
1755 Fray Joseph Antonio Rodriguez al
M. Rmo. R. N. Com. Oral. San
Francisco el Grande Archives,
Mexico (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q249, Vol. 835
[Vol. V:182-186]).
Rodriguez, Vicente
1772a Testimonio de la Entrega de la
Mision de San Bernardo del Rio
Grande del Norte, a los Reveren-

199
dos Padres de la Santa Provincia
de Jalisco, Ano de 1772. Saltillo
Archives (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q313, Vol. 840
[Vol. 111:34-75]).
1772b Testimonio de los Bienes de la
Mision de San Juan Bautista del
Rio Grande. Saltillo Archives (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center Archives, 2Q313, Vol. 840 [Vol.
 III:76-134]).
Ruecking, Frederick H., Jr.
1953 The Economic System of the Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern
Texas and Northeastern Mexico.
The Texas Journal of Science
5(4):480-497.
1954a Bands and Band-Clusters of the
Coahuiltecan Indians. Student
Papers in Anthropology, Department of Anthropology, The University ofTexas (at Austin) 1(2):124.
1954b Ceremonies of the Coahuiltecan
Indians of Southern Texas and
Northeastern Mexico. The Texas
Journal of Science 6(3):330-339.
1955a The Coahuiltecan Indians of
Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico. M.A. thesis, The University of Texas (at Austin).
1955b The Social Organization of the
Coahuiltecan Indians of Southern
Texas and Northeastern Mexico.
The Texas Journal of Science
7(4):357-388.
Saenz, Joachin
1755 Misi6n de Nra Senora del Rosario
en el Cavez6n de la Sal, Abril 14
de 1755. Archivo General de la
N aci6n, Provincias Internas (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center Archives, 2Q213, Vol. 519 [Vol.
179, Pt. 2:622-624]).

200

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Saldivar, Gabriel
1943 Los indios de Tamaulipas. lnstituto
Panamericano de Geograf{a e
Historia, Publicaci6n, tomo m1m.
70. Mexico.

tin, Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2Q292, Vol. 839 [Vol.
1:48]).
1743

1945 Historia compendiada de Tamaulipas. Academia Nacional de Historia y Geografia, Mexico.
1946 Organizaci6n de las Misiones.
Archivo de la Historia de Tamaulipas, Serie 3. Mexico.
San Buenaventura y Salazar, Diego
1699 Misiones de Coahuila. Archivo
General de Indias, Audiencia de
Mexico (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q145, Vol.
72:44--47).
1708 Misiones de Coahuila. Archivo
General de Indias, Audiencia de
Mexico (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q146, Vol.
77:11-28).
Sandoval, Manuel de
1733 Copy of residencia of Governor
Don Juan Anttonio de Bustillo y
Zavallos conducted by Governor
Don Manuel de Sandoval by order
of the Marques de Casafuerte.
Bexar-Archives Translations (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center Archives, 2Cl4, Vol. 3:1-213).
San Francisco Solano Baptismal Registers
n.d. See Valero Registers (included
with).
Santa Ana, Benito Fernandez
1737 Carta al Sr. Capn. Dn. Joseph de
Urrutia. Archivo General de la
Nacion, Misiones (The University
of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas
History Center Archives, 2Q201,
Vol. 454 [Vol. 21, Pt. 2:380]).
1739

(Report) Nacogdoches Archives
(The University of Texas at Aus-

Carta, Marzo 4 de 1743, de la
Mision de la Conzepcion de
Acuna. Archivo General de la Nacion, Provincias Internas (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center Archives, 2Q215, Vol. 531 [Vol.
236:69-75]).

Santamaria, Francisco J.
1974 Diccionario de mejicanismos. Editorial Pomia, Mejico.
Santa Marla, Vicente
1929- Relacion hist6rica de la colonia del
1930 Nuevo Santander y costa del Seno
Mexicano (two volumes). Talleres
Grafica de la Naci6n, Mexico.
Santos, Richard G.
1966- A Preliminary Survey of the San
1967 Fernando Archives. Texas Libraries 28(4):152-172. Austin.
Sapir, Edward
1920 The Hokan and Coahuiltecan Languages. International Journal of
American Linguistics 1(4):280-290.
Saravia, Atanasio G.
1937 Ensayos hist6ricos. Edici6n Botas,
Mexico.
Sarmiento, Jose 
1701 Testimonio del Decreto de Fundacion del Precidio de San Juan
Bautizta. Archivo General de la
Nacion, Historia (The University
of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas
History Center Archives, 2Ql 78,
Vol. 348 [Vol. 29, Pt. 1:69-76]).
Sauer, Carl
1934 The Distribution of Aboriginal
Tribes and Languages in Northwestern Mexico. Ibero-Americana
5. Berkeley.
1971

Sixteenth Century North America:
The Land and the People as Seen

201

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Reverendo Padre Fray Pedro Perez
de Mezquia. Archivo del Colegio
de la Santa Cruz de Queretaro (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center Archives, 2Q237, Vol. 766:36-41).

by the Europeans. University of
California Press, Berkeley.

Schmitt, Edmond J. P.
1901 A Catalogue of Franciscan Missionaries in Texas, 1528-1859.
(s.n.) Austin [bound with Dismas,
The Good Thief, translated from
the French by the Rev. E. Schmitt;
The University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center
Library].
Scholes, F. V., and H.P. Mera
1940 Some Aspects of the Humano
Problem. Carnegie Institution Contributions to American Anthropology and History 6:265-299.
Washington, D.C.

1727

Visita de las Misiones del Rio
Grande del Norte por F. Miguel
Sevillano de Paredes en 15 de
Octubre de 1727. Archivo General
de la Naci6n, Historia (The University of Texas at Austin, Barker
Texas History Center Archives,
2Ql 78, Vol. 348 [Vol. 29, Pt.
1:35-68]).

Shelby, Charmion C.
1923 St. Denis's Declaration Concerning
Texas in 171 7. Southwestern
Historical Quarterly 26(3): 165183.

Schroeder, Albert H.
1960 A Study of the Apache Indians,
Part Ill. The Mescalero Apaches.
Multilithed, Santa Fe [published
1974 as A Study of the Apache
Indians by Garland Pub., Inc.,
New York].

Simmons, Marc
1964 Tlascalans in the Spanish Borderlands. New Mexico Historical
Review 39(2):101-110.

1962 A Re-analysis of the Routes of
Coronado and Ofiate into the Plains
in 1541 and 1601. Plains Anthropologist 7(15):2-23.

Sjoberg, Andree F.
1953a Lipan Apache Culture in Historical
Perspective. Southwestern Journal
of Anthropology 9(1):76-98.

Schuetz, Mardith K.
1966 Historic Background of the Mission San Antonio de Valero. State
Building Commission, Archeological Program Report No. 1, Austin.

1953b The Culture of the Tonkawa, A
Texas Indian Tribe. The Texas
Journal of Science 5(3):280-304.

1980a A Historical Outline of Mission
San Juan de Capistrano. La Tierra:
Journal of the Southern Texas Archaeological Association 7(4):315.
1980b The Indians of the San Antonio
Missions, 1718-1821. Ph.D. dissertation, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Sevillano de Paredes, Miguel
1726 Representacion que haze Fray Miguel Sevillano de Paredes ... al muy

Skeels, L. L. M.
1972 An Ethnohistorical Survey of
Texas Indians. Texas Historical
Survey Committee, Archeological
Report No. 22. Austin.
Smith, Buckingham, translator
1851 The Narrative of A/var Nunez
Cabeqa de Vaca. George W.
Riggs, Jr., Washington, D.C.
1871

Relation ofAlvar Nunez Cabeqa de
Vaca, with "Memoir" of Buckingham Smith by John Gilmary Shay.
New York [printed by J. Munsell
for H. C. Murphy, Albany; also,
University Microfilms, 1966].

202
Solano Registers
n.d. [The baptismal, marriage, and
burial registers of Mission San
Francisco Solano are in the San
Fernando Archives, San Antonio,
Texas (see Santos 1966--1967)].
Photostat and microfilm copies,
Texas Catholic Archives, Austin.
Solis, Gaspar Jose de
1767 Diario que hizo el Padre Fr. Gaspar Jose de Solis en la visita de las
misiones de la Provincia de Texas.
Archivo General de la Nacion,
Historia (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, miscellaneous
transcripts, 2Q 177, Vol. 347 [Vol.
28:248-297]).
Steck, Francis B.
1932 Forerunners of Captain De Leon's
Expedition to Texas, 1670-1675.
The Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 36(1):1-28.
Stiles, Henry Reed, editor
1906 Joutel's Journal of La Salle's Last
Voyage, 1684-7. J. McDonough,
Albany.
Swadesh, Mauricio (Morris)
1959 Mapas de clasificacion lingiifstica
de Mexico y las Americas. Cuadernos de/ Instituto de Historia,
Serie Antropol6gica 8. Universidad Nacional Autonoma de
Mexico, Mexico.
1967 Linguistic Classification in the
Southwest. In: Dell H. Hymes and
Wm. E. Bittle, editors, Studies in
Southwestern Ethnolinguistics :281-309. Mouton, The Hague.
Swanton, John R.
1911 Indian Tribes of the Lower Mississippi Valley and Adjacent Coast
of the Gulf of Mexico. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 43.
Washington, D.C.
1915 Linguistic Position of the Tribes of
Southern Texas and Northeastern

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Mexico. American Anthropologist,
n.s., 17:17-40.
1940 Linguistic Material from the Tribes
of Southern Texas and Northeastern Mexico. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin 127. Washington, D.C.
1942 Source Material on the History and
Ethnology of the Caddo Indians.
Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of
American Ethnology, Bulletin 132.
Washington, D.C.
1952 The Indian Tribes of North
America. Smithsonian Institution,
Bureau of American Ethnology,
Bulletin 145. Washington, D.C.
Terrell, John U.
1962 Journey into Darkness. Morrow,
New York.
Tienda de Cuerbo, Joseph
1757 lnforma del Reconocimiento e Inspeccion de la Colonia.... Archivo
General de la N aci6n, Historia
(The University of Texas at Austin, Barker Texas History Center
Archives, 2Q179, Vol. 359 [Vol.
54:1-246]).
Tous, Gabriel
1930a The Espinosa-Olivares-Aguirre Expedition of 1709. Preliminary
Studies of the Texas Catholic
Historical Society 1(3). Austin.
1930b Ramon Expedition: Espinosa's
Diary of 1716. Preliminary Studies
of the Texas Catholic Historical
Society 1(4). Austin.
Troike, Rudolph C.
1959 A Descriptive Phonology and Morphology of Coahuilteco. Ph.D.
dissertation, The University of
Texas (at Austin).
1962 Notes on Coahuiltecan Ethnography. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 32:57-63.

203

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Trowbridge, A. C.
1923 A Geologic Reconnaissance in the
Gulf Coastal Plain of Texas, Near
the Rio Grande. In: David White,
editor, Shorter Contributions to
General Geology, 1922:85-107.
United States Geological Survey,
Professional Papers No. 131.
Washington, D.C.
Tucker, Sara J., compiler
1942 Indian Villages of the Illinois
Country. Scientific Papers of the
Illinois State Museum II (Pt. I,
Atlas). Springfield.
Turner, B. L.
1959 The Legumes of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Valdez, Juan
1720 Letter to the Marques de Aguayo,
giving an Account of the Founding
of Mission San Jose, Feb. 23,
1720. Archivo General de Indias,
Audiencia de Guadalajara (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center Archives, 2Q137, Vol. 23:12-25).
Valero Registers
n.d. [Baptismal, marriage, and burial
registers for Mission San Antonio
de Valero are in the San Fernando
Archives, San Antonio, Texas (see
Santos, 1966-1967)]. Photostat
and microfilm copies, Texas
Catholic Archives, Austin.
Valverde, Acisclos
1767 Memorial del R. P. Presidte. al
Capn. del Presidio de Sn. Antonio
para qe. se haga la diligencia jurfdica qe. va inserta a fin de averiguar a que mission pertenecen
unos indios qe. los minros de la
Misi6n de No. S. P. S. Franco. de
la Espada recogieron, Afio de
1767. Archivo del Colegio de la
Santa Cruz de Queretaro (The
University of Texas at Austin,
Barker Texas History Center Archives, 2Q237, Vol. 768:277280).

Velasco, Alfonso Luis
1897 Torno num. XIX: Geograffa y
estad(stica del estado de Coahuila
de Zaragoza. Serie: Geograffa y
estadfstica de la Republica Mexicana. Oficina Tipografica de la
Secretaria de Fomento, Mexico.
Velasco, Dr.
1958 Dictamen Fiscal, Mexico, y Noviembre 30 de 1716. Boletfn del
Archivo General de la Nacion
29(2):311-344. Mexico.
Vergara, Gabriel de
1965 El Cuadernillo de la lengua de los
indios pajalates (1732) por Fray
Gabriel de Vergara y el confesonario de indios en lengua coahuilteca, edited by Eugenio del
Hoyo. Publicaciones del Instituto
Tecnol6gico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey, Serie Historia, tomo num. 3. Monterrey.
Vetancurt, Fr. Agustfn de
1971 Teatro mexicano, cr6nica de la
provincia del Santo Evangelio de
Mexico. Menologio franciscano.
Biblioteca Porrila, tomo num. 45
[reprint of 1697 edition]. Editorial
Porrila, Mexico.
Wagner, H. R.
1924 The Spanish Southwest, 15421794. Gillick and Co., Berkeley.
Walters, Paul H.
1951 Secularization of the La Bahia
Missions. Southwestern Historical
Quarterly 54(3):287-300.
Webb, Walter Prescott, editor-in-chief
1952 The Handbook of Texas. The
Texas State Historical Association
(two volumes). Austin.
Weddle, Robert S.
1968 San Juan Bautista: Gateway to
Spanish Texas. University of
Texas Press, Austin.
1973

Wilderness Manhunt: The Spanish
Search for La Salle. University of
Texas Press, Austin.

204
Wedel, Mildred M.
1971 J. B. Benard, Sieur de la Harpe:
Visitor to the Wichita in 1719.
Great Plains Journal 10(2):37-70.
West, Robert C.
1964 Surface Configuration and Associated Geology of Middle America. In: Robert C. West, volume
editor, Vol.1: Natural Environment
and Early Cultures:33-83. Handbook of Middle American Indians,
Robert Wauchope, general editor.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Wheat, Carl I.
1957 Mapping the Transmississippi
West, 1540-1861. Vol. I, The
Spanish Entrada to the Louisiana
Purchase, 1540-1804. Institute of
Historical Cartography, San Francisco.
Wilcox, Seb. S.
1946 The Spanish Archives of Laredo.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly
49(3):341-360.
Williams, Albert C.
1939 The Route of Cabeza de Vaca in
Texas: A Study in Historiography.
M.A. thesis, The University of
Texas (at Austin).
Williams, J. W.
1962 New Conclusions on the Route of
Mendoza, 1683-84. West Texas
Historical Association Year Book
38:111-134.
Winfrey, Dorman H., and James M. Day
1966 The Indian Papers of Texas and the
Southwest, 1825-1916 (five volumes). Austin [edition of 1916,
reprinted by Pemberton Press,
Austin].

CAMPBELL: INDIANS

Wissler, Clark
1917 The American Indian: An Introduction to the Anthropology of the
New World. D. C. Murtrie, New
York.
Ximenes, Diego
1762a Relacion del Estado de las
Misiones de la Precidencia del Rio
Grande, pertenecientes al Colegio
de la Santa Cruz de Queretaro.
Archivo General de la Nacion,
Historia (The University of Texas
at .Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q178, Vol. 348
[Vol. 29, Pt. 1:108-116]).
1762b Relacion del Estado de las
Misiones de la Precidencia del Rio
Grande, pertenecientes al Colegio
de la Santa Cruz de Queretaro.
Archivo General de la Naci6n,
Historia (The University of Texas
at Austin, Barker Texas History
Center Archives, 2Q178, Vol. 349
[Vol. 29, Pt. 1, supplement:104ll 1]).
Ysasmende, Pedro de
1737 Fray Pedro de Ysasmende Pr Apco
y Mnro de la Mision dentro P. S.
Francisco de la Espada de Texas en
la major firma aya lugar digo asi.
Nacogdoches Archives (The University of Texas at Austin, Barker
Texas History Center Archives,
2Q292, Vol. 839 [Vol. 11:4142]) ..
Zelis (Celiz), Francisco de
1734 Mision nombre de Jhs. alias Peyot.
Archivo General de Indias, Audiencia de Mexico (The University of
Texas at Austin, Barker Texas
History Center Archives, 2Q147,
Vol. 84:8-9).

