TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED
SEAWAY PIPELINE AND DEPOT

Brazoria County, Texas

Bruce A. Nightengale

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN NO; 46
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
1980

- - - - ­ --._-_. - - - _ . -

~-.

----------~------------

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED
SEAWAY PIPELINE AND DEPOT
Brazoria County, Texas

By:

Bruce A. Nightengale

Principal Investigator:

David S. Dibble

A report submitted to Dames and Moore in partial fulfillment
of the terms of purchase order # HS-409, dated December 9, 1980.

- -

1

INTRODUCTION
From December 15 to 19! 1980! an archeological survey
was conducted by Texas Archeological Survey (TAS) staff
members Bruce A. Nightengale and Ray D. Kenmotsu to locate
and assess any archeological and historical sites which
might exist within an area proposed for construction of
onshore storage terminals and along a proposed pipeline
right-of-way connecting the storage facility to an offshore
deep water terminal. Also included in this survey was a
reevaluation of two previously recorded sites, 41B079
and 41B086. These two sites were recorded in 1973 by J.W.
McMichael during a survey of this same area (TAS Research
Staff 1973). No new sites were found or recorded during
the present survey.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The study area is located on the Upper Texas Coast.
This geographic area, as demarcated by Aten (1979), runs
from just inside the Louisiana border to the western shore
of the San Bernard River. The Upper Texas Coast ;s a
continuous deltaic plain formed during the Late Pleistocene
and known as the Beaumont Formation. Overlying this formation
are sediments deposited by the rise and fall of sea level
during the Late Pleistocene and Holocene. Four river deltas
make up the Upper Texas Coast - the Sabine, Trinity, Brazos,
and San Bernard rivers.
One of the major areas of archeological research on
the Upper Texas Coast has been the Galveston Bay area.
Here archeological projects resulting from the proposed
Wallisville Reservoir were conducted by the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project (TASP) - Ambler 09.70), Aten (19661, Gtlmore
(1974), and Dillehay (1975). This area is incorporated
i nto a dis s e r tat ion by Ate n (197 9) 0 n t he Upper Te x a s

........

-----­

2

Coast, which presents a good archeological and ethnohistoric
background for the present study area.
Aten attempts to
clarify the aboriginal culture history of the coast, based
on ceramic paste changes over a period of time. These changes
are correlated with radiocarbon dates from Rangia clam
shells and charcoal from the same occupational areas as the
ceramics. Although Paleoindian and Early Archaic projectile
points have been found in the area, no sites of these
periods have been recorded (Aten 1979: 451). The absence
of Middle Archaic sites is attributed to deep burial as well
as inundation by rising water. Late Archaic sites are
simply preceramic period shell middens with little or no
associated cultural material.
In 1972-1973, archeological survey and test excavations
were conducted in the Matagorda Bay area by TAS (Fritz 1975).
Twenty-eight previously recorded sites were revisited and
ninety-five new sites were recorded. Of these 123 recorded
sites, twenty-two are of historic non-aboriginal affiliation.
The majority of the remaining 101 sites are shell middens
with varying densities of Bangia and oyster shell. Nine
are listed as lithic concentrations and one site is a bone
and lithic concentration.
Raw material for the manufacture of lithic tools is
scarce on the Upper Texas Coast, and had to be either
imported from inland areas or retrieved from stream gravels,
the closest of which are 90 miles inland. Lithic trends
along the coast show the dart point, associated with the
Archaic period, disappearing around A.D. 400-500, or early
in the ceramic period. The arrow point, usually associated
with ceramics, marks the beginning of the Late Prehistoric
Period, around A.D. 600 in most areas of Texas (Aten:
1979: 443).

3

Since the Galveston Bay area yielded the most stratified
sites and has had the most work, it provides the best data
for constructing a more conclusive chronology. This chrono­
logy varies with each cultural area from east to west.
Sandy paste untempered plain ceramics, a homogeneous ware
throughout the ceramic and historic periods, first appeared
on the eastern end of the coast. By diffusion of an un­
determined nature, it worked its way down the coast. Ceramics
began to appear in the Sabine Lake area around 70 B.C. and
in the Corpus Christi area around A.D. 1100. The first
appearance of pottery in the Brazos Delta area was approxi­
mately A.D. 300 (Aten 1979: 425). Ceramic pastes and tempers
varied enough to enable an association of certain types with
different periods of time depending on the popularity of
the particular type. The earliest ceramic was the untempered,
sandy paste Goose Creek type, followed by tempered wares;
sandy paste Conway Plain~ grog tempered Baytown Plain~ and
an unnamed bone tempered ware not found in great quantities
. on the coast.
Most sites found in the Brazos Delta area are thinly
stratified shell middens. The limited diversity of ceramics
at these sites makes chronological verification difficult
(Aten 1979: 411).
Historically, the Upper Texas Coast was occupied by
four tribes. From east to west, they were the Atakapa, the
Akokisa, the Bidai north of the Akokisa, and the Karankawa
west of the Akokisa. The study area lies within the region
that was inhabited by the historic Coco, a tribal group of
the Karankawa (Aten 1979: 62). These are the people with
whom Cabeza de Vaca supposedly first made contact when he
landed on the coast marking the beginning of the
Historic Period in 1528. Also, from this point on, the

------~---~

--~~~~~~~~~--~-

4

slow demise of the native populations can be traced. Few
instances of European interaction with the aboriginal
populations are reported until the 1700's when the fur
trade and colonial encroachment resulted in increased
pressure. As a result of this European contact and Tonkawa
hegemony, which promoted hostilities and introduced fatal
diseases, the Karankawa tribe ceased to exist around
1860 (Aten 1979: 66). It is plausible that the shell middens
in the Brazos delta region are of historic Coco origin,
since settlement and subsistence patterns recorded at
contact would have left similar archeological residues.
During the warm months of the summer, microbands of perhaps
twenty-five individuals would inhabit certain localities
along the coast to exploit the food resources. During the
winter, microbands would converge into groups of between
400 and 500 and move inland to winter encampments.
Archeological investigations in the near vicinity of
the current project include the Brazos delta (Aten 1971),
Freeport harbor and Oyster Creek (Ippolito and Baxter
1976; Baxter and Ippolito 1976, Dering and Ayers 1977),
and the companion survey to the Seaway pipeline and depot
(TAS Research Staff 1973).
The Dow Cleaver site, 41B035, is located in the central
part of the Brazos delta (Aten 1971). Excavations
produced lithics, faunal material, shell and ceramics.
The predominant ceramic type was Goose Creek PZain, a
sandy paste untempered ware which first appeared about
A.D. 300 and continued in use through the early 1800's.
Lithic material, mostly from surface collection, was minimal
but included Perdiz and SaaZZorn arrowpoints which date
from around A.D. 600. Most of the lithic debitage was
found in the upper occupation zones; only one dart point

1. k ~'\..

>11;

~/l"~I'~\' ~-. ­-.k
?~ ' .~, -~~\--l~~t
~
.
:

. . "

#

_

~

-r_

-/'

/""-

' ..

••:

1.*. /1-1i" I~'
+!

/

._.

l

/

-

'

. .'.._~." '. .

,1'

418090..
. (Ellerslie Plantation):

\.'

.I

<of

.

•

..---­

II
t i JI
l t­
.."'::::...,,:

~.I"";""' ••'." ' . '
'"
....., r '~\ "., '.' \
I
\....'\

"

I

~..
~I

l

,

' .. _

,
I

"

'1

.....

"

_-"""'~,"""""

(

'( .
ALTUNAT£
PIPELINE

~--I--­

/

, IOUTES

f

.....

.

'''-'~ ,-'~+-­

:l ~ . ~:. :::~y.' .

..

: ),

*_. :-.... ,""

~f\

..

".

.

..."...
......

Offshore

Complex

\

<:>

\

.......
o
=s.
SCAt.( .,.

*' u•.ES

lou...: Se.dOdt environmenl.1 Aeport,

FIGURE 1

1973
1980

ARCHEOLOGICAL AND HISTORIC RESOURCE SITES (MARKED WITH
ASTERISKS)
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY( ROUTE MARKED WITH BROKEN LINE)

5

fragment came from the lower zones. These cultural zones,
six in all, rarely exceeded 5 cm. in thickness.
The Texas A & M surveys (Ippolito and Baxter 1976;
Baxter and Ippolito 1976), both of which were on the east
side of the Brazos River, were carried out during January
and February of 1976. The first survey recorded one pre­
historic site and three historic sites, one of which is
the possible location of Fort Velasco. The prehistoric
site is a shell midden of undetermined age and affiliation.
The second survey covered a more extensive area which
included parts of Oyster Creek.
In 1977, archeological survey and test excavations were
conducted within the village of Oyster Creek, Brazoria
County, Texas, by Texas A & M (Dering and Ayers 1977). Two
small shell middens were identified and one site, 41B0126,
was tested. Data from several test areas within the site
indicate a series of small temporary encampments. Radiocarbon
dates from Bangia cuneata shells date the occupation
periods of this site from 1800 B.P. to 1440 B.P. Also
recovered from the site were ceramics of the Goose Creek
type.
The 1973 TAS survey of the study area included recon­
naissance of two proposed terminal sites and the proposed
and alternate pipeline routes designated A, B, C, D, E, and
F. All pipelines originated at Terminal Site I, located on
the eastern boundary of the Clements State Farm, south of
Highway 36. These pipelines run southeast from the terminal
to the coast - a distance of approximately 8 miles. Most
of the sites found during the 1973 survey were adjacent to
the combined A, B, C, and D pipelines route which paralleled
the San Bernard River. Two other sites were recorded
:on the combined E and F pipeline where it crosses the

6

Intracoastal Canal. These two sites, 41B086 and 41B079,
were reevaluated during the present survey. Terminal Site
II, located southeast of the town of Jones Creek and
west of Jones Creek, was also surveyed in 1973; no sites
were found in that area at that time. The present survey
includes a pipeline that runs due south from this terminal
area. This proposed pipeline parallels the 1973 alternate
pipeline route E for 2.5 miles; it then follows the 1973
combined pipeline route E-F to the coast (see Figure 1).
The 1973 TAS survey of the present study area recorded
one historic plantation, 41B080, and twenty prehistoric
sites. The prehistoric sites were broken down into four
types. The first, estuarine gathering stations, exhibit
concentrations of shell covering small surface areas.
Twelve of this type were located along the San Bernard
River. The second, estuarine base camps, were multi­
functional camps with large surface areas. Two such sites
were identified along the San Bernard River about 8 km.
upstream from the Gulf. The third type is the brackish
lake gathering station, evidence of which is strictly shell
concentration. Two of these sites were located, one on
Cedar Lakes I and the other on Jones Lake. The fourth
site type, brackish lake base camps, were encampments
from which a variety of habitats - brackish water marsh,
fresh water marsh, fluvial woodland and upland prairie ­
could be exploited. The single site in this category,
41B079, is the largest site located during the survey.
The predominant cultural materials found at all four
types of sites were Bangia auneata and oyster shell, The
bulk of the ceramics collected from the sites were the
untempered sandy paste type, Goose Creek PZain, followed
in abundance by grog tempered Baytown PZain. A few

7

lithic artifacts were collected from the surface at
41B079 - one dart point base made of chert, one biface
fragment, a "knife" of pinkish thermally altered chert, and
a small amount of debitage.
SURVEY METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
The survey area is located approximately 5 km. west
of the city of Freeport in Brazoria County. The proposed
terminal area was surveyed first, after which the pipeline
running south to the gulf was investigated.
The northern area - about 400 meters square - includes
a 10 foot AMSL north-south running ridge line on the west.
Just 100 meters west of this ridge, a small drainage
trends to the south. The remaining eastern section is
relatively level, with vegetation consisting of stands of
oak and elm as the overstory, and dense marsh grasses covering
the ground. This latter vegetation made ground visibility
poor, so some shovel probes were used to check for buried
cultural deposits.
The intensive survey of the pipeline was accomplished
by walking intertwining transects from the Terminal to
the Intracoastal Waterway, and back. About one kilometer
south of the terminal, the pipeline traverses a remnant
terrace of the Brazos River for 1.2 km.; this terrace
dates from around 5000 B.C. (TAS 1973). This area, in
our opinion, presented the highest probability for sites.
The vegetation along the ridge consisted of scattered
oak and elm trees with thick marsh ground cover which made
ground visibility minimal; however, interspersed t~roughout
were open areas of fairly decent visibility. The 1973

8

survey of this ridge included numerous shovel probes in
search of buried cultural deposits. None were found.
During the recent survey, probes were also used; again,
no cultural material was recovered.
After coming off the ridge, the pipeline runs along
the western slope of the ridge. From here on, for about
2 km., ground visibility was better; thereafter, it was
ankle deep marsh with dense overlying cordgrass. No
sites were found on this final leg to the Intracoastal.
A boat was used to finish the survey of Intracoastal
banks and the barrier island, and to reevaluate the sites
41B086 and 41B079. A thorough inspection of the banks
and the island revealed no new archeological sites.
The sites are located on opposite banks of the
Intracoastal Canal and are thought to have once been
one site (TAS 1973). Construction of the Intracoastal
Waterway split the site in two; later widening of the
canal from 100 feet to 125 feet in the forties, cut
fUrther into the sites. Maintenance dredging of this
portion of the Intracoastal takes place every twentyfour months. This dredging in itself does not damage the
sites, since the width of the canal remains generally
constant (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1975:Vol I p. 72-73).
The depth is maintained at a constant 12 feet through the
use of hydraulic pipeline dredges which deposit their
spoil in designated disposal areas. Site 418079 is located
on the edge of spoil area #90 (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
1975:Vol III). Wash from these spoil piles is readily
discernable in the upper strata of the site. The mean
tide range is 1 foot, with storm surges of +15 feet and
winds causing a -4 foot variance (U.S. Army Corps of

9

Engineers 1975: Vol I p. 15). Wave action from constant
barge traffic, combined with natural tidal action, are
erosional factors which have further depleted the sites.
After comparing early site descriptions with photographs
taken in 1973 and those taken during the current survey,
it is apparent that site destruction over the last seven
years has been extensive. 41B086 is rapidly eroding;
418079 is still recognizable in the banks but, due to its
extensive size, its disappearance will be slower.
The current survey reaffirmed the importance of 418079
to the understanding of the culture in the Brazos delta
area. Artifacts collected from the site included sandy
paste untempered and grog tempered ceramics, the scapula
and vertebrae of a large mammal, one Perdiz arrow point,
one chert secondary flake, and Bangia auneata and oyster
shell. All except the flake were found in situ and
photographed before collection. The shell lens measures
40 cm. in thickness and is exposed along at least 50 meters
of the bank. In one place in the central part of the lens,
the upper strata of soil is gone and the cultural zone is
exposed on the surface. This shell lens is the upper of
two that are apparent in this portion of the site. There
appears to be about 5 cm. of soil between the two zones.
East and west of this central part, the separation is not
so apparent; the last seven years have exposed a new face.
Bangia and oyster shell litter the beach directly in
front and to the east of this central area; most appear to
have eroded from the shell lens.
Previous collection of the site in 1973 yielded the same
diversity of artifacts. The limited collection of Bangia
shells was found to be of value in determining seasonality
of the clams collected. From growth rings on the shell,

10

the age of the clam can be determined, as can the time
of year it was gathered. Rangia shells from 418079
appear to have been collected primarily in the spring and
summer, while a few were gathered in the fall. Further
testing of this eroding site could reveal much more in the
way of usable data.
Site 418086, located directly across the waterway
from 418079, was described in the first survey as
a 2.5 cm. thick, 10 meter long shell lens in the bank of
the Intracoastal, consisting exclusively of oyster shells.
Reexamination of the site revealed the remains of this
lens - mostly one shell thick - exposed in three areas
along the bank. The total exposed length was about 17
meters. Erosion at this site is not as apparent as at
41B079, but site destruction is in progress. The
remnant portions remain a valuable cultural resource.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
An intensive survey of the proposed Seaway onshore
terminal and pipeline right-of-way was conducted to locate
and assess any archeological and historical sites that might
exist in the area of the proposed construction. Before
actual field work began, Brazoria County files at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory and the Texas Historical
Commission were inspected for any new sites that may have
been reported in the study area over the last seven years;
no new sites were recorded.
The intensive survey of the onshore terminal extension
located no identifiable traces of prehistoric remains or
significant historical material. A systematic survey of

11

the proposed pipeline right-of-way, using intertwining
serpentine transects for more thorough ground coverage
and shovel probes where necessary, disclosed no new sites.
The area on either side of the pipeline right-of-way,
where it crosses the Intracoastal Waterway, was also
examined for evidence of cultural remains. No new sites
were found in this area. Sites 41B079 and 41B086,
previously documented in the 1973 survey, were reevaluated;
these two sites are situated on opposite sides of the
Intracoastal Canal, near the proposed pipeline crossing.
Both sites have eroded significantly over the past
seven years from various processes, most notably boat­
generated waves and tide action. In our opinion these
sites, particularly 41B079, retain sufficient structural
integrity to be of potential archeological importance;
this importance is emphasized by the probability of intact
cultural stratigraphy, most noticeable at 41B079, and by
the diversity of cultural material including food residues
observed at the site.
The results of this survey, except for the findings
at 41B079 and 41B086, indicate that construction of the
onshore terminal and pipeline will not affect identifiable
cultural resources. Avoidance, if feasible, is recommended
for sites 41B079 and 41B086 in the proposed crossing of
the Intracoastal Canal. Should this prove to be impractical,
then a sound plan for data recovery from these sites should
be implemented.

12

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alperin, Lynn M.
1977
Custodians of the Coast3 History of the u.s. Army
Engineers at GaZveston. Galveston District, U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers. Galveston.
Ambler, J. Richard
1970
Additional Archeological Survey of the Wallisville
Reservoir Area, Southeast Texas. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Survey Report No.6. Austin.
Aten, Lawrence E.
1966
Late Quaternary Alluvial History of the Lower Trinity
River, Texas: A Preliminary Report. In, An Archeol­
ogical Survey of Wallisville Reservoir, Chambers
County, Texas, by Harry J. Shafer. Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Survey Report No.2, Appendix I.
Austin.
1971

Archeological Excavations at the Dow-Cleaver Site,
Brazoria County. Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, Teahniaal Bulletin No.1. Austin.

1979

Indians of the Upper Texas Coast: Ethnohistoric and
Archeological Frameworks. PhD. dissertation, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Baxter, Edward P. and John E. Ippolito
1976
An Archeological Survey of the Freeport, Texas, Hurri­
cane Flood Protection Project, Brazoria County, Texas.
Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A & M University,
Report No. 22.
Dering, Phil and David Ayers
1977
Archeological Investigations in the Village of Oyster
Creek, Brazoria County, Texas. A Reassessment of
Economic Archeology On the Texas Coast. Anthropology
Laboratory, Texas A & M University, Report No. 42.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1975
Prehistoric Subsistence Exploitation in the Lower
Trinity River Delta, Texas. Texas Archeological
Survey, Researah Report No. 51. Austin.
Fritz, Gayle
1975
Matagorda Bay Area, Texas: A Survey of the Archeol­
ogical and Historic Resources. Planning Division,
Texas General Land Office, and Texas Archeological
Survey, Researah Report No. 45. Austin.

13

Gilmore, Kathleen
1974
Cultural Variation on the Texas Coast: Analysis of
An Aboriginal Shell Midden, Wallisville Reservoir,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report
No. 44. Austin.
Ippolito, John E. and Edward P. Baxter
1976
An Archeological Survey of the Freeport Harbor 45­
Foot Navigation Project, Brazoria County, Texas.
Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A & M University,
Report No. 21.
Texas Archeological Survey, Staff
1973
The Historic and Prehistoric Archeological Resources
of the Seadock Area. Manuscript on file at the
Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District
1975

Pinal Environmental Statement: Maintenance Dredging~
Main
Gulf IntracoastaZ Waterway~ Texas Section.
Channel and Tributary ChanneZs.
Volumes 1 and 3.

