ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED LUBBOCK
NORTHWEST WATER RECLAMATION WATER AND WASTEWATER
PIPELINES FOR THE CITY OF LUBBOCK, LUBBOCK COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 6997

by
Michael R. Bradle
and
Herbert G. Uecker

American Archaeology Group, LLC
Report of Investigations Number 193

2015

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE PROPOSED LUBBOCK
NORTHWEST WATER RECLAMATION WATER AND WASTEWATER
PIPELINES FOR THE CITY OF LUBBOCK, LUBBOCK COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 6997

by
Michael R. Bradle
and
Herbert G. Uecker

Principal Investigator:
Herbert G. Uecker

Prepared for

City of Lubbock
P. O. Box 2000
Lubbock, Texas 79457

Prepared by
American Archaeology Group LLC
P.O. Box 534
Lampasas, Texas 76550

ii

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey was undertaken in August and October 2014 and June
2015 by American Archaeology Group LLC (AAG) for the City of Lubbock for the
proposed Lubbock Northwest Water Reclamation Water and Wastewater pipelines in the
City of Lubbock, Lubbock County, Texas. Fieldwork was conducted under the auspices of
Texas Antiquities Permit Number 6997 and Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA). The pedestrian survey provided complete coverage of the
project area. Subsurface testing was accomplished by means of 80 backhoe trenches and
four shovel tests to intensively test for subsurface cultural deposits. On the west side of
where the proposed pipelines cross Yellow House Canyon is a previously recorded site,
41LU83. This site was recorded by the Lubbock Lake Landmark research project in 1989.
This was recorded as a small historic hearth, with a possible earlier occupation. The
recorder stated that this is a historic hearth of burned caliche and ash with rusted metal, tin
cans, nails, hinges and plastic. The recorder also noted that use was probably within the
last 25 years. The hearth was covered in caliche to protect it. The recorder noted that the
site was to be submitted for nomination (NRHP and/or SAL). No subsurface investigations
were conducted, therefore it is unknown if the purported site had any subsurface cultural
deposits that constitute archaeological site criteria. Based on the archival data, this site
appears to be nothing more than a late twentieth century burn pile or pasture clearing.
However, even though the site recorder believed that the hearth was historic in age,
it appears that most of the site area may have been bulldozed due to ranch road maintenance
and fence line clearing. This area is on private land owned by a trust. A few flakes of flint
were observed and a few scattered pieces of burned rock in the bulldozed ranch road (twotrack). Just below the hill where the slope meets the canyon floor, a small limestone hearth
was located on top of a thin veneer of caliche and sandy clay. The hearth appeared to be
approximately 28 x 45 centimeters in size. Since the hearth was already impacted and
continually impacted by ranch traffic, AAG cleaned the hearth and documented its location
and obtained s ample of matrix from between and underneath the hearthstones in an attempt
to obtain a radiometric date for this feature. Appendix IV presents the calibrated
radiocarbon date of A.D. 990 to 1045, A.D. 1095 to 1120, and A.D. 1140 to 1145 years
B.P., this rendering a known occupation date for this site from the Late Prehistoric time
period.
Based on the location of this hearth, and the surface locations of a few flakes and
burned rock scattered, the site size for the site (41LU83) was extended to include these
areas and the site appears to be at least 20 (north-south) x 126 meters (west-east), and
unknown how far to the north or to the south. Subsequent project access revealed that the
hearth had eroded away from recent flooding since it was located on the surface bedrock
and thin soils. Future investigations should address the northern and southern boundaries
in order to ascertain if any intact cultural deposits are present that could be evaluated for
significance. BHT-58 was excavated on top of the canyon edge where the flakes and
scattered burned rock were observed and there was only 23 centimeters of soil on top of
limestone bedrock.
iii

Many of the areas were bedrock exposure on top of the canyon edge. Down the
slope into the bottom of the canyon, BHT-59 was excavated to a depth of 248 centimeters.
It must be noted that the extensive depths of these soils is a result of extreme erosion and
run-off from the cultivated fields to the north. The erosion pathway was observed and
appeared to be filling up the canyon with re-deposited soils from the canyon edges on top.
This portion of the site does not appear to be eligible for inclusion on the National Register
of Historic Places (NRHP) nor worthy of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark
(SAL). The area to the south needs further investigation in the future should proposed
impacts occur in that vicinity.
On the east side of the Yellow House Draw a previously recorded site, 41LU73 was
relocated. This recorded archaeological site has no site form data on file. The Texas
Historical Commission Sites Atlas only shows an approximate location and has no site
data. The site size and depth is unknown. Upon extensive surface survey, it appears that
this site is a surficial scatter of historic trash debris dating from the late Nineteenth-Early
Twentieth Century based on the lavender glass, clear glass, brown glass, white ware
ceramics, metal fragments, and wire nails. The site has bedrock exposure and mixed
limestone fragments in a sandy clay. Shove probes proved that soil depth is thin and that
the site is located on the surface. The site either represents an early habitation site that may
have been bulldozed over the edge of the hill or it was a dump site along an old two-track
road through the ranch. This site appears to be 20 (north-south) x 50 (east-west) meters in
site size with the southern boundary unknown as to how far it may extend south of the
ranch fence line where the proposed pipelines will be placed. This portion of the site does
not appear to be eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
nor worthy of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL). The area to the south
needs further investigation in the future should proposed impacts occur in that vicinity.
Site 41LU89 was recorded and appeared to be just to the east of the project line at
its eastern most point where it turns to the south towards the Berl Huffman Complex. BHT74 proved that there are some deep soils in this area. However, the area has also been
subjected to a number of impacts including past dragstrip raceway track construction and
later demolition, soil removal based on mounds of soils present (similar to other parts of
the project area such as in Figure 16 near BHT-20), and golf course construction adjacent
immediately to the north. The area where the site was recorded further to the east was
inspected surficially during project area access and no cultural materials were observed, It
appears that this project did not locate any extensions of site 41LU89, therefore it does not
appear that this site was relocated, is located further to the east, and will not be impacted.
Site 41LU5 was recorded previously as the Dune Site consisting of a lithic scatter
and midden purportedly from Paleo-Indian to Late Prehistoric time periods. The site was
recorded in 1973 by Texas Tech University and in 1983 it was designated a State
Archeological Landmark. The surveyors identified a flint flake, burnt caliche concentration
and a bone concentration. They also noted that this may be an old floor based on the
iv

location of the artifacts. The site was recorded as eroding out of the highest eastern terrace
with a sand dune. The current project appears to have transected the very eastern edge of
the site and BHTs 76-78 were excavated to test for the presence of any potentially buried
cultural deposits based on the prior recommendations of the original site recorder. Even
though the soils appeared to be deep, no subsurface cultural deposits were identified and
no surface evidence was observed either. The site boundary as shown on the Sites Atlas
appears to be too far to the east. As previously noted, this appears to be the area of the
extreme eastern edge of the site and it appears that the site in question most likely is further
to the west of the proposed pipeline route, at a higher elevation to the sand dune. There is
also a caliche pit located adjacent to the project area and the area was subjected to soil
removal (for a previous swimming pool) so if there was any eastern extension if the site, it
was probably a surficial site that was removed due to these noted impacts. Any future
impacts in this vicinity or to the west should test the deep soils for any remaining cultural
deposits noted by the previous site recorder.
Site 41LU30 was recorded in 1974 as a prehistoric camp site consisting of “
worked stone and flakes”. The site was found on a high ridge to the Northeast of 41LU1
(the Lubbock Lake site). No subsurface investigations were conducted, therefore it is
unknown if subsurface cultural deposits exist. The site recorder recommended testing
(Phase II) to ascertain depth of cultural deposits. This site is located in the area where
BHT-80 was excavated. Based on the Sites Atlas plotting, the site is immediately south of
BHT-80 and is located over much of the Berl Huffman Complex (baseball fields). The
City of Lubbock would not allow AAG to use heavy machinery in the vicinity of the Berl
Huffman Complex since they have maintained ballfields and a series of irrigation pipes.
Since the proposed pipeline project will be placed adjacent to the fence line and
through the gravel road area, AAG strategically placed four shovel tests to a depth of 100
centimeters to test for any potential subsurface deposits that may be present since the site
recorder thought the site may be a surficial site with some bone present. All were negative
and no cultural materials were observed or found in any of the subsurface tests. However,
some bone fragments were observed in the extreme northeast corner of the park area,
southeast of BHT-80 (outside of the project area) in a pile of sandy clay that appears to be
scraped or bladed soils that were piled up during ballfield construction. It appears that based
on the extensive ball field construction, irrigation lines and utility lines installed, there does
not appear to be any intact surficial or subsurface cultural deposits to be assessed for
significance. The area along the proposed pipeline area within the previously recorded site
area was not found, therefore, no impact will occur to any cultural deposits in this area.
In conclusion, the field investigation conducted by AAG detected no surficial or
sub-surface archaeological sites or cultural remains other than extensions of sites 41LU73
and 41LU83. Further, the results of backhoe trenching conducted during the investigation
indicate that practically all of the ground surface and varying depths of the project area has
been extensively impacted by prior earth moving activities, road and utility construction,
farming and erosion. This suggests that any surficial remains in the area have likely been
altered or destroyed. There is no evidence to suggest that any significant stratified
v

archaeological deposits, features, or artifacts are present within the boundaries of the
proposed development for the new Northwest Water Reclamation Plant Water and
Wastewater Pipelines. AAG believes that this project should be allowed to proceed and no
archaeological monitoring is considered necessary during construction. No artifacts were
collected, however project data will be curated at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

vi

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
American Archaeology Group LLC is grateful to those whose cooperation made
the completion of this project possible. Mr. John Turpin, P.E. from the City of Lubbock
visited the project area to ensure the proper areas were examined and he handled unknown
utility issues. Mr. Logan Spencer of the L. Howard Construction Company operated the
backhoe for subsurface testing operations and is thanked for his assistance as well as his
supervisor, Mr. Ronnie Stamps and Mr. Cody Hamm who assisted with unknown and
unidentified utility issues. Herbert G. Uecker served as Principal Investigator for the project
and Michael R. Bradle served as Project Archaeologist. They led the project with
assistance from David C. Scott and David D. Bradle. Ms. Luci English, P.E. of
Enprotec/Hibbs and Todd, Inc. served as the engineering Project Manager on behalf of the
City of Lubbock and Mr. Fred Curnutt, P.E., Vice President of Enprotec/Hibbs and Todd,
Inc. also assisted AAG as a liaison with the City of Lubbock, ensured that AAG understood
the plan for proposed construction and assisted with all logistics on a daily basis while
performing the fieldwork. Ms. Tiffany Osburn of the Archeology Division, Texas
Historical Commission provided valuable input on the project and all was involved in the
review process and are thanked for their assistance.

vii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ...................................................................................................................... iii
ACKNOWLELDGEMENTS ........................................................................................... vii
INTRODUCTION ...............................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING .........................................................................................3
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ...........................................................................7
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ......................................................................................10
PROJECT METHODOLOGY...........................................................................................12
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS....................................................................................18
RECOMMENDATIONS ..................................................................................................27
REFERENCES CITED .....................................................................................................28
APPENDIX I: RESEARCH DESIGN AND SCOPE OF WORK ....................................32
APPENDIX II: BACKHOE TRENCH AND SHOVEL TEST LOG…………………… 34
APPENDIX III: ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE LOCATIONS……..…………………… 41
APPENDIX IV: RADIOCARBON DATE RESULTS………………………………… 43

FIGURES
FIGURE 1: MAP SHOWING GENERAL LOCATION OF PROJECT AREA ................2
FIGURE 2: BACKHOE TRENCH AND SHOVEL TEST LOCATIONS ........................13
FIGURE 3: VIEW OF BHT-38………..………………………………….......................14
FIGURE 4: VIEW OF BHT-46 PROFILE........................................................................15
FIGURE 5: VIEW OF BHT-53….....................................................................................15
viii

FIGURE 6: VIEW OF BHT-64……………………………………………......................16
FIGURE 7: NORTHEAST VIEW OF PRAIRIE DOG TOWN NEAR THE
JUNCTION OF HIGHWAY 84 AND LOOP 289 ...........................................................16
FIGURE 8: NORTH VIEW OF THE EDGE OF THE BERL HUFFMAN
SPORTS COMPLEX WHERE SITE 41LU30 WAS PREVIOUSLY
IDENTIFIED ....................................................................................................................17
FIGURE 9: EAST VIEW FROM SITE 41LU83 LOOKING TOWARDS YELLOW
HOUSE DRAW ................................................................................................................20
FIGURE 10: NORTH VIEW ON SITE 41LU83. NOTE EXTENSIVE
BULLDOZING AND EROSION .....................................................................................20
FIGURE 11: VIEW OF FEATURE 1 LOCATED AT SITE 41LU83 .............................21
FIGURE 12: WESTERN VIEW ACROSS YELLOW HOUSE DRAW FROM SITE
41LU73……………………………………………………………… .............................21
FIGURE 13: NORTHERN VIEW OF SITE 41LU73 FROM BOUNDARY WITH
LUBBOCK LAKE LANDMARK…………………………………... .............................22
FIGURE 14: VIEW OF HISTORIC ARTIFACT SURFACE SCATTER ON SITE
41LU73 .............................................................................................................................22
FIGURE 15: WESTERN VIEW OF AREA WHERE SITE 41LU89 WAS
PREVIOUSLY RECORDED ...........................................................................................25
FIGURE 16: SOUTHEAST VIEW OF PROJECT AREA NEAR BHT-20
SHOWING MASSIVE PILE OF TOPSOIL REMOVED FROM THE PROJECT
AREA AND SURROUNDING AREAS..........................................................................25

ix

INTRODUCTION
The City of Lubbock plans to construct the Lubbock Northwest Water Reclamation
Water and Wastewater Pipelines in the northwest area of Lubbock, Texas. The project area
covers approximately 40,305’ (with a 50 foot right-of-way) of water and wastewater lines north
and south of Highway 84 (Clovis Highway), near the junction with Loop 289 in the northwest
side of City of Lubbock, Lubbock County, Texas (Figure 1). Construction impacts are not
expected to exceed 3.5 meters in depth.
Because the construction will impact public land, permitting approval is subject to state
regulations governing the protection of cultural resources. Specifically, the Antiquities Code of
Texas (ACT) mandates that ground-disturbing activities must be preceded or accompanied by
archaeological investigations conducted by qualified professional archaeologists. Regulations of
the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission (THC), the state agency which
administers the ACT, are also applicable to development of the property.
American Archaeology Group LLC was retained by Enprotec/Hibbs and Todd, Inc. on
behalf of the City of Lubbock to conduct an archaeological survey. The investigation was carried
out under the auspices of Texas Antiquities Permit 6997 and Section 106 of the National Historic
Preservation Act (NHPA) through a nationwide permit from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and was funded by the City of Lubbock through its contract for engineering services with Alan
Plummer and Associates Inc. and Enprotec/Hibbs and Todd, Inc. Fieldwork was conducted in
August and October 2014 and June 2015 which included surface survey and backhoe trenching
to test for potential subsurface cultural deposits. Relief within the project area varies 40 feet from
3,292’to 3,242’feet above mean sea level. UTM coordinates for the approximate center of the
project area are zone 14S 232354 Easting, and 3725520 Northing located on the Lubbock West
and Shallowater 7.5’ USGS Quad Maps.
This report provides archaeological and historical information relevant to the project and
describes the implementation and results of the field investigations. Based on the results of the
investigation, it is recommended that construction of the proposed Northwest Water Reclamation
Plant Wastewater and Water Pipelines be allowed to proceed.

1

Figure 1: Map showing location of project area.

2

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Regional Environment
Geography and Geomorphology
The project area lies within a region known as the Southern High Plains, or Llano
Estacado. An extensive, high plateau, the Llano Estacado covers approximately 82,880 square
kilometers (32,000 square miles) in the western Texas Panhandle and eastern New Mexico. It is
bounded by escarpments from 50 to 200 meters high on the east, north, and west. The southern
portion grades into the Edwards Plateau (Holliday 1997; Leatherwood 2006).
The formation of the Llano Estacado is tied to a late Cenozoic uplift of the Rocky
Mountains. Beginning nearly eleven million years ago in the Miocene and continuing in the
Pliocene, vast quantities of alluvial and eolian sediments eroded from the mountains spilled into
eastern New Mexico and Texas, creating the Ogallala Formation. Much of Ogallala is covered
by a crust of indurated caliche, known as the Caprock, formed by the evaporation of calcium
carbonate carried in solution from the mountains (Holliday 1997; Leatherwood 2006; Pazzaglia
and Hawley 2004).
Mantling large areas of the Ogallala is another Pliocene deposit, the Blanco Formation.
This formation comprises sequences of lacustrine deposits from lakes formed in subsidence and
deflation basins on the Ogallala surface. Around the beginning of the Pleistocene (~ 1.6 million
years ago), the lakes vanished and the Llano was blanketed by eolian sands from the Pecos River
valley. These sediments constitute the Blackwater Draw Formation, the major surficial deposit
of the Llano (Holliday 1997; Pazzaglia and Hawley 2004).
Basin-like depressions known as playas, dunes, and dry valleys provide slight
topographic relief on the vast plains of the Llano. These features contain most of the intact
assemblages of buried cultural remains in the region and are therefore the focus of most
archaeological research (Holliday 1997). Playas are found throughout the Llano and number
around 25,000. They are typically less than 370 acres (1.5 square kilometers) and average about
17 acres (0.07 square kilometers). Recent investigations suggest that playas are erosional
features and that most formed during the Pleistocene (Holliday et al. 1996; Bolen 2006). In the
past the playas contained water and were both a refuge for wildlife and focus of prehistoric
settlement. Today, they are largely dry. Some contain water from seasonal rains, but it is
generally brackish (Bolen 2006). Dunes, also known as lunettes, are eolian features found
adjacent to playas. Their growth is linked to water levels in the playas, with growth peaking
when low water levels expose lake sediments, the source of the dune deposits (Frederick 1998).
The dry valleys, or draws, of the Llano were once tributaries of the Red, Brazos and Colorado
rivers, and they tend to follow the southeasterly course of these waterways. The draws cut into
the Blackwater Draw Formation and contain Pleistocene and Holocene lacustrine, paludal,
alluvial and eolian deposits (Holliday 1997).

3

Climate
The present day climate of the Llano Estacado is semi-arid, with long, hot summers and dry
winters. Gradients in precipitation and temperature are relatively uniform across the region;
temperature grades higher from northwest to southeast, and precipitation generally increases
from west to east, averaging 22-23 inches (56-58 centimeters) annually in the east to 14-15 inches
(36-38 centimeters) in the west (Holliday 1997; Leatherwood 2006).
Vegetation
Though today the Llano Estacado is largely under cultivation, potential vegetation is mixedprairie grassland, dominated by the short-grasses blue grama (Poa arachnifera) and buffalo grass
(Buchloe dactyloides). Other native plants include yucca cactus, catclaw and wildflowers
(daisies, buttercups, verbena, and Indian paintbrush). Native trees – cottonwoods and hackberries
– are limited to escarpments and canyons. Mesquite, cedars, Chinese elms, oaks and pines were
introduced historically. The natural vegetation of the Llano remained relatively stable
throughout the Holocene. In the late Pleistocene, when human groups began settling on the
Llano, vegetation varied with changing climatic regimes, ranging from subhumid to semiarid
savanna to semiarid grassland (Graves 2006; Holliday 1997; Samson et al. 1998).
Local Environment
Lubbock County is located on the eastern edge of the Llano Estacado, roughly midway between
its northern and southern boundaries. The county covers an area of 893 square miles (2,313
square kilometers) and comprises primarily flatlands which slope gently to the southeast from a
maximum elevation of 3,400 feet (1,040 meters). As is the case throughout the Llano Estacado,
the flatlands are dotted by playas. Nearly a thousand are present in Lubbock County. In the
southeast corner of county, the North Fork of the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River
descends the Caprock Escarpment, the eastern boundary of the Llano, leveling out at an elevation
of about 2,900 feet (884 meters) (Graves 2006). A tributary of the North Fork, Yellow House
Draw, passes just north of the project area.
Geology and Soils
The primary surface deposit in Lubbock County is the early Pleistocene Blackwater Draw
Formation (Fisher 1974). In the study area the Blackwater Draw Formation rests unconformably
on the Pliocene/Miocene Ogallala Formation. The Blackwater Draw Formation is a massively
bedded, grayish red, calcareous, silty, sand with caliche nodules. The Ogallala Formation is a
fluvatile sand, silt, clay, and gravel capped by a hard, pisolitic, caliche or calcrete (Barnes 1970).
The Web Soil Survey 1.1 (National Cooperative Soil Survey) depicts 11 soil series in
the project area:

4

Acuff loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes, and Estacado clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes. Acuff loam,
0 to 1 percent slopes was formed on plains from loamy eolian deposits. Typical profiles of this
soil series are 0-12 inches loam; 12-80 inches are below sandy clay loam (Blackstock 1979:6-7).
Amarillo fine sandy loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes is a gently sloping soil located primarily in
uplands. Typical profiles of this soil are a surface layer (0-10 inches) of reddish brown fine sandy
loam; 10-32 inches reddish brown sandy clay loam; 32-40 inches yellowish red sandy clay loam;
40-47 inches reddish yellow sandy clay loam;4780 inches reddish yellow sandy clay loam and
calcium carbonates (Blackstock 1979:8).
Arch loam, 0 to 3 percent slopes is a soil that formed on benches around playas. Typical profiles
of this soil are a surface layer (0-9 inches) of brown loam; 9-17 inches grayish brown sandy clay
loam and calcium carbonates; 17-34 inches brownish gray sandy clay loam with calcium
carbonate concretions; 34-47 inches gay sandy clay loam; 47-80 inches pale brown fine sandy
loam and calcium carbonate nodules (Blackstock 1979:910).
Arents and Pits are areas reshaped by heavy machinery around playas and caliche pits. Clay
lam mixed with mixtures of wood, glass, and plastic are often found (Blackstock 1979:10).
Bippus clay loam, occasionally flooded is a nearly level soil located in drainageways and
outwash fans. Typical profiles of this soil are surface layer (0-30 inches) brown clay loam; 3055 inches brown clay loam; 55-72 inches brown clay loam (Blackstock 1979:12).
Drake clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes is a gently sloping soil on convex sides of low duned
areas on the eastern side of playas. Typical profiles of this soil are a surface layer (0-10 inches)
grayish brown clay loam; 10-60 inches clay loam with calcium carbonates (Blackstock 1979:1213).
Drake clay loam, 3 to 5 percent slopes is a sloping soil on low duned uplands on eastern sides
of playas. Typical profiles of this soil are a surface layer (0-10 inches) grayish brown clay; 1060 inches pale brown clay loam with calcium carbonates (Blackstock 1979-13).
Estacado clay loam, 0 to 1 percent slopes were formed on plains from calcareous loamy eolian
deposits from the Blackwater Draw formation of Pleistocene age. Typical profiles of this soil are
surface layer (0-16 inches) brown clay loam; 16-26 inches brown clay loam with calcium carbonates;
26-40 inches light brown clay loam; 40-66 inches reddish yellow clay loam with calcium carbonates
(Blackstock 1979:13-14).
Estacado clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes is a gently sloping soil on uplands adjacent to playas.
Typical profiles for this soil are surface layer (0-14 inches) darker brown clay; 14-20 inches brown
clay loam; 20-34 inches yellowish red clay loam; 34-80 inches reddish yellow clay loam with
calcium carbonates (Blackstock 1979:14).

5

Manaker clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes is a sloping soil on uplands along draws and around
playas. Typical profiles for this soil are surface layer (0-8 inches) brown clay loam; 8-15 inches
light brown clay loam with calcium carbonates; 15-32 inches pink clay loam with calcium
carbonates; 32-60 inches reddish yellow clay loam with calcium carbonates (Blackstock
1979:16).
Potter loam, 2 to 12 percent slopes is a gently sloping soil on uplands. Typical profiles for this
soil are surface layer (0-12 inches) grayish brown loam with calcium carbonates; 12-18 inches
white platy caliche; and 18-30 inches white loamy material with caliche fragments (Blackstock
1979:21-22).
All of the soil series in the study area have been disturbed by farming, ranching, road
construction and maintenance, and utility installation; therefore, the likelihood of intact
assemblages of artifacts on the surface or near the surface at the study site is very low.

6

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Cultural Sequence
The history of human settlement on the Llano Estacado and across the greater Texas area
spans over 11,000 years. A chronological framework developed by archaeologists for the
interpretation of Texas history comprises five general temporal periods whose boundaries
correspond to significant cultural and social developments in the region (Nunley 1989:37-46).
These periods and their approximate dates are as follows: 1) Paleoindian (11,500- 8500 before
present [hereafter B.P.]); 2) Archaic (8500-2000 B.P.); 3) Late Prehistoric (1200 B.P. to A.D.
1450); 4) Protohistoric (A.D. 1450-1650); and 5) Historic (A.D. 1650-1940s).
The Paleoindian period begins during the last Glacial and continues into the early
Holocene. The earliest confirmed Paleoindian populations in Texas were small, highly mobile
bands of hunters armed with distinctive fluted “Clovis” projectile points who pursued large, late
Pleistocene mammals, most notably mammoths (Surovell 2000; Turner and Hester 1985;
Waguespack and Surovell 2003). Later Paleoindian populations developed new forms of
projectile points and refined their hunting strategies in response to environmental factors such as
the extinction of the mammoth and other mega mammals. Yet despite these adaptations, they
maintained a lifeway more like that of their predecessors than that of later Archaic populations.
The complete demise of the Pleistocene big-game animals and climate change
accompanying the onset of the Holocene are linked to shifts in stone tool technology, subsistence
pursuits and settlement patterns that define the Archaic period. The Paleoindian-Archaic
transition, like those between succeeding periods, occurred gradually. As the Pleistocene mega
mammals begin to vanish, indigenous populations focused on smaller game and increased their
reliance on local plant foods. With changes in subsistence came new and more diverse stone
toolkits and an increase in tools made of wood and other organic materials. Additionally,
settlements became more stable, and there is evidence for progressively sophisticated cultural
practices, such as systematic burial of the dead (Bousman et al. 2002). Although the Archaic
hunting and gathering lifeway remained relatively stable for thousands of years, archaeologists
are able to define four subperiods (or eras) – Early, Middle, Late and Transitional – based on a
dated sequence of diagnostic projectile points (Turner and Hester 1985:47-49)
The Late Prehistoric period is marked in some areas of Texas, including parts of the
Panhandle, by the introduction of domesticated plant foods such as corn and beans.
Technological innovations such as pottery and the bow and arrow were widely adopted (Nunley
1989:44; Turner and Hester 1985:82).
The Protohistoric period is associated with an incipient European presence in the region.
Protohistoric indigenous populations were the first described in early ethnohistoric accounts.
Often, these accounts reflected only indirect contact. Items of European manufacture are
occasionally found in Protohistoric sites, though in most cases these items were not acquired
directly but through so called down-the-line trading (Nunley 1989:45).
7

The Historic period is characterized by a firm historical record and increasing direct
contact between indigenous and European explorers and settlers. Horses introduced by the
Spanish and European material culture led to profound changes in indigenous cultures.
Eventually, Old World diseases, resettlement and warfare claimed up to 95% of Texas Indians
(Klos 2006). The latter part of the Historic period encompasses the AngloEuropean settlement
of Texas.
Local Archeological and Historical Context
Biessart et al. (1985) place Lubbock and Lubbock County within the Southern High
Plains archaeological region, which contains a total of 31 counties. With an abundance of
archaeological sites containing well-preserved cultural, faunal and microbotanical remains, and
one of the highest concentrations of Paleoindian sites in North America, this region offers
excellent opportunities to study patterns of prehistoric settlement and adaptations through time
(Holliday 1997; Wendorf 1961).
Among the archaeological resources in Lubbock County is one of the most significant
sites of Southern High Plains region, the Lubbock Lake National Historic and State
Archeological Landmark (41LU1; also known as the Lubbock Lake Site). Since 1939 numerous
investigations at this site, located near the project area in Yellow House Draw, have revealed
deeply stratified deposits of cultural remains representing each of the five cultural chronological
periods presented in the preceding section. The site is best known for its Paleoindian
components. They include Clovis and Folsom complex camps and “kill sites” where Pleistocene
mammoths, camels, horses, bison were hunted and butchered (Johnson 1977; Johnson and
Holliday 2006).
Native populations occupied the Lubbock County area continuously from the Paleoindian
period through the early Historic period. Throughout the Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric
periods, Indians of the Texas Llano were in constant, frequently hostile, contact with New
Mexican puebloan groups (Kenner 1969; Krieger 1946). When the renowned conquistador
Francisco Vásquez de Coronado arrived in the region during his ill-fated 1540 expedition, he
encountered two groups, the Quecheros and Teyas. The former were likely Apache. The Teyas
may have been Apache or the Tejas recorded ethnohistorically in later times (Kenner 1969:7-9).
Some evidence suggests that Coronado may have passed through Yellow House Draw at the
Lubbock Lake site. The first Spanish explorer that can be placed with certainty in Lubbock
County is Father Juan de Salas, who descended the Blackwater Draw to Yellow House Canyon
in 1629. Later Spanish expeditions followed the same route and recorded Lubbock Lake on their
maps as La Punta de Agua (Leatherwood 2006).
Around 1700 the Comanches moved into the Southern Plains from the north, bringing
European horses. A highly mobile group, the Comanches soon dominated most of the Llano
Estacado and lands to the Brazos River in the east (Leatherwood 2006). In the 1800s they became
known as “gun runners” for their trade with Mexican Comancheros to the south and west. While
firearms were bartered by both sides, more common was the exchange of Comanche horses and
8

mules for the iron lances and tomahawks, whiskey, coffee and tobacco of the Comancheros
(Griggs 1978:124; Kenner 1969:85-86).
Following the Civil War, buffalo hunters moved into the region and decimated the
enormous herds that once blackened the plains for miles. With their primary food source gone,
the Comanches were forced onto reservations in Oklahoma. Yet reservation life proved
unbearable, and many eventually returned to Texas, led by Chief Quanah Parker. Their stay was
short lived, however. Following a valiant attack on a buffalo hunter settlement at Adobe Walls
in 1874, they were pursued to Palo Duro Canyon by Colonel Ranald S. Mackenzie and the 4th
U.S. Calvary. There, the Comanches, along with their Kiowa and Cheyenne allies, were routed
in a surprise attack. The Indians’ village was burned, and their vast herd of over 1400 horses
was rounded up for slaughter in Tule Canyon. Lacking transportation, possessions and food, the
Comanches resigned to return to the reservation, opening the way for waves of Anglo-American
settlers from the east (Griggs 1978:124-130).

9

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
The Texas Historical Commission (THC) maintains records on 140 registered
archaeological sites in Lubbock County (RCRI 2014). The majority of these sites are located
along Yellow House Draw and the North Fork of the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River.
Other sites have been documented around playa lakes throughout the county.
A review of THC records revealed that the current project area had eight previously
recorded sites within or immediately adjacent to the area. To the east, the surface was surveyed
in 1974-1975 in anticipation of the Canyon Lakes Park Project in Yellow House Draw in which
many sites were recorded. In 1976, those sites and adjacent lands were designated as the Canyon
Lakes Archaeological District in the National Register of Historic Places. The district was
subsequently designated as a State Archaeological Landmark (RCRI 2014).
Baugh et al. (2005) surveyed areas immediately south of the southwest portion of the
current project for a proposed Northwest Passage Project that included the construction of roads
and installation of utilities. This area is almost the same as the 1.7 mile proposed water line.
However, the previous survey concentrated its efforts on limited near-surface testing and the
current study tested for deeper potential sub-surface cultural deposits due to the proposed deep
impacts. Baugh et al. (2005:28) recorded one historic archaeological site (41LU133)
immediately south of the project area that consisted of ceramic sherds and glass fragments. The
site was determined to be ineligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP) and not worthy of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL).
41LU5 is a previously recorded site called the Dune Site consisting of a lithic scatter and
midden from the Paleo-Indian to Late Prehistoric periods. The site was recorded in 1973 by
Texas Tech University. The surveyors identified a flint flake, burnt caliche concentration and a
bone concentration. They also noted that this may be an old floor based on the location of the
artifacts. The site was recorded as eroding out of the highest eastern terrace with a sand dune. In
1983, the site was designated as a State Archeological Landmark.
41LU30 was recorded in 1974 as a prehistoric camp site consisting of “ worked stone
and flakes”. The site was found on a high ridge to the Northeast of 41LU1 (the Lubbock Lake
site). No subsurface investigations were conducted, therefore it is unknown if subsurface cultural
deposits exist. The site recorder recommended testing (Phase II) to ascertain depth of cultural
deposits.
41LU46 was recorded in 1975 as a lithic scatter with flakes, 1 projectile point tip,
scrapers, and two bullets. No subsurface investigations were conducted, therefore it is unknown
if buried cultural deposits exist. In 1997 the THC (SHPO-State Historic Preservation Officer)
determined this site eligible for the NRHP, based on investigations conducted for the expansion
of the Lubbock County Youth Center facilities, using shovel testing and backhoe trenching. This
new work uncovered 14 new hearth stones and two flakes, “one of which is a Fresno projectile
point base”. These materials were found in the western portion of the site and that area was
recommended to be avoided.
10

41LU70 was recorded as a very eroded prehistoric site approximately one meter square.
A number of bone fragments were recovered from a sand dune bank. The site appears to be a
surface deposit due to the fact that a trench was placed at the site with no subsurface cultural
deposits identified. This site was not recommended for the NRHP or SAL designation. Further
action was not recommended due to “heavy use” by motorcycles and other all-terrain vehicles.
However, no discussions were provided on the past backhoe trench soil profile, and no column
sampling was conducted, i.e. no controlled sampling.
41LU73 is a recorded archaeological site that has no site form data on file. The Texas
Historical Commission Sites Atlas only shows an approximate location and has no site data. The
site size and depth is unknown.
41LU74 is a recorded archaeological site that has no site form data on file. The Texas
Historical Commission Sites Atlas only shows an approximate location and has no site data. The
site size and depth is unknown, therefore we will need to investigate this general area intensively
to enhance our ability to locate any previously identified cultural deposits, and determine their
potential eligibility for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or worthy
of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL).
41LU83 was recorded by the Lubbock Lake Landmark research project in 1989. This
was recorded as a small historic hearth, with a possible earlier occupation. The recorder stated
that this is a historic hearth of burned caliche and ash with rusted metal, tin cans, nails, hinges
and plastic. The recorder also noted that use was probably within the last 25 years. The hearth
was covered in caliche to protect it. The recorder noted that the site was to be submitted for
nomination (NRHP and/or SAL). No subsurface investigations were conducted, therefore it is
unknown if the purported site has any subsurface cultural deposits that constitute archaeological
site criteria. Based on the archival data, this site may be nothing more than a late twentieth
century burn pile or pasture clearing.
41LU89 was recorded as the Kent site. This site was recorded as a Paleo-Indian surface
scatter 40 X 20 meters in size. The recorder recovered and collected a biface midsection that has
been reworked of “possible Paleo origin” and associated lithic materials. No subsurface
investigations were carried out to determine if any subsurface cultural materials were present.
The recorder did state that a small bone scatter was present. The surface was noted to have
extreme disturbances and erosion. The site had a road going through it and then a crushed caliche
base was placed over it.

11

PROJECT METHODOLOGY
The project was divided into three phases – archival research, field survey, and report
preparation. The archival research consisted of a check for records of documented sites in the
online “Texas Archeological Sites Atlas,” which is maintained by the Texas Historical
Commission, as well as a review of other literature concerning previous work in the county. The
purpose of the review was twofold - to identify previously recorded sites in the project area and
to compile information relevant to the project from reports of prior archaeological investigations
in the region.
Field Investigation
The field investigation was comprised of a pedestrian survey and backhoe trenching
operations. Fieldwork was conducted in August and October 2014, and June2015. Herbert G.
Uecker was the Principal Investigator and Michael R. Bradle served as the Project Archaeologist
with assistance from David C. Scott, Leroy Forbes, David D. Bradle, and Logan Davis. Mr. Fred
Curnutt, P.E. and vice president of Enprotec/Hibbs and Todd Inc., and Mr. John Turpin, P.E., a
representative of the City of Lubbock met on-site to confirm the boundaries of the project area and
handled issues regarding utility locations.
The survey involved a systematic walkover of the entire project area at 20 meter intervals.
Surface visibility was approximately 50-80% depending on the locality. Surface disturbances
included two track roads, trails, past road construction, erosion, deflation, and bioturbidity.
Eighty backhoe trenches were excavated (Figure 2) at regular intervals throughout the
project area to test for potential subsurface cultural remains. The trenches averaged 3 meters long,
1.5 meters wide and 23 centimeters to 2.83 meters deep with an average depth of 1.28 meters
(Appendix II). All of the trenches were excavated to caliche and Figures 3-6 provide a
representative sample of the soil horizons present to the caliche zone. One wall of each trench was
troweled and visibly inspected for cultural remains. Samples of soil from each trench were
screened through ¼” hardware cloth in an effort to locate any smaller artifacts or cultural deposits.
Figure 7 is an example of undulating, uneven surface along the project area indicating
prior blading, surface clearance and subsurface disturbances. Figure 8 is representative of the types
of other impacts noted along the project alignment such as at the Berl Huffman Complex in which
the area was bladed down and soil brought in to level the fields, develop gravel roadways and
fence construction. Site 41LU30 was previously recorded in this area and the City of Lubbock
would not allow any backhoe trenching to be conducted in this area, therefore, 4 shovel tests were
excavated along this portion of the project area, all were negative.

12

Figure 2. Backhoe Trench and Shovel Test Locations.
13

Figure 3. View of BHT-38.

14

Figure 4. View of BHT-46 profile.

Figure 5. View of BHT-53.
15

Figure 6. View of BHT-64.

Figure 7. Northeast view of prairie dog town near the junction of Highway 84 and Loop
289.
16

Figure 8. North view at the edge of the Berl Huffman Sports Complex where site 41LU30
was previously identified.

17

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Archival Research
A search of the literature and the THC Sites Atlas revealed that no previous
archaeological sites were previously recorded within the project area. There was one site
recorded near the project area, 41LU6, that appeared to be an isolated prehistoric cache.

Field Investigation
The field investigation involved pedestrian survey and backhoe trenching. Eighty
backhoe trenches were excavated and four shovel tests (see Appendix II). No historic or
prehistoric cultural remains were detected in the trench walls or in excavated matrix,
including matrix samples screened through ¼” mesh (see Appendix II).
The survey was conducted in segments to better manage the project due to an
extensive amount of impacts, utilities, and access issues. The first segment was a west to
east transect along and in the middle of Ursuline Street (BHT-1 through 16, see Appendix
IIIa,b). Several large water pipes were located and other unknown utilities not identified
by the utility locating services. The pipeline route then turns south along the east side of
North Quaker Avenue. The area between BHT-16 and 48 was not tested due to extensive
utilities located by the utility location services and noted impacts. This area could not be
surveyed due to safety concerns.
The survey was then conducted along a small new road that runs west to east from
North Quaker Avenue to the edge of the right-of-way of Highway 84, across from the
Lubbock Lake Landmark site (41LU1). This area was subjected to extensive subsurface
backhoe trenching to test for any buried cultural deposits due to its proximity to 41LU1.
BHTs 17-35 tested this area (Appendix IIIa,b). There were a number of impacts noted from
past construction and development activities in the area including road construction for the
new Princeton Street and commercial development such as the new Texas Specialty
Hospital. Additional impacts observed were possibly related to the old Highway 84
construction and right-of-way maintenance.
The next segment of the proposed pipeline route surveyed was the extreme
northwest section where the proposed Lubbock Northwest Water Reclamation Water and
Wastewater Plant is planned for construction, on the west side of County Road 1900. The
proposed water and wastewater lines connect at the proposed plant site where Bradle et al.
(2014) surveyed and found no archaeological sites.
The final segment meandered along Kent Street from the junction with County
Road 1900 to the east for approximately one mile where it intersects North Quaker
18

Avenue. Some areas between BHTs 38-42 and BHTs 49-69 were not examined due to
restricted space where the backhoe could not dig due to fences, road pavement, numerous
utilities marked. These areas were inspected and where possible, shovel probes placed.
The entire area along Kent Street has been severely impacted.
The last mile headed further east from the junction of North Quaker Avenue and
Kent Street was the highest probability area along the entire project alignment due to its
proximity and crossing Yellow House Draw. On the west side of where the proposed
pipelines cross Yellow House Canyon is a previously recorded site, 41LU83 (Figures 9 and
10, Appendix IIId). This site was recorded by the Lubbock Lake Landmark research project
in 1989. This was recorded as a small historic hearth, with a possible earlier occupation.
The recorder stated that this is a historic hearth of burned caliche and ash with rusted metal,
tin cans, nails, hinges and plastic. The recorder also noted that use was probably within the
last 25 years. The hearth was covered in caliche to protect it. The recorder noted that the
site was to be submitted for nomination (NRHP and/or SAL). No subsurface investigations
were conducted, therefore it is unknown if the purported site had any subsurface cultural
deposits that constitute archaeological site criteria. Based on the archival data, this site
appears to be nothing more than a late twentieth century burn pile or pasture clearing.
However, even though the site recorder believed that the hearth was historic in age,
it appears that most of the site area may have been bulldozed due to ranch road maintenance
and fence line clearing. This area is on private land owned by a trust. A few flakes of flint
were observed and a few scattered pieces of burned rock in the bulldozed ranch road (twotrack). Just below the hill where the slope meets the canyon floor, a small limestone hearth
was located on top of a thin veneer of caliche and sandy clay (Figure 11). The hearth
appeared to be approximately 28 x 45 centimeters in size. Since the hearth was already
impacted and continually impacted by ranch traffic, AAG cleaned the hearth and
documented its location and obtained s ample of matrix from between and underneath the
hearthstones in an attempt to obtain a radiometric date for this feature. Appendix IV
presents the calibrated radiocarbon date of A.D. 990 to 1045, A.D. 1095 to 1120, and A.D.
1140 to 1145 years B.P., this rendering a known occupation date for this site from the Late
Prehistoric time period.
Based on the location of this hearth, and the surface locations of a few flakes and
burned rock scattered, the site size for the site (41LU83) was extended to include these
areas and the site appears to be at least 20 (north-south) x 126 meters (west-east), and
unknown how far to the north or to the south. Subsequent project access revealed that the
hearth had eroded away from recent flooding since it was located on the surface bedrock
and thin soils. Future investigations should address the northern and southern boundaries
in order to ascertain if any intact cultural deposits are present that could be evaluated for
significance. BHT-58 was excavated on top of the canyon edge where the flakes and
scattered burned rock were observed and there was only 23 centimeters of soil on top of
limestone bedrock.
19

Figure 9. East view from site 41LU83 looking towards Yellow House Draw.

Figure 10. North view on site 41LU83. Note extensive bulldozing and erosion.

20

Figure 11. View of Feature 1 located at site 41LU83.

Figure 12. Western view across Yellow House Draw from site 41LU73.
21

Figure 13. Northern view of site 41LU73 from boundary with Lubbock Lake Landmark.

Figure 14. View of historic artifact surface scatter at site 41LU73.
22

Many of the areas were bedrock exposure on top of the canyon edge. Down the slope
into the bottom of the canyon, BHT-59 was excavated to a depth of 248 centimeters. It must
be noted that the extensive depths of these soils is a result of extreme erosion and run-off from
the cultivated fields to the north. The erosion pathway was observed and appeared to be filling
up the canyon with re-deposited soils from the canyon edges on top. This portion of the site
does not appear to be eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP)
nor worthy of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL). The area to the south needs
further investigation in the future should proposed impacts occur in that vicinity.
On the east side of the Yellow House Draw a previously recorded site, 41LU73 was
relocated (Figures 12 and 13). This recorded archaeological site has no site form data on file.
The Texas Historical Commission Sites Atlas only shows an approximate location and has no
site data. The site size and depth is unknown. Upon extensive surface survey, it appears that
this site is a surficial scatter of historic trash debris dating from the late Nineteenth-Early
Twentieth Century based on the lavender glass, clear glass, brown glass, white ware ceramics,
metal fragments, and wire nails (Figure 14). The site has bedrock exposure and mixed
limestone fragments in a sandy clay. Shove probes proved that soil depth is thin and that the
site is located on the surface. The site either represents an early habitation site that may have
been bulldozed over the edge of the hill or it was a dump site along an old two-track road
through the ranch. This site appears to be 20 (north-south) x 50 (east-west) meters in site size
with the southern boundary unknown as to how far it may extend south of the ranch fence line
where the proposed pipelines will be placed (Appendix IIIc). This portion of the site does not
appear to be eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) nor
worthy of designation as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL). The area to the south needs
further investigation in the future should proposed impacts occur in that vicinity.
Site 41LU89 was recorded and appeared to be just to the east of the project line at its
eastern most point where it turns to the south towards the Berl Huffman Complex. BHT-74
proved that there are some deep soils in this area. Figure 15 depicts the current status of the
area near where site 41LU89 had been previously recorded. However, the area has also been
subjected to a number of impacts including past dragstrip raceway track construction and later
demolition, soil removal based on mounds of soils present (similar to other parts of the project
area such as in Figure 16 near BHT-20), and golf course construction adjacent immediately to
the north. The area where the site was recorded further to the east was inspected surficially
during project area access and no cultural materials were observed, It appears that this project
did not locate any extensions of site 41LU89, therefore it does not appear that this site was
relocated, is located further to the east, and will not be impacted.
Site 41LU5 was recorded previously as the Dune Site consisting of a lithic scatter and
midden purportedly from Paleo-Indian to Late Prehistoric time periods. The site was recorded
in 1973 by Texas Tech University and in 1983 it was designated a State Archeological
Landmark. The surveyors identified a flint flake, burnt caliche concentration and a bone
23

concentration. They also noted that this may be an old floor based on the location of the
artifacts. The site was recorded as eroding out of the highest eastern terrace with a sand dune.
The current project appears to have transected the very eastern edge of the site and BHTs 7678 were excavated to test for the presence of any potentially buried cultural deposits based on
the prior recommendations of the original site recorder. Even though the soils appeared to be
deep, no subsurface cultural deposits were identified and no surface evidence was observed
either. The site boundary as shown on the Sites Atlas appears to be too far to the east. As
previously noted, this appears to be the area of the extreme eastern edge of the site and it
appears that the site in question most likely is further to the west of the proposed pipeline route,
at a higher elevation to the sand dune. There is also a caliche pit located adjacent to the project
area and the area was subjected to soil removal (for a previous swimming pool) so if there was
any eastern extension if the site, it was probably a surficial site that was removed due to these
noted impacts. Any future impacts in this vicinity or to the west should test the deep soils for
any remaining cultural deposits noted by the previous site recorder.
Site 41LU30 was recorded in 1974 as a prehistoric camp site consisting of “ worked
stone and flakes”. The site was found on a high ridge to the Northeast of 41LU1 (the Lubbock
Lake site). No subsurface investigations were conducted, therefore it is unknown if subsurface
cultural deposits exist. The site recorder recommended testing (Phase II) to ascertain depth of
cultural deposits. This site is located in the area where BHT-80 was excavated. Based on the
Sites Atlas plotting, the site is immediately south of BHT-80 and is located over much of the
Berl Huffman Complex (baseball fields). The City of Lubbock would not allow AAG to use
heavy machinery in the vicinity of the Berl Huffman Complex since they have maintained
ballfields and a series of irrigation pipes.
Since the proposed pipeline project will be placed adjacent to the fence line and through
the gravel road area, AAG strategically placed four shovel tests (ST1-4, see Appendix II, IIIa,b)
to a depth of 100 centimeters to test for any potential subsurface deposits that may be present
since the site recorder thought the site may be a surficial site with some bone present. All were
negative and no cultural materials were observed or found in any of the subsurface tests.
However, some bone fragments were observed in the extreme northeast corner of the park area,
southeast of BHT-80 (outside of the project area) in a pile of sandy clay that appears to be
scraped or bladed soils that were piled up during ballfield construction. It appears that based
on the extensive ball field construction, irrigation lines and utility lines installed, there does
not appear to be any intact surficial or subsurface cultural deposits to be assessed for
significance. The area along the proposed pipeline area within the previously recorded site area
was not found, therefore, no impact will occur to any cultural deposits in this area.

24

Figure 15. Western view of area where site 41LU89 was previously recorded.

Figure 16. Southeast view of project area near BHT-20 showing massive pile of topsoil
removed from the project area and surrounding areas.
25

In conclusion, the field investigation conducted by AAG detected no surficial or subsurface archaeological sites or cultural remains other than extensions of sites 41LU73 and 41LU83.
Further, the results of backhoe trenching conducted during the investigation indicate that
practically all of the ground surface and varying depths of the project area has been extensively
impacted by prior earth moving activities, road and utility construction, farming and erosion. This
suggests that any surficial remains in the area have likely been altered or destroyed. There is no
evidence to suggest that any significant stratified archaeological deposits, features, or artifacts are
present within the boundaries of the proposed development for the new Northwest Water
Reclamation Plant Water and Wastewater Pipelines. AAG believes that this project should be
allowed to proceed and no archaeological monitoring is considered necessary during construction.
No artifacts were collected, however project data will be curated at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory in Austin, Texas.

26

RECOMMENDATIONS
American Archaeology Group LLC recommends that construction at the location
for the proposed Lubbock Northwest Water Reclamation Plant Wastewater and Water
Pipelines Project be allowed to proceed. Monitoring during construction by a professional
archaeologist is not considered necessary. However, should any cultural materials be
exposed in any area not discussed in this report, all work in the immediate area must cease
until the situation can be evaluated by American Archaeology Group LLC in consultation
with the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission, the City of Lubbock,
and Enprotec/Hibbs and Todd, Inc.

27

REFERENCES CITED

Barnes, Virgil E.
1970 Geologic Atlas of Texas; Texas Commission on Environmental Quality;
Austin, Texas.
Baugh, Timothy G., Steven M. Hunt, and Christopher Lintz
2005 Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Northwest Passage Project, City
of Lubbock, Lubbock County, Texas. Geo-Marine, Inc.
Miscellaneous Reports of Investigations Number 331. Plano.
Biessart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archaeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office
of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Austin.
Blackstock, Dan A.
1979 Soil Survey of Lubbock County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, and Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station.
Bolen, Eric
2006 The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Playas”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/PP/rop7.html
(accessed December 19, 2006).
Bousman, Britt C., Michael B. Collins, Paul Goldberg, Thomas Stafford, Jan Guy, Barry
W. Baker, D. Gentry Steele, Marvin Kay, Anne Kerr, Glen Fredlund, Phil Dering, Vance
Holliday, Diane Wilson, Wulf Gose, Susan Dial, Paul Takac, Robin Balinsky, Marilyn
Masson and Joseph Powell
2002 The Palaeoindian-Archaic transition in North America: New evidence
from Texas. Antiquity 76:980-990.
Bowman, Kathleen M. and John L. Montgomery
1986 A Cultural Resources Survey for Proposed Modifications to Atzlan and
Mackenzie Parks for the city of Lubbock, Lubbock County, Texas. Report
No. LB87.1, Agency for Conservation Archaeology. Llano Estacado
Center for Advanced Professional Studies and Research, Eastern New
Mexico University, Portales.
Bradle, Michael R. and Herbert G. Uecker
2014 Archaeological Survey of the Proposed Lubbock Northwest Water
Reclamation Plant and Waterline for the City of Lubbock, Lubbock County,
Texas. American Archaeology Group LLC. Report of Investigations
Number 192. Lampasas,
28

Campbell, Robert G., Sharon Judd, Mei Wan Campbell and April MacDowell
1986 Archaeological Monitoring of the Area Impacted by Construction of the
Northwest Sanitary Relief Main, Lubbock, Texas. Addendum to TAC
Permit #380. Occasional Papers, report No. 4, Anthropological
Investigative Consultants, Lubbock.
Fisher, W. L.
1974 Geologic Atlas of Texas: Lubbock Sheet; in 15-minute Digital Gat Quads,
NW; Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, Austin, Texas.
Frederick, C. D.
1998 Late Quaternary clay dune sedimentation on the Llano Estacado, Texas.
Plains Anthropologist, 43(164):137-155.
Graves, Lawrence
2006 The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Lubbock County”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/LL/hcl14.html
(accessed December 21, 2006).
Griggs, William C.
1978 Man and the Palo Duro Canyon: from Coronado to Goodnight.
Panhandle-Plains Historical Review, vol. 51:87-116.
Henderson, Jerry
1986 Archaeological Investigations within Right-of-way of IH27 at
Yellowhouse Draw, Lubbock County, Texas. Texas State Department of
Highways and Public Transportation, Highway Design Division, March.
Holliday, V. T.
1997 Paleoindian Geoarcheology of the Southern High Plains. University of
Texas Press, Austin.
Holliday, V. T., Susan D. Hovorka and Thomas C. Gustavson
1996 Lithostratigraphy and geochronology of fills in small playa basins on the
Southern High Plains, United States. Geological Society of America
Bulletin, 108(8):953-965.
Johnson, Eileen
1977 Animal food resources of Paleoindians. In: Eileen Johnson (ed.),
Paleoindian Lifeways; The Museum Journal, 17:65-77.
Johnson, Eileen, and Vance T. Holliday
2006 The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Lubbock Lake”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/LL/bbl13.html
(accessed December 21, 2006).
29

Judd, Sharon
1984a Letter to Parks and Recreation Department concerning 41LU136.
1984b The Cultural Resources Survey and Preliminary Testings of the Proposed
Northwest Sanitary Relief Main and Canyon Lakes Road Extension No. 6,
Lubbock County, Lubbock, Texas: TAC Permit No. 380. Anthropological
Investigative Consultants.
Kenner, Charles L.
1969 A History of New Mexican-Plains Indians Relations. University of
Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Klos, George
2006 The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Indians”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/II/bzi4.html
(accessed December 21, 2006).
Krieger, Alex
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern Texas; with Extension of
Puebloan Datings to the Mississippi Valley. University of Texas
Publication No. 4640, Austin.
Leatherwood, Art
2006 The Handbook of Texas Online, s.v. “Llano Estacado”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/PP/rop7.html
(accessed December 21, 2006).
Nunley, Parker
1989 A Field Guide to Archeological Sites of Texas. Texas Monthly Press,
Austin.
Pazzaglia, F.J. and J.W. Hawley
2004 Neogene (rift flank) and Quaternary geology and geomorphology. In: G.H.
Mack and K.A. Giles (eds.), The Geology of New Mexico; A Geologic
History. Special Publication - New Mexico Geological Society,
Vol.11:407-437.
Samson, Fred B., Fritz L. Knopf, and Wayne R. Ostlie
1998 Grasslands. In: M. J. Mac, P. A. Opler, C. E. Puckett Haecker, and P. D.
Doran (eds.), Status and Trends of the Nation's Biological Resources, Vol.
2. Jamestown, ND: Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center Online, pp.
437-472. http://www.npwrc.usgs.gov/resource/habitat/grlands/index.htm
(Version 21JAN2000, accessed December 19, 2006).

30

Surovell, Todd
2000 Early Paleoindian women, children, mobility and fertility. American
Antiquity 65(3):493-508.
RCRI
2014

Texas Historical Commission Restricted Cultural Resource Information
and Texas Archaeological Sites Atlas. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/
(accessed August 4, 2014).

TPWD (Texas Parks and Wildlife Department)
2006 Cntys04.shp (GIS shape file). Texas Parks and Wildlife Department GIS
Lab Data Downloads.
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/landwater/land/maps/gis/data_downloads/
(accessed December 20, 2006).
Turner, Ellen Sue, and Thomas R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. Texas Monthly Press,
Houston.
USDA
2014

United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service Web soil survey,
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/ (accessed September 15, 2014).

USGS (United States Geological Survey)
1957 Lubbock East 7.5' topographic quadrangle map. United States Geological
Survey.
Waguespack, Nicole and Todd Surovell
2003 Clovis hunting strategies, or how to make out on plentiful resources.
American Antiquity, 68(2):338-352.
Wendorf, Fred
1961 A general introduction to the ecology of the Llano Estacado. In:
Fred Wendorf (ed.), Paleoecology of the Llano Estacado, Fort Burgwin
Research Center. Museum of New Mexico Press, No. 1:12-21, Santa Fe.

31

APPENDIX I: RESEARCH DESIGN AND SCOPE OF WORK

Records Check
Prior to entering the field, American Archaeology Group LLC (A.A.G.) will contact
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas, the state
repository for site records on Texas, to determine if previously recorded sites are present
in the project area. This task may be conducted by a personal visit to TARL or by telephone.
The library at A.A.G. is very extensive, especially regarding reports for the project
area region, and much of the archival work can be accomplished in-house. Since A.A.G.
has conducted work in the area, much of the background work has already been
accomplished.
Permit Application
No fieldwork will commence until a permit from the Archeology Division (AD) of
the Texas Historical Commission has been issued. An application for an antiquities permit
will be submitted to AD-THC as soon as A.A.G. receives Notice To Proceed. Normally,
A.A.G. discusses the project with AD personnel before beginning any fieldwork. This is
done to ensure that both parties are in agreement as to the level of work required for this
project.
Survey Methods
The entire project area will be 100% intensively surveyed utilizing the pedestrian
survey method supported by shovel testing and/or augering and examination of eroded and
disturbed areas where cultural materials may be visible on the surface. Herbert G. Uecker
will act as the Principal Investigator. Shovel testing, augering, and backhoe trenching will
meet and exceed the Minimum Survey Standards For Texas established by the THC.
In areas of poor visibility, and environmental settings that have potential for buried
cultural materials, shovel testing will be required and tests will be concentrated in areas of
high site probability and randomly across the project area. All excavated fill will be
screened through 1/4-inch hardware cloth. Shovel tests will be manually excavated to sterile
clay or bedrock when possible.
The survey crew will be equipped with shovel test forms, notebooks, camera,
compass, and a project area map for accurate plotting of shovel tests, backhoe trenches,
and archaeological sites. In addition to shovel testing as a means of identifying buried sites,
select areas in alluvial settings or areas with some appreciable soil depth will be subjected
to backhoe trenching. All sites identified in the project area will be mapped in the field and
plotted on a topographic map. Site locations will also be determined through the use of a
32

Global Positioning System (GPS). Each site will be recorded using the official State of
Texas Archeological Site Form. In no case will the survey crew work outside of the project
area as depicted on the project area map provided by the client.
Only diagnostic artifacts will be collected from the surface. All artifacts recovered
through shovel testing will be collected. These specimens will be bagged and recorded on
a field sack log. They will be analyzed and prepared for eventual curation at TARL, unless
a petition to discard is prepared and accepted.
The draft report will be submitted to AD-THC for review. Once the report has been
approved by the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO), copies will be delivered to
AD-THC and the client. A.A.G. will maintain copies of the notes, photographs, site forms,
and any other records produced from the project deemed to be a work product.
Scope of Work
I.

Conduct background check for previously recorded archaeological sites in the
project area and the vicinity. Review the relevant literature.

II.

Discuss the project with the AD-THC reviewer assigned to this project before
entering the field.

III.

Obtain an antiquities permit from AD-THC.

IV.

Consult with the representative of the sponsor before beginning the field survey.

V.

Perform a 100% pedestrian survey of the project area to include shovel testing, and
examination of all exposed areas such as creek banks for buried or displaced
artifacts.

VI.

Check for deeply buried sites through the use of backhoe trenching in areas with
deep soils.

VII.

Analyze all artifacts recovered and prepare them for curation at TARL.

VIII.

Prepare a draft report and submit copies to the AD-THC and the sponsor for review.

IX.

Make all required changes, correct any mistakes, and submit the final report and
turn in the artifacts for curation.

33

APPENDIX II: BACKHOE TRENCH AND SHOVEL TEST LOGS
BHT
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Depth (cm)
0‐14cm
14‐113cm
113‐131cm
0‐15cm
15‐54cm
54‐129cm
129‐133cm
0‐26cm
26‐100cm
100‐127cm
127‐147cm
0‐22cm
22‐46cm
46‐85cm
0‐32cm
32‐52cm
52‐107cm
107‐228cm
0‐22cm
22‐90cm
90‐144cm
144‐233cm
0‐61cm
61‐134cm
134‐264cm
0‐28cm
28‐72cm
72‐140cm
0‐22cm
22‐48cm
48‐108cm
108‐163cm
163cm
0‐22cm
22‐57cm
57‐244cm
244cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
brown clay loam
tan/brown clay loam w/ caliche
caliche
brown clay loam, mixed, road materials
tan clay loam
tan clay loam w/ caliche
caliche
brown clay loam
tan clay loam
mixed tan clay loam w/ caliche
caliche
brown clay loam, mixed, road materials
light tan clay loam
caliche
mixed brown clay loam
mixed brown clay; tan/caliche mix
mixed clay, caliche
brown/tan caliche clay
brown mixed clay loam
tan mixed clay loam
tan mixed clay loam with some caliche
caliche/clay
brown clay loam
tan/brown clay loam mixed
caliche/clay
brown clay loam
brown clay loam
mixed clay/caliche
mixed clay
tan clay loam
brown clay loam w/ caliche
clay w/ caliche
caliche
brown mixed clay loam
brown clay loam
tan caliche/clay
caliche

34

BHT
11

12
13

14
15

16

17
18
19

20

21

22

23

24

Depth (cm)
0‐24cm
24‐62cm
62‐140cm
140cm
0‐65cm
0‐36cm
36‐68cm
68‐200cm
200cm
0‐31cm
31‐62cm
0‐45cm
45‐100cm
100‐116cm
0‐46cm
46‐91cm
91cm
0‐106cm
106cm
0‐26cm
26‐84cm
0‐36cm
36‐69cm
69cm
0‐34cm
34‐77cm
77cm
0‐39cm
39‐70cm
70cm
0‐82cm
82‐99cm
99cm
0‐32cm
32‐87cm
87‐100cm
0‐51cm
51‐117cm
117‐132cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
mixed brown clay loam
tan clay loam
mixed caliche tan/brown clay
caliche
mixed brown clay loam, caliche
brown clay loam
mixed caliche clay
brown caliche clay
caliche
brown clay loam
caliche clay
brown clay loam
tan caliche clay
caliche
brown clay loam
brown caliche clay
caliche
brown clay loam
calcareous clay
brown clay loam
tan caliche clay
brown clay loam
brown clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
calcareous clay
caliche
brown clay loam
brown caliche clay
caliche
brown clay loam
caliche clay
caliche
brown clay loam
brown clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
brown clay loam, tan clay
caliche

35

BHT
25

26

27

28

29
30

31

32

33

34

35

36
37

38

Depth (cm)
0‐5cm
5‐96cm
96cm
0‐37cm
37‐121cm
121cm
0‐53cm
53‐128cm
128cm
0‐64cm
64‐132
132cm
0‐76cm
76cm
0‐31cm
31‐84cm
84cm
0‐41cm
41‐98cm
98cm
0‐42cm
42‐67cm
67cm
0‐36cm
36‐80cm
80cm
0‐26cm
26‐85cm
85cm
0‐36cm
36‐92cm
92cm
0‐125cm
125cm
0‐39cm
39‐64cm
64cm
0‐41cm
41‐78cm
78cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
brown clay loam
brown clay
caliche
brown clay loam
red/brown loam
caliche
brown clay loam
brown loam
caliche
brown clay loam
brown clay
caliche
brown clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
red/brown clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
red/brown clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
red/brown clay loam
caliche
mixed brown clay
mixed caliche clay
caliche
mixed brown clay loam
red/brown clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
red/brown clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
red/brown clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
red/brown clay
caliche

36

BHT
39

40

41

42
43
44
45

46

47

48

49

50

51

52

Depth (cm)
0‐62cm
62‐202cm
202cm
0‐32cm
32‐88cm
88cm
0‐32cm
32‐125cm
125cm
0‐72cm
0‐90cm
90cm
0‐160cm
160cm
0‐36cm
36‐96cm
96cm
0‐44cm
44‐96cm
96cm
0‐62cm
62‐96cm
96cm
0‐54cm
54‐78cm
78cm
0‐23cm
23‐57cm
57‐85cm
85cm
0‐32cm
32‐76cm
76cm
0‐13cm
13‐58cm
58cm
0‐62cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
brown clay
tan/brown clay
caliche
brown clay loam
tan/brown clay
caliche
brown clay loam
clay loam
caliche
Brown clay loam, caliche
brown clay loam
caliche
clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
clay loam
caliche
brown clay loam
brown clay
caliche
brown clay loam
tan/brown clay
caliche
brown clay loam
tan/brown clay
caliche
sandy loam
sandy clay
clay
caliche
sandy loam
sandy clay
caliche
brown sandy loam
tan/brown sandy clay
caliche
Brown sandy clay, caliche

37

BHT
53

54

55

56

57
58
59

60
61

62
63

64

65

66

Depth (cm)
0‐30cm
30‐56cm
56cm
0‐32cm
32‐75cm
75‐95cm
95cm
0‐31cm
31‐74cm
74‐163cm
163cm
0‐55cm
55‐162cm
162cm
0‐48cm
0‐23cm
23cm
0‐37cm
37‐55cm
55‐104cm
104‐144cm
14‐248cm
248cm
0‐92cm
0‐105cm
105‐283cm
283cm
0‐39cm
0‐40cm
40‐139cm
139cm
0‐53cm
53‐189cm
189cm
0‐72cm
72‐212cm
212cm
0‐54cm
54cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
sandy clay loam
tan/brown clay
caliche
brown clay loam
mixed brown brown/tan clay
red/brown sandy clay
caliche
brown clay loam
brown clay
red/brown sandy clay
caliche
brown clay
caliche clay
caliche
Brown clay‐mixed, caliche
brown clay
bedrock
brown sandy clay
sandy gravel loam
brown clay
tan clay
brown clay
caliche
Brown sandy clay, caliche
brown sandy clay
tan caliche clay
caliche
brown clay loam
sandy clay loam
caliche clay
caliche
sandy clay loam
caliche clay
caliche
brown clay
tan clay
caliche
brown sandy clay
caliche

38

BHT
67
68

69

70

71

72

73

74

75

76

77

Depth (cm)
0‐46cm
46cm
0‐59cm
59‐74cm
74‐118cm
118cm
0‐41cm
41‐72cm
72‐133cm
133cm
0‐72cm
72‐181cm
181cm
0‐67cm
67‐173cm
173‐243cm
243cm
0‐47cm
47‐77cm
77cm
0‐42cm
42‐70cm
70‐211cm
211cm
0‐42cm
42‐103cm
103‐228cm
228cm
0‐62cm
62‐162cm
162cm
0‐49cm
49‐112cm
112‐163cm
163cm
0‐92cm
92‐132cm
132cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
brown sandy clay
caliche
brown sandy clay
mixed caliche clay
tan/brown clay
caliche
brown mixed sandy clay
red/brown clay
tan/brown caliche clay
caliche
brown clay loam
tan clay
caliche
brown clay loam
tan clay
caliche clay
caliche
brown clay loam
caliche clay
caliche
tan/brown clay loam
tan clay
caliche clay
caliche
brown sandy clay
tan clay
yellow/brown clay
caliche
brown sandy clay
tan clay
caliche
brown sandy clay
tan clay
caliche clay
caliche
brown sandy clay
caliche clay
caliche

39

BHT
78

79

80

Depth (cm)
0‐47cm
47‐214cm
214cm
0‐45cm
45‐137cm
137‐166cm
166cm
0‐47cm
47‐147cm
147cm

Results
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative
Negative

Remarks
brown sandy clay
tan clay
caliche
brown sandy clay loam
red/brown clay
caliche clay
caliche
brown sandy clay
tan clay
caliche

SHOVEL TEST LOG
ST

Depth (cm)

Results

1

0‐28

Negative

2

28‐100
0‐14
14‐100

Negative
Negative
Negative

3
4

0‐22
22‐100
0‐100

Remarks
tan mixed sandy clays with road gravels,
modern trash,
glass concrete, brick fragment
tan clay
tan mixed sandy clay with road gravels
brown sandy clay

tan/brown mixed sandy clay with road
gravels
brown/tan sandy clay

Negative
Negative
Negative

mixed tan/brown sandy clay

40

APPENDIX III: ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITE LOCATIONS

41

42

APPENDIX IV: RADIOCARBON DATE RESULTS

43

January 19, 2015
Mr. Michael R. Bradle
American Archaeology Group LLC
PO Box 534
Lampasas, TX 76550
USA
RE: Radiocarbon Dating Result For Sample 41LU74
Dear Mr. Bradle:
Enclosed is the radiocarbon dating result for one sample recently sent to us. As usual, specifics of
the analysis are listed on the report with the result and calibration data is provided where applicable. The
Conventional Radiocarbon Age has been corrected for total fractionation effects and where applicable,
calibration was performed using 2013 calibration databases (cited on the graph pages).
The web directory containing the table of results and PDF download also contains pictures, a cvs
spreadsheet download option and a quality assurance report containing expected vs. measured values for
3-5 working standards analyzed simultaneously with your samples.
The reported result is accredited to ISO/IEC 17025:2005 Testing Accreditation PJLA #59423
standards and all pretreatments and chemistry were performed here in our laboratories and counted in our
own accelerators here in Miami. Since Beta is not a teaching laboratory, only graduates trained to strict
protocols of the ISO/IEC 17025:2005 Testing Accreditation PJLA #59423 program participated in the
analysis.
As always Conventional Radiocarbon Ages and sigmas are rounded to the nearest 10 years per
the conventions of the 1977 International Radiocarbon Conference. When counting statistics produce
sigmas lower than +/- 30 years, a conservative +/- 30 BP is cited for the result.
When interpreting the result, please consider any communications you may have had with us
regarding the sample. As always, your inquiries are most welcome. If you have any questions or would
like further details of the analysis, please do not hesitate to contact us.
Thank you for prepaying the analyses. As always, if you have any questions or would like to
discuss the results, don’t hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

Digital signature on file

Page 1 of 3

Mr. Michael R. Bradle

Report Date: 1/19/2015

American Archaeology Group LLC

Sample Data

Material Received: 12/22/2014

Measured
Radiocarbon Age

13C/12C
Ratio

Conventional
Radiocarbon Age(*)

Beta - 400247
930 +/- 30 BP
-20.8 o/oo
1000 +/- 30 BP
SAMPLE : 41LU74
ANALYSIS : AMS-Standard delivery
MATERIAL/PRETREATMENT : (organic sediment): acid washes
2 SIGMA CALIBRATION :
Cal AD 990 to 1045 (Cal BP 960 to 905) and Cal AD 1095 to 1120 (Cal BP 855 to 830) and Cal
AD 1140 to 1145 (Cal BP 810 to 805)
____________________________________________________________________________________

Page 2 of 3

CALIBRATION OF RADIOCARBON AGE TO CALENDAR YEARS

(Variables: C13/C12 = -20.8 o/oo : lab. mult = 1)
Laboratory number

Beta-400247

Conventional radiocarbon age

1000 ± 30 BP

2 Sigma calibrated result
95% probability

Intercept of radiocarbon age with calibration
curve

1 Sigma calibrated results
68% probability

1125

Cal AD 990 to 1045 (Cal BP 960 to 905)
Cal AD 1095 to 1120 (Cal BP 855 to 830)
Cal AD 1140 to 1145 (Cal BP 810 to 805)

Cal AD 1020 (Cal BP 930)

Cal AD 1015 to 1030 (Cal BP 935 to 920)

1000 ± 30 BP

ORGANIC SEDIMENT

1100

Radiocarbon age (BP)

1075
1050
1025
1000
975
950
925
900
875
950

975

1000

1025

1050

1075

1100

1125

1150

Cal AD

Database used
INTCAL13

References
Mathematics used for calibration scenario
A Simplified Approach to Calibrating C14 Dates, Talma, A. S., Vogel, J. C., 1993, Radiocarbon 35(2):317-322

References to INTCAL13 database
Reimer PJ et al. IntCal13 and Marine13 radiocarbon age calibration curves 0–50,000 years cal BP. Radiocarbon 55(4):1869–1887., 2013.

Beta Analytic Radiocarbon Dating Laboratory
4985 S.W. 74th Court, Miami, Florida 33155 • Tel: (305)667-5167 • Fax: (305)663-0964 • Email: beta@radiocarbon.com

Page 3 of 3

1175

