...

..~

.,

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

'J'

, .

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF AREAS TO BE
AFFECTED BY THE TAYLOR GULLY CHANNEL IMPROVEMEN
PROJECT
, r

Harris County, Texas .

David S. Dibble

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas at A.lstin

Technical Bulletin No. 15
1977

..

'-­

.'.
-.~

.

.~

oit_I_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _'O.L..•••••.
•
~-

"
i

/

.....

. ,.

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF AREAS TO BE AFFECTED
BY THE TAYLOR GULLY CH.I'l.NNEL INPROVEHEt-."TS PROJECT,
HARRIS COUNTY, 'l'EXAS

Introduction
This is intended to report the results of an on-site archeological survey of
areas to be affected by construction of the Taylor Gully Channel Improvements
Project in northern Harris County, Texas (Texas Water Development Board docket
No. RE0018). This project, proposed by the Harris County Utility District No.
8, includes channel improvements of approximately 11,400 ft. and deposition of
spoil over an area of 19 acres. The Texas Archeological Su~ey, The University
of Texas at Austin, was invited by Turner, Collie and Bradeh, Inc. to examine
all areas proposed for modification for the presence of archeological resources
and to evaluate any identified localities in terms of their potential for
meeting the criteria of State Archeological.Landmarks.
.
This investigation was carried out under the provisions of Antiquity Permit
No. 135 granted by the State Antiquities Comm~!tee •

.,

Study Procedures
Prior to the on-site inspection, records housed at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, were consulted to
determine if any archeological sites \vere documented in the area to be affected
by the project. There lvere no sites recorded.
A field inspection of the project area was carried out on January 19, 1977,
by Grant D. Hall and Kenneth M.. Brown, staff archeologists of the Texas Archeo­
logical Survey. The inspection was guided by detailed engineering plats
indicating the extent of proposed modifications. The channel rectification
planned is confined to "Taylor Gully'! (an intermittent tributary of White Oak
Creek) and immediately adjoining areas. White Oak Creek drains into the East
Fork of the San Jacinto River (nmv comprising the northeastern arm of Lake
Houston). The previously wooded construction corridor had been cleared of
trees and understory grmvth by heavy eqUipment to widths verging from 150 to
190 feet. Additionally, a 19 acre spoil area situated a short distance south­
east of the Taylor Gully-\fuite Oak Creek confluence had been cleared of under­
story and smaller trees. Although the ground surface had been substantially
churned by this clearing, the r~sult did provide a much greater visibility.

1

.:"...,

-

.:""

.,
The on-foot examination of the project area did result in the discovery of
a small concentrated assemblage of prehistoric cultural material near the
edge of ~vhite Oak Creek at Project Survey Station 1+00.00. Here eight pot­
sherds, a chert pebble core and two chert flakes were exposed over an area
of about 5x5 m. and are assumed to mark the location of a prehistoric camp­
site. Examination of the area, including the excavation of shovel tests,
demonstrated that clearing activities had altered the original structure of
the site to such a degree that its scientific value is substantially reduced.
No further work at this locality can be justified by the surveyors. Specific
notes on the site (designated as 41 HR 313) were taken and, along with the
small collection of materials, will be deposited at the Texas Archeological
Research Center, The University of Texas at Au.stin.

,

,

Conclusions
An intensive inspection of proposed modifications associated with the con­
struction of the Taylor Gully Channel Improvements Project resulted in the
location of one severely damaged prehistoric locality, Site 41 HR 313.
Previous physical disturbance of the site has reduced its potential archeo­
logical value to the extent that further investigation is not recommended.
The results of this survey were negative in the sense of demonstrating the
presence of significant archeological or historical resources in areas to
be affected by project construction. Our study, then, must conclude that
construction of the Taylor Gully Channel Improvements Project will have no
adverse effects on cultural resources.

David S. Dibble, Director
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
February 15, 1977

*

McGuff, Paul R. and tvayne N. Cox
1973 A Survey of the Archeologica.1 and Historical Resources to be
Affected by the Clear Creek Flood Control Project, Texas. Research
Report No. 28, Texas Archeological Survey, The University of
Texas at Austin.
,

..

-'

. "',"

...

,:'

"

• f

~

