TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT
OF THE HARWOOD TO GONZALES TRANSMISSION LINE

Gonzales County, Texas

Ray D. Kenmotsu

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

The University of Texas at Austin
Technical Bulletin No. 41
1981

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

BaicofJes Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT
OF THE HARWOOD TO GONZALES TRANSMISSION LINE
Gonzales County, Texas

Ray D. Kenmotsu

David S. Dibble
Principal Investigator

ANTIQUITIES PERMIT NO. 252
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
Sponsored by the LCRA
Technical Bulletin No. 47
1 981

t

)
~.

Figure 1.

Site Locations along the Harwood to Gonzales Transmission Line.

.,., .
~........

.

-'

'

INTRODUCTION
This report details the results of a cultural resource
survey and assessment carried out along the route of the Harwood
to Gonzales transmission line in Gonzales County (Fig. 11. This
study, conducted at the request of the Lower Colorado River
Authority (LCRA), is oriented toward the identification and
evaluation of those sites affected by activities resulting from
the transmission line construction. It is the second of a
series of investigations related to this particular utility
project.*
Effort to minimize site damage was made at one site
through in-field supervision of LCRA construction crews.
Field work was out in late February, 1981 by Texas
Archeological Survey (TAS) staff members Ray Kenmotsu and Bruce
Nightengale. David S. Dibble, Director of the TAS, served as
Principal Investigator and provided additional in-field assess­
ment.
ENVIRONMENT
The LCRA transmission line corridor is located in north­
central Gonzales County and serves to connect the Gonzales sub­
station with the tie-in point at Harwood. Roughly 10 miles long
and 75 feet wide, the proposed LCRA transmission line parallels
the route of an eXisting Central power & Light (CP&L} transmission
line throughout the major portion of its length. Oriented in a
general north-south direction, the line corridor traverses the
rolling to level uplands formed of rolling hills and alluvial

*SEE, AraheoZogiaaZ Reaonnaissanae of a Proposed
Site~

38.

Sub~tation

TAS Technical Bulletin No.
Jack M. Jackson and David S. Dibble.
Gonzales

County~

Texas.

deposits from the upland intermittent drainages. Elevations
along the line range from 300 feet near the Gonzales substation
to 450 feet at Harwood.
The transmission line is routed over the structurally­
uncomplicated, alternating series of relatively unresistant sand­
and clay-dominant members of the Eocene Claiborne Group (King
1961). These formations are generally structured in southeast
trending bands of varying widths, and are poorly exposed in this
region. The topography is mostly broken along the margins of
the upland drainage courses, where erosion of upland slopes
is prevalent. The erosive action of these upland drainages
accounts for much of the local relief encountered along the
transmission line route. The rounded hills are intermittently
laden with large gravel cobbles which ~ere deposited during pre­
Holocene pluvial episodes.
Soils and vegetation appear closely related to the under­
lying geology. Thus, the clayey and sandy soils encountered on
hills and areas of high elevation well above the upland drainage
flood plains and terraces may be attributed to the weathered
geologic substrates. The distribution of vegetation assemblages
also appears to be closely associated with the factors of soil
and local geology, although the sUbstantial clearing and land
modification conducted in the region may obscure this association.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Gonzales County and surrounding areas have been suggested
to be physiographic and cultural transitions between Central and
Coastal Texas. Though many sites have been recorded by amateur
archeologists, most of the known sites have been documented
during systematic study by professional groups (Fox and others
1974; Hester, Kelly, and Bass 1975; McGraw 1979). All of these
studies have been undertaken primarily within the watersheds of

major rivers and tributaries which flow through the county. The
most comprehensive investigations involving both intensive
survey and testing were conducted within the Cuero I Archeo­
logical District (Fox and others 1974) which is listed on the
National Register of Historic Places. The Cuero I District is
located in the Guadalupe River Valley, south of the present
proposed transmission line route. This work has revealed 8,000
years of prehistoric occupation of this region, spanning the
period from Paleo-Indian to Historic times. Fox and others
(1974) recognized associations between physiographic features
of the Guadalupe River Valley and distributions of technological
traits indicative of general chronological periods. The
variations in settlement pattern were considered reflective of
adaptations to environmental changes and subsistence needs.

METHODS

Prior to field examination, a review of documents on file
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), U.T.
Austin revealed no known sites existing within the proposed
easement. The field method involved the on-foot inspection
of the entire width of the line corridor. Upon encountering a
cultural site, pertinent information was recorded on standard
U.T. site survey forms, which were subsequently housed at TARL.
In addition to surface observations, data recovery efforts were
augmented by shovel probes and the scraping of cut-bank exposures.
A particular effort was made to locate sites in areas
along the upland ephemeral drainages and in densely wooded areas.
This was necessary due to the poor visibility afforded by the
overburden of alluvial sediments and the dense mats of leaf
litter. Open areas and eroded hilltops and slopes provided
ample surface exposure and easier site recognition. Unfortun­
ately, the sites found in these contexts were severely affected
by the factors of clearing and erosion.

RESULTS AND COMMENTS
The survey was oriented toward the location and assessment
of cultural resources. A total of five prehistoric sites
(41 GZ 175, 176, 177, 178, & 179) were discovered and recorded
during the examination of the transmission line route. No
diagnostic materials indicative of general chronological periods
were found. Four of these prehistoric sites occur within or
overlap with the easement. One other site (41 GZ 175) only
fringes the northern boundary of the transmission line corridor.
All of these sites have been substantially affected by recent
land modifications related to ranching er public utility
construction.
Three of the identified sites (41 GZ 177,178, & 179) are
situated on hilltops or eroded slopes in association with gravel
deposits. Although the cultural assemblages of these sites have
been severely displaced by land modification, the observed
materials are suggestive of quarrying and the initial stages of
biface tool production. Two core bifaces collected from 41 GZ
177 appear similar to materials recovered from the Cuero I
District (Fox and others 1974) which were classified as Group II
core bifaces and occurred with high frequency at gravel deposit
sites. Such sites may represent utilization of the uplands
during the Archaic. Two additional sites (41 GZ 175 & 176), are
lithic/burned rock and lithic scatters, respectively, located in
sandy deposits near upland drainages. Neither of these sites
retained its structural context due to land modifications, nor
did either site demonstrate potential for further investigation.
Although none of the sites found during the survey are
worthy of nomination to the National Register, one site (41 GZ
177) consisted of considerable, but widely-scattered, lithic
debris which holds some potential for an analysis of extraction
and initial reduction of biface manufacture. Although the site
extends well beyond the boundaries of the easement, it was

considered necessary and feasible to minimize construction­
related damage to the portions of the site existing within the
transmission line corridor. During the clearing of the corridor,
an archeologist was on hand to advise LCRA field personnel of
sensitive areas of the site which required careful clearing and
the avoidance of surface scraping.
In the present study, cultural sites of potential historic
significance or investigative interest were not encountered. No
relict structures, habitation areas, or historic locales were
found to exist within or intersect with the transmission line
corridor. Those structures that do intersect with the line
corridor, such as fence rows, livestock pens, etc., are all of
recent origin.

SITE SUMMARIES
41

GZ 175

Located about four miles north-northwest of Gonzales,
the site is situated on a sandy rise amidst a dense post oak
woodland. Lying approximately 200 meters north of the upper
reaches of a small ephermeral drainage, this lithic/burned
rock scatter occupies a small area exposed in the scraped
corridor of the existing CP&L transmission line. The surface
topography is generally level with a slight slope declining to
the west.
Cultural materials consist of burned rock fragments and
lithic debitage, mostly interior flakes. Most of the materials
occur within and to the east of the existing transmission line
corridor in both surface and subsurface contexts. Shovel
probes revealed one flake and one burned rock fragment occurring
along the eastern fringe of the LCRA transmission line corridor~
with increasing frequencies of cultural materials occurring west­
ward toward the existing CP&L corridor.

Soils occurring in the area are deep sands which appear
unrelated to the depositional sequences noted along the margins
of the ephemeral drainage. The sands are widespread and may be
related to local geologic exposures.
The main portion of the site has been heavily disturbed
by previous construction activities and does not extend into the
proposed LCRA corridor. No additional work is warranted at this
site.

41 GZ 176

The site is located 3.2 miles north-northwest of Gonzales
on a sandy terrace developed at the confluence of Smith Creek
and a small tributary. This light lithic scatter occurs on the
lower eastern edge of a cleared. open terrace on the west bank
margin of a tree-lined tributary channel. The topography is
generally level with a gradual decline toward the drainage
channels and an incline toward a small terrace knoll about 40
meters north-northwest of the site. Plowing across the entire
terrace is evident and numerous rodent burrows occur throughout.
Cultural materials are scanty; one secondary flake and a
core were found along the bank. Shovel probes and inspection of
rodent mounds revealed no subsurface materials. No additional
work is warranted at this site,

41 GZ 177

Located 2.3 miles northwest of Gonzales, the site occupies
the steep, eroded slopes south of the Dry Fork drainage, an
epnemeral tributary to Smith Creek. A very dense accumulation of
cobble-sized gravels covers the surface of the slopes and hilltop.
Restricted to tne surface of the site, these cobbles are only one­
to two layers thick and overlie very thick lenses of yellow and
red clays. Deep gullying is evident along the entire western

portion of the site t where headward erosion has exposed the
thick clay subsurface lenses.
Cultural materials are widely dispersed across the site and
consist mainly of core fragments and primary reduction debris.
In addition, two core bifaces were collected. No discrete
concentrations of materials remain on the western and central
sectors of the site. This is attributable to the erosional
gullying, rangeland development, and the previous construction
of the existing CP&L transmission line.

41 GZ 178
Located 250 meters north of 41 GZ 179, the site occupies
similar terrain along the lower western edge of a steeply
declining slape. The modern flood plain spans about 100 meters
west from the site edge to the channel of the upland ephemeral
drainage. The site and most all of the surrounding area have
been modified for grazing.
This surface site consists of highly dispersed materials;
a few cares, core remnants, and lithic debitage (mostly
primary reductiGn debris) are widely distributed aver the
gravely sloping terrain. Cursory inspection of adjacent areas
outside the transmission line boundaries revealed a greater
concentration of cultural materials on the upper slope areas.

41 GZ 179
The site is located on the western edge of a slope pro­
jection near the channel of an unnamed drainage to the west.
Located roughly 0.5 mile northwest of Gonzales, the site occupies
the projecting toeslope which steeply declines from the upper
slopes to the east and grades with the flood plain of the drain­
age to the west. Shallow rills extend across the site area and
drain toward the channel. The site and immediate surrounding
areas have been modified for grazing.

A very light scatter of core remnants and primary reduction
debris is interspersed amongst an accumulation of large, naturally­
occurring chert cobbles. One thick biface of beige chert was
collected; the artifact is sub-rectangular in outline, with a
thinned basal section and numerous hinge scars and fractures on
both its ventral and dorsal faces. Although no thinning flakes
were noted on the site, these hinge fractures appear to have
resulted from attempts to thin the artifact and remove the large
knots found on both faces.
Soils of the site are a dark brown clay mixed with
gravel cobbles. Subsurface inspection through shovel probes and
cut-bank examination revealed no depth to the cultural deposit.
Lithic debris was found scattered on the upper slopes,
which may indicate that the cultural materials found in the line
corridor are redeposited. Additional disturbances are also
attributable to activities associated with pastureland
development.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Fox, Daniel E., R. J. Ma110uf, N. O'Malley, and W. M. Sorrow
1974
Archeological Resources of the Proposed Cuero I
Reservoir, Dewitt and Gonzales Counties. Texas
Historical Commission and Texas Water Development
Board. Araheologiaal Suruey Report No. 12.
Austin.
Hester, Thomas R., T. C., Kelly, and F. A. Bass, Jr.
1975
An Initial Archeological and Historical Assessment
of Three Proposed Dam Sites in Gonzales and Kendall
Counties, Texas. Center for Archeological Research.
Regional Studies~ No.2. University of Texas at
San Antonio.
Jackson, Jack M. and D. S. Dibble
1980
Archeological Reconnaissance of a Proposed
Substation Site, Gonzales County, Texas. TAS
Teahniaal Bulletin No. 38. The University of Texas
at Austin.
King, Elbert A., Jr.
1961
Geology of Northwestern Gonzales County.
Unpublished Thesis. The University of Texas at
Austin.
McGraw Joachim A.
1979
A Prelininary Archeological Survey for t~e Conquista
Project in Gonzales, Atascosa, and Live Oak
Counties, Texas. Center for Archeological
Research. Archeological Survey Report, No. 76.
The University of Texas at Austin.

