ARCHEOLOGICAL RECONNAISSANCE
IN THE SALADO CREEK WATERSHED,
BEXAR COUNTY, TEXAS

David S. Dibble

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SALVAGE PROJECT
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
Survey Report No. 9
November 1979

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

This report is submitted to the Interagency Archeological
Services - Denver, Heritage Conservation and Recreation
Service, in partial satisfaction of the terms of Purchase
Order No. A3535(70).

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I ntroduct ion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •
The Study Area . . . . . . . . . .
Previous Archeological Reporting
The Study • .
Methods

1

4
6
7
8

Results of the Reconnaissance
Archeological Site Summaries

8
10

Summary and Conclusions

26

Bibliography . . .

29

Acknowledgements

33

List of Figures
Figure 1.

Map of Upper Salado Creek Watershed. • .

Figure 2.

Views of selected archeological features
in the study areas

12

Views of selected archeological features
in the study areas

18

Examples of lithic artifacts

24

Figure 3.
Figure 4.

2

1

INTRODUCTION
This report will summarize the results of an archeological
reconnaissance carried out in areas to be affected by the con­
struction of a number of watershed retarding structures in the
upper Salado Creek drainage system in northern Bexar County,
Texas. This reconnaissance was carried out by the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project (currently named the Texas Archeo­
logical Survey), the University of Texas at Austin under terms
of an agreement with the Interagency Archeological Services ­
Denver, Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service.
The reasons for this initial reconnaissance and a number of later
studies aimed at intensive cultural resource survey, testing
and mitigation is the on-going development of the Salado Creek
Watershed Protection and Flood Protection Project. This project
is being accomplished under the joint sponsorship of the Alamo
Soil and Water Conservation District and the San Antonio River
Authority.
Construction of the watershed structures is by the Soil Conser­
vation Service, USDA. Fifteen earthen dams, built on the
Salado Creek mainstem or its tributary streams (Lewis, Panther
Spri~gs, Lorence, Mud, Elm Waterhole and other small tribu­
taries) will comprise the total project as now conceived (see
Figure 1). These dams are designed to control runoff in this
flood-prone drainage from a storm which might occur once in a
IOO-year interval. In addition to its flood control potential,
the Salado Creek system of temporary water retention will include
a number of structures which will serve to increase the ground­
water recharge into the Edwards Underground Aquifer. This
aquifer provides the main water source for the City of San
Antonio and Bexar County.

Figure 1.

Map of Upper Salado Creek watershed
with locations of floodwater retarding
structures.

- - - - ----------

~®

r::~::::-.\ >;
~\,
I
\

('-/'""'---­

''-'''~

Leon Springs

.'..;

-"'-"'~

\}

I

)

l
1---­

'. Military Reserv-otion

I

, j'"
.~, ,,/

\';

It

I

l) ~I \,~.,,"~'2'J
)

.,.~

"'~~
\?~~~..
'\

>,

) ".l. :

t{" ~0'O'(\ (.1 '\,:
·~
'­\ -o':\!,
'. 'J \. .:1.1I
: :. ., '

. z .,./ , . ' \:

'-\~"

.

Upper Salado Cr,

Location of Upper
Salado Creek
Drainage

UPPER SALADO CREEK WATERSHED
Showing locations of

KEY

Floodwater Retarding Structures
Detention and Sediment Pools
Detention
Pool

o
I

5
!

,

I

Scale in Miles

i~am
1971

Modified from Soil Conservation Service Project Mop (Revised 19681

VTH

3

At the present time eleven of the fifteen watershed retarding
structures have been completed or are in an advanced stage of
construction. These include structures 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11,
12, 13A and 138. Two structures originally planned, S-15A and
5-16, were included within the original reconnaissance reported
herein but have subsequently been dropped from consideration.
Substantial areas have been, or will be, affected by these con­
struction units. The total surface areas lying within the flood­
water detention pools are as follows (U.S. Department of Agri­
culture 1962; 1968):
Structure No.
1
2
3
4

5
6
7
8
9
10

Surface Area (acres)
251
149
247
138
218
107

230
232
84

117

178
273

11

12

13A
138

161
92

l5A
15 (revised)

394

16

Total acreage:

(dropped)
(dropped)

2,871

In terms of total area of effect, the Salado Creek Project has
had (and continues to have) considerable impact potential on
the landscape of northern Bexar County. A more important con­
sideration in terms of demonstrable affects on cultural re­
sources of potential value are the types of land modifications
involved in the construction and use of the water retention
structures.

4

The Study Area
The Salado Creek watershed is approximately 35 miles in length
and includes an area of 139,808 acres. It forms a major seg­
ment of the upper San Antonio River tributary system although
the streams (including the mainstem) must be considered as
ephemeral. The system characteristically reacts quickly to
precipitation and has been said to drain a portion of one of
the most flood-prone areas in the United States (Patton 1976).
The typically heavy flooding in this region of central Texas
is caused by the orographic effect of the Balcones Escarpment.
Moisture-laden easterly air movements coming inland from the
Gulf of Mexico are forced to rise appreciably along this feature
and often generate storms of high magnitude.
The northern section of the watershed, of prime concern here,
bisects the Balcones Fault Zone and thus cuts across the
boundaries of two major physiographic provinces, the Edwards
Plateau and the Gulf Coastal Plain. The Edwards Plateau to
the north is on the upthrown side of the Balcones Fault Zone
and is the source area of Salado Creek and most of its well­
developed tributaries. These streams have cut steep-sided
and narrow valleys through what by regional comparison is a
geologically complex zone. The underlying formations are
reflected in the topography, resulting in an area of
pronounced relief. Beginning at the north, the drainage
generally cross-cuts the Cretaceous Glen Rose, Comanche Peak,
Edwards, Austin and Anacacho strata as well as other less well­
exposed formations. The Quaternary system of more direct
archeological significance is represented by discontinuous
Recent flood plain deposits of variable texture and by
sporadic remnants of the Leona Formation (Pleistocene) in
the valley of Salado Creek (Arnow 1963; Texas Board of Water
Engineers 1959). Observations made during the course of this
reconnaissance indicate that many segments of the valley fill
sediments in the study area have been subject to scouring and

5

and reworking by water action. Several archeological sites
(e.g. Structure 1, Sites 1 and 2 and Structure 8, Sites 1 and
2--see Archeological Site Summaries) provide evidence of this
process.
Vegetation in the Salado Creek watershed is diverse, reflecting
its transitional position. Much of it is heavily wooded;
live oak, post oak, Texas oak, pecan, elm, juniper (cedar) and
persimmon occur commonly. In many areas dense tree and grass
growth, as well as humus ground cover, .create problems in site
recognition.
Present land use in the watershed ranges from livestock
ranching, military training ranges (Leon Springs Military
Reservation) to, more recently, limestone quarrying and
residential developments. Lower (southern) portions of the
study area, such as the vicinity of Structure 15A, are being
modified by housing developments associated with the San
Antonio urban expansion. It;s likely that land modifications
connected with the increasing industrialization and urbanization
of the Salado Creek watershed will soon pose a serious threat
to archeological resource~ exceedi~g that of flood control
programs.
The effects of past and present land use on the "natural" biota
in the Salado Creek region have undoubtedly been very substantial.
It should be assumed, for example, that the presently existing
vegetation patterns in the study area have been affected to
the degree that they offer few clues as to the regional
paleoenvironmental conditions. It is the opinion of this
writer that local paleoenvironmental reconstructions should
be based on other lines of investigation such as recorded
observations of the early historic period, studies of less
affected environmental indicators such as soil variables or
direct evidence gathered during archeological sampling.

6

Previous Archeological Reporting
Systematic archeological investigations within or adjacent
to the study area prior to professional activities initiated
as a direct result of the proposed Salado Creek Watershed
Project have been limited. W.B. Fawcett, Jr. (1972) has
provided a valuable service in his compilation of the results
of documented work prior to 1970. The reader is directed to
this article, both as a source for earlier work in Bexar
County and for still valid generalizations on the outlines
of the regional culture history.
Of direct pertinence to the Salado Creek cultural resource
evaluations are the results of investigations by the Texas
Historical Commission in the vicinity of the Walker .Ranch,
portions of which would be affected by construction of Structure
7 of the Salado Creek Watershed Project (Scurlock and Hudson
1973; Hudson, Lynn and Scurlock 1974). The on-going investi­
gations of the Center for Archaeological Research, the University
of Texas at San Antonio, in continuing cultural resource
assessment and mitigation in the Salado Creek Watershed
Project subsequent to tne initial reconnaissance reported
here, have been substantial. This work has included
intensive surveys in areas to be affected by Structures
3,5,6.7,9,10,11,13B,15A and I5-Revised (Hester 1974).
Additionally, testing, re-evaluation or sampling of archeo­
logical sites in Structure 7 (Kelly 1974); Structure 13A
(Kelly 1976); Structures 3,6,10 and 15 (McGraw and Valdez
1978a); and Structure 11 (Brown eta 1, 1977; McGraw and Va 1dez
1978b) has been conducted. Also, although not concerned
directly with Salado Creek Watershed Project areas, the
results of sampling survey in the Leon Springs Military
Reservation (Camp Bullis) in the upper Salado Creek drainage
has been reported by the Center for Archaeological Research
(Gerstle et at 1978). The reader is reminded that the
reporting here of a preliminary reconnaissance comes late.

7

THE STUDY
Basic field work associated with this reconnaissance was
accomplished in one to three day segments over the period
of August to November, 1971. This extended period of field
observations was made necessary by difficulties in gaining
access to various properties. All construction sites were,
and remain, in private ownership. The objective of this
field work was to achieve an overview of the archeological
potential of areas to be affected by this flood control
project including the specific documentation of definable
sites, and, where possible from surficial examination and
very limited shovel testing, to provide opinions on these
potentials. The main aim of the study was to attempt a
general evaluation of the resource and the probable effects
of the watershed protection project on this resource. It
was not an "inventory" as defined in the current usage.
The writer was in charge of field reconnaissance and was
assisted by Douglas B. Comstock and Vance T. Holliday.
D. Stephen and Trace A. Dibble served as volunteer assistants.
Field examinations were carried out in Structures 1,2,3,4,5,
8,9,10,11,12,13A,13B,15A,15-Revised and 16. Access to
Structures 6 and 7 could not be arranged during the recon­
naissance period.
Methods
Approximately 35 man days were expended in field ob­
servations in the study. Identification of the limits of
project-affected areas was facilitated by the use of engineering
plats drawn at a scale of 1"=660'. These maps made possible
the locating of dam axes, sediment and detention pools and,
in most cases, the planned borrow pits. Walking transects
were made on a judgemental basis to achieve a reasonable,
not compl~te, spatial coverage. The spacing was tightened
in areas where ground visibility was reduced because of

8

vegetation. The generally broken nature of the topography
and occasional very dense vegetation in many of the study
areas did not allow straight-line transects to be carried
out faithfully. Targets of opportunity such as natural stream
cutbanks, lateral erosional gullys or preliminary geologic
test excavations associated with the project where significant
segments of subsurface sediments were exposed, were examined.
Because of time limitations, observations were largely
restricted to the proposed project limits. The results,
as is the case with most surface water development projects,
were topographically biased to arbitrarily established valley
bottom units.
Collection of exposed cultural material was limited.
Primarily, items retained were restricted to lithic artifacts
with time-diagnostic value, a few other formally fashioned
lithic tools and occasional unworked chert samples.
Field documentation followed established forms; verbal
site notes, including sketches, and black and white photo­
graphy. All notes, photographs, annotated maps and collections
made during this reconnaissance will be permanently deposited
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones
Research Center, the University of Texas at Austin.
RESULTS OF THE RECONNAISSANCE
The essential result of this study was the definition of
nineteen sites, plus the notation of two "provisional" sites
within or near to the established boundaries of the Salado
Creek Watershed Project. With the exception of the two
provisional sites--both surface opening caves located within
the Structure 8 detention pool--all were open lithic local­
ities and probably prehistoric in age.
The definition of a "site" was conservative in the sense
that singular occurrences of artifacts or the appearance

9

of a very few flakes (especially those on deflated surfaces
or associated with clearly reworked sediments or resting an
bedrock) were not so designated.
In the following section a description of each site,
the materials observed and collected, and comments on
the site significance are ordered by numbered watershed
structure. If formally recorded. the sites' equivalent
trinomial number is given and appropriate references to
additional work within each Structure are listed.

10

Archeological Site Summaries
Structure 1 (Salado Creek)

Site 1: a light scatter of chert flakes and fire-fractured
limestone fragments is discontinuously distributed over an
area of about 20 x 30 m. This exposed material is situated
on a sloping rock bench bordering Salado Creek. Observable
debris is associated with a very thin sediment mapped as
Trinity and Frio soi1s*; the modern surface has been damaged
on the southern end of the site area by a shallow bulldozer
cut. The site is situated low in the modern flood plain near
the confluence of a right bank tributary of Salado Creek and
has apparently been seriously affected by scouring during
runoff. No structural features were visible.
Materials observed/collected: one stemmed arrow point conforming
to the Perdiz type description (Fig. 4a); miscellaneous chert
flakes.
Evaluation:
this site appears to have no potential for further
.
investigation due to post-depositional scouring of the flood
plain. A post-Archaic component is indicated by the presence
of the single arrow point.
Site 2: observable lithic debris is dominated by two mounded
accumulations of fire-fractured limestone. The site is sit­
uated 20 meters west of the shallowly incised (ca. 1.5 m.)
channel of Salado Creek and near the center of the detention
pool. The largest mound is oval in outl ine~ approximately 12 m.
in maximum diameter and rises to a height of .75 m. from the
flat surface of the site. The second mound, 15 m. north of the
fir s t. i s ge nera 1 1y 0 val, mea sur e s 6 m. i n 1 eng t han d r i s e s 1 e s s
than .5 m. in height. Scattered burned limestone spalls and
chert knapping debris occur discontinuously on a heavily
vegetated (oak, juniper, hackberry and various low annuals)
surface. The area of the site was approximated at 35 x 60 m.
* All references to named soil units in these descriptions are
taken from Soil Survey Staff (1966).

11

The soil is a stony clay loam mapped as Trinity and Frio
series which are lowland alluvial soils, frequently flooded.
MatepiaZs obsepved/coLlected: one side-notched dart point,
classed as Fpio; one dart point medial fragment; miscellaneous
bifacial and unifacial artifacts and unworked chert flakes.
Evaluations: although the site is' situated low in the flood
plain and ;s subject to frequent flooding, the mounded rock
features appear to have retained some structural integrity.
A subsurface testing is recommended. Depth of cultural
deposit is unknown but it is probably shallow. A late
Archaic age is suggested by the associated side-notched
dart point.
Stpuctupe 2 (Lewis Cpeek)

Site 1: the site is defined on the basis of closely spaced
concentrations of lithic debris (chert and fire-fractured
limestone spalls) visible on the surface of a low knoll, a
flanking bench and lower terrace remnant bordering the right
(west) bank of Lewis Creek. The knoll, cresting about 7 m.
above the streambed, exhibits chert flaking debris, a few
recognizable artifacts and fire-fractured limestone in
variable concentrations. A light scatter of chert flakes is
observable on an adjacent narrow bench. On the east, a
terrace remnant which rises 2-3 m. above the channel, exhibits
traces of similar cultural debris. The entire area of
observable cultural material (discontinuous) measures about
60 x 115 m. The depth of sediments at the site is unknown
but it probably varies with the associated landforms. The
site area is mapped as Krum Complex, here a silty clay loam.
Only the easternmost portion of the site falls within the
Structure 2 detention pool.
MatepiaZs obsepved/aoZZeated: one Pepdiz, one ScalZopn and
one unnotched arrow points (Fig. 4b,c,d); one Fpio-like dart
point t two unclassified dart point fragments; miscellaneous
bifacial and unifacia1 flakes. Small concentrations of burned

Figupe 2.

vie~s

of seZected apcheoZogical features in the

study areas:
A.

Poption of mounded bupned pock midden, a
ppominent featupe at Site 1, in Stpuctupe 3.
A pecentZy

e~cavated

pit is visible in the

right center of photograph.
B.

Fire-fractured limestone and chept concentration
e~p08ed

C.

on surface at Site 2, Structupe 3.

Considerable depth

(1

M.+) of sediment

e~posed

in SCS baprow pit at Site 5, Stpuctupe 13A.
This sediment body (stony, gpayish-bpown
silty loam) is associated with
e~posupe

D.

e~tensive

of Zithic cultural debris.

Closeup of rocky bench, a local

e~posure

of

Edwards limestone, at Site 6, Structupe 13A.
Site shows evidence of

e~tensive

utiZization

of chept outcrop overlooking Elm WaterhoZe Creek.

A

B

c

D

13

rock may represent hearths. Historic material on the site
probably results from military activity.
Evaluation:
the associated time-diagnostic projectile pOints
suggest the presence of late Archaic and post-Archaic components.
The site should be further investigated through subsurface
testing. Although the eastern (lowest) portion is within the
limit of the water detention pool, the site structure appears
stable and would probably not be seriously damaged by
occasional inundation of this area.
St~uatu~e

3 (SaZado Creek)

Site 1 (see Figure 2A): an oval midden of fire-fractured
limestone dominates this site. This "burned rock midden"
is situated on a terraced area near a tight meander of
Salado Creek approximately 200 m. north of the stream channel
and 250 m. west of the dam axis. The mound was measured at
8.5 m. in maximum diameter and rises less than .3 m. above
the level of the surrounding surface. Chert chipping debris
extends in variable density away from the feature for a
maximum observed distance of about 45 m. Recent excavation
by amateurs is indicated by three roughly 5 ft. squares dug
through the mound. Examination of the existing pits
indicated-that the thickness of rock concentration is at
least .3 m. Sediment in the area is a dark brown stony clay
loam mapped as the Tarrant Association.
Materials observed/coZZected: one unidentified dart point
f rag men t (F i g. 4 f). u n i fa cia 1 and b i fa cia 1 tool f rag men t s .
Rema~ks:
this site was reported by Hester (1974: 5-7) as Site
3-3 and was recommended for limited testing at that time.
Subsequently, The Center for Archaeological Research, the
University of Texas at San Antonio, conducted further inten­
sive survey and test excavations (McGraw and Valdez 1978: 11-13).
Their results include the conclusion that cultural materials
exposed in the area of the midden do not extend to significant
depths. No further work at the site was recommended except for
monitoring during the construction phase. This site is identified

14
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, the University
of Texas at Austin, as 41BX444.
Site 2 (see Figure- 2B): the site was defined on the basis of
a lithic scatter and two apparent structural features centered
approximately 90 m. south of Site 1 and 115 m. north of the
dry channel of Salado Creek. Cultural materials are strewn
on the surface of a third "bench" (probably a bedrock rather
than a Quaternary alluvial feature) above the stream. Featupe
1 is a well defined circular arrangement of stones in the
center of a small clearing in a densely forested area. Stones
are not mounded but often abut one another. Many of the rock
fragments exhibit evidence of thermal fracturing. The feature
is about 6 m. in maximum diameter and is associated with
chert chipping scatter. Feature 2, an oval, definitely mounded
accumulation of limestone spalls, rises about .4 m. above the
surrounding surface. The mound is largely obscured, except
on its northern edge, by a heavy growth of juniper and oak
trees and humus cover. Maximum measured diameter is 11 m.
This feature is situated approximately 40 m. east of Feature
1. Scatters of chert chipping debris exist in adjacent areas,
although the surface visibility is reduced by a heavy vegetation
cover.
Materials observed: chert flakes of several categories
including broad "thinning flakes!!; cores were observed but
were rare.
Remarks:
this site is within the area of later surveys reported
by Hester (1974) and McGraw and Valdez (1978) but the observed
features do not correlate closely with those reports. Further
investigation, specifically tests of the described features,
are justified.
Structure 4 (Unnamed Tributary of Panther Springs Creek)

Site 1: the site was defined on the basis of a scatter of
burned limestone spal1s and worked and unworked chert materials
exposed on the lower portion of the left (here east) valley
margin. This slope (about 50) merges with a narrow alluvial

- - - _ ...._ . - _ . - - - - - - - - - - - - ­

15

terrace bordering the stream channel and is characterized by
a very shallow sediment mantle. The site area~ approximately
15 x 45 m., ;s defined by the lateral extent of exposed lithic
cultural debris. The sediment is very shallow, less than 10
cm. where observable. The site area has been bisected by a
bulldozer cut--apparently test work done in connection with
the preparation of the construction site. As far as could be
determined, this locality is within or very near to the dam
axis for Structure 4.
Materials observed: miscellaneous worked and unworked chert
items; two roughly circular concentrations of burned limestone
spall suggest disrupted hearths. No time-diagnostic artifacts
were noted.
EvaZuation:
this site has been seriously disrupted by
natural processes, primarily slope erosion, and scraping
by heavy machinery. No further investigations appear
justifiable.
Structure 5 (Panther Springs Creek)

No sites were defined. See Hester (1974) for results of an
intensive survey of this area.
Structure 6 (Panther Springs Creek)

No access was obtained during this reconnaissance period.
Areas to be affected were subsequently surveyed by the Center
for Archaeological Research, the University of Texas at San
Antonio, and reported by Hester (1974). Additional site
definition and testing at two sites have also been carried
out (McGraw and Valdez 1978).
Structure 7 (Panther Springs Creek)

No access was obtained during this reconnaissance period.
Subsequent to the date of this study, however, substantial
survey and testing were carried out by the Texas Historical
Commission (Scurlock and Hudson 1973; Hudson, Lynn and Scurlock
1974) and the Center for Archaeological Research, the University

16

Texas at San Antonio (Hester 1974; Kelly 1974; Gerstle et al
1978). Sites 41BX228, a rich site showing extensive Archaic
and Late Prehistoric occupancy, and 41BX180, a 19th century
ranch ruin (Walker Ranch) have been of prime concern. Work
in the area by the Center for Archaeological Research is
continuing at the date of this writing.
Structure 8 (Mud Creek)

Site 1 (see Figure 3C): a moderately dense scatter of worked
and unworked chert debris is visible on the surface of a
terrace remnant adjoining Mud Creek flood plain on the west.
The level of the site, susceptible to heavy stream discharge,
averages about 3 m. above the present streambed. The surface
of the site area, approximately 15 x 75 m., is littered with
chipping debris on a stony surface mapped with the Krum
Complex soils. The area shows indications of substantial
water action. A concentration of burned limestone spalls,
slightly mounded, exists at the northern edge of the site
area near the mouth of a short lateral gully. This feature
appears to have been reworked subsequent to deposition and
therefore is considered to have limited archeological value.
Materials observed/collected: one arrow point and one dart
point (untyped) (see Figure 4); small thinning flakes and
a few chert cores were observed.
Evaluation: literally interpreted, the arrow point and dart
point suggest Archaic and Late Prehistoric use. The site
surface appears to have been affected by water scour. No
significant depth to the deposits is indicated. No further
investigation is recommended.
Site 2: chert scatter and fire-fractured limestone spalls are
visible in a tree cleared area immediately north and opposite
the tributary channel of Mud Creek from Site 1. Topographic
features and soil matrix are the same as Site 1. This con­
centration of lithic debris measures 20 x 60 m. and exhibits
a few concentrations of burned rock spalls which may represent

--------.-~~--

.......-

-­

---------

17

disrupted aboriginal hearths.
Materials observed:
two dart point fragments, chert flakes
including small tertiary flakes, cores, and a few bifacially
chipped artifact fragments.
Evaluation:
this site appears seriously degraded by water
action. No further work is recommended.
Site 3 (see Figure 3D): the site was defined as a roughly
circular area, 80 m. in diameter, exhibiting three closely­
spaced burned limestone rock features and associated chert
scatter. The site is situated on a slightly sloping terrace
surface adjoining Mud Creek on the east and about 425 m.
upstream from the planned dam axis of Structure 8. The
westernmost burned rock feature is mounded to a maximum
height of .5 m. and is generally circular with a diameter
of 7.5 m. Rock spalls making up the mound are typically
"fist-sized" and are angular to subangular in shape. Mound
2 has been partially destroyed by a stock feeder construction;
the remnant concentration is slightly rounded, irregular in
outline and is 8.5 m. in maximum diameter. A third feature
is problematical as to origin; it consists of mixed burned
and unburned limestone spall and may have resulted from
recent surface clearing. Chert scatters present at the site
are largely restricted to the areas around burned rock features.
Soil is the area is mapped as Krum Complex--expressed locally
as a clay or silt loam. The site, low in the valley of Mud
Creek, is subject to flooding from heavy discharges on Mud
Creek and a left bank tributary entering near the site area.
Materials observed:
worked and unworked chert flakes and
cores; bifacially and unifacially worked tools are present
but rare.
Evaluation:
the site has been adversely affected by flooding.
However, the westernmost rock feature appears to have remained
relatively stable. Testing of this feature, if still unmodified
by construction, is recommended.

Figupe 3.

Vie~s

of selected apcheological featupes in the

study apeas:
A.

Looking into main opening of Cave No.1,
a

ppovisi~nal

site situated neap damsite

of Structupe 8.

The featupe is a sinkhole

type cavern

mixed fine-gpain and

~ith

rocky deposi ts.
B.

Vie~

of central portion of Cave No. 2 in

the apea affected by Stpuctupe 8.

This

extensive sinkhole contains a light surface
scatter of prehistoric lithic debris and
artifacts

~ithin

sheltered area.

cuLtupaL debris couLd have
pepiods of heavy runoff.

This

~ashed

Note

in during

cpe~

member

at upper left for approximate scale.
C.

to east across vaZley of Mud Creek.

Vie~

Lo~er

poptions of the vaZLey

~iZl

by Structupe 8 detention pool.
partially visible on

lo~

be affected

Site 1 is

terrace ZeveL in

middZeground of photograph.
D.

Apea of Site 3, Structure 8.

Supface

apcheoZogicaZ features at the site - thpee
small areas of fire-fractured limestone
bordered by chert scatters -

~ere

readily

visible because of heavy grazing in the apea.

-~--------~--~------

~~~

A

c

B

D

19

Provisional Sites: Caves 1 and 2 (see Figures 3A and 3B):
two large caverns, both solution cavities in the Edwards
Formation open to the surface, were discovered in the
reconnaissance of the Structure 8 detention pool area. Both
caves appear suitable for aboriginal use and contain materials
suggestive of such use. The possibility of intrusion of
material into the caves from the surface is considered a likely
possibility, however. The localities are thus considered as
IIprovisionalll in terms of exhibiting unequivocal evidence of
significant human use.
Cave 1: a sinkhole type cavern; two vertical shafts open
to the ground surface approximately 225 m. northeast of
the eastern terminus of the Structure 8 dam. One entry
(Fig. 3A) provides easy access to the top of a coarse
boulder talus accumulated on the floor of the cave.
The talus extends dow~ward at an increasing slope for
at least 15 m. The cave is wet in areas and exhibits
considerable flowstone development. Bones of several
large animals--cow, sheep and possibly horse--litter the
top of the cave deposit. Dark silt or clay forms only
a minor fraction of this talus. The cave is readily
accessible, is lighted near the openings, and has
apparently been open to the surface for a long period.
For the mentioned reasons only, the possiblity of pre­
historic use is suspected. The effectiveness of the
feature as a faunal trap is demonstrated by the common
occurrence of the bones of domestic livestock. It may
be that the cave deposit does have at least paleonto­
logical, if not archeological, potential. Testing would
be very difficult because of the coarseness of the talus
but would be required for a reasonable assessment of the
site.
Cave 2 (see Figure 3B): a large sinkhole cave with wide
opening (approximately 23 m.) to the surface. A steep
talus exists at the front of the sunken area and slopes

20
downward at an angle of about 25 0 to the rear of the
sheltered area. The limestone ceiling overhangs the
recessed, sheltered area for a distance of approximately
11 m. The rear wall is crescentic with probable openings
to continuing solution channels in the darkened northern
section. The floor of the shelter is irregular, due to
variation in talus deposition. Substantial deposits
of fine-grained sediments exist in the southern rear
portion. The cave is damp, with active seepage and
flowstone development in certain areas. A small shovel
test of the fine sediments indicates a minimum depth
of 20 cm. in one area. Several flakes of worked and
unworked chert were observed on- the surface of the
recessed floor. One arrow point (Saallorn) (Fig. 4e
and five bifacially worked tools were collected from
the floor. A number of bones and bone fragments were
found on the surface and in the test probe. Although
the artifactual material present here suggests pre­
historic utilization of the cave, the situation of
the recessed features allows for the possibility of
redeposition into the shelter by water action from
ground surfaces above. A moderate concentration of
chert was noted on the surface near the opening to
the cave. Cave 2 is situated about 150 m. east of
Cave 1 and lies within the Structure 8 detention pool
Remarks (Caves 1 and 2):
the present suitability of
these sites for subsurface testing should be evaluated.
Structure 8 has been constructed and is now in use.
Observations made by James W. Thompson, Chief, Land
Division, San Antonio River Authority, indicate that
both caverns serve as natural drains during times of
floodwater filling of the detention pool (personal
communication to author, November 14, 1979). The
deposits of both caves appeared stable prior to
flooding and may still retain their original character.

21

Structure 9 (Mud Creek)

No sites were defined within the affected areas. Hester
(1974) reports one small lithic site and characterizes it as
a temporary occupation. No further work was recommended at
this locality.
Structure 10 (Mud Creek)

Site
this lithic scatter is situated near the .base of
a rocky slope bordering Mud Creek Valley on the west. The
site begins about 60 m. south of a fenceline forming the
boundary of F.M. Road 1604 right-of-way. The visible extent
of the site is estimated at 15 x 60 m. Soil unit association
is Crawford clay. The site appears to be just outside of the
detention pool limits and is therefore not subject to adverse
effects of the project.
Remarks:
this site is Hester1s (1974) Site 10-1 and is listed
at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory as Site 41BX450.
The locality appears to be stable and should not be damaged
by construction or innundation.
2: an extensive lithic scatter includes chert chipping
residues and artifacts exposed on the surface of the higher
of two alluvial benches bordering Mud Creek on the north.
Some fire-fractured limestone spalls are visible on the surface.
Shovel tests failed to demonstrate significant depth of the
cultural debris in the two areas sampled. The site is in the
detention pool area of Structure 10.
Materials observed: chert chipping debris; bifacially and
unifacially worked flakes.
Evaluation:
no additional work appears justified. See
Hester (1974) and McGraw and Valdez (1978) for subsequent
survey and testing in Structure 10.

~~~

Struature 11 (Elm Creek)

No sites were defined. Subsequent work in the area by the Center
for Archaeological Research, the University of Texas at San

22

Antonio! has been summarized by Hester (1974) and Brown
et aZ (1977).
Structure 12 (EZm WaterhoZe Creek)

Site 1: a 1ithic concentration is situated in a small
clearing in a forested area (oak, juniper) on the west
bank of an eastern tributary of Elm Waterhole Creek.
The thickest concentration of chert debris and artifacts
is on a flat area less than 2 m. above the presently dry
channel. Accumulations are spotty--possibly reflecting
knapping episodes. Possible stone-lined hearths are noted;
two of these! however, are definitely of modern age as
judged from the presence of preserved scorched fuel. The
depth of the site is probably limited but was not tested
during the reconnaissance. The estimated extent of the
site is 50 x 75 m. Soil is mapped as a Tarrant Association;
the local expression is typically stony clay loam, probably
shallow over weathered limestone bedrock.
MateriaZs observed: chert flakes (predominantly small)
and bifacially and unifacially worked tools. Unifacially
worked pieces heavily dominate in an casual on-site estimate.
EvaZuation:
although this site probably has limited depth,
the pattern of occurrence of surface visible chert tools and
debris appears to justify a systematic surface collection.
Structure 13A (Elm Waterhole Creek)

Investigations in the area of this structure subsequent to
this reconnaissance have been very extensive. These survey,
testing and mitigation studies have been carried out by the
Center for Archaeological Research, the University of Texas
at San Antonio. To date, this work has been reported by
Hester (1974) and Kelly (1976). Major excavations at Site
41BX300, a deeply stratified site endangered by Structure 13A,
have been carried out by U.T.S.A. under terms of an agreement
with the Heritage 'Conservation and Recreation Service, Inter­

- - - - - _ ...... _ - - -.......

--.~.-

....... -

--

---------------­

23
agency Archeological Services - Denver (reports pending).
Reconnaissance stage evaluations of this area, carried out
over the period of September 4-6, 1971, will not be summarized
here due to the intensity of subsequent coverage. Original
field notes from defined sites will be added to existing survey
records on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
the University of Texas at Austin. A consultation with these
files shows the following equivalencies between field site
designations used in this reconnaissance and final trinomial
site numbers based on intensive survey data:
Reconnaissance
Trinomial
Site 1
Site 2
41BX484
Site 3
Site 4
41BX486
Site 5
41BX300
Site 6
41BX299
Early views of exposed archeological features at Site 5
(41BX300) and Site 6 (41BX299) are provided in Figures
2C and 2D.
Struature 13B (Tributary of EZm WaterhoZe Creek)

No sites were defined during the reconnaissance. The area
was intensively surveyed subsequentlYt again without discovery
of archeological remains (Hester 1974).
Structure 15A (Lorenae Creek)

No sites were defined although the field notes comment
(entry of July 25, 1971) on the existence of two apparently
early historic lime kilns and spatially associated scatters
of prehistoric lithic debris. Housing developments had
extensively modified areas in the upper end of the proposed
detention pool area (see comments in Hester 1974: 20). Structure
15A has been subsequently dropped as part of the Salad'o Creek
Flood Protection Project.

Figure 4.

a.

Examples of lithia artifacts.
All artifacts
are shown actual size and have been coated
to emphasize chipping scars.

Perdiz point (Site 1, Structure 1).

Base and right barb missing.

b.

Scallorn point (Site 1, Structure 2).

c.

Perdiz point (Site 1, Structure 2).

d.

Unidentified unnotched arrow point.
(Site 1, Structure 2).

e.

Subtriangular biface.
(Cave 2, Structure 8)

f.

Unidentified dart point fragment.
(Site 2, Structure 3). Barbs and
distal end missing.

g.

Large roughly chipped biface.
(Structure 9, general).

h.

Large biface (Site 6, Structure 13A).

Barbs and distal tip missing.
Distal end missing.

p

J

6

q

25

Struature 15 (Mud Creek)

This structure, formerly labeled Structure 15 Revised, is
situated largely with~n the confines of San Antonio's McAllister
Park (previously called Northeast Preserve Park) on the lower
drainage of Mud Creek. A brief reconnaissance carried out by
the author resulted in the definition of an extensive lithic
site associated with a terrace adjoining the flood plain of
Mud Creek. This site, on the basis of engineering data then
available, was considered to lie within the southeastern portion
of the project-affected area. Refinement of the extent of
modification places this locality well to the east of the
planned floodwater retarding structure. Subsequent surveys
in the area of Structure 15 are reported by Fox (1973), Hester
(1974) and McGraw and Valdez (1978).
Struature 16 (Unnamed tributary of Salado Creek)

The southernmost of the originally proposed floodwater
retarding structures in the Upper Salado Creek project area,
Structure 16, is no longer under consideration for development.
Site 1: the site was defined on the basis of a surface
concentration of worked and unworked chert flakes and cobbles
on the eastern edge of a cultivated field immediately ad­
joining the proposed detention pool; the detention pool is
largely coterminous with the incised stream flood plain in
this area. The soil is mapped as Houston Black gravelly
clay, a soil type noted for a high percentage of limestone
and chert inclusions in the normal profile. The observed
concentration of flaking debris is considered moderate by
local standards.
Materials observed/collected: one untyped dart point
(probably an Archaic form); bifacial and unifacial tools or
preforms.
Evaluation:
this site is probably too disturbed by agri­
cultural practices for fruitful investigations although this
opinion is not supported by subsurface testing.

26

SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The described archeological reconnaissance of fifteen
watershed retarding structures in the upper Salado Creek
drainage resulted in the preliminary definition of nineteen
archeological sites. In addition, two caves were designated
as provisional sites. All of these locations were situated
in areas where dam construction, sediment pool borrowing,
or water detention pool innundation could have adverse
effects on their original structure or content.
The age of occupations at the defined sites can only
be estimated from the occurrence of reasonably time­
diagnostic lithic artifacts--specifically projectile points.
As noted in the Archeological Site Summaries, a number of the
locations can be assumed to have component occupations dating
from Late Prehistoric (ca. A.D. 1000 to historic times) and
extending well into the preceding Archaic Period. Subsequent
investigations at a number of these locations have clearly
established this time frame of occupation and extended this
to the full known range of Archaic cultures. The existence
of artifacts of clearly Paleoindian age occurring as surface
finds in the upper Salado Creek area has been cited by Fawcett
(1972). Most recently, excavations at the Peacock Bluff Site
in alluvial/colluvial sediments adjacent to Leon Creek in
northern Bexar County have revealed lithic assemblages
including Fotsom and Clovis projectile points in excellent
stratigraphic context. These investigations, carried out
by archeologists of the Texas State Department of Highways
and Public Transportation, are continuing.*
Variations in artifact and lithic residue types at a number
of sites defined suggests significant differences in site

*

Personal communication to the author from Ms. Jerry Henderson,
Dept. of Highways and Public Transportation, Austin. Texas.

27

IIfunction" exist in the sample. However, the author feels
that factors affecting site visibility and preservation which
appear operative in tpe stream valleys make such site use
assessments from surface observations highly problematical-­
in many cases divorced from archeological realities. Substantial
subsurface sampling and quantification of results would, I
feel, be minimal requirements for designing truly testable
hypotheses.
This study, designed to provide an archeological overview of
widely spaced valley bottom construction sites in the Salado
Creek drainage, could not be expected to generate data of
the sort considered essential for the assessment of resource
"significance
Individual evaluations of sites discovered
have been provided in the foregoing IIArcheological Site
Summaries", These evaluations, however, relate only to
the observable physical condition of the localities and
their apparent potential for further investigation. Certainly,
thoughtful estimates of their probable scientific significance
should rely on the results of intensive surveys which would,
in most cases, require subsurface testing. In the procedural
sense, determination of their eligibility for nomination to
the National Register of Historic Places was not an aim of
this reconnaissance.
ll

•

The following general conclusions are offered:
1) As specified previously, a number of the watershed
retarding structure construction sites do conflict with
demonstrable archeological resources. The predictable adverse
effects of these constructions are variable: dam locations,
borrow areas, and ancillary modifications made during construc­
tion will adversely affect any archeological sites present.
The sites within the floodwater detention pools, however,
will not necessarily be seriously damaged by occasional

28

inundatidn. In a few localities (for example, see Structure
2 -Site 1), the prognosis for limited adverse effects is
favorable.
The study area, characterized earlier as situated
in a region of high flood potential, yielded considerable
evidence of water scour which has seriously affected a
number of archeological sites. The watershed protection
and flood -prevention functions of the Salado Creek Water­
shed project can reasonably be assumed to result in beneficial
effects to existing archeological deposits by slowing
present degrading processes in portions of this drainage.
2)

29

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Arnow, Ted
1963
Ground-Water Geology of Bexar County, Texas.

u.s.

Geological Supvey Water-Supply Paper 1588.

Contains a useful mapping of the surface geology
of the study area and a brief discussion of the
local expression of Quaternary age sediments.
Brown, David, Paul Lukowski, Thomas R. Hester and Jack D. Eaton
Archa~ological Assessment of Two Sites in the
1977
Vicinity of Structure No. 11, Salado Creek
Watershed, Bexar County Texas. Center for
Archeological Research Archaeological Survey
Report No. 35, the University of Texas at San
Antonio.
Fawcett, William B.
1972
The Prehistory of Bexar County: A Study of Previous
Work in South Central Texas. Lower Plains
Archeological Society, Bulletin No.2.
Contains a useful summary of pre-1970 archeological
work in Bexar County. The upper Salado Creek
study areas are included within his "Northern Zone

ll
•

Fox, Anne A.
1973
An Archeological Survey of the Northeast Preserve
and J. Street Park. Unpublished manuscript.
Reports an intensive examination of an area which
includes most of Structure 15 - Revised (currently
IIStructure 15
affected property.
11

)

Gerstle, Andrea, T.C. Kelly and Cristi Assad
The Fort Sam Houston Project: An Archaeological
1978
and Historical Assessment. Center for Archaeological
Research Archaeological Survey Repopt No. 40, the
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hester, Thomas R.
1974
Archaeological Survey of Areas Proposed for Mod­
ification in the Salado Creek Watershed, Bexar
County, Texas. Center for Archaeological Research
Archaeological Survey Report No.3, the University
of Texas at San Antonio.
Provides the results of intensive surveys of

30

Structures
Hester~

1978

3,5~6,7,9,10,11,13B,15A

and IS-Revised.

Thomas R.

Early Human Occupations in South Central and South­
Preliminary Papers on the Baker Cave
and St. Mary's Hall Sites. Center for Archaeol09ical

~e8tern Te~a8:

Research,

th~

University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hudson, William R, Jr., Warren M. Lynn and Dan Scurlock
Walker Ranch: An Archeological Reconnaissance
1974
and Excavations in Northern Bexar County, Texas.
Texas Historical Commission, Office of the
State Archeologist Reports ~o. 26.
Additional work in the Walker Ranch area (including
an historic site and a number of prehistoric sites
endangered by Structure 7). This report augments
an intial report on the area by Scurlock and
Hudson (1973). Results should be compared with
Hester (1974) and Kelly (1974).
Kelly, Thomas C.
1974
Appendix II: Notes on Test Excavations at Site 41BX228
(Panther Springs Site). In: Archaeological Survey
of Areas Proposed for Modification in the Salado
Creek Watershed, Bexar County, Texas. Center for
Archaeological Research Archaeological Survey
Report No.3, the University of Texas at San Antonio.
Provides additional descriptive information on
Site 41BX228 in the Structure 7 area, including the
results of subsurface testing.
1976

An Archaeological Survey of Floodwater Retarding
Structure No. 13A in the Salado Creek Drainage.
Letter report to the Soil Conservation Service,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Temple, Texas.

McGraw, A. Joachim and Fred Valdez, Jr.
1978a Investigation of Prehistoric Rockshelter and
Terrace Sites along Portions of the Salado Creek
Drainage, Northern Bexar County, Texas. Center
for Archaeological Research Archaeological Survey
Report N~. 55, the University of Texas at San Antonio.
Reports test excavations, controlled surface
collections and additional survey carried out in
areas to be affected by Floodwater Retarding Structures
3,6,10 and 15.

31

1978b

A Prehistoric Quarry-Workshop in Northern
Bexar County, Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research Archaeological Survey Report No. 56, the
University of Texas at San Antonio.
A report concerned with the intensive mapping and
limited testing of Site 41BX68, an extensive pre­
historic "quarry-workshop" to be affected by the
construction of Structure 11.

Patton, Peter C.
1976
Geomorphic Criteria for Estimating the Magnitude
and Frequency of Flooding in Central Texas.
Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Geological Sciences, the University of Texas at
Austin.
An excellent geological study pertinent to the
evaluation of Quaternary sediments in the region.
Of particular archeological interest are his
observations and conclusions on alluvial valley
fill sediments as affected by natural processes.
Scurlock, Dan and William R. Hudson Jr.
1973

An Archeological Investigation of WaZker Ranch.

Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Initial repo-rting of the "Walker Ranch in the
area of floodwater retarding Structure 7. Historic
and prehistoric remains were tentatively defined
These results should be compared with project­
specific investigations reported by Hester (1974),
Kelly (1974 and subsequent studies in the Walker
Ranch area by the Texas Historical Commision (see
Hudson et al 1974).
ll

Soi 1 Survey Staff
1966

U.S. Department
of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.

Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas.

Texas Board of Water Engineers
1959
Ground Water Geology of Bexar County, Texas.
BuZZetin 5911.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
1962
Salado Creek Watershed, Bexar County, Texas:
Work Plan for Watershed Protection and Flood
Prevention. Prepared for the Alamo Soil
Conservation District and the San Antonio River
Authority.

~--

32

1968

Salado Creek Watershed, Bexar County, Texas:
Supplemental' Work Plan for Watershed Protection
and Flood Prevention

Woolford, S.W.
1935
Types of Archeological Sites found in Bexar County.
Witte Museum-AraheoZogiaaL BuLLetin 4.
A highly informative early statement on archeological
remains in the San Antonio area including general
references to the Salado Creek drainage.

...-.-.~..

- - -..

--~-

..

--­

33

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wishes to extend thanks to James W. Thompson,
Chief, Land Division, San Antonio River Authority, for his
effective and patient assistance during the course of this
reconnaissance and to Dr. Thomas R. Hester, Director of the
Center for Archaeological Research, the University of Texas
at San Antonio for providing the results of investigations
by his organization in the Bexar County area.

