<9

1
,.

hn

Archeological

c\
7 (v
j/'11
V.
lc

/'

(
l -?
._!_

i

._/oi"'}!/J.ick ,

Surveys of

!-- icJ,

0 3

GRANGER AND NORTH FORK
RESERVOIRS
Vol. 2
THE NORTH FORK REPORT

....

~-.

@]

IT®[V®ITU
from the Texas A&M

RESEARCH FOUNDATION
College Station, Texas

I

AR-TX
TAMU 04.0388
copy 1

8

-

Donated to TARL Library by
OLIN F. McCORMICK, Spring of 1988.

Archeological Surveys of Granger
and North Fork Reservoirs
Vo 1. I I

The North Fork Report

by
PatiencelPat~_Q[l

and
Harry J. Shafer

Report submitted, with corrections, to the National Park Service by
Texas A&M Research Foundation in fulfillment of terms in Contract
No. C3545(75) (formerly No. CS-1595-6-0008).

Report No. 38b
Anthropology Research Laboratory
Texas A&M University
January 1980
Submitted by

hc/J;:'

CONTENTS
FOREWORD.

v

ABSTRACT.

vii
viii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.
INTRODUCTION
SURVEY METHODS, THEORY, AND MODELS
Survey Methods
Survey Theory
Models . . . •
Proposed Models

2
2

3
5
5

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Chronological Constructs .
Spatial Constructs . .

8
11
13

ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE TYPOLOGY .
Open Lithic Scatter
Burned Rock Middens
Terrace Sites
Li thi c Procurement Sites
Rockshelters . . .

14
15

16
18
18
18

ENVIRONMENT OF NORTH FORK STUDY AREA
Topography
Soils
Vegetation .
Pollen Study
Potential Economic Plants
Fauna
Climate
Water Resources
Lithic Resources
Trace Element Analysis of Flint

20
20
20

27
36
37
37

45
45
46

47

SURVEY RESULTS
Description of Sites

54
54

----------

-

--

---

- ----~-----·--- ---~-----~·

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS .

..

77

SURVEY DATA ANALYSIS
Site Distribution Analysis
Testing of Models.
Settlement Models . .
Settlement Change.
RECOMMENDATIONS . .

91
94
94
100
102

..

103

CORPS OF ENGINEERS SCOPE-OF-WORK

110

APPENDIX l

117

APPENDIX 2

178

REFERENCES CITED

201

ii

FIGURES
l.

General location map of the North Fork study area . . . . .

22

2.

Photographs of North Fork topography and Upland vegetation

24

3.

North Fork River characteristics and Lowland vegetation.

26

4.

Schematic profile of vegetation

29

5.

Schematic of lithic resource location

49

6.

Location of North Fork reported sites

56

7.

Test excavations at 41 WM 330.

66

8.

Testing at 41 WM 332 . . . . .

69

9.

Transects utilized to collect and test 41 WM 342 .

72

10.

Stage 1-4 bifaces.

80

11.

Stage 5 bifaces. .

82

12.

Miscellaneous lithic artifacts

84

13.

Schematic profile of topographic site settings

93

zone~.

TABLES
l.

Chronology chart of Central Texas . .

10

2.

Common Plants of the North Fork Reservoir area .

31

3.

Plants of potential economic importance

39

4.

Mean and standard deviations of flint samples.

52

5.

Distribution of biface forms

87

6.

Site chronologies by index markers

89

7.

Site distribution data

96

3.

Field recommendations

105

9.

Mitigation meeting participants

109

10.

Site selection parameters

112

11.

Vegetation Releve's Granger area

181

iii

---

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - --

12.

Vegetation Releve's North Fork area

13.

Soil Analysis North Fork area

14.

Soil Analysis Granger area

192

15.

Modern pollen counts Granger Reservoir.

195

16.

Modern pollen counts North Fork Reservoir

197

187

.

iv

192

FOREWORD
Beginning in May, 1976, members of the Texas A&M University Anthropology
Laboratory conducted an intensive archeological site survey and assessment program of all government owned lands within the North Fork Reservoir
boundaries. A principal purpose of this archeological study was to locate
and assess the National Register potential of all previously located archeological sites. Previous archeological surveys and excavations by Shafer and
Corbin (1965), Sorrow (1973), and Jackson (1974) in the North Fork Reservoir
were conducted without using systematic sampling procedures. Nonetheless,
it was felt that one of the most pressing needs was a thorough, nearly 100%
coverage of the resource area without regard to systematic sampling. Two
reasons were stressed in support of this positiDn. First, a sufficient
comparative and unbiased sample of cultural resources was needed in order
to weigh the significance and potential of each site in respect to their
National Register status. Secondly, in order for the sponsor to design an
adequate mi ti gati on program, it was necessary to have on hand a full kn owledge of the kinds of cultural resources that lie in the district, their
pattern of location and potential for providing data useful in the examination of specific problems regarding culture history and human adaptations
in the area of study.
The North Fork reservoir has been submitted for nomination to the National
Register as an archeological district. In view of the focus of study of
aboriginal adaptation emphasized here, we feel that the district nomination
is crucial. The emphasis is focused on the full complement of cultural and
environmental resources in a specific section of block in central Texas.

\.;'

Regrettably, the archeological resources include those associated only with
the aboriginal remains. No resources identifiable as Spanish Colonial or
Anglo-American have been documented. Although no Spanish Colonial remains
were anticipated, artifacts of the Spanish Colonial period could occur.
The mid-18th century San Xavier Mission complex, for example, is located
only a few kilometers downstream from the Granger Reservoir dam. All
standing historic features had been removed at the time of the Texas A&M
survey, and consequently it was not possible to conduct a survey of historic
residences.
Our survey objective was to examine each site for the potential of providing
new archeological data. We had hoped to carry out a site evaluation study
based on surface inspection in order to provide a comparable known horizon for
every archeological site. However, because of severe time constraints, we
were unable to choose the best time of year to conduct the surveys (the optimum time being December-February). Consequently, the field work fell at the
absolutely worst season to conduct an archeological survey in central
Texas; that is, during the late spring and early summer. The spring of 1976
was notably damp, and the unusually high grass resulting from the wet spring
and three to four years of nonagricultural use of the lands resulted in probably the poorest surveying conditions imaginable. For example, it was often
necessary to visit a site area more than once to verify the location of a previously recorded site. In point of fact, the poor surveying conditions pre-

v

/-i

vented our making .full use of surface data potential; how much potential data
went unused is, of course, impossible to measure. In the opinion of one of
us (Shafer) who conducted the first survey of the North Fork area, the conditions caused a significant loss of archeological data. It is necessary here
to emphasize the importance of long range planning in order to schedule field
work under optimum field conditions. To ignore this important area of planning will reduce the efficiency of the survey, inhibit the entire project, and
serve to appreciably reduce the amount of information gathered on the cultural
resourceso

-

Another problem which affected the overall performance of the project was the
noticeable lack of cooperation offered from other professional archeologists
who had been involved in previous work in the two reservoirs and from the
governmental agency in charge of the reservoir construction. The research was
often hampered by an atmosphere of non-cooperation, an unwillingness to disseminate valuable background information, and an unhealthy spirit of competition among the Texas archeological community. To combat what we felt was
an undesirable by-product of contract archeology, the Texas A&M Anthropology
Laboratory stated during the Corps-Park Service December 14, 1976 meeting in
Georgetown that Texas A&M would not respond to any future Request-for-Proposal
for work in either reservoir, and that Texas A&M would gladly cooperate in
any way with the archeologists performing future reservoir work.

by Harry J. Shafer and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
Pri nci pal Investigators

ABSTRACT

The results of intensive archeological and botanical surveys of the Granger
(Vol. I) and North Fork (Vol. II) Reservoirs on the San Gabriel River, Texas, are reported.
The North Fork Reservoir survey found or relocated 82 prehistoric archeological sites that will or have been adversely affected by the proposed dam
and related construction activities. Forty-five sites had been previously
surveyed. Thirty-seven new sites were identified during this survey operation. All but two of the previously recorded sites were relocated; however,
eight sites had been destroyed as a result of either construction or inundation prior to being revisited.
All archeological resources from both surveys have been recommended for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places as an archeological
district.
Site locations, descriptions, and recommendations for further archeological
investigations in the North Fork Reservoir locality are presented in this
volume.

vii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The completion of this study was made possible by the cooperation of a number of individuals and agencies. Their assistance is acknowledged here and
we wish to point out that this is but a token of our appreciation of their
aid.
The assistance and cooperation provided by National Park Service, Interagency Archeological Services, Denver, deserves special mention. Specifically,
Roy Reaves III and Judy Shafer of the Denver Office aided directly in our
field work.
Curtis Tunnell and Alton Briggs of the Texas Historical Commission who visited the sites and made valuable suggestions are to be thanked for their help.
Students, staff and faculty also provided invaluable aid in both the field
and laboratory phases. Personnel who conducted the actual field survey, under the general direction of Gary L. Moore and Patience Patterson, who were
co-supervisors were Laura Hillier and John Ippolito. They are to be thanked
for their efforts and dedication under often adverse conditions.
Dr. Harry J. Shafer and Dr. Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr., Co-Principal Investigators,
and Edward Baxter, Staff Archeologist, provided excellent advice in all phases
of the study.
Reed Smith and Edie Schaffer aided in the drafting chores, photographic work
was done by Paul Nettell and Johnny D. George, and typing was done by Bill
Moore.

viii

INTRODUCTION

An archeological survey of areas to be affected by the proposed Granger Reservoir, Williamson County, Texas was conducted by members of the Texas A&M
University Anthropology Research Laboratory during the months of May - October, 1976. The Anthropology Research Laboratory performed the archeological services acting on a cost-reimbursable contract (No. CS-1595-6~0008) with
the United States Department of the Interior, National Park Service, Rocky
Mountain Region, Interagency Archeological Services, Denver. The Texas A&M
Research Foundation administered the contract.
The project was proposed by the Interagency Archeological Services, Denver,
since, as the Service stated:
Earlier research has provided the beginnings of a survey inventory of the Districts but these attempts, both formal and casual,
have already yielded a substantial number of unsystematically
collected data. Now that the Corps of Engineers has purchased the
land within each impoundment area, an intensive and complete
survey is feasible.
The Texas A&M Anthropology Research Laboratory, acting through the Texas A&M
Research Foundation, proposed the following objectives in response to the
National Park Service's Request-for-Proposals:

-

1.

Conduct an intensive, systematic site survey of the reservoir
district, including revisiting the 58 archeological sites which
have been recorded.

2.

Conduct an analysis of the modern natural environment of the
study area in order to define specific microenvironments based
on topography, plant and soil associations. This analysis will
also focus on the distribution of natural resources such as c~ert,
fuel, water, etc. relevant to the prehistoric occupation. '

3.

Synthesize the survey data (incorporating information gathered
during previous archeological surveys and excavations by TASP)
in order to accomplish objectives 5-7 below.

4.

Evaluate each site against the published criteria for the eligibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places
using information derived from objectives 1-3.

5.

Establish a typology of archeological sites in the study area based
on: (a) surface morphology; (b) surface artifactual inventory; (c)
modern environmental setting.

6.

Generate a tentative model of the subsistence and settlement systems
appropriate to each major prehistoric stage in the study based on
this survey data.

2

7.

Design a sampling program which will: (a) yield data on the full
range of variation of site types defined in objective 5 above;
{b) facilitate the testing of the various subsistence-settlement
systems advanced in objective 6 above.

The major archeological contract agreements after revision were as
follows:

-

1.

The contractor shall conduct archeological investigations in the
areas to be affected by the reservoir impoundments behind the Corps
of Engineers' North Fork dam in the San Gabriel River Basin, Williamson County, Texas. The work includes revisiting and limited testing, as appropriate. of the previously recorded archeological sites,
and recording and testing, as appropriate, of the other sites expected to be discovered and recorded in a complete survey of the proposed project lands.

2.

The contractor shall evaluate all archeological remains according to
the criteria for nomination to the National Register of Historic
Places and provide recommendations for each regarding its elgibility
for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places. The contractor shall provide an explanation of professional consideration
for each site not recommended for nomination.

3.

Upon notice to proceed, the Texas A&M archeologists commenced work,
utilizing the aforementioned objectives as an interim research design.
The survey was conducted by a two person crew. Preliminary analysis
and report preparation for the survey was performed by Patience E.
Patterson. Subsequently, the final report for the North Fork survey
and its companion volume, the Granger Survey, were completed by various Anthropology Laboratory personnel. This report documents the
results of the North Fork reservoir survey.

SURVEY METHODS, THEORY, AND MODELS

Survey_Methods
Prior to field reconnaissance, an inspection was made of the files and maps
in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at Balcones Research Center,
Austin. It was found that a total of 159 sites had been previously recorded
within the North Fork and Granger Reservoir boundaries. Given, respectively,
the 834-foot and 528-foot projected flood pool elevations, only 82 previously
recorded sites were to be directly affected by the reservoir impoundment,
actual dam construction, or borrow areas.
Maps used during the field reconnaissance included U.S.G.S. 7.5-minute quadrangle maps. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers supplied aerial coverage of
both the North Fork and Granger reservoirs.

3

A survey form designed specifically for the San Gabriel project was utilized
to record the presence of archeological materials. Artifact collections were
made on a selective basis because of the paucity of material at some sites.
Photographs were taken of the general environment and specific site localities.
All artifacts, photographs, and survey forms, as well as maps and field notes,
are now housed in the Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas. Newly discovered archeological sites, as well as additional data on previously known sites, have been recorded with the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, Balcones Research Center, The University
of Texas at Austin.
A discussion of survey procedures used during the North Fork and Granger surveys is presented at the beginning of the respective survey sections.
Survey Theory
It has been recognized repeatedly that
all archeological surveys (no
matter how meticulous) record only a sample of the sites in any area . . . "
(Schiffer and House 1975: 41). With this in mind, the only viable approach
to survey is mitigated upon a well-organized series of hypotheses which will,
in turn, allow the researcher to account for the adverse, incomplete nature
of his/her data base. The last ten years have seen an intense theoretical
and practical discussion of the various techniques by which survey can be
conducted. This discussion has focused on three principal points, each of
which will be discussed in turn:
11

•••

1.

the delineation of, and coping with, the traditional "time-space
systematics" (Chang 1967) demanded by archeology;

2.

the definition of adequate sampling strategies for survey use; and

3.

the development of practical multi-working hypotheses, based upon
survey supplied data, relating to the broader sociocultural questions now being asked by archeologists.

With regard to point one, Willey and Phillips (1958: 14-17) have stressed
the fact that cultures are conceived of as having spatial and temporal boundaries, be they natural or arbitrary. In turn, the cultures are assigned to
areas and periods on the basis of the spatial and temporal occurrences of the
similar assemblages of which they are composed. For the archeologist to
adequately cope with the data he collects in the field, he must condense it
into workable units which can be defined in a structural manner. Values of
some type are assigned to the units to facilitate the interpretation of those
units. Onone level, the units are defined within a time-space framework in
order to allow the archeologist the luxury of placing his data in relation
to his own time.
Survey-retrieved data is the least approachable with regards to time systematics. Most absolute dating methods are based upon excavation-retrieved
materials. Chronologies which can be structured from surface-retrieved data
often lead to isolated temporal frames relative only to themselves. Point

4

-

-

-

types or ceramic chronologies, even though both, in some cases, have been
correlated with absolute dates, tend to lead to a definition of cultures
based upon only one or two criteria. We are then confronted with such blatant anthropomorphisms as "the Ensor people" or the "Wepo B/W folks." Nonetheless, point or ceramic relative chronologies lend some information to the
temporal placement of a given site, and they (the chronologies) must be considered the minimal result achieved by the analysis of survey data.
The spatial aspect of the temporal-spatial duo is perhaps better realized.
The prevailing arguments now stress the viability of the utilization of' the
regional concept (Binford 1964) in the interpretation of survey data. An
archeological site, then, is viewed as an activity locus of a cultural system. The interrelationships of the activity loci become the important elements in any analysis, and in reality the individual site is left to be dealt
with by excavation. In this way, ideally, the archeologist can define a
modicum of relationships based upon accumulated temporal and spatial information. It is then possible for discussion of more ephemeral theoretical
constructs--be they population movement, subsistence patterns, or whatever
--to proceed.
However--and it is here that discussion of point two must commence--the construction of theoretical arguments is possible only if, prior to field work
or during initial reconnaissance of areas, some thought is given to the hypotheses and methods to be employed. Hue and cry have been heard concerning
the nebulousness of sampling strategies for survey work. While individuals
have realized the importance and practicality of utilizing statistical methods to more rigidly define a group of data, all too many surveys are still
performed without thought, prior to field work, of the possible consequences
of said field work.
Conclusions such as those reached by Muller-Wille (1954), Schiffer and House
(1975), Judge, Ebert and Hitchcock (1975) are only possible because of the
strenuously constructed research strategies which were formulated prior to,
or in the early stages of, their field work.
It is this latter point which has led to stage three conceptualizations. If
stage one of the analysis of survey data is the definition of the temporalspatial boundaries of the data base, and stage two is the application of research designs to the problem, then stage three becomes the construction and
application of appropriate models. It is at this stage three juncture that
the research strategies initiated during stage two work are fleshed out, and
credence is given to the results.
In conclusion, then, the orientation of survey theory currently is such that
any specific survey must be viewed as potentially as valuable a data source
as that supplied by excavation. Perhaps even more so, in that the corpus of
survey data can ultimately lead to a more all-encompassing definition of
applicable time-space frameworks for a given area, and a more thorough understanding of site (activity loci) interrelationships.

7a.?4~1'~~
~~

5

Mode 1s
The arguments just presented create a background for further discussion concerning appropriate models for the interpretation of the North Fork survey
data. There are two general models which have applicability. The first is
an environment-centered model, in which the present environment, in conjunction with paleoenvironmental data (Bryant and Shafer 1977) is used as a base
line of information to infer possible subsistence strategies. In turn, the
subsistence strategies possibly employed lead to a definition of seasonality
or non-seasonality with regards to activity loci, which are defined on the
basis of activities conducted at the given localities. The second is a variation of the first model. The interrelationships established between the
activity loci are utilized to infer population movement throughout the region
in question. As no adequate means of estimating population size based on
survey data has been formulated, the actual number of individuals utilyzing
any given activity loci is considered the "X" component of the model. The
range of activities conducted at the loci can be gauged, based on the complexity of the assemblage, and some conclusion can be reached as to whether
or not the loci were areas of limited activity, full maintenance activities
or whatever.
Proposed Models
Two settlement models ~ave been proposed to explain the location of archeological sites in the Archaic Period in the Granger Reservoir area. Frank
Eddy (1973) in his study of three sites in the Granger Lake area, proposed the following settlement strategy model: Archaic Stage sites along
the San Gabriel River of Central Texas were located according to the vegetation habits containing a few desirable resources. These key resources
were the principal determinants of the location choice. Thus, the close
proximity of these sites to selected and highly valued resources was a
decision to reduce the expliotative effort. A corollary statement
is: that the increased distance to other habitats progressively and
systematically reduced their resource use. To paraphrase, the aboriginal people of central Texas were efficiently lazy in their everyday, routine work.

-

Elton f~. Prewitt (1976) in his discussion of the Late Archaic occupation at
the Loeve-Fox Site, offers the following model to explain the exploitative system for the Central San Gabriel River occupation during the San
Marcos and Twin Sisters phase: (1) The proximity of the most desirable
of unequally valued resources (predominantly food as opposed to ra\.'1 materials or tools) partially determined site locations. Hypothesis: Prehistoric
camp sites will be found to reflect a consistently patterned distribution
in relation to the proximity of unequally valued resources as determinable
from paleoenvironrnental data. (2) Site locations were determined in part
by the surface topography. Hypothesis: Prehistoric camp sites will be found
to occur in areas which are consistent in their paleo-topography. (3) Knowledge of specific site location was retained by the peoples inhabiting thP area,
or alternatively, circumstances determininq the choice of site locations were
relatively consistent through time. Hypothesis: Prehistoric camp sites will
be found to reflect evidence of repeated use consistent with each site's

------ -- - - - - - -

~--- ---------~--------

----------------

6

paleo-topography and proximity to resources. (4) When available resources at
a given site were temporarily depleted to a certain point of efficiency in energy expended vs. yield, then the people moved to another site with the foreknowledge that a suitable, previously-used site was available. Hypothesis:
Prehistoric camp sites will be found to be relatively numerous and will reflect repeated use. (5) Seasonal variation of available resources may have
dictated the need of the people to move from one locality to another. Hypothesis: Prehistoric camp sites will be found to contain evidence that certain
resources which are available only during certain seasons of the year were
collected or utilized and that the locus of any site or set of sites will covary with the paleo-distribution of those resources. (6) Regardless of whether
seasonality or simple temporary resource depletion was responsible for these
people moving from one site to another, each site was repeatedly occupied
through time. Hypothesis: Prehistoric camp sites will be found to reflect
repeated use through the accumulation of debris in deep stratified context.
Prewitt's model, due to its vagueness and duplication of themes, has limited
applicability. He implies that the choice of sites is dictated mainly by
food resources and topography and that the prehistoric inhabitants practiced
a seasonal nomadism within a traditional territory (based on their knowledge
of previous site choices). He overstates the use of previous campsites--as
stated or implied in three of the hypotheses.
Verification of Eddy's model would be found if patterning could be demonstrated by correlating the location of specific kinds of sites with the
occurrence context of specific resources and not necessarily food resources. It will be necessary to obtain data on the functional activities at
sites and locating sites relative to the environmental setting. Prewitt's
model can be tested by reviewing the location, topography, evidence of repeated occupation and density. Both of these models will be given consideration in the Survey Results section of this report. Eddy is attempting
to explain the patterning of sites relative to the riverine environment in
the Blackland Prairie by stating a law-like proposition for the Archaic populations of Central Texas. Prewitt, on the other hand, is seemingly concerned with why sites are located where we find them and why most display
evidence of repeated occupation. Neither model considers the adaptations
in Central Texas from a regional perspective except to imply some degree of
nomadism and resource scheduling. Furthennore, the models are static with
regards to time and could not be used to explain a shifting adaptive pattern.
We propose testing Eddy's model with distributional data for burned rock
middens. Using infonnation obtained by Shafer and Corbin (1965), 20 of the
57 sites (or 35%) initially recorded in or near the North Fork Lake district
are mounded, dome-shaped burned rock middens (See Site Types). There is
common agreement among archeologists that the burned rock middens are products of cooking activity but the central issue, what was being cooked, has
been ignored. The longevity of the practice that resulted in midden accumulation has been adequately demonstrated at the John Ischy (Sorrow 1969) and
La Jita sites (Hester 1971). The economic importance of the activity cannot
be denied and we believe that one key to understanding much of the Archaic
adaptation in the Balcones escarpment zone is to learn what the specific
economical activity was that resulted in midden accumulation. Two possible
sources toward this end have been consistently overlooked or ignored. One

~--~·~----

--

--------~·-~-·---~-----

--------

7

is a thorough distributional study of the middens relative
tal context and the other is an intensive effort to secure
materials from midden context. Toward this end we propose
ing hypotheses during the survey concerning the geographic
burned rock middens.

to the environmencharred botanical
to test the followdistribution of

1.

The burned rock middens are randomly distributed in the valley.

2.

The burned rock middens are not randomly distributed in the valley
but occur at optimal locations where certain resources. such as exfol iated limestone slabs or river cobbles, water, wood and perhaps
certain plant communities were accessable.

Previous archeological studies in Central Texas (including both reservoir
districts) have indicated that the aboriginal populations inhabiting the San
Gabriel valley were almost, if not exclusively, hunters and gatherers. The
possible exception being the terminal prehistoric occupation phase, the Toyah
Phase (Shafer 1977). On the basis of the environmental data for Williamson
County, we proposed that no single resource zone (such as the Edwards Plateau
margin, Taylor Prairie or Blackland Prairie [cf. Shafer and Corbin 1965; Environment section of this report]) contained sufficient resources to provide
the year-round sustenance of groups of hunters and gatherers but that the zones,
taken together, could have provided the necessary resources to sustain such
populations indefinitely (cf. Campbell 1975; Shafer 1977). Given this, we
propose the following hypothesis: Settlements characterized by permanent
dwellings will not be represented in the archeological inventory. In order
to exploit the necessary diversity and because no one resource was sufficient
to provide year-round subsistence, we further propose that successful adaptation required individual groups to be composed of bands which followed a
semi-nomadic movement within recognized territorial ranges. Hypothesis: Each
site (See Site Types) will display evidence for the same range of behaviors
consistent within its type category. Furthermore, we predict that the bands
were essentially egalitarian in structure and evidence for elite or status
goods will be negligable.
We do not anticipate a major qualitative shift in the economic patterns of
the prehistoric adaptations. This expectation is based on a recent assessment of the early lithic assemblages (including materials from the Granger
Lake district) by Shafer and Bryant (1977). They hypothesized that the so-called
Paleo-Indian or lanceolate point assemblages represent the beginning of the
long Archaic continuum in central Texas rather than the terminal phase of the
specialized big game hunting adaptation assumed by some archeologists to
have existed in the area. If these early sites do represent hunter-gatherer
adaptations rather than specialized big game hunting sites, then the strategy
of site location should be similar to that discussed by Eddy (1974) for the
Archaic. We further expect, following Eddy, that the settlement strategy of
the entire Archaic in both areas was indeed dictated by the distribution of
key resources available either seasonally or permanently. We do expect quantitative shifts in the exploitation strategies to occur, however. For example,
the chronological position of the dome-shaped burned rock midden has been
demonstrated in central Texas (Sorrow 1969; Sorrow et al. 1967). This feature
no longer appears in the Central Texas sequence after about 500 B.C. We hy11

11

8

pothesize that the burned rock midden was the result of a major economic pursuit, perhaps acorn processing, that provided an important staple resource
for the aboriginal populations up, until about 500 B.C. Therefore, the shift
away from this exploitative strategy should be marked by the occurrence of
alternative resources. The rather sudden appearance of bison in central and
southwest Texas about 750 B.C. (Dillehay 1974) provided one possible alternative. The exploitation of bison should be marked in the archeological record
by the appearance of bison bone and by the increase in frequency of such tools
as end scrapers. Crucial to testing this hypothesis will be locating and excavating sites with deposits dating from 1000 B.C. to 500 B.C. in both districts.
Estimating population size and social structure -on the basis of survey data
is, at best, a highly tenuous exercise because both are the most nebulous of
concepts with which to grapple. With survey data, in most cases, it is not
known, for instance, how much of a site was occupied at any one time. Nor
is there adequate control on the duration of occupation.

-

The paucity of Paleo-Indian materials reported in the North Fork District
would seem to suggest that the area was one of low population density during
that period. Although it is suspected that this is actually the case, there
may be other alternatives which could explain the small number of early occupation sites. With the exception of one site, 41 WM 165, the Paleo-Indian
occupations were limited to locales which had been exposed through erosion or
had suffered from modern gravel quarrying activities. The failure of the
Texas A&M University survey party to document numerous Paleo-Indian sites
might be attributed to two factors: (l) the sites were not visible for inspection because of their deeply buried nature; or (2) the constant meandering of the San Gabriel River has destroyed many of the early sites.
The number and size of sites increased through the Archaic period. If this
observation can be interpreted as a reflection of actual population fluctuation, then we might assume that the Archaic sequence brought a growing exploitation of the district. However, it is difficult to determine if that
increase is the result of a greater population density or simply the product
of a more thorough utilization of the available resources.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND

-

Prior to the 1976 field reconnaissance of the North Fork area there have been
sporadic archeological investigations of a testing and survey nature. The
first field reconnaissance was conducted in 1963 by the Texas Archeological
Salvaqe Project (TASP) under the direction of Harry J. Shafer and James E.
Corbi~; it was a preliminary survey of the areas to be affected by the proposed North Fork Reservoir (Shafer and Corbin 1965). In 1967, the TASP began excavations at two sites, the John Ischy Site (41 WM 49) and the Barker
Site (41 WM 71). This was a direct result of recommendations by Shafer's
and Corbin's work in 1963. Although published much later (Sorrow 1973), in
1968 further test excavations were undertaken by TASP at eight sites with-

9

TABLE 1
Chronology chart of Central Texas

10

CHRONOLOGY CHART
CENTRAL TEXAS
Potterson 197 7

Prewtll

Ao diocar bon
Suooor ted

Years B P

0

lnde11.- markers

Time- markers

Cliffton

Toyah
~

Focus

;'

"
;;

;; ;;~

Austin

IOOO

Po Herson 1977

1974

l_:>~r~~:j

H1stor1c
Toyah

-

Eddy 1973

;;;

Focus

~

.
0

Twin

Toyah

Focus

Focus

x
Scallorn

Austin

Austin

IX

Foi.:us

Scollor n

focus

~--·-

Terminal

Sisters

PetdlZ

Cllffton

Perd11

Transitional

Archaic

'---

Archaic

Dorl
Frio
Fairland

Ded

lZIIl

Ensor

Fairland
Ensor

2000

Marshall

Montell

Lale

Son
Marcos

Late
Archaic

Marcos

Castroville
Morcos

Archaic

Castroville

Williams

Marshall

ml

Montell

3000

-

Pedernoles

Middle

Round

Archaic

4000

~,~=: I
Fork

0

Marshall

Middle

Archaic

Rock

:l1I

Pedernoles

Bulverde

--Bul11erde

·-

Nolan

0

Bulverde

;;

Travis

Wells

Nolan

'"

["

Tortugos

Travis

500ft

I

I

Early

AnlJOSturo

Archaic

Gower
Uvalde

Sor,

Martindale

Farly

Geronimo

Archaic

Ill

l::letl

Bell

Torlugos

6000

1---

Trans1tlonol
Early
Archaic

7000

Mor11ndole

Gower

Late

-

~

m

Angosturo
Merserve

Pateo

Golondrino

C111.:1evil1e

Sc.ottsblufl

!
8000

I
Paleo-

II

Indian

9000

Anr;iosturo

I
I
I

Paleolnd1on

Poleo- lnd1on

11

in the North Fork Reservoir area by W.M. Sorrow; 41 WM 33, WM 34, WM 56,
WM 57, WM 73, WM 87, WM 88 and WM 115. Sorrow's Ischy Site report was published in 1969 and the Barker Site report in 1970. In 1970, Sorrow carried
out additional examination of the area for TASP. Additional sites were identified during the latest survey period with some testing being conducted.
In 1974, Marsha F. Jackson, representing TAS (changed from TASP to Texas
Archeological Survey in 1973), reexamined and assessed some of the previous
sites and conducted a reconnaissance of some areas which were previously inaccessible (Jackson 1974).
Chronological Constructs
An important objective of archeology today is to investigate the paleoecology
and adaptive models of prehistoric cultures in order to identify and explain
the stability or changes observed in the culture history. In order to achieve
this goal, it is necessary to have control on both the time and space parameters of the cultural assemblages undergoing study. A more thorough discussion
of this takes place in the Survey Theory section of this report.
Chronological constructs for Central Texas have long been in existence and
have undergone constant modification through the years (See Weir 1976 for an
exhaustive historical perspective; Prewitt 1976; and Prewitt, in press). Weir
(1976: 9-10) points out two important events: (1) J. Charles Kelly's (1947a,
1947b, 1959) attempt to group central Texas archeological materials (primarily
projectile points) into units according to the Midwestern Taxonomic System
(McKern 1939), which brought about the term Edwards Plateau Aspect and (2)
the publication of An Introductor Handbook of Texas Archeolo by Suhm,
Krieger and Jelks (1954 in which various interpretations of Texas archeology
were brought together in a single volume. In the handbook, projectile points
and ceramics of the state were classified into a spectrum of types, most of
which are still in use today as the primary "fossil indicators or index markers of cultural components (Weir 1976: 10). The Handbook of Texas Archeology:
Type Descriptions (Suhm and Jelks 1962), revised from 1954, is undoubtedly the
most widely used source for temporal placement of artifacts; however, more
current evidence has been found and further modification of the chronology of
Central Texas has taken place. Briefly considered later in this report, and
illustrated in Table 1, is the latest chronological construct for the Central
Texas region (adapted from Weir 1976; Prewitt 1976; and Prewitt, in press).
In 1962, Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell distinguished Early, Middle, Late and
Transitional Archaic Periods within Kelly's Edwards Plateau Aspect. This
formulation too was based primarily on projectile point variations. In 1967,
Johnson presented a construct which again utilized projectile points as time
markers. Sorrow, Shafer and Ross (1967) developed a temporal scheme based on
projectile points which was expressed in terms of local and occupational phases.
Weir (1976: 13-14) concludes·that the periods constructed so far have been
considered ends in themselves and have not explained the prehistoric cultural
events. Accordingly, Weir (1976) offers a redefinition and division of the
Archaic in his The Central Texas Archaic. Weir's five phase designations of
the Archaic, along with the "Circleville" phase added by Prewitt (in press),
make up the chronological construct (Table 1) used here for the North Fork
Reservoir and surrounding areas. Weir follows the terminology of Willey and
Phillips (1958: 22) in regarding a phase as:
11

12

an archeological unit possessing traits sufficiently characteristic to distinguish it from all other units, similarly conceived,
whether of the same or other cultures or civilizations, spatially
limited to the order of magnitude of a locality or region chronologically limited to a relatively brief interval of time.
11

•••

11

Weir's phases of the Archaic correspond to intervals of stability and change.
His (Weir 1976: 5) construct of the Central Texas Archaic is seen through
" ... a simplistic model of cultural change--dissemination to coalescence to
proliferation." Weir (1976: 5-7) utilizes Maruyama's (1963: 164-179) ideas of
cybernetics or systems research and Birdsell 's (1968: 229-240) equilibrium
systems to investigate and explain the interrelat~d subsystems that regulated
stability and change during the Archaic.
As yet no manifestations of Prewitt's Circleville phase have been discovered
in the North Fork area, but they occur in the nearby Granger Lake Reservoir
area (see Fig. lA; Prewitt 1974: 135-147). No terrace sites in the North Fork
area have been extensively excavated; thus the absence of cultural remains
relating to the Circleville phase may be apparent rather than real.
Given the surficial nature of the surveys and the cursory subsurface investigations at some sites within the North Fork area, good primary context for the
diagnostic projectile points is often lacking. ,Table 1 illustrates artifact
provenience and frequency of occurrence according to the dated phase designations and their associated index markers or projectile point types. Sites
41 WM 49, WM 57 and WM 88 are burned rock middens with the majority of their
apparent cultural associations (e.g., index markers, other artifacts and debris) in the Round Rock and San Marcos phases, and some associations with the
later Twin Sisters phase. The majority of the sites noted in Table 1 are
classed within these same phases. However, at least one site, the Barker
Site (41 WM 72), is known to have later cultural associations of types of
arrow points of the Cliffton and Perdiz varieties and ceramics (see Sorrow
1970). Weir (1976: 139) summarizes the Archaic by stating.
"In the three part model for the Central Texas Archaic--dissemination/coalescence/prol iferation--I visualize groups of people
widely dispersed over central Texas at the beginning of the Archaic, coalescing into a cultural continuum (the Round Rock
Phase), followed by proliferation of different cultural groups
over most of Texas and especially the area of the Edwards Plateau."
The clustering of index markers on the Round Rock and San Marcos phases would
seem to substantiate Weir's overall projection of his model of dissemination/
coalescence/proliferation (1976: 139; see also his discussion of Birdsell 's
equilibrium systems and Maruyama's cybernetics, 1976: 5-7) if all factors were
equal. Unfortunately, they are not because of the nature of the sampling of
sites in the North Fork area. For example, there are sites which have evidence of being deep stratified archeological deposits (41 WM 51, WM 52, WM 53
and WM 81). These sites have been partially or wholly destroyed by construction
or only cursorily examined. Only one of a different type of site, i.e., a
burned rock midden, has been thoroughly examined, the John Ischy Site (41 WM 49).
Considering the number (over 100 archeological sites), type and topographical
setting of sites known in the North Fork area the sample (14 sites) of exca-

13

vated sites including those only, cursorily tested is inadequate (Read 1975:
50-51; 58-60). Those sites which have been tested, 41 WM 88 being one, were
examined with heavy machinery which leaves much to be desired in the way of
good primary context and control, over the physical situation. More substantial excavations on larger numbers of sites must be accomplished.
Spatial Constructs

-

-

The spatial parameters (i.e., territorial limits of the prehistoric populations)
are more difficult to define, or at least have not been given nearly as much
attention as the temporal models. Undoubtedly, part of the difficulty lies in
the conceptual approach to viewing the prehistory. Archeologists working in
central Texas in the past have relied on the apprication of the Midwestern
Taxonomic System of Kelly (1947b), and Suhm, Krieger and Jelks (1954) and their
definition of spatial boundaries. While this approach served the purpose of
placing attenti0n on similarities and differences from one geographic area to
the next, it was limited in that it served purely descriptive needs. Also,
the rigid application of the concept in Texas tended to obscure possible intraareal differences. For example, there are subtle but obvious differences in
the Archaic materials along the Leon River when compared to those along the
Colorado. These differences are erased, however, as emphasis is placed on
the similarities and both areas are included in the Edwards Plateau Aspect
(Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954: Figure 4). Such a classificatory scheme lacks
the flexibility of detecting the kinds of differences that could mark sensitive boundaries between prehistoric ethnic groups.
Previous archeological studies in central Texas have indicated that the aboriginal populations inhabitating the San Gabriel Valley were exclusively
hunters and gatherers. There is na evidence that agriculture was practiced
along the San Gabriel Valley until protohistoric (Spanish Colonial) times at
the San Xavier Mission complex (Gilmore 1969). Evidences for the foraging
adaptation occur all along the San Gabriel and its major tributaries from its
headwaters in the limestone plateau country and in the prairies to its confluence with the Little River. The archeological sites appear in several
different forms and in nearly every topographic setting. There is a notable
relationship between certain kinds of sites and environmental settings. For
example, burned rock middens occur in the limestone plateau country of western Williamson County. This type of site, which indicated repeated utilization of one locality for processing specific resources, is related either
to the limestone outcrops, to plateau plant resources or both. Rockshelters
sometimes occur in the plateau cliffs also (Shafer and Corbin 1965). In the
prairie setting, different topographic situations and environmental zones
are encountered.
The hunting and gathering lifeway, by its very definition, usually implies a
degree of mobility in the annual movement of the human populations as they
exploit the plant and animal resources. The degree of mobility or length of
time spent in any one location depends upon the resources available and the
peoples ability to exploit those resources; that is, theirtechnology and
social organization. Other factors may lead to changes in the way a group
of people will utilize a particular area. These factors include increased
knowledge in available resources leading to improved technology, increase or
decrease in population, ecological change, immigrants encroaching upon the
resident territory of a group or a shift in the territorial range that would

14

incorporate access to new or more abundant resources.
The ability for a hunter-gatherer population to maintain an existence in one
area depends upon the necessary resource diversity in the area that could
sustain the population throughout the year and their knowledge to exploit
these resources. One of the essentials to the survival of a hunter-gatherer
is the necessity of that group to remain in the territory where they know
the resources, as a move to a new unknown area would place a high risk on the
group's ability to survive. For that reason, territorial behavior can be expected and, we assume, was operative in the San Gabriel Valley. This is not
to say that such boundaries were not contested and Prewitt's (1974) data at
the Loeve-Fox Site suggests that intergroup warfare was practiced.

ARCHEOLOGICAL SITE TYPOLOGY

One objective of the survey was to establish a site typology based on surface morphology, surface artifactual assemblage and geomorphic setting in an
effort to recognize temporal and spatial patterning. Suhm (1960: 68-72) defines five types of sites in her review and synthesis of Central Texas archeology. These are: open lithic scatters, burned rock middens, terrace sites,
1 ithic procurement areas and rockshel ters. There are other types of archeological sites occurring in Central Texas in addition to those above, such as
rock art sites (both petroglyph and pictograph) and isolated burial localities.
Suhm's typology incorporates both morphological, geornorphic and functional
criteria although the headings are intended to be descriptive. For the sal:e
of gleaning anthropological data from the survey information, it would indeed
be advantageous to construct a functional typology for the cultural resources.
This was approached by reviewing the survey and test excavation data from the
North Fork, South Fork and from the general vicinity of central Texas. Functional typologies have been attempted in Central Texas (e.g. Skinner 1971;
Skinner et al. 1978: 15-24) but such schemes are open to criticism for implying
a static, non-evolutionary model of culture (Mallouf 1978; Shafer 1978). Functionally, the sites in the North Fork district fall into three classes: habitation (i.e., open lithic scatters, terrace sites, rockshelters and, around certain, probably most burned rock middens); lithic procurement; and special processing (burned rock middens). The special processing sites, however, rarely
occur without associated lithic scatters (if located on bluff tops or uplands)
or buried midden deposits (if located in tributary canyons or in the colluvial
or terrace deposits). Such site categories as "hunting stations" or fishing
stations," "temporary hunting camps," etc. are beyond the realm of the functional assessments possible given the nature of the archeological remains in the
North Fork district. Most archeological sites in the North Fork area yield
the evidence of multiple activity loci. Even burned rock middens display a
variety of behavioral activities upon investigation (e.g., Collins 1972). The
John Ischy Site, for example, yielded not only a two-meter-thick burned rock
midden deposit but a one-meter-thick midden and lithic workshop located adjacent to the burned rock midden. That the two kinds of refuse were parts of
related behavior sets can be argued on the basis of stratigraphic and chronological data. A significant finding at John Ischy Site was the lithic work-

15

shop which went largely ignored or unrecognized by Sorrow (1969).
The range of cultural activities carried out at any archeological site is, at
best, only partly indicated by surviving archeological remains, including context. To employ an arbitrary assessment of function with the extant survey
data would amount to constructing a "house of cards." Furthermore, the model
of human adaptation indicated by the previous investigations in central Texas
is one of foraging or gathering and hunting. Such an adaptation would not
expectedly be so highly specialized that only a narrow range of activities
would be conducted at locations exhibiting evidence of past utilizations. We
predict (as stated in Models) that evidence will support a model of opportunistic foragers who carried out a wide range of activities at any location
marked by occupational debris (i.e., chipped stone residue, burned rock, etc.).
While the location of a particular site is assumed to be dictated by the preferences of the aboriginal populations, the choice of location could have been
dictated by any number of factors, notall of which are archeologically testable
despite Eddy's (1973) and Prewitt's (1974) models; the site selection variables
could include drainage, protection from the weather, available wood, water,
limestone, presence of shade. nearness or distance from the next social group,
presence of the custom of utilyzing previously occupied sites, season of the
year, to name but a few.
The survey work conducted by Shafer and Corbin (1965) provided pn excellent
sample (44) of sites in the North Fork area. Although establishing functional criteria was not incorporated in their research design, it is relatively
easy to group their sites on the basis of Suhm's descriptive classification.·
It was hoped, as stated in the TAMU proposal, that the survey team could obtain
the following site data: surface debris density per square foot; assess the
functional range of activities indicated by the surface debris; and place each
site into the temporal phases or periods represented. These objectives were indeed feasible, given the surveying conditions of 1963 encountered by Shafer and
Corbin (1965). However, as stated in the Foreword, the surveying conditions in
the spring and summer of 1976 were the worst that could be imagined for the North
Fork area. Agricultural activity, especially farming and stock grazing, had
ceased for about two to three years and following an unusually wet weather cycle,
the terraces and pastures were severely overgrown with invading grasses and forbs
to the extent that it became necessary to literally cl.ear an area with shovels to
even verify the existence of previously recorded sites, much less estimate the
amount of surface debris and make accurate functional assessments. Furthermore,
because of the poor collecting conditions, the plan to systematically collect
each site was abandoned. Despite the necessity to change the research design
because of adverse field conditions, sufficient data was gained both during the
field season and the 1963 survey to establish a typology of archeological sites.
The site classification basically follows that of Suhm (1960) and each site type
is defined below. Rock art sites and burial sites are excluded since none were
found in the North Fork survey.
'.·.:-~,;..,
Q~__L_jthic

Scatter (I)

This kind of site is perhaps the single most common cultural resource in Central
Texas. They vary in size from a few square meters to several thousand square
meters and contain a variety of cultural materials such as lithic debitage,
chipped stone artifacts, burned rock and sometimes mussel shell. Because of the

....
16

shallow nature of these kinds of sites, vertical stratigraphic data are lacking. Since the kinds of cultural debris are virtually identical to that found
in buried deposits (terrace deposits), lithic scatters do not seem to represent
specific function sites except where chert outcrops occur. They seem to represent campsites situated on higher elevations at the valley's edge. Little effort
has been done to glean anthropological data from open lithic scatters and, indeed,
none were recommended for additional work by Shafer and Corbin (1965). Because
most have been exposed to surface disturbing forces for centuries, and the temporal range often argues from intermittent use over a long period of time, efforts
to systematically surface collect such sites in central Texas in order to define
activity areas and intrasite patterning would be an exercise in futility. These
are indeed challenging types of cultural resources and sometimes provide the
only evidence to the surveyor of early utilization in the valley because of the
exposed materials. Older materials located along the alluvial terraces are usually buried beneath later deposits and, except in rare instances, are masked
from the archeologist's inspection.
Burned Rock Middens (II)
Sizable accumulations of angular burned rock fragments are a common type of
archeological site in the Edwards Plateau and southwest portion of Texas (Suhm
1960). These accumulations usually appear as dome-shaped features situated
on limestone outcrops or outwash fans near springs or small creeks. The chrono··
logical position of these kinds of sites in the Edwards Plateau has been demonstrated (Sorrow, et al. 1967; Sorrow 1969) and no longer appear in the central
Texas sequence along the Lampasas and San Gabriel River drainages after about
500 B.C. It has been suggested that the dome-shaped burned rock middens were
the result of a major economic pursuit such as plant or acorn processing that
provided an important staple resource for the aboriginal populations up until
about 500 B.C. (Shafer and Bryant 1976). This suggested interpretation is advanced for the burned rock middens along the eastern periphery of the Edwards
Plateau in Williamson and Travis counties where such accumulations reached a
thickness of some two meters, suchas the John Ischy Site (Sorrow 1969). Also,
it should be noted that the time span for the accumulation of these midden
features clearly spans several thousand years as indicated in the gross stratigraphy (Suhm 1960; Sorrow 1969). An interesting horizontal cluster study of
projectile points from burned rock midden context by Jelks (1951) also strongly
suggests that in the Edwards Plateau area of central Texas, horizontal patterning is sometimes present and may provide data on manner and rate of accumulation.

..

In the Lampasas Cut Plain, burned rock midden studies have been grossly neglected by archeologists. Watt (1936) noted the occurrence of numerous burned rock
middens along Kell Branch in Bell County and Miller and Jelks (1952) tested
burned rock middens in the Belton Reservoir area along Horse Creek in southeast Coryell County. Shafer, Suhm and Scurlock (1964: 100) also noted a cluster
of 13 small burned rock middens at 41 BL 59 along a bluff overlooking Cedar
Creek. Similar features are known in Brown County (Baxter and Shafer 1975).
For almost 60 years, Texas archeologists have been investigating central Texas
burned rock middens. The main thrust of concern has traditionally been the
assignment of temporal position and little effort has been made to understand
their significance as a cultural phenomenon.

17

In 1972, the progress of burned rock midden study had developed to encompass
these three suggestions (Collins 1972):
(1)

It was generally agreed that a range of cultural activities were
involved and that the repeated use of stone in firerlace preparation was of major importance.

(2)

The discussions of burned rock middens suggested that the cultural activity was concentrated on and very near the midden structure.

(3)

It was suggested that some of the burned rock middens were central to a larger spread of activity areas or that they were
the result of the deliberate removal of debris from an area of
habitation to a central point of disposal.

Still, no major effort had been made to approach the burned rock midden as a
cultural artifact which remains as the result of a conscious and repeated
construction template.
In Collins discussion of the Devil s Hollow Site (1972), a basis for three
proposals amenable to testing in future investigations of burned rock midden
sites in central Texas has been presented.
1

1

First, in order to test the suggestion that earth ovens may be present, careful scrutiny of the midden configuration needs to be made.
Second, two suggestions concerning the significance of typology, especially of projectile points, are made: perhaps recognition of homogeneous
artifact forms will lead to further refinement of the local chronology ; also, the tenuous position has been taken that marked homogeneity
of projectile points indicates an abbreviated interval of manufacture
within a single social unit. Third, to test the proposal that social
groups of large size may be responsible for at least some middens, a
number of specific kinds of information are to be sought. In the
vicinity of the midden, the presence of reduplicative and contemporaneous clusters of remains indicative of separate households would
offer one positive test for large group occupancy. Biological evidence should be sought and analyzed for seasonality. Means for estimating population size from food remains might be developed as well
as an appreciation for the food potential of the Central Texas flora
and fauna under various extractive technologies.
The repeated theme of burned rock midden discussions has been directed at understanding the function of these particular cultural features, yet historically the
approach has been a "when" instead of a what" proposition.
11

Investigations of the dome-shaped features in the Lampasas Cut Plain, north of
the study area, are almost nonexistent. One such feature was recently tested in
Brown County (Shafer, Baxter and Stearns 1976) but other than this small test
conducted for assessment purposes, no internal investigations have been conducted.
It is not uncomnon to assume that burned rock middens are functionally the same
throughout central Texas. Yet we have observed that the dorre-shaped middens
in the Lampasas Cut Plain are smaller that those from the Edwards Plateau area,

and we suggest that functional differences may be a factor responsible for the
morphological differences. Furthermore, there are at least two kinds of burned
rock middens in the northern part of central Texas, a ring-shaped form and the
dome-shaped form. Ring-shaped burned rock middens have been recorded in Brown,
Comanche and Hamilton counties (Shafer 1975). These features are undated and
have not been explored in recent years.
Several forms of burned rock middens have been recorded in southwest Texas (Greer
1965). Recent investigations in Val Verde County have yielded a wealth of plant
remains associated with early and late Archaic burned rock middens in Hinds Cave
(Dering 1976; Shafer and Bryant 1977). While these southwest Texas findings have
little direct bearing on the North Fork features, we feel that the midden accumulations in both areas are the remains of intensive baking using rock as a heat
conductor.
Terrace Sites (III)

-

Terrace sites are localities where archeological material is buried in alluvial
terrace deposits. Although they presumably represent localities of human settlement, terrace sites are conducive to overbank flooding and flood water scouring
(Bond 1978). Despite the fact that only the heavier materials have the potential of occurring in undisturbed conditions, terrace sites provide one of the
most promising resources for detecting discreet activity areas. Cultural features such as thin refuse lenses (Story and Shafer 1965), intact stone alignments (Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967), baking pits (Bond 1978) and refuse concentrations offer opportunities to test temporal models and techniques for spatial
analysis. Deep excavations in terrace sites in central Texas have resulted in
recognition of one of the longest cultural chronologies in North America. Deeply
stratified terraces excavated in the vicinity of the study area include the Merrill
Site (Campbell 1948), Youngsport Site (Shafer 1963), Evoe Terrace and Landslide
Sites (Sorrow, Shafer and Ross 1967) and the Centerline Site (Moore, Shafer and
Weed 1978).
Lithic Procurement Sites (IV)
These are "areas where shipping materials were obtained from flint concentrations
embedded in the limestone or fromflint nodules eroded out of limestone formations"
(Suhm 1960: 72). Since chert outcrops are characteristic on the bluff tops on
both sides of the valley, lithic procurement sites are present and often cover
several hectares. These sites are marked by core and primary reduction debitage
and the presence of aborted biface preforms. Although none of these sites have
been investigated in the North Fork area, they are well known throughout central
Texas where ledge and nodular chert outcrop near streams (Patterson 1974; Kelly
and Hester 1975).
Bsick~h_eJ_t_e_12

( V)

Use of rockshelter sites in the central Texas area has been dated as early as
10,800 years ago at the Horn No. 2 Shelter (Watt 1978). Watt has recovered a
remarkable sequence of rockshelter use during the early prehistoric period
(i.e., from about 11,000 to 7,000 years ago) at the Horn No. 2 Shelter in McLennen County.

19

Based on the archeological work carried out in the Brazos, Bosque and Leon River
valleys, there appears to be a long period during the Archaic when rockshelters
in the northern part of central Texas were not utilized. This is not the case
in the Colorado Basin and westward (Johnson, Suhm and Tunnell 1962). The reason
for this shift in settlement strategy in the northern area is not known. Use
of these naturally protected localities began again in the Late Archaic Period
(that is; about 500 B.C.) in the sheltered canyons of the Brazos (Stephenson
1970; Jelks 1962) and Leon (Watt 1936; Miller and Jelks 1952) drainages. More
intensive use was made of rockshelters in the northern part of central Texas during the past Archaic Phase (or Focus as defined by Jelks 1962). A veneer of
Toyah phase materials is often found overlying or mixed with the Austin phase
deposits (Jelks 1953; 1962; Stephenson 1970). It was Jelk's work at Blum rockshelter and later at Kyle that provided the first clear seriation of the Austin
and Toyah phase materials in this portion of Central Texas.

-

Rockshelter excavations have provided much more than chronological data; however,
When excavated carefully several kinds of cultural features may be found. Human
burials dating in the post Archaic are not infrequent (Watts 1936; Miller and
Jelks 1952; Stephenson 1970). These burials date in the Austin and possibly in
the Toyah phases and are typically flexed, covered with limestone slabs (sometimes
including grinding slabs) and are notably without associated artifacts. Students
from Southwestern University at Georgetown removed a prehistoric human burial from
41 WM 37 a shelter in Dobbs Hollow below the North Fork in the early 1960s. Jelks
(1962) also documented a cremation contained in a grass mat at the Kyle Site.
Several kinds of features other than burials were found in rockshelter excavations
in the Whitney Reservoir area. At the Kyle Site, for example, Jelks (1962) noted
numerous circular concentrations of hearthstones and/or ash sometimes placed in
shallow basins. Other features at Kyle include a bison skull, a concentration of
cordage and basketry, a circular pit containing fire-cracked limestone and a feature of cedar branches, grass, and bark. Stephenson (1970) notes numerous features
at Pictograph, Buzzard and Sheep Shelters. all in the nearby Whitney Reservoir basin.
These features include burned rock and clay hearths, slab-lined cists, concentrations of snail shells, an9 a workshop area covering approximately 30 square
feet. The implications of Stephenson's findings of the stone-lined cists are very
important, especially when the question of seasonality is approached since these
features may have functioned as storage compartments. Also, the work area at
Buzzard Shelter, which was not described, serves as an example that discrete activity areas may be preserved in the shelter settings.
Findings in central Texas shelters suggest that midden accumulations resulted
largely from household activities centering around food processing and consumption, maintenance tasks, ritual and play activities. These behaviors are suggested
on the basis of the occurrence of garbage, animal bone, snail and mussel shell,
charcoal, burned rocks, hearths, rock-lined cists, grinding implements, manufacturing waste from stone and bone tools, manufacturing failures of stone tools,
dicarded tools, burials, rock art and painted pebbles. These same kinds of resources may be used to construct models of technological, sociological and ideological behaviors. Furthermore, direct inferences of band size can be drawn by
simply estimating the size of the available floor space.

-

20

ENVIRONMENT OF THE NORTH FORK STUDY AREA
The study area is located along the North Fork of the San Gabriel River in
western Williamson County (Fig. 1). The reservoir dam is 3.2 kilometers
west of Georgetown, Texas, and the reservoir boundaries, delimited by the
270 meter contour mark, continue westward along the North Fork River Valley.
Elevation in the North Fork area is slightly higher (180-240 meters above
mean sea level) than in the Granger region (130-150 meters above mean sea
level) due to the gentle southeastern slope of the underlying bedrock.

-

-

-

-

The North Fork reservoir is being constructed along the eastern edge of the
Edwards Pl ate au section of the Great Plains Pro-vi nee as described by Hunt
(1974) and Godfrey, McKee and Oakes (1973). The Balcones Fault zone occurs
about 3 kilometers east of the damsite and is oriented north to south.
The Edwards Plateau, on which the North Fork Reservoir is being built, is
largely underlain by thick Lower Cretaceous limestones, which generally strike
northeast-southwest and dip to the southeast (Hunt 1974:341; Department of
the Army 1972:11-1). Although siliceous nodules may be found in several of
the above named units, special mention is made of the Edwards formation which
contains a chert (flint) of high quality which was frequently used in prehistoric tool manufacture. East of the Edwards Plateau, towards Georgetown, the
Lower Cretaceous sediments become buried under the Upper Cretaceous to Eocene
deposits as a result of downward faulting along the Balcones Fault system.
Topography
The surface topography of the North Fork area consists predominantly of rolling
uplands with naturally dissected and steep walled valleys (especially in the
downstream half of the lake area), which are marked by vertical cliffs in places
rising 45-60 meters above the stream bed (Fig. 2A). Maximum elevations tend to
reach 340 meters above mean sea leve 1. Within the reservoir district the valley
width ranges from 0.4 kilometers at the damsite to about 1 kilometer in the
upper end of the lake area.
The gradient of the North Fork averages 3.3 meters per kilometer and the stream
can be generally characterized as having a bedrock bottom with numerous erosionresistant riffles (Fig. 3A), long narrow gravel bars and infrequent pools. The
character of the soil and the nature of the area's rainfall are conducive to
rapid runoff. Flooding, which may occur at any time of the year, is a common
occurrence (Department of the Army 1972: II-10).
Soils
Soils in the North Fork area reflect their development on the limestones of the
Edwards Plateau. Soils on the uplands of the area tend to be dark, shallow and
stoney, calcareous clays and clay loams belonging to the Tarrant, Brackett and
Tobosa series (Godfrey, McKee and Oakes 1973). Some of the bottomlands contain minor areas of calcareous, clayey alluvial soils belonging to the Frio
series (Godfrey, Carter and McKee 1973: 16).

----

21

FIGURE 1
Location of the North Fork of the San Gabriel
study area in western Williamson County.

------------

- - - - - - - - - - - - -

--------

\

LOCATION

MAP

·,..

•

0

/

\ , .. / /

TEX\~

••

... /··

'\ .

300

•

\•

'

183\ / '

,

· - - - - .. ....._

,.

.. ../ ......... ...

,,

,,
,,

35!

"'

/

,/

/

I
I

'

WILLt/AMSON

BURNET

L .. )

\/

BE L/L

, --

1.. )
..
,,..,
.

.
\

----·

kilometers

•

\

\

~I

\ ...

TEMPLE

.

I

I

I

. . . . . . . ......... ..I

.. ""'

'

~

(
\

·\
\

'\

,Taylor

\/
'

•

•

--@-@~

0

Interstate highway
U.S. highway
Reservoir area

10
kilometers

20

~
I

' ". '-\

\

''\

~,/'

,

.,,,,,,' , /

..J
.
·I'
..............

TR( AV I IS

,,

"

... ...
g., .. ' t1l

~

N

r-v

23

FIGURE 2
A:

North Fork valley near dam site; note the bluffs and river terraces.

B:

Uplands vegetation showing oak, juniper and rresquite with grasses
and Yucca arkansana dominating understory vegetation in photo.

A

25

FIGURE 3
A:

Riffle in the North Fork of the San Gabriel caused by erosion resistant bedrock.

B:

Thick luxuriant lowland vegetation 'in the Crockett Garden Springs
area.

---- - -

-------------~---

-----

A

B

-

27

Vegetation

-

-

-

-

Located on the eastern edge of the Edwards Plateau, the upper area of the San
Gabriel River in the North Fork Reservoir area contains a vegetation composition which represents elements of three distinct vegetational zones as defined by Gould (1969). The region is located in the southern extreme portion of
the Cross Timbers and Prairies vegetational zone but lies within a few miles of
the northern limits of the Edwards Plateau vegetational zone to the east. Since
the area represents an ecotone of these three regions, the vegetation is expressed as a mosaic of taxa common in many cases to all three of these vegetational zones (Table 2).
Vegetation in the North Fork Reservoir area is closely governed by the availability of water and by topography of the region. These two factors play a
major role in the determination of the two major vegetational zones (Upland
and Lowland) and the four minor zones (Riparian, Canyon-hollow, Terrace and
Bluff-face)(Fig. 4).
Lowland Vegetation
The river valleys and tributary streams of the North Fork Reservoir and the
flat, alluvial terrace areas of the southeast drainageways forms a fertile area
of Lowlands vegetation. The sandy, dark-colored soils of these Lowland areas
are deep and moist and support a rich growth of mesic-type vegetation. 1n some
areas of the North Fork Reservoir the Lowlands contain thick growths of trees
and shrubs (Fig. 3B), while in other areas the Lowlands are predominantly covered with tall grasses and have only an occasional tree present. From observations in the North Fork area, it appears that most of the open grassy areas
of the Lowlands region are directly associated with farming and ranching practices. This suggests that land clearing probably accounted for most of the
open grassy areas presently found in the Lowlands.
The cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia) is the most common tree in the Lowlands and
can be used in the North Fork area as a fairly good indicator of the boundary
between the Lcwland and Upland vegetational zones. Only rarely does one ever
encounter a cedar elm growing in the Upland areas of the North Fork reservoir,
and when found in the Uplands, they are generally associated with a seep or a
restricted area containing deeper and more moist soils.
Other trees and shrubs found in the Lowland area include the black walnut (~­
ans_ nigra), black hickory (Carya texana), water oak (Quercus nigra), bur oak
fQuercus rnacrocarpa), Texas persimmon (Diospyros texana), eastern red cedar
(Juniperus virginiana), pecan (Ca)ya illinoensis), American elm (Ulmus americana),
sugar hackberry (Celtis laeviyata , American sycamore (Platanus occidentalis),
shining sumac (Rhus copallina, yaupon (Ilex vomitoria), gum-elastic (Bumelia
lanuginosa), green ash (Fraxinus pennsylvanica), live oak (Quercus virginiana
var virginiana), Spanish oak (Quercus shumardii var texana), and shumard oak
(Quercus shumardii var shumardii).
Understory components of the Lowland areas of the North Fork Reservoir include
some of the same genera found in the Uplands, such as Arkanasa yucca (Yucca
arkansana), nopal pricklypear cactus (Opuntia Lindheimeri), Texas prickly
poppy (Argemore albiflora), bull nettle (Cnidoscolus texanus), buffalo gourd

28

FIGURE 4

Schematic profile showing vegetation zones in the North Fork area.

I

SCHEMATIC PROFILE SHOWING
VEGETATION ZONES

2

I

---i

I

L
.4.---

Ci

MAJOR ZONES
I. UPLANDS
2. LOWLANDS

A

c

A

SUBZONES
A
B
C
D

RIPARIAN

CANYON - HOLLOW
TERRACE
BLUFF - FACE
N
<.O

30

TABLE 2

Common plants of the North Fork Reservoir area.

31

Table 2.

Common plants of the North Fork Reservoir area.

Lowlands
Trees, Shrubs, Woody Vines, and Cacti

-

-

-

Cedar elm
Black walnut
Black hickory
Bur oak
Texas persimmon
Eastern red cedar
Pecan
American elm
Sugar hackberry
American sycarmre
Shining sumac
Ya upon
Gum-elastic
Green ash
Live oak
Spanish oak
Shumard oak
Honey mesquite
Nopal prickly cactus
Wild blackberry

Common Name
Arkansas yucca
Texas prickly poppy
Bull nettle
Buffalo gourd
Indian grass
Swi tchgrass
Rig bluestem
lJohnson grass
Narrowleaf dayflower
Prairie lily

Ulmus crassifolia
.J_ugl an_~ _!1igra
f~_ry'!_ _texana
Quercus macrocarpa
Diospyros texan~
~~niperu~ vira1niana
Carya i_U_i_noeQsi~
Ulmus americana
-~~LtL~ l_aevi~ta

Platanus occidentalis
_R!!_us copa_lli_ri_~
Il ex vomi tori a
~LJ_~~li'!. _l_a__n_u_g_i_ri_Cl_s__?_
_Fr~xi n us 12.E'_l"l_n_s_.YJy_a n i c C!_
Q_u_§_rcu~ "._j_tJiinia _nA var ~ _ irqini_~Il_a
QuE'rCLJ_s _s_h_u_ n1~r:_d_i__i__ var !_ex~n-~_
Q_ue re LJ_S _s __h_u__rn_9__r:_dj_i_ var ~-h uma rd Li
~_ro ~; s _g]__a__rl_cl__ll_l_o_s_a
Opun ti a__ l__i_ri_d_h_e_i__m_~t:_i
Rubus trivialis
Herbaceous Plants
Scientific Name
Yucca arkansana
_f\__r:_g_emo_n_E' _a_l__~i_iJ_Q_r~_
Cnidoscolus texanus
Cucurbita foetiddissima
S(_)rq~str_um _n__LJ_tan~

Pa~J~l:1.!!! tlY'~tum
/~_n d rq_Q_o_g oQ

_?o r_gh_un

ge r_C!_r:_d i i

h_E'_l~E'_i:i.?~

C_CJ_r_nm~l__i n~

an g1~s_!:_i_f_C!__l_!_~

C_o _qp__e_Y'_:Gi ~~L! nc_LJ_l_~~-~

-

32

Sensitive briar
Texas bluebonnet
Little Bluestem

Schrankia uncinata
~i nus texens i~
Schizact!l'!:_iJ:f_!:!_ ~copa_!:_~ um var frequens

Uplands
Trees, Shrubs. and Cacti

-

Sumac
Post cedar
Eastern red cedar
Shumard's red oak
Blackjack oak
Spanish oak
Live oak
Post oak
Sugar hackberry
Ya upon
Texas persimmon
Honey mesquite
Nopal pricklypear cactus
Devils pin cushion cactus

Juniperus yjrginian~
Quercus :;f.1:1mardi 1 var ~imardU_
~uercus marilandica
Quercus_ shumaJ"di i_ var texana
Quercus virginiana var fusiformis
Que re us s te 11 ata var st~_llata
Celti~ laevigata
I 1ex vomitori a
Diospyros texana
Prosopis glandulosa var glandulosa
Opuntia lindheimeri
Echniocactus texensis

Common Name

Scientific

Little bluestem
Switchgrass
Canada wild-rye
Indian grass
Big bluestem
Tall dropseed
Hairy grarna
Texas winter grass

~-~hizachyrium ~~opari_um

B_hu ~ 02j)ji_l_l_i_~~
~uniperus ~he_!_

~fame

var freguens

panic:~~ _v_~_!:_ga 1:_~!1_1
.[_lymu~ c:_~nadensis

~_i:_gll_a_~tT_Um iJUt~_rl_~

,l\_Q_c!!"_QQ0 g0_!! _g_e r a cc!l_~
~orobol u~ ~_p~_i:__

Bouteloua hirsuta

Common Name

Scientific Name

Turnbleqrass
Red love grass
Tumble windmill grass

'.)_~_:~_c:I_~_ na_d_u_~ p~n_i_c:_u_l~-~~

I_raqros tis ()_~l_~E_i_;s_ var QXJ'J_fj)_i_s_
Chloris vericillata

--~-----~--

33

-

Red grama
Texas grarna
Johnson grass
Hairy tridens
Arkansas Yucca
Texas Zephyl i ly
Buffa l obur
Trompillo
Buffalo gourd
Black eyed susan
Bull thistle
Texas thistle
Texas mistletoe
Eryngo
Bull nettle
Bluebonnet
Texas Prickly poppy
Rain 1i l y

Bouteloua trifida
l3_o_ute l ~a !'_i_g_i_g_i_s_e_t_a_
S_9J]Lhum _ha 1epen_~~
Erioneuron pilo?um
Yucca arkansana
Z_ephyr_anth__es ~~-x~_9_
Solanum rostratum
?_g__l_a_r:i__um el a ea 9!1._if O_~j_uni
Cucurbita foetidissi~a
Rudbeckia serotina
Cirsium ~orridulum
Cirsium texanum
Phoradendron serotinum
Erynnium
leavenworthii
__ ___ - - - - - --Cnidoscolus texanus
1uQ_i_n_us t_~~_r:_i_s_i_?.
-

:._;,}_

~_emo_~e ~_l_12_i f !_C?!~

CQ_Q_f)er_i a _fl_~-~-u-~-~-~-!-~_t_a

...
34

(Cucurbita foetiddissima), and a number of different grasses such as Indian
grass {Sorghastrum nutans), switchgrass (Panicum virgatum), big bluestem
(Andropogon erandii), little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium var freguens)
and Johnson grass Sorghum halapense).
(1)

Riparian vegetation subzone:

....

...

...
...

...

Along the edges of the San Gabriel River and also along major drainageways in
the North Fork area exists a narrow band of vegetation which is distinctive
from that found in other subzones. The permanent supply of water, a high
ground table and deep rich alluvial soils along the banks of these drainages encourages the growth of large trees such as-sycamores (Platanus occidentalis),
cedar elm (Ulmus crossifolia), black walnut (Juglans nigra), water oak (Quercus
nigra) and pecan (Carya illinoensis). Of these riparian trees, the cedar elm,
sycamore and black walnut are the dominants and, by themselves, form more than
50% of the riparian vegetation along the drainageways.
Other less frequently encountered trees along the edges of these drainageways
include the live oak (Quercus virginiana var vir iniana), sugar hackberry (Celtis
laevi ata), Texas persimmon (Diospyros texana, black willow (Salix nigra), American elm Ulmus americana), black hickory {Carya texana) and occasionally an eastern red cedar {Juniperus virginiana). The dense growth of trees provides almost
total shading of the understory in some areas along the banks while in other
areas the riparian vegetation is somewhat more open thereby permitting sunlight
to reach the ground surface. Understory plants include a few grasses and composites in the more open areas, and a number of herbaceous taxa in the shaded
regions. A checklist of colllllon plants in the North Fork area appears in Table 2•

...

The riparian vegetation of the North Fork Reservoir District is typical of the
type found on the Edwards Plateau and some of the plants in this zone represent
woody plants which are normally associated with the more mesic habitats in eastern Texas. The range extension is due to the mesic microhabitat produced by
the rivers that dissect the Edwards Plateau and is restricted to the areas of the
North Fork where canyon walls do not rise directly from the river bed. In many
places the riverine vegetation has been cleared for agriculture and the fallow
fields are covered with many primary plant invaders, including Johnson grass
(Sorghum halapense), sunflower (Helianthus annuus) and the ubiquitous riverside
exotic bermuda grass (Cynodon dactylon). One of these, bermuda grass, was an
early African invader to Texas that was so common by 1898 that it was regarded
as one of the distinctive grasses of central Texas. Barnyard grass (Enchinochloa
crusgalli), a native of the southern states, is also a frequent inhabitant of
fallow fields in central Texas. Like bermuda grass, barnyard grass appeared
early in central Texas. Many open areas in this zone support common grasses
of the Cross Timbers and Prairies (Gould 1975). These include wild rye (Ely)us
canadensis), switchgrass (Panicum vir atum), tall dropseed (Sporobolus asper ,
Texas wintergrass (Stipa leuchotricha , and little bluestem (Schizachyrium
scoparium) .

...

In many areas where the North Fork widens and agriculture is not practiced,
large monospecific stands of Texas red oak (Quercus texana) are found growing
at the river's edge .

...

...
...

35

(2) Canyon-Hollow Vegetation Subzone:
The vegetation of the short, intermittent streams, hollows and canyons that open
into the North Fork are slightly more xeric than the -riverine vegetation. Variation within these zones can be somewhat extreme, since the actual vegetation
component is dependent upon soils, topography and proximity to any water sources.

-

In many areas a mixed stand of juniper (Juniperus ashe!), live oak (Quercus virginiana), hackberry (Celtis laevigata), cedar elm TDTmus crassifolia) and shin
oak (Quercus vaseyana? mohriana?) dominate the canyon vegetation. Several monospecific stands of juniper and oak also exist. Texas persimmon (Diospyros texani_)
and mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa) are frequent, but do not occur in large monospecific stands as a dominant component in any area of this vegetation zone.
(3) Terrace Vegetation Subzone:
Deep soils on colluvial terraces allow several woody species to attain great size.
Hackberry (Celtis laevigata), pecan (Carya illinoiensis) and oaks and willows
(Salix nigra) are frequent in these areas. However, in more open, xeric situations, small stands of mesquite have invaded the terraces.
~nd V~~tati

on

Formerly, the uplands were occupied by a short to rnidgrass prairie which was
rapidly destroyed by fire control and overgrazing. In 1904 Bray (1904: 23) wrote:
Though the encroachment ~f timber on prairie is gradual and
insidious, to those whose observation covers a space of 25
years the change is truly startling. Where at the beginning of that period the prairie held undisputed sway, the observer now finds himself shut in by miles of oak scrub on
every side. Men who drive cattle in the earlier days say
that they rode across open country from above Georgetown to
the Colorado breaks, in Williamson County. This same region
is now all heavily timbered. A great deal of shinnery country undoubtedly represents a recent gain of timber growth on
prairie divides.
The rapid expansion of shinnery oak was surpassed only by the phenomenal juniper
invasion. Bray (1904: 19) stated that juniper
tends to regain ground formerly occupied by it, as well as that cleared of oak and mixed timber. and that
in many cases it is rapidly spreading over slopes hitherto wholly free from
timber."
11

•••

The overstory vegetation in some of the Upland areas is quite dense and provides
an almost continuous cover while in other areas the Uplands appear more a grassland prairie interrupted only occasionally by trees and shruby vegetation. Factors that appear to govern the degree of tree and shruby vegetation in the Upland
area are available moisture, soil composition, soil depth and pasture grazing and
clearing by ranchers in the area. Major overstory taxa include eastern red cedar
(Juniperus virginiana), post-cedar (Juni erus ashei), shumard 's red oak (Quercu_s_
shumardii var shumardii), Spanish oak Quercus shumardii var texana), live oak
fQuercus virginiana}, scrub live oak (Qlie-iClls~y_:i__r_gj_nian~ var fusi~orll)_i_s_). post

-

36

oak (Quercus stellata var stellata) and sugar hackberry (Celt_i.2 lae\'_j~~).
Other-overstory plants do appear in the Upland areas but are only occasionally
represented and are thus considered as only minor components (Table 1).

-

The abundance of woody species in the Uplands overlooking the North Fork Reservoir area has greatly increased in the last 150 years. Bray (1904:5) believed
that the climax vegetation was mid or tall grasses and today "relict" as it is
dominated by little bluestem, accompanied by sideoats grama and Indiangrass
(Yarlett 1954: 18). Foster (1917: 445) indicated that the grassland area was
heavily invaded by juniper and live oak around the turn of the century and
from these reports we can see that although the flora of the North Fork has
changed very little, the distribution of this flora has been drastically altered
in recent times.
The understory in most of the Upland area (Fig. 2B) consists predominantly of
native grasses such as the little bluestem (Schizach rium sco arium var freguen~),
switchgrass (Panicum virgatum), Canada wild-rye Elymus candensis , Indian grass
(Sor hastrum nutans), big bluestem (Andropogon gerardii), tall dropseed (_~orobolus
asper, hairy grama (Bouteloua hirsuta) and Texas winter grass (Stipa leucotricha).
Other understory vegetation consists of brushy plants such as the yaupon (Ilex
vomitoria), Texas persimmon (Diospyros texana), mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa var
glandulosa) and immature junipers and oaks. A number of other weedy plants are
found in the understory, some ofwhich represent invader species. Some of the
main invader annual and perennial grasses include the tumble grass (Schedonnardus
aniculatus), red love grass (Eragrostis oxylepis var oxylepis), tumble windmill
grass Chloris verticillata), red grama (Bouteloua trifida), Texas grama (Bouteloua ri idiseta), Johnson grass (Sorghum halepense) and hairy tridens (Erioneuron
pilosum . Other understory plants in the Uplands include taxa generally considered as dominants in other areas of Texas but which have invaded the North Fork
Upland areas in limited numbers. These include genera such as the nopal pricklypear cactus (Opuntia lindheimeri), devils pincushion cactus {Echinocactus texensis)
and Arkansas Yucca (Yucca arkansana).
(4) Bluff-face Vegetation Subzone:
The bluff faces of crumbly limestone hills in the North Fork area are often covered with extensive stands of juniper, which is a rapid colonizer of shallow soils.
Bray (1904: 19) mentioned the incredible durability of this species, and the rapidity with which juniper has spread. Other slopes in this zone are occupied by
a mixture of oak and juniper, with persimmon and an occasional mesquite dotting
the area.

-

Foster (1917: 442) noted that upland forest areas, especially juniper woodlands,
originally were restricted to the bluff faces where no other plants could survive.
However, since then the juniper and shinnery oak woodlands have spread from this
zone during most of the 19th and 29th centuries.
Pollen Study
One potentially important source of ecological data for archeology, both from a
paleoenvironmental and cultural perspective, is the analysis of fossil pollen
data from archeological and geneological deposits. Furthermore, studies of
modern pollen rains provide a valuable known for comparing fossil pollen frequen-

7a, ;ltd.

;e~ ~J..

··~·--- ;4~

37

cies. One aspect of the environmental study of the North Fork and Granger surveys was an analysis of the modern pollen rain to establish a known point of
reference for future fossil pollen studies and to examine the feasibility of
relying on pollen data for potentially important paleoecological data. The
findings of the pollen study by Dering, Bryant and Weir are presented in Appendix II.
Potential Economic Plants

\

~

During the course of the vegetation study, a list was compiled of plants which
may have had economic significance to the Archaic foragers. This plant list is
presented in Table 3. Although seasonal availability is not shown, the list
does indicate a variety of plant foods were available from March to January with
certain nuts and root plants available anytime of the year. A more intensive economic plant study is beyond the scope of this survey project but such an inventory
accompanied by known seasonal availability of each plant should provide data sufficient to model seasonal scheduling patterns appropriate for the Archaic populations.
Fauna
Williamson County is located north-northeast of Travis County and encompasses
two biotic provinces. The western part of Williamson County is located within
the Balconian Province and the Granger area of central and eastern Williamson
County lies in the Texas Province (Blair 1950). The fauna of both provinces
are reviewed since the North Fork area lies literally at the border between them.
Furthermore, the resources of both provinces would be available to the prehistoric
inhabitants of either location.
Fif~-seven species of mammals occur in the Balconian Province, some with Chihuahuan affinities, such as Bassariscus astutus, Citellus variegatus, Conepatus mesoleucus and Peromyscus boylii. Animals with Austroriparian affinities include
Didelphis marsupialis, Sciurus niger, Sylvilagus floridanus, Neotoma floridana
and others. Characteristic mammals from the zone include Perognathus hispidus,
Perognathus merriami, Peromyscus leucopus, Sigmodon hispidus and Lepus californicus.

The only land turtle is Terrepene ornata, the western box turtle. Sixteen species
of lizards also inhabit this zone, the majority coming from the Chihuahuan zone.
Important species include Gerrhonotus liocephalus, Holbroqki~ texana and several
species of Sceloporus. Amphibians are represented by 22 species, with Rana catesbeiana and Rana pipiens being the most important.
The Balconian Biotic Province is a region of intermediate ecological conditions
between the eastern forests and the western deserts. Granger Reservoir is located
east of the Balcones Escarpment, which is the eastern boundary of the Balconian
zone. The next eastern zone is known as the Texan Biotic Province, according to
Blair (1950). The Texan Province has three main vegetational zones. Sandy soils
support an oak-hickory forest while clay soils originally supported a tall-grass
prairie. Alluvial valleys support a mesic forest, which provides avenues for the
westward dispersal of forest inhabiting species. This province is a broad ecotone
between the Austroriparian forests and semi-arid grasslands. It is characterized
by the interdigitation of forest and grassland associations and species.

;

38

TABLE 3

Plants of potential economic importance to the prehistoric
inhabitants of the North Fork and Granger Reservoir areas.

39

Table 3.

Plants of potential economic importance to the prehistoric inhabitants
of the North Fork and Gran'ger Reservoir areas.

Species

Processing Technique and Plant Part Used

Aesculus glabra
Buckeye

Nuts roasted and boiled to remove disagreeable
taste, then eaten as gruel.

Allium drumrnondii
Onion

Bulb used to season food.

Asclepias incarnata
Milkweed

Buds boiled

Asclepias tuberosa
Pleurisyroot

Roots boiled, seed pods boiled, tender shoots
boiled.

Bi dens frondosa
Beggar Tick

Plant an expectorant.

Bumelia lanuginosa
Coma

Fruit eaten.

Callirhoe involucrata
Winecup

Roots eaten.

Carya illi_QQiensis
Pecan

Nuts eaten.

Ca rya texana
Black Hickory

Nuts eaten.

Celtis laevigata
Sugar Hackberry

Fruit pounded and mixed with food; or eaten.

occidentalis
Buttonbush

wit~

meat, and stored dry.

~halanthus

Cambium an emetic, bark a laxative.

Cercis canadensis
Redbud
-

Bark used for diarrhea.

Cirsium undulatum
--- Thistle

Stems and roots cooked and eaten.

Cnidoscolus texanus
Bull Nettle

Seeds eaten.

Crataegus mollis
Downy Hawthorn

Fruit eaten.

Cucurbita foetidissima
Buffa 1o Gourd

Fruit cooked or dried for winter use; seeds
made into mush.

texana
Texas Persimmon

Dio~_[l_yros

Fruit eaten.

40

Species

_______ Processing

Technig~~~_!!Q_

Plant Part Used _____ _

Diospyros virg1n1ana
Persimmon

Fruit eaten.

Echinocactus texensis
Devil 's Head Cactus

Fruit eaten, fresh or dried.

Elymus canadensis
Canada Rye

Seeds eaten.

Fraxinus pennsylvanica
Green Ash

Cambium cooked for food.

Hedeoma drummondii
---P-rairie Pennyroyal

Infusion from flowering tops.

Helianthus annuus
Sunflower

Achenes eaten raw, dried, roasted, ground
into meal.

11 ex vomi tori a
---Yaupon

Infusion of leaves stimulant and intoxicant.

Juglans nigra

Nuts eaten raw or cooked. in soup~ hard shell
ground and consumed as vermicide.

Bl ac k Via l n ut

Juniperus ashei
Cedar

Berries edible.

Linum lewisii

Seeds used for food and flavoring.

Lithospermum incisum

Roots boiled or roasted.

Ludwi gi a _nut ans
Water Seedbox

Leaves an expectorant.

~-~inus

Tops as greens, roots roasted.

~a cJ~!a

Bark yellow dye, wood used for bows and
arrow shafts.

Monarda citriodora
----Ho-rsemi n_t____ _

Plant boiled and eaten with rabbit.

Morus rubra
-- r:ecfVijTberry

Fruit eaten, bark a vermicide, cambium a
laxative.

Oxalis violacea

Leaves, flowers, and bulbs edible.

---TewisFl~::\x

---Gromwe11- -----

_texensis
Bluebonnet

po mi fer~
Osage Orange

- --TJo_o_J

~rre!

l

P_a_ri_i c_u~l_! ~ayi _l l~-~­
\•Ii tchgra s s

Seeds ground and used as meal.

41

Species

Proce~s i ng

Parthenocissus guinguefolia
Virginia Creeper

Fruit eaten raw, stalks peeled and boiled.

Phoradendron serotinum
Mistletoe

Berries edible.

Physalis viscosa
Ground Cherry

Berries edible.

Pluchea Q_l!!purescens
Marsh Fleabane

Leaves used as diuretic.

Populus deltoides
Cottonwood

Inner bark (cambium) edible.

Prosopis glandulosa
Mesquite

vJho le pods ground, made into meal , made into
sweet drink, fermented for alcohol.

Prunus serotina
Black Cherry

Fruit ea ten.

Psoraelia ~idata
Bush Pea - - -

White roots eaten fresh and cooked.

Quercus macroca~2~
Bur Oak

Acorns used--oil rendered.

Quercus .ni r~
Hater 0 ak

Acorns boiled for oil.

Quercus virainiana
Live.Oak

Acorns boiled for oil.

Ratibida columnaris
Coneflower

Leaves and flowers made into tea.

Rhus aromatica
---- -Skunkb-uSfl

Fruit eaten fresh or dried.

g~~~

Crushed fruit made into drink.

~-rraTrie

-

_co2.9J_lj_n_a
Shining Sumac

Technique and Pl ant Pa rt Usecj_ --·-··

Rhus toxicoidendron
----Poi son Surnac_. __

Leaves smoked as narcotic.

f\_~o s_~.ti_g_e_ra

Petals eaten. Cambium and roots used in
decoction for colds, swelling, and diarrhea.

Prairie r\ose
Rubus trivialis
Dewberry
------~----

Fruit eaten or dried, root boiled into tea
for bladder problems.

42

Species

Processing Technique and Plant Part Used

Rudbeckia laciniata
Coneflower

Young stems eaten, used as diuretic; roots
make soothing decoction.

Rumex cri spus
Curly Dock

Seeds ground into meal, roots are a laxative,
leaves made into decoction for boils.

Salix nigra
Black Willow

Roots and bark relieve pain, a decoction of
the cambium cures venereal disease and is
used as source of fiber.

Sambucus canadensis
Elderberry

Roots, stems, flowers and fruits used. Roots
and flowers used as diuretic; berries eaten
fresh or dried.

Sassafras albidum
Sassafras

Roots made into curative decoction or tea;
used internally or in eyes.

Smilax bona-nox
Greenbriar

Tuberous rootstocks made into soup and bread.

Solanum eleagnifolium
Nightshade

Berries used.

Solidago altissima
Goldenrod

Seeds eaten.

Sophia pinnata
Tansy Mustard

Seeds cooked into mush, leaves boiled or
roasted.

Sporobolus 9sper
Meadow Dropseed

Seeds parched, ground, eaten as mush or
eaten dry.

Symphoricarpos orbiculatus
Snowberry

Fruits edible.

Taraxacum officinale
Dandelion

Leaves used as greens.

Ulmus alata
Winged Elm

Cambium is ground into meal and used to cure
diarrhea, and used as fiber source.

Ulmus americana

Cambium is ground into meal.

Verbena hastata
Blue Vervain

Infusion made from leaves.

Viburnum rufidulum
Downy Vi burn um

Fruits edible.

Vitis mustangenis
Grape

Fruit eaten.

--Elm

43

-

-

Species

Processing Technique and Plant Part Used

Xanthium italicum
Cocklebur

Fruit parched, ground and mixed with meals.

Zanthoxylum clava-herculis
Toothache Tree

Bark and leaves chewed for relief of pain.
Fruit is an expectorant.

44
Forty-nine species of marmlals occur in the Texan Province. Forty-one of these
occur in the Austroriparian Province, with the remaining eight coming in from
the grassland zone to the west. Some of the more common mammalian species found
in Williamson County, according to Davis (1960), include opossum (Didelphis marsu ial is), raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis), gray fox
Urocyon cinereoargenteus), fox squirrel (Sciurus nige)), Plains pocket gopher
(Geomys bursarius), deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus , hispid cotton rat·
(Sigmodon hispidus), Florida wood rat (Neotoma floridanus), eastern cottontail
rabbit (Sylivilagus floridanus) and white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus).
Sixteen species of lizard also occur in the Texas Province. Some of the more
common ones are Anolis carolinensis and Sceloporus undulatus from the Austroriparian zone and Crotophytus collaris, Sceloporus olivaceous and Phrynosoma
cornutum from the grasslands. Thirty-nine species of snakes also occur in this
zone including Agkistrodon mokasen, A· piscivorus and Crotalus horridus. Twentythree species of amphibians are found in this area with bull frog (Rana catesbeiana) andleopard frog (Rana pipiens) being some of the more common ones. Two
species of land turtle--,-,-Ye in the Texan Province. These are the eastern box
turtle (Terrepene carolina) and western box turtle (Terrepene carolina). Freshwater turtles are represented by two species of Pseudemys.
Fish that are likely to occur in the San Gabriel River and its tributary streams,
according to Kemp (1971), include:
Micropterus punctulatus
Chaenobryttus gulosus
Lepomis macrochirus
Leopmis megalotis
Leopmis cyanellus
Apoldinotus grunniens
Amia calva
Le[isosteus sp.
Ictalurus natalis
Ictalurus melas
Ictalurus punctatus
l~tiobu~ sp.

spotted bass
warmouth
blue gill sunfish
longear sunfish
green sunfish
freshwater drum
bowfin
gar
yellow bullhead catfish
black bullhead catfish
channel catfish
buffalo

The preceding lists of vertebrates represent some of the more common animals
which are found in Williamson County today. The list may have been larger in
prehistoric times with the addition of Bison (Bison bison) and possibly prong
horn antelope (Antilocapra americana). It does give~dea of the diversity of
animals which 111ay have been used for food.
Mammals would have made up the bulk of the meat intake with such species as opposum,
racoon, striped skunk, gray fox, hispid cotton rat, Florida wood rat, eastern cottontail and white-tailed deer making up the bulk of the diet. Additions for the
8alconian Province would include the jack rabbit and the rock squirrel. Other

45

small rodents, lizards, snakes and amphibians would be utilized to a lesser
extent. Terrestrial and aquatic turtles would have also been important.
Birds would have been important, especially if the wild turkey was in the area.
Migratory wild fowl may also have been important in the late fall through the
early spring.
Fish which would have been important to the prehistoric populations would include
freshwater drum, bowfin, gar, catfish and buffalo.
The variety of animal resources in this area is remarkable and would provide a
fairly easy subsistence regime utilizing resources from both the Balconian and
Texan Biotic Provinces. The people could also take advantage of the diversity
of vegetational zones to increase their efficiency. In the Texan zone three areas
could be exploited; the forests, the grasslands and the mesic alluvial forests.
Deer probably provided the majority of the meat for most of the year. The potential of the smaller animals and reptiles should not be ruled out as a major
subsistence system. Dependency of deer could be a risky venture, while the smaller animals would provide a stable and easily replaceable resource which could be
exploited very heavily with little adverse affect on the population. Bison could
have also been utilized but the inconsistency of bison herds in the area would
have made for a much more nomadic way of life.
The foraging potential in this area is very great and a v1ide diversity of animal
remains should be found in the refuse of prehistoric sites. This report gives
broad information on two ecological zones. All of these animals may never occur
together, but these species should be found if a general study of prehistoric
subsistence were undertaken.
Climate
The Central Texas region is characterized by humid, hot summers and generally cool
winters. Temperatures range from the low lOO's Fahrenheit during summer to relatively mild (30-60 degrees Fahrenheit) averages during the winter. The coldest
month typically is January when temperatures average 36 degrees Fahrenheit (U.S.
Department of the Army 1972:11-10).
Mean annual rainfall is about 32 inches. The dominant rainy season, if one can
be characterized as such, is from mid-spring through late summer when the majority
of rainfall occurs as short duration frontal system storms or summer thunderstorms. Temperature and rainfall variables are such as to allow for a lengthy
frost-free growing season which averages currently 257 days.
Water Resources
Water resources are available in the North Fork area even during the driest years.
Although the river today seldomly flows the year around, water is available in
deeper holes in bedrock limestone and from artesian springs. Few creeks of significant size enter the valley in the study area, Sowes Branch being an exception.
There are numerous small creeks or branches that are fed by wet-weather springs
which today become reduced to seeps or dry up altogether during the late summer
months, depending on the amount of rainfall. One significant artesian spring
occurs on the south side of the reservoir area locally known as Crockett Gardens

46

Spring. Another is the Ischy Spring on the opposite side of the river below the
North Fork Dam. Other springs on the south side of the river include Cedar Hollow Spring, Hogg Spring, two springs in Sycamore Hollow, one spring in a small
canyon north of Sycamore Hollow and Sowes Branch. On the north side of the valley
are Ox Hollow Spring, Walnut Spring, Camp Spring and several unnammed springs.
In projecting the patterns of prehistoric human settlement to the availability
of water in the study area, water resources in the form of spring or river would
have been readily available probably even during extreme drought conditions. We
suspect that the water table was considerably higher prior to European exploitation of land and water resources (See Vegetation - this chapter) and therefore
assume that the wet-weather springs that rely on periods of high water table would
have been less likely to dry up during the late summer months. Travertine deposits at 41 WM 49 and 41 WM 81 indicate the former existence of springs that do not
flow today even during the wetter periods. It is assumed that water was readily
available during most or all of the year in the study area during prehistoric
times. Campsite and processing sites requiring the use of water resources would
predictably center along the faintly rolling terrace ridges paralleling the river
or at the confluence of spring-fed branches and the river, or around springs. Ox
Hollow site Complex is an excellent example of repeated utilization of areas around
springs, and sites 41 WM 51 and 41 WM 52 are examples of sites located along t~e
terraces at the confluence of spring-fed streams. The water resources have been
grouped into three classes: (1) river, (2) creek and (3) spring or spring branch.
The location of sites relative to these classes is presented in Table 7.
Lithic Resources

-

The lithic outcrops in the study area are dominated by Cretaceous limestone,
specifically the Edwards formation of the Fredericksburg group (Sellards, Adkins
and Plummer 1958:338-348). The Edwards, measuring about 230 feet thick in the
study area, is composed of reef and associated limestones varying from generally
light gray, crystalline, coarse-grained, or organic to nearly pure limestones with
much calcareous shell detritus. The upper 1/3 of the Edwards contains at least
four zones or reef limestone; the middle 1/3 is non-reef limestone containing
several prominent bands of flint nodules; the lower 1/3 contains at least one
band of reef limestone (ibid. 344).
Edwards limestone varies in quality and composition, thereby providing an opportunity for selectivity with regards to prehistoric utilization. The homogeneous
and fossiliferous light gray Edwards limestone was readily available for heat conducting purposes. Although the stone is likely to thermally fracture when exposed
to excessive heat, the rock tends to crumble or simply break apart rather than to
explode in the manner of chert. It was extensively utilized as a heat conductor
and the accumulation of the thermal fragments created the ubiquitous burned rock
middens. Burned rock fragments occur at virtually every abori gi na l site except
for quarry workshops located some distance from ~1ater resources. Limestones suitable for heat conducting purposes were available on the bluff tops, valley slopes
and from the river gravels. The river cobbles, however, exposed to the mineralladen water, absorbed certain minerals that oxidized upon firing to an ochre or
reddish-pink hue. By contrast, limestones gathered on the slopes or uplands become darker when fired; otherwise, except for the characteristic thermal fracturing which often produces a blocky fragment, the burned fragments are not easily
distinguishable from the naturally fractured exfoliated limestone debris.

47

Certain strata in the Edwards yields limestones that have properties suitable
for their use as tools. Coquina limestone, for example, is hard and contains
many fossil voids or geodes that are partially filled with quartz crystals,
giving the material a vesicular character. The hardness and vesicular characteristic make coquina limestone an excellent material for use in grinding tools
such as manos and metates. The more cherty limestones and dolomite cobbles and
pebbles make excellent hammers tones for biface thinning and core reduction and
have been described in artifact collections in the area.
Aside from the limestones used for heat conducting purposes, the most economically important material in the Edwards formation are the beds of chert or flint.
Indeed, the cherts or flints from the Fredericksberg Group are among the finest
in the United States for manufacturing chipped stone artifacts. The abundance of
chipping debitage is impressive at the most extensively occupied sites in the
North Fork district and evidence that biface tools were manufactured at most of
the sites is extensive.
Chert outcrops and quarry workshops observed during the course of the survey
indicate a great degree of selection. Indeed, most thin biface tools, notable
projectile points, are manufactured from a subtly banded blue-gray to brownish
flint or chert. This material was observed intermittantly outcropping on the
bluff tops on both the north and south sides of the valley in the form of flatoval or amorphous pebbles. A light-gray fossiliferous chert was more abundant
and outcropped in thick ledge formations at the bluff or plateau surface on both
sides of the valley. Some of these ledge nodules were seen to be 20-25 cm thick
and varied in chipping quality. Their use was observed in most collections but
the implements manufactured from this material were usually choppers or other
heavy cutting tools. Relative availability of the lithic resources is shown schematically in Figure 5.
Trace Element Analysis of Flint
One aspect of the North Fork and Granger surveys was to note the geological
occurrence and prehistoric use of lithic resources. The earlier survey work done
by Shafer and Corbin (1965) yielded a representative sample of chipped stone material from both reservoir localities and provided our first indication of the
material selection and differences between the two research areas. Visually, the
material differences were striking when one considers that chert (or flint) from
both areas shared the same parent formation and were being transported by the
same river system. The predominant chert in the North Fork area is a blue-gray
subtly banded flint which occurs in flat-oval nodules on bluffs overlooking the
valley at intermittant locations. This material is usually found extensively
quarried in prehistoric times and today modern flintknappers have to resort to
gathering the material from active limestone quarries. In the Granger area, one
predominant flint used by the prehistoric flintknappers is an excellent quality
banded flint occurring in such hues as gray, olive brown, reddish brown or pink.
It occurs in the river gravels and in Pleistocene gravel deposits at the valley's
edge. These flint cobbles display a gradual rounding as the distance downstream
is increased but large blocky nodules retaining some of the parent outcrop shape
do occur and provide a clue to the original state of the material. Field research
conducted by Harry J. Shafer at gravel outcrops and flint outcrops from the North
Fork area downstream to San Gabriel, Texas, below Granger Reservoir, indicated
that the banded chert at Granger was the same Georgetown material but that a change

48

FIGURE 5
Schematic profile showing the relative location of lithic resources.

I

I

I

LIMESTONE,
CHERT

LIMESTONE,
CHERT

I

COLLUVIAL DEBRIS
LIMESTONE

I

ALLUVIAL SOILS
LIMESTONE
GRAVELS

COLLUVIAL DEBRIS
LIMESTONE

L.
·1

~.

!

I

I
I

!
'

i

~
tt

···~:o

•.q.?!t!'·...:

t

~~

ft

t

+:>
lO

....
50

in chemical composition was providing the color variations observed downstream.
Precisely what chemical changes were taking place is unknown but it is suspected that iron was one element being absorbed through the stream environment due
to the tendency of Granger cherts to turn reddish brown when heated. The hypothesis could be tested through trace element analysis.

....
...

...

....

....
...

...

...

....
...

....

Trace element analysis has never been done on Edwards Plateau chert. However,
such studies, like those by Aspinall and Feather (1972) indicated that significant archeological data can be derived from trace element analysis of certain
flints. Working with the cooperation of Mr. David Moore and Dr. E.A. Schweikert
at the Center for Trace Characterization at Texas A&M University, a pilot trace
element study was done on ten flint samples collected from several separate localities in the Edwards Plateau region of Texas. -This study was a feasibility
test to examine if significant differences in the elementary composition of the
flints could be recognized and possibly used to fingerprint the general locality
of outcrop. Differences were expected since the coloration of the specimens in
the sample were noticeably different. The results of the pilot study were indeed
promising and showed that significant differences existed for certain elements at
the parts per million {ppm) level .
A specific study of the San Gabriel Flint was outlined and became the subject of
a masters thesis by Ann Neil McGinley (1978). McGinley, a chemistry major, was
supplied with 60 specimens collected from four geological locations by Shafer.
Each specimen consisted of an interior flake free of cortex. The four sampling
locations were Georgetown (at the bluff edge near 41 WM 334), a quarry of Pleistocene gravel east of Circleville Store, a Pleistocene gravel outcrop near Hoxie
Bridge south of 41 WM 130 and a Pleistocene gravel terrace near San Gabriel, Texas.
While the sample selection was specific, every effort was made to insure consistency in the flint collected .
A sample of each interior flake was selected by crushing the flake and drawing
particles from the interior portion. Once separated, one gram portions were prepared for irradiation. United States Geological Survey standards were employed to
insure accuracy. The irradiations were carried out at t~e TAM~ 1 MW Triga Reactor
at a thermal neutron flux of about 4 X 1012 neutrons cm- sec- . Two irradiations
were necessary to analyze for short and long-lived isotopes. The spectra were
processed on an Amdahl 470 V/6 computer using the HEVESY computer program (McGinley
1978: 9-10) .
McGinley's findings showed that nine elements were present in sufficient amounts
to use in a quanitative analysis; aluminum, calcium, iron and potassium were found
as minor rock constituents; and manganese, cobalt, scandium, arsenic and vanadium
were present in trace amounts. Using discriminant analysis, she determined that
cherts were not homogeneous in elemental concentrations and that the sample site
represented a statistically different rock type. In reality, the rock types were
the same and the quanitative analysis was simply measuring the differences caused
by weathering. Also, the Georgetown-Circleville samples clustered apart from the
Hoxie-San Gabriel samples .
McGinley interpreted the results on the basis of her statistical analysis of the
elementary measurements. Her results indicate that chemical changes were taking
place during the course of downstream movement. Data shown in Table 4 (taken from
McGinley 1978: Table VII) present the means and standard deviations of each of the

51

TABLE 4

Mean and standard deviations of flint samples in ppm.

1

1

Table 4.

I

'

1

1

1

1

1

I

1

1

'

Means and Standard Deviations of Flint Samples in ppm*

Georgetown
MeanStd. Dev.

Ci rel evi 11 e
Mean
Std. Dev.
--

Hoxie
Mean Std. Dev.

San Gabriel
Mean
- Std. Dev.

Mn.

2.09

1.38

4.64

2.78

8.80

4.97

9.30

5.60

Ca

496

178

450

253

443

148

434

127

v

1.46

.34

l.77

.49

3.92

1.32

4.09

1.89

Al

1507

236

1445

302

1874

350

2112

434

Co

.205

.195

.131

.095

.121

.049

.134

.083

Sc

.0312

.0083

.0314

.0074

.0327

.0072

.0034

.0090

Fe

237

86

415

126

348

157

414

306

As

.238

.070

.338

.179

.633

.345

.766

.525

K

164

44

139

39

174

76

145

46,

*After McGinley 1978:27

~

N

53

nine elements in each sample from the four localities. Downstream movement can
be read into the Table from left to right; that is, Georgetown denotes the parent
outcrop; Circleville, Hoxie and San Gabriel are progressively further away from
the parent outcrop. Manganese, vanadium and arsenic increase as the materials
were transported downstream; once the material was subjected to a riverine environment, iron increased significantly. Calcium and cobalt decrease slightly in
amount through stream transport.
McGinley's analysis, while problem specific, provides confirmation that thP Edwards cherts and flints were undergoing significant chemical alteration from
stream environment weathering. The study has also provided the first and most
thorough trace element analysis of Edwards cherts and flints. Should further
work be conducted from other chert outcrops, the researcher should refer to McGinley's original work.
The trace element analysis was not part of the original scope of work for the North
Fork-Granger surveys. The need for a pilot trace element of Edwards Plateau cherts
has been realized for some time, particularly given the successes of other researchers in other regions of the world. The opportunity to gain additional
scientific data for the North Fork and Granger areas was realized by Shafer in
designing the test project and by working directly with the Center for Trace
Characterization at Texas A&M, the project was done without change; otherwise the
expense of irradiating 60 samples twice (not including numerous check runs) would
be over twice the total project budget for both North Fork and Granger surveys.

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ---- - - - - -

54

SURVEY RESULTS

The description of each site is presented in this section followed by a discussion of the artifact assemblages.

-

Survey within the North Fork Reservoir impoundment area revealed 82 definable
prehistoric archeological sites (Fig. 6). The locations, descriptions and recommendations for these sites follows later in this section. All sites but three
( 41 WM 334, WM 339 and WM 362) have been or soon wi 11 be affected by the impoundment of water due to inundation for normal storage and/or flood control conditions.
41 WM 339, situated along the 850 foot contour level, theoretically should not be
endangered by the reservoir impoundment. However, after completion of the project,
it will be close to the water's edge and perhaps could be in the midst of a proposed recreation area. Implicit in this assumption is the possibility of some
form of land modification, and 41 WM 339 would be in danger of being destroyed.
Sites 41 WM 334 and WM 362 are situated above the 850 foot level and in close
proximity to the dam site. It is probable that they also will be in an area
scheduled for recreational activities.

-

Six sites (41 WM 51, WM 83, WM 84, WM 177, WM 192 and WM 196) have been destroyed
as a result of either construction or inundation. Sites 41 WM 83 and WM 84 (just
north of the centerline) have been bulldozed and graded away. 41 WM 192 has been
destroyed due to the digging of a flood pool for the tunnel in the dam and its
subsequent fluctuating inundation. Sites 41 WM 51, WM 177 and WM 196 have been
destroyed by diversion channel excavation.

-

Six sites in the impoundment area were tested beyond the normal reconnaissance
procedures. However, testing was of a preliminary nature to assess the validity
of possible further investigations. Each site according to its physical makeup
was tested through controlled surface collections, one meter by one meter test
pits, profiles or general surface collections. The sites tested were in a variety
of topographic settings and of different types and include 41 WM 328, WM 330, WM
332, WM 342, WM 353 and WM 360.

-

-

The following data are site descriptions. The sites placed in numerical order
according to their trinomial numbers. Previously recorded sites found before the
present survey have assigned consecutive numbers of less than 300; all the sites
which were newly recorded during the present survey have assigned consecutive
numbers of more than 300.
Description of Sites
41 WM 33
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:12; Patterson and Moore 1976:30-31.

41 WM 33 is an alluvial site located on the north terrace of the mainstem of the
San Gabriel River. A road, which is the "first low water crossing," bisects the
site. The apparent surface area of occupation is about 1000 square meters, and
depth is at least 0.9 meters. The site is northeast across the North Fork from
41 WM 57.

55

FIGURE 6

Map of North Fork Reservoir district showing location of reported sites.

-----

1

-

1

'

NORTH FORK RESERVOIR
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AREA

,-,;?
I

I

/1

J V'-"
/ I
\ '~':<,
~ \ \359
'
!-~72- \,,.,
'
~~
358
(_
6

\~- -~~360
sur~ey
.'."'l!"
<3 I

''-~

boundary

352-.~.:;,,

3_13

N.

~!"-'M'~
\?
340'

L'--.'

.

1
9~__,.-,~
,

..

..

.•> />

•

t21B

.

(\

~'-----".·f35 7
) \/\

354
,35.. 5

217

', - ~

---, ·-.. 347
#, 33 348
~56.
':-.

-

2

262

64

216,,..
I, ,
'

f',

·.

-

_,

••

•212

/

• 206
• 207

.,2~5
/

""1

"

~\J,830' "''""

line

I

263

I '

'--... _ _;

:
•

351

5
<,s;~~ 204~:
~
:_:~'=40
~l';
)., ••
57

126!

( 1/
~

i

r.

•

~
~ ,__/\

(

356

~ ~--

213

,219

.257

7

350

,363

{/~-r-&
v

2338\

'---1

I

l

70

•>-J
'

345

' ~a·0 r

_

~

\:H4

centerline

• •s6

'20s

of

dam

~

Geer

~eto111n

51,
111•

Q

proposed barrow areas

$existing borro• areas
•

orcheological sites· 41 WM_

,201

·~5-~~49
. . .- 5 3 - . -

miles
o·~---- --=-...:::r::~~--::.:.:..-;

I

nES

1976

Ul

°'

57

41 WM 34
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:12-13;

Patterson and Moore 1976:31.

41 WM 34 is on the south side of the river, overlooking Hunt's Crossing. Apparently, little of WM 34 remains; the area has been extensively cultivated, and
surficial indications were intermittant and scattered. According to previous
reports, the field road bisects WM 34; however, vegetation was too dense to examine the east side of the road for cultural indications. Surface area is undetermined and there is apparently little or no depth remaining to the site.
41 WM 50
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:14; Patterson and Moore 1976:31.
The site, located on the floodplain, is 0.5 mile north of the centerline. The
area has been intensively cultivated and shows scattered indications of burned
rock and flint. Subsurface materials are indicated in two deep probes dug by
the contractor.
41 WM 51
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:14; Patterson and Moore 1976:31.
41 WM 51, an alluvial site, was located on the south side of the river in what
used to be a cultivated field. The location is 0.5 mile southeast of the dam
centerline. The site was destroyed during diversion channel construction.
41 WM 56
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:17; Patterson and Moore 1976:31.
41 WM 56 is buried in alluvial sediments on the south side of the North Fork River
about 0.2 mile upstream from WM 33. The site is across the gully west of WM 57.
Dense vegetation prevented intensive surface investigations, so present areas of
occupation are undetermined and are at least 0.6 meters in depth.
41 WM 57
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:17-18; Patterson and Moore 1976:33.
41 WM 57 is a burned rock midden or middens on the south side of the river on a
terrace about 300 meters across the river to the southwest of WM 33. The surface
area of the occupation area is about 8000 square meters; it has been reported that
the depth of the site is at least 0.6 to 0.9 meters.
41 WM 58
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:18; Patterson and Moore 1976:33.
41 WM 58 appeared to be surface scatter of lithic debris. The site is located 0.4
miles southeast of WM 57; it is on the west side of the creek that runs through
Sycamore Hollow. It is on the south side of the river. The area is roughly 1000
square meters with no apparent depth.
41 WM 59
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:18-19; Patterson and Moore 1976:33.
The site is located on a knoll directly southwest 0.1 mile from WM 61: an unnamed
creek separates the two. The estimated area of occupation is about 2000 square

58

meters; there are indications of some depth to the site, but it is undetermined
at the present time.
41 WM 60
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:19; Patterson and Moore 1976:33.
41 WM 60 is located on a point at the mouth of an unnamed spring which empties
into the North Fork. It is located approximately 1.4 miles to the northwest of
the dam centerline. The area is heavily overgrown. but there are scattered surficial indications of cultural activity in an area of about 2500 square meters
with a depth of about 25 to 45 centimeters.
41 WM 61
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:19-20; Patterson and Moore 1976:33.
41 WM 61 is a burned rock midden located at the base of a limestone bluff and
along the rim of an unnamed tributary. The site is north of the river and 1 .7
miles northwest of the dam centerline. The burned rock midden has been almost
totally destroyed by pot hunters; potting and subsequent erosional factors have
caused an irreparable loss of valuable scientific information. The area of the
site is about 3000 square meters with an approximate depth of two meters.
41 WM 62
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:20; Patterson and Moore 1976:34.
41 WM 62 is a lithic procurement area with scattered evidences of burned rock.
The site covers a knoll, which extends south back into the tree line and higher
ground away from the floodplain, to the south of the river. Only surficial
evidence was encountered. The site covers an area of about one acre or more.
41 WM 63
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:20; Patterson and Moore 1976:34.
41 WM 63
The site
Jim Hogg
at least

is a small midden east of WM 34 on the south side of the North Fork.
is located on a narrow terrace below the bluff line just to the west of
Hollow. The surface area is about 2000 square meters with a depth of
53 centimeters.

41 WM 64
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:20-21; Patterson and Moore 1976:34.
The site, an open lithic scatter, is located on the south bank of the river southeast of WM 63. The site is situated in a once cultivated, and only a very few
flint flakes were noticed on the surface. The dense vegetation prevented a definition of the surficial limits of the site, and the depth remains undetermined as
well .
41 WM 65
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:21; Patterson and Moore 1976:34.
41 WM 65 is a lithic scatter and procurement area located on a hill slope on the
south side of the river approximately 0.3 miles upstream from WM 66 and on the west
side of an intermittent stream cutting through the center of the mouth of Cedar
Hollow. The area of the site is about one to two acres and is surficial in nature.

59

41 WM 66
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:21-22; Patterson and Moore 1976:34-35.

0~

~

41 WM 66 is a small burned rock midden between the bluff and the river on the
south about 0.5 mile northwest of Crockett Gardens. No apparent structural
texture was observed. The estimated surface area of occupation is approximately
10 square meters with a depth of at least 25 centimeters.
41 WM 67
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:22; Patterson and Moore 1976:35.

The site has been destroyed by the construction of a swimming pool and house
at Crockett Gardens, south of the river.
41 WM 68
Reference: Shafer and Corbin: 1965:22; Pattersonilld Moore 1976:35.

-

41 WM 68 is a burned rock midden and lithic scatter north of the river to the
immediate east of WM 85. It is south of the Jim Hogg Road intersection with
County Road 262. Estimated surface area is about two to three acres with an
estimated depth of at least 30 centimeters in some areas. The site has been
slightly disturbed by potting.
41 WM 69
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:23; Patterson and Moore 1976:35.
41 WM 69 is just to the northeast of WM 85 and across Jim Hogg Road. Cultural
indications were mostly surficial in nature, due to erosion and possibly plowing.
The site is about one to two acres in area.
41 WM 70
Ref~rence:

Shafer and Corbin 1965:23; Patterson and Moore 1976:35.

41 WM 70 is a burned rock midden south of Jim Hogg Road on the north side of the
river and 0.3 mile southeast of Taylor Ray Hollow. Due to dense vegetation, the
surface area of occupation is undetermined; subsurface indications occur at least
to 20 centimeters.

>(" 41 WM 71 <Bo.A~ <i>l~ - ~v1~Wi ~~~ So~ \({10
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:23-24; Patterson and Moore 1976:35.
41 WM 71 is located on the west side of a tributary at the confluence of the creek
with the river. The site is located east of the third crossing in a once cultivated
alluvial terrace on the north side of the river. Scattered lithic debris was found,
but not in great volume relative to the area, which is about one acre. The depth
·j s undetermined.
41 WM 72
Reference: Shafer and Crobin 1965:24-25; Patterson and Moore 1976:35-36.
41 t4M 72 is a site with scattered burned rock and very few fl int flakes on the
surface. It is located north of the river, 0.1 mile east of WM 71. Test probes
show no subsurface cultural evidence; tests reached a depth of at least 0.3 meters.
The site area may be 2500 square meters with no apparent depth.

-

-------

~-~----~~-----------

60
41 WM 73
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:25; Patterson and Moore 1976:36.
41 WM 73, a burned rock midden, is situated at the base of a sloping bluff north
of the river and 0.1 miles east of WM 72. The midden area is about 15 meters in
diameter and approximately 1.2 meters high. Indications of cultural activity can
be seen in an area of about 2500 square meters; depths throughout the area are
undetermined.
41 WM 80
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:28; Patterson and Moore 1976:36.
41 WM 80 is south of the river on the floodplai~ one mile northwest of the center1ine of the dam. The site area has been intensively cultivated, and plowing has
caused its destruction; only scattered surficial indications of cultural activity
remain in an area of about one to two acres.
41 WM 81
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:28; Patterson and Moore 1976:36.
41 WM 81 is located 0.7 mile northwest of the dam centerline. The large, extensive
burned rock midden is located up against the north bluff on a slope on the floodplain. The southernmost portion of the midden has been under cultivation and has
been scattered. The estimated area of occupation is about 2500 square meters,
with the depth being at least 0.9 meters in the midden proper.
41 WM 82
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:28-29; Pattersoh and Moore 1976:36.
41 WM 82 overlooks the river immediately to the south; the site is situated along
a high bluff on the rim, about 0.4 mile west of WM 81. Erosional factors have
caused depletion of the soils, and only surface scatters of lithic debris and
burned rocks were encountered. The area is about 350 meters along the north/south
axis.
41 WM 83
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:29; Patterson and Moore 1976:37.

-

41 WM 83 is a site with only surficial indications remaining. The site is heavily
overgrown but has at one time been intensively cultivated. It is located on the
floodplain south of the river and approximately 0.3 mile northwest of the center1ine of the dam.
41 WM 84
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:29; Patterson and Moore 1976:37.
41 WM 84 was originally located on the south floodplain from the river approximately 0.1 mile northwest of the dam centerline. The area has been bulldozed and
graded away.
41 WM 85
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:30; Patterson and Moore 1976:37.
41 WM 85 is located on the north side of the river about 0.2 mile from the river
bank. It is a burned rock midden situated to the south of Jim Hogg Road on a knoll.

-

----------~-

-

---

61
The site has been almost destroyed by pot hunting, but intact portions still remain. The approximate area of the site is about 2500 square meters, and the
depth is at least one meter.
41 WM 86
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:30; Patterson and Moore 1976:37.
41 WM 86, according to previous records, is a burned rock midden on the south
side of the river, on a hill slope about 0.2 mile northwest of WM 65. Due to the
heavy vegetation cover, we did not locate WM 86. In 1965, the site was reported
to be at least 30 meters in diameter with debris scattered over half an acre;
depth is undetermined.
41 WM 87
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:31; Patterson and Moore 1976:37.

-

41 WM 87 is a terrace site buried within alluvial deposits. Sorrow (1973) was to
have tested WM 87; however, his backhoe trenches were not found due to excessively
dense vegetation. The site, at present, is not well defined.
41 WM 88
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:31; Patterson and Moore 1976:37.
41 WM 88 is a burned rock midden located at the base of a limestone hill on the
south side of the North Fork, about 0.2 mile southwest of WM 87 and just northwest
of the mouth of Hogg Hollow. The estimated area of occupation is approximately
2000 square meters with an apparent depth of about one meter.
41 WM 89
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:31-32; Patterson and Moore 1976:37.

-

41 WM 89 is south of the river on the east side of a field road leading up to a
tank. It lies on a sloping terrace of a tributary creek in Hogg Hollow. The surface scatter of burned rock and flint covers an estimated area of approximately
1000 square meters with no indication of depth.
41 WM 115
Reference: Shafer and Corbin 1965:32; Patterson and Moore 1976:38.
41 WM 115 is located about 350 meters south of WM 88 and is situated on the south
side of the small spring-fed creek that runs through Hogg Hollow at the base of a
steep limestone bluff. The site appeared to be an extensive lithic scatter about
90 by 30 meters, with a lot of the surficial evidence in cedar thicket. An approximate area of the site would be about 4500 square meters with very little depth.
41 WM 177

j Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:38.
41 WM 177, a rockshelter, was approximately 300 meters northwest of 41 WM 196 on a
southern limestone bluff overlooking the North Fork. The shelter was about 30
meters long has about 3.9 meter~ of depth to the back wall. This site was destroyed during construction of the diversion channel of the dam.

62
41 WM 188
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:38.
41 WM 188 is marked on the maps as being located on the south side of the river
in Hogg Hollow approximately 0.2 mile south-southwest of 41 WM 115. No records
or site survey forms were on file for the site. A physical search for the site
proved to be negative.
41 WM 192
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:38.
41 WM 192 was a site south of the river. The site has been destroyed due to the
digging of a flood pool for the tunnel in the dam.
41 WM 195
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:38.
41 WM 195 has been partially destroyed and/or inundated by the rising water due
to the coffer dam that has been built. Only the southernmost edge of the site
can be seen. It is surficial in nature, and only scattered cultural indications
remain. Portions remaining are in an area of about 50 square meters with no depth.
41 WM 196
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:38-39.
41 WM 196 was northwest of sites 41 WM 51, WM 52 and WM 53 on a limestone bluff
overlooking the river. This site was destroyed during the diversion channel construction.
41 WM 204
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:39.
41 ~IM 204 is on a terrace west of a spring-fed creek in Sycamore Hollow on the
western edge of the mouth of Sycamore Hollow. It is just off a field road 0.2
mile south-southwest from WM 58. Dense vegetation made it difficult to define
the areal limits of occupation. It has no apparent depth.
41 WM 205
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:39.
41 WM 205, located in the upper (southern) reaches of Sycamore Hollow, is a lithic scatter with intermittent burned rock and also a lithic procurement area. It
is 0.3 mile northeast of an old stock tank and house site at the head of Sycamore
Hollow. Its area is about one acre with no indication of depth.
41 WM 211
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:39.
41 WM 211 is located about 0.4 mile west-southwest of WM 57 on the bluff on the
north side of an unnamed gully. The site has an approximate surface area of 2000
square meters with an undetermined depth.
41 \~M 260
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:39.

63
41 WM 260 is a burned rock midden located 0.4 mile north of WM 61 on the ranch
road that goes to the head of Ox Hollow. The site is located on a slope against
a limestone hill on the east side of Ox Hollow. The midden has been potted. The
area of occupation is estimated at over 2000 square meters with a depth of at
least one meter.

-

41 WM 263
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:39-40.
41 WM 263 is located at the head of the Corps boundaries in Taylor Ray Hollow on
the east side of the spring on the terrace and sloping upward and eastward into
the tree line. The site is 0.5 mile north from Jim Hogg Road up the stream in
Taylor Ray Hollow. The estimated surface area of occupation or cultural activity
is about 10,000 square meters with little depth.
41 WM 326
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:40.

-

41 WM 326 is a site south of the river; it is a lithic scatter with some burned
rock. The site is located upon a limestone terrace in the canyon and extends
along the rim for approximately 15 meters. There is no apparent indication of
depth. This site is 0.3 mile northwest of the dam centerline.
41 \4M 327
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:40.
41 WM 327 is an open lithic scatter located on the south floodplain of the river
0.5 mile east of WM 80 and just off to the south of Jim Hogg Road, 0.8 mile
northwest of the dam centerline. The site covers an approximate area of 1500
square meters and is composed only of surface materials.
41 WM 328
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:40.
This site (Type III, Setting A) is located on a terrace about 100 meters from the
north bank of the North Fork of the San Gabriel. Due to the time factor, one test
pit and a small profile were initiated at WM 328. A small surface collection was
made near an unearthed hearth. The area had been bulldozed or scraped in order to
create a road parallel to the river. This cut had uncovered a portion of the site
containing a fire hearth. This area is about one-half meter below the ground surface at the point where the test pit was placed, which is approximately 31 meters
to the north. The surface collection yielded three pieces of flint from the immediate hearth area.

-

An area about 31 meters north of the roadcut was cleared of heavy vegetation by
shovel, shaving away all grass and vines. A pit area of l .5 meters was established
with the northwest and southwest stakes along magnetic north. The pit area was
removed in arbitrary 10 centimeter levels. The soil was screened through 1/4-inch
hardware cloth. All lithic debris was placed in bags marked with the corresponding
level from which it was removed. The test pit was taken down to a level of 96 centimeters. Only one tentatively diagnostic artifact was recovered from the excavation, at the base of Level 1. From the configuration of the base and shoulders of
the projectile point, it appears to be a Scallorn. Burned rock, small thinning

-

64
flakes and snail shells were recovered throughout the levels to a depth of 96
centimeters.
To the west of the test pit was a hole, perhaps made by a bulldozer or some other
piece of heavy machinery. On the west side of this area, in a small grove of pecan trees, a small profile was cut into the wall and then taken about 80 centimeters down below the ground surface. No artifacts were found; however, burned
rock was noted between 50 and 60 centimeters below the ground surface. The ground
cover was so dense as to negate any possibility of surface collections. Presentation of the data collected can be found in Appendix l.
41 WM 329
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:40.
41 WM 329 is a site located on the north rim of the bluff overlooking the North
Fork of the San Gabriel. It is a lithic procurement area and/or chipping/quarrying
site approximately 0.5 mile long following the limestone outcrops along the rim.
The site is south of the "overlook" for the dam area. It is about 75 meters on
the east/west axis (short axis) and is confined to the surface of the area.
41 WM 330
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:40-41

-

41 WM 330 is a burned rock midden (Type II, Setting D) located on the western slope
of a northern spring emptying into the river to the northwest of the damsite. The
site is located near the bottom of the gully, not on top of the ridge or bluff.
The midden has been vandalized, but a sufficient amount remains to warrant investigation, given its unique topographic setting. Apparently, a fair-sized portion of
the midden has been potted, given the size of the back dirt pile. On a horizontal
level, approximately eight meters of the midden, facing the creek on the western
side, was exposed due to pothunters. A northern portion, perpendicular to the
creek and western wall, was cleaned and a new surface exposed to reveal possible
structural information (Fig. 78). A test pit, one by one meter square, was placed
at the juncture of the west and north sides of the pothole (Fig. 7A). The surface
area of the pit was cleaned with trowel and shovel. Arbitrary excavation levels
were set at 10 centimeter levels. The matrix from each level was passed through
1/4-inch hardware cloth. All lithic and faunal materials were bagged and marked
according to corresponding levels. Subsequent to the field phase, the lithic
materials were analyzed by the use of a lithic reduction sequence. The data collected is presented in Appendix I.
41 WM 331
Reference: Pcttterson and Moore 1976:41.
41 WM 331, a burned rock midden, is approximately 0.6 mile due north of the dam
centerline. The site is on the north side of a small gully leading into an unnamed spring which empties into the North Fork. Surface area of cultural activity
is approximately 200 square meters with a depth of about one meter.
332
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:41.

41 ~~M

This site is located directly east about 21 meters across the stream from 41 WM 330.
The site is a small shelter or overhang and is higher in elevation thon WM 330

-

65

FIGURE 7
A:

Test pit (one rreter square) at site 41 WM 330.

B:

Exposed portion of pothole from 41 WM 330.

B

67

{Type V, Setting E). The eastern slope of the creek is steep and densely covered with vegetation. Two one by one meter test pits were placed in the area of
the overhang (Fig. BA). Vegetation was removed from the surface of Test Pit I. ~
Most of the artifacts were found in the first five centimeters, then there was I
a sharp decline in number. The soil in Level 1 (surface-10 centimeters) was a
dark brown color mixed with rocks which probably come from the limestone overhang (Figure BB). Level II had very few artifacts. The soil seemed to have more
of a clayey consistency in Level II. Two small pockets of sand were encountered as well. In Level III, at approximately 32 centimeters, a hard clay floor
was encountered. No artifacts were found at this level. Test Pit I was closed
out and Text Pit II was initiated to the south of Test Pit I. Most artifacts
were found in the first ten centimeters. Pieces of glass, along with shotgun
shells, were found. In Level II of Test Pit II a large limestone slab was encountered in the southeast corner of the pit. In Level II (20-34 centimeters),
no artifacts were encountered near the bottom of the level. A hard clay was
encountered at the bottom. This test pit was closed out at 34 centimeters.
Very little in the way of prehistoric cultural material was found. The talus
slope was not examined.
41 WM 333
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:41.
41 WM 333 is located in a plowed field and also slopes upward toward the bluff.
The site is about 1.1 miles northwest of the dam site and north of the river.
The site exhibits only scattered surficial indications of cultural materials.
The depth is negligible.
41 WM 334
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:41.
41 WM 334 is about 0.2 mile north of the overlook. A primitive road bisects
the small burned rock midden and to the south of the midden and road there is
a sinkhole. The site area covers approximately 100 square meters and is about
0.5 meter deep.
41 WM 335
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:41.
41 WM 335 is an open lithic scatter located on the alluvial terrace on the north
side of the river, 0.2 mile west of WM 81. It is in a cultivated field and continues somewhat toward the creek (southwest). An approximate area of occupation
is about 200 square meters with no apparent depth.
41 WM 336
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:42.
41 WM 336 is a burned rock scatter, surficial in nature, located in a once-plowed
field between the confluence of two minor creeks emptying into the North Fork.
The site is about 3000 square meters in area and appears to have little or no
depth. WM 336 is 0.2 mile directly north of 41 WM 61.
41 WM 337
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:42.

68

FIGURE 8

Testing at 41 WM 332.

70
41 WM 337 is a quarry area or lithic procurement area. It is located on the
west slope of a northern drainage area to the river. The area of occupation is
about 3750 square meters, and the site appears to be rather surficial in nature.
41 WM 338
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:42.
41 WM 338 is a burned rock and lithic scatter and is located approximately 0.2
miles northwest of WM 82 and about 0.1 mile southeast of WM 337. The site is
on the rim of an unnamed spring. The site area is about 100 meters square and
is only surficial in nature.
41 WM 339
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976: 42.
41 WM 339 is located at the confluence of a tributary and an unnamed creek, on
the east side of the tributary. It has a lithic and burned rock scatter with
an estimated area of occupation of about 200 square meters. Due to cattle
grazing in the area, and little vegetation, the locality is somewhat eroded,
leaving a certain amount of doubt regarding the depth of the site.

-

41 WM 340
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:42.
41 WM 340 is a burned rock scatter located 0.3 mile north of WM 333 overlooking
an unnamed gully on the east side of another unnamed hollow. The site is illdefined as regards its size or depth.
41 WM 341
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:43.
41 WM 341 is a burned rock scatter and chipping/quarrying area located on a slope
on the south and west side of Ox Hollow and about 2.3 miles northwest of the
"overlook" near the Corps station. It is approximately 4000 square meters in
area, and the depth is undetermined.

-

41 WM 342
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:43.

-

The site is an extensive area of lithic scatter (Type I, Setting D). The site is
located west of WM 260 and is on the east and north of WM 341 in Ox Hollow. There
are three or four dense concentrations of flint and some burned rock. These were
designated as Area A, the northernmost area; Area B; and Area C; Area D is the
,_-""- 'Z\'-1'~ 4<.1-~
area closest to 41 WM 260.

-

Due to the apparent surficial nature of the site, a~oss-shap~transect was set
up through the area (Fig. >.r}~ The legs of the transectw"el'evariable in length and
three meters \'lide. A surface collection was made at three meter intervals along the
four legs of the transect. Also, a one by one meter test pit was placed in Area A.
A surface collection of the pit area was made and then the first vertical 10 centimeters were removed and screened through a 1/4-inch hardware cloth. Most of the artifact yield was from the first five centimeters. The pit was taken down a second
level. Gravels were encountered at the base of Level I. The soil in Area A, spe-

71

FIGURE 8

Transects utilized to surface collect and test 41 WM 342.

1

1

1

1

1

1

SITE

I

1

I

I

I

1

'

'

1

1

1

1

41 WM 342
Center Stake
11
11
Area 8
'

t
Norlhwes t
Slake

1J

TEST PIT I
OH

E3

5
1

Meters

EC S

'-J

.

N

-

73
cifically in the test pit area, is very clayey and contained more gravel. The
artifact yield diminished considerably, and the soil changed to a tannish brown
clay. Test Pit I at WM 342 was closed out at 35 centimeters.

-

Surface collections were made on each leg of the transect. On Leg I of the transect, squares 2, 4 and 6 were collected. On Leg 2, squares 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7 were
collected. On Leg 3, squares 1, 4, 5, 7 and 9 were collected. On Leg 4, squares
l, 3, 5, 7 and 9 were collected. The surface collections were placed in appropriately marked bags., In Area C, a different collecting method was utilized. A
three meter length of string was tied to the Area C center stake and then tied to
a field assistant, who collected surface materials in a spiral fashion. As she
kept the string taut and walked and collected, she wound around the stake, thereby shortening the radius of the collection area ~pon each revolution. The collection was bagged and appropriately marked. In the analysis portion of the study
these lithic materials were kept in their respective proveniences, but were divided
within them into the five stages of lithic reduction sequence. Data collected are
presented in Appendix I.

-

41 WM 343
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:43.

-

41 WM 343 is a series of small shelters with a northwestern exposure below some
limestone outcrops at the top of the bluffline. The site is 0.3 mile north of
Crockett Gardens on the south side of the North Fork River. A very light scatter
of flakes was found at the base of the shelters and down the talus. The area is
about 100 meters along the bluffline. The depth is undetermined.

-

-

-

...
...

41 WM 344
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:43.
41 WM 344 is a lithic and burned rock scatter about 3400 square meters in area
with an undetermined depth. WM 334 is located on the floodplain about 30 meters
north of the river on a small knoll. The area has been at one time intensively
cultivated, thus causing the destruction of the site. It is 0.7 mile northwest
of ~~M 328.
41 vJM 345
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:43.
41 WM 345 is an extensive lithic scatter and procurement area on the upland slope
of the floodplain on the north side of the river. WM 345 is just south of Jim
Hogg Road and 0.2 mile southeast of WM 70. The area of occupation, as well as
the depth, is undetermined .
41 WM 346

Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:43-44 .
41 WM 346 is located above 41 WM 81 on the north rim of the canyon on a limestone

,..

terrace. It is a continuation of 41 WM 329 as it follows the same elevation
throughout. It is 0.6 mile northwest of the dam centerline. The site covers
an area 0.7 mile long and at least 75 meters wide with no depth, as it lies directly on the limestone outcrop in most areas.

74

....

....
....

....
....

41 WM 347
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:44 .
41 WM 347 is a lithic and burned rock scatter just south of Jim Hogg Road and
0.2 mile north-northeast of WM 33. The site is on the upland slope of the
floodplain north of the river. The surface area is about 1500 square meters
with little or no depth. The area has been cultivated extensively, and destruction of artifactual context has been severe .
41 WM 348
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:44.

....

41 WM 348 is an apparently buried site in the all~vial terrace directly east of
WM 33 about 150 meters away on the floodplain north of the river. Surface indications of cultural activity are present in an area of about 7500 square meters;
the depth is at least 30 centimeters in some places .

...

41 WM 349
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:44 .

..
...

...
...

..
,..

41 WM 349 is located along a river terrace 0.1 mile south of Jim Hogg Road and
0.2 mile north of the river. It is situated south-southwest of the mouth of
Taylor Ray Hollow. The site is a lithic scatter with a surface area of approximately 1000 square meters and a depth of about 30 centimeters.
41 WM 350
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:44.
41 WM 350 is south of Taylor Ray Hollow on the floodplain about 100 meters north
of the river. The site is 0.2 mile west of WM 70, across a creek. The site has
an apparent surface area of about 400 square meters and little or no depth.
41 WM 351
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:44-45.
41 WM 351 is a burned rock and lithic scatter, fairly surficial in nature, with
a surface area of about 1000 square meters. It is located just to the west of
the spring which runs from Taylor Ray Hollow. The site is 0.2 mile directly
north of WM 350 and just south of Jim Hogg Road. The area appears to have been
under cultivation at one time.
41 WM 352
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:45.

..

41 WM 352 is located in the western portion of the cultivated field where WM 34
is located. To the north of WM 352 is the mouth of an intermittent stream flowing
into the south side of the river. Scattered lithic debris with a few burned rocks
can be found over an approximate area of 2000 meters, and there appears to be
little or no depth to the site. The site is 0.3 mile west of Hunt's Crossing.
41 WM 353
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:45.
41 WM 353 is a terrace site (Type III, Setting F) manifested in a cut-bank of a
tributary south of Jim Hogg Road and the river. Scant surface materials were

75

....

encountered and may, in part, have been obscured by the intermittent dense vegetation. In addition, cattle have grazed in the area. Concentrations of stream
rolled flint cobbles were evident all along the stream channel. Exploratory profiles were cut into the vertical banks of the stream, but no discernable cultural
remains were found. Small subsurface probes on top of the stream bank were negative .

...

41 WM 354
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:45 .

....

...

41 WM 354 is a lithic scatter south of Jim Hogg Road to the west of the Hawes
house and barns, which are situated to the south of the mouth of Camp Spring
Hollow. The site is surficial in nature and covers an approximate area of 1000
square meters.
41 WM 355
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:45.

...

..
...

41 WM 355 is a buried terrace site in the alluvium on the north bank of the river .
WM 355 is 0.6 mile northwest of WM 33 along the river bank. The area has been
intensively cultivated, and surficial indications are all that remain of any
cultural activities. Most cultural indications can be seen in the wall of the
riverbank; however, the bank was too steep to inspect. The area and depth of the
site are undetermined.
41 WM 356
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:45-56.

...

41 WM 356 may have been a burned rock midden at one ~me, but at the present it
has the characteristics of a dense lithic and burned rock scatter. It is north
of Jim Hogg Road at the mouth of Camp Spring and Walnut Spring Hollow. It covers
an area of about three acres and appears to have little or no depth. The area has
been intensively cultivated, and all context of the site is lost .

..

41 WM 357
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:46 .

..

41 WM 357 is a lithic scatter and possible procurement area located in Walnut
Spring Hollow just above the confluence of Camp Spring and Walnut Spring Hollows .
It is less than 0.1 mile northeast of WM 356. It has an apparent surface area
of about 2000 square meters with little or no depth.

..

41 WM 358
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:46.

,.

41 WM 358 is a burned rock and lithic scatter just to the north of Jim Hogg Road
on the floodplain below Rex Hawes• property in Bullion Hollow, north of the river.
The site is about 5000 square meters in area and has little or no depth. The
area has been both cultivated and utilized as grazing land.

,.

41 WM 359
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:46.

,.

41 WM 359 is 0.1 mile northeast of WM 358, close to the base of the bluff. Scattered burned rock covers an area of about 1000 square meters; there is no apparent

-

76

depth.

The same characteristics noted for WM 358 apply to WM 359.

41 WM 360
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:46.

-

1111

This site is an extensive lithic scatter with at least one small burned rock
midden {Types I, II, Setting B) near the slope of the north terrace on the North
Fork. The site is on the west side of the Bullion Hollow floodplain. Lithic
debris and scattered burned rock cover an area of three to four acres. Cultivation and grazing have been intensive in the past. An intensive surface collection
was made over the site. The midden concentration was to the west of the field
road. Evidence of diagnostic materials was found. Analysis of the materials
showed a preponderance of Stage 1 and 2 artifacts-with some final products (Appendix I).
41 WM 361
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:46-47.
41 WM 361, a burned rock midden, is located in a plowed field south of Jim Hogg
Road to the southeast of WM 71 and across the river. Surface debris is evident
in an area of about 1000 square meters; however, cultivation has effectively destroyed the midden.
41 WM 362
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:47.
41 WM 362 is
northeast of
extension of
the cultural

a burned rock scatter and a lithic procurement area about 100 meters
WM 334 and 0.3 mile north of the "overlook." The estimated surface
the site is about 500 square meters; there is little or no depth to
activity.

...

41 WM 363
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:47.

...

41 WM 363 is a lithic scatter with intermittent burned rock. It is located south
of the river and west of a small stream which empties into the river. It is also
north of the old Sawyer Cemetery in Sawyer Hollow. The area is approximately 1000
square meters with no apparent depth .

...

41 WM 364
Reference: Patterson and Moore 1976:47.
41 WM 364, a burned rock and lithic scatter, appears to be surficial in nature.
It is situated just east of an intermittent stream which empties into the river on
the south side. The site is located in the center of the mouth of Sawyer Hollow.
The site is about 1000 square meters or more in area and may only have a depth
of one to five centimeters.

---------·---

----~----~-~---------

-

-

-

...
...
...

...

77

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS

Analysis of the North Fork artifact assemblages was approaced from a technological level, with the resultant in-depth discussion stressing the various stages
through which an artifact passes before completion.
The artifact assemblages for the North Fork area gathered during the 1976 survey
were unifonnly small, Extensive collecting by local residents over the years
coupled with the poor collection conditions encountered in the spring and summer
of 1976 reduced the number of diagnostic artifacts from the sites. Nonetheless,
for each site where a collection was made, as representative a sample as possible
was garnered.
The method of analysis utilized on the materials generated from the intensive survey in the North Fork Reservoir area in the summer of 1976, and, to a more limited
extent on the Granger material, as well as the existing collections of lithic materials from previous surveys of the North Fork area, was used in Patterson's
(1977) master's thesis on an existing collection from North Fork (41 WM 88). Her
analysis was a test case for the present study. In the following discussion,
Patterson relies heavily on explanations of the method of analysis from her thesis,
as well as presenting the data from it.
In order to analyze the materials recovered during the North Fork survey specifically, a classificatory method was needed as an in-field indicator of site function. An analytical and heuristic device was created to aid the archeologist in
making in-field judgements regarding a site~s function (Patterson 1977).
In past years, analyses of stages of lithic artifact manufacture have been published (Sharrock 1966; Muto 1971; Collins 1975). These lithic reduction sequences
or models offer a suitable framework to study what Collins (1975:15) refers to as
"the adaptive role of lithic technology in the broader cultural context." Patterson (1977) synthesized and applied a sequence derived from the models of Sharrock
(1966), Muto (1971) and Collins (1975) to a lithic collection (41 WM 88) from the
North Fork Reservoir area.
In discussing the lithic reduction sequence utilized as a
processual typological tool, five stages or artifact groups
are recognized: (1) core biface or flake; (2) thick biface
(blank) or trimmed flake; (3) thinned biface (blank); (4)
thinned biface with form (preform); and (5) final product.
The production of lithic utensils should, however, be viewed
as a continuum. As Collins (1975:16) points out, the stages
or steps along the continuum are not sharply delineated
from one another but are distinct enough to merit separation, thereby identifying certain manufacturing processes.
Within this system there are certain optional steps such as
trimming, shaping, rejuvenation, or even utilization as an
option at any given point on the continuum. In reaching
each of the five stages on the continuum it is necessary to
utilize a mode of reduction. Each stage is generally the
precursor to the next stage in the reduction sequence. Manufacturing processes required to reach the stages in the lithic

-

-

-

...

...
...

...

78

sequence are trimming, shaping, and thinning (Patterson 1977:
19, 22).
One important aspect of lithic utensil production is the human error factor, or
what is termed "technological failure. 11 As Patterson (1977:22) points out, many
specimens in collections have been termed or typed as finished products; actually,
they are only failures within the reduction sequence. As such, they become a
part of the archeological context and are viewed as 11 fossilized 11 stages along the
continuum of lithic production.
As was stated previously, the lithic reduction sequence is made up of five stages.
Ancillary to reaching Stage 1 of the sequence there must be
an acquisition of raw materials. The raw materials are lithic
substances (flint) having the qualities of "elasticity, homo9eneity; are cryptocrystalline, isotropic and highly siliceous"
{Crabtree 1972:4-5). The lithic materials ideally have no
planes of weakness, no inclusions that would impair conchoidal
fracturing, the same properties in all directions in the substances and are able to return to their fo'rmer state after
being depressed by application of force (Crabtree 1972:71;
Semenov 1964:33) (Patterson 1977:36) .
Stage 1 - Core biface or flake. This primary stage is usually represented by a
large flake or core biface. In some instances they may still retain evidence of
cortex. Evidence of flaking on at least one face is a criterion. Intentional
form is not necessarily introduced at this stage (Fig. 10, A,B).
Stage 2 - Thick biface or trimmed flake (blank). Bifacial working of the stone
to reduce the mass, usually in thickness, shows at this stage. Often the artifact begins to take on a very rough subtriangular or lanceolate form (Fig. 10, C)
but relative to the finished product9 is still thick .
Stage 3 - Thinned biface (blank). these are generally thinned with some intentional form evident (Fig. 10, D-G). Reduction in thickness rather than in overall size is usually the process here. Up through this stage, utilization of the
lithic debitage as tools themselves has to be considered.

....
....

.

Through the next stages utilization of the debitage would be
kept to only light cutting and scraping operations most likely.
This is because as reduction proceeds the flakes become thinner and flatter; this would cause less tensile strength in the
flake. This reduction process is an ideal; when the thinning
flake hinges, runs too deep, or the artifact breaks due to end
shock, technological failures occur (Patterson 1977:43) .
Stage 4 - Thinned biface with form (Treform). In this stage, for the most part,
they have been thinned and a triangu ar or lanceolate form is very clear (Patterson 1977:43) (Fig. 10, H-L; Fig. 11, Q-S; Fig. 12, A-C).
Stage 5 - Final Product. In the last stage of the sequence the artifact takes
its form 9 usually as a dart point or arrow point, in the case of our samples
from North Fork. As Patterson (1977:48) points out, in the temporal context of

,..

79

FIGURE 10

Bifaces of the lithic reduction sequence in the North Fork Reservoir study area.
A - B, Stage 1; C, Stage 2; D - G, Stage 3; and H - I, Stage 4.

..

c

A

'

D

0 1 2
5
I I I
I
centimeters

E

I

I

I

H

I

\

J

K

L

81

FIGURE 11
Stage 5 bifaces recovered in the North Fork survey.

I

•

I

F
D

J

H
G

I

K
I

,

I

I

I

I

·-

M

p

N

T
0 1 2

I

Q

R

s

I

u
5
I

centimeters

83

(

FIGURE 12
Miscellaneous artifacts.
H, one-hand ma no.

A - C, Stage 4; D - F, cores; G, hanmerstone;

c

D

G

0 1 2
I

I

I

5
I

centimeters

H

-

85

-

-

-

-

...

...
...
,..

,..

the North Fork sample the dart point or the arrow point are the forms the archeologist expects to see, since hunting and gathering are the major subsistence
patterns given for the archeological universe in question. Within Stage 5 there
are product fonns (Fig. 11) typologically organized according to Suhm and Jelks
(1962). Assessment as to manufacture failure or impact fracture through its
use is difficult. Other possibilities of breakage besides impact fracture are:
thermal fracturing, end shock or the stone exceeding its elastic limits during
production or use and the artifact being broken after having been lost or discarded.
The findings and conclusions reached by Patterson in her thesis regarding ont::
site, 41 WM 88, within the North Fork Reservoir area can be easily and validly
generalized for all the site's collections that were analyzed. Those sites with
collections which were analyzed fonn a 20% sample of the total of 84 archeological
sites within the impoundment area of the North Fork Reservoir. From analysis of
this sample of the archeological universe within the North Fork Reservoir area,
certain predictive statements can be given. Presentation of these numerical and
metric data generated from the analysis is presented in Appendix I of this report.
Each site's lithic collection is broken down into the five-stage lithic reduction
sequence. Measurements were taken on each artifact, including length, width,
thickness as well as measurement of edge angles on the Stage 1, 2 and 3 artifacts
which were detennined to have been utilized. The nature of the data generated
from site to site within the area is remarkable in its similarity. Even though
there are five types of sites, conclusions reached from the lithic data are much
the same for general function and resource exploitation.
All of the bifaces from 14 sites representing the five reduction stages were
analyzed to detennine their relative frequency within each type and how much of
the total assemblage is represented by failures or end products in the biface
manufacturing system. A total of 929 artifacts were examined and the distribution of each biface stage at the 14 sites is presented in Table 5. This chipped
stone sample composes the vast majority, if not all, of the total artifact sample
at most sites excluding flake debitage. It would indeed be useful to include an
inventory of all artifacts from these sites together in this table but these data
are provided in Appendix I. Nonetheless, the lithic artifact assemblages from the
sites at North Fork district are dominated by residue resulting from biface reduction. Especially common at open lithic scatters, burned rock middens and
terrace sites are biface thinning flakes and aborted bifaces. At lithic procurement sites such as 41 WM 329, cores, primary reduction debitage and stages 1-3
in the biface reduction sequence dominate the assemblages. Stage 5 bifaces or
projectile points are notably frequent at any fonn of habitation site, that is,
lithic scatters, burned rock middens and terrace sites .
Table 6 is a chronological construct for the North Fork area with accompanying
artifact numbers. This table was presented in Patterson (1977:11) and was adapted
from Weir (1976), Prewitt (1976) and Prewitt (in press). Even though the collection methods leave much to be desired in the way of primary context, general
trends in temporal placement can be seen. In light of the infonnation given in
Tables 5 and 6, a tendency for Type I, the open lithic scatter, to have the earlier
point types is seen. However, these point types said to be in the Clear Fork
phase are found in Type II sites, or burned rock middens. These tendencies can
only be just that, certainly no more than general speculation. Greater control
through intensive excavation over a large number and type of sites could prove or

86

TABLE 5

Distribution of biface stages at 14 North Fork sites.

-

87

TABLE 5
Distribution of Biface Forms
Biface Reduction Stage

-

Site No .

-

WM 33
51
52
56
57
59
73
82
86
88
115
260
328
360

-

Total

-

-

-

-

-

..
..

..
,..

1

8
2
14
7
15
1
4
5
9
9

I

2

3

4

5

2
5

3
3
16
10

2

5
6
9
9
36
4

11

108
36

9
17
4
2
1
5
8
4
3
97
45

257

3

Percent 27.7%

4

11

5

Total

I
I

20
20
49
40
89
18
22

11

10

7
2
3
8
12
8
5
21
11

2
4
4
2
25
3
2
16
14

15

23
85
41
14
253
126

237

133

119

183

929

25.5%

14.3%

12.8%

19.7%

100%

10

10
3
31
17
1
11

18

88

TABLE 6

Chronological construct for the North Fork area with accompanying artifact nurrbers.

~

co

Table G.
Years
B.P.
150650
6501250
12501750

1 7502600

26004000
40005000

50007000

70 008000

Chronological Construct for the North Fork area with accompanying artifact numbers.

Sites
Index
41 WM:
Markers
Phase
Post-Archaic
33 34 49 51 52 53 54 56 57 59 71 73 82 87 88 115 206 208 260 261 262 330 360
Toyah Focus
Perdiz
- - - - - - - - - - 15
Cliffton
- - - - - - - - 7
Austin
Scallorn
Focus
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 - - - - 1
Archaic
Twin Sisters
- - - - - 2 - - 1 - - - - - 1
Darl
Frio
- - - - - - - - 1 - - - 1
- - - - 1 - - 3 2 - 2 - - - 3
Fairland
2 - - 1 2 - - 3 2 - 2 - - - 1 Ensor
- - 1
San Marcos
- 1 - - - 2
Marshall
- - - - - - - - 4 - - - - - 2 1 - 1 - - 1 2
Montell
Marcos
1 - - - - - 2 1 2
Castroville 2 1 53 - 1 - - - - - - 1 1
6 - - 1 - - 15 1
Williams
- - 2
Round Rock
Pedernales
- - 79 1 - - - - 14 - - 5 5 - 8 1 - - - 1 1
- - 26 - - - - - 9 - Marshall
9
Bulverde
- - 20 - - - - - 8
1 1 - 7 3
1
Clear Fork
Bulverde
3 - - - - 1
Nolan
- - 6 - - - 1
Travis
Wells
- 1
Tortugas
San
Angostura
Geronimo
Gower
Uvalde
- - - - - - Martindale
- - - - - 1
- - - - 1
Bell
Tortugas
Circleville
Angostura
Meserve
Golandrina
Scottsbluff

Adapted from Weir 1976, Prewitt 1976, and

I

l

I

I

I

I

I

I

Pr~witt,

I

in press.

I

I

I

I

l

l

l

l

l

-

90

disprove what is now merely apparent. We can state that the full range of sites
within the North Fork Reservoir area were being inhabited during the Archaic time
period from roughly 5000 B.P. to 1000 B.P.

-

-

-

...
...

...
...

...

The unfinished artifacts throughout the lithic reduction sequence and the amount
of debitage in all the collections support the assumption that stone working was
carried on at all sites. The preponderance of projectile points, about 20% of
the total lithic sample presented including intact artifacts, fragmented specimens,
and some reworked points, indicates that hunting was routine. With this comes
the assumption that meat and hide processing were being carried on at the sites.
The criteria set forward by Semenov (1964:20, 83-142) and Wilmsen (1970:70-71) imply that the edge angles on many implements show functions of this nature. Plant
and fiber processing at all sites are inferences also suggested due to the steep
beveled tools present in the collections (Patterson 1977:30-36). Grinding stones
present in collections suggest seeds and nuts as well as other edible plants were
being processed and consumed (Fig. 12, H).
The range of projectile point types found (Appendix I) indicates, as mentioned previously, that the sites were inhabited in more than one particular era or temporal
span. The evidence of so much manufacturing of bifaces as well as other tools,
and their subsequent discarding, reflects the abundant local lithic resource base
and seems to imply the mobility of the inhabitants.

....

91

....
SURVEY DATA ANALYSIS

...

....

...

..
..
..

Each site is examined regarding type, location relative to topography, vegetation
zone and nearest water resource in order to test the models and hypotheses presented under the section Survey Methods, Theory and Models. Site typology follows
that defined previously under Site Types and includes the following categories:
open lithic scatters (I); burned rock middens (II); terrace sites (III); lithic
resource procurement localities (IV) and rockshelters (V).
One criterion considered important in terms of site placement is the topographic
setting. In order to examine for patterning with- regards to the topography, seven topographic settings were tentatively designated. These are:
A

On the floodplain in or on alluvial deposits;

B - Against a bluff or slope of the mainstream;
C - On or along the rim of the river canyon;

D - On a slope of a hollow or tributary;

..

E - Against a bluff of a tributary;

...

G - At the confluence of the river and a tributary, usually on a
high terrace .

...

F

On the rim of a hollow or tributary;

A schematic cross-section of the North Fork valley illustrating the relative location of each topographic situation is shown in Figure 13. Vegetation zones
follow those described under the heading Vegetation. They are designated as
follows:
I - Lowlands

...

IA - Riparian
IB - Canyon-hollow
IC - Terrace
II - Uelands

IIA - Plateau Top
IIB - Bluff-face
Water resources are distinguished ~enerally on the basis of drainage size and include; (1) river, (2) creek and (3) spring or spring branch. When an archeological site is located at the confluence of the river and a tributary creek, the
designation will be 1-2; likewise, a site situated at the confluence of a springfed branch and the river will be designated 1-3. The designation 0 is used when
a site is found some distance from any water source.

92

FIGURE 13

Schematic profile showing topographic settings.

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

I

1

I

I

I

I

1

1

'

SCHEMATIC PROFILE SHOWING
TOPOGRAPHIC SETTINGS

c

F

E

6

A

RIVER
CHANNEL
<.O

w

-

-

-

,.
,..

,.

94

The chronological phases are indicated as follows: (1) Circleville; (2) San Geronimo; (3) Clear Fork; (4) Round Rock; (5) San Marcos; (6) Twin Sisters; (7) Austin;
and ( 8) Toyah.
Site Distribution Analysis
The distribution of each of the 82 sites relative to type, topography, vegetation
zone and nearest water resource is listed in Table 7. Their locations are shown
in Figure 7. The following trends were observed in the analysis of these data.
Open lithic scatters constitute the largest group of sites in the inventory, totaling 51% of the sample. These sites occur mos~ly on the floodplain, against
a bluff or slppe either at the edge of the valley or along a spring-fed branch.
Most are located in the Lowlands vegetation zones either along the river valley
or in a tributary canyon.
Burned rock middens tend to be located at the base of a bluff or slope either
along the river or in a tributary canyon. Although our sample would suggest that
middens occur at virtually any location except an a terrace, Shafer and Corbin
(1965) found burned rock middens on river terraces in the upper end of both the
North and South Fork reservoir areas, beyond the present survey boundaries. The
relevance of the burned rock middens on terraces will be discussed in Testing of
Models. Most burned rock middens tend to be in the Lowland vegetation zone although extensive survey sampling in the Uplands zone was beyond the scope of the
survey. Therefore, our sample is clearly biased in this regard.
Attempts were made during the course of the laboratory analysis to measure the frequency of occurrence of each site type with regards to the distribution relative
to topographic, vegetation and stream variables. The results showed only the most
general patterning; for example, burned rock middens are located near either valley or canyon slopes, open lithic scatters may be located anywhere an older erosional surface occurs in proximity to water; lithic procurement sites are located
where lithic outcrops occur in proximity to inhabitable locations and rockshelters
occur in bluffs. There is clearly an overlap in most categories with regards to
vegetation zones and water resources.
·
The major problem of identifying site patterning in the North Fork area is due to
the compaction of the microenvironments in the study area, especially in the lower
half of the reservoir basin. The long, narrow valley measures only about one-half
kilometer across the dams ite and a maximum of about l .3 kilometers in the upper
portion of the study area. Valley walls are more deeply entrenched in the lower
end of the district and here the site density is the highest (as can be seen in
Fig 6). Despite the problem of factoring out variables critical toward determining site location, an effort is made in the following section to examine the
proposed settlement models and hypotheses.
Testing of Models

,.

The models that have been proposed to explain the site patterning in central Texas
discussed in the Survey Method, Theory and Models sections are examined in light
of the survey data that has been presented. The models are both general and specific. The North Fork district incorporates a well-watered, well-drained deeply

95

TABLE 7

Site Distribution Data

-

96

TABLE 7
Site Distribution Data

-

-

-

-

..

-

...

-

Site No

Site Type

Topographic
Situation

33

II I

B

IA

34

I II

A

IA

1

so

II I

A

IC

1-3

51

I II

G

IA

1-3

4-6

56

II I

A

IA

l-3

5,6

57

II

F

IC

l-3

3-6

58

I

D

IC

1-3

59

I

F

IIB

0

60

I

G

IA

1-3

61

II

E

IB

62

IV

B

IC

63

II

B

IA

64

I

B

IA

1-3

65

I & IV

G

IA

1-3

66

II

B

I IB

1

67

II

F

IB

3

68

II

B

IC

69

I

B

IC

70

I

B

IC

1-3

71

II I

A

IA

1-3

72

I II

A

IA

1-3

73

II

B

IA/I IB

1-3

80

I

A

IC

81

II

B

IC/I IB

Vegetation
Zone

Nearest
Water

Chronology
Phases
5,6

5

5

1

3

6,8

4,5

-

-

-

-

-

-

...

,.

...

97
TABLE 7 (Con 1 t.)
Topographic
Situation

Vegetation
Zone

Nearest
Water

F

IIA

3

v

E

IB

3

333

I

D

IB

3

334

II

c

IIA

3

335

I

A

IA

3

336

I

D

IB

3

337

IV

D

IB

3

338

I

F

IIB

0

339

I

D

I IA

0

340

I

F

IB

3

& IV

D

IB

3

Site No.

Site Type

331

II

332

341

I

342

I

D

IB

3

343

v

c

JIB

3

344

I

A

IC

l

345

I

B

IC

346

IV

c

IIA

0

347

I

B

IC

0

348

I II

A

IC

349

I

A

IC

3!)0

I

A

IA

351

I

D

IB

352

I

F

IA

353

II I

F

IB

354

I

B

IC

355

II I

A

IA

Chronology
Phases

3

3

7~··/J~'R~ ~.
,t~
- - - - - - ---- -

-

---~-

-------

---

--

~-----~-

98

-

TABLE 7 (Con 1 t.)

Site No.

Site Type

Topographic
Situation

Vegetation
Zone

82

I

c

IIB

83

I

A

IC

84

I

B

IC/IIB

85

II

B

IC

86

II

B

IA

87

II I

A

IA

88

II

B

IC/IIB

89

I

D

IA

3

115

I

E

IC

3

177

v

c

I IB

0

192

I

A

IA

195

I

A

IA

1-3

196

v

c

I IB

0

204

I

D

IB

3

205

I

D

IB

3

211

I

F

IB

3

260

II

E

IB

3

& IV

E

IB

3

326

I

c

IIB

0

327

I

A

IA

l

328

I II

A

IA

l

329

IV

c

IIA

0

...

330

II

D

IB

3

-

* Unl ocated--no records avai 1able

-

-

-

...
...

Chronology
Phases

4

3

1-3

3-6

4,5

188*

Jiii

..

Nearest
Water

263

I

·----- -- - --- -- ·------ --

6

---~----·

·--··---

-

99
TABLE 7 (Can't.)

Site No.

Site Type

Topographic
Situation

Vegetation
Zone

Nearest
Water

356

I

B

IB

3

357

I

0

IB

3

358

I

A

IC

359

I

E

& II

B

IA

361

I

A

IC

362

I

c

IIA

3

363

I

-

D

IB

1-3

364

I

D

IB

3

-

Site Type:

-

-

-

-

...
...
...
...

360

I

I=
II=
II I=
IV=

Topographic
Situation:

open lithic scatters
burned rock middens
terrace sites
1 i thi c resource
procurement site
V= rock shelters
A= floodplain alluvial
deposit
B= agaisnt bluff/slope
of mainstream
C= on/along rim of
ri ve r canyon
D= on slope of hollow/
tributary
E= against bluff of
tributary
F= on rim of hollow/
tributary
G= confluence of river/
tributary, high terrace

IC/I IB

Chronology
Phases

3
1

Vegetation Zone: I = Lowlands
IA= Riparian
IB= Canyon-hollow
IC= Terrace
II = Uplands
IIA= Plateau Top
IIB= Bluff-face
Nearest Water:

l=
2=
3=
l -2=
=
1-3=

river
creek
s pri ng/spri ng branch
confluence of river
and tributary creek·
confluence of spring
fed branch and river
O= distant water source

Chronological Phases:
l= Circleville
2= San Geronimo
3= Clear Fork
4= Round Rock
5= San Marcos
6= Twin Sis te rs
7= Austin
8= Toyah

-

100

-

-

-

-

....
....

...
...

-

entrenched canyon that provided plant, animal and mineral resources in a concentrated area and created an attractive opportunity for exploitation to Archaic
foragers. They repeatedly utilize the area from about 9000 B.P. The paleoenvironmental model presented by Bryant and Shafer (1977) indicates that central
Texas was undergoing a gradual warming and drying trend since the Late Glacial
period 14,000 to 10,000 years ago. The environmental changes that have occurred
since that time are not seen as drastic enough to cause a replacement in the
plant and animal communities. This is not to say that the prehistoric environment was identical to that of today because historic ecological changes have
been rather dramatic. The lowering of the water table, loss of the grass lands
that formerly covered the Uplands and held a thin soil mantel has since eroded
away leaving a oak-juniper scrubla-nd as a result. The compliment of economic
plants and their density would have been conside~ably different in prehistoric
times. This fact must be kept in mind when the distribution of sites relative
to critical resources is considered.
The corridor-like distribution of critical resources within the area of study
would necessitate settlement movement in order to take advantage of resource
diversity and seasonal changes. The compact nature of the resource zone in the
North Fork area negates recognizing some kind of scheduling patterning here if
it existed. The range of cultural activities suggested by the artifact assemblages in the open lithic scatters, terrace sites and burned rock middens do not
appear to be significantly different except for the rock accumulations in the
burned rock middens themselves. All exhibit a quantity of lithic debitage resulting from biface manufacture, few formal tools other than projectile points, ad
hoc, cutting or scraping tools, grinding slabs and rnanos. The narrow, steep-walled
valley characteristic in the lower half of the study area would make virtually
all local resources available within one kilometer of any settlement. Water and
fuel appear to have been critical determinant factors for settlements other than
for burned rock middens where proximity to limestone, either as exfo1iated nodules
from the hillsides or as river cobbles, is an added factor. The one factor that
we cannot control for is the plant resources exploited. Pecans and walnuts would
be available during good yield years along the riparian vegetation zone; acorns
were available along the canyon-hollow and bluff-face vegetation zones, possibly
extending into the uplands in oak motts. Exploitation of these resources would
necessitate some seasonal scheduling. The valley itself, however, is also lush
in the late spring with succulent vegetation, some of which is suitable as vegetal foods. We can speculate on potential plant resources but ethnobotanical data
are critical toward identifying seasonally sensitive plants and modeling annual
rounds.
Settlerrent Mode 1s
The first settlement models to be considered are those by Eddy (1973) and Prewitt
(1976). Eddy argues that vegetation--food--was a principal determinant for choice
of settlement in the Archaic. Prewitt argues that the proximity of unequally
valued resources were determinants stating that paleoenvironmental (presumably
plant) resources. Given the emphasis on food resources, both models would be impossible to test with the North Fork data. If, however, we alter each model and
examine them with regards to "highly valued resources" they can at least be part i a11 y tested.

-

-

-

...

-

101

AA examination of Eddy's model will be made given the distributional data on burned rock middens. The middens are consistently located in proximity to water,
limestone and woody vegetation. Which of these resources is the oore important
is difficult to assess given the compacted environmental situation in the North
Fork canyor. However, in the upper end of the reservoir, where the river terraces
are much wider and the canyon itself is less abrupt with sloping walls, burned
rock middens do occur on the river terrace i tse 1f. Site 41 WM 57 is offered
as an example. Considering the proximity to the three resources (limestone,
water, fuel) the middens are situated closer to water and the riparian plant
communities than to limestone. These three variables are probably critical in
determining the location of the activities responsible for mi.dden accumulation
and together with the fourth and presently uncontrolled variable, the plants
being processed. Given this infonnation, Eddy's- model and Prewitt's hypothesis
regarding site selection seem to be supported with the North Fork distributional
data on burned rock middens.
One of Prewitt's hypotheses is concerned with proximity to resources, topography
and reuse of the same location. Burned rock middens can again be cited as verifying that proximity to resources was critical in selecting site location. We
cannot argue that topography was a critical variable with regards to locating
activities leading to the burned rock accretions. This may have been a variable
in choosing a place on the terrace to establish an encampment, however. Three of
the site types examined, open lithic scatters, burned rock middens and terrace
sites all display evidence of repeated use over a long period of time. Indeed,
this is one interesting and unexplained trait of burned rock middens. These discrete mounded features would appear to be primarily single event phenomenon; however, excavations into literally dozens of these features in central Texas have
shown that they invariably evidence accumulation over long periods of time despite
the seemingly homogeneous burned rock accumulation. The John Ischy Site and 41
WM 88 are good examples of repeated use of these kinds of sites. Also, where midden use extends over long periods, a multitude of activities were carried out at
these locations as indicated from the various classes of cultural refuse found in
them. The question is why did the groups come back to the same place after an extended absence and do this over and over again? Perhaps the variables determining
site selection were more strongly considered than we assumed and that only a limited
number of situations suited their selection. We certainly cannot disregard Prewitt's
hypothesis that site selection was determined, in part, on knowledge of previous
use of that particular locality. Indeed, all burned rock middens that have been
examined internally in the North Fork area demonstrate slow, long tenn accumulation.
Cultural tradition does seem to play an important role in the reuse of burned rock
middens.
Another point mentioned by Prewitt concerns the depletion of resources at one location which necessitated a move to another location. This statement seems oversimplified but should be considered again with burned rock midden data. For example, it is possible that a group moved a short distance upstream or downstream
after a brief stay at one traditional processing site. This pattern would yield
a number of middens in the same general area (like the North Fork), that yielded
an almost identical chronology of diagnostic items. Maintaining this pattern over
many generations would eventually lead to some locations being favored over others
and some middens to display a seemingly hiatus in the sequence.
In summary, the location of multi-activity sites (open lithic scatters, burned rock
middens and terrace sites) may be due to proximity to valued resources as both Eddy

-

....

-

...

...

...

102

and Prewitt argue. Certainly the data from North Fork does not negate this possibility but the compacted nature of the resource zones in the North Fork canyon
causes a severe overlap of zones and prevents any clear demonstration of patterning relative to resources. Burned rock middens appear to be located in proximity
to water, fuel and limestone, limestone being the least valued of these resources.
The repeated use of each of the multi-activity sites argues for a cultural continuum that lasted for several thousand years during the Archaic. Repeated use of
these locations, especially burned rock middens, may be due, in part, to there
being traditional locations for certain activities. The repeated use of terrace
sites, however, is more likely due to repeatedly weighing the topographic setting
in the riparian terrace situation as a critical variable for site selection.
Settlement Change
When we began the North Fork project, we anticipated recovering sufficient data
to trace the change of settlements through time and to explore for a shifting site
density through time that may provide some indication of population fluctuation.
Unfortunately, the quality of survey data was insufficient to explore for these
patterns with any degree of confidence. Table 6 lists the occurrence of temporally
diagnostic artifacts found both during the Shafer and Corbin (1965) survey, Sorrow's
(1973) testing and the present survey. The intensity of use for the area during
the Archaic appears to be the greatest during the Round Rock, San Marcos and Twin
Sister's phases ~ a time period extending from about 4000 to 1250 B.P. Evidence
for utilization after-this time was sparse, certainly hinting a major adaptive
shift was accompanying the introduction of the bow and arrow at about 1250 B.P.
Evidence for use during the Clear Fork and San Geronimo phases is, at present,
scant but given excavation data from the deeper alluvial and burned rock midden
deposits, we anticipate ample evidence of valley utilization during the San Geronimo and Clear Fork phases. Burned rock midden accumulations began in the Clear
Fork phase, if not earlier, as the John Ischy Site data demonstrates. The repeated
use of these same locations for at least 3500 years certainly argues for an adaptive continuity, not consistent with the claims of changing patterns argued by
Weir (1976). The conservative pattern may also indicate some degree of territorial
behavior.
In sum, the lack of diagnostic materials from the majority of sites in the survey
area negates the possibility of defining settlement and population trends for each
chronological period. General patterns of change have been noted, however, and
these merit serious consideration in future research planning in central Texas.
For example, use of terrace localities, burned rock middens and the locally available chert outcrops began as early as the Clear Fork phase, if not in the San Geronimo phase. Use of terrace locations for habitation sites in the San Geronimo
phase is predictable and should be verifiable through excavations into the older
deposits masked from the surveyors inspection. The patterns of exploitation of the
district's resources changed little from about 5000 to about 1750 B.P. when burned
rock midden accumulation ceased. This change may have been brought about by a
sudden influx of bison into the area (Dillehay 1974). Except for a change in the
activities responsible for burned rock midden accumulation, the Twin Sister's phase
Archaic adaptations were similar to the preceeding phase. The major settlement
shift in the North Fork area took place after the Twin Sister's phase. For reasons
that would call for a regional study to explain, the major use area during the
Austin and Toyah phases shifted from the North Fork area apparently northward and
westward to the lower Leon River watershed and Blackland Prairies .

--------------

-----

-------------

---

-

-

-

-

-

-

103

RECOMMENDATIONS

The objectives of the TAMU survey proposal were outlined in the Introduction.
One major objective was to evaluate each site against the published criteria
for elgibility for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.
National Register forms were completed and submitted to the contractor for each
site in 1976. In addition, each site was weighed against the potential for containing intact cultural deposits and providing new information on the aboriginal
cultures who formally inhabited the area. A significant portion of the archeological site sample (nearly 10%) was either destroyed or was in the proc~ss of
being destroyed by dam construction activities in-the late spring of 1976 or
by relic hunters. These were mostly the sites recorded by Shafer and Corbin
(1965) and recommended for extensive investigations at that time. This destructive activity went largely unchecked despite efforts by the TAMU survey team to
alert the agencies either responsible or concerned. Emergency testing was conducted at several sites by North Texas State University near the North Fork dam.
The recommendations listed in Table 8 were made at the time of the survey or
immediately after. Those resources recommended for testing or excavation contain intact deposits and may yield important new information on some period of
the area's prehistory. Sites not recommended for further work are generally
lacking in depth, or have been seriously disturbed and/or destroyed.
We observed that sites located in the Uplands or on the valley slopes exhibited
no significant depth of deposit unless mounded burned rock middens were present.
Terrace sites almost always displayed buried, intact deposits but the most concentrated terrace sites and the more deeply stratified sites were located near
the dam construction area and have been destroyed.
Subsequent to the field surveys of Granger and North Fork Reservoir, but prior
to the preparation of this report, a mitigation plan was developed to deal with
the cultural resources which are to be affected by the inundation of the reservoir basins. The mitigation design grew out of a meeting held December 13 and 14,
1976 at the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Office at the North Fork Reservoir,
Georgetown, Texas (see Table 9 for a list of participants). At that time, Objective No. 7 of the TAMU survey proposal was fulfilled verbally during the meeting.
While we provided a list of the sites and justifications for work for those sites
that promised to yield data on specific cultural problems, it was necessary to
work out a compromise in order to mitigate a reasonable sample of sites within
the limited time schedule demanded by the impending reservoir impoundment.
·The meeting was conducted at th,e request of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
and resulted in a Request for Proposals issued by the Corps of Engineers, Fort
Worth District. It was their desire to begin mitigation investigation as soon
as possible. While the TAMU Anthropology Laboratory staff maintained that an
optimum mitigation research design would not be possible without full analysis
of the survey results, it was agreed that the construction scheduling for the
reservoirs demanded prompt action. Therefore, verbal discussion of the possible
recommendations ensued at the meeting.

104

TABLE 8

Field recolTIT1€ndations for North Fork sites.

-

105

TABLE 8
FIELD RECOMMENDATIONS

-

Site Number

Recommendations

Comments or site

t~~e

41 WM 33

testing

50

testing

51

destroyed

56

tested

57

excavated

58

no further work

59

tested

60

tested

61

no further work

destroyed by looters

62

no further work

surface deposit

63

testing

64

no further work

-

65

testing

66

testing

-

67

destroyed

68

testing

,..

69

no further work

-

70

testing

71

excavation

72

no further work

73

excavation

80

no further work

81

excavation

82

no further work

-

-

-

....

..
...

terrace

surface deposit

surface

surf ace deposit

surface deposit

surface deposit

-

106

41 WM 83

no further work

surf ace deposit

84

no further work

destroyed

85

no further work

extensively damaged

86

no further work

surface deposit

87

testing

-

88

no further work

mostly destroyed

89

no further work

surface deposit

-

115

no further work

surface deposit

177

no further work

surface deposit

188

no further work

surface deposit

192

no further work

destroyed

195

no further work

destroyed

196

no further work

destroyed

204

no further work

surface deposit

205

no further work

surf ace deposit

-

211

no further work

surf ace deposit

260

testing

-

263

no further work

surface deposit

326

no further work

surface deposit

327

no further work

surface deposit

328

testing

329

no further work

330

testing

331

testing

332

no further work

testing indicate no
depth

333

no further work

surf ace deposit

-

-

-

-

surface deposit

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

....

-

107

41 WM 334

testing

335

no further work

surface deposit

336

no further work

surface deposit

337

no further work

surface deposit

338

no further work

surface deposit

339

no further work

surface deposit

340

no further work

surface deposit

341

no further work

surface deposit

342

no further work

surface deposit

108

TABLE 9

Mitigation meeting participants.

109

TABLE 9
Participants, December 13 and 14, 1976 Georgetown Meeting

-

-

-

....

...

Texas A&M Anthropology Laboratory
Patience Patterson
Ed Baxter
Harry Shafer
Gary Moore
Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Fort Worth
Sam Garrett
Larry Banks
Sue Hazen
Bud Horsman
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Granger and North Fork
Ron Zunker
Texas Archeological Survey
Dave Dibble
El ton Prewitt
North Texas State University
Scott Hayes
National Park Service, Denver
Roy Reaves I I I
Judy Shafer
Texas Historical Commission
Alton Briggs

...
...

...
...

....

7a:.1U~~bl.
~

-

110

Since the Corps of Engineers' interpretations of the meeting's recommendations
and sampling design have subsequently been implemented into contractual or precontractual agreements, prior to submission of this report, the TAMU Anthropology
Laboratory presents here the Scope-of-Work adopted by the Corps of Engineers
for the mitigation activities for both reservoirs. It is reflective of the
reco1T1T1endations made by TAMU during the December meeting.

-

-

-

-

...
...

CORPS OF ENGINEERS SCOPE-OF-WORK

To be as responsive as possible in compliance with pertinent legislation (Public
Law 89-665, Executive Order 11593, and Public Law 93-29), the plan of archeological mitigation at the San Gabriel (North Fork and Granger) project has
a multipurpose design. Basically, the plan to be used consists of three different concepts: conservation, preservation and data recovery. The remainder of
work to be performed is based on the conclusions of a meeting between three
former archeological consultants; the State Historic Preservation Officer's
staff, the National Park Service, and the Corps of Engineers on 13-14 December,
1976. This proposed scope of services is primarily concerned with that portion
of the program related to data recovery. Information obtained during and as a
result of data recovery will be used to form a basis for site preservation techniques to be applied where warranted.
Sites representing the full range of known potential for contributing additional
information to the current state of knowledge have been selected on an individual
or dual basis to provide the maximum results possible. The data recovery program
is also designed as a pilot study to determine the point of diminishing returns
and the validity of using this technique in archeological conservation. By use
of statistically valid sampling it is intended that maximum data recovery be
achieved and at the same time limit excavation to a minimum required to achieve
data recovery in order to preserve sites or portions of sites for future research
potential and reduce costs of mitigation in the best interests of archeological
goals, historic preservation and the public interest.
The decision to stop work on each particular site or cluster of sites will be
based on the curve of diminishing returns and in consultation with the Corps of
Engineers. However, it is anticipated that some subjective professional intuitiveness be considered in such determinations.
In order to accomplish this task, sites have been selected individually and
collectively based on the nine basic parameters that are shown in the tabulation
on the following page (Table 10).
Individual site descriptions will be provided separately from this scope of services.
Methodo 1ogy

...

-

In order to perform the work required, the contractor shall develop a program
based on this scope of services oriented toward resolving as many of the research
problems included herein as possible and addressing new problems which may arise

111

TABLE 10

Nine basic parameters.

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

I

1

TABLE 10:

I

I

I

I

1

1

1

1

Nine Basic Parameters

Lithi c
Processing
Sites

Lithi c
Procurement
Sites

Deeply
Stratified
Sites

Sites with
Environmental
Data

41WM65
117
130
l 34
165

4lWMll7
134
165
267
286
295

41WM124
133
214
215
230
267
370

41WM53
56
124
129
130
133
230
258
267
293
297
370

Ossuary
Sites

Unique
Sites

Burned
Rock
Midden

41WM124
163
230

41WM71
165
258
295
297 .
328

41WM57
66
73
330
331
360

N

-

-

-

-

...

113

during its course of investigation.
The contractor should be well infonned on the state of the pertinent regional
archeology and fully qualified to formulate research questions dealing with the
endangered cultural remains. The research suggestions enumerated below in this
scope of work are not intended to be limiting but to provide a minimum of recognized research problems.
The contractor shall develop a model of excavation units and amount of data recovery necessary to plot a curve for determining the point of diminishing returns.
The model shall be as flexible as possible to reflect and adjust to data being
recovered.
The contractor should orient the proposal toward creative and useful research
topics to assure that data recovery is adequate to mitigate the impact of the
sites' destruction on the data categories that give the sites their significance.
To this end, and to form the basis for higher levels of inquiry such as processional interpretations, the proposals should, at minimum, adequately consider
culture history. This is a reconstructed sequence of events placed in a timespace framework with appropriate processional explanations where possible. Some
of the objectives sought in a culture history reconstruction should be (1) a
paleoenvironmental reconstruction and relationships to available resources with
models of exploitation, (2) a settlement and population history, (3) socio-economicreconstruction for each definable time period and (4) explanations for the
cultural dynamics of the local sequence defined. Explanations should deal with
two levels of culture history: synchronic, or functional relationships, and diachronic, or culture change relationships through time and space.
In addition to the generalized problem-orientation presented above, excavations
could provide information which may be of use in solving the following problems:
Burned Rock Midden
Investigations should be directed towards developing a synthesizing statement on
the structure and functions of this type of site which will provide comparative
data for future investigations at Granger and North Fork Lakes, etc. Excavations
of middens and the surrounding area will attempt to settle the dispute between
the two major hypotheses on the function of burned rock middens, or present an
alternative. To illuminate the functional and structural characteristics, the
following possible areas or questions could be addressed:
(1) What is the hearth/artifact distribution within the burned rock midden?

(2) What is the activity or pursuit that was associated with the burned

rock midden?

...

(3)

If burned rock middens were utilized for cooking as most investigations
have suggested, then what foodstuff was being cooked?

...

(4)

Define the activities within and immediately surrounding the burned rock
midden.

,..

(5) Why was there an abrupt disappearance of this type of site between
1000-500 B.C.?

-

-

114

(6) Is there more than one type of burned rock midden, and, if so, is
there a temporal or functional distribution which can be developed
into a predictive model?
(7) What is the areal distribution of the ,burned rock midden in relation
to resource exploitation potentiality?

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

(8) Elaboration of subsistence techniques, including such activities as
scheduling and seasonality.
(9) After defining what possible food was being exploited, a determination
of the nutritional quality could be made by presenting a nutritional
breakdown or assessment of these potentially exploitable resources.
Quarry and Procurement Sites
Investigations at the quarry and procurement sites should also stress horizontal
distribution in an attempt to reveal interartifact -interfeature relationships.
Questions and areas of investigation which could be addressed are as follows:
(1) Determine subsistence activities as possibly delimited by the nature
of tool assemblage.
(2) Was there differential procurement at the quarry through time?
(3) What were the exploitation or quarrying techniques employed?
(4) If there exists more than one type of lithic material, determine the
differences in these materials. Obtain samples and data which can be
compared at a later date with the materials found at other quarries.
(5) Replicate the knapping techniques to illuminate reduction strategies.
(6) Was a segment of this reduction sequence performed at one place and
the rest elsewhere?
(7) Is there evidence of trade with this material?
(8) How can quarries be dated?

Determine the chronology of the site.

Deeply Stratified Sites/Single Component Sites
Investigations at these sites should include horizontal as well as vertical comparisons. Intersite, interfeature and interartifact relations should be explored.
Possible areas or questions to be addressed could be as follows:
(1) What are the relations between the deeply stratified sites and the so-called
single component sites? Are these differences merely a reflection of a continuous occupation through time?
(2) What relations exist between these sites, as living areas, with nearby
quarry sites? With burned rock middens?

115

(3) What changes in food procurement are exhibited through time?
(4) What environmental factors have contributed to the prolonged usage
of certain areas?
(5) Can seasonal cycles be determined from these sites?
(6) Do artifact assemblages reflect the same information that can be obtained
at quarry sites?
(7) Can nutritional data be derived from the materials at these and other sites?

Description of Services to be Performed

....

...
..
....

...

"""

"""

...

In addition to completion of an excavation program, the contractor shall conduct
additional survey work on fee owned land which has not been previously examined.
Any new sites discovered will be subject to limited testing as necessary to determine depth, areal extent, elevation and significance. A brief environmental
setting of each site shall also be included. The contractor shall notify the
Corps of Engineers in writing upon completion of the survey as to the results
thereof .
The contractor shall also conduct an archival study and a subsequent physical examination of historic sites within the project boundaries.
The contractor shall, in consultation with the contracting agency, employ other
archeologists or specialists in other fields to act as consultants and in aiding
in the actual data recovery process. The contractor, in the process of formulating the research design to this scope of work, shall devise methods of research
that will allow articulation of the research problem(s) with the expected data recovery. The anticipated methods and the sites to be used for data recovery are
as follows:
41 WM 165 - extensive data recovery
258 - machine stripping of upper layer to reveal
possible lower association
297 - minimal data recovery
295 - minimal data recovery
133 - extensive data recovery
230 - extensive data recovery, with a physical anthropologist in the field to oversee the removal of
human remains
124 - minor excavation
163 - limited testing to determine presence of osteological remains; preservation of material in situ
117 - limited surface sampling
134 - extensive, controlled surface collection
267 - excavation for extensive data recovery
286 - surface collections
53 - recovery for adequate sample; not to exceed 20

-

116

percent of site
330 - extensive testing at one of these at archeologists'
331
discretion, very limited sampling at other to insure
continuity
73 - complete data recovery
328
data recovery not to exceed 3 percent to show comparisons,
65
if any, between sites
66
56 - minor excavation

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

57 214
215
360
71 -

minor excavation
intensive data recovery for comparison of two
sites
grab sampling in and around miAden
strip and screen plow; test below plow zone for features

-

117

APPENDIX I
The following charts represent the artifactual data collected during the survey
of the North Fork Reservoir. The data represent a practical application of the
lithic reduction sequence presented earlier in this report.
~--~-----

-

-

-

-

...
....
....
....

-

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

'

1

Flake

Flaw

1

1

1

1

1

1

Stage 1 - & Optional tools 41WM33

Stage

Artifact No.

1
1
1

1. 1
1. 2
1.4
1.5
1.6
1. 7
l.8
l. 9

l

1
1
1
1

TOTALS
AVERAGES

L.

w.

T.

Tool

5.7
5. 3r:
3. 1
5.9
6.0

5.2
5.5
5.7
4.6
4.8

2.2
1. 2
1.:
1.1
1. 3

x
x
x
x

-

-

-

l.O

. 71

6.3
32. 3'
5. 3<

5.3

1. 2

5. l l

10.3
1 . 2c

Reject

Core
Biface

65°/90°
65° /75°
43°/65°

x
x
x

x

-

x

x
x
x

-

x
x

75°
80°

2. 1
2.2

-

4. 1

1.4
.9'

?
?

x

x

3
3
3

3.1
3.2
3.3

8.6
5.9
10.3
24.8
8.2

5.1

.9'
.9
1.0
2.8
.9 D

?
?

x
x

x

4. 1
4.2

-

4
4

TOTALS
AVERAGES

TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

3.3

6.2
14.6
4.8h

3. 0 p
.7
3.9
.8
6. 7 p 1. 5
3.3
.7~

x

Lateral
Edge Angle

x
x

2
2

-

Error

x
x

x

Distal
_Edge Angle
87°

-

92°
55°
42°
53°
50°

x
x
x
x
x

-

x
x

.

......
......

co

1

1

1

Stage

1

1

1

Artifact No.

w.

L.

1

T.

1

Tool

1

Reject

1

Core
Bi face

1

Flake

1

I

Flaw

Error

I

---- -

5
5
5
5
5

4 1WM51
1
1

5 .1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
TOTALS
AVERAGES

6.8
4.6
6.4

2.3
17. 8 11 .25
5.9
2.8

.6
.45
.95
.45
.6
3.05
.6

Tools; optional strati gy
l. 1
6.35 4.05
1.2
5.7
5.45
TOTALS
12.05 9.50
AVERAGES
6.02 4.75

l.4
1. 5
2.9
1.45

2
2
2
2
2

2 .1
11 .05
2.2
12. l
2.3
2.4
9.3
2.5
8.5
TOTALS
40.95
AVERAGES 10.24

3
3
3

3. 1
3.2
3.3
TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

5.75

2.05
2.7
4.2

-

5.5
6.5
4.8
5.6
22.4
5.6

.4. l
4.5

4. l
5.75 12.7
5.75 4.23

1.45
1.6
2.2
2.0
1.85
9 .10
1.82
.95
.9
1.85
3.70
1 .23

x
x
x
x

x

x

x
x

l

I

Distal
Edge Angle

-Ensor

39°
67°

x

x
x

1

Ensor
Marcos
Castrovi 1le

x

x
x

1

--

x

x

?

Lateral
Edge Angle

I

x
?

-

1

74°
82°

x

x
x
x

x

x
x
x

x
x

......
\.0

1

1

1

1

I

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

'

Flaw

Error

x

x
x
x
x

1

I

1

41WM51

Stage

Artifact No.

4

4. l
4.2
4.3
4.4

4
4

4

TOTALS
AVERAGES
5
5
5
5
5
5

5. l
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6

W.

T.

-

-

-

3.55
3.55
3.55

.6
.85
.8
.85
3.16
.78

-

4 .15

L.

-

-8.1
7.3

-

TOTALS
15.4
AVERAGES 7.7

.9
.7
.7
2.8
.8
2.0
.6
.6
8.95 4.3
.72
2.98

-

Tool

Reject

x
x
x
?

x

x
x
x
x
x
x

Core
Biface

Flake

?

x
?
?
?
?

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
Edge Angle

Castrovi 1~e
Probablv ::as trovi 11 e
Pedernalet5
Bulverde
Ensor
Marshall

N

0

1

1

1

1

1

I

1

1

1

1

1

'

Flake

Flaw

Error

l

'

'

1

1

1

41WM52

Too 1s as

optj_a_n_aJ~.trataqY'

Stage

Artifact No.

l
l

l. 1
l. 2
1. 3

1
l
l
l

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

12.5
9.7
7.6
l .4
7.7
l.5
7. l
l.6
9.1
9. 1
l. 7
1.8
7. 1
1.9
6.9
l.10
5.8
1.11
6.5
1.12
5.8
l.13
5.0
l.14
5.7
TOTALS
105 .6
AVERAGES
7.54
2. l
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2. 10
2 .11
TOTALS
AVERAGES

W.

T.

Tool

6.3
8. 1
5. 75
5.8
4.4
4.8
3. 1
5 .1
4.2
4.6
4.2
4.9
3. 1
3.4
67. 75
4.84

2.8
3.4
l.5
2.5
l.05
2.2
l.65
2.05

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

L.

1. 7
l.55
l. 7
1.25
l. 7
26 .15
1.87

2.1
1. 5
l.3
4.7
l.O
l.5
9.0 4.7
l. 35
7.8 4.25 2.2
l.2
6.0
5. l
.85
l.05
5.5
3.4
.8
39.9 29. 3i:; 14.85
7 .91 4.8< l.3"

11. 6

-

7.2

-

Reject

x
-

-

x
x

x

x
-

?
?

x
x
-

Core
Bi face

-

-

x
x
x
x
x
x

x
-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

50°
57°
70°
63°
55°
61°
60° /36°
54°
69°
70°/65°
54°

x
x
x
-

-

-

-

x

Distal
Edge Angle

69°

x
-

-

Lateral
Edge Angle

x

x (0)
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-

breakaqe) 80°

82°
95°
70°
92°
goo

-

70°
69°
76°
69°
79°
70°
63°

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

/Ov/53°

52°

-

-

70°

__,
N

1

I

1

1

I

1

1

1

1

I

I

I

1

Flaw

Error

1

'

1

1

l

1

41WM52
Stage

L.

Artifact No.

W.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face

Flake

-

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3.
3
3

3. l
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3. l 0
3. 11
3. 12
3. 13
3. 14
3. 15
3.16
TOTALS
AVERAGES

4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

-

-

-

l.3
l. 35

?
?

.85
1.05
1.1
.95
.8
.8
6.0 3.6
l. 3
7.45 3.7
.8
1.0
4.8 1.4
.9
3.0
.8
34.65 38.75 16. 30
6.93 4. 31 l.02

-

7.2
7.8

6.2

4. l
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.11

-

TOTALS
AVERAGES

7.7
7.7

7.7
-

4.2
5.1
3.55
5.2
5.6

-

-

3.3

-

3.0

-6.3
3.1:

.7
.6
.7
. 65i
.6
.7
.9
.95
.75
.8
.7
8.05
. 7,

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

1.0
.9

x
?
x
-

? -

x

-

x
?

-

x
-

.

x
x
x
x
x
x
-x
x
x

I!

-

-

-

x

-

-

I

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Lateral
Edge Angle

Dis ta 1

Edge Angle

--

-

-

-

-50°
-

70°

-

71°/65°

-

-

40°

-

45°

-

-

-

60°

-

-

-

N
N

1

1

1

1

I

1

1

1

I

I

I

'

'

'

1

1

'

41WM52

Stage

Artifact No.

5
5
5
5
5
5

5. 1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9

5
5

5

L.

-

6.2

-

4.0

-

W.

2.9
2.3
2.4
4.45
2. 1
2. 1
2.2
2.0

-

T.

Tool

.6

x
x
x
x
x

.65
.6
.8
.55
.6
.5
.6
.8

x
x
x
x

Reject

Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

Error
?X
?X
?X
?X
?
?X
?X
?

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
Edge Angle

Marcos?
Darl ?
?

-

Ensor

-

?

Ensor
Castroville

N

w

I

1

I

1

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

Flaw

Error

1

1

1

1

1

41WM56

Tools - optional strategy
Stage
l
l
l
l

l
1
l

2
2
2
2.
2
2
2
2
2

Artifact No.

4.65
1.2
8 .65
7.5
l. 3
1.4
4.6
l.5
5.6
6.8
1.6
l. 7
11. 7
TOTALS
49.50
AVERAGES 7.07
l. 1

2. l
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9

W.

L.

4 .1

-

7.6
6.9

5. 1
3.8

-

Tool

l. 35
l. 5

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

6.5
3.9
l . 25
5.4
l.5
5.3
2 .15
6.2
2.2
4.4
3.0
35.8 12.95
5. 11 l.85
7 .1
4.7
5.4
6.5

10.5
7.4
8. l

T.

-

-

5.4
3.85
TOTALS
45.9 36.45
AVERAGES 7.65 5. 21

2.3
2.0
l.9
l.8
l.4
l.8
l.4
1.0
1.0
14.6
l.62

? .
?

-

Reject

Core
Bi face

Flake

r

x
x
x
x

-

x
x

x

-

-

-

x
-

x
-

-

-

La tera 1
Edge Angle
66°172°
56° /45°
47°
87°
60°170°
55° /75°
90°/90°

Distal
Edge Angle
goo

-

68°
75°
goo
65°
90°/54°

x
x
x
x
?
?

x
x

_,
N

~

I

1

1

1

I

I

I

1

I

I

1

I

I

I

Flaw

Error

I

'

1

1

1

41WM56

W.

Stage

Artifact No.

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

3. l
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3. 10

11.0

r 4.75

-

5.5
4. l
5.2
3.3
4.0

4. 1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5

-

4·
4
4
4
4

TOTALS
AVERAGES

TOTALS
AVERAGES

L.

--

5.4

-

-

6.4
22.8
7.6

-

-

T.

l.6
l. 15
1. l
.6
l. l
l.05
.95
4.3
.95
.8
2.7
l. l
33.85 10.40
4.23 l.04

-

-

3.9

-

2.5
6.4
3.2

.8
.6
.85
.9
.8
3.95
.79

Tool

Reject

-

x
x

-

-

?

-

x
x
x
x
x
x

x

?

x

x
-

x
x
x

x
x

Core
Bi face

Flake

x

-

Dis ta 1
Edge Angle

x

x
x
x

-

x

x

x
x
x

-

Lateral
Edge Angle

x
x
x
x
x

x
x

__,
N
U1

1

1

1

Stage

1

Artifact No.

W.

L.

T.

Tool

I

I

I

1

1

1

Reject

Core
Biface

1

Flake

I

I

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

4·1WM57

1
1
l
l
1
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
1
1
l

5. l
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
TOTALS
AVERAGES

3.7
5.8

-

-

3.7

-

2.55
2.5
3.3

.55
.7
.75
.5
.7
.6
.55

-

l . 75

-

-

.7
13. 2 l 0. l 0 5.05
4.4 2.53
.63

Stage l + optio 1a l st
l. 1
7.2
l. 2
11. 5
1. 3
8.3
1.4
7.7
1. 5
7.3
1.6
10.5
l. 7
8.6
1.8
5.35
1. 9
7.0
1.10
6.8
1.11
8.6
1.12
8.2
1.13
9.3
1.14
10.4
l.15
5.8
TOTALS 122. 5'
AVERAGES 8.1.

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

ategi ~s thr Jugh too s.
8.4 1. 7
x
6.8 2.5
6.5 2.3
8.5 2.2
x
6.55 l.3
x
2.65 l.55
x
x
5.65 1.9
x
5.5 2.0
5. l
l.85
x
9.8 2.6
x
6.8 1. 7
x
5.8 l.4
x
3.8 2.5
x
x
4.4~
2.5
8.5 2.5
x
94.8 13. 2
6 .3.
.81

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

x
x
-

-

-

x
x
-

-

x
x

x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

-

x
x
-

·-

-

?
?

75°

50°

-

68°

-

45°
78° I 39°
380
57°

-

67°
720
65°
42°
68°
54°
60°

-

-

Ensor
Ensor?
Marcos
Ensor?
Bulverde
Ensor

x

x
-

_J___ J_

Distal
Edge Angle

-

4·1WM56

1

1

1

-

-

65°
62°
60°
65°

-

_.
N
())

1

1

1

1

I

I

}

1

I

I

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

41WM5 7

Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
Edge Angle

I
2
2
2

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2 .
2
2
2
2
2

Stage 2 and opt ona l '
2. 1
5.6
2.2
4.8
2.3
2.4
4.85
2.5
7.2
2.6
no ar
2.7
2.8
2.9
2. l 0
2 .11
2. 12
2. 13
2. 14
2. 15
7. 1
2. 16
8.85
2. 17
9.0
47 ,so
TOTALS
AVERAGES
6.78

-

-

trate<
5.2
4.6
3.95
5 .1
5.1
ifact
4.35
4.65
4.9

ies - tools.
l.65
1 .45
l.1
1.45
l. 9

1. 2
1.3
1.5
.1.2
4.7
l. 2
1.3
5.05 1.4
l. l
4.8
1. 3
5.95 1.55
6.7
2.25
65.05 23.15
1.45
5.0

-

x
x
-

x
-

x
-

?

x
x
x
-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

-

-

x

x
-

-

x
-

x

-

x
x
x
x
-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

__,
N
-....J

1

1

1

1

1

I

1

1

1

I

1

1

I

I

Flake

Flaw

1

1

1

1

Stage 3 - & Tools as optional strategy

Stage

L.

Artifact No.

W.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

Dis ta 1

Edge Angle

-·~··-----

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

~

3. l
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3. l 0
3. 11

-

4.9
5.3

1. 3
l. 1
.8

-

5.0
5.7

1.2

-

6.0

-

TOTALS
AVERAGES

6.0
6.0

4. l
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4 .10

-

TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

l. l
.75
4.7
l.2
3.2
l.O
.9
.9
.9
28.8 11 .15
4.8
l.01

-

5.45
5.0
4.05
5.55
4.1

.9
.75
.95
6.95
1.3
.8
.8
2.9
.8
.5
.7
.5
6.95 27 .05 8.0
6.95 4.51
.8

-

-

x
x
-

-

-

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x
x
x

-

X?

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

x

x

-

-

-

-x

x
x
x
x

-

x

x

-

-

x

x

-

-

x
x

x
x

x
x
?

x
x

x
x
x

t

it
k

N

00

I

I

Stage 5 - Final Product

41WM57

1

1

Stage

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5.
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

1

Artifact No.

L.

w.

5. 1
5.2
5.3
5 .4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5 .10
5. 11
5. 12
5 .13
5 .14
5. 15
5. 16
5 .17
5.18
5. 19
5.20
5. 21
5.22
5.23

9.0

3.3

-

6.7

-

6.75
5.5
6.5

6.0

4.5
-

3.9
6.3

-

6.9

-

--

-

3.05
3.5
3.2
3.8
3.7
2.9
2.9
3.3
3.2
4.3

-

2.0
2.6
3.25
3.9
2.5
3.3
3.9
2.3
3.5

-

T.
.65
.7
.7
.8
.9
.7
.8
.9
.8
.7
.8
.8
.75
.6
.8
.5
.7
.85
.6
.9 .6
.7
.9

I

I

I

Tool

Reject

x
x

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

?

?

-

-

-

I

Core
Biface

I

I

I

I

Flake

Flaw

Error

x
x
-

x
-

x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x

'

1

I

1

Lateral

Dis ta 1

Edge Angle

Edge Angle

Pederna 1e,,
Bulverde
Nolan
Bulverde
Nolan
Ma rs ha 11
Castrovil le
Bulverde
Cas trovi 1le
Bulverde
Frio
Castrovil le
Cas trovil le
Ensor
Pederna l Es
Montell
Bulverde
Pederna l Es
Marshall
Bulverde
Ensor
Monte 11
Pedernalies

N
\.0

1

1

1

1

I

I

1

1

I

I

1

1

I

I

1

1

1

1

41WM57
Stage
_5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

Artifact No.
5.24
5.25
5.26
5.27
5.28
5.29
5.30
5. 31
5.32
5.33
5.34
5.35
5.36
TOTALS
AVERAGES
RANGE

L.

W.

T.

3.3

3. l
3.85
2.3
3.5

.9
.8

-

6.9

l.O

.7
l.15
6.0 3.0
.7
2.2
.8
.7
4.5 3.0
1.8
.75
.6
4.5 3.25
6. l
.9
6.8 5.7
.85
8. 1 2.6
.9
02 .15 00.9 27.9
6.01 3. 15
.8

-

-

3.3- 1.89.0 6. 1

Tool

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

Reject

Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

X re\ orked

x
x
x
x

-

x
x
x
x

X re1 orked dri 11

-

-

Type

Castrovi 11 e
Pederna l es
Nolan
Pedernales
Bulverde
Pederna l es
Bulverde
Bulverde
Unidentified
Marshall
Marshall
Marshall
Lema

.51.15

..

w

0

1

1

1

1

I

1

1

I

'

I

1

'

1

41WM57
Tools - optional strategies - Irregularly shaped
Stage

~

t

Lateral
Edge Angle

Artifact No. Uni fa- Bi facial cial Function
T-1
T-2
T-3
T-4
T-5
T-6
T-7
T-8
T-9
T-10
T-11
T-12
T-13
T-14
T-15
T-16
T-17
T-18
T-19
T-20
T-21
T-2Z
T-23
T-24
T-25
T-26
T-27
T-28
T-29
T-30

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-

-

Dril

or Pun h

Dril · or Pun h

Proxir al porti n
Di sta

portion

33°130°

-

Distal
Edge Angle

-

-

45° /43°
51°157°
64° /65°
67°
33°
72°/80°
50°

-

73°
60°
70°

-

-

-

-64°
43°
71°/58°
58°
36°
55°
39°
80°
79°
38°/45°
38°

-

37°
52°

80°
65"

-79°

49°

-

66°

-

34°

-

-

75°
58°
87°

-

tr

t

w
__,

1

1

1

1

I

1

I

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

41WM59

Stage l - Including tools as optional strategy
Stage

Artifact No.

I

I. I

2
2
2
2

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
TOTALS
AVERAGES

3
3
3
3
3
3·
3

3. l
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
TOTALS
AVERAGES

L.

w.

no st aoe
8.5
7.4
8.3

-

T.

-

7.0
6.6

-

l.5
1.5

-

l.25
5.65
l.41

-

l.O
l. l
l.05
l. l
.9
l. l
1.2
7 .4!

-

2. l

13. 6~ 16.6
6.8 4.F

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
Edge Angle

I

4.8
4.4
4.9

5.7
4.5
4.3

Core
Biface

Reject

1

24.2 14. l
8.06 4.7

-

Tool

l.4

?

-

x
x
?

-

x
x
x
x

?

-

-

I

x
x
x
x

x
x

x

x
x
-

x
x
x

-

x

-

-

-

88°
63°

49°

-

-

-

-

-

45°/35°
-

52°
53°

51°/67°

-

-

-

80°

l.OE

__,
w
N

1

1

1

I

I

1

1

I

I

I

I

1

I

I

4HJM59
Stage

4
4

5
5
5
5.4

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.
.9
.7
1.6
.8

4. l
4.2

-

-

-

AVER.%E

-

-

5. l
5.2
. 5. 3
5.4

6.9

-

4.3
14 .4
11. 2
5.6

TOTALS
AVERAGES

3.8

-

3.4
5.3
7.2
3.6

.8
.75
.7
.9
3. 1:
.8

Tool

Reject

x
x
x
x
x
x_

Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

Error

I

Lateral
Edge Angle

Dis ta 1
Edge Angle

x
x

?X

Marsha 11
? Fairla hd? Ensor?
Marcos
Knife

•v

I

w
w

I

1

1

I

I

I

I

I

I

1

1

I

I

4lWM73
Stage
l
l
l
l

2
2

3
3·

4
4
4
4

Artifact No.
l.1
l.2
l. 3
l .4
TOTALS
AVERAGES

w.

T.

Tool

6.75

5.6

5.6

3.2
5.4

2. l
l. 5
l .l
1.3

x
x
x
x

L.

4.9

-

-

l 7. 2~ 14.2
5. 7~ 4.7

-

-

-

3. l
3.2
TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

-

4. l
4.2
4.3
4.4
TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

2. l
2.2
TOTALS
AVERJl.GES

-

-

6.0

I

Flake

x
x
x

Flaw

Error

1

Lateral
Edge Angle

-

Distal
Edge Angle

88°

-

55°
63°/79°
70°

x
x·

65°/34°
85°

-

-

l. 5

x
x

.8
l.O
1.8

'

.9

x

l.O

x

.6

-

l.6

-

.5

-

Core
Biface

Reject

.8
.8

.6.

.5
2.4
.6

-

x
-

x
x
x
-

x
x
x

-

w

~

I

1

1

1

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

1

1

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

1

4 HJM73

Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Core
Bi face

Reject

Flake

Flaw

-·-------

5
5
5
5
5
5
5

5
5
5

5. l
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5 .10
TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

-

5.0

3.6
2.45
3.5
2. 2~

5.o

-

5.5

-

3.6'
4.5

-

5. l
28.7
4.0

-

2.2

-

14.0
2.8

.8

.6 I
.7 .
.9
.7
.6~

.6
.8
.6'
6.4
7.1

x

x
x

x

x
x
x
x
x
x

I

Distal
Edge Angle

------

-

?

Cas trovi 11 e
Pederna 1es

?
?

?
?

reworked

?
?

-

Pede males
Bulverde

-

Pedernales
Bulverde
Montell

?
?
?

~

..

I

w

01

1

1

1

I

1

1

I

I

I

I

I

I

Flake

Flaw

1

I

1

I

1

41WM82
Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face
---

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
Edge Angle

---------

No stage l i n t ne col l ection
2

2 .1

-

-

l.3

3
3
3

3. l
3.2
3.3
TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

-

.9
.7
.75
2.35

4
4
4
4·

4. l
4.2
4.3
4.4
TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

-

-

3.0
3.0
3.0

4.5

-

4.4

-

8.9

4 .4'

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

5. 1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7

s. s I -

5.8

5
5

5.9
5 .10

-

2.95

5.0

2.8

4.1

2.6
2.7

-

-

-

2.5

-

-

-

x
x
-

56°

?

-

x
x

x
x
x

44°

-

-

-

-

-

.7

.95
l.O
.9
.8

3.6•
. 91
.7
.6
.7 .6
.6
.9
.7
.8
.8
.7

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x

?
?
?
?
?

x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x

?
?
?
?

reworked

Nolan
Pedernales
Bulverde
Bulverde
? Bulverde
Pederna l es
Pederna l es
Pederna l es
Pedernales

-

w

O"I

1

1

1

I

I

1

I

1

I

I

I

'

'

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

I

1

1

1

41WM86

Stage

Artifact No.

L.

W.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face
- -- -

1
l
l
1
1

2
2
2
2
2

3
3
3
3
3
3
3
,3

l. l
1.2
1.3
1:4
1.5

TOTALS
AVERAGES
2 .1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5

r

3.0
4.5
7. l
7.0
7.9
34.5
6.9
6.6~

-

5.7
8.7

-

5.55
4.3
3.8
8.3
5.3
27.25
5.45

2.2
.95
1.25
2.2
2.2
8.8
l. 76

x
x
x

5.6~

1.6
2.2"
2.3
2.3
l. l
9.5:

x

5.o~

4.5
6.5

-

TOTALS
21 .O! 21. 7
AVERAGES 7 .o~ 5.4~
3. l
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8

5.6
9.5
-

-

3.8
6.8
5.3
4.0
3.8

4.5

x
-

-x

x
x

-

x
x
-

-

x
?
x

Flake
·--

-

Dis ta 1

Edge Angle

-----

-x

70°

-

-

65°

goo
84°
70°
58°
59°

88°

60°

48°

65°

-

-

45u
50°

63°

-

x

70°

x
x

x
x
x
x

-

-70°
-

l. 91

1.0
l.4
1.8
l .5
l.5
.8
l. 3
1.1

TOTALS 15. l 27.85 10.45
AVERAGES 7.55 4.54 l. 31

x
?

-

x
x

-

x

x
x
x

-

x
x

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

-

-

62°

-

.....
w

-....J

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

I

I

1

I

1

I

1

1

l

41\.JM86
Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

Core
T.

Tool

Reject

Biface
--

4
4

5
5
5

41WM88
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
l
l

4.1
4.2
TOTALS
AVEi!AGES
5. l
5.2
5.3
TOTALS
AVERAGES
1.1
1.2
1. 3
1.4
l.5
l.6
l. 7
l.8
l.9
TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

4.7
3.5
8.2
4.1

1 .6
.9

3.5
2.3
2.25
6.4 8.04
6.4 2.07

.9
.8
.55
2.25
.75

-

-

6.4

Error

Lateral

Dis ta 1

Edge Angle

Edge Angle

-

x
x

2.5

Flaw

Flake

I

x
x

1. 25

7.7 4.4
1. 3
8.8 3.6
1.0
9.7
5.4 1. 5
10.7 6. 1 3.3
8.9 8.0
2.3
8.2 5.0 1.5
5.3 4.9
1.1
8.3 6.6
2.9
7.3 7.9 2.6
74.8 51. 9 17. 5
8.31 5.76 l.94

x
x
x

?

-

x
x
?
x
-

?
?
?

-

-

x
x

-

-

x
x
-

x
x

Nolan
Pedernales
Bulverde

x

x
x
-

-

x
x

-

-

w

co

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

Flaw

Error

1

1

1

41 ~IM88
Stage

L.

Artifact No.

w.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face

Flake
--

6.4
2.2
4.95
2.3
4.65
2.4
4.7
2.5
5.4
2.6
4.5
5.4
2.7
2.8
4.9
TOTALS 47.8 35.5
AVERAGES 6.82 4.43

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

2. l

3
3
3
3

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3.11
3.12

3
3

3
3
3
3
3
3

8.25
7.2
8.0
5.7
6. 1
6. 15

-

9.6
9.4

-

-

-

9.0
TOTALS 28.0
AVERAGES 9.3

4.7
6.6
4.7
4.7
5.2

-

7.4
3.95

-

1.65

-

1.4

?
?

2.3
1. 7
2.0
1.95
.95
1.6
13. 55
1.69
1.4
1. 2

1.1
1. 3
1.2

-

.9
1. 3

1.4
1.4
1. l
2.1
4. l
41 .45 14.4
5. 16 1.3
5. 1

X?

-

-

-

-

-

-

X?

---

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

-

-

-

-

Maybe staqe 3 (?)

-

x

-

-

-

x
x

-

Edge Angle

-

-

-

Dis ta 1

--

I

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Lateral

Edge Angle

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

I

snapped
· snapped
snapped
snapped
snapped
snapped
snapped
snapped
snapped

w

l.O

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

Flaw

Error

1

1

1

1

1

41W~88

4

I

4

I

4
4

I

4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

4

L.

Artifact No.

Stage

4.1
-4.2
4. 3
4.~

j

I
I
I

I
I

4

1

4
4
4
4
4
4

I
I
II
I
I

4 I
4 I
4 I

T.

-

Tool

I 6.7 I 4.6 I 1.0 I
- I 4.1 i ---:9 I
I - I 4 .4 I . 85 I

I

-1-T.1 T?.;

l_._7 I

4.5
4.21 .7 1
4.6
I - I 3.0 I .5 I
-4.7
I 6.6 I 3.9 I 1.151
4.8
I 7. 7 T 3.0 I 1-.3 I
4.9
l .6
4.10
l.1
4.11
I - T - I ~81
4.12
16~8,4.3rT~Q
4.13
8.4 3.4 1.15
-4.14-17.814.0Tl.OI
4.15
I - I - I .951
4.16- r-=-r 3-~s r .951 -4 .17
r 6~0 I
-T 1.15\
4.18 - - r-- r 2-:-rr -1.0 I
4.19
I - I - I .8 I
4 .20
I - I - I 1 .1 I
4.21
I - I 2. 7 I .8 I
4.22
I - I - I .9 I
4.23
I -.: I : T i:2 I

I-I-, I

I

4· I
4 I

W.

--=

4. 24
4. 25

I

X

I

x

I

x

I
I
I

X

I

I
I

I
I
I

rI
I
I
I
I
r

I

- I 4-:-2 I

.7 I

I
I

I

-

.8 I

I

I 3. 7 I

TOTALS- T5T.TT50.-2124--:4
7. 13 3. 74f- --;-9 71

Core
Bi face

Reject

X

X
X
X

I

l

j I
I
I -

X

I

x
x

j

I
I

x r -

X

x
x
X
X

x
x
x
X

----F

I ------,-·-

I

X
X

I

I

---,

x

X

Flake

I
I
I
I
I

I

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
Edge Angle

x

-

i

-

1 - x 1 snappeamecffilTfly

x --1 $napped-medT~Tly
--~-XlsrlappedTOrlgijfudinaTly

X I Snapped medi~lly
-,--- -,------1--X T Snapped-mec:fi~Tly-& hinges
-I 1- - -, - X [Sleep fracforles & hinoes
--l- - - I ---:..-1 X !Too thiCk-~-hilnges
x r Too thick, h1inges
X
Snapped
I
, --:------T--X fSn-apped
j
x 1Toosteepon]!Offa1surface

-,

I
I

-,

--,

I

-x I

x

-

X

II

--1- X
I

-,- ----r-·--1- x
I
I
- I
X
I
I
- I
x

r

I
I
I
I

I
I
I

I
I

I
I

1 -l
I

I

I

I

-

I
I
I
l

X
X
X

l
I

X

-

I

-

x

X
X

Hinoes & stedp fracture
Snapped

Snapped
Snapped
Snapped
Snapped;
Snapped
Snapped

AVE~

__,
.i::.

0

1

1

1

1

I

'

I

1

1

Staqes - Fina 1 Product

Stage

Artifact No.

L.

W.

T.

Tool

Reject

I

I

1

I

41 WM 88
Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

Lateral
Edge Angle

Error

Type

---

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
!J

_,

t

lt
~

5
5
5·
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

5. 1
5 .2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5 .6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5 .10
5 .11
5 .12
5. 13
5. 14
5. 15
5. 16
5 .17
5 .18
5.19
5.20
5 .21
5.22
5.23
5.24
5.25
5.26
5.27
5.28
5.29
5.30
5.31
TOTAL
AVERAGE

3.4
5.8
3.2
8.0
5.8
3.3
5.8
3.0
5. i- --3.0
4. l
6.6
3.5
7.2
3.5

.4
.8
.55
.9
. 7--.7
.55
.7
.65
.8
5.5
2.85 .75
.7
3.6
.7
2.5
5.4
.6
4. 75 3.0
.8
4.7
2.25 . 5
.7
3.6
1.6
l. l'
.7
3. l
.85
5.6
2.2
l. l
3 .4' . 7
4.2
3. 1
.7
.6
4.0
.8
.63
2.8
.9
l.5
2.9
.8
2.0
.9
.75
78.05 66.85 23.9
5.57 3.03 . 77

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

- s ta\qe 4 maybe

-

x
x
x

x
-

-

Castroville

-

Ensor
Bulverde
Ca s t ro vil 1e
Castro v il 1e
x
?
Marshall
x
Pede males
~1a rs ha 11 (?
x
x
Pederna l es
Bulverde
Pede males
x fr cture
Pedernales
Frio
Pede ma 1es
Ensor
X or impact fractur e Castrovil 11e
Oar
- II
II
II
Castroville
x II
II
II
Pedernales
x

-

x

x
-

x
x
x

?
Castroville (?)
II

II

II

?

II

II

II

Cas trovi 11 e
?
?

I

II

II

I

II

II

I

II

II

I

II

II

?

I

II

II

?

-

x
x

?
?

__.
~

1

I

1

1

1

1

I

I

I

1

Tools Optional strategy
Stage

Artifact No.

L.

W.

T.

Tool

1

'

1

I

I

1

1

1

41 vJM 115
Core
Bi face

Reject

Flake

Flaw

Error
-

Lateral

Distal

Edge Angle

Edge Angle

-·----

I
1
1
1
l
l

1
1
1
l

1.1
1. 2
l. 3
1.4
l. 5
l.6
l. 7
l.8
l. 9

7.0
10. 65
4.6
6.7 ~5-:6
5.25 3.0
6.3 8.0
5.;~ 4.1
10.5 8.4
g_g
4.8
66.75 55.5
7.42 6. l7

2.9
2.9
1.65
l.5
l.O
l.4
1.2
3.45
2.2
18. 20
2.02

2. 1
2.2
2.3
2.4

8.5 6.55
10.9 4.8
8.6 5.6
9.3 4.25
37.3
5.3
9.33 5.3

2.4
2.9
2.5
2.7
2 .63
2 .63

TOTAL
AVERAGE

z
2
2
2

TOTAL

AVERAGE
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

g_g
5.4
6.3

3. l
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8

TOTAL
AVERAGE

7_g

3_g

-

-

6.0

4.9

-

1.0
.9
1.2
1.0
.7
.65
.6

3.6
3.7
l. l
13.9 16. 1 7 .15
6.95 4.03
.9

-

x
x
x
x
x

x
-

x
x

x
x

-

x
x
x
x

x

-

?

x

?

?

-

-

x
-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

x

x

-

x
x
x

-

x

-

85/100°
40°

x

x

-

70/35°
58/86°
8g/68°
50°
85°
72/85°

x
-

60/77°
goo
85°
80.)
60°
8g 0
goo
.;.

x
x
x
x
-

x

50°

38°

x
x

x
x
x

~

N

1

1

1

1

'

1

I

1

I

I

'

1

'

1

Flaw

Error

'

1

1

41 WM 115

Stage

4
4

4

Artifact No.

4 .1
4.2
4.3
TOTAL
AVERAGE

5
5
5

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

5. 1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5 .10
5. 11
5. 12
5.13
5 .14
5.15
5 .16
5. 17
TOTAL
AVERAGE

L.

I -

-

w.

T.

4. l

.85
.6
l.05
2.50
2.50

-

5.3
5.3
5.3

4. l
8.2
4. l

6.6

4.7
2.5
2.9
3.0
4.35
2.9
2.8
3.2
2.6
2.95

-

6.25

-

-

-

8.7

-

-

-

-

3.6
2.5

-

.9
.8
.8
.8
.65
.8
.7
.85
.7
.95
.55
.6
.8
.9
.8
.8

4.6
3.4i
7.9
2.2
.8
29.45 48.25 13. 20
7.36 3.22 .78

Core
Bi face

Tool

Reject

?

x
x
x

x
x

x

x?

x

x
x
x
x

Lateral
Edge Angle

-

Marshall

-

Bulverde
Bulverde
Pedernales
Pedernales
Bulverde

x

-

?

-

x
x
x
x
x
x

x?

-

-

x

Type

x

?
?
?
?

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Flake

x?

x?
?

x?
x?
?

No Jan
Pederna 1es
Monte 11
Monte 11
?
Bulverde (que!SS)
Bulverde
Bulverde
Sul verde ( que ss)

......

+::>

w

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

1

I

1

I

I

I

1

1

'

1

41 WM 260

Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Biface

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral

Dis ta 1

Edge Angle

Edge Angle

--·-

l
l

l. l
l. 2
l. 3
TOTAL
AVERAGE

2
2
2

2. l
2.2
2.3

l

lOTAL
AVERAGE

3
3
3
3
3

3. l
3. 2
3.3
3.4
3.5

4

5

-

6.9
10.4 4.4
4. l
10.4 15.4
10.4 5. l 3

-

3.9
2.7
3.2
9.8
3.3

x
x
x

x
-

1.8
1.85
l .45
5. l
1. 7

?

x

-

x
x

.15

-

x

4.8
4.5
5.9

x

-

l.4
l.O

5.2
20.4
5 .1

l.4
l. 35
6.65
1. 33

-

-

l.O

TOTAL
AVERAGE

-

-

1.0
2.0
1.0

5. l

-

2.4

.4

TOTAL
AVERAGE
4

9. l
7.4
9.2
8. 1
12.2 5.9
30.5 21. 4
l 0. 16 7. 13

4. l
4.2

-

-

?

?

-

x

I

-

-

770

-

90°

80°

-

-

x

-

I

x

x
x

-

x

x
x

x

x
x

x
x

x

x

x

x

?

I

-

-

58/65°

-

73°
-

60°

-

-

60°

Ensor

I

__,
~
~

1

1

1

1

I

I

1

I

1

I

1

1

I

I

1

Flake

Flaw

Error

1

l

1

41 WM 328
Surf ace - hearth area
Stage

Artifact No.

W.

L.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face
-

-

-

-

-·---·-

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
Edge Angle

----

No ~ taae l
2
2
3
4
5

2. l
2. l

6.85 4.35

.9

-

-

1. l

7.3

4.7

. 95

x
x

x

-

x

-

x

41°
58°

-

-

NONE
4. l

x

x

NONE
TEST P T 1, I EVEL ,

i·

l. l
1.2
l. 3
1.4
TOTAL
AVERAGE

3.2
2.5
4.35
2.7
12.75
3. 19

2
2

2. 1
2.2
TOTAL
AVERAGE

6. l
4.2
6.2 3.5
12.3 7.7
6. 15 3.85

3

NONE

4

NONE

l
l
1

5

5. l

-

3.0
2.5
2.2
2.5
10.2
2.55

-

. 95
l. l
1. 3

.6
3.95
.99
2.0
l . 25'
3.25
1.63

x
x
x
x

x
x

69°
60°
84°

x
x

x
x

x
-

.5

-

x

-

x

-

?

-

52°

85°
goo

Ensor

I

__,
.i::..
U1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

41 WM 328
LEVEL 2 - Test Pit l

Stage
1
1
l

Artifact No.

L.

1. l
l. 2
l. 3

8.3
3. 1
3.8
15.2
5.06

TOTAL
AVERAG_E_
2

2. l

3

3. l

4

NONE

5

NONE

-

w.

T.

l. 4
5.1
2.5
.6
2.65 . 9
10.25 2.9
3.42 2.9

-

1. 65

-

.9

Tool

x
x
x

-

-

-

-

-

.9

-

Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

Error

x
x
x
x

x

LEVEL 3 - U ilize flak1 and etoucr.
T-1
T-2

Reject

* relative to artifact
numt::ers, large area debitage,
th1 nn i rig flakes or flints
Distal
Lateral
Edge Angle
Edge Angle
76°
39°

-

43°

-

59°

x
x

60°

lake
85°
69°
61°
* Mt ssel she l prese1 t in this l evE l '
sr all thinr i ng (pr( bably) pressur eflakes
r1 touch fl< ke has ( ld use edge ( -2)

see *

x

x
x

x
x

LEVEL 4 T-1
T-2

1.0

.9

770

-

83°
sm 11 thinn ng flake , presen - burned crac k on the dirt
2 lakes - tilized ~ T-1 an 2-.

.t::>

0"1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

Flaw

Error

1

1

1

1

1

1

41 WM 328
LEVEL 2 - Test Pit 1 (cont.)

Stage

Artifact

No.

w.

L.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face
--

Flake
-

Lateral
Edge Angle

Dis ta 1
Edge Angle

-

'

LEVEL 5
NO UTILIZED

LAKES FOUND - SMAl L AMOUN

LEVEL 6
STAGE 2 FLA ES AN
2. l
6.9
T-1

OF FLINT FALKES FOU

RETOt CH FU KE ANGLE WILL BE ( IVEN
5. 1
x
l. 2

m IN

x

LEV ::L 5 of 1 . p. l

50°

-

-

71°

LEVEL 7
ONLY VERY SM LL PO TION

F LFI1 T FLAKE' (THIN. SM! LL} FOUND

_,
.i:.
-....J

1

I

I

1

I

1

1

1

I

Artifact No.

L.

W.

T.

1

1. 1

14.5

5. 1

5.05

2

2.3

-

-

2.0

Tool

I

1

1

1

1

Surface collection - Quarry area

41 WM 329

Stage

I

Reject

x
x

Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

Dis ta 1
Edge Angle

soa 11

x

BURNED ROCK AREA u 2

1
1

2. l
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6

3

2.9
2.5
.8
1. 9
2.7
8.0 7.0 2.7
32.5 26.8 13. 5
6.5 5.36 2.25

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x

-

3. 1
3.2
3.3
3.4
TOTAL
AVERAGE

x
x

11. 6
11. 2
3.2
6.5

TOTAL
AVERAGE

3
3
3

x
x

-

TOTAL
AVERAGE

2
2
2·
2
2
2

3.2
2.7
5.4
2.95

11. 3 5.4
8.4
11. 3 13. 8
11. 3 6.9

1. l
1. 2

-

7.5

I

I

7.5

.5.8
5.7
3.8
4.5

-

3.9
-

1. 8
1. 75
1.8
1.0
6.35
3.9 1. 58

x

-

-770
-

-

-

-

x

Surfac e co 11 ection - Qua ~rv Site Area # 3
Preparation ~hase of stage prodLJction p"'esent. Large thinni1g falkes with bul Ds of pe'cussi6n (larg I>)
Rejects are flakes too thin to 11ithstand force of flaking O' thinning. Lots o
11ak ~s
with prominert bults of ~ercussion in this area.

• deco••r't•••to•

_.
~

co

1

1

1

1

1
1

Artifact No.

L.

1. 1
1. 2

14.2
8.55
22.75
11.38

TOTAL
AVERAGE

w.

T.

7.4 4. 1
2. 1 l.O
9.5 5. l
4.8 2.55

Tool

2. 1

4. 1

3.0

.5

x

3

3. l

-

-

.6

?

'l

4. l
4.2

-

-

-

-

5

5
5

TOTAL
AVERAGE

5. l
5.2
5.3
TOTAL
AVERAGE

-

. 14
l. 1

-

.6

. 55
l. 15
.58
.35
.35
.3

2.5 1. 00
l. 25 . 3

Reject

x
x

2

4

I

1

I

1

1

I

1

1

Surface and Level 1 of Test Pit 1

41 vlM 330

Stage

I

I

1

1

1

x
x
x

x
x
x

Lateral
Edge Angle

Core
Bi face

Flake

x
-

x
x

a1°

x

76/75°

Flaw

Error

-

Dis ta 1

Edge Angle
i::c::. 0 r.111<:
lnrinriinn nr
l:>hr:>rlinn c:tnn e

x
x

-

35°

X I urned)

?
?

?

. Sea 11 orn
Scallorn
Scallorn

...._,
\,0

1

I

1

1

'

'

1

1

1

l

I

41HM330

level 2

Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

--·--

l

1. l

9.3

5.0

l.8

2

2.1

8. 1

3.75

l. 9

3

3. 1

-

-

.8

4. 1

-

-

.65
1.45
. 73

-

-

.5
.3
.35

4

-·
5
. 5
5.
5
5

Total
AVERAGE

5. 1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5

TOTAL
AVERAGE

6.8
6.8

-

2.35
2.35

-

l. 55

-

-

.2

.25
l. 55 1. 6
l. 55 . 32

x
x
x
-

Core
Biface

Reject

Tool
---

Flake

Error

Flaw

lateral
Edge Angle

Dis ta 1
Edge Angle

-----

I

I

x

x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

?
?
?
?

62°

-

64°

45°

54°

-

-

-

?

Starr ?
Sea 11 orn

-

Scallorn

BO ~E PRESENT -BIRD AN ) OTHERS

_..
01

0

1

I

1

1

I

I

1

I

1

1

1

l

1

1

I

1

41 WM 330
Level 3

Stage

Artifact No.

l

1. l
l. 2
l. 3

l
l

TOT/\LS
AVERAGES

2
~

2

4
44

L.

W.

T.

Tool

7.4
4.5
6. l
9.6
7.2 2. l
1.4
7.0 4. l
22.7 18.7 8.0
7.56 6.23 2.6

x
x
x

2. 1
2.2
2.3

4.2
5.4

4.0
3.5

TOTALS
AVERAGES

9.6
4.8

7.5
3.75

-

-

4. l
4.2
4.3
TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

-

-

-

-

.6
.45
.9
l. 95
.65

x
x
x

.4
.35
.4
1. 15
. 38

x
x

-

Reject

Core
Bi face

Flake

Error

Flaw

I

x
x
x

-

x
x

-

x

-

Lateral

Distal

Edge Angle

Edge Angle
60°

20°/30°
19°/18°
38°

20°
60°

-

70°

.•

-

63°
45°
60°

-

-

-

85°

-

Animal bone pre sent - some ourned

_,
U1

1

'

1

1

1

'

I

I

I

1

J

1

1

I

I

1

1

1

1

41 WM 330

Level 4
Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

7.4
6.65
6. l
6.7
7.3
7.9
42.05
7 .01

8.05
2.9
8.35
7.0
4. l
4.8
35.2
5.86

4. l
l. 7
2.7
l .7
l.5
l. 9
13. 6
2.26

l
1
1
l
l
l

l. l
1.2
l.3
l.4
l.5
l.6
TOTAL:S
AVERAGES

2

2. l

-

-

3

None

-

-

-

4-

4. l
4.2
4.3
TOTALS
AVERAGES

-

-

6.0
2.7

l.O

-

-

8.7
4.35

.9
.3
2.2
.73

5. l

-

3. 5~

.7

4
4

5

-

.8

Tool

Reject

Core
Biface

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

-

x
x
x
x

Drill

-

-

-

x

x
x
x
Dar

-

Point

~ase

770

-

70°
75°
85°

36°
75°

55°

-

81°

-

-

-

x

Distal
Edge Angle

-

Marshal 1?

Bone and Musse 1 she 1l in 1 his le ve l (4) .
Bone - large sr 1i nte1 ed pie ces ir some ca ses

......
U1
N

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

41 WM 330
Level 5 - No
Stage

stag~s_cj_i_s_~er_nable_--

Artifact No.
T-1
T-2
T-3
T-4

L.
-

w.
-

util_ized fl9ke and edge anqles recorded

T.
1.5
.35
1.2
.4

Tool

I

x
x
x
x

Al so bone pre ent i , this level - splin ered and
LEVE

6 - No stages H seer nab le
T-1
T-2
T-3
T-4
T-5
Bone present

LEVE L 7
l
l
l
l

l. 1
1.2
1. 3
1.4
TOTALS
AVERAGES

Flake

x
x
x
x

Lateral
Edge Angle

Error

Flaw

I

4. l
1.6
l. 7
3.4
l 0.8
2.7

x
x
x
x

Distal
Edge Angle

65°
32°

-

-

66°

-

29°

-

60°
74°
75°
60°

-

ome partic lly burnE d

util zed flal es - edge angles re< orded
1.2
x
x
.6
x
x
1.4
x
x
.3
x
x
1.1
x
x

some burne ~; sma l roden
10.7
7.2
7.8
3.7
5.9
4.5
7.9
5.0
32.3 20.4
8.08 5. I

Core
Bi face

Reject

-

jaw port on pre sen"

-

61 °
75°

-

x
x
x
x

80°
66°/50°
68°

I

-

-

80°
60°

......
01

w

1

1

1

I

I

1

1

1

1

1

I

1

I

1

1

1

41 WM 330
Level 7 continued
Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

l. l

x
x

2
2

2. 1
2.2
TOTALS
AVERAGES

5. 1 3.4
4.8 3.0
9.9 6.4
4.95 3.2

3

3.1

6.9

-

4

None

5
5

5. 1
5.2
TOTALS
AVERAGES

3.0

1. 3

-

3.0
3.0

-

1.3
1. 3

.8
l.9
.95
1.0

.35
.2
.55
.28

Reject

. x

Flake

Flaw

Lateral
Edge Angle

Error

x

x
x

LEVE ~ 8 No di scernab le sta ~es - ~xcept on (T-1
T-1
6.0 5. 15 l. 35
x
4.8 3.2
T-2
.6
x
2.3 2. l
.4
T-3
x
T-4
.7
x
4. 15 1.4 1.0
x
T-5
·17 .25 11 .85 4.05
(T- 3 mav
TOTALS
AVERAGES 4. 31 2.96
. 81
No )hell
Fli nt is
I
I

Core
Bi face

-

-

-

x
-

75°
55°

-

48°

-

Scallorn

-

?

Bon

Distal
Edge Angle

al so pre ent in Li ve l 7 ts me burnt d)

x
x

-

be s aqe 3 rej ect-snapp ~d)
or b ~ne found ~n this 1 'Ve1 in T p. I.
gene "'ally qrai hY and po t>r qualitv

-

x
-

-

61°
47° .
80°/80v
55°
87°

85°

-

80°

-

__,
U1
~

1

1

I

I

I

1

I

1

I

I

1

1

I

I

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

1

1

1

41 WM 330
Level 9
Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Core
Bi face

Reject

Flake

Flaw

-

T-1
2. l
T-2
No shell or bo ne rep1 1rted n thi
WEST WALL PROFILE (C EANED
l
l. l
7. l 4. l
l
1.2
8.0 5.4
TOTALS
15. l 9.5
AVERAGES 7.58 4.75
2

2. l

3

3. l

4

4. l

5

-

5.1

3. l

x
x

Retouch

x I

f

ake - war king edge knocked c ff - toe dull

--

~

Distal
Edge Angle
-

---

70°
75° edce

---·

----

-

level

x

2.5
2.2
4.7
2.35

x

.8

x

l. l

.6

-

x

x
x
x

x
x
x

95°
45°

90° (fossil)

50°

-

-

-

None
No she 11 or be ne pre sent i n this area cl eaned.

__,
U'1
U'1

I

I

1

I

I

I

I

I

1

I

1

•

I

41 WM 330

West Wall Profile cleaned
Stage
1
l
1

Core
Bi face

Artifact No.

L.

W.

T.

1.1
1.2
l. 3
TOTALS
AVERAGES

11.0
8.0
9.3
28.3
9.4

4.8
6. l
6.8
17. 7
5.9

1.9
1.8
2.0
5. 7
l.9

x
x

x
x

.9
.6
.9
2.4
.8

x
x

x
x

.7

?

(Deb itage)
2. l
2
2
2.2
2
2.3
TOTALS

AVERAGES
3-

None

4

4. l

5

None

6.3 4. l
4.2
2.9
5.3
3 .85
15.8 10.85
5.3 3.7

-

2.8

Wes1 Wall Profile (c is turb ed)
1
8. l
l. l
7.0
.8
l
l .2
6.2 5.2c 1.5
1
l. 3
5.3 3.7
l.4
1
4.8 4. l
1.4
3.0
1
1.5
6.8 6.6
2. 15
TOTALS I 31 .z 26.65 8.85
AVERAGES 6.2il 5.33 1. 77

Tool

Reject

x

Flake

x

x

x

Latera 1
Edge Angle

Error

Flaw
I

-

-

Distal
Edge Angle

290
44°
53°

-

35°/70°
85°
86°/32°

-

-

Bone oresent

x
x
x
x

x

x

x

x
x

x
x

x

-

-

55°

40°
75u
80°
64"'
44°

-

-

-

U1
0)

I

1

1

1

I

I

1

I

1

1

1

1

I

I

'

1

41 WM 342

General Surface
Core

Stage
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l

2
2.
2
2

2
2
2
2
2

~
t+

t
f
~·

3
3
3
3
3

Artifact No.

W.

L.

T.

l. l
l.2
l.3
l.4
l.5
l.6
l. 7
l.8
l.9

14.9
12.8
10.7
11. 35
6.4
6.3
5.5
6.0
12.6
86.55
9.62

2. l
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9

2. 15
5.2 .7
2.75
5.0 8.45 I. 75
6.05 8.45 l.3
4.55 2.6
.6
1.0
4.8 3.6
.9
4.7
2.95
.85
51.6 34.0 9.25
6.45 4.9
1.16

TOTALS
AVERAGES

TOTALS
AVERAGES
3. l
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5

TOTALS
AVERAGES

12. 0

-

8.7

7.95 4.7
7.45 2.8
5.3 2.5
7.7
l.5
3.3 1.4
3.3 1.0
2.8 1.2
2.9
l.2
7 .1
2.2
47.8 18.5
5. 31 2.05

-

4.95 l. 75
3.4 l.O
3.65 1.0
.8
l.O
14.3 12.0 5.55
7 .15 4.0 l.11

-5.6

Tool

Reject

x
x

x
x
x

?

x

Flake

x
x
-

·x

-

-x

-

Biface

x
x
-

x

-

x
xx
x
x
x

-

--

-

-

x

x
-

x

x

x

-

-x

-

-

x
x
x

-

x
x
x
x
x
x

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

-

-

Distal
Edge Angle

75°
-

-

-

60°
54°
43°
80°
65°
81°
54°

x

-

-

-

-

-

x

-

x
-

-

-

-

x
x
x
-

-

60°
70°
45°
39°
71°
63°
44°

-

-

57°
59°

-

-

33°
73°

-

-

51°
59°

66°

82°

85°

-

-

76

l

~

__,
01
-...i

1

1

1

1

I

I

1

1

I

1

1

1

1

1

41 WM 342
~!l~raj __s_urf_a_fe_ {Co_r1t.j
Stage

4
4
4

Artifact No.

L.

4. l
4.2

-

5.6

-

4.3

TOTAL
AVERAGE

5
5
5
5

5. l
5.2
5.3
5.4

TOTAL
AVERAGE

5.6

-

4.6

w.

Core
T.

4.0
.85
4.3
.9
3. 1 .7
11. 4 2.45
3.8
.82
3. l
2.3

-6.0 -

-

10.6 5.4
5.3 2.7

.7
.55
.7
.75
2.70
.68

Tool

-x
x

x
x
x

x

Reject

x

.x

Biface

Flake

Flaw

Error

x
x
x
?
?
?
?

Lateral

Distal

Edge Angle

Edge Angle

-

78°
-

-

84/73°

-

Pedernales
Pedernales
Pedernal es

..

,

-

_,
()"I

co

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

I

1

1

1

1

1

1

Flaw

Error

1

1

1

41 WM 342
Transect I (15 x 100 ft.)

Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face
---

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
I

l

l
I

l
l
l
l

1
I

1. l
1. 2
1. 3
1.4
1. 5
1.6
1. 7
1.8
1. 9
1. 10
1. 11
1. 12
1. 13
1. 14
1. 15
1. 16
1. 17
1. 18
1. 19
1. 20
1. 21
l. 22
1. 23
1. 24
1. 25
1. 26
l.27
l.28

TOTAL
AVERAGE

11. 7 7.4 1. 9
11. 6 7. l
3.2
11. 7 4.8 3. 15
8.9 6.0 4.6
9.35 7.3 5.0
10. 1 6.4 3.0
9. l
5.5 2. 1
4.7 3.2 1. 1
5.4 3.8 l. 5
4.2 4.3 l. 3
3.0 5.7 1. 3
4.5 3.2 1. 2
4.2 4.5 l. 0
6.8 5.,. l. 3
2.0 4.5
.8
6.6 4.2 l. 7
9.0! 7.0 2.2
6.9 4.7 1.8
3.8 4.4 1. 7
11. 5 7.0
3.6
3.6 1.8 l. 4t
3.9 3.3 1. 0
3.7 3.0 l. 3
2.5 3.6 1. 0
5.5 2.5 1. 2
3.3 3.7
.7
5.2 6.4 1.8 11
3.4 2.4
.7
177 .2( 133.3 1 52.6!
6.33 4.76 l.88

x
x

-x
x

-x

x

x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

--·

Flake
-

-

x

x
-

-

x

-x
-

-

-x
-

-

-

x.
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

--

Lateral
Edge Angle

Dis ta 1

40°
66°

-

Edge Angle

-------

-

x
x
-

x
-

76°

-76°

-72°

-

71°

-

70°
64°
50°
67°
73°

.

-

53°

-

-

85°
75°

-

78°

-

66°
62°
60°
70°

-

770
73°
75°

go

-

73°

-

-

-

82°

Rl 0

-

67°
41°

770

;lf;O

I

f;i:;o

An°

-

......
01

"°

I

1

1

1

I

1

1

I

1

•

I

I

41 WM 342
Transect I (15 x 100 ft.)
Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Core
Tool

Reject
-

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

TOTAL

2. 1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2. 10
2.11
2. 12
2. 13
2 .14
2 .15
2. 16
2. 17
2. 18
2. 19
2.20
2. 21

AVERAGE
3
3

4

6.7
8.4"
6.3

5.95
4.85

2.45
l.8
3.9~
2.0
4.2
l. 7
8.5 4.9
3.0
9.0 3 .6 1 l.6
3.3 2.4
. 75
3.8 4.6
1. 5
2.8• 2.6
.9
3. l
3.4
1.0
i.2•
3.9
2.5
.5
5.0 3.5
l. 1
- 1 2.6 .85
3.2 3.0
.6
5. l
2.9
.8
.8
3.9
2. l
2.9
3. 61 .75
6.7 l 3.8
l. 3
3.7 l 4. 7 .8
3.6 3.9 1. 0
90.15 73. 15 27.05

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

4.74

3.66

1.29

3.1
3.2

-

3.6
4.9
8.5
4.25

1. l
1.2
2.3
l.15

x
x

4. 1

-

5.6

1.3

x

TOTAL
AVERAGE

--·-

Biface

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral

Dis ta 1

Edge Angle

Edge Angle

83°
78/46°
-

85°
65°

-

x
x

x
x
x

x

x
x
x
x

-

-

x
x
x.
x

x
x
x
x
-

-

x
x
x

-

x
x
x
x

x
x

x

80°
69°
68°
63°
69°
goo
75°
58°
40°
53°
66°
61°
63°
44°
52°
62°

70°
62/73°

-

82°

-

70°
-

67°

70°
-

67°

-

63°

-

-

.....

°'

0

I

'

1

I

I

I

41 WM 342
Transect I (15 x 100 ft.)

Stage
5
5
5

Artifact No.

1

l
l
l

r
l
l
l
l

--

5. 1
5.2
5.3
TOTAL
AVERAGE
",

1

L.

-

11.•

...

....

w.
-

3. l

-

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face

Flake

;:::

i:'..

~

tiurverae
Bulverde

-{

?
?

-

n
~

x
x

-

9.7

-

2.8
5.7

o.J

-

4.4
4.45
5.7
5. ~

3.8)
1.8
1.2
.95
2.3)

x
x
x
-

60°

x

-

x

53°
48°
35°
58°
75/70°
51°
50°

x
x

x
x
x
x
....
~

2. 1
2.2
2.3
2.4

Dis ta 1
Edge Angle
-

x
x
x

.95
.9
.7
2. s~
.88

Area "A" - Gener, l sur ace c< 1lectior
l. l
12.3 9.6 4.4
x
l. 2
x
l 0. l 5.3 2.4
1. 3
5.6
5.4 l. 6
x
1.4
x
7.6
4.7 l. 9
1. 5
x
5.75 5.5 l. l
x
l. 6
5.05 2.6
.75
l. 7
5.2
x
5.3 l.8
1.8
10.2 7.7 2. l
x
l. 9
8.8
5.0 1.4
x
1. l 0
5.3
x
2.5 l.4
TOTAL
75.90 53.65 18.85
AVERAGE
7.59 5.37 l.87

2
2
2
2

Lateral
Edge Angle

Error

Flaw

x
x

L
~

-x

x
x

-

::1

.J .... ..,

''-

,....

....... i;;;1

x

-x

...

I

,.,--

-~

~

..

-

66°
58°

-

-

-

L - \
~--1

-

69°
g70

-

-

-

51°

-

__,
O'\
__,

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

1

I

I

1

1

1

1

41 WM 342
Area "A" - General Surface Collection

Stage
2
2
2
2
2
2

Artifact No.
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2 .10
2.11
TOTALS
AVERAGES

3
3
3
3
3·
3

4
4
4
4
4
4

L.

IL

4.3 5.4
6.95 4.4
6. 15 3 .15 4.85
4.8
3.95

-

-

T.

Tool

Reject

1.5
2.3
.8
.55
l. 35

x
x
x
x
x
-

-

x

x
x

-

49.85 38.55 16.65
5.54 4.82 l.67

3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6

9.45

3.6
-

l. 9
.95
1.4
1.4
l. 3

TOTALS
AVERAGES

9 .4' 10.6
9.4! 5.3

8.0
1. 3.

4.1
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5 .
4.6

-

-

-

-

7.0

-

4.6
3.9

-

4.8

-

4.0

l.O:

.9
1.0
.7
.8
.7
.8

x
-

x

x

-

x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

-

Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

Lateral
Edge Angle

Error

x
x

45°

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

-

84°
60°

55°
53°
53°

62°

-

66°

-

x
x

Distal
Edge Angle

-

Retouch -

-

-

-

x

-

X?

46°

-

x

x

x

X?

x

-

49°

-

flake

-

-

.....
0\

N

I

1

I

1

1

1

1

1

1

I

1

I

41 WM 342
Area "A" - Test Pit I - Surface

Artifact No.

Stage

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Core
Reject

Biface

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

Di sta 1

Edge Ang1e

No staqe l
2

2.1

11.8 I 7.4 I 1.4

x

5

5. 1

3.8

.65

x

LEVEL l
1.1

4. l I 3. l

.6

x

2

2. l

x

64°

x

770

x

x

1.25

LEVEL 2

N/A

Area "B"

Gener~l

Sur!face Cbl 1ectron

l
I
1. 1
I 12. 6 I 1o. o I 4. 25
1 I - -1.Z- -113.2 17 .2~1 2. 7
1.3110~ l-6.6 I 3.7
1 1
i -1 1. 4--11~~5r-4. 4-1 3. 55
l
7
4 .or
1
1 . 6 1 4 . 8 6.85 3.71
TOTALS -l75-:9d 42.40T21.91
AVERAGES I 12:051-7~11 .61

x

H

! . 1.5 - - -F9.351 .TI

x

--

x

x
x

I -- x -, -

x
x
-=--

-

x
x

71°

I - :.- l -x I x 1· x

-

Flin

-

72°

70°

86°

I

67°

-

hammerstone recovere

.....

m
w

I

1

1

1

1

1

41 WM 342
Area
Stage

11

8 11

-

General Surface Collection

Artifact No.

W.

L.

Tool

T.

Reject

Core
Bi face

-

x

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
Edge Angle

-~-

I

2
2
2
2

2. l
2.2
2.3
2.4
TOTALS
AVERAGES

7.0
4 .15
7.0
5. l
23.25
5 .81

5.8
3.9
4. l
2.9
16.7
4.2

.6
.6
.85
l. l
3.15
.79

3
3

3. l
3.2
TOTALS
AVERAGES

8.7
8.7
8.7

-

4.95
7.7
12.65
6.33

2.0
l.85
3.85
l. 93

Area "C" - General Surface Colle
l
l. l
10.5 8.45
1
1.2
9.3 5.9
l
l. 3
8.2 4. l
l
1.4
l
l. 5
9.7 5.3
l
l.6
10.2 4.5
l
1. 7
6.9 9.3
l
1.8
11.5 5.1
l
l.9
9.0 5.5
1
l. 10
6.3 5 .2 1
1
l. 11
9.8 5.3
. 1
1. 12
7.7 6.5
1
1.13
4.8 3. 1~
TOTALS
03.9 68.35
AVERAGES
8.66 5.7

ti on
4. l
4.5
l.2
1.6
3.5
2.0
l. 35
3.6
3.2
2.0
3.0
3.4
1.0
34.45
2.65

No staqes

~

and

x
x
x

?

-

x
x
x

x
x

x
-

-

-

66°

65°
76°

-

-

x
x

:i

-

x

x
x
x
x
-x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

-

-

x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x
x
-

-

-

74°

73°

63°
67°

86°
-

-

-

-

-

82°

-55°

-

-

-

.....

°"
.i::..

41 l·JM 342

Area "C" - General Surface collection
Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Biface

Flake

Flaw

Error

--

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2.
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

2. l
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2 .10
2.11
2. 12
2. 13
2 .14
2. 15
2 .16
2. 17
2 .18
2. 19
2.20
2. 21
2.22
2.23
2.24
2.25
2.26
2.27
2.28
2.29
2.30
TOTALS
AVERAGES

8.7
7.6
8.0
8.5
5.0
5.7
3. l
3.6
3.8
5. l
5.6
6.0
3. 851
7.5
6.2

6.6
4.4
5.95
7.2
5.45
2.8
3.5
3. l
4.35
6.2
6.3
4.9
4. 5
4.4
3.2

5.4
6.0
5.3
3.85
4.6
4.5

5.1
4.2
3.3
3.55
3.6
3.5

-

-

-

6.2
5.2
4.7

-

-

3.4
4.0
3.4

-

l. 8
l. 9~

2.8
l. 9
3.45
l.65
.95
.7
l.45
l. l
l.85
l. l
l.4
2.0
l .4
2.0
l. l
l.O
.9

.6
.7
l.1
l. 3
2.0
.9
1.0
.9!:

7.2
4.4
2. l
5.0
3.6
l. l
2.75
.6
3.7
49.95 21 .65 42.85
5.55 4.51 l.43

x

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

x
x
x
-

-

x

x
x

x
-

x

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-

x
-

x

x

x
x

-

I

-

x
x
x
-

Lateral
Edge Angle
-------

54°

goo

-

-

-

38°

-

66°
68°
75 °
69°

-

67°

--

73°/70°
69°

-

x

-

--

x
x

-

x
x

-

Dis ta 1
Edge Angle

63°
720

-

-

-

69°

-

-

90°

-

-

-

59°
59°
65°
64°
bCJu
55u
65° Retouch-- ·emoval of fliake
54°
57°

-

-

68°
63°

74°

-

80°
65°

-

-

-

79°

-

_,

°'
(J1

1·--

1

1

1

41 HM 342
Area "C" - General Surface Collection

Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Biface

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
Edge Angle

-·----~

3.1
3.2
3.3

3
3
3

TOTALS
AVERAGES

4. 1
4.2

4
4

TOTALS
AVERAGES

5
5

5. l
5.2
10TALS
AVERAGES

-

-

3.8
3.8
3.8

-

1. 0
l. 2
1. 8

x

-

?

1.0

?

3.5
3.5

.9
1. 9
.91

3.2
2-:85

.9
.7

6.0~

1.6
.8

x
x

3.0:

x
x

x
x

x
x

-

-

-

64°

-

4.0
1. 3

3.5

-

-

-

x
x

41 WM342 1Area C" - Spi r, 1 Sur1 ace Cc 11 ec ti on
1
1. 1
11 . 2! 7.5 4.3
l
1.2
8.3
7. l
2.7
1
1. 3
5.9
7.0
2.5
1
1.4
7.2 6.5
.85
x
1
1.5
3.8 2.8 1. 1
x
1
1.6
3.8 2.0
l. 0
x
1
1. 7
4.65 3. 1 l. 3
x
TOTALS
44.90 36 .6 13. 75
Avt::RAGES
6.41 5.23 l.96

-

?

x

-

Nolan(?)
Pedernales--s eeol v beve 11 ed
Rework[?)

11

x
x
x

-

x

--

-

-

x
x
x
x

x
x

-

-

-71

x

-

-

-

64°

C>

-gg-o

62°

-

-

_,
0\
0\

l

I

.

1

41 WM 342
Area "C" - General Surface Collection
S~ge

2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2-

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

2
2
2
2

Art1fict No.
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2. 10
2 .11
2 .12
2. 13
2. 14
2. 15
2 .16
2. 17
2 .18
2. 19
2.20
2.21
2.22
2.23
2.24
2.25
2.26
2.2/
2.28
2.29
2. 30
2.31
2. 32

N.

l.

7. 75 4. l
8.4
5.8
6.8 6.0
7.3 3.9 . 3 .0

-

-

T.

Tool

Rf..Jec:t

2.0
2.6
2.05
l. 7

-

x
x
x

T.j5

l . 45
l. l
l. 9

3.6
6.7
5.3 3.6
l.5
4.0 3.0
.6
.9
3. l
3.0
.8
3. 15 3.8
5.8 2.8
1.1
.55
3.8 2.5
4.5 4.2
1.5
3.95 l. 95
.9
3.2 4.8 1.8
3.75 4.5 1.2
.45
3.25 2.0
.8
.9 .
2.9
3.2
l.15
6.4
2.6
2.0
4.0
2.6
.55
3.8 2.7
.45
3.9
2.95
. 75
5.7
3.2 1.1
4.6 4.4
l. 1

-

-

4.Z

4.0

4. 35
4.9

3.3
3.7

-

.8~

.9
.7

x

x
x
?

x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

Core
Bi f1ce

x
x
-

-

-

-

-x

x
-

-

-

Retouch f ake

-

-

Flite

-

x
x
x
-

x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

x
x
x

Flaw

l1ttr1l
Edge Angle

Error

x
x
x
-

o:i-

-

78°

x
x
x

-

-

80°

-

-

-

710

70°
78°

-

64°
46°

-

67°

-

-

70°
61°

49°
-

-

-

x

49°

!)?O

710

-

-

Distal
. £dgt Angle

68°
50°
80°

ou-

73°
60"

-

--

69°

-

88°
-

64°

-

80°

-

67°
73°
80°

-

-

.......

°'

.......,

I

1

1

I

1

I

1

'

'

1

l

41 WM 342
Area ''C" - Spiral surface collection

Artifact No.

L.

w.

2
2
2
2
2

2.33
2. 34
2.35
2.36
2.37

4.4
4.8
2.2
4.55

4.3
3.0
3.0

3
3

3. 1

-

Stage

T.

Tool

Reject

x
x
x

x
x

Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

Lateral

Dis ta 1

Error

Edge Angle

Edge Angle

-

80°
770

67°

-

70°
47°
46°

67°

-

--

------

.7
.9
.55
3.5
.7
4.4
.9 X
TOTALS
n38. 55 115 .30 40.27
AVERAGES
4.62 3.6
l. 12
3.2
TOTALS
AVERAGES

4
4

4. l
4.2
TOTALS
AVERAGES

5

5. l

5 .1

l. l

-

-

3.7
8.8
4.3

1.0
2. l
.6

-

4.3

-

4.3
4.3

-

-

Retou1

.5
l. 3~

x

h flake -

-

x

x
x

55°

x

-x

x

x

60°

-

x

-

--··--

?

-

.er;

-

x

x

x
x
x
x

-

.61

-

x

.7

I

?

-

-·--

-

-

-

-

Pedernales (?

I

__,
O'I

co

41 WM 342
Transect Leg l SQ 2
Stage

Artifact No.

2
2
2

2. l
2.2
2.3
TOTALS
AVERAGES

4

4. l
- SQ 4 Utilized
T-1
T-2
T-3
T-4
T-5
T-6
T-7
T-8
TOTALS
AVERAGES

L.

4.0
3.95
1.8
9.75
3.25

-

w.

T.

2.5
.5
2 .45
.5
2.3
.4
7.25 1.4
Z.42
.46
4.2

Tool

x
x
x

Core
Biface

Flake

Flaw

Lateral
Edge Angle

Error

x
x
x
x

.9

lakes - #T-~
4.3 4.7
.7
3.9 l. 25
5. l
4.3 3.8 l. 15
4.5 2.6
.4
2.9 3.9
.95
l . 4 2.4
.65
.65
2.5
2.6 2.6
.4
25. l 26.4 6. 15
3.59 3.3
. 77

Reject

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Dis ta 1
Edge Angle

56°
45°

-

-

89°

x
No stagi s presen , just

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

x
-

1

tilized flake• size
80°
62°
61°
62°
78°
63°
89°
76°

SQ 6 - No util ized f lakes di scerjnab le in this soua "'e
SQ 8

~

t

l
l
l

l

l .l
1. 2
1.3
1.4
TOTALS
AVERAGES

11. l 6.2 3. l
10. 4 5.P 2.3
4.55 3.6 1.2
5.1
3.5 1.3
31. 15 18.45 7.9
7.79 4.61 1.98

-

x
x

-

-

x

x
-

x
x

57°

-

-

-

-

80°

b-. •

ft
~

__.
O"I

l.O

41WM342
Transect Leg l SQ8
Stage

Artifact No.

2
2
2
2

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
TOTALS

2

2
2
2

AVERAGES

L.

4.8
5.3
2.6
1.85
2.2
3.15
3.2
3.7
26.8
3.35

w.

T.

4.7 l. l
2.75 l.O
2 .65
.7
l.8
.5
1.45
.3
2.5
.7
2.0
.8
3.5
.7
21. 35 5.8
2.67

Tool

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Reject

Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

latera 1
Edge Angle

Error

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Distal

_Edge Angle

720

-

80°
74°

79°

75°
70°
45°
57°

-

74v

52°
52°

55°

-

-

770

-

.73

Transect Leg 2 SQ2

·-

-

Utilized flakes - No stages di see rnable
T. l
T. 2

TOTALS

4.2
4.7
8.9

3.9
2.4
6.3

.6
.6
1.2

x
x

x
x

-

AVERAGES
SQ. 3
SQ. 4
SQ. 6
this square

No util i ed fl kes i
No util i 'ed fl kes i

1

SQ. 7
this square

-

_.
'-I

0

'

l

l

1

1

1

41 WM 342
Transect Leg 3 SQ l
Stage

Artifact No.

w.

L.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Biface

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral

Distal

Edge Angle

Edge Angle

-

59°

No ut l ized f akes in ti is square
---+----T_-_;_1_

SQ •
3.6
5.0

.9

X

X

SQ J
No utili ed fl i.kes
SQ
3

3.1

No utilized

7

2.4

-

.7

SQ 3
in thns souare - ju)t

~lakes

x
thinnin~

x
flakes

__,
"'-J
__,

41 WM 342
Stage

Artifact No.

w.

L.

Tool

T.

Transect Leg 4 SQ
Core
Biface

Reject

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
Edge Angle

-··---------

I
4

4. l

-

-

x

.8

x

SQ 3 - No

til i z, d flake· - onlv t inninq fl< kes

SQ 5 - No

ti 1 i z, d flake• - only t inninq flc: kes

SQ 7

2

2.1

4.4

3.6

.7

x

x

42°

2

2. l

SQ 9
7.6

-

1. 0

x

x

48°

I

I

I

I

"'-I

N

,
41 WM 360
Surface Collection

Stage

1
_ _l_

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
l·

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Artifact No.

1.1
1. 2
1. 3
1. 4
1. 5
1.6
1. 7
1. 8
1.9
1.10
1.11
1.12
1.13
1.14
1.15
1.16
1.17
1.18
1.19
1. 20
1. 21
1.22
1.23
1. 24
1.25
l. 26
1. 27
1.28
1. 29
1. 30
1. 31

L.

9.0
11. 5
6.0
7.5
5.4
7.3
5. 7
5.9
14.0
3.8
7.5
6.35
2.0
3.5
9.5
7.6
5.5
6.9
7:8
8. 3
8.6
8.5
8.5
7.3
3.9
6.3
8.5
5.7
8.7
6.3
6.1

W.

5.6
7.0
5.8
5.9
6.0
6.1
7.7
5.5
7.1
6.3
4.3
5.0
5.15
6.0
5.2
5.8
4.65
6.3
7.15
5.5
6.8
8.7
4.5
7.5
4.4
4.3
4.7
4.5
6.8
6.7
5.2

T.

3. 3
4.1
1. 2
2.9
1. 8
2.9
1. 7
1. 8
2.9
1.95
1. 9
2.25
1. 8
1. 85
2.3
4.2
3.1
2.2
2.2
2.6
1. 85
3.7
1. 6
2.2
1. 3
2.1
3.5
1. 4
3.15
1. 8
2.0

Tool

x
x
x

Reject

Core
Biface

Flake

x

x

x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x

Distal

Edge Angle

90"/10"
':1Uv

l'O v

x
~:>"

'db" I I'd"

8.:S"

72"

:>4°//U 0

4:>"
35"
90"

58°
62"
!:18"

74°
90°

x
51°
46°/44°

x
x

x

5!:1"

x

x

x

x
x

Edge Angle

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x

x
x

lateral

Error

/b 0

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Flaw

b..;v

x
x

59°
':1U"
/j"

x
x
x
x
x

9U"

49"

.

/U"

!:14"

IU"

I

10"

__,
........

w

1

t

41 WM 360

Surface Collection

Stage

1
1
1
1
1

Artifact No.

1. 32
1. 33
1. 34
1. 35
1. 36

TOTAL
Average
2
2
2

i
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

-

2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
2.10
2 .11
2.12
2.13
2.14
2.15
2.16
2.17
2.18
2.19
2.20
2.21
2.22
- 3-

-

T.

L.

W.

6.5
6.8
6.95
7.0
9.6
248.0
6.8

5.5
5.9
8.35
7.7
8.4
218.0
6.05

1.8
1.6
2.3
1. 3
2.85
83.4
2.32

7.15
8.6
7.4
6.4
6.25
5.35
10.5
6.3
. 6 .. 85

6.4
3. 35
5.0
5.8
3.9
3.5
2.9
5.0
4.7
4.8

2.6
1. 45
2.0
3.1
1. 5
1. 4
.9
2.6
1. 4
1. 8
1. 3
1. 4
.7
.9
1. 3
.8
.6
.65
.8
.7
2.0
1.6
,..,,,
.65

4.4
3.25
2.8
3.9
3.6
3.0

3.8
4.1
4.4
4.5
2.25
3.1

3.2
6.1
8.3
3.2.

3.2
4.4
7.4
3.2

Tool

-

Reject

x
x
x
x
x

Core
Bi face

x

Flake

Flaw

x
x
x
x

x

x

x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x

x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x

x
x
x

85°
61°
37°
76°
73°/86°
70°

x
x

x

84°
63°

78°
56°
64°

x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Distal
Edge Angle

x
x

x
x

lateral
Edge Angle

87°
82°
78°
52°
58°

x

x
x

Error

x
x
x

xv

x

x

82°
goo
86°
720
66°
66°
62°
84°
52°
39°
70°
88°
65°

74°
720

720
900
77°
89°
87°
goo
71°

~

"""'

.i:::.

1

41 WM 360
Surface collection

Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Reject
-

2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2·
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2

2.24
2.25
2.26
2.27
2.28
2.29
2.30
2. 31
2.32
2.33
2.34
2.35
2.36
2.37
2.38
2.39
2.40
2. 41
2.42
2.43
2.44
2.45
TOTAL

AVERAGE

-

4.4
7.0
6.8
7.8
5.0
l 0. E

-

7.4
3. l
3.4
7.0
7.8

-7.8

4.9
6.2

9.3
5.0

-

3.7
6.4
6.4
4.8
3.5
3.2
7.2
3.4
2.8
3.0
5. l
5.0
5. l
4.0
4. l 1
3.7

-

3.5
3.5
5.9 5.5
5.2 3.6
22Cl 95 173.25
5.79 4.33

1.0
1.1
2.5
l. 5
l. 75
l. 0

l. 8
1.8
2.0
.7
l. 0
2.6
2.0
2. l
l. 9'
l.4'
l.8~

2.0
.4
7.5
l. 5
l.6
73.25
1. 63

x
x
x
x
x
x
-x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
-x
x
x
x

Core

Biface

Flake

Flaw

Error

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal

Edge Angle

-···-

x
x
x
x
x
-

-

-

x
x
x
x
x
-x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

-

-

-

-

x
-x
x

51°
66°

-60°

80°
54°
88°

-

-

-

69°
goo

-

-

89°

-90°

65°

62°

-

86°
85°
71°

-

-

-

57°
70°

-

x
-x

48°
87°

61/45°
57°

-

56°

770

-

82°
65°
90°

-

-

-

89°
88°

-

......
-....!
(.11

'

1

1

I

1

41 WM 360

Surface collection
Stage

Artifact No.

L.

W.

T.

Tool

Core
Bi face

Reject

Flake

4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

4

3. l
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
3.10
3. 11

TOTAL
AVERAGE

4. l
4.2
4.3
4.4
4.5
4.6
4.7
4.8
4.9
4.10
4.11
4. 12
4.13
4. 14

TOTAL
AVERAGE

3.3
8.9
3.7
6.8

-

6.0

4.4

2.0
.9
5.8 2.0
2.4 1. 1
5.4' l.3
.8
4.3 2.0
,85
l.9
4.6
5.1
1.5
6.7 2.6
38.75 16.95
4.84 1. 54

-

-6.9 6.8
9.0
51. 4
6.43

-

-

-

-

5.2

3.8'
-

-3.6
5.4

-

.95
.8
.6
l.3
.6
.8
.6
.65
1. 7
l. 0
l. 5

6.3
3.0
.9
4.0 1.0
4.1
.95
35.45 13.35
4.43 .95

x
x

-

x
x

x
-

-

x
x

x
x
x
x
-

x
x
x

x
-

x
x
x

-x

-

--

x
x
x

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

Lateral
Edge Angle

Distal
-Edge Angle

I

!
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

Error

Flaw

-

-x
-

-

-

-

-

x

-

-

x
x
x

56°
49°

x

50°
50°
84°
48°

-

x

-x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

-

-75°

61°

85°
-goo

-

53°

-

39°

-

62°
60°

-

57°

......
.....,
O"I

1

J

I

41 WM 360
Surface collection
Stage

Artifact No.

L.

w.

T.

Tool

Reject

Core
Bi face

Flake

Flaw

Error

Type

Dis ta 1
Edge Angle

------

5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5

5. 1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.5
5.6
5.7
5.8
5.9
5. 10
5.11
5. 12
5. 13
5.14
5. 15

TOTAL
AVERAGE

5.2

2.0

.6
.5
2.3 .5
.7
•7
.4
.8
.9
3.0 .7
8.2 3. 71 1. 1
2.8
.7
3.3 .8
3. 1 .9
2. 1 .8
.9
13.4 22.35 11.0
6.7 2.8
.73

-

-

-

-

-

x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

?

x

-

?
?
?

-

?
?
?
?

-?
?
?
?
?

Drill
Dril 1
reworked

?

Castrovi 11 e
?
?
?
Bulverde
Marshal 1
Bulverde
Marsha 11 or .. as trovi 11 e?
Nolan??

-

? = p ~ssible im1 ~act fract1 re

-

_,

.....,
.....,

178
APPENDIX II
Pollen Studies for North Fork and Granger
Reservoir Districts
by
P. Dering, V.M. Bryant, Jr. and G.H. Weir
Introduction

-

In order to gain an inductive basis for interpreting fossil pollen data, palynologists usually analyze pollen samples from modern sediments. The qualitative
and/or quantitative relationship of the modern pollen samples is described in
terms of the modern vegetation that produced it (Birks, Webb, and Berti 1975:
134). Then the modern data is commpared to the fossil data as a guide to reconstructing prehistoric vegetation (McAndrews 1966; Wright 1967).

-

Much work has been devoted to describing the relation ofmodern vegetation to the
modern pollen rain (Birks, Webb and Birti 1975:165). Janssen (1966:804) recognized that quantitative differences in pollen concentrations reflected the sample's distance from a given vegetation type, and described these pollen concentrations as being "local," extralocal" or "regional. 11 Other studies have shown
that, when carefully interpreted. modern pollen data can accurately reflect
modern vegetation distribution (Webb 1974:18). Thus, the analysis of modern
pollen spectra can sometimes be used to characterize defined vegetation types,·
and therefore, provide data critical to the interpretation of fossil pollen
data (Lichti-Federovich and Ritchie 1965).
Although our scope of work did not include a search for fossil pollen in these
reservoir areas we did feel that a preliminary test of the modern pollen rain
would assist us in our present vegetation analysis and would be helpful as a
basis for any subsequent fossil pollen analyses that might later be attempted
for this region. We would also like to at least mention that an overview of the
potential paleovegetational changes for these areas is already published (Bryant
1977; Bryant and Shafer 1977) and would be of use for any future palynologists
working with fossil sediments from these reservoir areas.
Field and Laboratory Techniques

-

Modern pollen surface samples from the two reservoir areas were collected using
a modified pinch sampling method based on Hevly, Mehringer and Yocum (1965).
This sampling methodology involved: (1) selecting a sample area within the sampled vegetation releves (Mueller-Dombois and Ellenberg 1974:45), (2) collecting
random pinch-size subsamples of surface sediments no deeper than one centimeter,
while crossing a releve area in a random manner; and (3) collecting no less than
25 pinch-size subsamples from each sample releve area, for a total sample size
of about 100 grams. Each total sample was then thoroughly mixed, labeled and
stored for later analysis.
Clean trowels used during sampling were rinsed with distilled water and wiped
clean after each use. All samples were collected in relatively wind-free environments and immediately sealed in sterile polyethylene bags which were labeled and
recorded in a field log. Each vegetation releve (from which the samples were

179

taken) was described in the following manner: (1) location and position, including slope, altitude, aspect and associated plant communities, (2) species
quantities and stratification of species and (3) soil description. Plant
species percentages were estimated using the Braun-Blanquet rating method
(Mueller-Dombois 1974:45). An abridged version of the data sheet used to record
each of the releves is presented in Tables 11 and 12.

-

-

-

The modern pollen samples collected in this study were processed at the Texas A&M
University Palynology Laboratory using a technique modified for extraction of
pollen from alluvial sediments (Weir 1976). This extraction technique minimized
the impact of low pollen concentration factors in alluvial soils, and concentrated
the available pollen with high efficiency. The extraction technique consisted
of two basic steps; removal of extraneous materials and concentration of the
pollen in each sample. Samples were first premoistened and then passed through
a series of screens with openings no smaller than 200 microns using distilled
water and ethanol. This removed large particles of mineral and organic origin.
The liquid fraction recovered beneath the screens was processed using a five-step
procedure: (1) removal of carbonates wi·th hydrochloric acid, (2) concentration of
pollen with a swirl technique, (4) removal of other non-pollen fine-grained material using a zinc chloride heavy density separation method and (5) removal of
extraneous organic material by acetolysis (Erdtman 1969). The remaining polleniferous material was then mounted in silicon oil on microscope slides for analysis.
Identification of pollen grain types for this study was based on morphological
comparisons with fresh pollen collected during the survey and with Texas A&M
University modern pollen reference collections.
Analysis of the sediment samples included 200 gram pollen counts, whenever possible, for each sample (Barkley 1934). Pollen grains which were crushed or deteriorated so as to be unidentifiable and fungal or other cryptogamic spores
were noted but excluded from the pollen counts. Pollen types that could not be
identified were included in the counts as unknowns •
Soil Analysis

-

Soil analysis of each modern pollen sampling locale in both reservoir areas revealed a soil chemistry profile which implied that conditions were not ideal for
pollen preservation (Tables 13 and 14). This realization was clearly demonstrated
by the lack of adequate preserved pollen in four of the eight samples collected
in the North Fork area and in six of the eight samples collected in the Granger
region.
The pH of most soils in the North Fork is alkaline even though there are some
instances where certain localized conditions have led to a soil pH that is slightly acidic (Table 13). In general, the soil pH of the soils we sampled revealed a
gradation from a pH of 6.2 in the upland area where soil depth was thin above the
underlying caprock to a pH of 8.2 in the lowland region along the San Gabriel River
where the alluvial soils were deep.
The converse was true of the percent of organic matter in the North Fork soils.
The highest percentages of organic matter were found in the thin upland soils
while the lowland alluvial soils contained significantly lower percentages of
organic matter.

---~-----

180

TABLE 11

Vegetation Releve 1 s of Modern Pollen sampling locales for the Granger area.

-------

-------

181

Table ll:

Vegetation Releve's of Modern Pollen sampling locales for the
Granger Area

Key to symbols:
Stratification
Sl
S2
V
H

-

Woody plants over three meters tall
Woody plants under three meters tall
Vines
Herbaceous plants

Cover-Abundance Scale
5 - Species covers more than 75% of sample area
4
3
2
l
+

-

50-75% cover
25-50% cover
5-25% cover
l -5% cover
Less than 1% cover

Releve l
Stratum

Species

Sl

Quercus macrocarpa
Ulmus americana
Meli a azada rach
Ulmus crassifolia
Celtis laevigata
Ilex deci dua
Viburnum rufidulum
Symphoricarpos spp.
Panicum virgatum
Ambrosia trifida
Ambrosia psilostachya
Bouteloua curtipendula
Cynodon dactylon
Solanum eleagnifolium

52

H

Location:

Low terrace overlooking river.

Cover Value
l
2
l
l
+
+
+

2
4
+
+

2
+

182

Releve 2
Cover Value

Stratum

Species

Sl

Ulmus americana
Juglans nigra
Carya illinoiensis
Celtis laevigata
Melia azadarach
Rhus toxicodendron
Ampelopsis sp.
Panicum oligosanthes
Callicarpa americana
Ambrosia psilostachya
Rubus spp.

S2

v
H

Location:

3
1

2
3

2
+
+

3

2
2
+

Bottomlands adjacent to river bank.
Releve 3

Stratum

Species

S2
H

Ba cc ha ri s
Cynodon dactylon
Solanum eleagnifolium
Ambrosia trifida
Amaranthus sp.
Xanthium sp.
Psoraelea tenuiflora
Helianthus annuus
Parthenium hysterophorus
Daucus pusillus

Location:

Plowed field in floodplain.

Cover Value
+

3
+
+
+
+
1

2
+
+

183

Releve 4
Species

Sl

Populus deltoides
Salix nigra
Celtis laevigata
Carya illinoiensis
Celtis laevigata
Cephalanthus sp.
Fraxinus pennsylvanicas
Diospyros virginiana
Rhus copallina
Rubus trivialis
Coreopsis basalis
Rudbeckia amplexicaulis
Hypericum drummondii
Li num medium

S2

-

Cover Value

Stratum

v
H

Location:

3
1

+
+
1

+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

Bottomlands adjacent to river.
Releve 5

Stratum

Species

H

Sorghum halapense
Helenium tenuifolium
Leptaloma cognatum
Pani cum ha 11 ii
Bothriochloa saccharoides
Euphorbia spathulata

Location:

Low terrace, disturbed pastureland.

Cover Value
3

+
+
1
+
+

1_

184

Releve 6

-

Stratum

Species

S2
H

Baccharis sp.
Solidago sp.
Heterotheca subaxillaris
Sorghum halapense
Cucurbita foetidissima
Euphorbia corollata
Euphorbia spathulata
Ambrosia trifida

Location:

Cover Value
+

1
+

2
2
+
+

2

Low terrace open pasture.
Re 1eve 7

Stratum

Species

Sl

Maclura pommifera
Prosopis glandulosa
Celtis laevigata
DiosPYros texana
I 1ex vomi tori a
Bumelia lanuginosa
Celtis laevigata
Prosopis glandulosa
Solanum rostratum
Asclepias engelmanniana
Sorghum halapense
Schizachyrium scoparium
Desmanthus leptolobus
Physalis viscosa
Bouteloua curtipendula
Andropogon glomeratus

S2

H

Location:

Low terrace on Willis Creek.

Cover Value
3

2
1
1
1
1
l
l

l
2
+

l
+
+
+

185

Releve 8
Stratum
Sl

S2

H

Location:

Cover Va 1ue

Species
Quercus nigra
Quercus durandi i
Celtis laevigata
Carya illinoiensis
Ulmus americana
Ulmus crassifolia
Celtis laevigata
Morus rubra
Viburnum sp.
Symphiocarpos orbiculatus
Rh us co pa 11 i na
· Hyperi cum mutil um

2
2
1
3
1
2
2
2
1
+
+

+

Bottomlands along river bank.

----

--

--

~------

----~-·-----

186

TABLE 12

Vegetation Releve's of Modern Pollen salJl)ling locales for the North
Fork Reservoir area.

....
187

Table 12. Vegetation Releve's of Modern Pollen Sampling Locales for the
North Fork Reservoir Area
Releve l
Stratum

Species

Sl

Quercus virginiana
Juni perus ashei
Ilex vomitoria
Lantana horri da
Aristida glauca
Schizachyrium scoparium
Andropogon gerardii
Croton monanthogynus
Bouteloua curtipendula
Xanthacephalum texanum

S2

H

Location:

Cover Value
3
+
+
+
3
2
l

1

+
+

Uplands one kilometer from ridge overlooking valley.
Releve 2

Stratum

Species

Sl

Quercus virginiana
Diospyros virginiana
Quercus sinuata
Juniperus ashei
Opuntia sp.
Ulmus crassifolia
Croton monanthogynus
Aristida glauca
Sorghastrum avenaceum
Elymus canadensis
Eriochloa sericea
Sporobo 1us asper

S2
H

Location:

Ridgetop overlooking river valley.

Cover Value
l

+
+
2

+
+
+
1
+
+
+

188

Releve 3
Stratum

Species

Sl

Quercus virginiana
Juniperus ashei
Yucca louisianensis
Sorghastrum nutans
Schizachyrium scoparium
Bothriochloa saccharoides
Phyllanthus polygonoides
Helianthus annuus
Ambrosia psilostachya
Heterotheca canescens

S2
H

Location:

Cover Value
2
2

+
2
2
l

+
+
+
+

Slope just below ridge overlooking the river valley.
Releve 4

Stratum

Species

Sl

Quercus virginiana
Celtis laevigata
Quercus sinuata
Quercus shumardii
Ulmus crassifolia
Rhus lanceolata
Bumelia lanuginosa
Yucca louisianensis
Li at ri s pu nc ta ta
Bouteloua curtipendula
Hedyotis nigricans
Andropogon gerardii
Panicum virgatum

S2

H

Location:

Cover Value
2
3

l
l
+
1
+
+

l
+
1

l

Bank of tributary creek cutting through low terrace near river.

189

Releve 5
Stratum

Species

Sl

Ulmus crassifolia
Ulmus rubra
Celtis laevigata
Juniperus ashei
Quercus s i nua ta
Platanus occidentalis
Juniperus ashei
Celtis laevigata
Prunus serotina
Rhus lanceolata
Thelesperma simplicifolium
Eragrostis intermedia
Bouteloua curtipendula
Sporobol us asper

S2

-

H

Location:

Cover Value
l
3

+

l
+
2

l
+
+
+
+

River bank of North Fork.
Rel eve 6

Stratum

Species

Sl

Quercus nigra
Ulmus crassifolia
Celtis laevigata
Quercus sinuata
Ulmus rubra
Prosopis glandulosa
Rh us 1anceo1 a ta
Juniperus ashei
Vitis sp.
Smilax bona-nox
Baute l oua curtipendula
Verbesina virginica

S2

v
H

Location:

Cover Value
3
2

l
2

+

l
3

+
+
+
+

Closed canopy tree stand on North Fork River bank.

-

190

Rel eve 7

-

Stratum

Species

H

C,l'.'.nodon dact,l'.'.lon
Sorghum halapense
Helianthus annuus

Location:

-

2
3

1

Disturbed open field in river va 11 ey.
Releve 8

Stratum

Species

Sl

Prosopis glandulosa
Ulmus crassifolia
Juniperus ashei
Fraxinus pennsylvanicas
Ilex decidua
Yucca louisianensis
Smilax bona-nox
Sorghastrum nutans
Panicum virgatum

-

Cover Value

S2

v
H
Location:

Low terrace overlooking river.

Cover Value
3

2
l
+
+
+
+

191

TABLE 13
Soil Analyses of North Fork Modern Pollen Sample Locations.

TABLE 14
Soil Analyses of Granger Modern Pollen Sample Locations.

192

Table 13. Soil Analyses of North Fork Modern Pollen Sample Locations
Pollen Sample
Number
2
3

4
5
6

7

8

pH

Organic
Matter (%)

6.2
6.9
7.4
7.3
7.6
7.4
8.0
8.2

2.9
2. 1
1. 7
1.8
1. 0
2.7
0.7
0.6

Table 14. Soil Analyses of Granger Modern Pollen Sample Locations
Pollen Sample
Number
2

3
4

5
6

7

8

pH
8.6
8.4
8.2
7.6
7.9
8.3
7.8
7.9

Organic
Matter (%)
1. 1
2.3
1.8
2.5
1. 3
l. 7
1. l

2.0

193

The percentages of organic matter in soils not only have an apparent correlation
to the probability of recovering preserved pollen (Bryant 1977), but also may
play a role in determining the actual pH. High percentages of organic matter in
soils tend to reduce the probability of the soil becoming too akaline (Cornwall
1958). This then may account for the upland soils having both a higher organic
content and lower pH.
The pH and organic contents of the.modern soils in the Granger area do not show
the type of upland to lowland gradation found in the North Fork region. Instead,
the modern soils we sampled have both the upland prairies and lowland wooded
areas all contain pH levels that are akaline and organic soil levels ranging
from a high of 2.5% to a low of 1.1%

-

The chemical composition of the soils we sampled in both reservoir areas was s1m1lar. Magnesium levels in all of the sampled soils were high and none were lower
than 250 ppm of exchangeable magnesium. Phosphorus levels varied in the sampled
soils from the North Fork area from a low of 4 ppm in the soils of the up 1and
region to a high of 23 ppm in the deeper soils along the bluffs overlooking the
San Gabriel River. The deep alluvial soils in the San Gabriel River floodplain
had phosphorus levels that ranged from 2.8 to 13.1 ppm. In general, all sampled
soils from the Granger area had higher levels of phosphorus and ranged from a low
of 17.1 ppm to a high of 35.3 ppm. Potassium levels in the sampled soils from
both reservoirs were high and all contained more than 250 ppm of exchangeable
potassium. The highest levels of potassium, however, were found in the Granger
area where some of the sampled soils from the upland prairie contained levels as
high as 600 ppm.

DISCUSSION

As indicated in tables 15 and 16, the modern pollen found in the samples from the
Granger and North Fork Reservoirs was poorly preserved. Of the 16 samples examined, 100 grain counts were possible in only 6 of them and the standard 200
grain count, as recommended by Barkley (1934), was not possible in any sample
because of poor pollen preservation. These results were surprising because
pollen is generally recoverable from most modern soil samples. Of the ten samples examined from the Granger area, only two produced 100 grain pollen counts.
Although only slightly better, the samples from the North Fork area did yield
100 grain pollen counts in four of the eight samples.
Due to the sparse amount of recoverable pollen in both sets of samples, we feel
that we cannot rely too heavily upon these data as a basis for fonnulating even
a preliminary model of the modern pollen rain and vegetation distribution in
these areas. In spite of these problems, at least a few general statements concerning the relationship of the modern pollen rain and the vegetation distribution in these areas can be made.
North Fork Region
Pine trees are not part of the natural vegetation in the North Fork area, yet
pine pollen was the most prevalent pollen type found in all of the modern soil

194

TABLE 15

Modem Pollen Counts for the Granger Reservoir area.

-

195

Table 15. Modern Pollen Counts for the Granger Reservoir Area
Samo l e Num ber:

-

Pi nus
Quercus
Celti s
Prosopis
Juglans
Carya
Ulmus
Populus
Gramineae
Che no-Am
Cyperaceae
Onagraceae
Malvaceae (cf. Sphaeralcea
Ephedra (cf. tor.)
Umbe 11 i ferae
Compositae (LS)
Li gul i florae
Compositae (HS)
Unknown

2

3

4

5

6

7

12
7

8

5

3

3

10

N

N

0

0

p
0

p
0

L
L
E

L
L
E

N

N'

8

2
38

17

N

N

0

0

N
0

0

N

p
0

p
0

p
0

p
0

L
L
E

L
L

E

L
L
E

L
L
E

N

N

N

N

l
2
2
l
l
26
7
l

2
l
l
2

42

18

13

5

3

16

2

3

196

TABLE 16

Modem Pollen Counts for the North F@rk Reservoir area.

197

Tab 1e 16. Modern Poll en Counts for the North Fork Reservoir Area

samp

e

Num ber:

Pi nus

2

36

3

4

5

51

35

39

4

3

3

6

32

16

12

13

Celti s

2

l

Prosopis

1

l

Quercus

Cary a

1

N
0

35

p
0
L
L
E
N

Che no-Am

7

Onagraceae

l

Ma 1vaceae (cf. Sphaeralcea)

1

l
31

11

5

5

8

10

4

2

Yucca

l

Ephedra (cf. nev.)

l

l

2

Ephedra (cf. tor.)
l

l

2

13

29

6

11

Compositae (HS)

2
4

7

5

8

Unknown

3

l

l

2

Ilex

2

5

Rh us

1

1

Umbe 11 i ferae
Compos i tae (LS)
Liguliflorae

Verbena
TOTALS

N
0

N
0

N
0

p
0
L
L
E
N

p
0
L
L
E
N

p
0
L
L
E
N

l

Fraxinus
Grami neae

8

3

2

Ulmus
Salix

7

1

Al nus
Juni perus

6

l

2

198

samples collected from the North Fork area. Pine grains are buoyant, well adapted for easy wind transport and the pollen is produced in great quantities by
each tree. These factors, combined with the realization that large stands of
cultivated pines currently exist in the Georgetown area (less than two miles east
of the proposed North Fork Reservoir), convince us that those are probably responsible for almost all of the pine pollen found in the North Fork surface soil
samples.
Grass grains were another one of the more dominant pollen types recovered in the
modern soil samples from the North Fork area. In those soil samples where sufficient pollen was recovered for analytical purposes, we found that high counts
of grass pollen were associated with areas identified vegetationally as part of
the grassy highlands. On the other hand, when compared to the samples collected
from modern soils in nearby wooded lowlands, the grass pollen counts are lower,
which is to be expected since the understory vegetation in the wooded lowlands
contains only a sparse representation of grasses.
As pointed out in our vegetation study of the North Fork Reservoir, juniper trees
are present in many areas of that region. Since junipers are known to produce
considerable amounts of airborne pollen, one might expect this pollen type to be
a dominant in the modern pollen rain. This was not the case, however, in the
modern pollen samples collected in the North Fork Region. This type of underrepresentation of juniper pollen often occurs in both modern and fossil deposits
and is caused, in part, by the fact that although juniper produces large quantities
of pollen, their pollen grains are thin-walled and very fragile. As a result,
the grains are very susceptible to easy destruction through simple mechanical
breakdown processes and subsequent attack by micro-organismssuchas fungi. Thus,
except in certain environmental settings (where the environment of deposition is
very favorable for pollen preservation), one should not expect to recover significant quantities of juniper pollen even though the plants may be one of the dominant types in the local vegetation.
The percentages of preserved pollen from the riverine plant groups (i.e., cottonwood, walnut, sycamore, pecan, hickory and elm) were very low or missing entirely in our samples from the North Fork Reservoir. We feel that this resulted primarily from the high degree of pollen destruction that undoubtedly must have
occurred in these surface soil deposits soon after deposition. Each of these
plant types produces airborne pollen grains which are less fragile than those of
juniper and thus should be expected to be found as a component in the modern pollen
rain of an area such as the North Fork Reservoir region.
Granger Region
Unlike the North Fork Region, pine pollen was not a dominant type found in the
surface samples from the Granger Region. These data add more support to our
original assumption that the pine pollen in the North Fork area samples resulted
primarily from the cultivated pines growing in isolated stands of the Georgetown
area. Since pine trees are not part of the present day vegetational composition
found in the Granger area and since the Granger region lacks stands of cultivated
pines, we assume that this accounts for the significantly lower percentages of
pine pollen in the modern samples of the Granger area. What few pine pollen grains
were recovered in the Granger area modern soil samples may have been derived from
sources in Georgetown region 30 miles to the west of the Granger Reservoir.

199

The percentages of grass pollen recovered from samples in the Granger area are
very similar to the percentages recovered in the North Fork Region. Since both
reservoir areas contain significant quantities of grasslands in their vegetational component, we feel that the pollen percentages should be expected to be somewhat similar, as in fact is the case.
One of the basic differences between the pollen counts recovered from the Granger and North Fork areas is in the percentages of pollen originating from trees
which occupy the riverine areas. In the North Fork area counts, the percentage
of these tree pollen types was quite low, whereas in the Granger Reservoir these
percentages were somewhat higher. We have no explanation for the occurrence of
this phenomenon. We can only suspect that perhaps in the Granger Reservoir the
environment of deposition may have been more favorable for the preservation of
these types of pollen grains than in the North Fork area. This type of problem
is often seen and in most cases can only be explained in terms of factors that
affect the eventual destruction or preservation of pollen from the pollen rain.
Pollen Preservation
The amount of pollen preserved in soils often depends upon many factors as well
as how much pollen the regional vegetation produces. A number of studies of
depositional environments has revealed that the susceptibility of pollen grain
destruction varies greatly from pollen type to pollen type (Sangster and Dale
1961:1964). In general, alkaline environments, leaf moulds and riverine clays
are considered to be the most destructive environments of deposition (Havinga
1971).
Within the environment of deposition at least three major processes interact
alone or with each other and can lead to the eventual destruction of some or all
of the pollen found in soils. These processes include: (1) physical or mechanical processes; (2) chemical processes; and (3) biological processes.
Mechanical destruction of pollen grains can begin anytime after the pollen is
released into the air. Since many airborne pollen types have thin walls and
lack excessive ornamentation, they are among the most susceptible to mechanical
destruction. Destruction of pollen grains may result from airborne collisions
with any other objects during transport, from abrading action while on the surface of soils, or during the post-depositional period.
The chemistry of the depositional environment can also determine the probability
of preservation. The pH of soils has been shown to be a factor in pollen preservation (Dimbleby 1957). Dimbleby noted that fossil pollen was best preserved
in soils with a low pH, and that pollen could probably not be recovered in soils
with a pH higher than 6.5. Since Dimbleby's study, Martin (1963) and Bryant
(1969) have been able to recover pollen from deposits with a pH as high as 8.9.
However, in those cases where the pH was higher than 6.5 the condition of recovered pollen was extremely poor. We feel that it is possible that the high pH
of the soils of both reservoirs may have beer. a contributing factor to pollen destruction in the Granger and North Fork areas.
Another source of pollen destruction is a biological degradation. Experiments
have shown certain species of bacteria and fungi feed on pollen, Goldstein (1960)
demonstrated that certain species of Phycomycetes can play a major role in the

200

pollen grain destruction. Likewise, Elsik (1971) has found that several species
of the Actinomycetes feed on both fresh and fossilized pollen.
The potential for pollen destruction withir. the depositional environments in and
around the Granger and North Fork Reservoir areas is very great. Soil tests revealed that most of the area contains soils that are akaline and have levels
averaging 8.1. In soil environments such as these the chance for oxidation of
pollen grains is very great.
Of the pollen samples collected in the North Fork area, three were selected from
closed canopy riverine woods which had a leaf mat below both the trees and around
the woodland's.periphery. The lack of pollen in those samples may well reflect
Havinga's (1971) remarks about high pollen destruction levels found in areas where
leaf molds are ·active.
Large numbers of fungal spores were observed in all of the pollen samples we examined. Although these spores were not identified as to specific genus, the high
fungal spore count suggests the possibility that biological degradation was one
of the destruction agents in both reservoir areas.
Pollen destruction was the dominant factor in the pollen studies of these areas.
We suggest that any subsequent studies should be conducted with this aspect in
mind. Further studies should perhaps concentrate on the attempt to recover fossil
pollen from deeper soil levels in the area. However, even those attempts may
meet with eventual failure as was already demonstrated by Bryant (1977).

SUMMARY

The potential economic plants of the North Fork and Granger Reservoir were described. A preliminary attempt was made to describe the relationship between vegetation
and modern pollen rain distribution in the North Fork and Granger Reservoir areas.
Modern pollen soil samples were collected from vegetation areas described by the
releve method (Mueller-Dombois and Ellenberg 1974:45). Unfortunately, pollen
preservation evidently was so poor that conclusive pollen counts could not be
generated. Possibi1ities of pollen destruction were discussed and suggestions for
further study were made.

201

REFERENCES CITED
Aspinall, A. and S.W. Feather
1972
Neutron Activation Analysis of Prehistoric Flint Mine Products.
Archaeometry 14 (1):41-53.
Barkley, F.
1934

The Statistical Theory of Pollen Analysis.

Ecology 15:283-289.

Baxter, Edward P. and Harry J. Shafer
1975
A Supplementary Archeological Report of Floodwater Retarding
Structure No. 2A, Brownwood Laterals Watershed. Anthropology
Research Laboratory Report No. 16, Texas A&M University.
Binford, Lewis R.
1964
A Consideration of Archaeological Research Designs.
Antiquity 29:425-441.
1972

An Archeological Perspective.

American

Semina Press, New York.

Birdsell, Joseph E.
1968
Some Predictions for the Pleistocene System Among Recent
Hunters and Gatherers. In Man the Hunter, edited by Richard
Lee and Irven Devore, Aldine Publishing Company, Chicago.
Birks, H., T. Webb III, and A. Berti
1975
Numerical Analysis of Pollen Samples from Central Canada: A
Comparison of Methods. Review of Paleobotany and Palynology
20:133-169.
B1a i r, ~-J. Frank
1950
The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Vol. II, No. 1.

The Texas Journal of Science

Bond, Cle 11 L.
1978
Three Archeological Sites at Hoxie Bridge, Williamson County
Texas. Anthropology Research Laboratory Report No. 43, Texas
A&M University.
Bray, W.
1904

The Timber of the Edwards Plateau of Texas: Its Relation to
Climate, Water Supply and Soil. United States Department of
Agriculture Forestry Bulletin No. 49.

Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr.
1969
Late Full-Glacial and Post-Glacial Pollen Analysis of Texas
Sediments. Dissertation on file at the University of Texas
Library, Austin.
1977

Analysis of Soils and Fossil Pollen from 41 WM 21. In Archeological Test Excavations at±!_ WM .fl in Granger Reservoir,
Williamson County, Texas, edited by G. Moore, Anthropology
Research Laboratory Report No. 37, Texas A&M University.
7~ A~ "R~ L~.
···-~i~

202

Bryant, Vaughn M. Jr. and Harry J. Shafer
1977
The Late Quaternary Vegetational Record of Texas: The Last
30,000 Years. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
48:1-26.

Campbell, T.N.
1948

The Merrill Site: Archeological Remains Associated with
Aluvial Terrace Deposits in Central Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 19:7-35.~

1975

The Payaya Indians of Southern Texas. Southern Texas Archeological Association Special Publication No. 1, San Antonio.

Carr, J. Jr.
1967

The Climate and Physiography of Texas.
ment Board Report No. 53.

Texas Water Develop-

Chang, K.C.
1967

Rethinking Archeology.

Random House, New York.

Collins, Michael B.
1975
Lithic Technology as a Means of Processual Inference. In
Lithic Technology: Making and Using Stone Tools, edited by
E. Swanson, Mouton Publishers, distributed by Aldine, Chicago.
Collins, O.B.
1972

Climax Vegetation and Soils of the Blackland Prairie of Texas.
Master's thesis on file in the Texas A&M University Library,
College Station.

Collins, O.B., F. Smeins and D. Riskind
1975
Plant Communities of the Blackland Prairie of Texas. In Prairie:
~ Mutiple View, edited by M.K. Wali, University of North
Dakota Press, Grand Forks.
Cornwa 11 , I. W.
1958

Soils for the Archeologist.

Phoenix House, London.

Crabtree, Don E.
1972
An Introduction to Flintworking. Occasional Papers of the
Idaho State University Museum No. 28, Pocatello.
Davis, William B.
1960
The Mammals of Texas.
No. 41.

Texas Game and Fish Commission Bulletin

Department of the Army
1972
Final Environmental Statement: Laneport, North_ Fork and South
fork Lakes, San Gabriel River, Texas. U.S. Army Engineer· District, Fort Worth, Texas.

203

Dering, James Phil
1976
Preliminary Analysis of Plant Material Recovered from a
Burned Rock Midden in Hinds Cave, Val Verde County, Texas.
Paper presented at the Texas Archeological Society Annual
Meeting, Houston.
Dillehay, Tom D.
1974
Late Quaternary Bison Population Changes on the Southern
Plains. Plains Anthropologist, Vol. 19, No. 56:180-196.
Dimbleby, G.
1957
Dodd, J.D.
1968

Pollen Analysis of Terrestrial-Soils.
12-28.

New Phytologist 65:

Grassland Associations in North America. In Grass Systematics,
edited by F.W. Gould, McGraw-Hill, New York.

Dykstehuis, E.J.
1946
The Vegetation of the Fort Worth Prairie.
16:2-29.
Eddy, Frank
1973

1974

Elsik, W.C.
1971

Ecology Monographs

Salvage Archeology in the Laneport Reservoir District,
Central Texas. Unpublished manuscript released to the National
Park Service by the Texas Archeological Survey.
Resource Management and Locational Strategies of Certain
Prehistoric Sites in Central Texas. Plains Anthropologist,
Vol. 19, No. 64:99-106.
Microbiological Degradation of Sporopollenin. In Sporopollenin, edited by G. Brooks, Academic Press, New York.

Erdtman, Gunnar
1969
Handbook of Palynology: Mophology, Taxonomy, Ecology.
Hafner Publication Co., New York.
Foster, J.H.
1917

The Spread of Timbered Areas in Central Texas.
Forestry 15:442-445.

Journal of

Gilmore, Kathleen
1969
The San Xavier Missions: A Study in Historical Site Identification. State Building Commission Archeological Program
Report No. 16, Austin.
Godfrey, Curtis L.
1964
fl Summary of~ Soils of the Blackland Prairie of Texas.
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, MP-698.

204

Godfrey, C., C. Carter and G.S. McKee
1969
Land Resource Areas of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station, Texas Agricultural Extension Service, United States
Soil Conservation Service Bulletin 1070.
Godfrey, C., C. Carter and G.S. McKee
1973
General Soil Map of Texas. Texas A&M University and the United
States Department of Agriculture, College Station.
Godfrey, C., G.S. McKee and H. Oakes
1973
General Soil Map of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station, Texas A&M Univeristy, in cooperation with the Soil
Conservation Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
Goldstein,
1960

s.

Gould, F.
1969

Degradation of Pollen by Phycomycetes.

Ecology 41:543-545.

Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary.
Agricultural Experiment Station MP-585. Revised.

Greer, John W.
1965
A Typolopgy of Midden Circles and Mescal Pits.
Lore, Vol. 31, No. 3:41-55.

Texas

Southwestern

Havinga, A.J.
1964
Investigation into the Differential Corrosion and Susceptibility of Pollen and Spores. Pollen et Spores 6:621-635.
1971

Hester, T.R.
1971

An Experimental Investigation into the Decay of Pollen and
Spores in Various Soil Types. In Sporopollenin, edited by
G. Brooks, Academic Press, New York.
Archeological Investigations at the La Jita Site, Uvalde
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
42:51-148.

Hevly, R., P. Mehringer and H.G. Yocum
1965
Studies of the Modern Pollen Rain in the Sonoran Desert.
Journal of the Arizona Academy of Science 3:123-135.
Hill, R.
1901

Geography and Geology of the Blackland Grand Prairies, Texas.
United States Geological Survey 21st Annual Report, Part 7.

Hunt, Charles B.
1974
Natural Regions of the United States and Canada.
and Company, San Francisco.

W.H. Freeman

205

Jackson, Marsha F.
1974
Archeological Resources of the North Fork Reservoir Area:
Results of Survey and Testing, 1970 Season. Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Survey, Austin.
Janssen, C.
1966

Recent Pollen Spectra from the Deciduous and Coniferous Deciduous Forests of Northeastern Minnesota: A Study in Pollen
Dispersal. Ecology 47:804-825.

Jelks, Edward B.
1951
Relationships Between Foci of the Edwards Plateau Aspect: A
Distributional Analysis of Diagnostic Projectile Point Types
from Archeological Sites in the Marshall Ford Dam Reservoir,
Travis County, Texas. Master's thesis on file at the University of Texas, Austin.
Bulletin of-the
- Texas

1953

Excavations at the Blum Rockshelter.
Archeological Socie~ 24:189-207.

1962

The Kyle Site: A Stratified Central Texas Aspect Site in Hill
County, Texas. The University of Texas, Department of Anthropology Archaeology Series No. 5, Austin.

Johnson, Leroy Jr., Dee Ann Suhm and Curtis D. Tunnell
1962
Salvage Archeology of Canyon Reservoir: The Wunderlich, Footbridge, and Oblate Sites. Texas Memorial Museum Bulletin No. 5.
Judge, W. James, James I. Ebert and Robert K. Hitchcock
1975
Sampling in Regional Archeological Survey. In Sampling..:!!!.
Archeology, edited by James W. Mueller, University of Arizona
Press, Tuscon.
Kelly, J. Charles
1947a
The Lehman Rock Shelter: A Stratified Site of the Toyah,
Uvalde, and Round Rock Foci. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 18:IT5-138.
1947b

The Cultural Affiliations and Chronological Position of the
Clear Fork Focus. American Antiquity 13:97-108.

1959

The Desert Cultures and the Balcones Phase: Archaic Manifestations in the Southwest and Texas. American Antiquity 24:276288.

Kelly, T.C. and T.R. Hester
1975
Additional Archaeological Survey in the Dry Comal Watershed,
Comal County, South Central Texas. Center for Archeological
Research, Archeological Survey Report No. 10:-The University
of Texas at San Antonio.

206

Kemp, Robert J.
1971
Freshwater Fishes of Texas.
partment, Bulletin-S-A.

Texas Parks and Wildlife De-

Lichti-Federovich, S. and J. Ritchie
1965
Contemporary Pollen Spectra in Central Canada.
et Spores 7:63-87.
Mallouf, R.
1978

Martin, P.S.
1963

II.

Pollen

Review of: An Evaluation of Archaeological Resources at
Aquilla Lake. In An Evaluation of Archaeological Resources at
Aquilla Lake. Archaeological Research Program, Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
The Last 10,000 Years: A Fossil Pollen Record of the American southwest. University of Arizona Press, Tucson:--

Maruyama, Magoroh
1963
The Second Cybernetics: Deviation-Amplifying Mutual Causal
Processes. American Scientist 51:164-179.
McAndrews, J.
1966
Postglacial History of Prairie, Savanna, and Forest in NorthWestern Minnesota. Torr~ Botanical Club Memoirs 22:1-72.

-

-

-

McGinley, A.N.
1978
Elemental Analysis of Edwards Formation Flint: A Comparison
of Sample Areas. Master's thesis on file at Texas A&M University, College Station.
McKern, W.C.
1939

The Midwestern Taxonomic Method as an Aid to Archeological
Culture Study. American Antiquity 4:301-313.

Miller, E.O. and Edward B. Jelks
1952
Archeological Excavations at the Belton Reservoir, Coryell
County, Texas. Bulletir:!. of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Socie_ty, Vol. 23:168-207.
Moore, G.L., H.J. Shafer and C.S. Weed
1978
Archeological Surveys of Granger and North Fork Reservoirs:
Volume I, The Granger Report. Anthropologl Research Laboratory Report No. 38a, Texas A&M Univeristy.
Mueller-Dombois, D. and H. Ellenberg
1974
Aims and Methods of Vegetati9~ Ecology.
New York.

John Wiley and Sons,

Muller-Wille, W.
1954
Arten der Menschlischen Siedlung. Abhl. Akad. Raumforsch
Landesplan. Bremen, 28 (Mortensen Festshrift}:141-163.

207

Muto, Guy R.
1971

A Technological Analysis of the Early Stages in the Manufacture of Lithic Artifacts. Unpublished Master's thesis,
Idaho State Univeristy, Pocatello.

Patterson, P.E.
1974
Upper San Marcos River Watershed, Hays County, Texas: An
Archeological Survey of Areas Proposed for Mitigation. Texas
Archeological Survey Research Re.E_ort No. 42, Austin.
1977

A Lithic Reduction Sequence: A Test Case in the North Fork
Reservoir Area, Williamson County, Texas. Unpublished Master's
thesis, University of Texas, Austin.

Patterson, P.E. and Gary Moore
1976
An Archeological Study of North Fork and Granger Reservoirs,
A Preliminary Report. Anthropolo~y Research Laboratory Report
No. 34. Texas A&M University.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974
Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site, Williamson
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No.
49, Austin.
1976

In
Press

Late Archaic Occupations at the Loeve-Fox Site: The San Marcos
and Twin Sisters Phases. In The Texas Archaic: !l Symposium,
edited by T.R. Hester, Center for Archeological Research Special
Report No. 2, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
The Rogers Spring Site: 1974 Investigations. Manuscript in
press. Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No. 54, Austin.

Read, Dwight W.
1975
Regional Sampling. In Samplin_g_ in Archaeology. edited by J.W.
Mueller, The University of Ar1zona Press, Tucson.
Sangster, A. and H. Dale
1961
A Preliminary Study of Differential Pollen Grain Preservation.
Canadian Journal of Botany 39:35-43.
1964

Pollen Grain Preservation of Underrepresented Species in Fossil
Spectra. Canadian Journal of Botany 42:437-449.

Schiffer, Michael B. and John H. House
1975
The Cache River Archeological Project: An Experiment in Contract
Archeology. Arkansas Archeological Survey Publications in
Archeology, Research Series No. 8.
Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins and F.B. Plummer
1958
The Geology of Texas, Volume I:
Texas Bulletin No. 3232.

Stratigraphy.

University of

208

Semenov, S.A.
1964
Prehistoric Technology: An Experi~ental Study of the Oldest
Tools and Artifacts from Traces o~Manufacture and Wear.
M.W. Thompson, trans-:---Barnes anctNobel Books, New York.
Shafer, Harry J.
1963
Test Excavations at the Youngsport Site: A Stratified Terrace Site in Bell County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo- -logical Society 34:57-81.

-

1975

Ring-shaped Burned Rock Middens in Brown and Comanche Counties,
.Texas. Newsletter of the Central Texas Archeological Society,
Vol. 9, No. 9, Waco, Texas.

1977

Late Prehistory of Central Texas: 500 B.C. to A.O. 1700.
Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological Society, Vol III:
18-24.

1978

Preface in Lithic Technology at the George~- Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University.

Shafer, H.J., Edward P. Baxter and T.A. Stearns
1976
Archeological Assessment at Upper Pecan Bayou and Brownwood
Laterals Watersheds, Brown County, Texas. Anthropology Research
Laboratory Report No. 29, Texas A&M University.

-

-

-

Shafer, H.J. and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
1976
An Archeological Investigation of the North Fork and Granger
Reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas. Proposal No. RF-76-228,
submitted by the Texas A&M Research Foundation, Anthropology
Research Laboratory to the U.S. Department of the Interior,
National Park Service.
Shafer, H.J. and Vaughn M. Bryant, Jr.
1977
Archeological and Botanical Studies at Hinds Cave, Val Verde
County, Texas. Anthropology Research Laboratory Special Series
Report No. 1. Texas A&M University.
Shafer, H.J. and James E. Corbin
1965
An Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of the North Fork,
South Fork, and Laneport Reservoirs, Williamson County, Texas.
Report submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project.
Shafer, H.J., Dee Ann Suhm and J. Dan Scurlock
1964
An Investigation and Appraisal of the Archeological Resources
of Belton Reservoir, Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas: 1962.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project Miscellaneous Papers No. 1,
Austin.

209

Shantz, H. and R. Zon
1924
The Physical Basis of Agriculture: Natural Vegetation. In
Atlas of American A7riculture, Part I, Section E. United
· "S"tates""'Department o Agriculture, Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Wahington, D.C.
Sharrock, Floyd W.
1966
Prehistoric Occupation Patterns in Southwest Wyoming and
Cultural Relationships with the Great Basin and Plains Culture
Areas. Anthropological Papers No. 77, University of Utah.

-

Skinner, S. Alan
_
1971
Prehistoric Settlement of the DeCordova Bend Reservoir, Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
No. 42:149-270.
Skinner, S.A., C. Shaw, K. Huckabay and M.L. Bartsch
1978
An Evaluation of Archaeological Resources at Aquilla Lake.
Archeological Research Program, Southern Methodist University.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1970
Archeological Investigations in the Whitney Reservoir Area,
Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
Vol. 41: 37-276.
Story, D.A. and H.J. Shafer
1965
1964 Excavations at Waco Reservoir, Mclennan County, Texas:
The Baylor and Britton Sites. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project Miscellaneous Paper No. 6, Austin.
Sorrow, W.M.
1969

-

Archeological Investigations at the John Ischy Site: A Burnt
Rock Midden in Williamson County, Texas. Papers of the Texas
Archeological Salvage Project No. 18.

1970

Archeological Investigations at the Barker Site.
logi cal Salvage Project Research Report No. 1.

1973

Test Excavations in the North Fork Reservoir Area. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by the Texas Archeological
Survey, Austin.

Sorrow, W.M., H.J. Shafer and R.E. Ross
1967
Excavations at Stillhouse Hollow Reservoir.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project No. 11.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1960
A Review of Central Texas Archeology.
Archeological Society 29:63-108.

Texas Archeo-

Papers of the

Bulletin of the Texas

Suhm, Dee Ann and E.B. Jelks
1962
Handbook of Texas Archeology: Type Descriptions.
Museum Bulletin No. 4, Austin.

Texas Memorial

-

210

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger and E.B. Jelks
1954
An Introductory Handbook to Texas Archeology.
Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 25.
Tharp, B.C.
1926

Bulletin of the

Structure of Texas Vegetation East of the 98th Meridian.
UnJversity of Texas Bulletin 2606:45-54. Austin.

Watt, Frank H.
1936
A Prehistoric Rockshelter Burial in Bell County, Texas.
tin of the Texas Archeological Societ~ No. 2:5-27.
1978

Bulle-

Radiocarbon Chronology of Sites in the Central Brazos Valley.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society Vol. 49:111-138.

Webb , T. , II I
1974
Corresponding Patterns of Pollen and Vegetation on Lower Michigan:
A Comparison of Quantitative Data. Ecology 55:17-28.
Weir, G.
1976

Palynology, Flora, and Vegetation of Hovenweep National Monument: Implications for Aboriginal Plant Use on Cajun Mesa,
Colorado and Utah. Dissertation on file at Texas A&M University Library, College Station.

Willey, G.R. and P. Phillips
1958
Method and Theory in American Archeology.
thicago Press, Chicago.

The University of

Wilmsen, Edwin N.
1970
Lithic Analysis and Cultural Inference: A Paleo-Indian Case.
Anthropological Papers of the University of Arizona No. 16,
The University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Wright, H.
1967
Yarlett, L.
1954

The Use of Surface Samples in Quaternary Pollen Analysis.
Review of Paleobotany and Palynolo9.t 2:321-330.
Reseeding Trials with Hay Material of Little Bluestem in
Western Williamson County, Texas. Master's thesis on file at
Texas A&M University Library, College Station.

