AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY FOR THE
CITY OF PEÑITAS COLONIA WASTEWATER PROJECT
IN HIDALGO COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 05-17

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
City of Peñitas
Post Office Box 204
Peñitas, Texas 78576

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of 3 km of force main, three lift stations, and two
proposed sites for a wastewater treatment plant in southwestern Hidalgo County,
Texas was conducted by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) in November
of 2005 for the City of Peñitas under Antiquities Permit 3958. In all, 20.8 acres were
examined. No previously recorded archaeological sites have been recorded within
any portion of the project area, and no new sites were found. One small scatter of
three chert objects was found at Plant Site A and is discussed in this report as an
Isolated Find. One historic cemetery (San Antonio) is located in the area, but it is
outside the Area of Potential Effect (APE). No artifacts were collected.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge those individuals who provided assistance during
this project. Julian J. Gonzales, City Administrator for the City of Peñitas, obtained
landowner permission and provided a backhoe operated by Mario Rosales and
Pedro Rosales under the supervision of Duane Bell. Maps and other information
was provided by Hollie H. Nowlin and George E. Lazaro of J. F. Fontaine &
Associates. The background search was provided by Jean Hughes, Records
Conservator at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL). Jennifer
McMillan provided technical support, and Nora Rogers assisted with the editing
chores. Joe Metz owns the property where the treatment plant will be constructed.
He provided information about nearby Indian camps and local disturbance,
specifically the settling basin.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................5
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................8
METHODS OF INVESTIGATION .......................................................................10
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................13
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................15
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................16
APPENDICES
Appendix I: Research Design
Appendix II: Previous Investigations in Vicinity of Project Area
Appendix III: Shovel Test Log
Appendix IV: Backhoe Trench Profiles
Appendix V: Isolated Find Location
FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location ...................................................................................2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangle La Joya ................................4
Figure 3. View of Proposed Force Main Along Highway 83 ..................................6
Figure 4. View of Proposed Force Main Along Tom Gill Road ..............................7
Figure 5. View of Proposed Plant Site A .............................................................11
Figure 6. View of Proposed Plant Site B .............................................................11
Figure 7. Shovel Test Locations at Plant Site A ..................................................12

iv

INTRODUCTION
The City of Peñitas is a small community located on Farm-to-Market Road
1427 in rural southwestern Hidalgo County, Texas (Figure 1). Currently, the
city’s service area is bounded on the south by the Rio Grande River, on the west
by the city of La Joya, on the east by the city of Palmview, and on the north by
farm and ranch lands.
The proposed wastewater project will benefit
approximately 1200 colonia families living in and around the incorporated city
limits of Peñitas with first time wastewater service. Presently, there are 600
families living in colonias within the city limits of Peñitas. These families are
presently provided water service by the La Joya Water Supply Corporation.
Wastewater treatment in the project area consists of individual on-site septic tank
systems. Lot sizes are typically 50’ x 100’ and are inadequate to treat efficiently
the waste generated by these families with on-site septic tank systems. The
development of this project will help eliminate the existing health hazard posed
by the current method of treating waste.
The current project consists of a collection system, three lift stations, one
grinder pump station, and a wastewater treatment plant. The gravity flow
collection system will consist of approximately 109,000 linear feet of 8” PVC
gravity sewer lines installed on grid with manholes spaced not more than 500
feet apart. The three lift stations with force mains ranging from 4” to 12” in
diameter are proposed to transfer the wastewater to a new 750,000 gallon per
day wastewater treatment plant. The project area is depicted on two USGS 7.5’
topographic quadrangles, Citrus City (2698-132) and La Joya (2698-123).
All of the collection system will be installed within existing road rights-of­
way. The three lift stations will be small (20’ x 20’) sites with frontage on existing
road rights-of-way. The proposed wastewater treatment plant site will be
constructed on an 8.7 acre tract of land owned by the city.
Removal of large trees within paths of pipelines will be avoided where
possible by boring. Creek crossings will be encased, and creek bottoms and
slopes restored to their original conditions. Maps will be evaluated for crossings of
prime farmland, floodplains, and wetlands throughout the project area. It is
anticipated that the project will not result in adverse effects on these resources
since the majority of the proposed collection system will be placed in previously
disturbed routes within the rights-of-way of existing roads and streets.
Proposed sewer line additions will be centered in a 15-foot wide permanent
easement adjacent to the various road rights-of-way, which they parallel. The pipe
will be placed in a trench two feet wide and four feet deep.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Funds for this project will come from the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA), Rural Utilities Services (RUS). The general location of the
project area is depicted in Figure 1. After a field assessment and review of past
disturbances to the overall project area, the area surveyed by BVRA was greatly
reduced in size and is depicted on only one topographic quadrangle, La Joya
(Figure 2).
An archaeological survey was requested in an email from Debra L. Beene
of the THC to Hollie H. Nowlin of the engineering firm J. F. Fontaine &
Associates, Inc. dated November 8, 2005. In order to satisfy this requirement,
the City of Peñitas retained the services of BVRA to perform an archaeological
survey per the requirements of the Texas Historical Commission (THC).
A field assessment and review of past work in the area by professional
archaeologists revealed much of the area planned for construction has been
disturbed to the point that archaeological survey is not necessary. It was also
learned that shovel testing would not be possible in some of the rights-of-way
where the line will be placed beneath existing pavement and that portions of the
force main have already been installed. Because of the above-mentioned reasons,
the two large subdivisions and other areas along the rights-of-way were eliminated
from survey. At the time of this investigation two locations for the wastewater
treatment plant were being considered, and this was an addition to the project area
since only one location was depicted on the original maps submitted to BVRA. The
methods. The survey methods for these areas are described in more detail in the
Methods section below.
This survey followed the methods outlined in the Research Design submitted
to the THC (Appendix I).

3

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Quadrangle La Joya

4

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The following information was taken from the Hidalgo County soil survey
(Jacobs 1981), a guide to Texas mammals Davis (1974), a planning document
published by the THC (Mercado-Allinger et al. 1996), and The Handbook of
Texas Online (2001).
Hidalgo County is in South Texas and is bordered by Cameron County on
the east, Brooks County on the north, Starr County on the west, and Mexico on
the south. The county seat is Edinburg, which is located at the junction of United
States Highway 107 and United States Highway 281. The county is irregular in
shape, measuring about 55 miles from north to south and about 50 miles from
east to west. Hidalgo County comprises 1596 square miles of the Rio Grande
delta. Its elevations range from 40 to 200 feet. The land surface is nearly level
to gently sloping. Generally, drainage is in a northeastern direction. However, in
the area around La Joya Creek in the southwestern part of the county, drainage
is to the south, and on the Rio Grande flood plain drainage is to the east.
Hidalgo County is in the southernmost part of the Rio Grande Plain Land
Resource Area. Many of the soils in the county were formed in sediments
deposited by the Rio Grande River. These sediments are mostly clay and sand.
The southern part of the county has moderately deep-to-deep loamy surfaces
over clayey subsoils. Along the Rio Grande, brown to red clays occur.
Hidalgo County is in the South Texas Plains vegetation area, which
features grasses, mesquite, live oaks, and chaparral. Many native plants have
been reduced in recent years by extensive farming. These include chapote,
guayacan, ebony, huisache, Brazilwood, and yucca. In 1982, 91% of the land
was in farms and ranches with 52% of the farmland under cultivation and 85%
was in irrigation. Primary crops were sorghum, cotton, corn, cantaloupes,
carrots, and watermelons. The main fruit crops in the area are grapefruit,
oranges, and pecans. Natural resources include caliche, sand, gravel, oil, and
gas.
The climate is subtropical and subhumid. Temperatures range from an
average low of 47 degrees Fahrenheit in January to an average high of 96
degrees Fahrenheit in July. The average annual temperature is 73 degrees
Fahrenheit. Rainfall
Numerous species of mammals occur in Starr County today or were living
there in the past. These include opossum, mole, shrew, black bear, raccoon,
weasel, skunk, badger, fox, coyote, ocelot, cougar, jaguarundi, bobcat, squirrel,
gopher, mouse, rat, beaver, rabbit, javelina, antelope, and deer (Davis 1974).

5

At the time of this survey very little natural vegetation or pristine landforms
were found to exist within the APE. Much of the route of the force main was in
disturbed rights-of-way along United States Highway 83 (Figure 3) and city
streets in the colonias (Figure 4). The local soils consist of a clay loam over hard
calcareous clay, clay and gravel over clay, and alluvial clay loam over clay.

Figure 3. View of Proposed Force Main Along Highway 83

6

Figure 4. View of Proposed Force Main Along Tom Gill Road

7

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
According to a statistical overview published by the THC (Biesaart et al.
1985:76), Hidalgo County is located in the Southern Coastal Plains CulturalGeographical Region of Texas. In 1985, when the overview was published, the
number of archaeological sites in the region was 1516 or 7.50% of the state. In
1985, there were 89 recorded sites in the county. This accounted for 5.87% of
the region and .44% of the state. Although three Paleo-Indian sites were
reported, the majority of sites in 1985 were listed as Archaic (n=38) and Late
Prehistoric (n=46). Site disturbance is common in the area. Biesaart et al.
(1985:146) mention erosion disturbance (24 sites), construction disturbance (19
sites), disturbed and artificially capped (2 sites), deflated (5 sites), dispersed (73
sites), potted and/or surface collected (2 sites), and destroyed (25 sites). Sites
with subsistence related features have been recorded with hearths present at 2
sites, burned rock features present at 11 sites, midden soil present at 1 site,
bone beds present at 2 sites, and other (1 site). In 1985, 10 stone tool
manufacturing areas were known to occur, and burials had been reported at four
sites. Today there are approximately 200 recorded sites in Starr County.
According to a planning document for the Central and Southern Planning
Region of Texas as defined by the Texas Historical Commission (MercadoAllinger et al. 1996:13), Hidalgo County is located in the Rio Grande Plains
Archeological Region. This is one of the major oil producing areas in the state. It
also contains significant amounts of coal-bearing formations and is on the
eastern edge of Falcon Reservoir. The area is rapidly changing due to an
increase in tourists and seasonal residents (“Winter Texans”). These factors are
major contributors to site disturbance in the area.
Sites defined as Paleo-Indian in South Texas are typically limited to
surface discoveries of distinctive lanceolate spear points (Hester 1980a). As
stated above, Archaic and Late Prehistoric sites are common and consist of
campsites with subsistence-related features and, in some cases, burials.
According to Hester (1980b:57), there are two kinds of occupation sites in
South Texas: surface-exposed sites and sites buried in stream silts. He states
that “Erosion, often helped along by cultivation, cattle grazing, ranch roads, and
droughts, has exposed many prehistoric occupation sites.” According to Hester
(1980b:73), prehistoric cemeteries are present in the area. One of these is the
Ayala site (41HG1) in Hidalgo County. This site contained multiple burials in
flexed positions with associated grave goods. Ayala dates to the Late Prehistoric
Brownsville Complex.

8

Several archaeological surveys have been performed in the vicinity of the
project area. These projects were associated with oil and gas production (i.e.,
pipelines and well pads) and water drainage projects (canals). The kinds of sites
found include prehistoric camps (41HG96), lithic scatters (41HG97, 41HG99,
41HG101, and 41HG102), and unknown prehistoric (41HG148). The only
historic site recorded in the area appears to be a capped wall associated with the
railroad (41HG143). The location of these sites and areas surveyed may be
found on the maps at TARL and the Texas Archeological Sites Atlas. A listing of
the surveys in the area, including those that recorded the above-mentioned sites,
is presented as Appendix II.
Additional small area surveys have been conducted in Hidalgo County.
For more information regarding other work in the area researchers are advised to
consult the site files at TARL and the THC. No bibliography has been published
for that part of South Texas that includes Hidalgo County. There is a published
series entitled Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology (published by the THC
and compiled by William E. Moore) that documents all work in Texas from 1988
through 1992. As mentioned above, there are several overviews of South Texas
that provide excellent data for the area. These are Archeology in the Central and
Southern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document (Mercado-Allinger et al.
1996), Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur Archaeologists
(Hester 1980b), Texas Graveyards: A Cultural Legacy (Jordan 1988); Prehistoric
Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview (Biesaart et al. 1985), and
Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450 Years (Fox
1983).

9

METHODS OF INVESTIGATION
Prior to the field survey, the Principal Investigator conducted a review of
previous work in the general area and talked with other archaeologists. The
Texas Historic Sites Atlas was checked for previously recorded sites and areas
surveyed, and a records check by Jean Hughes at TARL was performed.
The project area was examined by a 100% Pedestrian Survey, shovel
tests, and backhoe trenches. Shovel test locations along the route of the force
main and at the lift station sites are depicted in Figure 2. Excavated earth from
each shovel test was screened using ¼” hardware cloth, and a shovel test log
was maintained (Appendix III). One shovel test was dug at each lift station (n=3),
19 tests were dug along the route of the force main, and 5 tests were dug at
Plant Site A. All tests were terminated when the clay subsoil was encountered.
Pedestrian Survey was conducted where the ground surface was visible
and was mainly carried out at the treatment plant site. This changerequired
survey of two plant sites instead of one as depicted on the original maps and
described in the Research Design (Appendix I). At the time of this survey, the
location of the treatment plant had not been determined. Therefore two areas (A
and B) were being considered by the city. At Plant Site A, a 100% Pedestrian
Survey was carried out, and parallel transects at 30 meter intervals were walked
across the plowed field. Two backhoe trenches were excavated in those areas
where the subsurface disturbance will be the greatest, and each trench was dug
to beyond the vertical limits of the APE. Selected areas along the walls of the
backhoe trenches were profiled and photographed (Appendix IV). Also, selected
samples of earth were screened, and the walls were examined for features and
soil change. It was learned in the field that Plant Site B had been excavated for a
levee borrow pit and then used as a settling basin. The present fill is recent silt
from the abandoned basin. Therefore, no Pedestrian Survey was conducted at
this disturbed site, and no subsurface work was performed. Figure 5 illustrates
the use of the backhoe at Plant Site A, and Figure 6 is a view of Plant Site B. In
addition, five shovel tests were dug in this area and were excavated to depths of
40 cm before reaching the clay subsoil. The approximate location of these tests
appears in Figure 7. The project was documented through digital photography,
and control was achieved by the use of a handheld GPS.
Originally, the project called for 2.7 km of force main to be examined. In
the field, however, an additional .3 km was added to create a total of 3 km.
No cultural materials were found in any of the shovel tests or backhoe
trenches. Three chert artifacts were found on the surface at and near Plant Site
A. These specimens were examined in the field and not collected.

10

Figure 5. View of Proposed Plant Site A

Figure 6. View of Proposed Plant Site B

11

Figure 7. Shovel Test Locations at Plant Site A

12

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Pre-Field
A search of the site records at TARL revealed no previously recorded sites
in the APE. Several professional surveys have been conducted in the area, and
some of these recorded sites (see Archaeological Background above).
Field Survey
At the time of this survey, the majority of the proposed 12” force main was
in very disturbed areas with little or no natural vegetation or pristine landforms
present. Some of the areas had been cultivated (orchards) prior to street
construction. Past and present farming activities as well as grading and filling for
street construction have completely disturbed the original surface and near
subsurface in these areas. Other observed forms of disturbance include drainage
ditch construction, underground gas pipelines, phone utilities, a railroad, levee
borrow pit, and numerous paved and unpaved entrances to local businesses.
The soils in these areas consisted of a clay loam over a hard calcareous clay at
depths between 20 and 40 cm.
The three lift station sites were found to be disturbed through cultivation,
field roads, and buried gas and utility lines. The soils at lift stations “A” and “B”
were clay loam over a hard calcareous clay at 40 cm, and the soils at Lift Station
C was clay and gravel over clay at 30 cm.
Proposed Plant Site A is located in a plowed field north of Farm-to-Market
Road 1427 (Figure 2) and east of Chihuahua Road. The soils in this area
consisted of alluvial clay loam over clay at 40 cm. Three chert objects were
found on the disturbed surface. They are a flake, a shattered quartzite cobble
fragment, and a crude unifacial scraper made on a split cobble probably made
from local chert. These specimens are referred to in this report as an Isolated
Find, and their location is shown on a map in Appendix V. An interview with the
landowner, Joe Metz, revealed that he has never found artifacts in this area. Mr.
Metz is an artifact collector who regularly collects at a site in his orange grove on
a hill to the north of Plant Site A. The Isolated Find may be related to this site.
Proposed Plant Site B is located in a plowed field that is currently
surrounded by a levee that is now breached in several places for the passage of
field roads. An interview with Mr. Metz revealed that the plant site had been
used in the past as a borrow pit for the creation of the levees surrounding the
field. The area was then used as the Edinburg Settling Basin for irrigation water.
When it filled with silt it was abandoned. A new basin was constructed to the
west and is in use today (Figure 2).

13

One cemetery that meets the age criterion for a historic cemetery is
located near the project area (Figure 2). San Antonio Cemetery, however, is well
outside the APE and will not be affected by construction as currently planned.
The current survey was performed according to the “Minimum Survey
Standards for Project Areas of 200 Acres or Less” as defined by the Texas
Historical Commission, Archeology Division.

14

RECOMMENDATIONS
No prehistoric archaeological sites were found to be within the APE, and
the San Antonio Cemetery is well outside the APE (400 meters). Therefore, it is
recommended that the City of Peñitas be allowed to proceed with construction as
planned throughout the project area. If any prehistoric or historic sites within the
APE are encountered during construction, all work must cease until the Texas
Historical Commission, Archeology Division can assess the situation. Should
construction plans change to include new areas that will affect undisturbed
ground the THC must be notified as a return visit by a professional archaeologist
may be required.

15

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistorical Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical
Commission.
Davis, William B.
1974 The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Bulletin 41. (Reprinted 1978).
Fox, Daniel E.
1983 Traces of Texas History: Archeological Evidence of the Past 450
Years. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.
Hester, Thomas R.
1980a A Survey of Paleo-Indian Archaeological Remains Along the Texas
Coast. In Papers on the Archaeology of the Texas Coast, edited by
Lynn Highley and Thomas R. Hester, pp. 1-12. Center for
Archaeological Research, Special Report Number 11. The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
1980b Digging Into South Texas Prehistory: A Guide for Amateur
Archaeologists. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.
Jacobs, Jerry L.
1981 Soil Survey of Hidalgo County. United States Department of
Agriculture in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Jordan, Terry G.
1988 Texas Graveyards: A Cultural Legacy. University of Texas Press.
Austin.
Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A., Nancy A. Kenmotsu, and Timothy K. Perttula
1996 Archeology in the Central and Southern Planning Region, Texas: A
Planning Document. Office of the State Archeologist, Special
Report 35 and the Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural
Resource Management Report 7. Texas Historical Commission.

16

APPENDIX I
RESEARCH DESIGN
CITY OF PEÑITAS, TEXAS
Records Check
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) will contact the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the state repository for site records,
to determine if previously recorded sites are present in the project area. In
addition, a review of relevant archaeological reports was conducted. This action
revealed that adjacent areas have been examined by professional archaeologists
and sites have been found in the vicinity. These sites are mainly surface lithic
scatters.
Project Description
The City of Peñitas, Texas in southwestern Hidalgo County proposes to
construct a wastewater collection system, three lift stations, one grinder pump
station, and a wastewater treatment facility in order to serve its customers who
are currently using septic tanks. The gravity flow collection system will consist of
approximately 109,00 linear feet of 8” PVC sewer line. This system will be
installed with existing road rights-of-way and, in some cases, beneath the paved
streets. The three lift stations will be small (20’ x 20’) and will be located on
highway frontage adjacent to the existing road rights-of-way. Grinder Pump
Station 1 will be located within the existing road right-of-way. The proposed
wastewater treatment plant site will be constructed on an 8.7-acre tract of land
owned by the city. The three lift stations with a 12” force main are proposed to
transfer the wastewater to a new 750,000 gallon per day wastewater treatment
plant.
Removal of large trees within paths of pipelines will be avoided where
possible by boring. Creek crossings will be encased, and creek bottoms and
slopes restored to their original condition. It is anticipated that the new line will
not adversely affect prime farmland, floodplains, and/or wetlands since the
majority of the proposed line will follow along previously disturbed routes of the
road right-of-way.

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE TWO)
Areas to Survey
The 8” collection system will pass through two colonias, Dos Jardines and
Colonia Martinez and King Ranch Phases 1-3. These colonias are recent,
having been constructed in the 1980s. Therefore, there are no historic structures
present. The line will be placed in the existing rights-of-way (borrow ditch) and/or
beneath the narrow paved streets. These areas have been disturbed through
construction of the houses and streets, and utilities are present in the borrow
ditches. In some areas, previous disturbance has resulted from agricultural
practices in the form of citrus orchards. BVRA believes that there is little chance
of encountering undisturbed prehistoric archaeological sites in the Area of
Potential Effect (APE) in either of these colonias. Therefore, it is recommended
that these areas be exempted from survey.
The 8” collection system will also be constructed along Farm-to-Market
Road 1427 and within the city of Peñitas. These areas have also been disturbed.
Therefore, it is recommended that these areas be exempted from survey.
Much of the 12” force main is already in place. The only areas of
proposed force main are north of United States Highway 83 and adjacent to the
proposed wastewater treatment plant. It is recommended that these areas be
examined through shovel testing and/or backhoe trenching as needed.
The three lift stations will affect undisturbed ground. Even though they are
small in size, it is recommended that they be examined through shovel testing
and/or backhoe trenching as needed.
The proposed wastewater treatment plant will affect undisturbed ground in
deep alluvial soils. It is recommended that it be examined through backhoe
trenching.
The proposed grinder pump station is in an already disturbed area.
Therefore, no survey is recommended.
Site Types
Based on previous work in the area, prehistoric archaeological sites are
known to occur in a variety of settings. Habitation sites are mostly commonly
found on the lower terraces adjacent to streams, while lithic quarries have been
recorded in all settings where chert cobbles were available in prehistoric times.
Lithic scatters and hearths are found on terraces and uplands. Buried sites may
be found in the floodplains of major streams. Historic archaeological sites are
not always tied directly to water and may be found in areas between streams.

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE THREE)
Survey Methods
The Principal Investigator for this project is William E. Moore, and the Project
Archaeologist is Edward P. Baxter. No fieldwork will commence until an Antiquities
Permit has been issued for this project. The entire project area was assessed by
the Principal Investigator accompanied by George E. Lazaro, P.E. of J. F. Fontaine
and Associates, Inc., the engineering firm associated with this project. The
following methods are based on this “windshield survey” and a review of previous
work in the area.
All exposed ground surfaces will be carefully inspected for cultural materials
and features. Normally only diagnostic artifacts will be collected from the surface of
a site. Quarry or lithic procurement sites will be treated differently. In these areas,
a controlled collection of cultural materials may be made to identify the kinds of raw
materials present and the ways in which these materials were used.
Non-diagnostic artifacts observed in the back dirt of the backhoe trench or
trenches will not be collected. Selected shovels full of earth will be screened at
each backhoe trench location. Since only a small portion of the wastewater
treatment facility will contain subsurface disturbance it is estimated that no more
than two trenches will be adequate to evaluate the APE in this area.
Shovel tests will be excavated at the discretion of the Project Archaeologist
and will be dug in arbitrary 10 cm levels. All excavated earth will be passed
through ¼ inch hardware cloth. Artifacts found in shovel tests will be collected and
analyzed in the laboratory prior to curation. Shovel tests will be dug to the
underlying clay or rocky subsoil (caliche) when possible and to depths of about 100
cm when clay or rock is not reached. If clay or rock can’t be reached through
shovel testing, backhoe trenches will be excavated where appropriate. When a site
is found, an attempt to determine its boundaries through shovel testing and surface
inspection will be made.
The project will be documented through a shovel test log, backhoe trench
log, field notes, and digital photography. A map will be drafted that depicts the
location of all areas surveyed, including shovel tests and backhoe trenches.
All archaeological sites will be located on the landscape using a hand-held
GPS, and each site will be plotted on the proper USGS topographic quadrangle.
Field numbers will be assigned to all sites until an official trinomial can be
obtained TARL.

RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE FOUR)
The number of shovel tests and/or backhoe trenches will meet or exceed
that number requested in the Minimum Survey Standards for projects of 200
acres or less.
Artifact Analysis and Curation
All significant artifacts will be collected for analysis in the laboratory. They
will be described and measured. Those specimens deemed worthy of permanent
curation will be processed and turned over to TARL. All artifacts not viewed as
containing research potential for future researchers will be discarded following a
written document authorizing this action from the Texas Historical Commission
(THC), Archeology Division. Artifacts found on private property will be offered to
the landowner.
Report Preparation
A report documenting the findings of this project will be written by the
Principal Investigator and Project Archaeologist. This report will follow the
guidelines established by the Council of Texas Archeologists and THC. Two
draft copies will be submitted to the THC for review. Upon acceptance of this
report, 20 copies will be submitted to the THC for distribution to regional libraries.

APPENDIX II
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS IN VICINITY OF PROJECT AREA
Day, D. William, Jane-Laurens Day, and Elton R. Prewitt
1981 Cultural Resources and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo and
Willacy Counties, Texas. Prewitt & Associates, Inc., Report of
Investigations 15.
This project recorded sites 41HG28-41HG42 and 41HG81-41HG98.
Etchieson, Gerald Meeks, and Douglas K. Boyd
1982 Cultural Resources Survey for Proposed Rehabilitation and a New
Drain for Hidalgo County Irrigation District Number 16. Bureau of
Reclamation, Southwest Region, USDI, Amarillo.
This project recorded sites 41HG99-41HG113.
Godwin, Molly G.
2005 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Valero Logistics LP, Penitas to
Edinburg Extension, Hidalgo County, Texas. Antiquities and
Consulting, Heritage Management Series Survey Report 41.
This project did not record any sites.
Harrington, Laverne
1986 Field Trip Report for the Willacy-Hidalgo Drainage Project
conducted for the Federal Regulatory Commission.
This project recorded sites 41HG39, 41HG91, and 41HG96.
Rue, David J., John F. Doershuk, Heidi Fassler, Norman A. Haywood,
Christopher A. Bergman, and John S. Jacobs
1992 Phase I Cultural Resources Project on the Pemex-HPL 36-Inch
Pipeline Project in Hidalgo County, Texas. 3-D Environmental
Project C7168-01.
This project recorded sites 41HG146-41HG15_.

Appendix III
Shovel Test Log*

Shovel Depth

Soils

Comments

Test

(cm)

1

40

Clay loam/Clay

Force main. From proposed plant site B to FM 1427.

2

40

Clay loam/Clay

Force main. From proposed plant site B to FM 1427.

3

30

Clay loam/Clay

Force main. From proposed plant site B to FM 1427.

4

40

Clay loam/Clay

Force main. From proposed plant site B to FM 1427.

5

40

Clay loam/Clay

Proposed plant site A. Plowed field.

6

40

Clay loam/Clay

Proposed plant site A. Plowed field.

7

40

Clay loam/Clay

Proposed plant site A. Plowed field.

8

40

Clay loam/Clay

Proposed plant site A. Plowed field.

9

40

Clay loam/Clay

Proposed plant site A. Plowed field.

10

40

Clay loam/Clay

Proposed plant site A. Plowed field.

11

20

Clay loam/Clay

Force main along FM1427 by levee.

12

20

Clay loam/Clay

Force main along FM1427 by levee.

13

30

Clay loam/Clay

Force main along FM1427 by levee.

14

30

Clay loam/Clay

Lift Station C disturbed by gas line.

15

30

Clay loam/Clay

Force main along Tom Gill Road. Disturbed by ditch and two gas lines.

16

30

Clay loam/Clay

Force main along Tom Gill Road. Disturbed by ditch and two gas lines.

17

20

Clay loam/Clay

Force main along Tom Gill Road. Disturbed by ditch and two gas lines.

18

20

Clay loam/Clay

Force main along Highway 83. Disturbed by ditch and phone utilities.

19

20

Clay loam/Clay

Force main along Highway 83. Disturbed by ditch and phone utilities.

20

20

Clay loam/Clay

Force main along Highway 83. Disturbed by ditch and phone utilities.

21

40

Clay loam/Clay

Lift Station A. Disturbed by street construction.

22

30

Fill/Clay loam/Clay

Force main. East side of new street. Disturbed by construction.

23

30

Fill/Clay loam/Clay

Force main. East side of new street. Disturbed by construction.

24

30

Fill/Clay loam/Clay

Force Main. South side of Diamond Avenue, Disturbed by street consturction.

25

30

Fill/Clay loam/Clay

Force Main. South side of Diamond Avenue, Disturbed by street consturction.

26

30

Fill/Clay loam/Clay

Force Main. South side of Diamond Avenue, Disturbed by street consturction.

27

40

Clay loam/Clay

Lift Station B, Flat lot, disturbed by small road.

*All Tests Were Negative

APPENDIX IV: BACKHOE TRENCH PROFILES

