An Archaeological Survey of the Senator
Frank L. Madla, Jr. Natural Area, Bexar
County, Texas
By
Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester

Submitted to
The City of Gray Forest, Texas

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 5681
Report No. 94
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants
San Antonio, Texas
2011

1

Abstract
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants conducted a Phase I archaeological survey at the
42.1 acre Senator Frank L. Madla, Jr. Natural Area, Bexar County, Texas for the City of
Grey Forest in January 2011. Texas Antiquities Commission Permit # 5681 was issued
for the project since the natural area is public property. No prehistoric sites or features
were identified but a vertical shaft cave recorded on the property has the potential for
containing human remains. However, no evidence of human activity was noted around
the cave. The cave is secured with a locked grate. One historic site, a late 19th early 20th
century board and batten structure built partly with square nails was recorded. This
structure was once used as a hunting cabin and retreat by the prominent Beckmann family
of San Antonio. The poorly preserved structure might meet the criteria for a Texas
Archeological Landmark.

No other archaeological recommendations are deemed

necessary due to the absence of physical evidence of prehistoric occupation.

2

Introduction
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants (AAC) conducted a Phase I archaeological survey at
the 42.1 acre Senator Frank L. Madla, Jr. Natural Area, Bexar County, Texas for the City
of Grey Forest. Texas Antiquities Commission Permit # 5681 was issued for the project
since the natural area is public property. The pedestrian survey was carried out in
accordance with the “Archeological Survey Standards for Texas” to insure that no
archaeological or historical resources eligible for nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places are damaged or destroyed due to the planned construction. This Phase I
investigation was designed to detect and record any archaeological or historical
component that may be present in the project area.

Senator Frank L. Madla, Jr. Natural Area was established by the City of Grey Forest as a
natural area. It is located east of Scenic Loop Drive and is partly bordered on the north
by Menchaca Road in northern Bexar County (Fig. 1). The generally rocky terrain is
mostly covered by juniper with deciduous trees and undergrowth along the arroyo that
drains the property (Figs. 2-3). The exception is an abandoned field recently cleared of
invader species for conversion to grassland (Fig. 2 top). The previous landowner had
shredded some of the juniper around the trails and on top of the hill that left a blanket of
mulch across the areas shredded (Fig. 2 bottom).

The topography is mostly hilly (Fig. 4) and the local geology is dominated by upper
Glen Rose Cretaceous limestone (Fig. 5). This parent material along with the rocky
terrain formed the shallow soils of the Brackett-Tarrant association found on the hill
(Taylor et al. 1991). To the east of the hill and north of the existing field, TaB soils are
found.

This soil unit is described as “Tarrant association, gently undulating, 1-5%

slopes” comprised of dark shallow soils formed over hard limestone. It is within this unit
that the vertical cave is present. The present-day field has Krum complex (KrO soils,
found in long, narrow valleys in northern and northwestern Bexar County (Taylor et al.
1991:24). These clayey soils are deeper than the Tarrant soils to the north and can be
cultivated.

Finally, on the south and far eastern edges of the Natural Area, the TaC

3

“Tarrant association, rolling” soils are found. They are typical of slopes and draws on a
5-15% slope. Some pieces of poor-quality chert were seen in the TaC soils during the
survey.

Research Design
Scope of Work
The following tasks were proposed and outline the scope of work for this project.
Task A: Apply for a Texas Antiquities Committee Permit.
Task B: Conduct a 100% surface inspection of the 42.1 acres for traces of prehistoric or
historic archaeological resources; shovel tests will be excavated if deemed necessary to
determine the presence or absence of buried cultural material. The need for shovel tests
will be based on surface visibility, soil conditions, and geomorphic setting.
Task C: Document any archaeological sites and isolated finds encountered in the survey
by obtaining GPS coordinates on the location and plotting the resources on a project map.
Task D: Document standing historic structures.
Task E: Conduct a historical background.
Task F: Provide interpretations of the survey findings and assess the significance of
any archaeological sites encountered within the project area with regards to their potential
for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places and as a Texas Archeological
Landmark.
Task

G: Prepare

used, archaeological

a

written

report

background,

detailing

historical

the

area

background,

surveyed,
survey

methods

findings, and

recommendations for future work.
Task H: Provide one unbound copy and two CDs of the final report to the Texas
Antiquities Committee as required, and an electronic copy and three hard copies of the
final report to the City of Grey Forest.

4

Archaeological Background
The broad outline of the archaeology of northern Bexar County is reviewed here. Major
time periods and site types are briefly noted. Time periods are based generally on data
published by Turner and Hester (1993) and Hester (2004).

The Paleoindian period, 9,200-6,800 B.C., has distinctive chipped stone spear points
used in hunting mammoth and other late Ice Age mammals early in the period. Other
spear types appear with a shift to bison, deer and other game after the Ice Age ended
around 8000 B.C. Known site types in northern Bexar County are campsites with flintchipping debris from stone-tool making and repair. One site of Clovis age (9,200 B.C.)
was excavated near FM1604 and Leon Creek (Collins et al., 2003). A later site, dating
around 7,500 B.C., was investigated on the grounds of St. Mary’s Hall on Salado Creek.
A summary of these early sites can be found in Collins et al. (2003).

Sites of the following Archaic period are common in northern Bexar County. These
peoples were hunters and gatherers as in the earlier Paleoindian period, but lived in an
environment very similar to those of modern times. Projectile points used to tip spears
(often erroneously called “arrowheads”) change in shape through time, from 6,800 B.C.
to 500 A.D.

Archaeologists use these forms to recognize more specific time frames

within the Archaic (e.g., Early, Middle and Late Archaic).

In northern Bexar County,

the most distinctive Archaic site is the burned rock midden. These large accumulations
of fire-cracked limestone result from the use of earth-oven cooking starting around 3,000
B.C. Such features were part of larger campsites, with large amounts of flint debris from
tool-making; sometimes, animal bone (dietary remains) and charcoal that can be used for
radiocarbon dating.

Other Archaic site types include lithic procurement areas (where

flint cobbles eroded out of the Edwards limestone and were processed), lithic scatters
(lightly-used areas probably representing short-term hunting and gathering activities), and
rarely, sinkhole burials (Archaic peoples often disposed of their dead by placing them in
sinkholes and caverns).

5

By 700 A.D., there began to be some changes in the long hunter-gatherer life way. The
Late Prehistoric is first seen with the introduction of the bow and arrow. The stone
arrow points are very small (mistakenly called “bird points”), but could be used in
hunting game of any size. By 1300 A.D., the economy emphasized buffalo-hunting.
Most sites of this era include campsites, often in areas previously used by Archaic
peoples, lithic scatters of this age; and the lithic procurement areas of earlier times
continued to be used.

During the Historic period, the best known archaeological remains are ranch and farm
houses of cut stone, dating from the 1840s through the 1880s. Stacked- stone fences also
occur (Shafer and Hester 2007). Such sites, including those without surviving structures,
are recognized from 19th century pottery fragments, artifacts of glass and metal, etc.
Some later Historic houses and farmsteads dating through the early 1900s survive, but
these along with the older houses and outbuildings are in danger of being engulfed by
expanding development in the greater San Antonio area.

Nearby Sites

Somewhat surprisingly, very few sites have been formally documented in the Grey
Forest/Helotes Creek area.

To the west of the Madla Natural Area property is site

41BX71. Recorded in 1971 by W. Fawcett and P. McGuff, it is in the French Creek
drainage. They recorded scattered campsite debris, including flakes and a Pedernales
point (Middle Archaic).

On the Helotes Creek drainage, there is a clustering of sites recorded downstream from
the Natural Area. Most of the sites were recorded by A. Ferraro and B. Markey in 1978,
as a part of an undergraduate student project in archaeology at The University of Texas at
San Antonio. From north to south, these include 41BX492 (lithic scatter or “workshop”),
41BX491 (burned rock scatter and flakes), 41 BX 488 (stone house ruins), 41BX489
(rock lime kiln in bank of a tributary to the creek), and 41BX490 (a Historic cemetery,

6

with perhaps 15 unmarked graves).

In this same area in 2007, an avocational

archaeologist with the Southern Texas Archaeological Association, Joseph W. Beavin,
recorded site 41BX1736 (a burned rock midden) and 41BX1742 (a basin shaped hearth
exposed in a waterline trench dug by the San Antonio Water System).

A Historical Overview of the Early History of the Madla Natural Area
The first settlement of the area, part of which is today the Madla Natural Area property,
was by John Conrad Beckmann (See Fig. 6).

A German immigrant, Beckmann was a

blacksmith and wrought-iron craftsman at the time that he and his wife (Regina Muller)
moved to San Antonio, with their first child, Heinrich. The Beckmann Ranch was
formed in 1852, when it was purchased from early San Antonio developers Thomas
Devine and F. Giraud. There is considerable information (and a fair amount of myth)
surrounding the ranch, Indian raids, land transfers, deeds, buildings and the like.
Presently, the Daughters of the Republic of Texas Library have archived the John Conrad
Beckmann Papers, with further materials being added at the time of this report by David
and Myrna Langford.

Deeds dealing with lands associated with the Beckmann Ranch

can be found at the Office of the County Clerk, along with many deeds involving John
Conrad Beckmann’s property acquisitions within San Antonio.

The Beckmann Ranch consisted of 320 acres of hills, canyons, and farmlands, cut by
Helotes Creek. At the time, the locality was known as “Canon de los Helotes” and had
few settlers. It is reported that Beckmann promised his wife, Regina, that he would build
her a “Swiss chalet” in light of homesickness for her native Switzerland. The reference
to a “Swiss chalet” must have been a joke, because the first house built on the property
was a house of sticks shown in Figure 9 (Susan Beavin, personal communication, 2011).
Presumably it was this house that was built in 1852-1853 and was later replaced by the
board and batten structure. The Beckmanns lived in San Antonio and only occasionally
visited their “country” property. They hired a “Mexican family” to be caretakers at the
ranch. All members of that family were killed by “Indians” in 1853, at a time that the

7

family was reportedly living in the “Swiss chalet” (Massey 2008::43). This was one of
several such raids in the area in 1853.

The ranch was used by a variety of individuals, and for a variety of reasons, up through
the 1920s.

One deed of note in the Office of the Bexar County Clerk, dated August 3,

1905, apparently involves the sale, for $1.00, of 344 acres in the “Canon de Helotes.”
John A. Beckmann (second son) sells this property back (?) to his father, John C.
Beckmann, with this deed.

Obviously, a great deal of deed research would have to be

done to follow all of the land sales involved the Beckmann Ranch – a task well beyond
the scope of the present research. John C. Beckmann was about 90 years old at this time.
Around the turn of the 20th century, the property that is now the Frank Madla Natural
Area, was used by the Merry Knights of King William as a retreat and hunting area. In
1918, and for some years earlier, Max Martinez operated a blacksmith shop and
sharecropped.

A photograph of his brother in law, Gabriel Marnoch (and wife,

Carmelita) is found in Massey (2008: 43), showing them standing in front of a building,
presumably a house on Beckmann Hill.

The historical record shares little light on the surviving structures atop the hill within the
Frank Madla Natural Area.

One is a rock home, built in the 1920s, and remodeled

several times after that. Nearby is the remnant of what was a board and batten structure,
presumably a home (probably the house in Massey 2008: 43 and in Figures 7 and 8 of
this report.

A 1905 photograph of several Hispanic children shows a building of a very

different jacal-like style (Fig. 9). This may be the fable “Swiss chalet” discussed later in
this report.

Survey Findings
The pedestrian survey was conducted on January 6, 2011 by the authors and accompanied
by Susan Beavin and Jennifer Nottingham. We did not find any evidence of a prehistoric
archaeological site on the property. No shovel tests were deemed necessary due to the
shallow rocky soils and the absence of any concentration of evidence such as fire-cracked
rock or chert flakes or artifacts indicative of prehistoric features or activity. While the

8

landscape was most certainly used for hunting and gathering wild foods by the many
generations of hunters and gatherers over the 11,000 years of prehistory, the only
indication of this use were a rare fire-cracked rock (which may or may not have been
prehistoric) less than half dozen chipped stone flakes observed over the entire area, and a
single small discarded biface (Fig. 10). The flakes were noted in two areas; less than a
dozen flakes were observed in the cleared field, and two flakes were seen on the west
side of Beckmann Hill where the sotol stand is today. Finding discarded tools and an
occasional flake amongst stands of sotol are not unusual in the Balcones Canyonlands
(Saunders 1992).

No concentrations of fire-cracked rock indicative of a hearth or pit

oven were found on the property. The most likely explanation for the absence of
concentrated prehistoric cultural deposits was a lack of immediate water. Spring-fed
Helotes Creek is nearby to the west, but not in the immediate Madla Natural Area.

Vertical Shaft Cave
One feature that potentially could have archaeological significance is a vertical shaft cave
located on the northern section of the property (Figs. 11, 12). This cave is currently
capped with a locked grate for safety. The depression measure about 10 meters across
and sinks down about a meter and a half at which point it opens to a vertical drop of
several meters to an accumulated talus deposit. The opening itself is about .75 to 1.
meter across. The only evidence of possible prehistoric activity was two fire-cracked
rocks in the proximity. Two armadillo back dirt piles revealed no evidence of any
accumulated midden and no other evidence of hearths or burned rock midden were
observed.

The proximity of this cave to Helotes Creek would make it obvious to American Indians
who traversed back and forth along the creek valley prehistorically. Therefore, we
consider this cave has having a high potential for containing human remains although
there is no empirical evidence that it does.

Vertical shaft caves are features commonly used prehistorically throughout the karst
areas of the Edwards Plateau Canyonlands as a place to deposit the dead. Archaeological

9

investigation of such features yielding human remains have shown that their use as
mortuary depositories extend back to ca. 8,000 years (Bement 1994). Vertical shaft cave
sites within Bexar and adjacent counties that have contained human remains include
Hitzfelder Cave (Collins 1970), and sites 41BX207 (Ralph 1996:212) and 41BX1068
(Ralph 1995: 164) in the Government Canyon State Natural Area. Numerous vertical
shaft caves were found on the Redbird Ranch property, especially south of Potranco
Creek although none had confirmed human remains present (Shafer and Hester 2006). In
addition often being repositories for human remains, the caves also are often infested
with rattlesnakes as we observed at Redbird Ranch.

Historic Structure

The one significant cultural resource is the remnant of what we assume was the
Beckmann hunting cabin that may have replaced the “Swiss chalet” stick structure. As
noted earlier, the Madla Natural Area is within the boundaries of the old Beckmann
ranch, portions of which remained in the hands of the Beckmann heirs until recently. The
hill, or Beckmann Hill, was a popular destination for hunting parties in the early 20th
century, and the ranch was used as hunting retreat by the Beckmanns and their friends
and relatives in the late 19th and well into the 20th century. Remnants of the board and
batten hunting lodge or cabin used by the Beckmanns and the Beckmann boys’ friends
remains (Figs. 7, 8) as shown the graffiti still on the walls. It was a popular retreat for the
Merry Knights of King William, which began as a secret men’s club in the King William
neighborhood started by the friends of the young Beckmann boys.

The remnants of the structure include three standing walls and a roof constructed of both
square and round nails (Fig. 13). Round nails began to replace square nails about 1892 in
the San Antonio area. The board and batten has been partially disassembled and rebuilt
on the north, and remodeled on the east end (Figs. 7 and 8). The floor has been recently
replaced and the north wall is missing. Some of the boards from this wall are stacked
nearby. It also has a tin roof that is obviously a replacement and ties into the more recent
structure built onto the south side with a concrete floor (Fig. 8). The board and batten

10

structure measured 15.25 feet long, slightly over 12 feet wide, and is about 11.5 feet from
floor to the top of the roof.

Windows were open to the south and west sides, and a door was once in the east wall
(Fig. 14) that opened into an adjoining room that has since been replaced by the much
later structure. A door to the exterior is on the south wall (Fig. 14). The cabin was once
warmed by a wood stove as there is an opening on the west wall for a stove pipe (Fig. 15
top). It is apparent that to be treated to a stay at the cabin was a memorable hunting
experience based on the numerous penciled names and dates that are on the east and
south walls. These names include both men and women are among those on the walls
(Fig. 15 bottom; Fig. 16).

Changes have taken place since the construction of the board and batten house. There is
some forensic evidence based on photographs as noted above that suggest the house was
more extensive than we see today (see Figure 6). Sometime in the late 20th century a
screened sleeping porch or room with the concrete floor was added, presumably for
hunters. The area around the houses, and indeed on the entire property, has no visible
occupational refuse dating from the 19th or early 20th century. Our only clues to the age of
the house is the building style and the square nails found in boards and battens lying in a
stack nearby and in the west wall. The image shown in Figure 6, based on the 1906
photograph, shows Beckmann men standing near the structure. In the upper left, there is
a high roof line, suggesting more complicated architecture than seen in the surviving
board and batten.

Also, we wonder what structure(s), if any, were destroyed when the

1920s-vintage home was built south of the board and batten?

The photo shown in Figure 9 of the Hispanic children was made in 1905 according to
notations on the photo album from which it came. Susan Beavin provided the image and
information of its source which is the Beckmann’s photo album made available to Susan
Beavin by David Langford & Amanda Ochse. The issue is this: when was the stick
structure constructed, was this the “Swiss chalet;” where was it in reference to the board
and batten structure; did the two structures stand for a while; or did the board and batten

11

structure replace the stick structure? Unfortunately, none of these questions can be
answered at this time. And finally, we assume the stick structure was indeed the fable
“Swiss chalet,” if so, the title must have been intended as humorous reference.

Twentieth Century House

Near the board and batten structure is a small two-bedroom house constructed in the
1920s (Susan Beavin personal communication, 2011) (Fig. 17). This house was also
added onto at some time, probably to accommodate a growing family.

Several

interesting outdoor features also were observed, including a terrace wall that contained
several niches for religious figures, used quite recently to hold candles (Fig. 18). There
are also two outhouse associated with the rock house; one “his” and one “hers” (Fig. 19).

The survey team searched on both sides of the hill for a historic artifact scatters that
might provide some indication of late 19th century occupation, but none was found. Only
a few scattered bits of broken bottles, more recent beer cans, and a scatter on the east
slope of broken and discarded tiles, probably from some kitchen renovation of the rock
house (Fig. 20).

Merry Knights of King William

The historic connection of the Beckmann hunting cabin at the Madla Natural Area
property to the Merry Knights of Kings William is related in the history of this interesting
men’s club compiled by Walter Berman and Kurt Beckmann, both former members of
the club. The Merry Knights of King William was a secret society organized in 1909 by
several King William neighborhood teenagers, Willard Berman, Arthur L. Bergstrom,
and Walter G. Giesecke (Bergstrom 1976). Joining them at that time were Percy W.
Clarkson, Federick W. Bolinger, and Werner N. Beckmann, Albert Beckmann, Henry
Pancoast, Harry Ankerson, George Henyan, and Ernest P. Schuchard. By 1916 there
were 29 members and by 1975 the list included 109 names of members and former
members, many of them deceased by that time. This organizational meeting place was a

12

refurbished room in the carriage house behind 208 King William Street. The boys did all
of the necessary work to convert the carriage house to a meeting room.

World War I

interrupted their activities but the young men, some returning from the war, the
organization became a men’s club whose sole purpose was “to have fun” (Beckmann
1976).
The club, originally named the Mystic Knights of King William, became very prominent
and popular in the King William neighborhood. They held an annual wild game dinner
often at Beckmann Hill near Grey Forest, the only time females were allowed to attend
meetings. Ernst Schuchard made red and grey shields and wooden swords for each
knight. They wore robes similar to those of the Klu Klux Klan and held candlelight
ceremonies and initiations (Bergstrom 1976). There is no record of the club being racist,
however; membership simply was composed of boys and young men in the King William
neighborhood that was made up mostly of descendants of German immigrants (Kurt
Beckmann 1976).

Beckmann (1976) also noted that they had their own handshake, secret recognition
whistle, and motto “Every Progressive, Honest, and Friendly.” Their colors were scarlet
and silver, flower the red carnation.

The activities of the members as boys were

swimming and canoeing in the San Antonio River, swimming in the Oma Steves’
natatorium (where the Conservation Society Party House is today), top spinning, marble
shooting, tennis, football, and baseball. As men, they went camping, hiking, swimming,
and hunting, including at the Beckmann Ranch (Fig. 6). The connection to the board and
batten structure to the Merry Knights was their annual Founder’s Day weekend and wild
game dinner which was first held on Beckmann Hill (Bergstrom 1976).

The Merry Knights social group still exists and consists of male descendants of the
former members according to Judge Fred Shannon, a former member himself who had
joined the club in 1975. Judge Shannon recalled that there were monthly meetings but no
dues. The only “dues” was that three members would host a monthly dinner with drinks
and card games, and this responsibility would be rotated; an annual banquet was also held
and this was the only time that wives or women guests were invited to attend.

13

Summary and Recommendations
A though pedestrian survey conducted of the Madla Natural Area property found no
significant prehistoric resources within the Natural Area. One natural geological feature,
a vertical shaft cave, was recorded and this feature has a high potential for containing
prehistoric human remains as such features tend to do in the karst Balcones Canyonlands.
There was no confirmation that such remains occur in the site, however. Indeed, we were
told that the feature is subject to flooding after rains, although this does not preclude its
use as a mortuary cave. Certainly, the depression in which the cave sits would direct
water into the opening. This feature is currently sealed and secured with a locked metal
grate. Because there is no empirical evidence of prehistoric use, no archaeological site
number was assigned to the cave. Its potential significance, however, is recognized.

The historic board and batten structure on top of Beckmann Hill, however, merits some
preservation attention despite its poor condition. This structure was built near the end of
the 19th century and served as a hunting cabin/retreat for member of the Beckmann
family and their friends, including the men’s club the Merry Knights of King William.
We recommend the preservation of this pre-1892 board and batten structure. Much more
research could be done on the structure. However, at this time, we do not believe that it is
eligible for the National Register of Historic Places due to its current condition. It might,
however, be recorded as a State Archeological Landmark at some future date. The
remaining structures are dated to the 20th century and are not eligible for historic
nomination.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Susan Beavin for her assistance during all phases of this project
and for providing the maps used in Figures 1-3 and photos in Figures 6, 9, and 20. We also
would like to thank Jennifer Nottingham for also assisting us during the survey. The oral history

14

of the Merry Knights of King William provided by Judge Fred Shannon is also greatly
appreciated.

Texas Historical Commission Review
Texas Historical Commission review letter of the draft report is provided in Appendix A.
The THC agrees that the vertical shaft caves has the potential for containing prehistoric
human remains, but does not merit an archaeological site designation at this time due to
the fact that there has been no confirmation that human remains are indeed present.
Regarding the historic structure, the letter states that the “cabin is eligible for listing as a
State Archeological Landmark under Criterion 5. Other Criteria may apply after the
Bckmann Ranch has been fully assessed.” They go on to state that the cabin should be
preserved and protected.

References Cited
Beckmann, K. D.
1976 A Glimpse into the Past With An Eye To the Future of the
Merry Knights. In The Merry Knights of King William:
Recollections of WalterBergstrom, Part II. The Clegg Company. San
Antonio.
Bement, L. C.
1994

Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices During the Central Texas Archaic.
The University of Texas Press, Austin.

Bergstrom, W,
1976

The Merry Knights of King William. In The Merry Knights of King
William: Recollections of Walter Bergstrom, Part I. The Clegg Company.
San Antonio.

Collins, M. B.
1970

On the Peopling of Hitzfelder Cave. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological

15

Society 41:302-304.
Collins, M.B., D. B. Hudler and S. L. Black
2003

Pavo Real (41BX52): A Paleoindian and Archaic Camp and Workshop on
the Balcones Escarpment, South-Central Texas. Studies in Archeology
41. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Hester, T.R.
2004

The Prehistory of South Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, ed. by T. K.
Perttula, pp. 127-154. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

Massey, C. L.
2008

Helotes: Where the Texas Hill Country Begins. Old America Publishing,
Houston, Texas.

Saunders, J. W.
1992

Plant and Animal Procurement Sites in the Lower Pecos Region, Texas.
Journal of Field Archaeology 19(3): 335-350.

Ralph, R. W.
1995 Government Canyon State Natural Area. In Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department Annual Report for 1994, pp. 163-167. Cultural Resources
Program, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
1996

Government Canyon State Natural Area. In Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department Annual Report for 1995, pp. 209-215. Cultural Resources
Program, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.

Shafer, H. J. and T. R. Hester
2006

An Archaeological Survey of Redbird Ranch, Bexar and Medina
Counties, Texas: Final Report. Report No. 33, Abasolo Archaeological
Consultants, San Antonio, Texas

Shafer, H. J. and T. R. Hester

16

2007 An Archaeological Survey of the Sundance Ranch, Northern Bexar County,
Texas. Report No. 54. Abasolo Archaeological Consultants, San
Antonio, Texas.

Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993

Field Guide to the Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians. 2nd edition.
Gulf Publishing, Houston.

17

Figures

Historic structure
Cave

Figure 1. Google Earth map showing the boundaries of the Madla Natural Area
and location of the historic structure and cave. Based on image provided by Susan
Beavin.

18

Figure 2. Views of the Madla Natural Area showing the old field recently
cleared of juniper (top) and oak-juniper parkland showing shredded juniper
mat (bottom).

19

Figure 3. Views of the Madla Natural Area showing the more arid west side of the
hill and dispersed stands of sotol (top) and view from the crest of the hill looking
west up the Helotes Creek canyon (bottom).

20

Figure 4. Topographic map of the Madla Natural Area. Map provided by
Susan Beavin.

Figure 5. Geological map of the Madla Natural Area showing the dominant
geological formation to be the Cretaceous Upper Glen Rose formation. Map
provided by Susan Beavin.

21

Figure 6. Beckmann’s Helotes cabin in 1907; left to right: Mr.,
Martines, Albert Beckmann, Herman Schuchard, and John C.
Beckmann. Photo provided by Susan Beavin.

Figure 7. Beckmann’s Helotes cabin as it stands today.

22

Figure 8. Beckmann’s Helotes cabin remains attached to a 20th century
sleeping porch addition.

Figure 9. Children of Beckmann’ workman’s children taken in
1905. The location of the jacal-like structure on the property is
unknown, but there is no evidence that it is on the Madla Natural
Area. Image provided by Susan Beavin.

23

Figure 10. Views of the biface found in the old field.

Figure 11. View of the sink and opening to the vertical shaft cave.

24

Figure 12. Views of the vertical shaft cave entrance and steel grate.

Figure 13. Construction details of the board and batten structure. Left
shows square nails; right shows round nails.

25

Figure 14. Interior views of “Beckmann’s cabin.”

26

Figure 15. Top: West window and stove pipe hole in the wall.
Bottom: Graffiti dating to 1922.

27

Figure 16. Interior views of the Beckmann’s board and
batten cabin showing graffiti left by hunters or partiers in
the board and batten structure on Beckmann Hill dating
1924 and 1927.

28

Figure 17. Two views of the 20th century rock house on Beckmann Hill.

29

Figure 18. His and hers outhouses associated with the
rock house on Beckmann Hill.

Figure 19. Stone terraces and wall niches associated with the rock
house on Beckmann Hill.

30

Figure 20. Tiles observed on the east slope below the
houses on Beckmann Hill. Photo by Susan Beavin

31

APPENDIX A

32

33

