TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICJ\L SURVEY

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES
1",$

FILE CO?y~

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY IN THE UPPER
CANEY CREEK WATERSHED AREA

.-.

Leon and· Madison Counties. Texas

Duford

W. Skelton

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

.t<. ~ , "L

The University of Texas at Austin
'1.- )

Technical Bulletin No. 21

1978

7a,

;4~ i<~

~

Ld. "

---,
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
• AUSTIN, TEXAS

"conts Research Cenur
100 Burnet Road

78758

J u 1 y 10, 19 7 8

Hr. George C. Marks
State Conservationist
Soil Conservation Service, USDA
P.O. Box 648
Temple, Texas 76501
Re:

An Archeological Survey in the Upper Caney treek Watershed
Area, Leon and Madison Counties, Texas: Purchase Order No.
40-7442-8-1165

Dear Mr. Marks:
Attached is a report on the results of our surface survey of
areas in the Upper Caney Creek Watershed area specified in the
subject purchase order. As you will note, a thorough coverage
of. these areas failed to identify any evidence of archeological
sites or features or histor~cal resources of potential significance.
Based on the negative results of this field and archival investi­
gation it is apparent that no further work can be justified in
the project area. With the ever-present possibility of deeply
buried cultural material existing in the Quaternary sediments
it is strongly suggested that if recognizable archeological
materials are exposed during construction the Texas Historical
Commission be notified.
We have enjoyed cooperating with your assessment program. Please
advise me if any further information is needed.
Sincerely,

tf/k;fd/l~
DavidS. Dibble
Director
SD:mg
ttachment
opy to Mr. A. J. Dusek, UT Office of Sponsored Projects

•
10 July 18

AN ASSESSMENT OF THE CULTURAL RESOURCES IN AREAS
AFFECTED BY THE PROPOSED FLOODWATER RETARDING STRUCTURES,
LEON AND MADISON COUNTIES, TEXAS
A Report to the Soil Conservation Service,
USDA, Temple, Texas
Duford W. Skelton
Staff Archeologist
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at
Austin
INTRODUCTION
On July 6, 1978, the writer from the Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas, performed an intensive sur­
face survey in two areas to be affected by the proposed con­
struction of floodwater retarding structures. Area A
included 98.5 acres of land along Caney Creek approximately
one mile north of Normangee, Texas, in Leon County. Area B
encompassed some 30 acres of land also along Caney Creek
approximately 1 mile south of Area A, within the city limits
of Normangee, Texas, Leon and Madison counties.
Texas
Field
under
Texas

The survey was conducted under contract between the
Archeological Survey and the Soil Conservation Service.
investigations were performed by Duford W. Skelton
the direction of Dr. David S. Dibble, director of the
Archeological Survey.

Prior to field investigations an exhaustive literature
search was completed to document any archeological sites
known to exist in the project area. This work included a
review of relevant maps and records on file at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin. As a result of this research it was determined that
no prehistoric or historic sites have been previously
recorded within the stuny area.

2

SURVEY RESULTS

Area A extends along the upper section of Caney Creek
for approximately one mile and is less than .5 mile at its
widest point.
The area is presently seeded with various
grasses and used for pasture except along the creek margins
which support dense stands of woody vines, trees and shrubs.
Although surface visibility was generally poor due to the
dense vegetational cover, the presence of numerous rodent
burrows, erosional rills, cattle trails, and cut banks along
the stream channel provided sufficient exposure of surface
and subsurface characteristics.
A total of six transects running north-south and parallel­
ing the main stream channel were completed in Area A.
In
addition several subsurface shovel probes were used in areas
where surface visibility, was extremely poor or subsurface
sediments could not be viewed.
Surface inspections and
subsurface probes failed to produce any evidence of cultural
materials. Hematite concretions were occasionally encountered
along with scattered clusters of pea gravels, but these
materials displayed no evidence of human modification.
It
has been concluded that no prehistoric or historic sites can
be demonstrated to exist in Area A.
Area B lies within the city limits of Normangee extending
from the Fort Worth and Denver Railroad .5 mile south along
Caney Creek.
The area is generally less than .25 mile in
width. The area presently includes a sewage disposal station
in the northern section with urban development scattered
throughout the southern sections.
The northern section where
the disposal station is located has been extensively modified
through construction of several water treatment ponds. This
area is also used as a garbage dump and the aroma from
freshly deposited waste was at times overwhelming. Vegeta­
tion is sparse and scattered but generally dense along creek
margins. Downstream surface modifications include housing
developments and access roads.
Flora in the lower section
of Area B included grasses in cleared areas and dense tree
stands along Caney Creek.
Four transects were completed in Area B using the same
procedures as previously described.
Subsurface shovel
probes were used in selected areas where surface and/or sub­
surface characteristics were obscured by dense vegetation.

7e~. ,,4~, ~~

Littuvt~

LId

3

No evidence of prehistoric or historic materials was
recognized.
It has beert concluded that no cultural" re­
sources can be demonstrated to exist in Area B.
Archeological investigations, including a literature
search and extensive surface inspections of both areas to
be affected by the construction of floodwater retarding
structures indicate that no recognizable cultural resources
can be shown to exist within the study area.
Therefore it
has been concluded that at the present time there is no
~vldence of a potential conflict between project construc­
tion and archeological sites. However, it is recommended
that the Texas Historical Commission be notified immediately
If any evidence of cultural materials is encountered during
the project c~nstructlon.

•

