ARCHEOLOGICAL TESTING AND ASSESSMENT
OF 4lTV46l AND THE ONION CREEK
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT SITE,
Travis County, Texas

Peter Thurmond

Principal Investigator:
David S. Dibble

Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
February, 1982

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcoms Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

Principal Investigator
David S. Dibble

Editor
Carol R. Fabac

A report submitted to Turner Collie and Braden Inc, in
partial fulfillment of the terms of letters of agreement
issued February 1980 and November 1981

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract

• • • •

v

Introduction

1

Environment of the Onion Creek Basin

4

Paleoenvironments .

.

• .

.

.

.

.

• • .

Previous Archeological Investigations • .

· 28

• • • •

• 29

Present appearance of the proposed wastewater treatment
plant site and 4lTV46l . . . . • .
• • • . • • . . · 31
Test Excavations
· 36
4lTV46l . . • • •
• • • 38
Material recovered from 4lTV46l .

.

Finished Tools

•

• 48

·

. 51

Historic Artifacts

· 53

Interpretations and conclusions .

• 55

Recommendations •

· 61

Bibliography

· 63
69

Appendix

LIST OF TABLES

Table 1.
Table 2.
Table 3.
Table 4.
Table 5.

········ ·
Description of stratigraphy, Backhoe
Trench 1 . . . .
··············
Descriptions of burned rock concentrations,
Backhoe Trench 1
· · · ·
······
Provenience of artifacts and associated
materials, 4lTV46l
·············· ·
Specimen density by excavation level,
Test pits 1-3 .
················
Dimensions of Excavation units

37

39
47
54

58

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1.

Figure 2.

Figure 3.

Figure 4.

Figure 5.
Figure 6.
Figure 7.

Air photo of general vicinity of proposed
Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant site
and 4lTV461 • • . • . . • • • • . . • . . • • .

3

Map of general vicinity of proposed Onion
Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant site and
41TV461 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

Map of surface geology in vicinity
proposed Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment
Plant site and 4lTV46l . • • • • • • . •

• 11

Topographic map of proposed Onion Creek
Wastewater Treatment Plant site and 4lTV461,
showing location of excavations • . • • •

• 35

Photos of soil profiles, Backhoe Trenches
2 and 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

Scaled drawing of stratigraphy, Backhoe
Trench 1
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .

..

. . 43

Photo of stratigraphy, Backhoe Trench 1 • .

45

. 41

ABSTRACT
In Febnuany, 1980, the Texa~ Aneheologieal Sunvey, The
Univen~ity 06 Texa~ at Au~tin, eondueted te~t exeavation~ at
the ~ite 06 the pnopo~ed Onion Cneek Wa~tewaten Tneatment

Plant nean the eon6luenee 06 Onion Cneek and the Colonado
Riven in Tnavi~ County, Texa~. The pnojeet, undentaken 60n
the City 06 AU6tin, and unden eontnaet with Tunnen, Collie
and Bnaden, Ine., wa~ de6igned to te~t the anea 06 the plant
6ite and dnainagewaY6 60n 6ub6ulL6aee eultulLal lLemain~. Site
41TV461 wa6 inve6tigated to detelLmine it/) velLtieal extent,
eondition and potential 6igni6ieanee.
VUlLing 6ive day6 06 te6ting, thinteen baekhoe tlLenehe~
welLe excavated in the alLea unden con6idelLation nOlL con6tlLuction
00 the plant and dnainageway~. The6e plLobe~, in conjunction
with plLe-exi6ing geomolLphieal innOlLmation, indieated that the
plant 6ite i6 on the tlLead 06 a Level 4 tennaee 06 the Colonado
Riven. Thi6 evidently-/)table land60nm, 6ubjeeted to veny
limited dep06ition, yielded no evidenee 06 pnehi6tonie eultunal
utilization.
Thnee baekhoe tnenehe~ and thnee hand-excavated te~t pit6
wene plaeed in the anea 06 6ite 41TV461. The plLeviou6ly
neeonded eultunal dep06it plLoved to be extnemely 6hallow but
one tneneh nevealed an undi6tunbed, bunied oecupational compo­
nent on the uppen, Holoeene, Onion Cneek tenlLaee at a depth
06 alm06t 2 m. below the modelLn 6unoaee. The p066ibility 06
a well-6tnati6ied 6equenee 06 eomponent6 i6 theneby demon6tnated
and eaution in additional eon6tlLuetion in thi~ anea wa~
neeommende.d.

INTRODUCTION

The City of Austin is presently developing plans for the
construction of a wastewater treatment plant to supplement its
present facility on Williamson Creek in serving the south
Austin area.

The new plant will be built on the north side of

Onion Creek, approximately 1200 meters upstream of its con­
fluence with the Colorado River (Fig. 1 ).
As a part of its planning procedure, and in accordance with
federal Environmental Protection Agency regulations, the city
contracted with Turner, Collie

and Braden, Inc. to prepare an

Environmental Assessment or impact statement resulting from
the construction and operation of the new plant.

That firm, in

turn, subcontracted with the Texas Archeological Survey, a re­
search unit of The University of Texas at Austin, to conduct
archeological excavations of an exploratory nature at the pro­
posed plant site.

The excavations had two objectives:

1) to

test for the presence of subsurface archeological remains at
the actual plant site and a related drainagewaYi and 2) to
establish the depth and significance of a nearby, previously
recorded prehistoric archeological site, 41TV461.
The following is a report of those excavations.

Information

on the local environment and previous archeological investi­
gations in the area which is pertinent to an interpretation of
the excavations is abstracted from the published literature
and other available data sources.

The present appearance of the

study area is described, the methodology and results of the
excavations are detailed, and an analysis

made of the cultural

materials recovered. Finally, an interpretation of the results
and recommendations pertaining to the construction of the new
facility are provided.

2

FIGURE 1

Aerial photograph of immediate vicinity of proposed
Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant and 41TV46l.

Compare

with Figure 2 to establish locations of these features.

Note

numerous paleochannels of the Colorado River which appear as
darkened linear bands of varying sinuosity.
3 summary of depositional history.

Compare with Figure

Photo was taken in 1937

by Edgar Tobin Aerial Surveys of San Antonio for the Texas State
Highway Department.
Courtesy of the Texas Natural Resources Information Service in
Austin.

1000

2000

!

fEET

Figure

I

4

ENVIRONMENT OF THE ONION CREEK BASIN

CLIMATE
The present climate of the Onion Creek Basin is warm,
humid

and subtropical.

Summers are hot, winters mild, and

below-freezing temperatures occur on fewer than 25 days per
year

on average.

Strong northerly winds accompanied by sharp

temperature drops occur in winter in connection with cold fronts
commonly referred to as "northers".
68.3 degrees F.
low.

Mean annual temperature

Diurnal variation in temperature is relatively

Temperatures, on average, range from 70 to 95 degrees F.

during the summer, and from 40 to 60 degrees F. in winter (Texas
Water Development Board 1976) .
Mean annual precipitation is 32.8 in. but rainfall is highly
variable, ranging from over 50 in. to less than 20 in.
usually occurs throughout the yearj however

Rainfall

mean monthly pre­

cipitation tends to be bimodally distributed with precipitation
peaks occurring in spring (April through June), and late summer
(September and October).
and July the driest.

May is typically the wettest month,

The bulk of the rainfall during the warmest

part of the year (April through September) results from con­
vective thundershower activity (56.5% of the mean annual preci­
pitation).

These thundershowers often produce heavy amounts of

rainfall over short periods, contributing to rapid runoff

(~b~d).

TOPOGRAPHY
The most dramatic topographic feature in the Onion Creek
Basin is the Balcones Escarpment, associated with the Balcones
Fault zone.

Both trend northeasterly across the center of Onion

5

Creek Basin.

The escarpment resulted from a series of pre­

dominantly dipslip faults, with the down-thrown side to the
southeast, which occurred during the Miocene Epoch, some 16 to
28 million years ago (Urbanec 1963: 11).
have been:

Its topographic results

I} The Edwards Plateau to the west and north of the

escarpment, 2) the Rolling Prairie, a moderately rolling zone
along the Escarpment, and 3) the Blackland Prairie, a gently
rolling plain below the Escarpment.

This drop in elevation

occurs over a distance of 10-12 miles on the Onion Creek Basin.
The Edwards Plateau has been highly dissected by the Colo­
rado River and its tributaries which include Onion Creek.

Slopes

are generally short and steep, averaging 5 to 15% but exceeding
15% in the immediate vicinity of the major watercourses.
plateau extends some 500 mi. to the west of Austin.

The

The Rolling

is moderately dissected, slopes are of moderate length
and are commonly less than 5%.

This topographic unit, as de

ned

by Garner and Young (1976: 5-6), extends south-southwestward
from Austin to the vicinity of San Antonio.

The Blackland

Prairie is a slightly to moderately dissected area east of the
fault zone, extending north-northeast from San Antonio to the
Red River.

Slopes are long and typically range from 2 to 5%.

The terraces of the Colorado River alluvial valley, below the
escarpment and within Travis County, are generally considered a
part of the Blackland Prairie.

Terrace slopes may be less than

1 to 2%.

Approximately 50% of the Onion Creek Basin lies on the Ed­
wards Plateau, 30% falls within the Rolling Prairie

and 20%

characterized by Blackland Prairie topography, in a west-to­
east progression (Skolasky 1978: 8, Fig. 2).

- _ ..............................................................­

6

FIGURE 2
Map showing the density and distribution of recorded
archeological sites in the vicinity of the proposed plant
site and 4lTV46l.

Compare the drainage pattern and site

distribution to the surface geology in Figure 3.

---------------

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Figure

2

t

Archeological Site
(A II site nu mbers are
preceded by '41TV')

I

,

455

457

km.

TAS' Foboc·/982

8

SURFACE GEOLOGY
Geological units outcropping in the Onion Creek Basin are
Cretaceous marine sedimentary and igneous rocks, Pleistocene
and Holocene alluvial terrace deposits
alluvium.

and modern flood plain

The Cretaceous units will be dealt with first, from

the limited perspective of:

1) their influences on the topo­

graphy and hydrology of the Basin; 2) their roles as sources of
alluvium characteristic of Onion Creek (rather than the Colorado
River); and 3) the

roles as sources of raw material

riginal chipped stone industries.

abo­

The Quaternary units will

then be described as background to aid in the interpretation of
the deposits underlying the proposed plant site and 4lTV46l.
Cretaceous Geologic Units
The structural history of the Central Texas Region has
resulted in the association of characteristic assemblages of
outcropping geologic units with the topographic divisions des­
cribed above.

The pre-Quaternary surface geology will therefore

be described in terms of those associations.

The following

information has been abstracted from Barnes (1974), Garner and
Young (1976) and Sellards et

at. (1932).

That portion of the Onion Creek Basin which lies on the
Edwards Plateau drains an outcrop of a single levier Cretaceous
unit, the Glen Rose Formation.

It is composed of gray, brown,

and tan beds of nodular-weathering limestone, dolomite, and
marl.

The alternation of resistant and recessive strata pro­

duces a terraced topography on hillsides and weathers to steep
canyons along the stream channels.

Marine megafossils are common,

including molluscan steinkerns, rudistias, oysters, and echinoids.
The complex pattern of faulting along the Balcones Fault
zone of the Rolling Prairie has produced an intricate exposure
of twelve Lower and Upper Cretaceous Formations.

For the

9

purposes of this discussion, however, these can be grouped into
three broad categories in which the dominant lithologies are:
1) limestone and dolomitei 2) chalk and claYi and 3) igneous
materials.
The first category includes the Lower Cretaceous Edwards
and Georgetown Formations, which outcrop immediately below the
western edge of the Balcones Escarpment.

Both formations are

composed of gray to grayish-brown, nodular-weathering limestone
and dolomite, containing numerous marine megafossils.

The

Edwards Formation also contains abundant gray to black chert.
It has been honeycombed by solution channels and functions as an
aquifer, producing much of the spring discharge responsible for
the perennial flow of Onion Creek.

The topography characteristic

of these formations is one of broad, relatively flat areas,
bordered by sheer scarps along stream channels.

Many caves and

rockshelters occur along these scarps.
The second descriptive assemblage of geologic units incor­
porates the Lower Cretaceous Del Rio Formation and the nine Upper
Cretaceous Formations which compose the Austin and Taylor groups.
Outcrops across the lower two-thirds of the Rolling Prairie are
pure white chalk alternating with gray and brown, calcareous,
montmorillonitic clay.

The chalk deposits are typically about

85% calcium carbonate.

Only the Del Rio Formation contains

marine megafossilsi pelecypods are particularly abundant.

Out­

crops of these units tend to produce a rounded and gently rolling
topography.
Finally, in the vicinity of the U.S. Highway 183 crossing
of Onion Creek, there is a small outcrop of black microcrystal­
line basalt, associated with greenish-brown pyroclastics which
have been altered to nontronite.

These materials were produced

by Pilot Knob, an exhumed marine volcano which erupted during
the late Cretaceous.

The resistant basalt has created a small,

rounded promontory on the south side of Onion Creek.

10

FIGURE 3
f.1ap showing outcrop distribution of relevant geologic
units in the immediate vicinty of the proposed plant site and
41TV461.

Compare with Figure 2.

The symbols listed on the

figure refer to the following units:
Qcr:

Colorado River:
Levels 2 and 3

Recent Alluvium and Terrace

Qt4:

Colorado River:

Terrace Level 4

Qt7 :

Colorado River:

Terrace Level 7

Qoc:

Onion Creek:

Recent Alluvium

Qtoc:

Onion Creek:

Terraces

Khnm:

Navarro Group

Descriptions of these units appear in the text, in the
section on surface geology.
Note:

The mapped extent of the Level 7 Colorado River

terrace illustrates the distribution of moderately intact deposits.
Lag gravels occur downslope across most of the Navarro Group
outcrop.

- - - - -....

~.-~~--~

.......

-----

- - -......

......

~---.-

~

- - ­

12

The four formations composing the Upper Cretaceous Navarro
Group are the only pre-Quaternary units outcropping in the small
segment of Blackland Prairie which is incorporated by the Onion
Creek Basin.

The Navarro Formations are composed of brown and

dark gray, calcareous, montmorillionitic clays.

They are

asso­

ciated with a gently rolling topography.
It would be useful at this point to emphasize the most
salient characteristics of the preceeding geologic units.

These

materials are predominantly gray or brown in color, fine-textured,
and calcareous.

Gravels resulting from their erosion would be

composed of nodular limestone, dolomite, chert, a small quantity
of basalt, and numerous marine megafossils.

The only raw

materials available for lithic manufacture are gray and black
cherts.

QUATERNARY DEPOSITS
High Terrace Deposits
Alluvial terrace deposits occur in the Onion Creek water­
shed at elevations of 198 to 207 m. above mean sea level (MSL),
following alignments and gradients which are discordant with
those of the lower terraces and modern flood plains of the Colo­
rado River and its major tributaries (Garner and Young 1976:
37).

These deposits, sometimes called the Delaney terraces,

appear to have been formed during the late Pliocene or early
Pleistocene, when the Colorado was at a much higher level than
at present.

Relict braided stream patterns and sedimentary

structures, calcification of relict paleosols, and a morphology
consistent with alluvial fan development all suggest deposition
in an arid climatic regime (Baker and
397).

Penteado~Orellana

1977:

The Delaney terraces are composed primarily of gray to

brown sand and limestone-chert gravel, and may locally relate to

13

ancestral precursors of Barton and Onion Creeks (Garner and
Young 1976: 37).

These deposits, indurated by calcification,

cover much of the northern boundary of the Rolling Prairie portion
of the Onion Creek Basin and form the resistant caps of scattered
hill tops throughout.
Also occuring within the basin, below elevations of 207 m.
above MSL are lag deposits of gravel which have been variously
referred to as the Uvalde or Manor Gravels.

These deflated

gravel deposits resulted from the winnowing out by erosional
processes of the finer materials from pre-Delaney terraces of
the Colorado River Basin.

Subsequent erosion of the Upper Cre­

taceous clays which underlaid the former terraces has resulted
in the downward migration of the gravels, such that their present
elevation is of no stratigraphic significance.

The gravels are

composed of granite, veined quartz, gneiss, schist, limestone,
chert and sandstone (Weber 1968: 27-30).

As will be discussed

below, this suite is typical of Colorado River alluvium.

Lag

gravel deposits are fairly extensive along the southern boundary
of the Onion Creek Basin, upstream of Pilot Knob and below the
Edwards Plateau (Urbanec 1963: Plate II) .
Colorado River Terraces
The later Pleistocene alluvial terrace deposits of the Colo­
rado River, post-dating the high terrace deposits, have been the
subject of considerable study (Hill and Vaughn 189.6....·9·.7; Deussen
1924; Nickell 1941; Weeks 1941: 1945: Mathis 1942: Quinn 1957:
Urbanec 1963; Weber 1968; Looney 1976: Wallis 1976: Baker and
Penteado-Orellana 1977; Looney and Baker 1977).

Multiple clas­

sifications of the Colorado terrace system have been suggested
by these studies (c.f. Baker and Penteado-Orellana 1977: 399).
Looney (1976) discusses at length the errors made in several of
the earlier studies.

As the research performed by Baker and

Penteado-Orellana (1977) seems to be the most methodologically

14

sophisticated to date, within the relevant segment of the Colo­
rado Valley, their classification and geomorphic interpretations
have been followed here.

However, Nickell (1941) and Urbanec

(1963) have been utilized for certain descriptive details.
Through the use of panchromatic remote sensing imagery
supplemented by limited field work, Baker and Penteado-Orellana
(1977) identified ten cross-cutting assemblages of relict
Colorado River channel patterns associated with seven alluvial
terrace levels in the Austin area.

Each assemblage was defined

on the basis of systematic changes in channel width, meander
wavelength, sinuosity

and channel sediment type.

The results

of this study of fluvial morphometric variables, in combination
with data from terrace sediments, relict paelosols

and paleo­

biological studies, suggest that these channel-terrace assemblages
resulted from cyclic climatic variations which have occurred
since early Illinoisan times.

Humid intervals were characterized

by fine-grained sediments and high-sinuosity meander patterns.
Changes to arid conditions initially caused episodes of down­
cutting.

Continued aridity promoted aggradation by low­

sinuosity, braided streams transporting relatively coarse sedi­
ments.

A return to more humid climate was accompanied by in­

creased channel sinuosity and continued, albeit far less rapid,
aggradation.

The author believes multiple transitions from

humid to arid and back again have been recorded in the terrace
sequence.
Remnants of Baker and Penteado-Orellana's terrace levels
4, 5 and 7 occur within the Onion Creek Basin.

Level 7 (most

often referred to in previous studies as the Capital Terrace)
dates from approximately 350,000 to 120,000 B.P.

It correlates

with their channel assemblage 7, and occurs at elevations of
40 to 48 m. above the present surface of the Colorado.

Depo­

sition apparently occurred during an arid phase, associated with
a low-sinuosity, braided stream (ibid: 399, 404, 412).

Two

15

small remnants of Level 7 cap the hills which rise above the
south side of Onion Creek

near its mouth (Fig. 2).

Terrace level 5 (formerly the Sixth Street Terrace) dates
from ca. 120,000 to 30,000 B.P.

It is associated with channel

assemblage 6R, and occurs at elevations of 18 to 20 m. above
the present Colorado.

A major remnant of level 5 occupies the

north side of Onion Creek, due south of the Montopolis Bend of
the Colorado.

Terrace Level 4 (formerly the First Street Terrace)

dates from about 30,000 to 10,000 B.P.

It is associated with

Baker and Penteado-Orellana's channel assemblage 6 in the
vicinity of Onion Creek, and occurs at elevations of 10 to 15 m.
above the present Colorado.

Level 4 terrace remnants are quite

extensive near the confluence of Onion Creek and the Colorado.
The proposed Onion Creek wastewater treatment plant site is lo­
cated on one such remnant (Fig. 2).
(~b~d)

Baker and Penteado-Orellana

also identify two lower, Holocene channel-terrace levels

along side of the present flood plain.

However, these are not

relevant to the present study, and will be given no further
consideration.
The alluvium of the Colorado River is much more variable
in character than that of Onion Creek, reflecting its larger
basin and the more complex lithology which it drains.

Colorado

River alluvium is therefore difficult to deal with on a broad level
of generalization.

However, several useful contrasts can be

made between the alluvial deposits of the Colorado and those of
Onion Creek.
One such observation is that the gravels associated with
Colorado River terraces typically include a more varied minerology.
The river crosses the Llano Uplift, a massive structural dome
and igneous intrusion which begins about 25 km.
of Austin.

(40 mi.) upstream

Beyond the uplift, in West Texas, the Colorado

drains large outcrop areas of Permian, Triassic
sandstones and conglomerates.

and Tertiary

Thus, in addition to the limestone,

16

dolomite

and chert from the Edwards Plateau which characterize

Onion Creek deposits, Colorado River gravels contain varying
amounts of granite, veined quartz, gneiss, schist
(Nickell 1941: 4-13).

and sandstone

Cherts derived from sources other than the

Edwards Plateau, and of colors other than gray or black, are
often present in Colorado deposits.
In a normal sequence of flood plain stratigraphy, laterally
accreted point bar deposits of sand and gravel will occupy the
lower portion of the profile, and vertically accreted silt and
clay will dominate the upper segment (Ritter 1978: 258-261).
That this is generally the case for the Colorado terraces has
been documented by Urbanec (1963: 58-9).

It may therefore be

presumed that gravels in Colorado terraces would be available
for aboriginal exploitation only where

ther: 1) stream cuts

have reached the basal portions of younger terraces

or, 2) more

areal erosion has removed the upper portion of older terraces.
Finally, the Colorado River alluvium tends to be much
more variable in texture
from that of Onion Creek.

and of a color distinctly different
It may grade from deposits of almost

pure gravel through various mixtures of gravel, sand, silt
clay to nearly pure clay (Urbanec 1963: 55-58).

and

And in contrast

to the low-chroma grays and browns of Onion Creek alluvium,
that of the Colorado (with the exception of some channel fills
or deposits of sand and gravel) is commonly various shades of
reddish-brown, due to the presence of iron oxides (ibid: 40).
The relevance of these differences will become apparent in the
description and interpretation of the excavations at 41TV461
which follow in subsequent sections of this report.
Onion Creek Terraces
Hill and Vaughn (1896-97: 2) first recognized the presence
of terraces along Onion Creek, upstream of Pilot Knob, but
mistakenly interpreted them as lacustrine deposits.

17

Koenig (1940: 19-20) defined two terrace levels along
Onion Creek from Buda to McKinney Falls on the basis of altitude
above the present stream-way and field observations of litho­
logic composition.

His upper terrace was defined as standing,

at its upper surface, about 25 m. above the present channel and
ranged from B to 12 m. in depth of deposits.

The lower terrace

was approximately 12 m. above the stream and averaged 8 m. in
depth.

Both were composed of calcareous clayey alluvium, grading

downward to limestone and chert gravels.

The upper terrace

showed advanced calcification.
Urbanec (1963: 29-30) described three terrace levels ad­
jacent to Onion Creek on the basis of methods similar to those
of Koenig, but with the added advantages of an aneroid
barometer, more accurate topographic maps and stereo-paired
vertical aerial photographs

(~b~d:

l3-l4).

He believed that a

projection of these terrace surfaces to the Colorado permitted
a correlation with what Baker and Penteado-Orellana (1977: 399)
would term levels 3, 4, and 5.

If so, the Onion Creek terraces

would date ea. 1,000-2,000 B.P.; 2,000-3,000 B.P.; and 3,000­
10,000 B.P. respectively

(~b~d:

412).

Urbanec (1963: 29) views

the Onion Creek terraces correlating with Colorado levels 4 and
5 as best developed above Pilot Knob, and those contemporaneous
with levels 3 and 4 as dominant below that promontory.
The most recent study of Onion Creek terraces was thesis
work conducted by Skolasky (1978).

He utilized high altitude

panchromatic and false-color infrared remote sensing imagery,
existing geologic (Garner and Young 1976), topographic (USGS
1:24,000 scale)

and soils (Werchan et

at. 1974) maps, and very

limited field reconnaissance in an analysis of the origins and
significance of certain high-albedo mottling which occurs on
alluvial deposits about the lower reaches of Onion Creek.

The

surface on which this mottling occurs lies between Onion Creek
and the Colorado River

the vicinity of Bergstrom Air Force

18

Base, and correlates with terrace level 5 of the Baker and
Penteado-Orellana (1977: 399) scheme.

Skolasky established

that the mottling resulted from the erosional exposure on topo­
graphic highs of calcic horizons which had developed in the
alluvium (Skolasky 1978: 65-78).

He then proceeded to define

three Onion Creek terrace levels, the upper two of which cor­
respond to Colorado River levels 5 and 4, and the lowest of
which was defined as representing the modern flood plain (ibid:
91-97).

However, this definition of terraces is based largely

on the previous work by Urbanec (1963) and is quite tangential
to the primary focus of Skolasky's thesis.
An adequate study of the alluvial terraces associated with
Onion Creek, and particularly of the complex history of the
alluvial deposits near its confluence with the Colorado River,
has not yet been made.

Previous studies have either dealt only

tangentially and superficially with Onion Creek terraces (Koenig
1940; Urbanec 1963; Weber 1968; Baker and Penteado-Orellana 1977)
or else have been very limited in scope (Sko1asky 1978).

The

results of these studies, when applied to a specific location,
are mutually contradictory.
Onion

None of the interpretations of the

terraces appears, to this author, to be based on

adequately detailed research.

However, an involved critique

would be beyond the scope of this document.

Suffice it to say

that none of the previous definitions of Onion Creek will be
followed here.
A map of the surface geology in the vicinity of the proposed
Onion Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant and 41TV461 has been
prepared by the author (Fig. 3).

Delineation of the outcrops

of the Navarro Group (KKNM) and Colorado River terrace level 7
(Qt 7) follow Garner and Young (1976: Plate VII) and Urbanec
(1963: Plate I), respectively.

The delineation of Colorado

River terrace level 4 (Qt 4), the lower Colorado terraces, and
the modern Colorado flood plain (Qcr) follows Baker and Penteado­

19

Orellana (1977: 402, figure 5).

The terraces (Qtoc) and recent

alluvium {Qoc} of Onion Creek have been approximately mapped
by the author on the basis of low level (3,500 feet) panchromatic
aerial photography which was shot for the Texas Highway Depart­
ment in 1937 (provided by the Texas Natural Resources Information
Service), elevational data from The USGS 1:24,000 scale Weber­
ville Quadrangle, and observations in the field of fluvial land­
forms and sediment composition.

It should be noted that the

author is an archeologist and not a trained fluvial geomorpho­
logist.

It is hoped, however, that the results will be adequate

for the present study.
No attempt has been made to define individual Onion Creek
terrace levels, or to correlate Onion Creek terraces with those
of the Colorado River.

However, it may be noted generally that

all of the Onion Creek terraces in the area mapped are topo­
graphically lower than terrace level 4 of the Colorado, and thus
are presumably post-Pleistocene in age.

There is, in fact, a

complex sequence of non-paired terraces along the lower reaches
of Onion Creek below level 4.

A very detailed study of the

sedimentology and landforms of this terrace assemblage will be
required to unravel its history.

SOILS
The soils of the Onion Creek drainage basin will be dealt
with on a selective basis.

The soils of the basin as a whole

will be described in very general terms, with an emphasis on
their influences upon its hydrology.

A more detailed examination

will then be made of the soils which the published literature
predicts will occur within the area excavated during this study.
The following information has been abstracted from Garner and
Young (1976) and Werchan

e~

al (1974).

20

The Edwards Plateau portion of the basin is characterized
by Entisols and some small areas of Inceptisols on flood plains.
These are very shallow soils, generally 20 to 51 cm. deep, and
there are numerous bedrock exposures.
to dark brown, calcarous

They are grayish-brown

and include silty clays, clay loams

and stony clays.
The soils of the Rolling Prarie segment are more variable,
reflecting the transitional nature of the physiographic unit.
The western third is dominated by shallow Orthents and Lithic
Argiustolls which are quite similar to the soils of the Plateau.
Typically less than 51 cm. in depth, these soils are dark brown,
calcareous, and include clay loams, stony clays

and clays.

The

lower two-thirds of the Rolling Prairie is covered by consider­
ably deeper Mollisols and Vertisols, with soil profiles ranging
up to 152 cm. in depth.

This latter group of soils ranges

from brown to dark grayish brown in color, from silt loams to
clays in texture, and all of the included soils are calcareous.
Deep Mollisols and Vertisols characterize the Blackland
Prairie section of the basin.
more in depth.

Soil profiles may be

265 cm. or

outcrops of the Navarro Group and Onion Creek

alluvium are associated with calcareous brown or gray clay loams
or clays.

Colorado River alluvium is, by contrast, characterized

by brown to reddish-brown, calcareous, sandy loarns, silt loams,
and silty clay loams.
The soils occurring in the Onion Creek Basin are quite
conducive to flashy stream discharge and severe flooding.

Over

50% of the basin is covered by shallow orthents, with numerous
exposures of bedrock.

The soils throughout the basin, whatever

their depth, are fine-textured and slowly permeable.

The infil­

tration rate is very low, and runoff is therefore high.
Werchan et ale
to the series level.

(1974) have mapped the soils of Travis County
Three series, the Bergstrom, Lewisville

and Frio, are mapped in the immediate vicinity of the proposed

~----~-~~-------~~-----

-~~-----

-

--------~

21

plant site and 41TV461.
The Bergstrom series consists of deep, calcareous cumulic
Haplustolls, developed on low terraces of the Colorado River under
a cover of mid and tall grasses.

A typical profile consists of

an A horizon, which is a deep mollic epipedon; a B horizon, which
is a cambic horizon defined only on the basis of its subangular
blocky structure and not characterized by an appreciable illuvial
accumulation of silicate clays; and a C horizon of unaltered
alluvial material.

The A horizon ranges from 51 - 122 cm. in

thickness; is dark brown to very dark grayish brown in color;
and ranges in texture from silt loam to silty clay loam.

The B

horizon ranges from 25 - 102 cm. in thickness, is light reddish
brown to reddish brown in color; and ranges from silt loam to
silty clay loam in texture.

Thickness of the solum over the C

horizon ranges from 127 - 203 cm.

The C horizon ranges from

silt loam to clay loam in texture, may be light reddish brown,
reddish brown, or reddish yellow in color; and often contains
numerous calcium carbonate threads and concretions (Werchan
~t

at. 1976: 13-14).

Baker and Penteado-Orellana (1977: 407-8)

note that Colorado River terrace level 4 is typically occupied
by the Bergstrom series.
The Lewisville series includes calcareous Typic Haplustolls
which developed on terraces of Onion Creek under a cover of mid
and tall grasses.

The A horizon is a moderately deep mollic

epipedon, 24 to 48 cm. in depth, is grayish-brown to very dark
grayish-brown, and ranges from silty clay to clay loam in texture.
The B horizon is 25 to 81 cm. in thickness, its color is very
pale brown to brown, and it is silty clay or clay loam in texture.
Thickness of the soil above the C horizon ranges from 64 to 117
cm.

That horizon is typically also very pale brown to brown,

and of a texture similar to that of the B horizon.
developed calcic horizon may occur (Werchan

~t

A weakly

at. 1976: 30-31).

22

The Frio series consists of calcareous Cumulic Haplustolls
which developed on the lower terraces and flood plain
Creek under tall grasses and trees.

There

of Onion

typcially an A

horizon, which is a mollic epipedon, directly overlying the C
horizon.

The A horizon is about 127 cm. thick, dark brown to

very dark grayish-brown, and a silty clay loam in texture.

The

C horizon ranges from pale brown to light brownish gray in color,
and from silty clay loam to clay loam in texture.

There is no

illuvial concentration of calcium carbonate as in the Bergstrom

(ibid: 23-44).
According to Werchan et ai. (1976: Sheet No. 71), the

and Lewisville

northern half of the Colorado River terrace level 4 remnant on
which the proposed plant site is located (Figs. 2 and 3) is
occupied by the Bergstrom series.

The southern half, including

41TV461, is mapped as Lewisville series.

A narrow band of Frio

soils is shown to parallel the present channel of onion Creek.
As will be discussed below, the excavations associated with the
present study indicate the mapping of the Lewisville series into
the study area is in error.

However, the contrast between the

Bergstrom and Frio series, and their associations with Colorado
terrace level 4 and Onion Creek, respectively, will prove quite
useful to an interpretation of the excavations.

HYDROLOGY
Onion Creek rises in eastern Blanco County and flows
eastward through Hays and Travis Counties before joining the
Colorado River near the study area (Fig. 2).
basin area is 905.6 km 2 (348 square miles)

Its total drainage

(Skolasky 1978: 4).

Approximately 50% of the Basin lies on the Edwards Plateau,
where the streams have eroded narrow, steep-sided canyons in a
high-density dendritic network.

Both valley depth and drainage

23

density are considerably reduced after Onion Creek crosses the
Balcones Escarpment and emerges onto the Rolling and Blackland
P.rairies.

Major tributaries of Onion Creek include Bear, Boggy,

Marble, Rinard, Slaughter

and Williamson Creeks.

The average

slope of the creek through Travis County is .15 meter per km.
(8

per mile), and the weighted channel gradient of the

entire mainstem is .22 meters per km.

(12

per mile).

Ground elevation ranges from 503 m. MSL in Blanco County to

3

m. at the Colorado River (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers 1976:
2-3) •
The combination of climate and topography along the Balcones
Escarpment produces one of the most catastrophic precipitation
regimes in the conterminous United States (Baker
630).

e~

a~.

1976:

Warm, moist Gulf air moving west and northwest is rapidly

uplifted by the topographic rise of the Escarpment, producing
an exceptionally high number of convective thunderstorms, which
often stall over the eastern margin of the Edwards Plateau, con­
centrating precipitation on basins like that of Onion Creek.
Further, major tropical storm tracts cross the Balcones Escarp­
ment and, by a similar process, can infrequently produce severe
flash floods like those which devastated Thrall in 1921 (Baker
1976: 2-3) and the Kerrville area in 1978.

During a flood in

1972, Blieders Creek near New Braunfels with a basin area of
38.6 km 2

(14 miles 2 ) produced a peak discharge of 48,000 cubic

feet per second (Colwick, McGill and Erichsen 1973: 1).
Once precipitation reaches the ground, the conversion to
streamflow depends primarily on drainage basin and channel
characteristics.

A very high runoff rate is promoted on the

Edwards Plateau segment of the Onion Creek Basin by sparse
vegetational cover, steep slopes, high drainage density, thin
fine-textured soils

and numerous bedrock exposures.

It is

also this part of the basin which is most likely to experience
catastrophic rainfall events.

In the lower half of the basin

24

a dense grassland vegetation, gentler slopes

and a lower drain­

age density combine to produce a lower runoff rate (Baker 1975:
3).

However, fine-textured, impermeable soils drastically

reduce infiltration, and simultaneous high discharges of the
Colorado River and Onion Creek can exacerbate flooding along the
lower reaches of the creek.
Onion Creek is deeply entrenched in a narrow valley through­
out its course.

Consequently, flooding generally does not

extend great distances beyond the creek banks or cover large
areas.

However,

given their narrow horizontal extent, the

floodwaters can be quite deep.

A study by the U.S. Army Corps

of Engineers (1973: 23) predicted, for a point about six river
miles (9.7 km) upstream of 41TV461, a 100 year interval flood
stage of 4.9 m. and a maximum possible flood rise of 7.6 m.
Given the proximity of 41TV461 to the Colorado River (Fig. 2),
one might expect even higher flooding.

The archeological site

is 7.3 to 11.6 m. above the present channel of Onion Creek
(Fig. 4).

The lowest of the backhoe trenches (BHT-l) associated

with the present study is about 6.7 m. above the creek.

Flooding

of at least the lower portion of the site into recent times
certainly seems possible.

FLORA
The flora of the Onion Creek Basin will be described only
in very general terms.

Sufficient information to permit a

detailed reconstruction of the microenvironments in the immediate
vicinity of 41TV461, from the point of view of the subsistence
base, is not available.

Natural vegetation assemblages were

generally associated with underlying rock types (Garner and
Young 1976: 8), and can therefore be summarized in terms of the
lithic categories defined above in the section on surface geology.

25

The limestone and dolomite of the Glen Rose Formation on
the Edwards Plateau were characterized by a climax community of
short juniper
copa{{~na)

(Jun~pe~u~

a~he~

and

v~~g~n~ana)
(Opunt~a

trees, prickly pear cactus

variety of fairly sparse, short grasses.
and scrub oak (Q.

v~~g~n~ana)

and sumac
sp.) and a

Live oak

6u~~6oftm~~)

(Rhu~

(Que~cu~

occurred in significant

numbers only where soil moisture was unusually high.

A park­

land of short to mid grasses, with scattered thickets of live
oak, scrub oak, post oak (Q.
ma~~{and~ca)

~tettata)

and blackjack

oak (Q.

was coextensive with outcrops of the Edwards and

Georgetown Formations in the western Rolling Prairie
(Sarner and Young 1976: 8-9; Plate VI).
The chalks and clays of the lower Rolling Prairie and the
Blackland Prairie

and the alluvium of the mid-level Colorado

River terraces were characterized by a savanna of mid to tall
grasses, with locally abundant live oak, juniper, persimmon
(V~o~py~o~

texana)

and mesquite

(P~o~op~~

gtanduto~a).

The

grasses in the vicinity of 41TV461 would have included little
(Sch~zachy~~um ~copa~~um),

bluestem

ge~a~d~~),

(E{ymu~

(So~gha~t~um

avenaceum) Canada Wildrye
Texas wintergrass (St~pa teucot~icha) ,

Indian grass

canaden~~~),

(And~opogon

big bluestem

tall dropseed

(Spo~obo£u~

a~pe~),

~accha~oide¢)

and side oats gramma (Baute{oua

(Whitsett and Fox 1979: 6).

silver bluestem

(Both~~och{oa

cu~tipenduta)

The high terraces of the Colorado

River and its tributaries within the lower Onion Creek Basin
were occupied by heavy concentrations of Cedar elm
~i6otia),

(utmu~

c~a~­

live oak, mesquite and a dense scrub undergrowth.

(Garner and Young 1976: 9).
Cottonwood
c~denta{i~),
n~g~a),

(Poputu~

American elm

pecan

and Bois d'Arc

dettoide~),
(U{mu~

sycamore (

ame~~cana),

(Ca~ya i{tinoen~i~J,

(Mactu~a pomi6e~a),

Ptatanu~

black willow

hackberry

(Ce{ti~

oc­
(Sa{~x

{aev~gat4),

with an understory of mid

grasses and forbs, occurred on the flood plains and lower

26

terraces of the major watercourses.
cypress (Taxodium

di~~i~hum)

A concentration of bald

typically paralleled each perennial

stream (Thorp 1939; Garner and Young 1976: 8-9).
Vegetation was thus relatively sparse on the Edwards
Plateau and the western Rolling Prairie, contributing to a high
runoff rate in approximately 60% of the Onion Creek watershed.
Much of the natural vegetation, particularly below the Edwards
Plateau, has been altered or destroyed by modern land use prac­
tices (Garner and Young 1976: Plate VI).

However, it may be

noted generally that 41TV461 would have been in an ecotonal
situation on the boundary between the terrace/uplands grasslands
and the riparian resources of Onion Creek.

FAUNA
A complete listing of the late Holocene fauna known to have
occurred in the Onion Creek Basin would be beyond the scope and
needs of this report.

However, a brief look at some of the

more important exploitable taxa serves again to emphasis the
ecotonal setting of the site.
Many mammalian species are present or are known to have
been present in the vicinity of 41TV461.

The bottomland forest

along Onion Creek and the Colorado River would have been a locus
of concentration for the fox squirrel
(P~o~yon ~o~o~),
(Ca~~o~

(S~iu~u~

nig~~),

raccoon

oppossum (Vid~~phi~ ma~~upia~i~), beaver

~anad~n~i~),

and black bear

(U~~u~

am~~i~anu~).

More

cosmopolitan mammalian species of the area included five large
carnivores:
gray fox

gray wolf

~upu~),

(U~o~yon cA..n.eJ(.~a a.~g~n~~u~),

bobcat (Lynx

~u6u~) i

white-tailed deer
lope

(Cani~

(An~i~o~ap~a

coyote

cougar

three large ungulates:

(Odo~oi~~u~
am~~i~ana) i

vi~ginianu~),

(Cani~

(F~~i~

bison

~a~~an~),

~on~o.to~),

(Bi~on

and

bi~on),

and pronghorn ante­

Eastern cottontail

(Sy~vi~agu~

sp.),

27

California jackrabbit
skunk:
and

(Meph~t~~

Conepatu~

(Lepu~

meph~t~~

me~oleucu~

cal~6o~n~cu~),

va~~an~,

mea~n~~),

Meph~t~~

three species of
meph~t~~

me~omeca~,

and numerous other small

mammals (Suhm 1957: 53-54; Davis 1974; Whitsett and Fox 1979: 7).
Numerous exploitable species of fish, amphibians, reptiles

and

molluscs would also have been available within a short radius
of 4lTV461, particularly along the watercourses.
birds, wild turkey

(MeleagnA.~

Among the

gallopallo) was especially impor­

tant (Whitsett and Fox 1979: 7).

Archeological data from a site

upstream, the Smith Rockshelter (4lTV42) indicates that fresh­
water mussels, turtles, white-tailed deer, bison, skunk

and

raccoon were the most heavily exploited taxa (Suhm 1957: 53-54) .

..

.

.

~-~

......•.•......

_-_..

28

PALEOENVIRONMENTS

Bryant and Shafer (1977) have used archeological, paleon­
tological, plant macrofossil, hydrological

and palynological

data to propose a model of late Quaternary (33,500 B.P. to
present) environmental change in central Texas.

The Bryant­

Shafer model seems to correlate well with that proposed by
Baker and Penteado-Orellana (1977) for late Quaternary Colorado
River fluvial processes.

Therefore, the two models will here

be combined in an attempt to summarize the major environmental
changes in the vicinity of 41TV461 from late Pleistocene times
to the present.
The earliest climatic episode identified by Bryant and
Shafer dates to the Wisconsin Interpluvial,
B.P.

~a.

33,500 to 22,500

A warm, rather arid climate is hypothesized, producing

a scrub grassland in which trees were very scarce or completely
absent.

The Colorado River, flowing as a low-sinuosity braided

stream, deposited most of terrace Level 4 (the level on which
the proposed plant site is located) during this period.
During the Wisconsin Fullglacial, from

~a.

22,500 to 14,000

B.P., the climate of central Texas became significantly cooler
and more humid, resulting in the development of an open canopy
forest composed of spruce, poplar, birch, hazelnut, ash, maple,
alder, dogwood, hickory, basswood, oak and pine, an
now characteristic of the northern united States.

assemblage
The Colorado

was gradually transformed into a high-sinuosity stream and con­
tinued to aggrade at a progressively slower rate.
From about 14,00 to 10,000 B.P., the climate slowly became
warmer and more arid.

This climatic degradation was accompanied

by an expansion of grassland areas at the expense of the forests,

29

transforming the character of the environment from woodland to
parkland (grassland interrupted by scattered groves of trees)
by the end of this interval.
Around 10,000 B.P., the climate became sufficiently arid to
trigger an incision by the Colorado River down through terrace
Level 4.

Presuming that Onion Creek began to incise its valley

in the vicinity of 41TV461 concurrent with this incision of the
Colorado below terrace Level 4, the landform at the proposed
plant site has therefore not been a part of the active flood
plain since the end of the Pleistocene Epoch.

As the climate

continued to deteriorate slowly from 10,000 to 7,000 B.P. the
Colorado first stabilized and then aggraded as a low-sinuosity
braided stream to form the flood plain represented by terrace
Level 3.
Both the climate and the river seem to have stabilized from
7,000 to 3,000 B.P.

A mesic interval occurred between 3,000

and 2,000 B.P., transforming the Colorado once again into a
high-sinuosity meandering river, and causing a brief resurgence
of the wooded areas around 2,500 B.P.

However, by 2,000 B.P.

the environment had assumed the late prehistoric savanna ratio
of grasslands to woodlands.

The Colorado River has assumed its

present morphology and elevation since that time (Baker and
Penteado-Orellana 1977; Bryant and Shafer 1977).

PREVIOUS ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
Most of the archeological research in the Onion Creek basin
has been done by amateurs and students.
have been reported to The University

Archeological sites
Texas by amateurs since

the 1930's and this contribution continues to the present day.
Student activity was greatest along Onion Creek during the
1940's and early 1950's when anthropology students from the

30

University recorded a number of archeological sites in the
Rolling Prairie segment of the basin.

Two prehistoric sites,

the Collins and Smith Rockshelter sites (Suhm 1955; 1957) were
partially excavated by student volunteers from 1953 to 1955.
Most recently, members of the Texas Archeological Society have
conducted excavations in that same part of the basin at the
Thomas F. McKinney homestead, a nineteenth century house and
flour mill (McEachern and Ralph 1974).
The research at Collins and Smith Rockshelter provides use­
ful comparative information as to the subsurface character of
prehistoric cultural deposits along Onion Creek.
s

(41TV40) is located 16 km.

The Collins

(10 mi.) upstream of the con­

fluence with the Colorado River on an Onion Creek terrace which
is 14.02 m. above the present stream.

Cultural material extends

a maximum of 2.74 m. below the surface of the terrace but was
concentrated in the upper 91 cm.

Two components were present:

a Late Prehistoric one represented by arrow points and pottery,
and an Archaic one indicated by dart points.

While the two

components were not clearly separated by sterile fill, they were
distributionally distinct (Suhm 1955) .
The excavation of Smith Rockshelter (41TV42) is even more
indicative of the potential for stratified deposits along Onion
Creek.

The shelter is about 1 km.

C.6 mi.) upstream of the

Collins site in a limestone bluff about 12.12 m. above the pre­
sent stream.

Six clearly defined occupation layers were sep­

arated by five relatively sterile layers in a maximum alluvial
accumulation of 2.59 m.

The six occupation layers were grouped

into three chronological units on the basis of clustering of
facts (in descending stratigraphic order):

1) the Late

Prehistoric Toyah Focus, represented by pottery and Pendiz and
Cti66~on

arrow points; 2) the Late Prehistoric Austin Focus,

indicated by

Seatta~n

nent, represented by

arrow points; and 3) a late Archaic compo­
Va~t

and

En¢a~

dart points and artifacts

31

of polished stone (Suhm 1957) .
The most recent archeological research along Onion Creek
was a survey of its lower 24 km.

(15 mi.) conducted by pro­

fessional archeologists from the Texas Department of Water Re­
sources (Whitsett and Fox 1979).

The survey was conducted to

provide the City of Austin with a planning tool in its search
for a location for the proposed wastewater treatment plant with
which the present research is concerned.

A reconnaissance of

some 4,400 acres (1,776 hectares) recorded 75 prehistoric and
28 historic sites.

The prehistoric site tested by the present

study, 41TV461, was recorded by the surveyors (ibid: 16-17).

PRESENT APPEARANCE OF THE PROPOSED WASTEWATER TREATMENT
PLANT SITE AND 41TV46l
The prospective site of the Onion Creek wastewater treat­
ment plant is on the northwest side of Onion Creek, about 250 m.
from the stream and 1,200 m. upstream of its confluence with
the Colorado River (Figs. 1,2 ).

This location is on a Level 4

terrace remnant of the Colorado, about 100 m. northwest of its
eastern berm (Fig. 3).

Paleochannels of the river clearly can

be seen to extend across the terrace in Fig. 1.

The surface of

the terrace slopes very gently to the east, following the down­
stream gradient of the Colorado.

It is presently covered by a

Coastal Bermuda pasture, with a scattering of pecan trees.
Onion Creek has incised a deep, narrow valley to the east
of the plant site.

This valley is quite asymmetrical,and the

creek is flowing near its eastern edge.
a steep bank on the

Thus, while there is

side of the valley, the margin closest

to the plant site is formed by a moderate slope from the terrace
berm to the present stream.

The terrace tread

is at 129.5-130

m. mean sea level, and the normal surface of the creek is at

32

about l17 m. mean sea level near the plant si,te, a difference
in elevation of some 12 m.

A series of four narrow f unpaired

alluvial terraces parallels Onion Creek below 125 m. mean sea
level.

The lowest of the terraces probably represents the pre­

sent zone of frequent Ll-2 yr.} flooding, as there is consider­
able battering to its trees and some flotsam accumulation.
Small gullies penetrating these lower terraces show them to be
composed of gray and brown clays and limestone and chert gravels,
characteristic of Onion Creek.

The creek has incised completely

through the Colorado River alluvium, and has penetrated about
1 m. into the underlying Navarro Group clays.

Terrace Level 4

deposits have been exposed in a vertical cut bank on the east
side of the creek revealing a classic flood plain succession
from gravel and sand point bar deposits at the base to silt and
clay overbank deposits in the upper segment.

The Onion Creek

terraces are presently covered by trees, predominately pecan and
hackberry, with an understory of mid grasses and forbs.
The western slope of the valley, below the plant site and
above 125 m. mean sea 1

, appears to represent a slip-off

slope of Onion Creek marking the initial incision if its valley
below terrace Level 4.

has been no appreciable accumu­

lation of Onion Creek alluvium on this surface; it is merely an
erosional

ature cut through characteristic reddish-brown

Colorado River alluvium.

Two relatively recent erosional gullies

have developed on this slope to the south and southeast of the
plant site CFig. 4 }.

A cultivated field of oats presently

occupies the area between the gullies, about 125 m. MSL and
below 130 m. MSL, and its plowing has exposed materials indi­
cating the presence of an aboriginal site.

thic debitage,

burned rock and scattered mussel shell fragments occur across
an area approximately 122 m. east-west by 137 m. north-south
'16,700 m2 ) .

This site was designated 41TV461 by Whitsett

and Fox (1979: 16-17).

Its position between the gullies

33

is presumably fortuitous, as those topographic features appear
to have formed in recent times.

Several failed retaining walls

mark recent efforts to control their progress.

In fact, it is

quite likely that portions of 41TV46l have been destroyed by
gully erosion.

----~

----~---

- - - - - -

----~--------

34

FIGURE 4
Topographic map of the proposed Onion Creek Wastewater
Treatment Plant site and 41TV461, showing locations of exca­
vations associated with this study.

Dotted lines mark locations

of planned construction; dashed lines delimit: surface sca,tter
previously recorded by Whitsett and Fox (1979) as 4lTV46l.
above the 424 ft.

Area

(129.24 m) contour is the tread of a Late

Pleistocene Level 4 terrace of the Colorado River; the slope
from 424 ft. to 410 ft.

(124.97 m) is the scarp of that terrace;

and all landforms below 410 ft. appear to represent Holocene
alluvial deposits of Onion Creek.

The two gullies which are

incising the slope seem to be quite recent features.

Cultural

material was recovered only from BHT-1-3 and TP-I-3.

Cultural

deposits of the Colorado River terrace scarp were quite shallow,
but those on the Onion Creek Terrace (BHT-I) were deeply buried.

Figure 4

o
I

,,

,,
,

c

,-,......"0

,,p..

~

,,

,C!,.

,,

~

15

N

, ,I

•

,.,
16

,,

...

'~ 15

,

,
... Datum
1 Backhoe trench

o

Test pit

"

Gully profile

r. A. S.· Ftlbtlc' 1982

, 114

" ,

I

50
I i
meters

100
I

36

TEST EXCAVATIONS
The five days of test excavations associated with this
project had two primary objectives:

l} to test for the

sence of subsurface cultural remains at the proposed plant site
and a related drainageway (Fig.

4}i

and 2) to determine the

vertical extent and significance of the cultural deposit pre­
viously recorded as 41TV46l.

Although the known archeological

site is not directly within the planned construction area, its
position on the perimeter of that area, and straddling an impor­
tant access road, renders disturbance during construction of
the plant quite likely.

PROPOSED PLANT SITE AND DRAINAGEWAY
Testing of the plant site and drainageway was accomplished
by the excavation of thirteen short, deep backhoe trenches.
average, the trenches were 4 m. long, 1 m. wide

On

and 2 m. deep.

The actual dimensions of each trench are provided in Table 1,
and their locations in relation to the planned construction are
shown in Fig. 4.

Eight trenches were dug on the plant site,

three on the drainageway, and two were placed in the area between
the plant site and 41TV46l to determine whether the known archeo­
logical site might extend beyond the terrace berm and below the
surface of the terrace tread in the direction of the plant site.
It seemed possible that the surface scatter of artifacts along
the slope, below the berm might simply be a product of erosion,
partially exposing a buried archeological deposit.

However, no

cultural material was detected in any of the backhoe trenches
on the terrace tread.

There was not sufficient time to screen

the backdirt from any of the trenches, so this statement is

37

TABLE 1

Dimensions of Excavations.

Backhoe Trenches:
Width em)

#

Depth (m)

1

6.72

2.11

2.35

2

6.37

1.90

2.01

3

6.43

1.95

1.78

4

3.42

1.12

1.91

5

3.38

.94

1.54

6

3.68

.91

2.35

7

4.18

.87

2.43

8

3.10

.80

2.08

9

7.13

2.04

2.25

10

3.54

.77

1.90

11

3.50

.97

1.90

12

3.66

.78

1. 85

13

3.45

.76

1. 85

14

3.52

.76

1. 68

15

3.30

.76

1. 96

16

5.95

1. 75

1. 64

Test Pits:

#

Length (m)

width em)

Depth (m)

1

2.00

1.00

.52

2

2.00

1.00

.72

3

2.00

1.00

.55

38

based on visual observation by the author of the excavation of
the trenches, and an inspection of their profiles and backdirt
piles after excavation.
The widths of Backhoe Trenches (BHT) 9 and 16 were increased
to about 2 m. to facilitate the cleaning, photographing
description of their soil profiles.

and

The profiles of all the

trenches on the terrace tread were quite similar to one another,
except for BHT-16.

The profile description of BHT-9 is therefore

representative of the norm among the terrace tread trenches,
and that of BHT-16 represents a sufficient deviation from that
norm to warrant separate treatment.

Descriptions of the soil

profiles of BHT-9 and -16 appear in the Appendix.

Both profiles

were described when moist, in mid-afternoon on an overcast day_
The assessments of color, texture, and pH were made in the field.
All profile descriptions in this report follow the Soil Conser­
vation Service (Soil Survey Staff 1951: 471-486) format.

4lTV46l
The testing of 4lTV46l was begun by means of two excavation
techniques with differing objectives.

It was presumed that the

cultural deposit previously recorded as 4lTV46l would be of
fairly shallow subsurficial extent.

In order to quantify the

vertical distribution and density of that deposit, three lx2 m.
pits were hand excavated to a depth of 50 to 70 cm. below the
surface (Fig. 5).

The first level of each pit was 10 cm. deep,

and subsequent levels were expanded to 20 cm. as artifact density
dropped off dramatically below the plowzone.

The lowest level

of each pit, excavated to clearly define the lower limit of the
vertical artifact distribution, was stepped down to a lxl m.
square in order to conserve time.

All of the fill from the test

pits was passed through a 1/4 in. mesh hardware cloth, and re­

39

TAB LE 2

Description of Stratigraphy, Backhoe Trench 1.

Ap:
0-13 cm. (0-5 in.):
dark reddish-brown (5YR3/2); clay loam, fine, granular
structure; moderately alkaline; abrupt, smooth boundary; scattered terrestrial gastropods,
freshwater mussel shell fragments, and lithic debitage.

AI:
13-29 cm. (5-11 in.):
dark reddish-brown (5YR3/2); clay loam; medium, subangular, blocky structure; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary; numerous
vermiform crotovinae and terrestrial gastropod shells.
C:
29-47 cm. 01-19 in.):
brown (7.5YR4/4,; clay loam; fine, granular to massive
structure; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary; numerous vermiform crotovinae
and terrestrial gastropod shells.
IIA1 B:
47-66 cm. (19-26 in.):
dark reddish-brown (5YR3/2); clay loam; fine
granular structure; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary; fairly numerous
terrestrial gastropod shells.
II C:
66-73 cm. (26-29 in.):
reddish-gray (5YR5/2); clay loam; fine, granular
structure; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary; numerous vermiform crotovinae
and terrestrial gastropod shells.
IIIC:
73-107 cm. (29-42 in.):
pinkish-gray (5YRS/2); silty clay loam; medium,
granular to subangular blocky structure; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary;
scattered vermiform crotovinae and terrestrial gastropod shells.
IVA 1 B:
107-124 cm. (42-49 in.):
dark reddish-brown (5YR3/4); silty clay loam;
fine, granular structure; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary; numerous
vermiform crotovinae and terrestrial gastropod shells.
IVC:
124-145 cm. (49-57 in.):
grayish-brown (10YR5/3); clay loam; medium,
granular to fine, subangular blocky structure; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth
boundary; scattered gastropod shells.

145-150 em. (57-59 in.):
pinkish-gray (5YRS/2); silty clay loam; massive
VC:
structure; moderately alkaline; clear, wavy boundary.
150-160 cm. (59-S3 in.):
reddish-yellow (5YR7 /6); clay; massive structure;
VI C:
moderately alkaline; abrupt, wavy boundary.
160-180 em. (S3-71 in.):
complex horizon of inter-digitating lenses of (1)
VIIC:
brown (10YR5/3) clay loam; medium, subangular blocky structure; and (2) pinkish­
white (7.5YR8/2) sandy clay; massive structure; both are moderately alkaline; clay
loam predominates, but one large lense of sandy clay, 3-7 cm. (1-3 in.) thick, is
almost continuous across the profile; lower contact is abrupt and wavy.
VIIIC:
180-185 cm. (71-73 in.):
dark reddish-brown (5YR3/2); clay; massive
structure; moderately alkaline; abrupt, wavy boundary.
IXC:
185-235 cm. (73-93 in.):
brown (10YR5/3); silt loam; massive structure;
moderately alkaline; numerous vermiform crotovinae, terrestrial gastropod shells, and
charcoal fragments; scattered burned rock fragments, freshwater mussel shells and shell
fragments, and lithic debitage; 2 probable rock-lined hearths identified; 1 crude
core-derived tool recovered.

40

FIGURE 5
Photographs of LA) west wall profile, Backhoe Trench
2, and (B) west wall profile, Backhoe Trench 9.
descriptions of soil profiles in Appendix.

Compare with

Note compression

of soil profile on terrace scarp (BHT-2) relative to terrace
tread (BHT-9).

The parent material was in both cases reddish­

brown fine textured alluvium.

~~~~~~~~--------~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~-

"f

Figure
To left. west wall profile of
backhoe trench number 22
compare with descriptions of
profil e in appendix
note compression of soil profile
on terrace scarp here and
relatively open profile on the
terrace tread , below

To right. west wall profile of
backhoe trench number 9.
Terrace tread profile. The parent
material was in both cases,
reddish brown fine textured alluvium

5

42

FIGURE 6
Scaled drawing of east wall profile, Backhoe Trench 1.
Compare with description of stratigraphy in Table 2.

with the

exception of the VI C horizon, all of the material was grayish­
brown, fine-textured alluvium characteristic of Onion Creek.
The former horizon may represent a backwater flood deposit of
the Colorado River.
modif

The upward succession from adjacent un­

alluvial deposits to buried soils may reflect increasing

vertical distance from a downcutting Onion Creek.

As height

above the creek increased, frequency of flooding would have
decreased, rendering significant deposition a less frequent
phenomenon.

Cultural material was detected only in the plowzone

and th IX C horizon.

Figure
41TV461

6

Wall
Profile
East
B ac k hoe
Trench 1
Base Line B

Base Line A

3

4
5

6
7

Base Line
121.98

Base Line

m.

121.98

m. AMSL

8
9

::_~_:::~~~~~~4·::_~~-~~;:~1~::-::-·:7:~:':~~:~:~~~::!:!~!i:.r, __

charcoal

-- ""'- -------_ .... -

Solid lines demarcate d""eriplivt: units,
dash"d line. imli<:ate major subdivisions
within thuse units.

Interbedded area
(laminations are approximate)

o

concentration
--~;'----~--------;

13 - Cultural level

13

40 H
!\-1ussd shell

@

i3urnt'd tuck

...c:

60 ~ ~
Base Line A

Base Line B

80
r.A.S.-Fchc' 1982

.
E

20 n :::

44

FIGURE 7

Photograph of east wall profile, Backhoe Trench 1.
The dark horizons in the upper segment of the profile are buried
A horizons. Compare with the description of stratigraphy in
Table 2, and the scaled drawing in Figure 6.

46

covered artifacts were bagged separately by level.

The base

of each level was trowelled and examined for cultural features
but none were encountered.
In order to test for the presence of deeper cultural deposits,
three backhoe trenches (BHT 1-3) were excavated across the
archeological site (Table I, Fig. 4).

BHT-2 and -3 were located

on the slope below the upper terrace berm within the bounds of
the recorded site.

BHT-l was placed somewhat below the site,

on a relatively level area that appeared to represent an alluvial
terrace of Onion Creek, as this seemed a likely place for the
burying of cultural deposits by colluvium from upslope and
alluvium from the creek.

The profiles of BHT-2 and -1 are des­

cribed in the Appendix and Table 2, respectively.

As the pro­

files of BHT-2 and -3 were quite similar to one another, that
of BHT-2 may be considered a representative example of the slope
area occupied by 4lTV46l.

Both profiles were described while

moist on an overcast day.

As was the case for the trenches on

the plant site, none of the backdirt from BHT-l through -3 was
screened.

However, while cultural material was visible in the

plow zones of BHT-2 and -3, none was observed below that level,
bearing out the pattern indicated by the test pits for the slope
area.
The supposition of a rapid depositional environment on the
Onion Creek terrace below the previously recorded site was
borne out by the excavation of BHT-l.

At least two buried soil

profiles were found to overlie a cultural deposit which occurred
below 185 cm.

(Table 2, Figs. 6 & 7)

Total vertical extent of

the cultural deposit was not determined.

That portion of the

deposit exposed consisted of one definite rock-lined hearth and
one probable hearth associated with a crude bifacial, core­
derived tool, lithic debitage, fresh-water mussel shells
charcoal.

Radiocarbon samples were collected from both hearths.

The associated a

_ ...._ -

...

and

---------~.

facts and mussel shells were collected but

47

TABLE 3

Description of Burned Rock Concentrations, Backhoe
Trench 1.

BRC-1
A tight concentration of 19 burned rocks in the south­
east corner of BHT-1, 19 cm. (8 in.) above the floor. Dimensions
of exposed portion were 41 (E-W) x50 (N-S) cm. (16x20 in.), but
feature was not entirely uncovered, and extended undetermined
distances into the east and south walls of the trench.
Two of the rocks were limestone, 4 were pink granite, and
13 were veined quartz. They ranged from 2x3x5 cm. (lx1x2 in.) to
5xl1x13 cm. (2x4x5 in.) in size. All were fire-reddened, 4 showed
heat-induced spalling, 14 were stained with carbon, and all of the
crystalline rocks had become friable through exposure to intense
heat. The rocks appeared to have been arranged in a rough oval
in plan. In cross-section, it appeared that first a floor of
rocks was laid in a basin-shaped depression, and that the rocks
about the margin were then placed on end to create a wall ~a.
10 cm. (4 in.) high. BRC-1 was associated with a dense accumu­
lation of charcoal in its interior, from which a sample was col­
lected for radio carbon analysis. The uncorrected date obtained
from the assay is 1370 + 60 years ago.
BRC-2
A very loose concentration of 5 burned rocks near the
northeast corner of the exposed floor of BHT-l, encircling a
roughly oval charcoal- and ash-stained area. The rocks were dis­
tributed across an area 46.5 (E-W) x50 (N-S) cm. (18x20 in.), and
the exposed stain was 35 (E-W) x38 (N-S) cm. (14x15 in.) in area.
However, as in the case of BRC-1, the feature was not entirely
uncovered by the backhoe cut. The rocks were all veined quartz,
were fire-reddened, were friable from exposure to intense heat
and were carbon-stained. They ranged from 2.5x3x5 cm. (lxlx2 in.)
to 4x7.5x10 cm. (2x3x4 in.) in size. Two rocks extended into the
profile. Several burned rocks of similar characteristics were
recovered from the backdirt, and it is quite likely that much of
BRC-2 was removed by the backhoe. Despite this disturbance, it
was the author's impression that there had never been any rocks
in the center of the feature. Thus, rather than having a rock­
lined floor as in the case of BRC-1, this feature appears to have
been simply a ring of rocks within which a fire was built. The
matrix in its center was charcoal- and ash-stained, and had a
Munsell color of dark gray (5YR4j1). There were dense concen­
trations of charcoal in portions of the center of BRC-2.

48

burned rocks were left in place.

Cultural material was also

recovered from the plowzone of BHT-I.

A description of the

burned rock concentrations appears in Table 3.

The character

and distribution of the artifacts and associated materials re­
covered from the test pits and lower backhoe trenches are
treated in the section which follows.

All of the data gathered

in the course of this research will then by synthesized in an
interpretation of the study area.

MATERIALS RECOVERED FROM 41TV461
A total of 250 prehistoric and historic artifacts was re­
covered in the course of the excavations.

The provenience of

the specimens is recorded by classification category in Table 4.
In the discussion which follows, the prehistoric collection is
divided into chipped stone, burned rock, burned clay
water mussel shell.

and fresh­

The historic artifacts are dealt with

briefly at the end of the section.

An interpretation of the

collection as a whole will be reserved for the concluding section
of the report.

CHIPPED STONE
The 154 chipped stone specimens are the most conunon
component of the collection from 41TV461 (62 percent of the
total).

Lithic debitage in turn dominates the chipped stone

category; only two finished tools were recovered in the exca­
vations.

In the analysis below, the specimens are placed with­

in a classification which attempts to parallel the stages of
reduction from unmodified pebble to finished tool.

49

LITHIC DEBITAGE
virtually all the debitage suggests, by its morphology,
derivation from stream-worn gravels, probably

less than 10

cm. in maximum dimension, rather than from tabular beds.
wide variety of source materials is present.

A

Aphanitic cherts

dominate the collection, and include white (10.6%), light gray
(25.8%)

I

medium gray (29.1%)

and red (7.9%) materials.

I

dark gray (4.6%)

I

brown (17.9%),

Brown siltstone (0.8%) and quartzite

both gray (2.0%) and red (1.3%), also occur.
of percussion, crushed platforms

Prominent bulbs

and a high frequency of

chips suggest that freehand hardhammer percussion was the domi­
nant technique of reduction.

A small fraction of the debitage,

9.9%, showed evidence of exposure to intense heat.

The high

clay content of the soils on the site made screening for arti­
facts quite difficult, and many were abraded across the hardware
cloth repeatedly before being recognized and collected.

Edge

modification analysis therefore seemed inappropriate, and has
not been conducted.

UNMODIFIED PEBBLE (1 specimen, 7% of the debitage)
This single pebble of brown quartzite, 4.6x3.4x2.7 cm.
shows no evidence of modification.

It was presumably collected

as raw material for lithic manufacture and carried to the site.

CORES (4 specimens, 2.6% of the debitage)
Classified as cores are pebbles from which multiple flakes
have been intentionally removed.

All of the specimens are

rather small, ranging from about 5x3xl.5 cm. to 6.5x5x2 cm. in

50

size.

All are amorphous in shape, exhibiting no patterning of

form or flake removal.

In no case was a striking platform pre­

pared prior to flake removal.

PRIMARY FLAKES (2 specimens, 1.3% of the debitage)
The primary flakes retain unaltered cortex over the entire
dorsal face.

Their removal thus would represent the initial

stage of core reduction, and all evidence cortex platforms.

SECONDARY FLAKES (14 specimens, 9.2% of the debitage)
Retaining a remnant of unaltered cortex over some portion
of the dorsal face, secondary flakes resulted from the inter­
mediate stages of core reduction.

This category has been further

subdivided in Table 4 into those flakes having cortex platforms,
and those with faceted platforms, where the scars of one or more
previous flake removals were used as a platform.

It is pre­

sumed that secondary flakes with cortex platforms would tend
to be produced by earlier stages of core reduction than those
with faceted platforms.

TERTIARY FLAKES (58 specimens, 38.2% of the debitage)
The tertiary flakes are entirely decorticate, and thus are
the by-products of the final stages of core reduction and
chipped stone tool manufacture.

By definition, this category

includes only flakes with faceted platforms.
tiary

Many of the ter­

akes are quite small, being less than 1 cm. in maximum

dimension, and probably represent final tool thinning.

51

CHIPS (73 specimens, 48% of the debitage)
Defined as chips are those specimens lacking recognizable
platforms.

Thus, the category includes medial and distal blade

fragments, and proximal or otherwise complete specimens having
platforms which have been crushed beyond distinction.

In order

to identify the stages of reduction analogous to the primary­
secondary-tertiary flake scheme, the chips have been subdivided
in Table 4 into corticate, partially decorticate

and decorti­

cate groupings.

FINISHED TOOLS
Dart Points
One dart point fragment was recovered by the present study,
and a second specimen is reported by Whitsett and Fox (1979:
39, Fig. 4 ) .
The fragment recovered by this study is the proximate or
basal portion of a crudely-executed, bulbous-stemmed dart point.
The stem is asymmetrical, and its plane would have joined that
of the blade at about a 20 degree angle.

The specimen was

shallowly side-notched, with weakly developed shoulders.
manufactured from a red aphanitic chert.
1.9 cm., stem length is 2 cm.

It was

Maximum stem width is

and stem thickness is 0.5 cm.

Typologically, the specimen shows affinities to the type

Paimilla~.

The complete specimen reported by Whitsett and Fox (ibid)
has a narrow, triangular blade, very weakly developed shoulders,
a slightly expanding base

and a slightly concave base.

A steep,

narrow bevel runs down the left edge of the blade and stem,
having been formed by the removal of a series of thin, parallel
flakes.

The distal end of the projectile point has been re­

worked into a drill.

Width at the shoulders is 2.7 cm., maximum

52

stem width is 2.2 cm., stem length is 1.1 cm. and total length
after reworking is 5.6 cm.

The maximum thickness of the specimen

and the material from which it was manufactured are not reported.
It would be typologically classified as Va4f.
Core-Derived Biface
This crude biface was produced by striking nine large per­
cussion flakes from

ther face of one end of a somewhat tabular

stream-worn cobble of dark gray aphanitic chert.
of the surface of the tool is cortex.
9.1x4.1 cm.

The remainder

Its dimensions are 9.7x

The specimen is a convenient size to have been hand­

held, and highlights about the distal end are indeed somewhat
smoothed as if from being gripped in use.

There is also some

heavy battering on the distal end, suggesting that the tool may
have occassiona11y been reversed for use as a hammerstone.

The

primary working edge of the tool is quite broad and sinuous and
exhibits extensive shattering.
crushing tool is indicated.

Use as a heavy chopping and

Similar specimens are reported

from the nearby Collins Site (Suhm 1955: 42-45, Plate 8G) and
Smith Rockshelter (Suhm 1957: 44-45, Figure 6L).

Stratigraphic

evidence from both sites suggests use of such tools at least
throughout the late Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods.
Burned Rocks and Rock Fragments
Two burned rocks and twenty-nine burned rock fragments were
recovered.

As noted above, the twenty-four in situ burned rocks

composing BRC-2 and 2 in BHT-1 were 1e

in place.

The two com­

plete rocks collected were from disturbed contexts in BRT-1;
one specimen was found on the backdirt, and the other in machine­
disturbed fill at the floor of the trench.

Both were probably

displaced from BRC-2 by the backhoe along with additional rocks
which were presumably concealed within the backdirt piles.
The burned rocks and rock fragments collected are quite

53

similar to those of the features in BHT-l in size and composition.
The two complete specimens are 11.6x8.2x4.5 cm. and lO.5x7.6x4.5
cm. in size.
size.

The fragments appear to be from rocks of similar

The specimens are all stream-rolled cobbles or fragments

thereof.

Of the complete specimens, one is dolomite and the

other is veined quartz.

The fragments include nineteen specimens

of veined quartz, eight of limestone, and two of pink granite.
Freshwater Mussel Shells and Shell Fragments
Nineteen complete freshwater mussel shells and forty-three
mussel shell fragments were recovered.

All but two of the com­

plete specimens and many of the fragments are from BHT-l (Table
4).

Mussel shells were common in the lower cultural level pene­

trated by that trench and it is quite likely that many of the
specimens from BHT-l backdirt also derive from that deposit.
Members of four pelecypod species compose the identified
portion of the collection:
mens),

Fu~ionaia a~kewi

Amblema plieata penplieata (2 speci­

(2 specimens),

Lamp~iti~

anodontoide~

(1 specimen), and Quadnuta quadnuta (14 specimens).
species are

These

1 common in modern central Texas streams.

None of the valves show modification and it is presumed that
the mussels were collected from nearby Onion Creek as food.

The

specimens are relatively small, indicating collection from either
a suboptimal habitat or from a population subject to heavy pre­
dation.

Given the proximity of 41TV461 to an ideal habitat for

these species, Onion Creek, the latter interpretation is indicated.

HISTORIC ARTIFACTS
Only two artifacts resulting from recent Euro-American
activity on the site were recovered:
a small scrap of sheet steel.

a threaded steel nut and

Both were recovered from the plow­

TABLE 4

Provenience of Artifacts and Associated Materials, 41TV461.

Test Pit 1

surface

level
1

level

level

2

3

surface

level
1

level

level

level

2

3

4

1

Core

Olip:
corticate
partially decorticate
decorti cate

level

2

3

1

9

1

1
3

1

1

7

2

1
3
10

1

8

1

11

3

3

10

1

6
8

4

1
2

1

58

1

2
12

.
3
14

1

1

2

12

1

59

1

1
1

1

1

2

9

5

7

10

10

4

1

6

1

9

Mussel shell

1
2

2

5

2

25

1

1

1
1

1

1

Historic Artifact

1

4

1

2

1

5

9

1

3

7

29

29

19
1

43

2

1

16

total

4

1
1

2

I

Burned rock trag.

TOTAL

plow
zone

2

3

1
2

5

plow
zone

1

Burned rock

Mussel shell frag.

back
dirt

1

1

1

Tertiary flake

level

1

1

1

Secondary flake:
cortex platform
faceted platform

level

2

Primary flake

Tool:
dart point
crude biface

surface

BHT-3
lower
cultural
level

I

1

Un mod. pebble

BHT-l

Test Pit 3

Test Pit 2

34

7

2

7

33

20

o

29

2

26

-­

4

249

55

zone and the nut, at least, is of quite recent manufacture.

INTERPRETATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS
The interpretation of the results of the present study is
organized on the basis of the areas subjected to archeological
testing.

The proposed plant site and drainageway area tested

by BHT-4 through -16 will be dealt with first; the archeological
site recorded as 4lTV46l and tested by BHT-2 and -3 and TP-l
through -3 will then be treated; finally, the stratigraphy re­
vealed by BHT-l and a cut bank of the gully south of 4lTV46l
will be discussed.

PROPOSED PLANT SITE AND DRAINAGEWAY
A review of the pertinent geomorphological literature and
pre-existing data has indicated that the proposed plant site
and drainageway will be located on the tread of a Level 4 terrace
of the Colorado River, deposited from 30,000 to 10,000 years
ago.

That prediction has been confirmed by the excavations.

The soil profile typical of BHT-4 through -15, as represented
by BHT-l (Appendix) is that of a Bergstrom series Cumulic Haplu­
stoll, consisting of a deep mollie epipedon, a Cambic

horizon,

and a Calcic horizon, underlain by yellowish-red silty alluvium.
Parent material of that nature is characteristic of the
Colorado River and its occurrence confirms the identity of the
landform on which the plant site is located as an alluvial pro­
duct of the river.

The presence of a deep, dark-colored, humus­

rich mollic epipedon confirms the prediction of a grassland
vegetation, and shows that the soil received enough moisture in
most years to support fair to luxuriant plant growth.

There is

56

even greater genetic significance in the presence of a structure­
less cambic horizon which is redder than the parent material,
underlain by a calcic horizon.

The absence of soil structure

in the cambic horizon is attributable to the action of soil
fauna (earthworms and small gastropods) which have effected suf­
ficient bioturbescence to prevent the formation of peds.
redder hue in that horizon is due to weathering
free iron oxides.

A

that liberated

The illuvial calcic horizon was also formed

by weathering, as the downward percolation of rainwater trans­
ported carbonates from the cambic horizon to the upper extremity
of the C horizon.

Calcic horizons of a character like that

found in BHT-9 are typically developed in a calcareous parent
material under a subhumid climatic regime such as that which
presently exists.

Further, the absence of an argillic horizon

on a landform of Pleistocene antiquity suggests that a long
term (1,000 years or more) humid climatic episode associated
with extensive forest expansion has not occurred since the for­
mation of the terrace.

In short, the soil profile on the terrace

tread underlying the proposed plant site and drainageway, as
typified by BHT-9, is basically what one would expect to find
under the present environmental conditions and suggests the
prevalence of those conditions throughout the Holocene.
The profile of BHT-16 is markedly different from those of
the other terrace tread excavations, but the differences are
attributable to the character of the parent material, a brown
clay.

A deep mollic epipedon again indicates pedogenic develop­

ment under a grassland vegetation.
the illuvial carbonate enrichment of

The very retarded nature of
Band C horizons pro­

bably reflects the slow permeability of the clayey solum.

There

no topographic evidence of an intrusion by Onion Creek into
the vicinity of this trench.

It is therefore quite likely that

the alluvium represents a terrace Level 4 backwater deposit of
the Colorado.

The in-filling of a cutoff channel would produce

57

a very fine-textured deposit of low chroma with a high organic
matter content like that which occurs in BHT-16.

The poor

aeration of the solum would prevent the liberation of free iron
oxides and maintain a low chroma.
The relative stability of the landform is evident in the
profiles of BHT-4 through -16.

Limited deposition has undoubtedly

occurred during the Holocene as a result of infrequent, very
high flooding of the Colorado River and Onion Creek, contributing
fine-textured material to the mollic epipedon.

However, given

this type of deposition, one would certainly not expect to find
cultural remains buried deeper than perhaps one meter on this
landform, and certainly no deeper than the penetration of the
backhoe trenches.

41TV461
The profiles of BHT-2 and -3 and TP-l through -3, as typi­
fied by BHT-2 (Appendix) are consistent with an interpretation
of the slope on which 4lTV46l is situated as the scarp of the
Colorado River Level 4 terrace discussed above.

A soil profile

similar to, but much more compressed than that described in BHT­
9, occurs across the site.

A shallow sequem consisting of a

mollic epipedon, a cambic horizon
yellowish-red silty clay.

and a calcic horizon overlies

The shallow nature of the soil pro­

file on the scarp may reflect both the erosional nature of the
landform and pedogenesis under a mixed vegetational regime.

On

the other hand, the fact that the soil profile has developed to
the extent it has, under these conditions, suggests that the
slope was formed quite early in the Holocene Epoch and presumably was
eroded by Onion Creek during the initial incision of its
present valley.
That erosion has continued through the Holocene is evident:

58

the mollic epipedon was about 20 cm. deeper in TP-2 at the lower
extremity of 4lTV46l than it was in TP-l at the upper end of
the site.

This may be due, in part, to modern clearing and cul­

tivation but the plowzone was not recognizably deeper down­
slope, indicating that any modern colluvial redeposition has
been minor.

Deposition like that on the terrace tread has un­

doubtedly occurred throughout the Holocene but sheet erosion
of the slope seems to have approximately equaled the rate of
alluvial deposition, given the abbreviation of the soil profile.
Excavation of the test pits demonstrated that the surface
scatter recorded by Whitsett and Fox (1979: l6-l7) is of shallow
subsurficial extent, suggesting that the position of the surface
has not substantially changed since the aboriginal occupation
of the site.

In fact, the vertical distribution of the artifacts

approximates a distance decay function, suggesting that post­
occupational biological disturbance may account for much of
what depth there is to the deposit.
by Tab
rock

This pattern is illustrated

5, where prehistoric specimen (chipped stone, burned
and mussel shell) density in all of the test pits combined

is shown as the ratio of specimens recovered to volume of

11

excavated.
TABLE 5

Specimen Density by Excavation Level, TP 1-3.
No. of Specimens

Level

Vol. :3 of fill

Specimen Density

(Ill )
surface

19

0-10 em.
10-30 em.
30-50 em.
50-70 em.

85
70
10
2

.6
1.2
.8

.2

145
58
13
10

The character of the prehistoric artifacts and associated
materials suggests use of the site as a temporary campsite.
The lithic debitage collection is dominated by tertiary flakes

59

and decorticate chips (Table 4), indicating that only the final
stages of tool manufacture occurred at the site.
gravels were presumably tested and collected

Stream-worn

sewhere and trans­

ported to the site after preliminary core reduction had reduced
their weight and removed most of the cortex.

The presence of

burned rocks reflects the construction of rock-lined hearths.
Both chipped stone and burned rock collections contain signifi­
cant quantities of materials which can be attributed only to the
Colorado River: red and brown cherts, veined quartz

and granite.

It is possible, but unlikely, that Onion Creek had already
penetrated the base of the Level 4 Colorado terrace.

More

plausible sources for the material are the highly eroded Level 7
terrace remnants which lie to the immediate south of 41TV461.
Aboriginal quarry sites, 4lTV440, 441, 443, 444, 448, 451

and

452 (Figs. 2 and 3), have been recorded on or near the margins
of those terrace remnants (Whitsett and Fox 1979: Table I).

The

occurrence of mussel shell reflects the exploitation of the
nearby riparian environment.

The absence of other more perishable

subsistence remains is surely attributable to the shallow, open
nature of the site.
sence of a

Va~l

Of the two dart points recovered, the pre­

indicates a Terminal Archaic, Twin Sisters

Phase (1,750 - 1,250 B.P.) occupation of the s

(Prewitt 1974;

1976; Weir 1976ai 1976b).

BACKHOE TRENCH 1
The profile revealed by the excavation of BHT-l (Table 2,
Figs. 6 and 7) is totally different from those of the other ex­
cavation units and indicates that the trench penetrated an al­
luvial terrace of Onion Creek.

The upper 145 cm. is occupied

by three successive Frio series soil profiles characteristic of
Onion Creek.

Each is composed of a moderately deep mollie

60

epipedon overlying a C horizon of gray or brown fine-textured
alluvium.

Moving up through the profile, the mollic epipedons

become increasingly thicker; the lowest is 17 cm. thick and the
uppermost 20 cm.

If one considers each mollic epipedon and all

of the alluvium below it to compose a sequem, there is an up­
ward decrease in sequem thickness from 128 cm. to 60 cm. to 47
cm.
These two vertical trends probably reflect a decrease in
frequency of flooding through time as a function of increasing
vertical distance from Onion Creek.

The lowest deposits, horizons

VC through IXC, accumulated in a sufficiently rapid succession
to prevent the formation of any soil horizons.

The surface

formed by the deposition of sequem IVA-C was the first to be
stable long enough to permit the development of a mollic epipedon,
a process which requires a minimum of several centuries (Soil
Survey Staff 1975: IS, Table 1).

Two depositional units, horizon

IIIC and the material composing sequem IIIA-C were then laid
down in relatively rapid succession, followed by a stable inter­
val during which mollic epipedon IIAlb formed.

A final depo­

sitional event created the present surface, on which a third
mollic epipedon, the present AI, has developed.
The formation of the three mollic epipedons revealed in this
profile must have required at least a millenium (ibid).

Given

the position of this terrace, some 5 m. below the tread eleva­
tion of Colorado River terrace Level 4, and the date postulated
by Baker and Penteado-Orellana (1977) for the incision of the
river below that level, the deposition of this Onion Creek terrace
presumably began well after 10,000 B.P.
The composition of the lower cultural level penetrated by
BHT-l suggest a site function analagous to that of 41TV461.
An assemblage of lithic debitage dominated by the latter stages

of tool production, hearths, charcoal and fresh-water mussel
shell again suggest an occupation site.

No chronologically

61

diagnostic artifacts of a very discrete nature were recovered,
but a crude cobble tool that was present is common in cultural
assemblages of Late Archaic or later (2,600 B.P. +) age in the
area (Suhm 1957: 44-45).

All the molluscan species present are

common in Onion Creek today, and the two terrestrial gastropod
species common in the deposit Rabdotu6 de.a£.batU-6 de.a£.batU-6 and

Me.-6omph.ix bfl.iab.i£..i-6, also suggest that occupation occurred in
an environment much like the historically recorded one.
Examination of a cut bank in the gully to the south of 41TV
461 (Fig. 4) revealed two separate concentrations of mussel
shell and charcoal at

evations of 118 to 117.9 m. mean sea

level and 117.51 to 117.48 m. mean sea level.

The elevation of

the lower cultural deposit in BHT-l is from 121.28 to 120.78
m. mean sea level.

The uppermost of the two lenses in the gully

is therefore 2.78 m. lower in elevation than the floor of the
nearby BHT-l.

Three separate cultural deposits are suggested,

and it appears that one may expect sealed, stratified deposits
to a depth of at least 3.85 m. below the surface (the latter
represents the vertical distance from the top of the gully pro­
file at 121.33 m. to the base of the lower of the two deposits
detected there).

A rapid depositional context of this kind,

where individual components are isolated between sterile strata,
is ideal for archeological research.

RECOMMENDATIONS
Both geomorphological interpretation and test excavation
indicate that the presence of buried archeological deposits
beneath the terrace tread occupied by the proposed plant site
is highly improbable.

No further archeological investigation

is recommended for that area.
Given the shallow depth of the cultural deposit previously

..... -

---------

-

..........

_--_._-­

62

designated 4lTV46l, the preservation of in situ features and
reconstructable activity areas is also very unlikely.

The mix­

ture of multiple components in such a shallow deposit is pro­
bable.

The expense involved in further excavation of this deposit

therefore seems

unjustified.

However, a relatively inexpensive

controlled surface collection might be useful to demonstrate
whether or not horizontal variation in artifact distribution is
present.
BHT-l has clearly demonstrated the presence of a buried,
undisturbed cultural deposit within the uppermost of the Holo­
cene Onion Creek terraces.

An examination of the nearby gully

has identified two more cultural deposits, and the probability
of a well-stratified sequence of components is cear.

Any con­

struction in the alluvial valley of Onion Creek, below the
erosional scarp of Colorado River terrace Level 4, would probably
disturb prehistoric remains of considerable archeological sig­
nificance.

It is therefore strongly urged that any planned

construction by the City of Austin within that valley be preceded
by archeological testing appropriate to the planned depth of
construction disturbance.

........

_ - - - - _ .......

-----­

63

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Baker, Victor R.
1975

Flood Hazards along the Ba1cones Escarpment in Central
Texas:

Alternative Approaches to Their Recognition,

Mapping, and Management.

Geolog~cal

C~nculan

No. 7

5

Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas
at Austin.
1976

Hydrogeomorphic Methods for the Regional Evaluation
of Flood Hazards.

Envinonmental Geology 1: 261-281.

Baker, Victor R., and Margarida Maria Penteado-Ore11ana
1977

Adjustment to Quaternary Climatic Change by the Colo­
rado River in Central Texas.

Jounnal

on

Geology 85:

395-422.
Baker, victor R., Robert K. Holz, and Steven D. Huke
1974

A Hydrogeomorphic Approach to Evaluating Flood Poten­
tial in Central Texas from Orbital and Suborbital
Remote Sensing Imagry.

national
men~

Sympo~ium

on

06 the Ninth Inte~­
Sen~ing 06 ~he Envinon­

Pnoceeding~
Remo~e

1: 629-646.

Barnes, Virgil E.

1974

06 Texa~, A~t~n Shee~. Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

The Geologic

Atla~

Bryant, Vaughn M., Jr. and Harry J. Shafer
1977

The Late Quaternary Paleoenvironment of Texas:
Model for the Archeologist.
Ancheolog~cal

A

Bulletin 06 the Texa6

Society 48: 1-25.

Colwick, A.B., H.H. McGill and F.P. Erichsen
1973

Severe Floods at New Braunfels, Texas.

American

Society of Agricultural Engineers PapeJr.

f~o.

73-206.

64

Davis, William B.
1974

The Mammals of Texas.

Buiie~~~

and Wildlife Department.

No. 41, Texas Parks

Austin.

Deussen, A.
1924

Geology of the Coastal Plain of Texas West of the
Brazos River.

Pnobe~~~o~ai

Papen No. 126, U.S. Geo­

logical Survey, Washington, D.C.
Garner, Lee Edwin
1973

Environmental Geology of the Austin Area, Texas.
Unpublished Master's of Arts Thesis.

The University

of Texas at Austin.
Garner, L.E. and K.P. Young
1976

Environmental Geology of the Austin Area:
the Urban Planning.

Repont ob

An Aid in

1nve~t~gat~on~

No. 86,

Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Hill, R.T. and T.W. Vaughan
1896- Geology of the Edwards Plateau and Rio Grande Plain
7

Adjacent to Austin and San Antonio, Texas, with Refe­
rence to the Occurrence of Underground Waters.
Geoiog~Qal

Sunvey

A~~ual

Repon~

U.S.

18: 195-321.

Koenig, J.B.
1940

A Consideration of the Blanco River Terraces North of
San Marcos.

Unpublished Master's of Arts Thesis.

The

University of Texas at Austin.
Looney, R. Michael
1976

Late Quaternary Geomorphic Evolution of the Colorado
River, Bastrop and Fayette Counties, Texas.

Unpub­

lished Master's of Arts Thesis, The University of
Texas at Austin.

65

Looney, R. Michael and Victor R. Baker
1977

Late Quaternary Geomorphic Evolution of the Colorado
T~an~aetion~

River, Inner Texas Coastal Plain.

the Gul6

Coa~t A~~oeiation

On

Geologieal

06

Soeietie~

27: 323-333.
Mathi s, R . lv •
1942

Heavy Minerals of the Colorado River Terraces.
lished Master's of Art's Thesis.

Unpub­

The University of

Texas at Austin.
McEachern, Michael, and Ronald W. Ralph
1974

An Experiment in Historical Archeology:

Archeological

Investigations at the Thomas F. McKinney Homestead,
Travis County, Texas.

Unpublished Manuscript, on file

with the Texas Archeological Society.
Nickell, C.O.
1941

Report of the Mineral Resources of Travis County,
Texas.

Minenal

Re~ounce

Sunvey Cinculan No. 39,

Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Patton, Peter C.
1976

Geomorphic Criteria for Estimating the Magnitude and
Frequency of Flooding in Central Texas.

Unpublished

Ph.D. Dissertation. The University of Texas at Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974

Archeological Investigations at the Loeve-Fox Site,
Williamson County, Texas.

Re~ea~eh

RepoJtt No. 49.

Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas
at Austin.
1976

Late Archaic occupations at the Loeve-Fox Sitei the
San Marcos and Twin Sisters phases.

IN: The

Texa~

AJtehaic: A Sympo~ium, (ed.) T.R. Hester, Center for
Archeological Research, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

66

Ritter, Dale F.

1978

PfLoee.6.6 GeomofLphology.

William C. Brown and Co.,

Dubuque.
Quinn, J.H.
1957

Paired River Terraces and Pleistocene Glaciation.

JoufLnal 06 Geology 65: 149-166.
Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins, and F.B. Plummer
1932

The Geology of Texas.

Bulletin No. 3232.

The

University of Texas at Austin.
Skolasky, Robert A.
1978

The Use of Color Infrared and Panchromatic Aerial
Photography for Drainage Density Analysis and Soil
Mottling Studies of Onion Creek Terraces, Travis and
Hays Counties, Texas.

Unpublished Master's of Arts

Thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Soil Survey Staff
1951

Soil Survey Manual.

Handbook No. 18.

U.S. VepafLtment 06 AgfLieultufLe

U.S. Government Printing Office,

Washington, D.C.
1975

Soil Taxonomy: A Basic System of Soil Classification
for Making and Interpreting Soil Surveys.

ment 06 AgfLieultufLe HandbooQ

No. 436.

U.S. VepafLt­

U.S. Govern­

ment Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
Suhm, Dee Ann
1955

Excavations at the Collins Site, Travis County, Texas.

Bulletin 06 the Texa.6 AfLeheologieal Soeiety 26: 7-54.
1957

Excavations at the Smith Rockshelter, Travis County,
Texas.

Texa.6 JoufLnal 06 Seienee 9: 26-58.

Texas Water Development Board
1976

A Climatological Summary of Austin, Texas.

In6ofLmation

CifLeulafL, Texas Water Development Board, Austin.

-

-----------

--------------------

67

Trippet, A.R. and L.E.
1976

Guide to Points of Geologic Interest in Austin.

Guidebook No. 16, Bureau of Economic Geolog¥, The
University of Texas at Austin.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

1973

Fiood Piain Inbonmation; Onion

C~eek?

Au~tin,

Texa~.

Prepared for the City of Austin, Texas by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District.
Urbanec, Don Alan
1963

Stream Terraces and Related Deposits in the Austin
Area, Texas.

Unpublished Master's of Arts Thesis, The

University of Texas at Austin.
Wallis, John Charles
1976

Evidences of Climatic Change from Fluvial Geomorphology
and Alluvial Soils of the Colorado River, Texas.

Un­

published Master's of Arts Thesis, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Weber, G.E.
1968

Geology of the Fluvial Deposits of the Colorado River,
Central Texas.

Unpublished Master's of Arts Thesis,

The University of Texas at Austin.
\tVeeks, A.W.
1941

Late Cenozoic Deposits of the Texas Coastal Plain
Between the Brazos River and the Rio Grande.

Unpub­

lished Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of Texas at
Austin.
1945

Quaternary Deposits of the Texas Coastal Plain between
the Brazos River and the Rio Grande.
Ameni~an A~~o~iation

1720.

ob Petnoleum

Bulletin ob the

Geologi~t~

29: 1693­

68

Weir, Frank A.
1976a The Central Texas Archaic.
sertation.

Unpublished Ph.D. Dis­

Washington State University, Pullman.

1976b The Central Texas Archaic Reconsidered.
Texa~

A4ehaie: A Sympo~ium.

IN: The

ted.l T.R. Hester.

Center for Archeological Research, The University of
Texas at San Antonio.
Werchan, Leroy E., A.C. Lowther and Robert N. Ramsey
1974

Soil Su4vey

06

T4avi~

County, Tex46.

United States

Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service,
Washington, D.C.
Whitsett, Hayden and Daniel E. Fox
1979

Cultural Resources of Lower Onion Creek. Unpublished
report on file with the Department of Water Resources,
Construction Grants and Water Quality Planning Divi­
sion, Austin.

--~---.------

-------.---~

..................- - - - - - - - - - - -...........

---.------------~---

-~--

----------

........•.

..............

-­

- - - -

APPENDIX

DESCRIPTION OF SOIL PROFILES, BACKHOE TRENCHES
2, 9, and 16.

--~----~

------------~-------------------~------~

70

SOIL PROFILE DESCRIPTION BACKHOE TRENCH 2
Ap:

0-13 cm.; very dark gray (SYR3/1) silty clay loam; fine
granular structure; moderately alkaline; abrupt, wavy
boundary.

All:

13-19 cm.; dark reddish brown (SYR3/2) silty clay loam;
medium, granular to fine, subangular blocky structure;
moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary; numerous
vermiform crotovinae and terrestrial gastropod shells.

A12:

19-30 cm.; dark reddish brown (SYR3/3) silty clay loam;
fine, subangular blocky structure; moderately alkaline;
gradual, smooth boundarYi numerous vermiform crotovinae
and terrestrial gastropod shells.

B:

30-S1 cm.; reddish brown (SYR4/4) silty

loam; massive

structure: moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary:
scattered vermiform crotovinae and terrestrial gastropod
shells.
Cca:

Sl-89 cm.; yellowish red (SYR4/6) silty clay loami massive
structure; very alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary,
numerous tiny calcium carbonate concretions.

C:

89-201 cm.; yellowish red (SYR4/6) silty clay: medium,
platy structure: moderately alkaline: scattered tiny
calcium carbonate concretions; weakly stratified in lower

IS cm.
SOIL PROFILE DESCRIPTION BACKHOE TRENCH 9
Ap:

0-17 cm.: very dark gray (SYR3/1) silty clay loam: fine,
granular structure; moderately alkaline: abrupt, wavy
boundary.

All:

17-51 cm.: very dark grayish brown (10YR3/2) silty clay
loami medium, subangular blocky structure; moderately
alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary; numerous vermiform
crotovinae and terrestrial gastropod shells.

71

A12:

51-74 cm.; dark brown (7.5YR4/4) silty clay loam; sine,
subangular blocky structure; moderately alkaline; gradual,
smooth boundary; numerous vermiform crotovianae and
terrestrial gastropod shells.

B:

74-105 cm.: reddish brown (5YR4/4) silt loam; massive
structure; moderately alkaline; clear, smooth boundary;
numerous terrestrial gastropod shells, scattered powdery
calcium carbonate masses.

Cca:

105-140 cm.: yellowish red (5YR5/6) silt loam; massive
structure; very alkaline; clear, smooth boundary; heavy
concentration of powdery calcium carbonate threads and
masses.

C:

140-255 cm.+; yellowish red (5YR5/6) silt loam; massive
structure; moderately alkaline; weakly stratified.

SOIL PROFILE DESCRIPTION BACKHOE TRENCH 16

Ap:

0-24 cm.; very dark grayish brown (10YR3/2) clay loam:
fine, granular structure; moderately alkaline; abrupt,
wavy boundary; scattered terrestrial gastropod shells.

Al:

24-60 cm.; dark grayish brown (lOYR4/2) clay loam;
medium, granular structure: moderately alkaline; gradual,
smooth boundary; numerous vermiform crotovinae and
scattered terrestrial gastropod shells.

B:

60-117 cm.; dark brown (10YR4/3) clay loam; massive
structure; moderately alkaline; gradual, smooth boundary;
scattered calcium carbonate concretions and terrestrial
gastropod shells.

C:

117-164 cm.+: brown (10YR5/3) clay; massive structure;
moderately alkaline; scattered calcium carbonate con­
cretions.

TABLE 4

Provenience of Artifacts and Associated Materials, 41TV461,

,
I

I
surface

level

level

level

1

2

3

surface

level

level

level

level

1

2

3

4

COre

1

9

1

1
3

5

1

8

1

7

2

3

3

1

10

14

11

3

3

plow
zone

4

1

1

1

6

1

8

:2

4

1

58

1

2
12

1
1

2

1

1

6

12

1

59

1

1

1

1

2

9

5

7

10

10

4

1

43

26

4

249

1

1

I

•

Burned rock frag.

9

Mussel shell

1

Mussel shell frag,

1

1

1

1

4

1

2

1

2

7

5

9

25

16

3

7

29

33

20

29
19

2

-

5

1

1

1
I

1
1

2

2

Historic Artifact

2

total

2

10

Burned rock

TOTAL

lower
cultural
level

1

2

2

1

Tool:
dart point
crude blface

3

3

1

1

1

Chip:
corticate
partially decorticate
decorticate

,.

plow
zone

1

1

Tertiary flake

2

back
dirt

1

Primary flake

I

1

level

2

1

Secondary flake:
cortex platform
faceted platform

level

I

1

Unmoel. pebble

surface

level

34

7

o

29

2

