A RECONNAISSANCE SURVEY OF A 20 ACRE TRACT
IN SOUTH-CENTRAL HIDALGO COUNTY, TEXAS

By
William E. Moore

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 39

1995

A RECONNAISSANCE SURVEY OF A 20 ACRE TRACT
IN SOUTH-CENTRAL HIDALGO COUNTY, TEXAS

Principal Investigator: William E. Moore, SOPA

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Project Number 95-06

Prepared for
The United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians in Oklahoma
Post Office Box 736
Tahlequah, Oklahoma 74465-0746

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
219 North Main Street
Varisco Building - Office 309
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
A reconnaissance survey of a twenty acre site on private land was conducted by
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) on June 29, 1995 at the request of the United
Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians in Oklahoma who wish to operate a gaming facility
at this location. Although the entire tract was evaluated, only ten acres will be involved in
the permit application. No previously recorded archaeological sites were found to be
present within the project area and the field reconnaissance did not locate evidence of a
prehistoric or historic site. The entire tract has been disturbed and is approximately five
miles from the nearest water source, the Rio Grande River. Therefore, the project area is
considered unlikely to contain significant, intact cultural resources. It is recommended
that construction be allowed to proceed as planned with no additional archaeological
investigation.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am appreciative of the help I received during this project. Joe Guerra and his staff
were very supportive. Mr. Guerra showed me the project area and provided the maps
and a copy of the legal description of the area examined. Art Nave is thanked for serving
as a representative of the United Keetowah Band of Cherokee Indians in Oklahoma. He
reviewed the report and offered suggestions. At the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas Carolyn Spock, Head of Records, is acknowledged
for checking the site records for previously recorded sites.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ............................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 2
CULTURAL CHRONOLOGY .......................................................................................... 3
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ....................................................................................... 4
METHODS OF INVESTIGATION .................................................................................... 7
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................... 8
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................... 9
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 10
Appendix I: Legal Description of 10 Acre Tract

iv

INTRODUCTION
On June 29, 1995, Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) was contracted by
the United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians (UKB) in Oklahoma to conduct a
reconnaissance survey of a ten acre tract in south-central Hidalgo County that has been
selected as the future site of a gaming facility. This tract is privately owned and will be
donated to the UKB if the project is approved by the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the
Secretary of the Interior. An adjacent ten acre tract (also privately owned) will serve as a
parking area and is not included in the pending permit application. The reconnaissance
evaluated both tracts. According to a legal description obtained at the Hidalgo County
Recorder's Office in Edingburg, Texas, the project area is part of Lot 38, Block 3, in the C.
E. Hammond Subdivision as recorded in Volume 18, page 439, Deed Records, Hidalgo
County, Texas. The legal description of the ten acre tract appears as Appendix I of this
report. Topographic coverage of the project area is provided by the 7.5' quadrangle,
Hidalgo.

1

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Climate
Hidalgo County is located in South Texas in an area known as the Rio Grande
valley on the north bank of the Rio Grande River. This area is hot and humid most of the
year with an annual temperature of 74 degrees Fahrenheit. In winter, frosts are rare and
continued periods of intense heat and drought have been noted during the summer
months. The average rainfall is 61.65 cm with the majority occurring in early fall and late
spring with thunderstorms most common in September and October.
Soils
The project area is composed entirely of soils that are described in the soils book
for Hidalgo County (Jacobs 1981:48-49) as Reynosa silty clay loam. This is a deep,
nearly level soil with slopes ranging from 0 to 1 percent. The surface layer is usually
grayish-brown, silty clay loam about 15 inches thick. This is followed by a brownish-gray
silty clay loam from 15 to 48 inches and by a pale brown silt loam extending from 48 to 65
inches. The soil is calcareous throughout. Reynosa silty clay loam is well drained and
surface runoff is slow and permeability is moderate. The soils book states that a few
areas of this soil have been altered by land leveling for irrigation and in these areas this
soil has a thin surface layer because of cutting and in some areas a thick surface layer
because of filling. In some areas the surface layer has been removed. This soil is used
almost entirely as irrigated cropland.
Flora and Fauna
The reader is advised to consult Blair (1950) and Hall et al. (1987) for more
detailed information regarding the flora and fauna of the region. The following information
was taken from these sources.
The native vegetation is characterized as a thorny brush savannah with tall
grasses and scattered motts of Live Oak or brush and prairies of Sacahuista, a tall,
coarse grass. It has been suggested that grasslands were the primary vegetation during
prehistoric and early historic times. Later, brush appeared along with cattle, horses,
sheep, and goats.
There is substantial faunal diversity in the Rio Grande Delta. Animals known to
inhabit the area include large game species such as deer, javelina, bobcat, cougar, and
coyote. Small game species include raccoon, skunk, badger, opossum, jackrabbit,
cottontail rabbit, and armadillo. A large number of migratory birds, snakes, lizards, turtles,
and fish are also present.

2

CULTURAL CHRONOLOGY
The South Texas archaeological area that includes the Rio Grande delta is,
according to Hester et al. (1969) one of the least understood regions in Texas. The
earliest sites in South Texas dated to the Late Pleistocene, circa 9500 B.C. to 5500 B.C.
These early inhabitants subsisted by hunting and gathering. They often followed what
archaeologists refer to as "seasonal rounds." This is the practice of returning to favored
areas during the year in order to exploit certain resources that occurred in these areas at
different times.
Archaeological sites in far South Texas are most often associated with Archaic,
Neo-Archaic, and Historic materials. Paleo-Indian occupations, although documented,
are rare in the region. Lanceolate and stemmed projectile points diagnostic of the earliest
sites have tentatively been associated with bones of Late Pleistocene animals at the
Morhiss site northeast of Harlingen in Victoria County (Campbell 1976).
The Archaic period, circa 5000 B.C. to A.D. 1000, is characterized by a
dependence on gathering of wild plants and the hunting of small game. Diagnostic
artifacts include stemmed and triangular dart points, bifacial tools, milling stones, and
bone and shell artifacts. In South Texas, the Early Archaic is represented by the Falcon
Focus followed by the Mier Focus, a transitional period indicating a Late Archaic and
Early Neo-American occupation.
The Neo-American period is the last prehistoric culture in the area, circa A.D. 1000
to European contact. It is characterized by flint and marine shell tools and ornaments
including arrow points. The presence of arrow points in Neo-American sites represents a
transition from the atlatl to the bow and arrow. In the Rio Grande Delta region this culture
is evidenced by the Brownsville Focus. Interaction with nearby groups is indicated by the
occasional recovery of diagnostic pottery sherds. Historic Indian sites contain tools and
ornaments manufactured from glass. Historic Indian groups known to have inhabited the
region include the Karankawa and Coahuiltecan. Newcomb (1961) provides the
interested reader with more in-depth information regarding the various Indian groups
living in South Texas during the Historic contact period.

3

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
The following listing of previous work in Hidalgo County and vicinity is given to
provide an insight to the amount of work that has been conducted in this region of Texas.
This list is not purported to be complete. Rather, it represents the major works and all
additional efforts the authors were able to locate and stay within the scope of this project.
The first, and some of the most important, archaeological investigations in the area
were conducted by A E. Anderson, a civil engineer from Brownsville, Texas. From 1908
to 1940 he made systematic collections from sites in Cameron County and northern
Mexico. During this time he recorded approximately 196 prehistoric sites in Cameron
County and about the same number in northern Tamaulipas, a state of Mexico. The
Anderson file and collection at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in
Austin, Texas contains data and artifacts from his work. In addition, Anderson (1932)
published some of his findings in the Bulletin of the Archeological and Paleontological
Society in 1932.
In the 1930s, E. B. Sayles (1935) conducted a preliminary survey of Texas. He
used data collected by Anderson to describe what he referred to as the "Brownsville
Phase of the Tamaulipecan." Sayles attempted to define a cultural and/or temporal
separation for the southern Texas groups. Richard McNeish (1947, 1958), in later studies
of the area revised Sayles' list of traits. Of particular interest to this project is the
Brownsville complex defined by McNeish based on data from sites recorded by Anderson
and McNeish.
In the late 1940s, a Brownsville complex burial site in Hidalgo County was
investigated by Campbell and Frizzell (1949). The Ayala site proved to be important in
terms of substantiating statements previously based on surface finds. In 1952, Frederick
Ruecking, Jr. visited the Ayala site and attempted to collect additional data. Although his
efforts were hampered by vandalism to the site, some of the data he obtained were
incorporated into a later report on the site (Hester et al. 1969).
T. N. Campbell (1960) published a major article in the Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society entitled "Archeology of the Central and South Sections of the
Texas Coast." This work provided a detailed discussion of archaeological work along the
Texas coast prior to 1958.
In 1969, Hester et al. (1969) published a three-part article on prehistoric
cemeteries in Cameron and Hidalgo counties. The sites discussed include Floyd Morris
(41CF2) in Cameron County and Ayala (41HG1) in Hidalgo County.
Important information concerning burial patterns of the Brownsville complex was
obtained by Hester and Rodgers (1971) when they investigated a single flexed burial
north of the Arroyo Colorado on the terrace of an oxbow channel known as Concepion
Resaca about 0.8 kilometers upstream from the Ayala site.

4

In 1972, Douglas R. Brown conducted a survey in Hidalgo County to be impacted
by construction of the Retamal Dam and United States Dike and the Modified Hackney
Floodway as well as the closure of the Mission Floodway (Brown 1972). His survey
documented the alteration of archaeological sites by extensive land modification activities
and noted a general scarcity of prehistoric materials in the area investigated.
A major overview of the general area was authored by Thomas R. Hester (1973)
and entitled Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower Coast of
Texas. This work presents a general discussion of aboriginal populations occupying the
large area of Texas south of the Edwards Plateau and San Antonio River, often referred
to as the "Rio Grande Plain." Hester's paper is a synthesis of previous work in the area.
In a later work (Hester 1975), he discarded and revised some of his views in the 1973
version.
A paper presented by Hester (1975) entitled A Chronological Overview of
Prehistoric Southern and South-Central Texas discussed the area of Texas from the
Edwards Plateau on the northwest and the Guadalupe River on the northeast, southward
to the Rio Grande. His study area covers 34 counties and is larger than the Rio Grande
Plain discussed in his earlier paper (Hester 1973).
In 1977, a major study involving Hidalgo and Willacy counties was conducted by
the Office of the State Archeologist (Mallouf et al. 1977). This agency sampled
archaeological sites across all of Willacy and parts of Hidalgo counties in response to
proposed construction of a floodwater channelization project by the United States Army
Corps of Engineers. The final report contains very detailed discussions of previous work
in the area and should be consulted in any serious research project involving South
Texas.
A cultural resources survey was conducted in portions of Hidalgo and Willacy
counties by Prewitt and Associates, Inc. in 1980 (Day et al. 1981). The purpose of this
study was to locate, record, and assess the information yield potential of prehistoric and
historic sites which may be affected by the construction of major drainage improvements
within the two counties. Information regarding 63 archaeological sites was collected.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. (EHA) conducted a cultural resources survey
and records review of three proposed segments of transmission line right-of-way in
Cameron and Hidalgo counties (Voellinger 1983). This is the closest previous study to
the current project area. EHA archaeologists located two previously unrecorded sites
(41CF122 and 41CF123) and revisited one known site (41HG7). These three sites are
located in close proximity to the current project area. They are discussed elsewhere in
this report.

5

In 1986, archaeological, geomorphological, and paleontological investigations
were conducted in portions of Hidalgo and Willacy counties by Prewitt and Associates,
Inc. (Hall et al. 1987). Forty-three sites and 21 isolated finds were recorded. The
Sardinas Resaca site (41HG118) was intensively investigated through controlled surface
collection, backhoe trenching, and test pit excavations.
Since 1986, a number of small area surveys have been successful in locating and
recording sites in Hidalgo County. Reports for these studies were authored by Prewitt
(1987), Quigg (1988), Crass (1989), Quigg et al. (1989), Bousman et al. (1990), Eling
(1991), Good (1991), Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation (1991),
Whitsett (1992), Whitsett and Jurgens (1992), and Bradle et al. (1995).

6

METHODS OF INVESTIGATION
Prior to the field investigation, archival research was conducted at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas to check for previously
recorded archaeological sites in the project area and vicinity. A literature search of
relevant site reports, maps, and soils books was also performed.
The field reconnaissance consisted of a surface investigation of the exposed areas
not in cultivation. This was supplemented by limited shovel probing. A recently
excavated trench across much of the project area provided excellent visibility. This
exposed area was examined for displaced cultural materials and measurements were
taken to determine depth of clay along the trench.

7

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
The background check revealed that no previously recorded prehistoric or historic
sites are present within the 20 acres examined during this reconnaissance survey. A
limited surface inspection was negative in terms of observing cultural materials.
According to the soils book for Hidalgo County, the project area is composed of Reynosa
silty clay loam. Although this was not confirmed, the area does contain a clay loam
overlying a subsoil that is very hard. This subsoil contains less loam than the top stratum.
A trench through part of the project area revealed this subsoil at an average depth of 13
centimeters below the ground surface.
It is unlikely that a prehistoric site would be present in this area for two reasons.
First the nearest water source is the Rio Grande River approximately five miles to the
south and second, prehistoric sites are usually found on landforms containing sandy
soils. The review of archaeological literature for the area showed a definite preference for
proximity to water as a major factor in site selection by prehistoric groups in South Texas.
Should a prehistoric site be present it would most likely be disturbed through cotton
agriculture and other activities that its research potential would be severely diminished.
Although some types of historic sites are not tied to water, any site in this area would
likewise be disturbed with little research potential.

8

RECOMMENDATIONS
It is recommended that the United Keetoowah Band of Cherokee Indians of
Oklahoma be allowed to proceed with their plans to construct a gaming hall on the 10
acres examined during this reconnaissance survey. An intensive survey is not
considered necessary as this area is very disturbed and is not likely to contain significant
cultural resources. Monitoring by an archaeologist during construction is also not
necessary. Should, however, evidence of a prehistoric or historic site be uncovered
during construction all work must cease until the situation can be evaluated by the proper
regulatory agency.

9

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, A. E.
1932

Blair, W. Frank
1950

Artifacts of the Rio Grande Delta Region. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological and Paleontological Society 4:29-31.

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
2(1):93-117.

Bradle, Michael R., Floyd D. Kent, and William E. Moore
1995
An Archaeological Survey of a Proposed Eighteen Mile Distribution
Line and Six Substations in Cameron and Hidalgo Counties, Texas.
American Archaeology Group. Lampasas. (Draft)
Bousman, C. Britt, Steve A. Tomka, and Gail L. Bailey
1990
Prehistoric Archeology and Paleoenvironments in Hidalgo and
Willacy Counties, South Texas: Results of the Phase II Test
Excavations. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations
76. Austin.
Brown, Douglas R.
1972
An Assessment of the Archeological Resources to be Affected by
Construction of Retamal International Diversion Dam, United States
Dike and Modified Hackney and Closure of Mission Floodway,
Hidalgo County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Project, Report
15. The University of Texas at Austin.
Campbell, Thomas Nolan
1960
Archeology of the Central and South Sections of the Texas Coast.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 29:145-176. (published
for 1958)
1976

Archaeological Investigations at the Morhiss Site, Victoria County,
Texas, 1932-1940. In An Archaeological Survey of Coleto Creek,
Victoria and Goliad Counties, Texas, Texas, by Anne A. Fox and
Thomas R. Hester. The University of Texas at San Antonio, Center
for Archaeological Research, Archaeological Research Survey
Report Number 18.

Campbell, Thomas Nolan, and Jack Q. Frizzell
1949
Notes on the Ayala Site, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 20:63-72.

10

Crass, David Collin
1989
An Archeological Survey of the Mid-Valley Airport, Weslaco, Texas.
Day, D. William, Jane Laurens-Day, and Elton R. Prewitt
1981
Cultural Resources Surveys and Assessments in Portions of Hidalgo
and Willacy Counties, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Report of
Investigations, Number 15. Austin.
Eling, Herbert H., Jr.
1991
Cultural Resource Assessments in the Magic Valley Electric
Cooperative Service Area, 1991. Galvan Eling Associates, Inc.
Austin.
Good, Carolyn
1991

Cultural Resources Survey, Arroyo Colorado (Lower Rio Grande
Basin, Texas) Revalidation Report, Hidalgo and Cameron Counties,
Texas. Unnumbered report published by the United States Corps of
Engineers, Galveston District.

Hall, Grant D., Michael B. Collins, and Elton R. Prewitt
1987
Cultural Resources Investigations along Drainage Improvements,
Hidalgo and Willacy Counties, Texas: 1986 Investigations. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Report of Investigations Number 59. Austin.
Hester, Thomas R.
1973
Hunters and Gatherers of the Rio Grande Plain and the Lower Coast
of Texas. Paper presented at the 74th Annual Meeting of the Texas
Academy of Science in Nacogdoches, Texas in 1971.
1975

A Chronological Overview of Prehistoric Southern and South-Central
Texas. Paper presented at the Conference of the Prehistory of
Northeastern Mexico and Texas in 1975 in Monterrey, Mexico.

Hester, Thomas R., Michael B. Collins, Frank A. Weir, and Frederick Ruecking, Jr.
1969
Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower Rio Grande Valley of
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40:119-166.
Hester, Thomas Roy, and R. W. Rodgers
1971
Additional Data on the Burial Practices of the Brownsville Complex.
The Texas Journal of Science 22(4):367-372.
Jacobs, Jerry L.
1981

Soil Survey of Hidalgo County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in cooperation with the Texas
Agricultural Experiment Station.

11

McNeish, Richard S.
1947
A Preliminary Report on Coastal Tamaulipas. American
Anthropologist 13(1):1-15.
1958

Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Sierra de Tamaulipas,
Mexico. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society 48:6.

Mallouf, Robert J., Barbara J. Basin, and Kay L. Killen
1977
A Predictive Assessment of Cultural Resources in Hidalgo and
Willacy Counties, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist, Survey
Report 23. Texas Historical Commission. Austin.
Newcomb, W. W., Jr.
1961
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press. Austin.
Prewitt, Elton R.
1974

1987

Quigg, J. Michael
1988

Preliminary Archeological Investigations in the Rio Grande Delta
Area of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 45:55-65.
An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Enlarged Portion of the
Southwest Lateral Ditch System, Hidalgo County, Texas. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Letter Report 351. Austin.

Archeological Reconnaissance of Realigned Channel Segments,
Radio Drain and West Main Drain, Hidalgo County, Texas. Prewitt
and Associates, Inc., Letter Report 358. Austin.

Quigg, J. Michael, Douglas K. Boyd, and Elton R. Prewitt
1989
An Archeological Survey of Proposed Drainage Ditch Realignments,
Hidalgo County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Technical
Report 2. Austin.
Sayles, E. B.
1935

An Archaeological Survey of Texas. Medallion Papers 17. Gila
Pueblo. Globe, Arizona.

Texas Department of Highways and Public Transportation
1991
Cultural Resources Assessment, Hidalgo County, Ridge Road:
Highway Reconstruction from Tenth Street in McAllen to U.S. 281 in
Pharr. Unnumbered letter report published by the Texas
Department of Highways and Public Transportation. Austin.

12

Voellinger, Melissa W.
1983
A Summary Report of the Cultural Resources Survey of Three Areas
of Magic Valley Electric Cooperative, Inc. 12.47 KV Transmission
Lines, Hidalgo and Cameron Counties, Texas. Unnumbered report
published by Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. Austin.
Whitsett, W. Hayden
1992
An Archeological Survey of Proposed Water and Wastewater
Utilities by the City of Pharr, Hidalgo County, Texas. Unnumbered
report published by the Texas Water Development Board. Austin.
Whitsett, W. Hayden, and Christopher J. Jurgens
1992
An Archeological Survey of the City of Mission-Madero & Granjeno
Wastewater Project. Unnumbered report published by the Texas
Water Development Board. Austin.

13

APPENDIX I
LEGAL DESCRIPTION OF THE PROJECT AREA

14

Property (including any improvements):
A 10.0 acre tract of land out of the North part of Lot 38, Block 3, C. E. Hammond's
SUBDIVISION, Hidalgo County, Texas, as recorded in Volume 18, Page 439, Deed
Records, Hidalgo County, Texas.
BEGINNING at an iron rod sat on the East line of South 23rd Street (Spur #115) far
Northwest corner of the following described tract of land; said point located South 81
Degrees, 20 Minutes, 15 Seconds East, 386.38 feet East and South 8 Degrees, 39
Minutes, 45 Seconds West 712.1 feet from the Northwest corner of Lot 36.
THENCE, parallel to the North line of Lot 38, South 81 Degrees, 20 Minutes, 15 Seconds
East, 686.94 feet to an iron rod set, for the Northeast corner hereof;
THENCE, South 4 Degrees, 03 Minutes, 00 Seconds West, 681.7 feet to an iron rod set,
for the Southeast corner hereof;
THENCE, parallel to the North line of Lot 36, North 81 Degrees, 20 Minutes, 15 Seconds
West, 595.2 feet to an iron rod set, on the East line of South 23rd Street (Spur #115), for
the Southwest corner hereof;
THENCE, with said highway right-of-way North 3 Degrees, 30 Minutes, 31 Seconds
West, 695.11 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING, Containing 10.0 acres of land, more or
less;
SAVE AND EXCEPT, all oil, gas, and other minerals, which are hereby reserved unto the
Grantors, their heirs and assigns.

15

