AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE MAXWELL WATER SUPPLY
CORPORATION USDA I.H. 35 CORRIDOR PROJECT
IN SOUTHEAST HAYS COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 03-19

Author and Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
Maxwell Water Supply Corporation
P.O. Box 158
Maxwell, Texas 78656

ABSTRACT
An archaeological investigation of a proposed 1522 foot water line (2.65 acres) in
southeast Hays County, Texas was performed by Brazos Valley Research Associates in
July 2003 under Texas Antiquities Permit 3186 with William E. Moore the Principal
Investigator. Shovel testing and surface inspection of exposed areas did not locate
evidence of an archaeological site within the boundaries of the project area. Copies of
the report are on file at the Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory (TARL) on The
University of Texas campus in Austin, Texas, the Historical Commission, Archeology
Division, and Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA).

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am appreciative of the assistance provided by Maxwell Water Supply Corporation
and Gallegos Engineering, Inc. throughout this project. Mabel Vaughn, General Manager
of the Maxwell Water Supply Corporation, visited the project area with the field crew prior
to the archaeological survey. At Gallegos Engineering, Inc. in San Antonio, Richard M.
Gallegos, President and Steven Gonzales, Construction Manager, provided maps and
other logistical support. Edward P. Baxter served as the Project Archaeologist. The
reviewer for this project, representing the Texas Historical Commission, was Ed Baker.
The figures appearing in this report were prepared by Lili Lyddon of LL Technical
Services in North Zulch, Texas.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ...................................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.................................................................................................. iii
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 4
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS ...................................................................................... 7
METHODS ...................................................................................................................... 9
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 10
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 11
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 12
Appendix I: Archaeological Sites in the Vicinity of the Project Area
Appendix II: Shovel Test Log
FIGURES
Figure 1. General Location Map ...................................................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area Map Depicting Shovel Test Locations ........................................... 3
Figure 3. Project Area on Soils Map................................................................................. 5

iv

INTRODUCTION
BVRA was retained by the Maxwell Water Supply Corporation (WSC) of Maxwell,
Texas to conduct an archaeological survey of a proposed water line in southeast Hays
County, Texas (Figure 1). Maxwell WSC proposes to provide new service to clients in the
area by constructing a water line from an existing 12 inch pipeline at least 1000 feet north
of the Blanco River to an existing 2 inch line 11,522 feet to the north of this point (Figure
2). Overall, construction will affect the subsurface to a depth of three feet. The width of
the trench will not exceed 24 inches, and the permanent easement will be 10 feet.
Overall, the project area comprises 2.65 acres. The Federal agency involved in this
project is the United States Department of Agriculture, Rural Development office. Since
the project area is considered a political subdivision of the State of Texas, an Antiquities
Permit was required, and permit 3186 was issued to BVRA by the Texas Historical
Commission, Archeology Division. The project number assigned by BVRA is 03-19. The
archaeological survey was conducted on July 30, 2003. The Principal Investigator was
William E. Moore, and the Project Archaeologist was Edward P. Baxter. The project area
is depicted on the USGS 7.5' topographic quadrangle San Marcos North dated 1995
(map number 2997-333) (Figure 2).

1

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The following statements were taken from the published Soil Survey of Comal and
Hays Counties by Charles D. Batte (1984:1-4). Hays County is located in south-central
Texas. The Balcones Escarpment extends through the eastern part of the county
separating it into the Edwards Plateau Land Resource Area and the Blackland Prairie
Land Resource Area. The project area is located within the Blackland Prairie portion of
the county. In the Blackland Prairie, soils are mainly deep clays, and elevation ranges
from about 600 to 1600 feet. There has been a significant change in land use in the
Blackland Prairie since 1960. Much of the area once used for agriculture has been
converted to urban use because of the expansion of nearby urban areas of Austin and
San Marcos. Also, much of the formerly marginal cropland has been converted to
pasture. The soils in the Blackland Prairie are well suited to improved pasture grasses,
and many are used for field crops. Summers in Hays County are hot, and winters are
fairly warm. Cold spells are of short duration, and snowfall is rare. Rainfall is usually the
heaviest in late spring and early fall.
Seven soil types are present within the area investigated for this project. They are
Boerne fine sandy loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (BoB), Branyon clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes
(ByA), Gruene clay, 1 to 5 percent slopes (GrC), Krum clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (KrA),
Lewisville silty clay, 0 to 1 percent slopes (LeA), Lewisville silty clay, 1 to 3 percent slopes
(LeB), and Seawillow clay loam, 1 to 3 percent slopes (SeB). These soils are depicted on
Sheet 55 of the soil survey (Batte 1984) and on Figure 3 of this report.
BoB soils are described by Batte (1984:17) as deep, gently sloping soils found on
convex slopes of low stream terraces near rivers and large creeks in the Blackland Prairie
Land Resource Area. Typically, the surface layer is a dark grayish-brown, moderately
alkaline fine sandy loam about 17 inches thick. The subsoil extends to a depth of 41
inches and is a pale brown and very pale brown, moderately alkaline fine sandy loam.
The underlying material, to a depth of 65 inches, is a very pale brown, moderately alkaline
fine sandy loam. This soil is well drained, and surface runoff is slow. Permeability is
moderately rapid, and the available water capacity is medium. This soil is flooded only
rarely.
GrC soils are described by Batte (1984:24), as shallow to very shallow soils on
stream terraces. Slopes are convex. The areas are long and narrow in shape and range
from 5 to 650 acres in size. Typically, the surface layer is very dark grayish-brown clay
about 13 inches thick. The underlying material, to a depth of 22 inches, is a strongly
cemented, massive caliche containing embedded gravel. The underlying material, to a
depth of about 80 inches, is a very gravelly loam. This soil is well drained, and surface
runoff is medium. Permeability is moderately slow in the surface layer and very slow in
the cemented layer. The available water capacity is very slow. Water erosion is a
moderate hazard.

4

KrA soils are described by Batte (1984:29) as deep, nearly level soils on stream
terraces and valley fills. Slopes are plane or slightly concave. These areas are mostly
long and narrow or oblong in shape and range from 10 to 360 acres is size. Typically, the
surface layer is a dark brown clay about 19 inches thick. The subsoil, to a depth of 49
inches, is brown clay, and to a depth of 69 inches is yellowish-brown clay. The underlying
material, to a depth of 80 inches, is yellowish-brown clay. The soil is moderately alkaline
and calcareous throughout. This soil is well drained, and surface runoff is slow.
Permeability is moderately slow. The available water capacity is medium.
LeA soils are described by Batte (1984:30-31) as deep, nearly level soils on plane
to slightly convex slopes on stream terraces. These areas are irregular in shape and
range from 5 to 400 acres in size. Typically, the surface layer is dark grayish-brown, silty
clay about 17 inches thick. The subsoil, to a depth of 36 inches, is brown silty clay, and to
a depth of 54 inches is yellowish-brown silty clay. The underlying material, to a depth of
61 inches, is brown silty clay. The soils are moderately alkaline and calcareous
throughout. This soil is well drained, and surface runoff is slow. Permeability is
moderate, and available water capacity is high.
LeB soils are described by Batte (1984:31) as deep, gently sloping soils on stream
terraces. Slopes are convex. These areas are irregular in shape and range from 5 to
200 acres in size. Typically, the surface layer is dark grayish-brown, silty clay about 15
inches thick. The subsoil, to a depth of 33 inches, is light brown silty clay, and to a depth
of 63 inches is reddish-yellow silty clay. The soils are moderately alkaline and calcareous
throughout. This soil is well drained, and surface runoff is medium. Permeability is
moderate, and available water capacity is high.
SeB soils are described by Batte (1984:39) as deep, gently sloping soils on low
ridges on stream terraces. Slopes are convex. The areas are mostly long and narrow in
shape and range from 5 to 100 acres in size. Typically, the surface layer is a grayishbrown clay loam about 11 inches thick. The subsoil, to a depth of 26 inches, is a very
pale brown clay loam. About 70 percent of this layer is calcium carbonate (lime). The
underlying material, to a depth of 60 inches, is a very pale brown clay loam. It is
moderately alkaline and limy throughout. This soil is well drained, and surface runoff is
medium. Permeability is moderate, and the available water capacity is medium. Water
erosion is a slight hazard.

6

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Hays County is located in the Central Texas Archeological Study Region of the
Eastern Planning Region as defined by the Department of Antiquities Protection in
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document (Kenmotsu and
Perttula 1993). The county is located in the Central Texas cultural-geographical region
(Region 10) as defined by Biesaart et al. (1985:96-98) in a statistical overview. At the
time the overview was published, Hays County was 5th in the region with 130 recorded
archeological sites. The 130 sites comprised 3.71% of the region and .64% of the state.
As of July 24, 2003, there were 374 recorded prehistoric and historic sites in Hays County
(TARL site files). The Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas
(Simons and Moore 1997) cites 97 references for the county. Although many of these
investigations have been small area surveys, often resulting in no sites being recorded,
several projects involving larger areas have been conducted. A review of the Abstracts in
Texas Contract Archeology series authored by William E. Moore and published by the
Texas Historical Commission from 1988 through 1992 revealed sporadic small area
surveys, many resulting in negative findings.
The majority of Hays County is located in the Edwards Plateau geographic region
of Texas. In the eastern part of the county, the geographic region changes to the
Blackland Prairie, and this is the locus of the current project area. Although a county wide
review of previous work was not conducted, it appears that many of the larger, more
significant archaeological sites in Hays County are located along the Blanco and San
Marcos rivers.
No surveys have been conducted within the project area as currently presented by
the Maxwell WSC. The first archaeological sites recorded in the general area (41HY13
and 41HY14) were documented by Johnny Greer in 1962 that was a student in the
Department of Anthropology at The University of Texas in Austin at the time. All of the
information regarding theses sites is found on the key site cards at TARL as no site forms
are on file. Greer recorded additional sites in 1962, but they are south of the river.
Discussion of these sites can be found in the contract report authored by David O. Brown
(1989). The location of these sites is depicted on the topographic map as Appendix I.
41HY13: This prehistoric site is located on the north side of the Blanco River south
of the current project area. Cultural materials at this site were found in river gravel on a
gravel bar. According to Greer, there was very little material, and most of it was "water
worn and banged up."
41HY14: This prehistoric site is located on a high terrace on the north side of the
Blanco River west of the current project area. It is described by Greer as a "probable
multi-component" site containing dart points, knives, bifaces, scrapers, a chopper,
possible arrow point preform, lithic debitage, prehistoric ceramics, bone, and historic
debris.

7

The next investigation in the vicinity was a survey of the proposed San Marcos
Municipal Utility District Number 1 site by Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. (1985) in
1985. This investigation located and recorded eight prehistoric sites and one historic
homestead. Two of the prehistoric sites (41HY175 and 41HY176) are on the east side of
the Blanco River to the west of the current project area. The remaining sites are on the
west side of the river. They are discussed in the contract report by Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc.
41HY175: This is a light scatter of lithic debitage in a level, plowed field
approximately 40 meters east of the bank of the Blanco River. Soils at the site consist of
a brown sandy loam over a fairly deep deposit of brown, gravelly fine sandy clay loam.
Artifacts observed include lithic debitage (n=20) utilized flakes (n=2), and numerous
pieces of burned limestone rock, chert, and quartzite spread over an area of about 120 x
180 meters.
41HY176: This is a light scatter of lithic debitage and tools in a plowed field at the
edge of the first terrace southeast of the Blanco River. Soils at the site consist of a
shallow sandy loam over a brown gravelly sandy clay loam. Artifacts observed include
150 pieces of lithic debitage and tools spread over an area of about 100 x 350 meters.
The most comprehensive overview of Hays County archaeology is present in a
report by Ricklis and Collins (1994). Although this study was carried out in the Edwards
Plateau region of the county, it is the most definitive discussion of Hays County prehistory
found by the Principal Investigator during the literature search. A general overview of
Hays County archaeology was written by Dee Ann Story (1993) for the younger audience.

8

METHODS
Prior to entering the field, a records check for previously recorded sites in or near
the project area was conducted by Allegra Azulay at TARL. The Project Archaeologist
and Principal Investigator visited the project area with Steven Gonzales, Construction
Manager of Gallegos Engineering, Inc. and Mabel Vaughn, General Manager of Maxwell
WSC, before conducting the field survey to make sure that all shovel tests would be
excavated within the construction corridor and not outside the project area right-of-way.
Edward P. Baxter, Project Archaeologist, performed this study on July 30, 2003. In
general, the surface visibility was estimated in the field as nearly 0% with three areas, a
goat pen, plowed field, and garden, as high as 100%. The entire project area was
examined by a 100 percent pedestrian survey accompanied by shovel testing. The
Project Archaeologist worked from north to south and numbered the shovel tests
consecutively from 1-19. A digital camera was used to document the field conditions
present during the survey. Only one area had been originally considered for backhoe
trenching, that portion nearest the southern end of the pipeline route closest to the river.
This area was found to be at least 1000 feet from the river and in an already disturbed
context due to the presence of a concrete plant. The rest of the line is located in an
upland setting above the floodplain of the Blanco River. Therefore, shovel testing and
surface inspection was considered adequate.
According to a letter from F. Lawrence Oaks, Executive Director at the Texas
Historical Commission, signed by William A. Martin and dated March 30, 2003, two areas
were recommended for survey. These are the southern half of Segment A and the
northwestern half of Segment E. After a review of TARL maps it was learned that two
archaeological sites exist to the west of Segment A and the northern half of Segment A.
The Field Archaeologist shovel tested these areas to make sure that these sites do not
extend to the project area. No tests were dug in Segment B or Segment C. The five
segments (A-E) are depicted on the project area map (Figure 2).
In all, 19 shovel tests were excavated along the construction corridor, and all tests
were negative in terms of yielding cultural materials. The tests were dug through clay and
gravels. The depth of the tests varied between 20 and 40 cm. All earth excavated
through shovel testing was screened using 1/4" hardware cloth, and a shovel test log was
kept (Appendix II). Most of the soil consisted of a very hard clay that had to be broken
apart by hand in the screen. The approximate location of each test is depicted on the
topographic map San Marcos North, Texas (Figure 2).

9

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
Literature Review
A review of previous work conducted in the area revealed no previously recorded
sites in the project area. It was also learned that no professional survey involving any part
of the current project area had been conducted. Several archaeological sites had been
recorded by archaeologists in the area prior to this study. The four nearest sites
(41HY13, 41HY14, 41HY175, and 41HY176) are depicted on the topographic map and
appear as Appendix I to this report.
Field Survey
The archaeological survey examined a proposed water pipeline route of 1522 feet
with a 10 foot easement which traversed an upland setting overlooking the floodplain of
the Blanco River. The area was examined through shovel testing and a careful inspection
of areas with good surface visibility. Overall, the ground surface had poor surface visibility
as it passed through a pasture and a cornfield. Three areas had near 100% surface
visibility. These are the goat pen, plowed garden, and disturbed tie-in location at the
southern end of the project area. Although seven soil types are mentioned by the soil
survey (Figure 3), only two discernable areas were observed by the Project Archaeologist.
These are an area of dark gray or black clay and an area of clay that appeared to have a
brown tint. The clay soils throughout the project area were very firm and difficult to
screen. No natural chert cobbles were observed. It is believed that the route of the water
pipeline as currently planned avoids any localities that would have been favored by
prehistoric groups for lithic procurement or as a campsite. The presence of numerous
sites nearer the river (i.e., 41HY175 and 41HY176) supports this statement. It should be
pointed out that no sandy loam soils or sandy clay were found in the project area. Sites
41HY175 and 41HY176 were found to contain a stratum of sandy loam overlying sandy
clay loam. Should any cultural materials be present in the clay soils of the project area
they would most likely be out of their original context due to plowing. It is also unlikely
that cultural materials are present in the heavy clays below the plow zone.

10

RECOMMENDATIONS
No archaeological sites were found as a result of this survey. It is recommended
that the Maxwell WSC be allowed to proceed with construction as planned. Should,
however, evidence of an archaeological site be uncovered during construction all work in
the area of the find must be temporarily suspended until the situation is evaluated by the
Texas Historical Commission in consultation with BVRA and the Maxwell Water Supply
Corporation. Artifacts that are considered significant in this area consist of concentrations
of burned rock with associated shell and lithic debris.

11

REFERENCES CITED
Batte, Charles D.
1984 Soil Survey of Comal and Hays Counties, Texas. United States
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa Clinton Spotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview. Office of
the State Archeologist, Special Report 28. Texas Historical Commission.
Boes, Thomas C.
1994 Archeological Testing and Monitoring at San Marcos (A.E. Wood) Fish
Hatchery, Hays County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
Public Lands Division Cultural Resources Program, Austin, Texas.
Brown, David O.
1989 Archaeological Survey of the Canyon to San Marcos Transmission Line
(Circuit T-143), Hays County, Texas. Horizon Environmental Services,
Inc., Archaeology Series 5.
Collins, Michael B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:361-400.
Davis, Michael W.
1985 An Archeological Survey and Assessment of the San Marcos (Wood) Fish
Hatchery, Hays County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Technical
Bulletin 79. The University of Texas at Austin.
Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.
1985 The Cultural Resources of the Proposed San Marcos Municipal Utility
District Number 1, Hays County, Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.,
Document Number 85547.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula
1993 Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document.
Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resources Management
Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.
Ricklis, Robert A., and Michael E. Collins
1994 Archaic and Late Prehistoric Human Ecology in the Middle Onion Creek
Valley, Hays County, Texas. Studies in Archeology 19, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

12

Simons, Helen, and William E. Moore
1997 Archeological Bibliography for the Central Region of Texas. Office of the
State Archeologist, Special Report 36, Texas Historical Commission.
Story, Dee Ann
1993 Riddles of the Past: The Archeology of Hays County. Published by the
Hays County Historical Commission.

13

