AN ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF THE
PROPOSED CITY OF BELLVILLE CLARK PARK
IN AUSTIN COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project Number 05-08

Principal Investigator
William E. Moore

Prepared by
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

Prepared for
The City of Bellville
30 South Holland
Bellville, Texas 77418

ABSTRACT
An archaeological survey of a 28.29-acre tract in Austin County, Texas was
conducted by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) in May of 2005 under
Antiquities Permit 3792 for the City of Bellville. The proposed project is a
community park to be funded by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD).
A check of the site records at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
in Austin, Texas revealed this tract had not been previously examined by a
professional archaeologist, and no previously recorded sites have been recorded
within the project area. No evidence of a prehistoric site was found. The survey
located one historic site (41AU89), a standing structure that was erected prior to
World War II to be used as a place to play dominoes and cards by the landowner.
This site is in poor condition and does not appear to be significant. It is, therefore,
recommended that construction of the community park be allowed to proceed
without further consultation from the Texas Historical Commission (THC). No
artifacts were collected. Copies of this report are on file at the THC, TARL, TPWD,
BVRA, and City of Bellville.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to those individuals who participated in this project.
At the City of Bellville, we were assisted by Lynn S. Roberts (City Administrator)
and Betty Hollon. Maps and other information necessary to complete this
investigation were provided by Trenton Schwartz and Craig Kankel at O’Malley
Engineers of Brenham, Texas. The site number was assigned by Adrianne Mraz,
TexSite & Atlas Coordinator at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. The
authors are grateful to several local residents of Austin County for their help
regarding the standing structure in the project area. They are Charley Smith (City
Attorney) and Lawton J. Clark. Jennifer McMillan provided technical support.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT........................................................................................................... ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iii
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING...............................................................................4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ..................................................................6
METHODS ............................................................................................................9
SITE DESCRIPTION ..........................................................................................11
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS........................................................................13
RECOMMENDATIONS.......................................................................................14
REFERENCES CITED........................................................................................15

APPENDIX I - Previous Investigations in Austin County that
Recorded or Tested Archaeological Sites
APPENDIX II– Research Design
APPENDIX III – Shovel Test Log
APPENDIX IV – Location of Site 41AU89

iv

Figures
Figure 1. General Location ............................................................................................ 2
Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map................................................................ 3
Figure 3. View of Southern Portion of Project Area.................................................... 5
Figure 4. Location of Shovel Tests.............................................................................. 10
Figure 5. Site 41AU89 (Southeast Elevation)............................................................ 12
Figure 6. Site 41AU89 (North Elevation) .................................................................... 12

v

INTRODUCTION
The City of Bellville is applying for funds from the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department (TPWD) to create a community park known as Bellville Clark Park.
The site of the proposed park consists of approximately 30 acres and is adjacent to
the north corporate limits of the City of Bellville in central Austin County (Figure 1).
Topographic coverage of the project area is found on the Bellville 7.5’ quadrangle
(2996-434) (Figure 2). The project number assigned by TPWD is 48-01065.
In all, 28.3 acres will be used for the community park. Of this, 22 acres were
deeded to the City as a gift in 2000. An additional 6.3 acres will be acquired at a
later date. Approximately 5 acres will be set aside for a wildlife area. Most of the
area to be surveyed by archaeologists is vacant except for a standing structure;
stands of pine trees; and a pond fed by a wet weather creek, a tributary of Little
Piney Creek. There is also a wet season marsh area adjacent to the pond.
According to Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) personnel, there is
an uncultivated meadow adjacent to the marsh containing native grasses and forbs.
Kinds of improvements scheduled include soccer fields, baseball fields,
basketball court, RV campground, playgrounds, nature and jogging trails,
amphitheater, water splash pad, and picnic area. The remaining 5.2 acres will be
set aside as natural areas.
The project area is roughly triangular in shape and is bounded on the west
by Granville Road, on the east by F.M. 1456 (North Holland Street) and the Santa
Fe-Burlington Northern Railroad tracks, and on the south by private property.
An archaeological survey was requested in a letter from Joel S. Seffel of
TPWD to Ms. Lynn S. Roberts dated March 4, 2005. The City of Bellville retained
BVRA to perform this service.

1

Figure 1. General Location

2

Figure 2. Project Area on Topographic Map

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
Austin County is located in Southeast Texas. The following discussion was
taken from The Handbook of Texas (Webb 1952) and an Environmental
Assessment of Clark Park, City of Bellville prepared by Sebesta & Associates, Inc.
in 2004.
The project area lies within the Post Oak Savannah within a band of oakhickory forest that traverses the center of the county from southwest to northeast.
The site contains primarily pine trees in contrast to the typical vegetation of the
county, oak and other hardwoods. According to NRCS personnel, there is no
obvious explanation for the presence of pine trees in a vegetative zone and soils
that do not typically support this type of tree. The project area contains the
following vegetation:
Pond and Marsh Area
This is a Riparian habitat that contains willow, water oak, various grasses,
hackberry, ash, American elm, yaupon, blackberry (dewberry) and Muscadine
vines. Non-native species present are Chinese tallow, chinaberry, and privet.
Wooded Area
This area consists of large mature stands of loblolly pine. Understory
vegetation consists of beautyberry, greenbriar, yaupon, and grape vines. Typical
grasses include Little bluestem, Indiangrass, Switchgrass, Peaked Panicum, Sand
Lovegrass, Crinkleawn, Purpletop, Brownseed, Paspalum, Purple Lovegrass,
Splitbeard Bluesem, and Low Panicums. The presence of nearby developed areas
has affected the species of wildlife present. Wildlife known to inhabit the project
area are cottontail rabbit, squirrel, morning dove, raccoon, and opossum. Deer
have been sighted on occasion. At this time there are no known threatened or
endangered species of wildlife on this site.
Topography in the county varies from rolling hills in the northern, western,
and central portions to a nearly level coastal prairie in the south. The project area
is moderately rolling and slopes downward to the north, south, and east from the
location of the water tower, the highest point on the site. It also rises to the south
from the pond and marsh area (Figure 3).
Soils in the project area consist of Crockett fine sandy loam (CrC), 1 to 5%
slopes, Kenney loamy fine sand (KeD), 1 to 8% slopes, Straber loamy fine sand
(SrC), 1 to 5% slopes, and Tremona loamy fine sand (TeC), 1 to 5% slopes.
Bellville is located within the Brazos River drainage basin. The project area,
however, is not within the 100 year floodplain as indicated on a map entitled Austin
County, Texas and Incorporated Areas, Flood Insurance Rate Map, dated 1990.

4

Figure 3. View of Southern Portion of Project Area

5

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
General
The project area is located in a region referred to by Biesaart et al. (1985)
as the Southeast Texas cultural-geographical region. In 985, this area contained
1630 sites (8.06% of the state), and Austin County contained 45 recorded sites
(2.76% of the region and .22% of the state). The 45 sites date to Paleoindian,
Archaic, and Late Prehistoric times. The majority of sites (n=13) are Archaic.
Forms of disturbance to these sites include erosion, construction, dispersion, and
vandalism. Investigation at the sits include excavation (n=1), hand testing (n=4),
machine excavation (n=1), and surface collecting (n=38). Features reported at
these sites include 1 hearth, 1 burned rock midden, and 2 sites with midden soil.
Biesaart et al. does not provide site numbers for the categories mentioned
above. Today, there are 88 recorded sites in Austin County due to the work of
professional archaeologists and avocationals. Two sites in the corporate limits of
Bellville are listed on the National Register of Historic Places. These are the
Austin County Jail and the Old Masonic Hall (no site numbers assigned).
Previous Investigations
The earliest reported archaeological investigations in Austin County were
conducted by avocational archaeologists. In 1959, Alan Duke and members of
the Houston Archeological Society investigated the Goebel site (41AU1) located
on a terrace of Mill Creek. This site produced 42 human burials interred in a
natural mound along with bone and conch shell ornaments. This site contained
Archaic and Late Prehistoric components. Charcoal from a hearth in the lower
deposits was dated to 2569 B.C. by radiocarbon assay (Fleming 1961:330). This
site is discussed in a report by Duke (1981). Members of the Houston society
also collected artifacts from the surface of 41AU4. This site is buried in a terrace
of Mill Creek and appears to have been occupied from Paleoindian through Late
Prehistoric times (Duke 1981). The Journal of the Houston Archeological Society
reports the activities of its members, and contains numerous articles for Austin
County and vicinity.
The largest and most intensive archaeological survey in the county was
associated with the proposed Allens Creek Nuclear Power Plant in the 1970s by
archaeologists from the Texas Archeological Survey (Dillehay et al. 1972). The
site of this plant (11,000 acres), which was never built, is located on a tributary of
the Brazos River. Surface survey revealed 45 prehistoric sites and 9 historic
sites within the plant site and an adjacent transmission corridor. Prehistoric sites
ranged from small lithic scatters to extensive habitation areas containing
ceramics. At least four sites (41AU18, 41AU36, 41AU37, and 41AU38) yielded
human burials.

6

Most of these sites were found in sandy sediments along small streams
cutting through a relict meander scarp of the Brazos River. No sites were found
on the low terraces adjacent to the river. Buried sites may be present, but the
methods employed did not allow for deep subsurface testing.
The historic sites at Allens Creek consisted of 1 community, 2 house sites,
3 family cemeteries, and 3 historical markers.
In 1974, 15 of the Allens Creek sites were tested, and three (41AU36,
41AU37, and 41AU38) were excavated under the supervision of Grant D. Hall
(1981). The three sites were buried in colluvial deposits on minor streams that
cut into a relict Brazos River meander scarp. Site 41AU36 yielded 238 burials
dating to the Archaic period along with grave goods such as conch shell beads
and pendants, incised bone pins, and large chipped stone bifaces. Site 41AU37
also dates to the Archaic but contained fewer burials. Site 41AU38 was a
habitation site dating to the Ceramic or Late Prehistoric period.
In 1988, another site in the county (41AU55) containing human burials on
a relict Brazos River meander scarp was discovered. Three burials were
removed along with Late Archaic Ensor points, conch shell ornaments, incised
bone pins, and large chipped biface (Highley et al. 1988). Additional human
bone scattered across the site suggests more burials were present at one time.
The second largest survey in Austin County, based on number of sites
recorded, was the All American Pipeline that passed through Texas while
crossing the country. This project was conducted by archaeologists from TARL
(Turpin et al, 1992) and recorded 23 sites (41AU56 – 41AU77, 41AU79, and
possibly 41AU78. A copy of the report was not available for review at the time of
this study.
In 1995, archaeologists from the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
conducting testing at the San Felipe de Austin Townsite (41AU2) at the site of
Stephen F. Austin State Historical Park on the Brazos River in southeast Austin
County (Howard et al. 1999). This study represents the most intensive
investigation of a historic site in the county. This is a major site in Texas history
as it is the location of the unofficial capitol of the Austin colony. In the site area
are seven town lots once owned by Stephen F. Austin. The distributions of
buried artifacts suggest that the remains of several structures and activity areas
are preserved in the park.

7

Other investigations in the county include surveys associated with
transmission lines, distribution lines, sand and gravel mine, erosion control
projects, river crossings, and pipelines. A list of other projects in the county that
recorded sites appears as Appendix I.
A review of the Abstracts in Texas Contract Archeology series revealed an
absence of professional surveys from 1987 through 1992. No archaeological
surveys have been conducted in the project area. This investigation represents
the first visit to the area by a professional archaeologist.

8

METHODS
Pre-Field Tasks
Prior to entering the field, the site records at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory on the campus of The University of Texas at Austin were
checked for the presence of previously recorded archaeological sites in the project
area and vicinity. In addition, a thorough review of the existing literature for Austin
County was conducted. A Research Design, which describes the methods to be
used in the field was submitted to the Texas Historical Commission reviewer along
with the permit application and topographic map plotting of the project area
(Appendix II).
Field Survey
A 100% Pedestrian Survey with shovel testing was conducted in May of
2005. The majority of the area was in pasture with no trees or thick brush and
woods. The few eroded or exposed areas were in the woods around the pond
where mechanical brush clearing had exposed the sandy surface. The subsurface
was examined through shovel testing. In all, 13 tests were dug. Each shovel test
was recorded on a shovel test log (Appendix III) and discussed in the project notes.
Depths of the tests varied from 30 to 100 cm. The soils in the project area were
sands and sand and gravel over a hard packed orange clay. All excavated earth
was screened using ¼ inch hardware cloth, and the locations of the shovel tests
are depicted on a project area map (Figure 4).
The single historic site (41AU89) was photographed and assigned a field
number (TS-1). The location of this site was depicted on the proper USGS map
(Appendix IV). Later, a site form was submitted to the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory so that an official trinomial could be issued. The Bellville
Public Library was visited for published works regarding the area, and local
residents were interviewed.

9

Figure 4. Location of Shovel Tests

10

SITE DESCRIPTION
Site 41AU89 is a standing structure that was erected in the 1940s prior to
World War II by local carpenter Jerry Gregor. The building was made from pine
boards from the site that were milled at Krueger Lumber Mill in Bellville. The
building and property was owned by L. J. Clark a local dentist. He had the building
built for recreational purposes as a place where he and his friends could play
dominoes and cards. In the 1950s, the building became a storage facility for hay
and farm equipment. At the time of this survey, it contained various pieces of
broken furniture and other objects. The structure is in its original location. At one
time it sat on top of the hill closer to the highway to be used as office space. This
never happened, and it was later moved back to the current location. The above
information was provided by Lawton J. Clark (son of L. J. Clark) in a personal
communication to Charley Smith on May 25, 2005
At the time of this survey, the building was found to be in poor condition. It is
made of board and batten construction and has a pier and beam foundation. The
walls and floors are made from pine boards, and the roof consists of cedar shakes
covered with a corrugated tin roof that does not appear to be original due to a lack
of rust and the style of the tin used. A brief inspection of the siding revealed
machine cut nails were used. The outer dimensions are 7 m 30 cm across the front
and back by 3 m 50 cm across the sides. The front elevation has one door and two
windows. The back elevation contains one door (missing) and two windows. The
north elevation contains no door and one window. The south elevation contains no
door and one window. In the upper left of this wall is a metal vent for a heater or
wood stove. The front door is wood and covers a screen door. This is a one-room
structure.
The area around the building is very overgrown with various grasses and
weeds. Next to the house are small trees and other bushes. In front of the house
is a small area that has been scraped by machinery. It revealed sandy soil and one
piece of clear window glass. Figure 5 depicts the southeast elevation, and Figure 6
depicts the north elevation of this site.

11

Figure 5. Site 41AU89 (Southeast Elevation)

Figure 6. Site 41AU89 (North Elevation)

12

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
A search of the site records at TARL revealed that no archaeological sites
have been recorded in the project area, and a professional archaeologist had not
examined the area.
This survey did not discover evidence of prehistoric utilization or occupation
of the project area. Although the two hills in the project area contained sandy soil,
the stream or gully that passes through the project area appears to be very
ephemeral. It was probably not a dependable source of water in prehistoric times.
One historic site (41AU89) was found. This is a standing structure dating to
the 1940s that was used for recreational purposes. It is not viewed by BVRA as
worthy of additional work. A visit to the Bellville Public Library found no published
sources dealing directly with the historic site. Several sources relevant to Austin
County are in the library. They discuss early pioneers of the county (Meischen
2002), historical records of the county (Haskew 1969), and a history of Bellville
(Frizzell 1992).
This survey was done in accordance with the Minimum Survey Standards as
outlined by the Texas Historical Commission, Archeology Division.

13

RECOMMENDATIONS
One historic site was found in the project area, and it has been determined
to be not eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places or for
designation as a State Archeological Landmark. Therefore, it is recommended that
the City of Bellville be allowed to proceed with construction of Clark Park as
planned without further consultation with the Texas Historical Commission.
Protection for site 41AU89 is not considered necessary.

14

REFERENCES CITED
Biesaart, Lynne A., Wayne R. Roberson, and Lisa ClintonSpotts
1985 Prehistoric Archeological Sites in Texas: A Statistical Overview.
Office of the State Archeologist, Special Report 28, Texas Historical
Commission.
Dillehay, Tom D., Michael J. O’Brien, Michael G. Mallouf, and David S. Dibble
1972 An Archeological Reconnaissance of Areas to be Affected by the
Proposed Nuclear Power Plant, Austin County, Texas and Power
Transmission Lines in Austin, Waller, Fort Bend, and Harris Counties,
Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report 16. The
University of Texas at Austin.
Duke, Alan R.
1981 The Goebel Site (41AU1), an Archaic-Neo-American Site in Austin
County, Texas. Newsletter of the Houston Archeological Society
71:1-4.
Frizzell, Isabel
1992 Bellville: The Founders and Their Legacy. New Ulm Enterprise, New
Ulm, Texas.
Hall, Grant D.
1981 Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of the Lower Brazos
River Valley, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey, Research Report
61. The University of Texas at Austin.
Haskew, Corrie Patterson
1969 Historical Records of Austin and Waller Counties. Premier Printing &
Letter Service, Inc., Houston
Howard, Margaret, Amy Ringstaff, Carlos Beceiro, and Paul Schuchert
1999 Testing at the San Felipe De Austin Townsite (41AU2) and
Archeological Survey at Stephen F. Austin State Historical Park,
Austin, County, Texas. Unnumbered report published by the Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department
Meischen, Betty Smith
2002 From Jamestown to Texas: A History of Some Early Pioneers of
Austin County, the Colonial Capitol of Texas. Writer’s Showcase, San
Jose, New York, London, and Shanghai

15

Turpin, Solveig A., Leland C. Bement, and David G. Robinson
1992 All American Pipeline Project: Final Status Report. Unnumbered
report prepared by theTexas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

16

APPENDIX I
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS IN AUSTIN COUNTY
THAT RECORDED OR TESTED ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES

Brownlow, Russel K., and Sergio Iruegas
2003 An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey of a Proposed 110-Acre
Sand and Gravel Mine and Sorting Plant for Riverside Aggregates,
Austin County, Texas. Unnumbered report prepared by Horizon
Environmental Services, Inc.
This survey recorded sites 41AU40 and 41AU42
Cruse, J. Brett, and Richard F. Taylor
1995 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed New Bremen
Substation, Austin County, Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates,
Inc. Document Number 950955
This survey recorded site 41AU83
Fox, Daniel E., and W. Hayden Whitsett
1987 An Archeological Reconnaissance at the City of San Felipe, Austin
County, Texas. Unnumbered report prepared by the Texas Water
Development Board.
This survey recorded site 41AU2
Kotter, Steven
1989 A Cultural Resources Survey of the Proposed Pisek 138-KV
Transmission Line, Austin, Colorado, Fayette, and Washington
Counties, Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc. Document
Number 890394
This survey recorded site 41AU81
Latham, Mark A.
2001 Archaeological Monitoring of the Brazos River Crossing.
Unnumbered report prepared by Burns & McDonnell, Project
24012.
This project monitored site 41AU42

Lord, Lenneth
1997 Numerical Analysis of Faunal Remains of the Little Bethelem
(41AU38) and Leonard K (41AU37) Sites. In Plains Anthropologist,
pp. 22-78.
This project analyzed faunal remains from sites 41AU37 and
41AU38
Lorrain, Dessamae
1971 Archeological Investigations at the Original Site of the MacGregor
House, Austin County, Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage
Project, Research Report 2. The University of Texas at Austin.
This project investigated site 41AU6
Marek, Marianne
2003 Archeological Investigations at San Felipe de Austin (41AU2), The
Colonial Capital of Texas. Unnumbered report published by the
Texas Archeological Society.
This project investigated site 41AU2
Patterson, Leland W.
2002 A Lithic Collection from an Austin County Site. Fort Bend
Archaeological Society, Occasional Papers 5.
This project examined lithics from 41AU88
Pliska, James R.
1979 A Cultural Resources Assessment of the Bellville South to Waller
Transmission Line, Austin and Waller Counties, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey, Technical Bulletin 27. The University of
Texas at Austin.
This survey recorded five historic sites (no trinomials given)
Schroeder, Eric, Charles Jennings, and James T. Jones
1996 Cultural Resources Survey of the proposed Industry Wastewater
Treatment Plant Site, Austin County, Texas. Unnumbered report
prepared by Paul Price and Associates, Inc.
This survey recorded site 41AU84

Robinson, David G.
1982 A Cultural Resource Survey of the Fayette to Salem Transmission
Corridor, Fayette, Austin, and Washington Counties, Texas. Texas
Archeological Survey, Technical Bulletin 60. The University of
Texas at Austin.
This survey recorded site 41AU53

APPENDIX II
RESEARCH DESIGN
CITY OF BELLVILLE CLARK PARK
Records Check
Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) will contact the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the state repository for site records, to
determine if previously recorded sites are present in the project area. In addition, a
review of relevant archaeological reports will be conducted, and local informants will
be interviewed concerning known sites and artifact types in the area when possible.
Project Description
The City of Bellville proposes to develop a 28.3 acre tract of land into a
community park. Twenty-two acres have already been acquired by the City
through donation. An additional 6.3 acres will be acquired at a later date.
Approximately 5 acres will be set aside for a wildlife area. Kinds of improvements
scheduled include soccer fields, baseball fields, basketball court, RV campground,
playscape, nature and jogging trails, ampitheater, water splash pad, and picnic
area. The project area is depicted on the Bellville topographic quadrangle (2996434).
Site Types
Prehistoric sites in this area are typically found on sandy knolls adjacent to
streams. Although Paleoindian artifacts have been reported, the majority of known
prehistoric sites date to the Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods of Texas
prehistory. Features reported include burned rock middens and burials. There is
no major stream within the boundaries of the project area. Therefore, the potential
for significant prehistoric sites is viewed by BVRA as low.
Historic sites are common in the county and are not always tied to water.
Austin County was the site of Stephen F. Austin’s colony. In 1834, the Department
of San Felipe (which includes Austin County) was established as one of the three
original departments of the state under Mexico. This is one of the original Texas
counties having been created in 1836 and organized in 1837. Although it is not
possible to predict the probability for significant historic sites in the project area,
there is the potential for early Texas sites and sites dating to later periods.

CLARK PARK RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE TWO)
Survey Methods
The Principal Investigator for this project is William E. Moore, and the Project
Archaeologist is Edward P. Baxter. No fieldwork will commence until an Antiquities
Permit has been issued for this project. A Request for Housing has been mailed to
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory requesting permission to curate
significant artifacts found within the project area.
A 100% Pedestrian Survey will be conducted over the entire tract to look for
evidence of archaeological sites on the surface. Shovel tests will be dug in those
areas that appear to be likely settings for prehistoric or historic sites. All shovel
tests will be dug in arbitrary 10 cm levels. All excavated earth will be passed
through ¼ inch hardware cloth. Shovel tests will be dug to the underlying clay
subsoil when possible and to depths of about 100 cm in sandy areas when clay is
not reached. Artifacts found in shovel tests will be collected and analyzed in the
laboratory prior to curation. When a site is found, an attempt to determine its
boundaries through shovel testing and surface inspection will be made, and all
diagnostic artifacts observed on the surface will be collected.
All sites found in the project area will be mapped. The site map will depict
shovel tests and approximate boundaries. GPS plottings will be taken to more
accurately plot sites on the USGS topographic map. All archaeological sites will be
assigned a field number. Later, an official trinomial will be assigned by TARL.
Future references to these sites will use the TARL number. The number of shovel
tests will meet or exceed that number requested in the Minimum Survey Standards
for projects of 200 acres or less.
The entire project will be documented through digital photography, a handheld GPS, forms, and field notes.
Artifact Analysis
All significant artifacts will be collected for analysis in the laboratory. They
will be described and measured. Those specimens deemed worthy of permanent
curation will be processed and turned over to TARL. All artifacts not viewed as
containing research potential for future researchers will be discarded following a
written document authorizing this action from the Texas Historical Commission,
Archeology Division.

CLARK PARK RESEARCH DESIGN (PAGE THREE)
Report Preparation
A report documenting this project will be prepared following the guidelines
established by the CTA and THC. The style of this report will generally follow
that adopted by American Antiquity.
Two copies of the draft report will be submitted to the THC for review. A
discussion of the project and recommendations for future work will be included.
Following acceptance of this report, 20 copies will be submitted to the THC for
distribution to regional libraries. No site specific information will be present in the
19 copies for the general public.

APPENDIX III: SHOVEL TEST LOG *
________________________________________________________________
Test
Depth
Comments
_______________________________________________________________
1

90 cm

dug in grass in front of building; clay at 90 cm

2

50 cm

dug in grass in open pasture; clay at 50 cm

3

40 cm

dug in grass in open pasture; clay at 40 cm

4

90 cm

dug in grass in open pasture; clay at 90 cm

5

60 cm

scraped area in woods; clay at 60 cm +

6

80 cm

dug in grass in open pasture; clay at 80 cm

7

100 cm

dug in grass in open pasture; sand throughout

8

90 cm

dug in grass in open pasture; clay at 90 cm +

9

90 cm

dug in grass in open pasture; clay at 90 cm +

10

80 cm

dug in grass in open pasture; clay at 80 cm +

11

50 cm

dug in brush and woods; clay at 50 cm +

12

50 cm

dug in brush and woods; clay at 50 cm +

13
30 cm
dug in grass; clay at 30 cm
________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________
* All tests were negative.
+ Gravels mixed with the clay

APPENDIX IV
LOCATION OF SITE 41AU89

