HISTORICAL AND ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH AT 41TV1668,
THE COLORADO SCHOOL AND MARTIN FAMILY CEMETERY,
BERGSTROM AIR FORCE BASE,
TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS

by

Martha Doty Freeman
Amy C. Earls
Ross C. Fields
and

L. Wayne Klement

AR-TX
PAI 03 . 020

TECHNICAL REPORTS, NUMBER 20

HISTORICAL AND ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH AT 41 TV1668,
THE COLORADO SCHOOL AND MARTIN FAMILY CEMETERY,
BERGSTROM AIR FORCE BASE, TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS

by

Martha Doty Freeman

~11111111111 u

Amy C. Earls
Ross C. Fields
and

L. Wayne Klement

TECHNICAL REPORTS, NUMBER 20

Submitted to

Tetra Tech, Inc.
San Bernardino, California

by

Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
Consulting Archeologists
Austin, Texas

April 1994

101782

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ABSTRACT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

iv

INTRODUCTION AND ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS

1

OBJECTIVES AND METHODS

3

RESULTS.................................................................

4

Archival and Informant Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The Project Area, 1832-1876 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
School-Church-Community Patterns in Rural Texas
Site 41TV1668 as a Community Center . . . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
..

4
4
6
6

Pedestrian Survey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cemetery ......................................................
Access Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Cistern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Grove and Drainage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Possible Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9
9
14
14
15
16

ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
National Register Eligibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
State of Texas Guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
REFERENCES CITED ........................................................ 19
APPENDIX: Testimony Concerning Unmarked Graves at Site 41 TV1668
Martha Doty Freeman . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21

LIST OF FIGURES

1.

Project location map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2

2.

Project area map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

3.

Map of present-day Greenwood Cemetery and Martin Family Cemeter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8

4.

Photograph of the Martin Family Cemetery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

5.

Plan of the Martin Family Cemetery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

6.

Photograph of Sarah [A.] Martin headstone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12

7.

Photograph of Freddie Martin headstone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

8.

Photograph of infant son headstone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13

9.

Photograph of refitted [P]earl May Martin headstone . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

10.

Photograph of the cistern . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

iii

ABSTRACT

In late 1993 and early 1994, Prewitt and Associates, Inc. conducted archival and infonnant research and
surface recording for historical resources on a 5.65-acre tract at the northwestern edge of Bergstrom Air Force
Base in Travis County, Texas. The work was done for Tetra Tech, Inc., and was part of studies associated with
closure of the Base and development of a new airport by the City of Austin. A single archeological site
(41TV1668) was recorded. The site contains a small enclosed cemetery with four marked graves and a cistern,
access road, and scattered debris associated with structures used as a school and church from the late nineteenth
century through the mid twentieth century. Although the project area played an important role in the development
of the community of Del Valle, it is recommended that the site be considered ineligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places. The enclosed cemetery, as well as unmarked graves that are suggested
by infonnants' reports but that are not evident on the surface, are protected by State of Texas statutes, however.

iv

HISTORICAL AND ARCHEOLOGICAL RESEARCH AT 41 TV1668,
THE COLORADO SCHOOL AND MARTIN FAMILY CEMETERY,
BERGSTROM AIR FORCE BASE, TRAVIS COUNTY, TEXAS

INTRODUCTION AND
ENVIRONMENT AL BACKGROUND

The vegetation in the area is the grasslandmesquite assemblage characteristic of the Blackland
Prairie. Most of the Blackland Prairie has been
heavily cultivated or grazed, and the native tall
grasses have been replaced by grasses such as
bermudagrass, buffalograss, and Texas grama (Texas
Agricultural Extension Service 1980:44-45).
Mesquite is another invader. The 5.65-acre area
under consideration is covered with a dense growth of
waist-high and shorter grasses and forbs and a
moderate to dense growth of knee-high and taller
mesquite saplings, with scattered stands of mesquite,
hackberry, chinaberry, and oak trees. A grove of elm
trees mixed with oaks, chinaberries, ligustrums, and
mesquites forms a moderate-density overstory in the
northeastern portion of the area.

This report concerns archival and informant
research and surface recording of an historic cemetery
and related features in south-central Travis County,
Texas. The project area encompasses 5.65 acres and
is located at the northwestern edge of Bergstrom Air
Force Base, just south of the intersection of U.S.
Highway 183 and State Highway 71 (Figure 1). The
work was contracted to Prewitt and Associates, Inc.
by Tetra Tech, Inc. of San Bernardino, California, as
part of cultural resources studies associated with the
closure of Bergstrom Air Force Base and the
development of a new airport for the City of Austin.
The project area lies at the western edge of the
West Gulf Coastal Plain, just east of the Cretaceous
Edwards Plateau, and sits on a ridge that is composed of Pleistocene terrace sediments deposited by
the Colorado River, with more-recent alluvial deposits and the modern river valley lying just to the north
(Garner and Young 1976). The Colorado River flows
2.1 km to the east and 3.1 km to the north of the
project area, with a large bend in the river extending
to the northeast. A small tributary, Carson Creek,
skirts the ridge on the west and the north and joins
the river 2.2 km northeast of the cemetery.
The soil developed on these Pleistocene terrace
sediments is mapped as Altoga silty clay, which is a
deep, well-drained soil that occurs usually "... high
on the landscape, mostly on long narrow side slopes,
but also on ridges paralleling the major streams"
(Werchan et al. 1974:11). The typical soil profile
consists of the following: a silty clay to clay loam A
horizon that is 5-15 inches thick and light brownish
gray, brown, pale brown, or grayish brown; a silty
clay loam B21 horizon that is 12-30 inches thick and
pale brown, brown, or yellowish brown, with
scattered calcium carbonate concretions; and a silty
clay loam B22 horizon that extends to a depth of at
least 60 inches and is pale yellow, light yellowish
brown, very pale brown, or pale brown, with soft
masses and some hard concretions of calcium
carbonate (Werchan et al. 1974:11).

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Numerous cultural resources investigations have
been undertaken in the vicinity of Bergstrom Air
Force Base. Notable examples, most of which have
been concentrated along Onion Creek to the south,
include projects associated with the operation and
closing of the Base itself (Bement 1991; Davis 1993;
Hoffman 1987; Maslyk et al. 1993; Masson et al.
1993; Standifer et al. 1986), the construction of the
South Austin Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant
and associated features (Brown 1981; Davis 1984;
Robinson and Utley 1992; Thurmond 1982; Whitsett
and Fox 1979), and the development of McKinney
Falls State Park (Kegley 1972; McEachern and Ralph
1980, 1981; Ralph and Loving 1973).
Most of these studies have dealt primarily with
prehistoric resources, but some attention has been
paid to sites of historic age. For example, the work
reported by McEachern and Ralph (1980, 1981)
concerned survey and excavations at the mid 1800s
homestead and mill of Thomas McKinney on Onion
Creek, the work reported by Whitsett and Fox (1979)
inventoried a number of historic sites in the area, and
the testing reported by Brown (1981) identified
remains perhaps associated with the nineteenthcentury Watrous Plantation on lower Onion Creek.
1

. l an d Archeological Researchat 41TV1668
Historzca

0~~1/~4==~1~/~2;:;=====::::J
kilometer

0
P&A/194/SLH

1/4

1/2
mile

MN

location map.
Figure 1· Proiect
,

2

Objectives and Methods

At Bergstrom Air Force Base, Maslyk et al. (1993)
tested two prehistoric sites in 1992, with one of these
also containing an historic component representing the
remains of a house and dairy barn constructed during
the first half of the twentieth century. More recently,
Masson et al. (1993) performed a survey of a 1,032acre area just south of the Base, locating 34 historic
archeological sites and 3 architectural properties, and
Davis (1993) did shovel testing at 2 historic sites and
1 prehistoric site.
Most relevant to this project is the survey
reported by Bement (1991). This project involved
pedestrian survey of five areas covering a total of
380 acres. These areas were around the margins of
the Base, and one (Area A) was situated just east
and north of the 5.65-acre area that is the subject of
this report. Bement (1991:9) describes Area A in the
following manner: 11 All that remains of once extensive paved roads and buildings are chunks of asphalt
and concrete. This area was heavily disturbed during
the demolition of houses, roads, and apartments on
this and the adjoining parcel when the runway was
constructed, and again in 1981. No evidence of
significant cultural materials was found. 11

papers at the Austin History Center, and censuses,
death records, and microfilm newspapers at the State
Library. After learning the identity of the individuals
who were buried in the plot between 1880 and 1909
and identifying the use of the surrounding property as
a school and church between 1876 and 1958, it was
recognized that the relevant historic context for the
project area is the post-Civil War period and issues
such as public education, development of community
centers, and identification of key elements within
those centers such as community schools, churches,
and cemeteries. As a result, research was done at the
Austin History Center, the Center for American
History, and the State Library concerning families
who lived in the area, the public institutions that
existed there, and the extent to which the community
was a typical one in rural Travis County.
A final issue revolved around the question of
whether the project area contains graves other than
those within the enclosed plot. Because the legal
records and historic maps did not provide the answer
to this, information provided by individuals who had
attended the school located a short distance from the
plot was obtained and reviewed. In addition, a 1945
aerial photograph clearly depicting the homes,
schools, and other cultural features that existed in the
area prior to acquisition by the government was
examined.
The pedestrian survey involved three trips to the
project area. The first visit entailed ca. one-half day
of effort inspecting the area to determine whether
vegetation clearing would be required prior to the
survey. Having determined that the vegetation was
sufficiently dense to prevent ground surface inspection, a two-person crew returned to the site for onehalf day of work to map the location of the cemetery
relative to the two tracts that make up the project
area and to secure a cost estimate from a local
contractor for mowing the tract that contains the
cemetery and a ca. 10-m-wide area around this tract.
The mapping was done with a transit, metric stadia
rod, and a metric/english (60-m/200-ft) tape measure
and involved locating the approximate boundaries of
the tracts. This was accomplished using a tax map of
the area and triangulating and measuring from
existing boundaries and landmarks including the
Greenwood Cemetery fence, remnants of the old
Austin-Del Valle Road, and old fencelines. Once the
boundaries of the tracts were identified, the cemetery
location was plotted on the tax map.
The third visit entailed a full day of work by a

OBJECTIVES AND METHODS
As outlined in the scope of work, the primary
objectives of this project were to record a small
fenced cemetery plot containing four or five marked
graves, to examine the remainder of the 5.65-acre
project area for surface evidence of additional graves,
to determine the history and associations of the
cemetery plot, and to evaluate the eligibility of the
cemetery for listing on the National Register of
Historic Places. These objectives were accomplished
by conducting archival and informant research and by
completing a pedestrian survey.
The initial archival research included a review of
legal documents supplied by Tetra Tech, Inc.,
supplemented by additional deed, tax, and probate
records at the Travis County Courthouse for the
purpose of establishing a clear chain of title and
identifying the uses of the property on which the
graves are located. Research concerning the identity
of the individuals buried in the enclosed plot and their
possible relationships to other persons interred in
Greenwood Cemetery was accomplished using the
sources cited above, as well as marriage records at
the Travis County Courthouse, death certificates at
the Texas Department of Health, microfilm news3

Historical and Archeological Research at 41TV1668

two-person crew and consisted of mapping and
recording the cemetery, pedestrian survey of the
surrounding area, and recording of features found
during the survey. Cemetery mapping consisted of
creating a detailed plan using metric tapes and a hand
compass to measure the dimensions and orientation of
the cemetery perimeter fence, the headstones, the
footstone, and the plinths/bases. Cemetery recording
involved photographing the general layout of the
cemetery prior to moving broken headstone fragments
back to their appropriate locations, and headstone
fragments were temporarily refitted for individual
photographs and for overall cemetery photographs.
The cemetery perimeter fence was described, and the
shape, material type, and dimensions of the headstones, footstone, and plinths/bases were recorded in
detail.
An intensive pedestrian survey was accomplished by walking transects spaced ca. 5-10 m apart
within the tract containing the cemetery and using
both ca. 20-m-interval transects and zigzag transects
within the adjacent tract. The tract containing the
cemetery, which had been mowed, provided poor to
good ground surface visibility, while surface visibility
in the adjacent unmowed tract was generally poor.
The ground surface was carefully inspected for
artifacts, depressions, and other discernible features,
and trees within the project area were inspected for
evidence of barbed wire or scars from wire indicating
fencelines and/or property boundaries. Available
exposures (i.e., eroded areas and small sinkholes or
voids) provided a fair to good view of the subsurface
in some areas. No shovel tests were dug and no
artifacts were collected during the survey. Blackand-white photographs and color slides were taken to
record general landform characteristics, vegetation,
surface integrity, and site features. Written survey
records include descriptions and sketches or maps of
artifacts and features noted, photograph logs, and
daily journal notes, and a State of Texas Archeological Site Data Form was completed for the site
reported herein. Additionally, a sketch map of the
project area was generated in the field using a hand
compass and paced and/or taped distances; this map
was combined with previous transit data and a tax
map of the area to generate a project map showing
the cemetery and other feature locations.

of site 41TV1668 (see Pedestrian Survey below for
site description), is located north of the Greenwood
Cemetery in an open field (Figure 2). Visually
isolated, the enclosed graves appear to exist on a
piece of rural property devoid of improvements. In
reality, the family plot is located within the boundaries of a once-burgeoning agricultural community.
The community itself centered on a school, church,
and cemetery that dated to the last quarter of the
nineteenth century and remained functional until the
mid-twentieth century.

The Project Area, 1832-1876
Site 41TV1668 is located on a portion of the
Santiago del Valle tract, a Republic of Mexico grant
totaling more than 35,000 acres and lying between
Onion Creek and the Colorado River southeast of
present-day Austin. Del Valle held the grant for 3
years and then sold 9 leagues to Michel Menard, who
in turn conveyed it to a business associate, Thomas
F. McKinney. By the 1850s, McKinney and his
partners, Albert C. Horton, Nathaniel H. Watrous,
and Bartlett Sims, had sold large portions of their
land to farmers and stockmen who settled in the area
and began the community center of Del Valle (Del
Valle file, Austin History Center, Austin Public
Library; Masson et al. 1993:16; Public Relations
Office n.d.:n.p.).
The rich black soil of the area attracted
numerous farmers, many of whom settled near the
northwestern portion of present-day Bergstrom Air
Force Base. James S. Shaw, for example, who
served as Comptroller of Public Accounts for the
State of Texas, purchased land from Andrew
Davidson and built a two-story, stone, Greek Revival
residence on the crest of a hill near the project area.
Across from Shaw's home was a two-story stone and
wood residence owned by Dr. Frank Maxwell, first
doctor in the Del Valle community. Nearby was a
stagecoach stop (Public Relations Office n.d.:n.p.;
Sherman 1993).
By the 1870s, the burgeoning community was the
location of numerous farms and businesses that were
linked to the city of Austin and outlying towns such
as Bastrop and Lockhart by a network of public
roads. William Givens ran a general store and post
office that served the Del Valle area, and children
attended a school that was on land owned by Nichols
McArthur and his heirs, Jim McArthur and Mary
Elizabeth McArthur Sneed, who also allowed the
building to be used as a church (Rural Schools of
Travis County 1936:n.p.). This cooperative arrange-

RESULTS
Archival and Informant Research
The Martin Family Cemetery, recorded as part
4

Results

3.88-acre Hill 1ract

/

Debris-filled drainage

I

I

/
()
Q

::t>

c:

(})

\

I
/

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I
I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I
I

Iris//
I

/
I

I

~Iris

I

I

1.77-acre Davidson 1ract

I

I
I

Marlin Family Cemetery

{)

MN

Greenwood
0

12.5

Cemetery

25

50

meters

0

50

100
feet

P&A/194/SLH

Figure 2. Project area map.

5

200

Historical and Archeological Research at 41TV1668

ment between church and school was common
throughout Travis County during the late nineteenth
century and reflected a pattern in which school and
community were one.

land. New schools in a new location often were
either older buildings moved and adapted, or they
were simple frame structures erected from materials
donated by the parents. Such frame schools remained
the rule until the 1940s, although some communities
did manage to erect brick or stone structures during
the consolidation movement of the 1920s and 1930s
(Sitton and Rowold 1987:38-42, 48, 55).
Sitton and Rowold (1987:59, 66) note that well
into the twentieth century most rural schools obtained
their water from wells, cisterns, or nearby springs.
When no such conveniences were available, the
children had to bring their own water to school.
Toilet facilities also were primitive affairs, in most
cases, with only 4 percent of Anglo schools and 0.3
percent of Black schools having flushing toilets.
More commonly, children used pit toilets and
outhouses or simply headed for the outdoors.
If the practical aspects of school life often
mirrored those found at home, so also the educational
aspects reflected community policies, procedures, and
values. Home, community, and school were .intertwined, especially in cases where the school served
multiple purposes typical of community centers.
Presentation of programs and entertainments and
participation in religious events, including burials
where cemeteries were present, all strengthened the
group's bonds within itself and with the buildings that
provided public spaces.

School-Church-Community Patterns
in Rural Texas
The cooperative pattern of common building use
by education and religious communities that was
exemplified by Del Valle's earliest school was
repeated at site 41TV1668.
This pattern was
common throughout rural Texas during the antebellum period and into the opening decades of the
twentieth century. Approximately a dozen or more
Travis County schools functioned simultaneously as
educational and religious institutions, and a number of
them were the locations of cemeteries as well.
Notable examples in the county between 1858 and the
early 1900s included the Cypress, Del Valle, Eanes,
Garfield, Gregg, Littig, Manor, New Sweden, and
Rose Hill schools (Rural Schools of Travis County
1936:n.p.).
The characteristics of rural agricultural communities described by Sitton and Rowold (1987) made
this cooperative use a natural and logical one. In the
nineteenth century, and well into the twentieth when
school consolidation occurred, "school and community
were one." Particularly after 1876, when the Texas
Legislature passed a School Law that made the
financing of schools a local responsibility, citizens
were totally vested in their children's education.
Empowered to open community schools and given the
responsibility of providing teachers, salaries, and
buildings, parents saw education as an opportunity to
teach information and as a tool to transmit "beliefs,
attitudes, and values" (Sitton and Rowold 1987:315). Even the increasing urbanization and industrialization of Texas, together with educator-generated
attempts to wrest power from parents and the local
community, often failed to affect rural communities.
Within the local group itself, first-generation
schools often were held in existing buildings such as
the home of a teacher or parent or in a church, fraternal organization, or business. With time, location
became a key issue, and schools often were moved as
the centers of population moved, political influence
changed, or the convenience of the students was taken
into consideration. Once parents had agreed on an
appropriate location, they approached the landowner,
who either donated or sold the necessary tract of

Site 41TV1668 as a Community Center
On April 17, 1876, the same year the State
Legislature passed the School Law allowing the
initiation of community schools, long-time Del Valle
resident Andrew M. Davidson conveyed a rectangular
piece of land to S. G. Sneed, School Director of
Travis County (Travis County Deed Record 32:110111). The land measured 70 varas by 156 varas and
ran generally north from the vicinity of present-day
Greenwood Cemetery.
Various deed and map
records indicate that the total acreage was 1. 77 or
1.74 acres (see Figure 2).
According to a history of the school located on
Davidson's land (Rural Schools of Travis County
1936:n.p.), the first school on the property was an old
building that had been located near the road from
Austin to Bastrop. After it was moved, a second
room was added, and a cistern was dug. A plastered
feature in front of the wood frame school in a
photograph labeled "A Class of 1895" may represent

6

Results

the nineteenth-century cistern (Rural Schools of
Travis County 1936:n.p.).
Shortly after the building opened and began
functioning as a school and church, community
members began to bury their dead in the area,
creating an informal cemetery. The earliest marked
grave still having a headstone is that of a 2-weekold child, John T. Brown, who was buried a short
distance south of the school and church in presentday Greenwood Cemetery (Figure 3). Brown's interment was followed on October 23, 1880, by that of
2-year-old G. P. Houston nearby (Greenwood
Cemetery File, March 5, 1977, Austin History Center,
Austin Public Library) and of Sarah [A.] Mayfield
Martin, whose tombstone is visible at 41TV1668.
Thirty-eight years old at the time of her death,
Martin was a native of Tennessee who was born on
January 3, 1842, and married Tennessee-born Gould
D. [Goolman] Martin in Travis County on December
23, 1857 (Travis County Marriage Record 2:16). By
1880, Gould and Sarah had five children: Ephraim
[B.], born October 22, 1860 1; Molly, born ca. 1862;
Ella, born ca. 1869; William [Estes], born ca. 1870;
and Susan, born ca. 1873 (Texas Department of
Health 1936, 1947; U.S. Bureau of the Census 1880).
Shortly after his mother's death, Ephraim B.
Martin married Amanda M. [Mary A.] [last name
unknown], a native of Alabama born in July 1864,
and they established their household in the Del Valle
area (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1900). A year later,
in March 1883, they had their first child, Thomas M.
Martin, who was followed in October 1884 by a
second son, Walter M. [also listed as Walter L.]
(Travis County Historical Commission 1986; U.S.
Bureau of the Census 1900). These births were
followed by two children who died before the age of
2: an unnamed infant son, born October 13, 1888,
and died October 19, 1888; and a daughter, [P]earl
May, born November 1, 1889, and died December 20, 1890 (Travis County Historical Commission
1986). Both children were buried beside their
grandmother, Sarah [A.] Mayfield Martin, at site
41TV1668 a short distance from the community
school and church.
Between 1890 and 1910, the number of burials

in the area increased to such an extent that the
community found it necessary to purchase additional
land and incorporate a cemetery association.
Chartered on February 7, 1907, the Greenwood
Cemetery Association provided burial spaces for
families in the Del Valle community. They enlarged
the area available to them by purchasing 4.62 acres
from F. A. Maxwell adjacent to the "old graveyard"
but failed to file a plat of the original section with the
County Clerk (Travis County Plat Book 14:44; Texas.
Secretary of State 1907). The lack of a plat makes
it difficult to pinpoint a construction date for the
Austin-Del Valle Road that eventually formed the
northeastern boundary of Greenwood Cemetery, but
Commissioners Court records indicate that it was
present by World War I when it separated the Martin
plot and other burials believed to be in the area from
the formally dedicated cemetery.
Ephraim B. and Amanda M. Martin continued to
contribute to the population of Del Valle after 1890,
having a son, William G., born in September 1891; a
daughter, Nellie, born February 1894; and another
son, Erestus B[enjamin], born in November 1897
(U.S. Bureau of the Census 1900). They also had a
sixth son, Freddie, who was born on February 13,
1901; and a seventh son, Newton [J.], who was born
in about 1905 (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1900,
1910, 1920).
Four years later, a double tragedy hit the Martin
family when they lost two of their sons within 6
months: Freddie, who died on April 28, 1909, and
Walter, who died on October 26, 1909, after being
kicked in the head by a mule in Port Arthur (The
Austin Daily Statesman, October 29, 1909:3). The
Martins buried Freddie at 41TV1668 near his grandmother and two siblings, and they buried Walter in
the newer section of Greenwood Cemetery in lot 22,
a short distance south of the other Martin graves.
His grave is marked with a vertical column marker of
a different style from the Martin Family Cemetery
headstones. The remaining family then left Travis
County and moved to Port Arthur where Ephraim
found work as a watchman in a machine works (U.S.
Bureau of the Census 1920). At the time of his death
on March 27, 1936, Ephraim was a retired teamster
who was survived by his daughter, Nellie; three sons,
W. G., Ben, and N. J.; a brother, W. E. Martin; and
two sisters (The Port Arthur News, March 27, 1936:
1). Ephraim was buried at Greenlawn Cemetery in
Port Arthur, hundreds of miles from the graves of his
mother and four of his children.

1
Conflicting birth dates are provided for many
individuals in the census records. The dates provided in
death certificates, where they are available, are used in this
report.

7

Historical and Archeological Research at 41TVJ668

\
Mortin Family Cemetery

~

(port o1 41TV1668)

Figure 3. Map of present-day Greenwood Cemetery and Martin Family Cemetery north of the old Austin-Del Valle Road.
The earliest burials in the Greenwood Cemetery are highlighted.

8

Results

After the Martin family's departure from Del
Valle and the enlargement of the cemetery adjoining
the local school, changes continued to occur on the
1. 77 acres that Andrew Davidson had sold for
"school and Church purposes." In 1921, the old log
and frame school building was demolished and a new
two-room brick building was erected. According to
a former student (Willhoite 1994), the brick school
was constructed on the site of an old graveyard. The
building faced generally west and had windows on the
east side. Water was obtained from the old cistern
that was located in an easterly direction from the
brick building. As late as the 1940s, students
obtained their drinking water by pumping it from the
cistern by hand into a tank. Later, a well was drilled
to supply water for the school, but it was located
nearer the Lockhart Highway (U.S. Highway 183)
because there was concern about drilling through the
old graveyard.
The buildings constructed on the 1.77-acre
Davidson tract and called the "Colorado School"
remained the primary educational institution until
August 17, 1926, when James Eugene and Mary
Belle Hill sold approximately 3.8 acres 2 to the
County Board of Education of Travis County (Travis
County Deed Record 388:475). The Hills' land
adjoined the existing Colorado School tract on the
north and west (see Figure 2) and was bounded by
the Austin-Del Valle Road on the west (Travis
County Deed Record 354:316). A history of the
Colorado School (Rural Schools of Travis County
1936:n.p.) provides a conflicting date for the
acquisition (1934) but states that the additional land
was "adjacent" to the Davidson tract and that it
became the location of a "Mexican school." In 1935,
another room was added to the 1921 brick building
for primary grades. This room was located on the
northeast side of the brick building (Curry 1994;
Erickson 1994; Sherman 1994).
In 1941, plans were made to demolish the tworoom brick building and the one-room frame building
next to it and to erect a new five-room school "to
take care of the increasing number of pupils in the
district" (American-Statesman, May 25, 1941:n.p.).
Eleven years later, on November 18, 1952, the Austin
Independent School District annexed the portion of the
Colorado School District Number 36 located on the

Davidson and Hill tracts (Travis County Deed Record
1297:389-393), and the Austin District then operated
the school. In 1958 or 1959, all school activities at
the site ceased when the Austin Independent School
District sold the two tracts to the United States
government (Travis County Deed Record 1994:535536). The land was incorporated into Bergstrom Air
Force Base, and the school buildings were demolished.

Pedestrian Survey
As a result of the pedestrian survey, the
cemetery and several nearby features were recorded
as site 41 TV1668 (see Figure 2). These features are
described in the following paragraphs. No evidence
of unmarked graves (i.e., rectangular depressions)
was observed near the cemetery or elsewhere in the
project area.

Cemetery
The main focus of the survey was to record the
small Martin Family Cemetery in the lower portion
of the Davidson tract in a level area across the old
Austin-Del Valle Road from the private Greenwood
Cemetery. A wire fence encloses a 5.5-x-3.2-m
area containing a single row of four marked graves
(Figure 4), although there are markers for at least
five people in the cemetery. The headstones for the
four marked graves are spaced 1 m apart. If burials
additional to the marked ones are present and if
additional graves are spaced the same as the marked
ones, there is room within the enclosure for only one
more grave on the southwest, although more than one
individual conceivably could have been placed in a
single grave. The headstones are on the northwest
side of the plot, and the single footstone and the gate
are on the southeast. The inscriptions on the markers
face northwest, to be read from the heads of the
graves, rather than from the gate. The cemetery is
overgrown with weeds, and as these were cleared for
mapping and recording several headstone fragments
No
were found buried under the vegetation.
systematic probing for additional headstones or
footstones was done. All headstones and fragments
were matched with and temporarily reset on their
plinths or the embedded bases of broken tablets for
recording and photography (see Figure 4), and they
were laid flat at the heads of the graves following
recording.

2

Various deed and plat records give three different
acreages for the Hill tract: 3.72, 3.88, and 3.97.

9

Historical and Archeological Research at 41TV1668

Figure 4. View to the northeast of the Martin Family Cemetery, with the broken headstones reset into place.

The 1-m-high ferrous metal fence is made of
slightly twisted wire formed in vertical inverted U
and shepherd's crook shapes interwoven with
horizontal double-twisted wire strands and wired to
galvanized pipe posts. The gate is square with
rounded comers and made of nongalvanized pipe
outlining wire loops similar to those used in the
fence. The gate and bolts attaching the gate to the
galvanized gate post are rusted. The pipe posts
retain their galvanization, and some of the pipes
contain concrete with abundant river sand as is found
elsewhere on the site. The rusted bolts on the gate
post and the type of concrete in the posts indicate that
the pipes are contemporaneous with the wire fencing,
and the style of the wire fencing, pre-World War II
in age, indicates that the fence was placed within one
to two decades of the last burial, that of Freddie
Martin in 1909.
There is no visible evidence of a road to the
gate on the east side of the cemetery. The access
road that loops through the project area (see below)
runs northwest of the cemetery. The northwestward-

facing inscriptions (which can be read most comfortably from outside of the cemetery), the small size of
the enclosure, and the lack of a road to the gate
suggest that the enclosure was placed after the burials
were made and served to delimit this area from the
school and church grounds.
The north end of the cemetery is marked by
trees and a concrete curb 6.2 m long made of the
same kind of concrete with abundant aggregate and
river sand that occurs elsewhere on the site (Figure
5). The fast-growing hackberry and ligustrum trees
probably postdate the burials and grew because the
cemetery area was protected from mowing. The
curb, on the other hand, could date to the original use
of the cemetery and may represent a landscaping
element predating the fence. Evidence of landscaping
inside the enclosure consists of lilies (possibly day
lilies) on the southeast end of the plot in an area
probably lacking a burial. Lilies also occur outside
the enclosure. Present on the north end is a fragment
of a dry-pressed brick dating to the twentieth century
and two small caliche cobbles. No evidence of grave
10

Results

Concrete Curb

[P]earl Moy Mortin

infant son Mortin

Freddie Mortin

\

Sarah [A.] Mortin

Fence

I

Gate

LEGEND
Plinth/Headstone Bose
.
Headstone
~ Footstone

D

~/
i-

0
I

1/2

1

2
I

meters

0

2

4

8

feet

P&A/194/SLH

Figure 5. Plan of the Martin Family Cemetery.

Freddie Martin headstone, and three-quarters of the
unknown headstone containing only a fragment of an
inscription (see below). The missing fragments could
be present beneath the vegetation. In any case, there
is no evidence of chipping on the headstones as a
result of mowing or target practice.
The headstones were not attached to their plinths

decoration artifacts was found.
The cemetery shows signs of neglect but not
vandalism. The marble headstones have experienced
minor lichen growth but are in excellent shape except
for the fragmentation probably resulting from natural
breakage. Missing are the upper portion of the Sarah
[A.] Martin headstone, the lower portion of the
11

Historical and Archeological Research at 41IV1668

or embedded tablet bases but, except for the Freddie
Martin headstone, were found lying nearby. The
[P]earl May headstone was found with the two upper
fragments on either side of the embedded base. The
infant son Martin and Sarah [A.] Martin headstones
were just southwest of their base and plinth, respectively. The Freddie Martin headstone fragment was
found well south of its associated plinth, lying
adjacent to the quarter-fragment of an unknown
headstone in an area with no marked burial. These
adjacent fragments of two different headstones are
almost identical in size and shape and apparently
were placed together intentionally sometime after the
Freddie Martin headstone broke and the top portion
could no longer be set on the plinth.
All of the grave markers are marble and are the
simple tablet type common on nineteenth-century
Texas burials in family cemeteries. The inscriptions
all appear to have been made by hand by a craftsman, although none of the stones are marked with
carver's initials. The more elaborate plinth bases are
present on the two northeastern graves, which
represent the oldest (1880) and the most recent (1909)
burials. The two southern grave markers consist of
tablet headstones embedded in the ground.
The northeasternmost headstone is for a woman
38 years old who is believed to be Sarah [A.] Martin
based on archival research and the S.A.M. footstone.
The tablet is of unknown shape since the top and
probably one or two lines of inscription are missing.
It is inscribed in letters with serifs (Figure 6):

Figure 6. Sarah [A.] Martin headstone.

measures 52 cm long, 51 cm wide, and 10 cm thick
and is notched at the bottom to fit into the marble
slot in the plinth and has a hole for the rebar. ·
The headstone fits onto a two-part plinth
consisting of a concrete base and a beveled marble
top. The concrete base is a homogeneous concrete,
not the type with high aggregate and river sand
content that occurs in the cemetery curb and in
concrete foundation fragments elsewhere on the site.
The base measures 71 x 33 cm and has a beveled
top. The marble top has a slot for the headstone and
a piece of rebar to reinforce the headstone. The top
measures 61 x 20 cm and is 14 cm high. The footstone inscribed "S.A.M." in letters without serifs
measures 21 cm long, 19 cm wide, and 5 cm thick
and is embedded in the ground without a plinth. The
distance between the inner edges of the Sarah [A.]
Martin headstone and the S.A.M. footstone possibly
marking the length of the grave is 187 cm.
The markers for this grave suggest that some
postburial modifications were made. The twentiethcentury concrete used in the plinth probably postdates
the 1880 tablet, which based on the tablet and
inscription styles was marked about the time of death
and was set onto a plinth that may have been
replaced later. This tablet probably was reset on a
new plinth sometime in the twentieth century, perhaps
when the adjacent Freddie Martin burial with plinth
was made in 1909 or when the S.A.M. footstone was
placed. The S.A.M. footstone postdates the headstone based on its machine inscription.

G. D. MARTIN.
BORN [script]
Jan. 3. 1842,
DIED [script]
Oct. 23, 1880.
She was a zealous member
of the Christian church. [script]
The inscription style, including letters with serifs and
script, matches the 1880 date and indicates that the
tablet was made within a few years of the woman's
death. The initials are unclear since only the bottom
portions are present, but they probably represent
G. D., Sarah [A.] Martin's husband. A missing first
line probably gave her name (Sarah [A.] Martin). A
missing second line probably stated that she was the
wife of G. D. Martin, whose name is given in the
partially present third line. This headstone fragment
12

Results

The marker in the third burial position consists
of a tablet embedded in the ground without a plinth
and representing a 6-day old infant who was not
named. The tablet is a Roman arch with a slight
recurve. A pecked sleeping lamb motif is present at
the top of the stone. Lamb motifs were common
markers of child burials in the late nineteenth century.
Below this are the words "INFANT SON" in a
simple arched banner. The headstone is inscribed in
letters with light serifs (Figure 8):

The Freddie Martin headstone fragment and
plinth occur in the second burial position but represent
the last marked burial in the plot. Freddie Martin
was a child 8 years old. The headstone is a simple
Roman arch (U shape) marked in letters without
serifs but crowded onto the small tablet (Figure 7):
FREDDIE MARTIN
BORN
FEB. 13, 1901
DIED
APRIL 2[8], 190[9]

INFANT SON
OF
E. B. & M.A. MARTIN
OCT. 13, 1888
OCT. 19, 1888

Although only the top portions of the numerals are
present, the death date is April 28, 1909, based on
archival evidence. The tablet fragment measures
22 cm long, 21 cm wide, and 6 cm thick. The sans
serif style of the inscription matches the twentiethcentury death date, and the crowding of the letters
indicates a craftsman using hand tools rather than a
commercial establishment using machine tools.
Remnants of the lower portion of the headstone are
embedded in the plinth. The plinth is a flat slab of
limestone with concrete mortar around the base of the
headstone. The concrete is the homogeneous type
lacking abundant aggregate and river sand and is
similar to that in the adjacent Sarah [A.] Martin
plinth. The plinth measures 38 x 24 cm.

Our Darling Babe [script]
The headstone fragment measures 52 cm long, 31 cm
wide, and 8 cm thick. The inscription style, including
light serifs and script, matches the death date and
indicates placement within a few years of the death.

Figure 8. Infant son headstone.

The southwestemmost marker consists of a
tablet embedded in the ground without a plinth and

Figure 7. Freddie Martin headstone.

13

Historical and Archeological Research at 41TV1668

representing a 1-year-old girl. The tablet is a
Roman arch with slight recurve. At the top is a
pecked side view of a flying dove with leaf. The
headstone is inscribed in letters with serifs (Figure 9):
[P]EARL MAY
Inft. Dau. of [script]
E. B. & M. A. MARTIN
NOV. 1, 1889.
DEC. 20, 1890.
Gone but not forgotten. [script]
Although the first initial is missing, archival evidence
suggests that the infant's name was Pearl May
Martin. The tablet measures 56 cm long, 32 cm
wide, and 7 cm thick. The inscription featuring
letters with serifs and script matches the death date
and indicates placement within a few years of the
death date. This tablet and the adjacent infant son
tablet are very similar in size, shape, and inscription
and may have been made by the same craftsman,
which is possible given that only two years separate
the death dates. The two headstones also could have
been placed at a single time after the second child's
death.
The fifth headstone was found lying on the
ground at the southwestern end of the cemetery in an
area with no marked grave. The fragment consists of
the lower right portion of a headstone containing a
portion of the inscription in script letters:

Figure 9. Refitted [P]earl May Martin headstone.

contain remnants of asphalt showing that it once was
paved. Looping eastward through the project area off
this road is a road used to access the Colorado
School and Martin Family Cemetery (see Figure 2).
The access road is marked by concrete culverts at its
two ends ca. 30 m west and 120 m northwest of the
cemetery. The road crosses both the Davidson and
Hill tracts, and it is marked by river gravels for at
least part of its length and by the slight rise of the
roadbed, particularly in its western portion. Irises
occur at the north edge of the intersection of the
access road and the old Austin-Del Valle Road near
the cemetery (see Figure 2). They also occur in an
area southeast of the road and northeast of the
cemetery; at both locations, they may indicate the
presence of historic graves.

... re done
... to fill the vacant soul
The fragment measures 22 cm long, 21 cm wide,
and 6 cm thick, which is exactly the same size as
the Freddie Martin headstone fragment, which was
lying adjacent to it. It is unknown if this fragment
is from a headstone once standing in the cemetery
or if it is from a grave in the adjacent Greenwood
Cemetery or elsewhere in the area. Its inscription
style and size are more similar to the infant son
and [P]earl May Martin headstones than to the
Freddie Martin marker dating at least 13 years
later.

Access Road
Cistern
The 5.65-acre project area is bounded on the
west and south by an intact section of the old AustinDel Valle Road. Portions of the raised roadbed

A cistern was found north of the cemetery near
the bend in the access road on the Davidson tract (see

14

Results

noted below, structural trash in the grove and
drainage areas to the northeast indicates that the
school structures were demolished and pushed
downhill. The construction date for the cistern is
unknown, although the lime mortar and masonry
construction probably indicate nineteenth-century
construction.
This is supported by the 1895
photograph showing a feature probably representing
a cistern (Rural Schools of Travis County 1936:n.p.).
The relationship of the water pipe to the cistern is
unknown, but the pipe may have attached to a pump
identified by one informant (Willhoite 1994) as the
mechanism used to raise water from the cistern and
direct it into a trough nearby. The age of the cistern
fill also is unknown, but oral history (Willhoite 1994)
indicates the cistern was used at least until the 1940s.

Figure 2). The cistern is mostly filled, and its
exposed upper portion has a bottleneck shape. The
interior is thoroughly mortared with lime, not concrete
mortar, approximately 1.5 cm thick. As a result,
little of the construction is evident. Erosion at the
base of the neck opening shows two limestone blocks
or slabs 8-9 cm wide laid at a 45° slope from
horizontal. The diameter of the rim is 55 cm. The
present depth to the top of the cistern fill is 4150 cm. A 11.4-inch ferrous metal water pipe crosscuts the top of the east side of the cistern (Figure 10),
and the cistern rim apparently was notched 5 cm deep
to accommodate this pipe. The sediments above the
top of the cistern rim into which the pipe is set
contain gravels like those in the nearby road.
Artifacts exposed at the cistern rim are a piece of
colorless bottle glass and a tin can with crimped end
seam. These artifacts probably date to the tum of the
century or later.

Grove and Drainage
Downhill ca. 25 m northeast of the cistern is a
grove of elms and other trees and shrubs along a
small drainage and along the northeastern boundary of
the Davidson tract (see Figure 2). Several elm trees
with barbed wire remnants or scars mark this boundary. One has a scar at 80 cm above the surface and
wire embedded at 53 and 108 cm on the north side of
the trunk. The wire at 53 cm is a wrapped twostrand piece too deeply embedded to identify the
type. The wire at 108 cm is a two strand, coiled,
two-point wire barb known as Glidden's Barb,
Common Variation, a variation of Patent 157124,
patented by Joseph F. Glidden in 1874 (Clifton 1970:
99, 365). This barbed wire type was used widely.
This part of the site is marked by tree falls and
depressions. The depressions may represent old tree
falls or low areas that have been filled partially with
trash or within which materials such as wood have
rotted. Certainly, the depression contents (concrete
slabs, wood, and bottle and window glass) and their
exposed faces (mottled, with ferrous or burned earth,
and including concrete, cobbles, gravels, and eroded
concrete remnants) indicate that many of these are
low areas filled with trash.
Cultural materials in the uphill portion of the
grove consist of an area of gravels and charcoal
downhill from the cistern, a thick colorless glass soda
pop bottle fragment with enamel lettering, brown
stippled beer bottle glass, structural clay tiles, and
1-2-ft fragments of concrete containing abundant
aggregate and river sand.
One slab measures
43 x 18 cm and has one flat face (the remaining faces

Figure 10. Cistern.

Based on its location adjacent to the access road
and inside the Davidson tract and reports by informants, the cistern marks the location of the original
nineteenth-century school and the 1921 school. As
15

Historical and Archeological Research at 41TV1668

are irregular). The concrete resembles that comprising the curb along the northeastern end of the
cemetery. The concrete probably dates to the period
from the turn of the century until World War II, and
the soda pop and beer bottles date to the second
quarter of the twentieth century or later.
Materials observed in the depressions in or near
the drainage include concrete fragments 8-10 cm
thick; a 3-x-1.5-inch wooden post with wire nails;
planks 2-3 inches wide; wooden siding or shingles;
corrugated plastic siding; a window glass corner
slightly more than 2 mm thick; an aluminum can; a
thick slightly patinated colorless glass body sherd,
probably from a bottle with an oval cross section; a
chain link fence section; an automobile door and other
body parts; and a black hard rubber hose. A colorless cylindrical bottle base with a post seam and
fragmentary mark may represent an N inside an oval,
a mark used by Obear-Nester Glass Co., East St.
Louis, Illinois, on blown-in-mold glass from 1895 to
1915 (Toulouse 1971:373-374). These artifacts
represent a mix of time periods, including probably
pre-World War II concrete and wooden siding and
bottle glass and probably post-World War II plastic
siding, automobile parts, and aluminum cans. The
debris in this part of the site appears to have resulted
partly from demolition of the school structures
upslope, although trash deposits both predating and
postdating demolition could be present as well.

complete brick. No mortar is present on this brick,
which probably dates to the nineteenth century. The
other brick fragment is machine-made stiff mud with
three holes. It measures 16 cm long, 9 cm wide, and
6 cm thick. Concrete mortar with a high sand content
is present on one face and one end. This brick
probably postdates World War I.
A shoe fragment consisting of the insole, a
feathered strip of leather, and a fragment of the upper
is present near the structural artifacts. The upper is
leather, and the insole is either leather or hard rubber.
Rubber began to be used on shoes around the mid
nineteenth century after the vulcanization process was
patented in 1844 (Anderson 1968:59). The shoe is a
turned shoe with insole attached to the upper by
stitching and a nailed heel. All of the insole is
present, but it is rolled from toe to heel so that some
observations were difficult to make. The uppers are
joined at side seams at the instep and outstep by
double or triple stitching. The feathered strip of
leather is sewn to both the upper and the insole,
indicating a turned shoe. The thread attaching the
feathered strip to both the insole and to the upper is
still present. Turned shoes predate 1926, when shoe
production involving cementing of uppers and soles
became practical. No rib is present on the bottom of
the insole to indicate a Goodyear welt, available in
1875 (Anderson 1968:61, 64). The heel is nailed in
a square pattern with four large nails in the center.
The edges are nailed with six pairs of smaller nails.
The nails are wire and probably machine-nailed. An
automatic heeling machine became available in 1875
(Anderson 1968:61).
The insole is relatively
symmetrical, and its rolled condition makes it
difficult to determine if the shoe has a shaped instep.
The slight shaping suggests it is probably a right
shoe. Shoes made on crooked lasts and shaped into
right or left shoes date no earlier than the Civil War
(Anderson 1968:59). The shoe is small, measuring
approximately 18.5 cm long and 4.5 cm wide at the
heel. Based on its size, it likely was either a
woman's or child's shoe. Judging from the combination of sewn and nailed construction, this shoe dates
to the last quarter of the nineteenth century or the first
quarter of the twentieth century.
The structural artifacts reflect a wide range of
construction dates. The handmade brick could be
from the chimneys or foundation of the original
Colorado School. The tum-of-the-century concrete
could be from the foundation of additions to this
same building. The machine-made brick could be

Possible Structure
Another possible structure is marked by a few
structural and personal artifacts in the vicinity of a
mesquite tree on the Hill tract 45 m northwest of the
cistern and 12 m northeast of the access road (see
Figure 2). Four of the observed artifacts, two
concrete fragments and two brick fragments, are
structural. One concrete fragment is irregular on all
sides and 15 cm long. It contains many gravels and
abundant river sand similar to other turn-of-thecentury concrete on the site. The second concrete
block fragment has three flat faces and is 3 cm thick.
The concrete is homogeneous and machine formed,
based on the sharpness of the edges. This block
probably dates to the post-World War II period.
One of the yellow bricks is handmade of soft
mud and sand struck. This fragment is 11 cm long,
10 cm wide, and 6 cm thick. The broken end is very
regular, and the brick may have been used as a halfbrick to fill in a corner or other area too small for a
16

Assessment and Recommendations
from the second school, built of brick in 1921 or from
the 1934 Mexican school probably built on this tract.
The concrete block fragment is probably from an
addition or a much later building. The shoe could be
associated with the first school building.

undetermined number of late nineteenth- and early
twentieth-century burials, some of which may have
been disturbed by construction of the Austin-Del
Valle Road, and others of which may have been
impacted when a new school was constructed in 1921.
Site 41TV1668 includes components associated
with the community life of Del Valle, beginning in the
1870s and continuing until the property was sold to
the U.S. government in 1958. The site became the
location of a school and church building shortly after
1876, and burials on the site and in the adjacent
Greenwood Cemetery indicate that neighboring
families began burying their dead there by 1879 and
perhaps earlier. Use of the site as a burial ground
probably decreased in frequency following incorporation of the nearby Greenwood Cemetery in 1907,
although at least one burial is known to have occurred
at 41TV1668 after that date (in 1909). The site
remained a center for community activities for
another 50 years, retaining representative elements
and institutions by which Del Valle defined its
educational, religious, and .social institutions.
Under some circumstances, site 41TVl668 might
be eligible for listing on the National Register of
Historic Places because it was the location of several
institutions- a school, church, and cemetery- that were
key components in a local community, Del Valle.
However, both the architectural and archeological
integrity of most of the site was destroyed after 1958
when the government demolished the buildings and
most of the associated site features. Within site
41TV1668, the enclosed Martin Family Cemetery
possesses integrity of materials. However, the
historic setting has been destroyed, and the individuals interred there were not associated with important
events (Criterion A), nor were they locally significant
historic figures in Travis or Jefferson counties
(Criterion B). Finally, the cemetery does not include
noteworthy examples of mortuary art or landscaping
(Criterion C).
The only feature with sufficient
integrity to warrant consideration under Criterion D is
the cistern, but this feature reportedly was used until
the mid twentieth century, and thus the fill is likely to
be too recent to contain important archeological data.
For these reasons, it is recommended that site
41TV1668 be considered ineligible for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places.

ASSESSMENT AND
RECOMMEND ATIO NS
Site 41TV1668 consists of marked and enclosed
graves and features and artifact scatters associated
with use of the site as a school and church. In
addition, historical records and informant data
(Appendix) suggest that unmarked burials dating to
the last quarter of the nineteenth century and the first
quarter of the twentieth century may be present
outside the boundaries of both the enclosed burial
area containing graves associated with the Martin
family and the formally dedicated Greenwood
Cemetery to the southwest. The National Register
eligibility of site 41TV1668 is considered first; the
State of Texas guidelines for treatment of cemeteries
are discussed last.
National Register Eligibility
Historic properties may be eligible for listing on
the National Register of Historic Places if they are
associated with important events (Criterion A) or
important individuals (Criterion B); if they embody
the distinctive characteristics of a particular architectural style or type, chronological period, or construction method (Criterion C); or if they are likely to
yield important information (Criterion D). Such
properties also must possess integrity. That is,
architectural properties must retain integrity of style,
setting, association, feeling, and context, as well as
enough of their principal features for their historic
identities to be readily apparent.
Site 41TV1668 is located on a 5.65-acre tract
and consists of several discrete features, including the
enclosed cemetery plot, the remnants of the old
Austin-Del Valle Road and an access road, a cistern
associated with a late nineteenth- to mid-twentiethcentury school and church site, and scattered artifacts
and debris located to the northeast and northwest of
the cistern. In addition, information gathered from
former students at the school suggests that the portion
of the site from the vicinity of the cistern to the
Greenwood Cemetery fence, associated with the
1.77-acre Davidson tract conveyed in 1876 for school
and church purposes, may be the location of an

State of Texas Guidelines
The guidelines of the State of Texas governing
the treatment of formally and informally dedicated

17

Historical and Archeological Research at 41TV1668

cemeteries have been thoroughly reviewed by Earls et
al. (1991:2-5). Under State guidelines, any cemetery
containing graves 50 years old or older is considered
historic and can be designated a State Archeological
Landmark. Such sites may be either formally or
informally dedicated cemeteries. Formally dedicated
cemeteries "require a recorded instrument either
granting or reserving the grounds for burial purposes."
According to the Texas courts, informal dedication
may be considered to have occurred provided (1) the
location of the interments has been enclosed for use
as a cemetery or (2) actual interment has occurred
regardless of enclosures. Such interment and, hence,
informal dedication, may be substantiated by written
or oral history despite a lack of legal documentation
or physical evidence (Appendix).
Dedication may be removed only if the county
district court "receives proof that all bodies have been
removed from the cemetery or that none were ever
present and that the premises are no longer used or
required for cemetery purposes." Dedication also
may be removed if "the maintenance of the cemetery
is enjoined or abated as a nuisance" (Earls et al.
1991:4).
Because the intent of Texas law is to preserve
cemetery sites, disturbance of such cultural properties
is allowed "only when there is a necessary or
compelling reason to do so" and only after securing
legal consents. Remains may be removed "with the
consent of the cemetery association, if any, the
written consent of surviving spouse or relatives, or
permission of the county or district court." In every
case, remains may be removed only upon securing of
a "written order of the health department or county
court" (Earls et al. 1991:4-5).
Site 41TV1668 apparently contains the remains
of two sets of burials. The first, recorded as a site
component and designated the Martin Family
Cemetery, constitutes an informally dedicated
cemetery according to State of Texas statutes by
virtue of the fact that the location of the burials is
indicated both by headstones and a footstone and by
a perimeter fence. According to informant reports,
additional burials are located on the portion of
41TV1668 lying on the 1.77-acre Andrew Davidson
tract northeast of the Greenwood Cemetery; these
constitute an informally dedicated cemetery according
to State of Texas statutes by virtue of the fact that
individuals familiar with the historic appearance of
the property after 1925 recall the presence of marked

graves in the area (see Appendix).
Management of the 1. 77-acre Davidson tract
should entail land use consistent with its burial
ground designation and should avoid any desecration
of either the marked Martin Family Cemetery or
possible unmarked graves from the Greenwood
Cemetery fence to the cistern area of the tract. If the
land is to be used for a noncemetery purpose, a court
proceeding is required before the cemetery dedication
can be removed and the bodies, markers, fence, and
other artifacts removed to another cemetery. The fact
that the Martin Family Cemetery has not been
regularly maintained does not remove its protection
under the law and does not cancel the responsibilities
of present and future landowners.
Because of the legal responsibilities listed
above, avoidance of land development on the 1.77acre tract is recommended. Limiting access to the
tract by fencing and marking would reduce the potential for desecration. If avoidance is not feasible and
the land must be developed, next of kin for marked
and unmarked graves should be notified and a court
order for relocation sought according to applicable
Travis County laws. Identification of the boundaries
of the cemetery, including the locations of unmarked
graves, would be necessary to plan the relocation.
Testing phase work at the site would involve the
suspected cemetery portions of the Davidson tract and
would entail at least three tasks: (1) additional
archival work; (2) remote sensing; and (3) excavation.
Additional archival work should focus on searching
for low-altitude aerial photographs of the area to
identify marked burial plots and map work to date
the construction of the Austin-Del Valle Road that
separated the two portions of the Greenwood
Cemetery. Remote sensing should attempt to identify
subsurface anomalies that could represent unmarked
graves. Mechanical excavation would be necessary
to ground-truth remote sensing anomalies by identifying actual grave shafts. Despite the bulldozing of
former structures in the project area, intact burials are
likely to remain because of the suspected depth of
burials at 2-4+ ft (based on previous cemetery
excavations in Texas) and the presence of relatively
intact surface features such as the access road and, in
particular, the iris concentrations that could mark
grave locations. Once the extent of the cemetery is
known and the grave locations identified, final plans
for relocation can be made.

18

References Cited

REFERENCES CITED

Anderson, Adrienne
1968
The Archaeology of Mass-Produced Footwear.
Historical Archaeology 2:56-65.

Erickson, Leroy
1994 Interview with Leroy Erickson, January 29, 1994,
by Martha Doty Freeman.

American-Statesman (Austin)

Garner, L. E., and K. P. Young
1976 Environmental Geology of the Austin Area: An
Aid to Urban Planning. Reports of Investigations 86. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Austin Daily Statesman, The
Bement, Leland C.
1991 Cultural Resources Survey of Portions of
Bergstrom Air Force Base, Travis County,
Texas. Technical Series 17. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Hoffmann, J. J.
1987 Appraisal of Archeological Resources at
Bergstrom Air Force Base, Austin, Texas. U.S.
Department of the Interior, National Park Service.

Brown, David 0.
1981 Archeological Testing along the Proposed Route
of Wastewater Pipelines for the Planned Onion
Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant. Technical
Bulletin 50. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Kegley, George
1972 McKinney Falls State Park: A Preliminary
Workup of the Archeological Resources. Letter
on file, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Austin.

Clifton, Robert T.
1970 Barbs, Prongs, Points, Prickers, and Stickers:
A Complete and Illustrated Catalogue of
Antique Barbed Wire. University of Oklahoma
Press, Norman.

Maslyk, Paul, Solveig A. Turpin, and S. Christopher Caran
1993 Test Excavations at 411V435 and 411V436:
Cultural Resource Investigations at Bergstrom
Air Force Base, Travis County, Texas. Technical Series 33. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Curry, Mary Louise Norman
1994 Interview with Mary Louise Norman Curry,
January 29, 1994, by Martha Doty Freeman.

Masson, Marilyn A., James T. Jones, Michael Myers, and
David 0. Brown
1993 Cultural Resources Survey and Assessment for
the Proposed Reuse of Bergstrom AFB and
Adjoining Areas, Travis County, Texas.
Archeology Series 28. Hicks and Company, Inc.,
Austin.

Davis, Michael W.
1984 Archeological Investigations at 4I1V285: A
Site to be Affected by Construction of the Onion
Creek Wastewater Treatment Interceptor Line.
Technical Bulletin 78. Texas Archeological
Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
1993

McEachem, Michael, and Ronald W. Ralph
1980 Archeological Investigations at the Thomas F.
McKinney Homestead, Travis County, Texas:
An Experiment in Historical Archeology, Part I.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 51:
5-208.

Letter Report to Provide Additional Information
on Sites 411V432, 411V1632, and 411Vl644 at
Bergstrom AFB, Travis County, Texas. Report
prepared for Greiner, Inc. by Hicks and
Company, Inc., Austin.

1981
Earls, Amy C., Christopher R. Lintz, George W. Gill,
Patrick L. O'Neill, and W. Nicholas Trierweiler
1991 Investigations of Historic Cemeteries at 0. H.
Ivie Reservoir, Coleman, Concho, and Runnels
Counties, Texas. Technical Report No. 403.
Mariah Associates, Inc., Austin.

Archeological Investigations at the Thomas F.
McKinney Homestead, Travis County, Texas:
An Experiment in Historical Archeology, Part II.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
52:5-63.

Port Arthur News, The

19

Historical and Archeological Research at 41TV1668

Public Relations Office
n.d.
Del Valle Army Air Base Bergstrom Field, First
Troop Carrier Command, 1832-1943. N.p.,
n.p.

1947

Texas. Secretary of State
Greenwood Cemetery
1907 Charter No. 17059:
Association. Incorporated February 7, 1907.

Ralph, Ronald W., and Charles I. Loving
1973 McKinney Falls State Park:
Archeological
Testing. Field notes on file, Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Austin.

Thunnond, Peter
1982 Archeological Testing and Assessment of
41TV461 and the Onion Creek Wastewater
Plant Site, Travis County, Texas. Technical
Bulletin 49. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Robinson, David G., and Dan K. Utley
1992 Cultural Resources Survey Plan for the South
Austin Regional Wastewater Treatment Plant
Service Area, Travis County, Texas. Technical
Series 24.
Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Toulouse, Julian H.
1971 Bottle Makers and Their Marks.
Nelson, Inc., New York.

Rural Schools of Travis County
1936 The Defender. N.p., n.p.

Thomas

Travis County (Austin, Texas)
Deed Records
Marriage Records
Plat Books

Shennan, Louise McCall
1993 Affidavit by Louis McCall Shennan, June 14,
1993, Austin, Texas. Affidavit on file, Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.
1994

Standard Certificate of Death No. 38847:
William Estes Martin, September 21, 1947.

Travis County Historical Commission
1986 Travis County Cemeteries. Typescript in the
Austin-Travis County Collection, Austin Public
Library, Austin.

Interview with Louise McCall Shennan, January
28, 1994, by Martha Doty Freeman.

Sitton, Thad, and Milam C. Rowold
1987 Ringing the Children In:
Texas Country
Schools. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.

U.S. Bureau of the Census
1880 Travis County, Texas
1900 Travis County, Texas
1910 Jefferson County, Texas
1920 Jefferson County, Texas

Standifer, Mary L., Ross C. Fields, and Gail L. Bailey
1986 Archeological Investigations at 41TV1173,
41TV1174, and 41TV1175, Travis County,
Texas. Letter Report No. 328. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.

Werchan, Leroy E., A. C. Lowther, and Robert N. Ramsey
1974 Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas. U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.

Texas Agricultural Extension Service
1980 Know Your Grasses. Publication No. B-182.
Texas Agricultural Extension Service, Texas
A&M University System, College Station.

Whitsett, Hayden, and Daniel Fox
1979 Cultural Resources of Lower Onion Creek.
Texas Department of Water Resources, Austin.

Texas Department of Health, Bureau of Vital Statistics
1936 Standard Certificate of Death No. 15789: E. B.
Martin, March 27, 1936.

Willhoite, Ross
1994 Interview with Ross Willhoite, January 24, 1994,
in Austin, Texas, by Martha Doty Freeman.

20

APPENDIX: Testimony Concerning Unmarked Graves at Site 41 TV1668

Martha Doty Freeman

Interest in the potential for unmarked graves in
the vicinity of site 41TV1668 led Austin resident
DaVon Wood to contact former residents of the Del
Valle area who had first-hand knowledge of the
Colorado School either as students, as teachers, or as
members of the congregation that used the school
building for church purposes. In addition, Mr. Wood
provided the project historian with the names of
former students whom he had contacted informally.
Finally, the historian used a 1936 roster of Colorado
School students to contact several other individuals
who attended the school. This appendix consists of
typed transcripts of letters written at Mr. Wood's
behest and summaries of informal interviews
conducted by the project historian.

a stagecoach station. This was to have been left
intact when the government bought this property but
it was torned down sometime later. There was
another two story rock home next to my grandparents'
home owned by the Lungrens. Down the hill across
from the Greenwood Cemetery was the old Seeling
Store and home owned by Ed Seeling.
Much history is buried in this area.

Summary of Interview with Ross Willhoite
January 24, 1994
Ross Willhoite, a resident of Del Valle, Texas,
attended grades one through eight at the Colorado
School between 1937 and 1945. According to Mr.
Willhoite, the old brick school faced west and had
two rooms with windows on the east elevation.
There was a stage at one end of the building.
Sometime after the brick building was completed, the
community added a wooden building behind to the
east for the primary grades. Between the brick and
wooden buildings was a cistern. Water was gathered
from the roof and ran through gutters and a charcoal
filter into the cistern. The children pumped the water
out, and it ran into a tank where it collected for
drinking. Mr. Willhoite also remembered that there
was a school for colored children at Montopolis and
a one-room, boxed frame school for Mexican
children nearer the Lockhart Highway.
Mr. Willhoite remembered having heard that the
brick school building was constructed on top of an old
graveyard, and during the time he attended grades one
through eight, graves were still visible between the
school and the road to the south. He also remembered that, when the district decided to drill a new
water well for the school, a decision was made to
move the well nearer the intersection of the Lockhart
Highway because there was concern about drilling
through graves.

Letter from Mr. Homer Bartlett
and Mrs. Elsie Bartlett
June 3, 1993
To Whom it may concern:
There is a old section of Greenwood cemetery
that was divided when Del Valle road was built.
This section was very old[.] [M]any headstone were
gone at the time.
I attended the school Cloud [a school off of
Burleson Road] many years ago. Renamed Norwood
school. My Parents, and Grandparents and a brother
buried in new section [of Greenwood Cemetery].
Daniels is family name. Davidson[s] are kin to me.
Its a Holy p[ie]ce of ground to us ....

Letter from Louise McCall Sherman
June 14, 1993
To Whom It may Concern:
I am Louise McCall Sherman. As a child I
attended the Colorado School in the late twenties and
early thirties. I remember graves being located on
the school grounds in two different locations. One
was in the front of the school and the other was in the
back off to the side toward the road. These plots
were enclosed with iron fences. These cemetery sites
were still there in the mid-forties when I returned as
a teacher.
In earlier days my mother, Alma Seeling and her
sisters attended the old Colorado school. Her
parents, the Robert Seelings, lived just up the hill in
a two story rock home, originally the home of
Dr. Maxwell. The Lundells two-story rock home
was across the road. In the early days this had been

Summary of Interview with Elsie Bartlett
January 24, 1994
The historian contacted Mrs. Elsie Bartlett, who
stated that she had attended church at the Colorado
School. She recalled that there were graves in the
schoolyard, "scattered around," and that there was no
fence around them. She also mentioned that, when
the Austin-Del Valle Road was built northeast of
Greenwood Cemetery, her mother had remarked that
it was constructed over some graves.

23

Historical and Archeological Research at 41TV1668

Summary of Interview with
Louise McCall Sherman
January 28, 1994

grades one through eight, beginning January 1936. He
recalled that there were four buildings on the site.
The first one was the older school made of sand or
Mexican brick, and it faced northwest. To the left, or
northeast of that building, was a frame building, and
about 75 to 100 yards farther northeast was a metal
shed where the teachers parked their cars. Finally,
there was a portable coal shed to one undefined side
of the school.
To the right, or southwest, side of the school was
the Austin-Del Valle Road that bordered Greenwood
Cemetery. Mr. Erickson remembered that once the
road left the vicinity of the school it climbed a hill
where the Norman family lived. He vaguely recalled
having seen a cemetery or graves below the Norman
house, but he had no memory of graves in the
immediate vicinity of the school.

Mrs. Sherman was part of a family that had
long-term associations with the community in the
vicinity of the Colorado School. Her mother was
born in 1887 and attended the school in the 1890s.
Her grandfather Seeling had the old school bell from
the first school, and his barn was called the "school
barn" because it was made from lumber taken from
the first school.
Mrs. Sherman remembered that the school faced
the Lockhart Highway (generally west) and that the
old road that went past the school on the edge of
Greenwood Cemetery (Austin-Del Valle Road) went
up the hill after leaving the school yard, past several
rock houses, and on to Bastrop.
The school was comprised of two rooms. To the
left (from the perspective of facing the front
elevation) was a metal cistern and a wooden building.
An old underground cistern and flagpole were located
in front of the school building.
Mrs. Sherman recalled that there were two
different graveyards on the school grounds. One set
was to the right of the school toward Greenwood
Cemetery but not in the cemetery; a second set was
located between the brick and wooden buildings.

Summary of Interview with
Mary Louise Norman Curry
January 29, 1994
Mary Louise Norman Curry attended the
Colorado School for 7 years, beginning in 1933. Her
family's home, which they rented from Mrs. Seeling,
was located down the Austin-Del Valle Road from
the school a short distance and on top of a hill.
Mrs. Curry remembered that the school was a
two-room building. There was a room to the left (or
northeast) for the first and second grades. Outhouses
were located toward the front of the school and to the
north. Mrs. Curry had no memory of any graves in
the vicinity of the school.

Summary of Interview with Leroy Erickson
January 29, 1994
Leroy Erickson attended the Colorado School,

24

