TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

A CULTURAL RESOURCE ASSESSMENT OF
THE BELLVILLE SOUTH TO WALLER TRANSMISSION LINE
Austin and Waller Counties, Texas

James R. Pliska

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
Technical Bulletin No. 27
1979

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcones Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

A CULTURAL RESOURCE ASSESSMENT OF
THE BELLVILLE SOUTH TO WALLER TRANSMISSION LINE

Austin and WaZZer Counties, Texas

By:

James R. Pliska

Principal Investigator:

David S. Dibble

A report submitted to the Lower Colorado River Authority by
the Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at
Austin, in fulfillment of the terms of a letter of agreement
dated July 26, 1979.
Work conducted under this agreement was
authorized by Antiquities Permit No. 214.
October 1979

A CULTURAL RESOURCE ASSESSMENT OF
THE BELLVILLE SOUTH TO WALLER TRANSMISSION LINE
INTRODUCTION
The Lower Colorado River Authority proposes to construct
a transmission line in Austin and Waller counties, Texas,
extending from the town of Bellville northeast to the Waller
substation in Hempstead.

The utility easement corridor is

85 to 100 feet wide and 15.81 miles long (Fig. 1).

A

cultural resource inventory of the area to be affected by
construction of this power line was conducted in August and
September of 1979 by James R. Pliska and Molly B. Godwin,
staff members of the Texas Archeological Survey, the University
of Texas at Austin.
The objectives of this study were to provide the sponsoring
agency, the Lower Colorado River Authority. with:
1)

a records and literature search to determine if any

previously recorded archeological or historic sites were
located within the boundaries of the proposed corridor;
2)

a field inspection to locate and record cultural resources

in the area of the proposed construction. including a search for
post-European contact sites;
3)

an assessment of the potential significance of located

sites and an evalutation of the impact of land modifications
necessary for construction of the transmission line upon these
sites; and
4)

recommendations for mitigating any adverse effects of

this construction.
Authorization to conduct this cultural resource survey
was granted to the Lower Colorado River Authority by Permit
No. 214 issued by the State Antiquities Committee.

----~-------

------~.~---

L

~

y
I

A.USTIN.

Figure 1.

,~~~ER AUTHORITY

Bellville South to Waller Corridor

transmission rme corridor

THE AREA TRAVERSED BY THE POWER LINE
The study area crosses portions of Austin and Waller
counties, Texas.

The major urban areas connected by this

transmission line are the cities of Bellville and Hempstead.
Physiographically, the counties are located within the
Fayette prairie of the Upper Gulf Coastal Plain (Fenneman
1938).

The major drainage basin is the Brazos River which

bisects this slightly upraised deltaic plain at roughly
right angle.

a

Smaller basins crossed by the proposed power

line are the Piney and Ivy, feeding into the south side of
the Brazos River, and the Peach which feeds into the Brazos
on the north.

Landform elevations range from 280 feet MSL

in the gently rolling upland areas, to 140 feet MSL on the
Brazos floodplain.

Annual precipitation is from 35 to 40

inches (Arbingast 1976).
The prominant geologic formations of the gently rolling
upland areas are Pleistocene in age and include the Willis
and Lissie formations (Sellards 1938; Geologic Atlas of
Texas 1976).

The Brazos floodplain and low terraces are a

Recent Alluvium composed of clay, silt and gravels (Sellards
1938).
Land resource areas include the Post Oak Savannah, the
bottomlands of the Brazos River and a portion of the East
Texas Timberlands (Blair 1950; Correll and Johnston 1970).
These resource areas and locai ecological situation affected the
settlement patterns and subsistence modes of early cultural
groups; therefore, a consideration of the natural environment
is pertinent to the location of prehistoric cultural residues.
The power line right-of-way crosses the Post Oak Savannah
northeast of Bellville to the southern floodplain of the Brazos
River.

Vegetation overstory is primarily post and blackjack

oak with a scattering of hickory, walnut, juniper and hackberry.
Understory vegetation consists mainly of grasses and invader
weeds in the open areas and green briars, yaupon, vines and
3

western ragweed near the drainages.

The majority of the land

is now improved pasture; the land has been cleared but not
cultivated.
No soil survey has been published for Austin and Waller
counties (See Godfrey et al 1973).

Soils in the uplands and

elevated areas are of the great group Paleustalfs (Axtell and
Tabor series).

Characteristics include a sandy surface layer

of a grayish brown color with a mottled yellow or red loamy
subsoil.

Albaqualfs (Lufkin series) occur in the lowlying

areas that seasonally have water perched above (Soil Conservation
Service 1975).

Characteristics include a dark to light brownish

gray silt or clay loam surface layer with a dark gray subsoil.
On the south side of the Brazos River bottomlands, the
dominant vegetation is grasses and weeds with isolated pecan
trees.

The north side is primarily overs tory growth of elm,

cottonwood, sycamore, oak and hackberry.

Dominant understory

growth is briars, berry vines and brambles.
Soils in these bottomlands are of the great group Udifluvents.
Characteristics include reddish to red brown silt or sand
loams found in recent water-deposited sediments which are
well drained (SCS 1975).
North of the Brazos River floodplain and southwest of
Hempstead, the power line crosses through a portion of the
East Texas Timberlands.

The original vegetation was Post Oak­

Hickory forest; presently the dominant overstory growth has
been cleared for agriculture and grazing.

The overstory

growth remains only in small isolated areas and along drainages.
Cleared, uncultivated pastureland covered by grasses and invader
weeds is now the dominant vegetational cover.
Soils in this area fall in the Paleudalf great group.
Characteristics include a loamy surface layer (usually a
grayish brown) with mostly clayey (montmorillonitic) subsoils.
The loamy surfaces vary from clays to sand; the sand 10ams
occur in the elevated areas.

4

THE ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Only two published reports detail the results of previous
archeological investigations in the general vicinity of the
current study.

Southeast of Rosenburg, in Fort Bend County.

the Albert-George Site, a sand midden, was sampled by the
Houston Archaeological Society (Walley 1955).

The Texas

Archeological Salvage Project conducted an intensive survey
near the town of Wallis in Austin County in the area proposed
for the construction of the AlIens Creek Nuclear Generating
Station (Dillehay and Mallouf 1972).

This survey identified

34 prehistoric sites primarily of Archaic to Late Prehistoric
age.

A report of subsequent excavations of sites located

by that survey is currently in preparation (Hall 1979).
METHODS OF STUDY
The cultural resource assessment of the proposed power
line corridor consisted of two parts; a literature and records
search and a field survey.

Records and relevant maps maintained

at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, the University
of Texas at Austin, were checked for previously recorded sites.
None were reported near the proposed construction area.

Texas

Historical Commission files were searched, especially for
sites nominated to, or listed on, the National Register of
Historic Places.

This was most important in Austin County

where San Felipe de Austin, an early Anglo-American settlement,
was founded by Stephen F. Austin in 1829 in and around the
present town of San Felipe.

Many of the original structures

still exist and, because of their demonstrated historic and
architectural merit, are listed on the National Register of
Historic Places.

No listed sites, however, are within or

adjacent to the present study area.
The field inspection consisted of walking transects at 10
meter intervals parallel to the power line right-of-way.

The

entire 100 foot corridor and high probability areas (i.e. stream
5

terraces and eleva ted areas} illUlledi.atel¥ adj acent were
inspected.

Many sections of the

cor~idor

were covered

t.~ce.

Erosional rills, gullies and cut banks wexe examined for
cultural deposits.

High probability localities, especially

where the ground surface was obscured by vegetation or humus,
were shovel tested and the soil screened to determine if
cultural material was buried or hidden.
THE RESULTS OF THE SURVEY
No prehistoric sites were located during the field survey
and no records of previously recorded sites were found.
However, a large percentage of the land in the survey area
is cleared pasture; modifications associated with this modern
land use may have destroyed or obscured surface archeological
material.
Five historic localities were noted during the present
survey; three (H-l,H-4,H-5) were within the right-of-way and
two (H-2,H-3) were immediately outside.

All five of these

localities are post-1900 in age and are not considered to merit
designation as significant historic sites.
Historic 1 - UTM Zone 14 770400E 3312920N (USGS Burleigh Quad)
This site is approximately one mile south of Burleigh and 100
feet west of FM2429 on the southeast slope of a small sandy
slope projection.

A southerly flowing wooded drainage is

downslope east of the site.

Elevation is 160 feet MSL.

This

extant wood structure with porch, presumably a farmhouse,
is currently used to store hay.
Historic 2 - UTM Zone 14 770400E 3318100N (USGS Burleigh Quad)
This site is located two miles east of Hwy. 159 and approximately
one mile south on Lisa Mary Road.

An extant wood structure with

a tin roof, farm buildings and a corral stand on a small sandy
rise above the surrounding lowlands which constitute the
inter fluvial divide between Piney and Ivy creeks.

6

Elevation

is 185 feet MSL.

Cultural materials indicate this ranch

house and auxiliary structures are post-1900 in age.
Hi

- UTM Zone 14 779700E 3326850N (USGS Hempstead
Quad)

Two sets of (recent) concrete steps, steel pipes, a cesspool,
and a very recent pump house are located on a sandy terrace
knoll overlooking the floodplain of the Brazos River approximately
one-half mile east of Hwy. 159 and one mile northeast of the
Brazos River.

Elevation is 190 feet MSL.

These remnants are

probably those of a farmhouse which is post-1900 in age.
Historic 4 - UTM Zone 14 779350E 3326800N (USGS Hempstead
Quad)
Less than one-half mile south of H3, structural remains
consisting of red brick fragments, steel pipes and several
concrete pads are situated on a sandy rise above the floodplain
of the Brazos River.

No standing structures exist.

Cultural

materials such as bottle glass, nails and record album fragments
indicate this probable farmhouse is post-1900 in age.
is 180 feet MSL.

Elevation

Soil matrix indicates this structure probably

burned.
Historic 5 - UTM Zone 14 778500E 332575N (USGS Hempstead
Quad)
Two miles south of the Brazos River and less than one-half
mile south of Hwy. 159, on a sandy terrace rise above the
floodplain, scattered cultural remains consist of (recent)
concrete blocks, stove parts, metal plates and glass-sherd
scatter.

Elevation is 150 feet MSL.

The remains of this

farmhouse appear to be post-1900 in age.
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This report details the results of an archeological
investigation of the proposed power line between Bellville
and Hempstead, Texas.·

A literature search yielded no previously

recorded sites or organized archeological surveys within the
easement and no sites nominated to, or listed on, the National

7

Register of Historic Places.

Field investigations resulted

in the location of five historic localities of recent age.
No prehistoric sites were found.

The results of this

inspection do not definitely demonstrate a total absence of
prehistoric occupation of the area however.
In view of its proximity to the AlIens Creek survey area,
it is possible that Archaic and Late Prehistoric encampments
may be present, but due to agricultural modification and recent
flood deposits, are buried by sediments.

For example, at

41AU36, over 250 burials were excavated (Hall 1979); no
cultural debris was initially noticed on the surface.

The

evidence for the site's presence was supplied by the contents
of geologic cores which contained human bone fragments and
cultural material (Dillehay and Mallouf 1972).
It is our opinion, based on the results of the current
investigation, that construction and use of the Bellville
South to Waller transmission line will not affect cultural
resources of determined merit.

As noted, no definable

traces of prehistoric sites or features were found; historic
site remnants situated within the transmission corridor were
of late construction and not institutionally recognized as
having significant architectural or historic status.
However, although our field coverage of the corridor did
include shovel probes of limited depth, the probability of
buried archeological features being extant in the construction
area does remain.

This is perhaps most pertinent in crossings

of the Brazos River terrace system.

It is therefore strongly

advised that chance exposures of buried archeological material
made during the line construction be reported to the offices
of the Texas Historical Commission.

REFERENCES CITED
Arbingast, Stanley A.
1973
Atlas of Texas.
Bureau of Business Research,
University of Texas at Austin.
Blair, F.W.
1950
The Biotic Province of Texas.
Science 2(1): 93-117.

Texas Journal of

Bureau of Economic Geology
1976
Geologic Atlas of Texas: Austin and Seguin Sheets.
University of Texas at Austin.
Correll, Donovan S.and Marshall C. Johnston
1970
Manual of the Vascular Plants of Texas.
Research Foundation, Renner, Texas.

Texas

Dillehay, Tom. D. and Michael G. Mallouf
1972
An Archeological Reconnaisance of Areas to be
Affected by the Proposed Nuclear Power Plant,
Austin County, Texas and Associated Power Transmission
Lines in Austin, Waller, Fort Bend and Harris
Counties, Texas.
Research Report No. 16, Texas
Archeological Salvage Project, the University of
Texas at Austin.
Godfrey, C.L.
1973
General Soil Map of Texas.
Texas A & M University
and the United States Soil Conservation Service.
Fenneman, N.M.
1938
Physiography of the Eastern United States.
McGraw-Hill, New York.
Hall, Grant D.
1979
Allen's Creek: A Study in the Prehistory of the
Lower Brazos River.
Research Report No. 61,
Texas Archeological Survey, the University of
Texas at Austin.
Sellards, Elias Howard
1933
The Geology of Texas.

University of Texas Press.

Soil Conservation Service
1975
Soil Taxonomy. U.S.D.A. Agriculture Handbook
No. 436.
U.S. Government Printing Office,
Washington, D.C.
Walley, Raymond
1955
A Preliminary Report on the Albert-George Site
in Fort Bend County.
Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 26.

