TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF A
PROPOSED OLEFINS COMPLEX IN BRAZORIA COUNTY

JAMES R. PLISKA

TECHNICAL BULLETIN NO. 31
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
The University of Texas at Austin

THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
AUSTIN, TEXAS

78758

Balcom. Research Center
10,100 Burnet Road

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT OF A
PROPOSED OLEFINS COMPLEX IN BRAZORIA COUNTY

By:

James R. Pliska

Principal Investigator:

David S. Dibble

A report submitted to Radian Corporation by the Texas
Archeological Survey~ The University of Texas at Austin~
in fulfillment of the terms of a letter of agreement
dated October 12. 1979.

- - - - - - -

- - - - - - _............

__

... _

-----­

TABLE Of CONTENTS
Introduction

1

Study Area . .

1

Archeological Background.

4

Survey Procedures

5

Results of the Study.

8

Historic Resources . .

8

Prehistoric Resources

10

Conclusions

1Q

References Cited.

12

Bibliography of Historic Sources.

14

Acknowledgements . .

15

List of Figures
Figure 1.

Project Area Map

iii

Figure 2.
a.
b.

Grassland ground cover in project area
Linnville Bayou with riparian vegetation
and dense understory

Figure 3.
a.
b.

3

.......

.

.

. . .

.

.

.

. . .

.

.

.

6

Bear Camp area along Linnville Bayou
Overstory along Linnville Bayou, showing
extent of last major flood
List of Tables

Table 1.

Sites near the Proposed Olefins Site
Having Texas Historical Markers . . .

Table 2.

National Register Sites in the General
Ar ea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7

.

.

7

Figure 1.
Project area map
including the site
of the 01 efins
complex and the
auxillary pipeline.

#Ji

i

/

,.

INTRODUCTION
Phillips Petroleum Company proposes to construct an
olefins complex utilizing a tract of approximately 2,100 acres
in western Brazoria County, Texas. (Fig. 1). At the request
of Radian Corporation, a cultural resource inventory of the
area to be affected by the construction of this complex was
conducted in December, 1979, and January, 1980, by James R.
Pliska, Ray Kenmotsu and Bruce Nightengale, staff members of
the Texas Archeological Survey, the University of Texas at
Austin under the supervision of David S. Dibble, Director.
with:

The objectives of this study were to provide the sponsor
1) a records and literature search to determine the
extent of previous archeological investigations in
the region and the presence of any recorded archeo­
logical or historic sites within the project area;
2) a field inspection to locate :and record cultural
resources in the area of the proposed co~struction,
including a search for post-European contact sites;
3) an assessment of the potential significance of
located sites and an evaluation of the impact of land
modifications necessary for construction of the com­
plex; and
4) recommendations for mitigating any adverse effects
of this construction.
STUDY AREA

The study area lies in western Brazoria County, south­
west of the community of Sweeny, Texas. The 2,100 acres
under consideration include a plant site and auxi11ary facil­
ities such as a three~mile pipeline corridor to the existing
Phillips' Sweeny refinery. The major drainage is Linnville
Bayou which borders the study area on the northwest and
southwest.
The study area is located within the Texas Coastal Plain
physiographic zone (Fenneman 1938). The project area is a
nearly level plain, slowly drained by the sluggish Linnvil1e
Bayou and its tributaries. Landform elevations are less than
50 feet MSL; the only major topographic features are Linnville
Bayou and Old Ocean Swamp, a poorly drained, low-lying marsh
on the eastern edge of the project area.
The countryside is characterized by level grasslands
(Fig. 2a), low riparian woodlands along the bayou and its
tributaries (Fig. 2b, 3a, 3b), fresh water marshes, swamps,

1

and other flood-prone areas (Correll and Johnston 1970;
Bureau of Economic Geology 1968). The majority of the land
has been cleared, and some areas are planted in Bermuda and
carpet grass which is cultivated for turf. Most of the
marshy areas are used for grazing cattle. The overstory
growth along the bayou consists of live oak, pecan, Texas
sugarberry, cedar elm and eastern hophornbeam (Radian 1979:
3-60, 3-62). The dense understory consists primarily of
yaupon, green briar and numerous vines. Both the natural
and domestic vegetation very effectively conceal the ground
surface and whatever archeological remains are on it,
rendering survey difficult.
The mean annual precipitation in the study area is 44
inches with the maximum in September and the minimum in March.
However, a governing factor in the weather pattern in this
area is extreme weather phenomena. The fifty-mile strip of
Gulf Coast in which the project area lies has an average of
52 days per year wi.th thunderstorms, a tropical cyclone (winds
40 mph or greater) every five years, a hurricane (winds 74 mph
or greater) every seven years, and a great hurricane (winds
125 mph or greater) every twenty-eight years (Radian 1979: 3-12
to 3-15). Flooding in the area is generally connected with
these extreme weather phenomena. Such frequent flooding has
undoubtedly had its effect upon the archeological remains in
the area, both because of the depositional and erosional effects
and because the wetting and drying cycles will have affected
both stratigraphic stability and the preservation of organic
materials.
Geologically, ,the area is composed of Pleistocene and
post-Pleistocene sediments deposited by alluvial, deltaic
and coastal inter-deltaic processes (Sellards, Adkins and
Plummer 1932). The Pleistocene (Beaumont) and Holocene forma­
tions have been modified by fluvial processes such as stream
incision and local subsidence. The immediate project area
is entirely underlain by the Holocene alluvium (Radian 1979).
No soil survey has been published for Brazoria County
(see Godfrey et aZ 1973). The soils of approximately 90 percent
of the project area are in the Pledger Series, which typi~a11y
occurs on high, nearly level floodplains. The soils are
characteristically composed of a black clayey surface over a
reddish-brown clayey subsoil. The soils are calcareous, with
a subangular blocky structure and a high shrink-swell potential
(Soil Survey Staff 1975). This latter characteristic causes
a great deal of subterranean movement, which is naturally
detrimental to the survival of cultural remains in strati­
graphic context.
Norwood soils are restricted to the borders of Linnville

2

Figure 2.
a.

An example of the dense ground cover
characteristic of the level grasslands
within the project area. Riparian
vegetation bordering the bayou in background.

b.

Linnville Bayou, the major drainway within
the study area, bordered by riparian vegetation
which is typically dense overstory growth
choked by understory brush.

:.

Bayou {Radian 1979: 3~36}. The soil characteristics include
a reddish-brown silty loam surface over a reddish-brown to
reddish-yellow fine sand/silt loam subsoil. These soils have
a low shrink-swell potential and, due to the new deposition
from overbank flooding of the bayou, are favorable for the
preservation of buried prehistoric sites.
The project area is within that zone defined by Blair
(1950) as Texan Biotic Province, a region transitional between
the eastern woodlands and the western grasslands. At least
forty-nine species of mammals, sixteen lizards, thirty-nine
snakes, five urodeles and eighteen anurans occupy, or have
recently occupied, the Texan province, but none are endemic
to that area. Species which were probably exploited by the
prehistoric inhabitants include deer, rabbit, opossum, raccoon,
squirrel, various rats and mice, ground squirrel, and the
ocelot and jaguar. Althou9h the armadillo is present in the
area, Lundelius (1967: 313) states that it has been in the
region for only a few hundred years. See Radian Corporation
(1979: 3-64 to 3-74) for a detailed listing of modern faunal
components in the project area.

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
The many published reports which detail the results of
previous archeological investigations along the Texas Gulf
Coast have described a large number of prehistoric sites
along the major rivers, estuaries and brackish-water lakes.
The majority of these sites are refuse mounds, or "shell
middens." These large accumulations of shell are the result
of the repeated exploitation of the aquatic environment by
prehistoric populations. The primary constituent of the
shell middens of this area is the brackish-water clam Rangia
euneata, which was utilized as a food source.
No previous archeological investigations have been
reported for the immediate project area. However, studies
have been carried out nearby in Brazoria and Matagorda coun­
ties, and several shell middens have been intensively analyzed
for information on the subsistence patterns and ecological
adaptations of the prehistoric inhabitants.
A survey of the archeological and historic resources was
carried out in 1973 along the mouth of the San Bernard River,
southeast of the study area, and twenty-one sites were record­
ed (Texas Archeological Survey Research Staff 1974). All
twenty prehistoric sites were shell middens and were catego­

4

rized as estuarine base camps, estuarine gathering stations,
brackish lake base camps and brackish lake gathering stations.
In the same year, a reconnaissance survey and limited
test excavations were conducted in the Matagorda Bay area by
staff members of the Texas Archeological Survey (Fritz 1975).
Ninety-five sites were located and recorded within the target
areas chosen for that study and twenty-eight previously
recorded sites were revisited. Of these 123 sites, twenty-two
are historic. The vast majority of the prehistoric sites
were shell middens comprised of varying amounts of oyster
and pangia~ but nine were lithic concentrations and one a small
bone and pottery exposure.
In the Clear Creek watershed, north of the present project
area, Texas Archeological Survey personnel recorded seventy­
six prehistoric and two historic sites (McGuff and Cox 1973).
Twenty-four sites were described as shell middens, eleven as
terrace sites and twenty-two were located on sandy loam mounds
within the flood plain.
In 1974, a field examination of the Vicker's Site No.1
in Brazoria County located and reported nine prehistoric sites
along the San Bernard River (Skelton 1974). All were shell
concentrations; seven were considered as almost completely
destroyed by erosion.
An archeological assessment of areas to be affected by
a proposed sewer line in the village of Oyster Creek, Brazoria
County, was conducted by Texas A & M University in 1977, and
a survey and limited test excavations were carried out. One
site locality, 41B0126, yielded evidence of a series of small,
brief and separate encampments, indicating transient foraging
activities (Dering and Ayers 1977).
SURVEY PROCEDURES
The cultural resource assessment of the study area
consisted of two parts, a literature search and a field
survey. Records and relevant maps maintained by the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, the University of Texas
at Austin, were checked, as were the Texas Historical
Commission files (Radian 1979: 3-88,3-89). No prehistoric
or historic sites had been recorded either within or immediately
adjacent to the area of the present study. The Texas
Historical Commission has placed historic markers at the fol­
towing sites in the general vicinity of the proposed complex:

5

Figure 3.

---~~---

~-

------

~

a.

Dense riparian vegetation along the
fringes of Linnville Bayou. This locale
is known as "Bear Camp" and purportedly
derives its name from its repeated use
as a hunting camp for bear in the past.

b.

Overstory growth along Linnville Bayou.
Note the flood stage discoloration on the
trunks of the trees which illustrates the
height of the water during the last major
flooding.

TABLE I.

SITES NEAR THE PROPOSED OLEFINS SITE HAVING
TEXAS HISTORICAL COMMISSION MARKERS

Cedar Lake Salt Works
9 mi. SW on FM2611
Brazoria

Site of Home of John Austin
Old Cemetery Near Mason Oak
Brazoria

Dan Carlos Barrett
Old Cemetery
Brazoria

Jordan Plantation
4 mi. S
Sweeny

Henry Smith Statue
School Grounds, SH 36
Brazoria

Old Sweeny Cemetery
Sweeny Community
Sweeny

Masonic Oak
Pleasant & Wood Streets
Brazoria

Sweeny Plantation
SH35 at Plantation Road
Sweeny

Old Brazoria Townsite
Masonic Park
Brazoria

Thomas Jefferson Sweeny
Sweeny Family CemeterYI .3 mi.
NWon FM524
Sweeny

Site of Home of James Walker Fannin
4 mi. SW on FM521
Brazoria

Sites in the surrounding area which are nominated to or
listed on the National Register of Historic Places are:
TABLE II.

NATIONAL REGISTER SITES IN THE GENERAL AREA
Name
Location
Brazoria County
1975
Jones Creek
Listed:
McCrosky Log Cabin
Ellerslie Plantation
1978
% m i. S of SH 36
East Columbia
Ammom-Underwood House
1976
Angleton
Brazoria County Court House 1979
Approved by
Review Board:

SE of Jones Creek

Durazno Plantation
Sweeny Plantation
Varner Hogg Plantation

On FM1459
2 mi. N of West Columbia

Matagorda County
Listed:
Approved:

Hotel Blessing
Matagorda Light House

1979

Blessing 'rf.exas
Matagorda Bay
I

.~--""~--""--."

Only two sites are listed in the records of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory which lie within a ten mile

7

radius of the project area. Approximately seven miles east,
Site 41B0109, the Sweeney Plantation, is listed on the National
Register of Historic Places. Additional survey of a small tract
directly across the San Bernard River from 41B0109 was conducted
by the Texas Archeological Survey in 1979 (Robinson 1979) but
neither historic or prehistoric cultural material was found.
Site 41MG41 is situated approximately five miles west of the
proposed olefins complex on an abandoned channel of Caney Creek.
The landowner reported lithic debris including seven arrowpoints,
potsherds and shell - indicative of a Late Preh'istoric occupation
(1,200 B.P. to European contact).
The closest area investigated by professional archeologists,
other than the limited tract adjacent to the Sweeney Plantation,
is the Vickers Site No.1 (Skelton 1974), an area of 2,200
acres on the San Bernard River approximately fifteen miles
east of the current project. Nine prehistoric sites, 41B0100
through 106, were located. All of these are shell deposits
which were buried by overburden and were only exposed by
erosion in cutbanks, by rodent activity or by subsurface probes.
Only two of these sites had not been too severely disrupted
to merit further investigation.
The historic ownership of the study area was compiled
from the Brazoria County deed records (see Bibliography).
The field inspection consisted of walking parallel
and meandering transects. Previous experience indicated
that shell middens are usually located along the banks of
major streams and their tributaries. Linnvil1e Bayou
was thus the main focus of study, and its eastern bank
was intensively surveyed. Due to the nature of the vegetal
cover, the ground surface visibility was poor except in
cutbanks and other erosional features along the bayou.
Elevated areas, being the most likely to retain archeological
remains, were shovel tested for buried cultural debris.
RESULTS OF THE STUDY
HISTORIC RESOURCES
The project area was included in the original land
grant made to Milton B. Nuckols (Nichols?), a doctor from
Kentucky who was one of Stephen F. Austin1s Old 300. The
grant of a league and a laborl was made August 3, 1824. Dr
Nuckols, however, resided in San Jacinto in 1824, and never
improved or occupied this grant.
1

A league is defined as 5,000 square varas and equates to
4,428.4 acres; a labor is 1,000 square varas or 177.9 acres
(General Land Office 1974).
8

Dr. Nuckols' will of 1830 left the league to his mother
and father-in-law, William and Mary Scott. Five years
later, in 1835, William Scott sold the entire league, with
the exception of one labor of land sold earlier to Oliver
Jones, to McKinney and Williams, apparently a land speculation
partnership. The McKinney and Williams partnership held the
land throughout the period of the Republic of Texas from
1835 to 1847. Although they had paid $3,188.25 for the land,
and held it twelve years, they got only $1,000.00 for the
league when they sold it to another partnership, Butler
and Hodge. Apparently, it was not a good investment. No
structures or improvements are mentioned in any of the
above deeds.
Butler's half interest was passed to Thomas Toby of
Galveston in 1849. The Hodge interest passed to J. Ledyard
Hodge of Washington, D.C. Branch T. Masterson and his family
reassembled the league as a single holding from the various
heirs of Toby and Hodge during 1884. These deeds still
treat the entire league as undivided and unimproved.
By 1906 the Masterson family investment showed some
signs of maturing well. In that year, Branch T. Masterson
sold a 100-foot right-of-way across the league to the St.
Louis, Brownsville and Mexico Railroad, the planned route
of which ran from Bay City through Brazoria, Angleton and
Alcoa. It is apparent from this rather lengthy deed that
the Masterson family controlled large tracts of land in
this area, including several other tracts the size of the
Nuchols' grant.
The first subdivision of the league occurred in 1909
when several 160 acre farms were surveyed and offered at
prices ranging between $2,134.00 and $2,160.00. These
offerings apparently did not lead to settlement. In 1911
the league was again sold as a unit to the Southern Devel­
opment Company by Edward Aaron and Herbert M. Woolf of
Kansas City, Missouri for $275,000.00.
Two locations were reported by the local residents
to the survey crew as the earliest building sites in the
project area. Intensive examination of these localities
yielded no trace of these structures or of any occupational
debris. However, given the history of land ownership, these
structures would have been either of post-1900 construction
or squatter's cabins which were never legally recorded.
Another reported locality immediately adjacent to
the project boundaries is known as Bear Camp (Fig. 3a),
and purportedly derives its name from its repeated use as a

9

base for hunting bear. This area was closely examined; no
evidence of any utilization was found.
PREHISTORIC RESOURCES
No prehistoric sites were located during the field
survey and no records of previously documented sites were
found. However, a large percentage of the land in the
study area is cleared pasture and oil field. Modifications
associated with this modern land use, such as the construc­
tion of wells, roads and pipelines, may have destroyed or
obscured surface archeological material. In addition, sites
have probably been concealed or eradicated by frequent
flooding of the bayou. Recent land modifications, dense
vegetation, the pattern of extreme weather phenomena, and
the depositional and soil environments have all conjoined
to obscure or disrupt any surficial remains which may have
existed.
CONCLUSIONS
This report summarizes the results of an archeological
investigation of areas to be affected by the construction
of an olefins complex by the Phillips Petroleum Company in
Brazoria County, Texas. A literature search yielded no
previously recorded sites or organized archeological surveys
within the present study area. No sites nominated to, or
listed on, the National Register of Historic Places are
within the study area.
No historic sites were located during the field
survey and no significant historic resources were indicated
by the archival search.
No prehistoric sites were encountered during the field
investigations. However, such results do not definitely
demonstrate a complete absence of prehistoric occupation
in the project area. As was evidenced at the nearby Vickers
Site No.1, prehistoric occupation areas often lie buried
beneath flood deposited sediments and are apparent only
when other disruptive forces expose cultural material.
Although the necessarily shallow shovel probes per­
formed during the survey failed to yield any cultural
material, it is possible that deeply buried archeological
features do exist within the study area. That possibility
would increase with proximity to the bayou, where overbank
deposition could have rapidly buried old land surfaces.

10

It is our oplnlon, based upon the above results, that
construction of the complex is not likely to affect
cultural resources in the study area. If chance exposures
of buried archeological material occur during construction,
it is strongly advised that the Texas Historical Commission
be notified immediately.

11

REFERENCES CITED
Blair, \4. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Te:xas.

The Texas JOUTnal.

of Science 2(1):93-.127.

Bureau of Economic Geology, the University of Texas at Austin.
1968 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Houston Sheet. University
of Texas at Austin.
Correll, Donovan S. and Marshall C. Johnston
1970

Manual of theVaseulap Plants of Texas.

Research Foundation.

Renner, Texas.

Texas

Dering, Phil and David Ayers
1977 Archeological Investigations In the Village of
Oyster Creek, Brazoria County, Texas. Repopt
No.42, Anthropology Laboratory, Texas A & M
University. College Station.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938

McGraw­
New York and London.

Physiogyaphy of Eastepn United States.

Hill Book Company, Inc.

Fritz, Gayle
1975 Matagorda Bay Area, Texas: A Survey of the
Archeological and Historical Resources. Planning
Division, Texas General Land Office and Texas
Archeological Survey, Reseapch Repopt No. 45.
University of Texas at Austin.
General Land Office
1974 Texas Land Measure.
Godfrey, Curtis L., Gordon S. McKee and Harvey Oakes
1973 General Soil Map of Texas. Texas A & M University
and the United States Soil Conservation Service.
Lundelius, Ernest L.
1967 Late Pleistocene and Holocene Faunal History of
Central Texas. In Paul S. Martin and H. E.
Wright (editors), Pleistoeene Extinctions.
New Haven.
McGuff, Paul R. and Wayne N. Cox
1973 A Survey of the Archeological and Historical
Resources to be Affected by the Clear Creek Flood
Control Project, Texas. Texas Archeological
Survey, Reseaych Repoyt No. 28. University of
Texas at Austin.
12

Radian Corporation
1979 Environmental Information Document for a Proposed
Olefins CompleJ(, Brazoria County, TeJ(as. Radian
Corporation. Austin.
Robinson, David G.
1979 An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Barge Off­
loading Facility, Brazoria County, Texas. Letter
report on file at the Texas Archeological Survey.
Sellards, E.H., W.S. Adkins and F.B. Plummer
1932

The Geology of Texas.

Volume I:

Stratigpaphy.

Bureau of Economic Geology,Univefsity 6f
Texas at Austin.

­

Skelton, Duford W.
1974 Vickers Site No.1, Brazoria County, Texas:
A
Survey of the A.rcheological and Historical Re­
sources. Texas Archeological Survey, Reseapoh
Repopt No. 50.
University of Texas at Austin.
Soil Survey Staff, Soil Conservation Service, USDA
1975 Soil Taxonomy. Agrioultupal Handbook No. 436.
U.S. Government Printing Office. Washington, D.C.

,

13

BIBLIOGRAPHY OF HISTORIC SOURCES
General Land Office, 8th Floor, Stephen F. Austin
Building, Austin, Texas.
1) Land Grant Map, Brazoria County
2) Milton B. Nuchols league grant August 3, 1824
in Austin Colony
Brazoria County Abstract Company
111 East Magnolia Street
Angleton, Texas
1) Document index for M.B. Nuchols league, courtesy
of Mr. Sheppard
Brazoria County Clerks Office
County Courthouse
Angleton, Texas
1) Book 1, pg. 233 Wm Scott sold to McKinney and Williams
2) Book 1, pg. 231 McKinney & Williams sale to Butler
& Hodge
3) Book 1, pg. 230 Quit claim by Tax Assessor for back
taxes
4) Book Z, pp. 476, 479. 480, 481 Deeds concerning
acquisition of the league by Masterson family
5) Book 69, pg. 605 Railroad right-of-way deed
6) Book 108, pg. 352 last sale of entire league to
Southern Development Company in 1911

14

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author gratefully acknowledges the contributions
of many people to the completion of this project. The
field work was carried out with the assistance of Ray
Kenmotsu and Bruce Nightengale. The historic resources
were investigated by Jack M. Jackson. The project was
supervised by David S. Dibble
Photographic plates were processed by Jack Grieder.
The final manuscript was edited by Margaret J. Kluge
and Solveig Turpin.
The cooperation of Dennis Harner of Radian Corporation,
who served as coordinator between TAS and Phillips
Petroleum Company, is greatly appreciated.

l5

