ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION
at

FORT GRIFFIN MILITARY POST,
Shackelford County, Tex as

by
DORRIS L. OLDS

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin
August, 1969

ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION AT FORT GRIFFIN MILITARY POST
SHACKELFORD COUNTY, TEXAS
SPRING, 1969

Dorris L. Olds

Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
The University of Texas at Austin
August, 1969

This page intentionally left blank.

PREFACE
In March, 1969 the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) undertook a two month archeological investigation
at Fort Griffin State Park, Shackelford County, Texas. The
project was conducted in accordance with Interagency Contract
No. IAC (68-69)-439 between the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department and the laboratory, and its purpose was to furnish
archeological information for use in restoration planning.
The archeological investigation was under the direction
of Dr. Dee Ann Story, Executive Director of TARL. Chief
field archeologist was Dessamae Lorrain, with J. David Ing
and Dorris L. Olds as assistants. Crew personnel changed
frequently but those who remained with the crew more than a
few days were Marsha Jackson, Douglas Gordon, Glenn Garner,
and Paul Alexander. Several members of the Texas Archeological Society volunteered their services at the site from time
to time; their help was much appreciated.
Archeological activity was closely correlated with plans
for architectural restoration and reconstruction at the fort
and was oriented toward furnishing information for this project. The area of the parade ground was determined and the
site of the original flagpole was located. The four rows of
enlisted men's huts were located as well as a row of officer's
quarters.
Several structures peripheral to the parade ground
were located and excavated: a set of officer's quarters, the
library; and examples of two types of enlisted men's huts.
Details of construction were recorded for the administration
building and the sutler's store.
The primary source for information on the original structures at Fort Griffin was Roy E. Graham's 1968 report, Texas
Historic Forts Part IV, Griffin, published by the Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department. This detailed and thoroughly documented study was an invaluable aid in understanding the layout
of the fort and in locating and identifying structures and
other features.
Our debt to Mr. Graham ~s obvious in the frequent references to his report throughout this paper.
I .would also like to acknowledge with pleasure the assistance and cooperation of the Parks and Wildlife personnel
in carrying out this undertaking. In particular, I want to
express our appreciation to Gerald D. Harlan, historian for
the Fort Griffin project, who generously shared his extensive
historical knowledge of the fort with us and provided us with
a number of maps and drawings as well as a comprehensive bibliography of the fort.
The residents of Albany, Texas showed their great interest
in plans for Fort Griffin by their cordial hospitality and
helpfulness. Special thanks are due John H. McGaughey, owner
and publisher of The Albany News and M. L. Joyce, Manager of

ii

the Albany Chamber of Commerce, who assisted us in more ways
than I could recount, including finding a place to live and
locating laborers for the crew.
Many people have contributed in numerous ways to the
archeological investigation and to the preparation of this
report, and to them all I extend my sincere thanks.
I would
like to mention a few individuals in particular whose contributions have added very much to the success of the project.
Charles A. Smith, Jr., one of the enthusiastic amateur
archeologists of the Texas Archeological Society, made a number of the detailed drawings that are reproduced in this report. James E. Corbin, Jr., of TARL, and Harald P. Jensen,
Assistant State Archeologist, identified the gun cartridges
and other ordnance items. Larry T. Lazicki designed the
cover. Vaughn M. Bryant and Alton K. Briggs, graduate students at The University of Texas at Austin, prepared the site
maps and drawings for publication. Christopher R. Thompson
photographed the artifacts. Terrisa Lazicki, TARL, typed the
paper, and.Jackie Foster was a willing and patient "Girl Friday" who counted nails, weighed glass, and performed countless
other tedious chores.
I am deeply grateful for Dr. Dee Ann Story's continuing
guidance and wise counsel throughout the entire project, from
its inception.to its completion.
For any errors of fact or interpretation I assume full
responsibility.
Dorris L. Olds
Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory
·
July, 1969

Report submitted to the Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, in partial fulfillment of the terms of Interagency
Cooperation Contract IAC (68-69)-439.

iii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
INTRODUCTION • . .

1

SITE DESCRIPTION

3

. . .

ARCHEOLOGICAL' INVESTIGATION

. . ..

Parade Ground, Sun Dial, and Flagpole

B
8

Administration Building .

22

Officer's Quarters

39

•••

Enlisted Men's Quarters. ·-· •.•..
E-I-2

E-I-4

53
53

.................

Stone Foundation Hut .
Library
Sutler's Store

58
58
68

..........

76

SUMMARY

83

RECOMMENDATIONS

85

REFERENCES CITED

..

86

APPENDIX . •

88

List of Specimens •

89

iv

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Page
Fig. 1.

Fort Griffin, ca. 1940-1941 . . •

4

Fig. 2.

Location of Fort Griffin military
post and old town, and old road
connecting them . . . . . . . . .

5

Fig. 3.

Archeological site map of Fort Griffin

9

Fig. 4.

Plan of Fort Griffin, 1871

10

Fig. 5.

Sketch of Fort Griffin, 1875

11

Fig. 6.

Plan of Fort Griff in, 187 5 ( '?) •

12

Fig. 7.

Plan of Fort Griffin, 1876

13

Fig. 8.

East-west line of officer's quarters

15

Fig. 9 .

Row of enlisted men's huts, sun dial
foundation, and flagstone walk in
parade ground .
. . . . . . .

• • •

17

Fig. 10.

Sun dial foundation

19

Fig. 11.

Site of flagpole

21

Fig. 12.

Administration building

23

Fig. 13.

Administration building, scale
drawing
~
r."l

"

•

•

•

•

...

•

•

•

24

•

Fig. 14.

Adminstration building

26

Fig. 15.

Administration building, construction details
. . . . . . . . . • .

28

Administration building, chimney
footing . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.

29

Administration building, construction details
. . . . . . . . . . .

30

Administration building, construction details
. . . . . . . . . . .

31

Fig. 16.
Fig. 17.
Fig. 18.
Fig. 19.

Administration building, construction details
. . . . . . . . . . .

.

35

Fig. 20.

Administration building, artifacts

38

Fig. 21.

Officer's quarters, scale drawing . .

40

v

Page

. . .. ....

Fig. 22.

Officer's quarters

Fig. 23.

Officer's quarters, east chimney

Fig. 24.

Officer's quarters, east chimney
foundation

. . . . .

43

................

44

.

Fig. 25.

Officer's quarters, west chimney

Fig. 26.

Officer's quarters, artifacts

Fig. 27.

Officer's quarters, artifacts

Fig. 28.

Enlisted men's hut E-I-2

Fig. 29.

Enlisted men's hut E-I-2, chimney
foundation
. .
.

Fig. 30.
Fig. 31.

41

. .

.

45

......

52

. . . . . ..

. . .

54

. .. .

55

. . . ... . .

57

. .. .. .

59

. . . .

Enlisted men's hut E-I-2, scale
.
drawing

. . .

52

Enlisted men's hut E-I-2,
artifacts
. . . .

Enlisted men's huts E-1-2 and
E-I-4, artifacts . . . . . . . . .

60

Fig. 33.

Enlisted men's hut E-I-4 •

61

Fig. 34.

Stone foundation hut . • .

62

Fig. 35.

Stone foundation hut, scale
drawing . . . . . . . . . .

64

Fig. 36.

Stone foundation hut, artifacts

67

Fig. 37.

Library

69

Fig. 38.

Library, scale drawing

70

Fig. 39.

Double hearth, detail drawings .

71

Fig. 40.

Library, double hearth

72

Fig. 41.

Library, artifacts . . .

75

Fig. 42.

Sutler's store, south wall .

77

Fig. 43.

Sutler's store, west wall

79

Fig. 44.

Sutler's store, east wall

80

Fig. 45.

Sutler's store, chimney and
fireplace
. . . .
. . .

82

Fig. 32.

vi

This page intentionally left blank.

INTRODUCTION
On a wind-swept plateau on the rolling plains of northeastern Shackelford County, north central Texas, remains what
is left of Fort Griffin, once one of Texas' most active frontier forts.
Stone walls of a few crumbling buildings still
stand, along with a lone chimney, a large stone well, and a
cistern. But mesquite brush, cacti, weeds and grass obscure
the outlines of the old parade ground with its gravel and
flagstone walks, cover the stone foundations of many buildings,
and form low mounds over the tumbled rubble of chimneys. The
noisy bustle of military life with its clatter of cavalry has
given way to the sound of bird calls and the quiet meanderings
of a lonely Longhorn bull.
Sometimes visitors come to see the
old fort, trying to understand and recapture in some measure
what life must have been like there in 'the active days, but
little is left to be seen now.
The post was established under the name of Camp Wilson
on July 31, 1867, with Lt. Colonel Samuel D. Sturgis commanding four companies of the Sixth.U. S. Cavalry (F, I, K, and
L). The name was changed to Fort Griffin on February 1, 1868
in honor of Colonel Charles Griffin, Thirty-fifth Cavalry,
who was commander of the Department of Texas until his death
in 1867. One June 3, 1868 companies of the Seventeenth Infantry under Lt. Colonel s. B. Hayman joined the cavalrymen at
the garrison. Other military units mentioned as being stationed at the post later were Company A of the Tenth Cavalry
(Rister, 1925: 20), Companies A, F, and G of the Eleventh
Infantry, and two companies of the Fourth Cavalry (Clarke,
1925: unpaged).
Fort Griff in was one of a line of western frontier posts
established on the border of Indian country to protect the
Texas frontier from Indians and marauding whites and to guard
the mail and stage lines, the settlements, and the supply
lines that supported them. The other garrisons on the western
line were Forts Belknap, Richardson, Merrill, Terrett, Phantom
Hill, Concho, McKavett, Clark, Chadbourn~, and Camp Cooper.
When Colonel Ranald McKenzie's forces succeeded in eliminating
the threat of danger from the Indians after the campaign of
1875, Fort Griffin was no longer necessary to the defense of
the area and it was abandoned as a military establishment on
May 31, 1881. Its last military occupants were the men of the
Twenty-second Infantry under Captain J. B. Irvine (Clarke,
1935: unpaged).
Neither Fort Griffin nor the other posts of this line
were built as stockades or places of refuge, but served rather
as bases from which the Army units moved out to attack the
enemy. Fort Griffin was planned as a permanent post, but because of the military demands made on the garrison, and its
short active life, few permanent structures were ever erected.
Quarters for officers and enlisted men were not only simple
but were hastily built of flimsy materials that were impos1

2

sible to maintain as comfortable dwellings. The enlisted
men lived for years in tents or huts that were small, crowded,
and unsanitary; candles furnished their only light after dark
(Risch, 1963: 488-489). The more enduring sets of houses
were constructed of pickets, logs, or frame over a stone foundation, as were some of the buildings designed for general use,
such as the hospital, the library-chapel, and the quartermaster's storehouse. Only the structures built of stone comprise the present standing ruins: the administration building,
sutler's store, bakery (partially restored in recent times),
the magazine, the lone standing chimney, a 60-foot deep well,
and a cistern.
During the period when the fort was most active, a thriving little town, also called "Fort Griffin" or, locally, "The
Flat", grew up below the fort in the valley between the foot
of the hill on the north and the Brazos River.
Its prosperity
was based on a tremendous trade in buffalo hides and cattle,
for which it served as a supply base, and on its proximity to
the army post. It was notorious in its time as a wild frontier town; buffalo hunters, cowboys, cattlemen, and soldiers
all patronized its places of entertainment--saloons, gambling
houses and dance halls--and wild shooting scrapes were common.
The town could boast of an opera house and a school, though,
and a number of good respectable citizens lived in the town
and on nearby ranches. After the buffalo were exterminated
and the military post was abandoned, the townspeople were
disheartened when, in 1881, the Texas and Pacific railroad
was routed through the rival town of Albany, the county seat.
"The Flat" had lost its livelihood and it was not long before
most of its people had moved out, many to Albany.
In some
instances the buildings themselves were moved. Only two of
the original structures remain at the site; evidence of the
rest of the town lies in pasture or plowed field.
A small group of Tonkawa and Lipan Apache Indians lived
in another settlement that was contemporary with the fort
(Sjoberg, 1953: 284). Tonkawas were reported in the vicinity of Fort Griffin by 1872, when some of the men were acting
as scouts, guides, and spies for the American soldiers. Edgar
Rye (1909:
87) describes their settlement as about twentyfive tepees in an arena-shaped area of about one-half acre,
located in a grove of cottonwood, pecan, and elm trees. This
was only about one-half mile northeast of "The Flat." A few
Lipan Apaches had been settled with the Tonkawas by 1876, but
by 1884, most of the Indians had been removed to Oklahoma.
The Indian village, too, has disappeared, but our survey has
tentatively located the original site in a plowed field.
Since the day the U. S. Army abandoned the fort it has
had interludes of occupation, or at least of some sort of
activity. According to one historian (Clarke, 1935: unpaged),
after the troops moved out "a number of residents moved from
'The Flat' to 'The Hill' and occupied the better homes there.

3

But, one by one, as Albany and other towns grew, they moved
away and soon these buildings were again abandoned and left
to go to wreck and ruin."
Graham (1968: 15) relates that some of the stone structures served as barns until their roofs had fallen in and
that some of the frame structures had been hauled away by the
settlers. We learned from local informants that the administration building was in use as a dwelling as late as the
early 1920's, when it burned down. Ross A. Maxwell relates
(1940:
9) that he was told that at the time of a drouth in
1934 one of the ranchers placed a pump in the old well and
watered his stock there. Between 1938 and 1940 a Civilian
Conservation Corps camp was established on the mesa within
the limits of the State Park. During ~his period the men
must have done considerable clearing, for stones have been
piled together in various locations and wooden stakes have
been driven at the sites of a good many structures. Neither
the condition of the ruins when the c.c.c. moved in nor the
extent of their activities is known at present. The map
shown in Fig. 1 is adapted from one that was compiled by the
State Parks Board in cooperation with the National Parks Service about 1940 or 1941. In the early 1960's much of the
fort area was cleared of mesquite trees by the use of heavy
chains dragged between tractors, with the result that many
wall foundations were pulled over or destroyed and the stones
were widely scattered.

SITE DESCRIPTION
The fort site itself is the historical sector of Fort
Griffin State Park, which is situated about 15 miles north of
Albany and is bisected by U. S. Highway 283. The mesa on
which the military post is located covers perhaps a square
mile, but most of the fort's buildings w,ere erected near the
parade ground in the flat central area and occupied only about half of the hill top. Nearly 100 feet above the surrounding terrain, the fort commanded a panoramic view in every
direction. Below the steep bluff on the northeast, Collins
Creek, flowing from the west, joins the Clear Fork of the
Brazos River as it flows southward. On the east, below the
bluff, Mill Creek runs northward through wooded banks to join
the Brazos. To the south and west the larid slopes more gradually down to the rolling prairie, broken by similar wide,
high plateaus.
Standing at the eastern tip of the hill, the modern flagstaff marks the fort from the highway (Fig. 2, A) and from
the site of the once-lively town of Fort Griffin (Fig. 2, B).
The town lay at the foot of the northeast bluff and stretched
along both sides of a half-mile road that led to the Brazos
River crossing on the north. From the vacant fields.that

4

FORT GRIFFIN STATE PARK-63
MILITARY POST AREA

Commissary
~oles
~ Blocksmilh

Shop

a

0

contour

inlervol five feel
0
I

1969

Mogozine

•Men's Quarters not
drafted to scale

Texas State Parks Board and
United States Department of the
Interior National Park Service
cooperating

500 Feet
I

Adapted from Plan No.

SP-TEX

F.G.9012
VMB

Fig. 1

c

A
~

Fig. 2. Location of Fort Griffin Military post, old town, and old road connecting them. A, Eastern bluff of Fort
Griffin mesa from U. S. Highway 283; B,
Road bisecting site of old town of Fort
Griffin ("The Flat"), looking north toward crossing of North Fork of the
Brazos. C, Old road between fort and
town, looking northeast over the bluff.
(Compass directions).

B

U1

6

represent the ghost town, and from the site of the former
Tonkawa village nearby, the administration building's chimney
top and one wall of the sutler's store on "Government Hill"
can be seen through the trees. Even the path of the old road
that once descended the hill and connected the fort and the
town can be ~ade out dimly through the undergrowth.
Up on the hill the road is easily identified, running
near the library and down.over the bluff (Fig. 2, C).
Its track is clear of trees and brush and its crown is elevated above shallow ditches on either side. A modern road
crosses the center of the old parade ground area and takes
the visitor from one to another of the standing ruins and to
the remains of the hospital's foundation walls adjacent to the
cistern. A branch of this road leads to a scenic view on the
east where the modern flagstaff stands. Other modern constructions consist of three stone monuments clustered not far
from the center of the parade ground, a storage shed and
water tower in the southwestern part of the fort, and two.
sets of power lines.
Although most of the ground cover is young mesquite,
scrub brush, cacti, and grass, near the fort boundaries are
a few hackberry and live oak trees. Cacti are especially
thick around the former habitation sites; among the species
identified were tasajillo, pricklypear, devilshead, and petaya. Devils claw also flourishes. Rattlesnakes frequent the
piles of stone, mesquite brush, and cacti. Less formidable
are other reptiles, lizards, rabbits and small rodents whose
burrows run under the stone foundations. Many birds enliven
the place: mocking birds, blackbirds, cardinals, meadow larks,
mourning doves, bobwhite quail, buzzards and hawks. During
early spring, great flocks of geese and ducks fly high over
the hill on their way northward. Blair (1950: 110) assigns
this part of Texas to the Mesquite Plains district of the
Kansan biotic province.
The cap rock ledge on the Fort Griff in mesa is a part of
the Coleman Junction limestone member of the Cisco group,
Permian period. Maxwell (1940: 4) describes these limestones
as "hard, with fine crystalline texture, . • . [weathering] to
a yellowish-gray, yellowish-brown, or bluish-gray color.
Fresh exposures are frequently dark-gray or grayish-blue." He
goes on to say that below the cap rock the strata are for the
most part "shale, interbedded with a few thin zones of limestone and an occasional layer of sandstone." He describes
freshly exposed shales as gray, grayish-blue, or greenish-blue
in color, weathering to shades .of yellow and brown and sandstone layers as mostly yellow or brown. The kiln that the
troops used for making lime mortar for the fort is visible on
the hillside north of the entrance road as it climbs to the
mesa. Overlying the Permian bed rock are thin terrace materials from the Quaternary--red gravels, sandstone, silt, and
mud, according to Leonard F. Brown, of the Texas Bureau of
Economic Geology (personal communication, 1969).

7

The mesa appears to be a part of the North Central Prairies
as described in Land Resource Areas of Texas (Godfrey, Carter,
and McKee, n.d.: 16). These upland soils are characterized in
this reference source as 11 brown, sandy loam to silty loam,
slightly acid soils over red to gray, neutral to alkaline,
clayey subsoils (Main series: Truce, Waurike, Bonti); and
brown, moderately deep to shallow, calcareous, clayey soils
over shaly subsoils (Main series: Owens)."
The climate is subtropical (U. S. Dept. of Commerce publication 20-41), with dry winters and hot, humid s~ers, distinguished by a great variation both in annual temperature ex ...
tremes and in monthly and .yearly rainfall averages. The
Albany station reports a 20-year rainfall average .(1938-1967)
of 26.25 inches, but extremes from 11.01 to 47.01 inches have
been recorded since 1869 when the Albany station began operating. Temperatures have varied from -8°F. to 110° with cold
fronts bringing strong northerly winds. Prevailing winds are
south to southeasterly, most persistent in the spring.

8

ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATION
Fort Griffin Military Post was designated 41 SF 4 in the
recording system used by the. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL). These symbols indicate that it was the fourth
site recorded by the laboratory for Shackelford County, Texas.
The site was plotted on U.S.G.S. 7.5' Quadrangle Sheet
Fort Griffin and is located at N32°55'36" and W99°13'45".
Most of the fort area lies at an elevation between 1280 and
1290 feet above sea level, although the eastern tip, where
the modern flagpole stands, rises to 1300 feet. Another small
area at the north edge of the hill also reaches the 1300 foot
height.
A datum point was established on the large stone well,
at the top center of the lowest rock on the side toward the
parade ground. This rock was marked by a nail driven into
the mortar to the right side of the rock. Datum was assigned
an arbitrary elevation of 100 feet and all measurements of
distance and elevation were related to it. Fig. 3 is a reproduction of the archeological site map locating the parade
ground and the structures excavated by TARL •
. Parade Ground, .Sun.Dial, and Flagpole
Assigned priorities put location of the parade ground
and the original flagpole in first place. This meant that
the structures on the perimeter of the parade ground must
first be located and identified because the parade ground had
no visible boundaries and it could be defined only on the basis
of the structures bordering it. According to the old plats and
sketches of the fort, the parade ground formed a rectangle about twice as long as it was wide, and it was oriented with the
long axis running roughly northeast to southwest (Figs. 4, 5,
6 '

7) •

To simplify description of locations, the northern edge
of this rectangle was termed grid north and the other directions were designated accordingly. Grid north was actually
45° west of magnetic north. The datum point was located, then,
on the grid east side of the well. Grid terms were used for
description, but both grid and magnetic north were shown on
maps and scale drawings. Photographs were oriented by grid
directions except for Fig. 1.
Parade Ground
On all the plans and sketches, the first (southernmost)
row of enlisted men's quarters was shown on the north side of
the parade ground, and the east~west row of officer's quarters
appeared on the south. Orleman's sketch (Fig. 5), dated 1875,
indicated a well within the limits of the parade ground on the

9

SITE MAP,

FORT GRIFFIN

~0-

Enlisted Men's
Stone
0
Foundation
Hut

c

Huts (not to

scale)

cc c

6 4 32

.East edge of Flagstone Wolk

.:~
:

A front .of Monument

Flagpole.

~enter of
Sun Dial

Parade

Ground

D

Officer's

Quarters

~1290'

NW corner
Bakery

A of

0
Map adopted from
State of Texas
Parks map No.9012

(~

1941)

contour interval five feet

Fig. 3

VMB

10

I \fill 1~I

·-r-··

'=

oe.o,o.?~~o

oo

00000000 DO

1111111111

1111111111

:;v,,,,.·,
1111111111
f{ut1rl•r•

HllllHll

:t'"•" ,. ,
OODDDDODOO

11'"'.-..l .......,.14, .,/ir~ffU,,. '!/'
C..,...V..~<C..,..r °'-'"'""

.....,....~r!)~.- ..l'¢'21o,.c.-,, .

.;. ....?........~ ....

Of"

FORT GRIFFIN TEXAS
SCAU . 100 TEET"IO.All. -lllOH

NOTE
-

DESIGNATES

-

r-::~-.---··~·:· ·. s.

~
l

f

j

chiv•••

srom:aUit.DlNW

FRAME BUillllNGS
f l ltET BUillllNGB

IZi:ll

Nationd ii!I

!tiscell&11eoua
Forts f'ile, ••cord Group

i,

No, 17,

11

-- - - - . ____ J_

.

11

r.

>!

~

~~.

::~

r

-!

tt

t•~-W.of!°li

...c
~

~

~

~

,...,. zr;:

i..

ii!

~

~

i

~~
1~

.
J

.R

~.

~

~~ ~
t

'

...

.,

~·

t.

~~~:l

J
J~.,.,u~
-;
-:::. ,ilhi'1'
.,:t ••••• . .
'
~ 1
t
. '. . · 1,f ' }'
;fl.1··
.
...,•'
..,, ...
~

..,~

.~

~ i~
-~ ~ ~

d~ :i:~~j!J1

~

,.

~

·i

_l

"'~

.~[~J

-~~j·

i.

.... .;,j • ...;.,_~- "'".~ • .;

c ..

.......
...........

0 ..

..... c

.....
:0: 0

l··
ti~

........

Ult

.......
"'""
"•O ....> ...
•Q

•

" wen
Q)

"' >'ti co
•"4 H m
• "'0
""0 0

•

.,,; !! &,g

~

,,
- j

...

,\

...

--~1

·

\1

12

l•'ll •

••

. .'ti

•

r.ci.. •

(]

..

~

~~

1

.,a,.

.

~

.,;.

la

It
llil

l'il

llJ

Ill

GI

.E?.I

Cill
JI

"•a

rt
Ill

la
li!
Ill

...

mm

l!I
riJ

ea

liJ
~

ru

~

lil

=r~
II':
raa ' ..i

l!ill

•• •

' !!
f.if

d

f!J

ID
...

~

m

...

~

....

II

""

-~
:.

l'
fil

1:11
GI

ru
.

•

..

.'\( ""
•

.(J

-~

.

B
"'

,
J

Il

13

PLAN
of

}'UR1"• (~IU1'14"Ii\~

'I" •. x.
..
'"'"""
6 ·lifr•<IHJ l.f.rw
t>I'jir<"n,,.

' ii

r

..

,.

I

_
.

1

4·
l
...

l

tbv ,

~ib.I

n...J..,,.

.. .

~Ji,..

~·
}~«" ,L,, ~..tt#1"t" &'# ~

1~1~v fln•.

.•'f..:l>l,.;,,. .

• ._,_ &1 .
11~;u.

,.;u.J..Wt
.. I/. J(. tlt)i ....

d 1arr-7ff!>r

n

,. r ...." ..
"
,.

<drnil .
1'-'! '~

,.

NtW"-

'

6~

··J.
.,.iJ'
•

J;p
,,.....;

I

..

~pf

.
...

t"J

"'r •

u ....

a

a

"'

.J
u

•

Fig. 7. M. L. Crimmins Collection
No. 108 (1876).
The University of

Texas Archives.

14
west, in line with the flagstaff that was center~d between the
north-south boundaries. This drawing.also showed a library
on the northeast side of the parade ground, right at the
boundary line. Boundaries were usually undefined, but the
north and south limits appeared to .be parallel with and approximately equidistant from the first row of enlisted men's huts
and the row of officer's quarters; and, where a scale was indicated, about 50 feet from each row. On the east side, the
early plats showed only the hospital and an adjutant's office
(one or both) at a considerable distance from the parade ground
area; there was no structure in the present position of the administration building. On the west, a small guard house was
sometimes shown, outside the limits of the parade ground, and
in one instance a few scattered lieutenants' quarters were indicated at some distance away. Orleman's sketch was the only
one in which the well appeared.
All of the contemporary plans depicted either a flagstaff
or a sun dial near the center.of the area between the officer's
row and the enlisted men's row. Orleman's plan indicated both
features adjacent, with the sun dial slightly south of the
flagpole.
The National Park Service Map, drawn to scale, agreed
with this general orientation and placement of the enlisted
men's .huts, officer's quarters, and library, but added the administration building (called "Officer's Quarters"} about 45
feet beyond the eastern edge of the pai:ade ground. Both the
sun dial and flagpole were indicated, just a little north of
the center on the north-south axis, with the sun dial to the
south. The well was placed close to the exact center on the
west, but the western side of the parade ground was left undefined.
At the time of this writing no report was available
that explained on what basis this map was drawn--whether it
was based on structures that were clearly discernible in 19381941, or whether it was a composite of earlier plans and the
features observable at the time the map was made.
After the datum point was established,and the approximate
size and orientation of the parade ground determined, the next
step was to locate the row of officer's quarters parallel with
the south boundary and the row of enlisted men's huts parallel
across the way on the north side.
Under a heavy growth of vegetation. in the field southeast
of the administration building, concentrations of rocks and
mounds of stone and mortar rubble could be recognized south of
the assumed southern-boundary of the parade ground (Fig. 8, A).
Numerous large flat stones set even with the ground surface
suggested wall foundations; in some places these flagstones
were directly associated with the mounds of rubble that probably indicated fallen chimneys (Fig •. 8, B) .
In a few places
there were depressions filled with stone rubble; these were
identified as cellars, for the records mentioned them in connection with several of the houses.

D

Fig. 8. East-west line of officer's quarters. A, Looking westward along the row, uncleared
rubble in foreground.
B, Looking across the end of the row toward stone monuments and sutler's store. C, Looking east toward bakery across ruins of possible end house. D, Cleared
cellar steps of same house.
(Grid directions).

c

A-

,_.
V1

16
Three stone steps leading into one of the cellars, on the
eastern end of the row, were cleared and exposed (Fig. 8, C
and D). The steps were made of solid, dressed sandstone blocks,
and, where measured, the treads were a little more than 0.5 feet
wide and long, with the riser slightly over 1.5 feet high. The
lowest step was exposed only along its top surface. There was
an indication of stone edging along either side of the steps.
Square nails and bits of glass were mixed with the soil that
covered them. This house, for which the steps were the cellar
entrance, was designated Feature 1.
It may have been the last
house on the east end of the row, but it was impossible to ascertain this without clearing the entire row. The meager surface indications suggested a two room house with the main living room on the north and a kitchen on the south over the cellar.
As we searched through the high grass we marked the locations of seven individual houses along the row. The maps
usually showed four or five, but the Howarth drawing illustrated .by Graham(l968: 104) showed seven. The various
sketches and plans, of course, were made at different periods,
and no doubt a good many changes occurred from time to time as
additional structures were built or old ones modified.
It is
quite possible that if all the foundations were cleared and
exposed some of the marked locations should be combined into
single structures. The foundations that were identified,
though, formed a straight line running east and west, north
of which would lie the southern boundary of the parade ground.
Across the parade ground we searched for the southernmost row of enlisted men's huts. Three of the huts could be
quickly located and identified by rectangular formations of
large, heavy stones--the chimney foundations.
Others were
more obscure, .but additional concentrations of stone could
be made out, either piled together or scattered around a
limited.area. In nearly every instance when a hut site was
identified we found a wooden stake at.the northwest corner
of the chimney stones or in the midst of scattered stone.
When distances between the centers of the stone concentrations
were paced off we found them to be just about 21 feet apart,
and there were ten of them all in line (Fig. 9, A) .. This row
was designated E-I (Enlisted Men's Row I), and the individual
huts were assigned numbers in order: E-I-1, E-I-2, and so on
from east to west. At the western end of the row was a large,
rock-filled depression surrounded by flagstone slabs and
large rocks, some obviously in place and others jumbled about
on all four.sides; the whole .assemblage was heavily overgrown
with vegetation. This, we surmised, .might well be a kitchen
or mess room. As shown on the old fort plats they were usually located.fairly close to the huts, but Graham (1968:
36)
records them as being "35 yards from the southwest end of each
row of company quarters. 11
To confirm the identification of E-I as the first row of
huts we searched for similar hut debris which would represent

c

A

Fig. 9. Row of enlisted men's huts,
sun dial foundation, flagstone walk
in parade ground. A, Facing west along first row of huts, E-I. B, Sun
dial foundation seen from the south.
C, Clearing flagstone walk, looking
north to lone standing chimney.
(Grid directions).

B

......
-..J

18
the other three rows that should be similarly aligned to the
north. Arranged in good order, hut for hut, were.corresponding remains of three more rows, ten huts to a row, with what
appeared to be a larger, different type of structure at the
west end of each row. These rows were designated E-II, III,
and IV. The space between E....,II and E-III was somewhat greater
than that between E-I and. E--II or E-III and E-IV. Running along the eastern edge of the rows from E-I to E-IV were the
remnants of a flagstone walk tha± may have bordered a secondary drill field.
It was traced out on foot but not cleared.
Based on the information gained from the old plans and
from our identification of the outlying structures, we measured and staked out the boundaries of the parade ground, using a transit and relating the position of the parade ground
to the datum point on the well. Stakes were placed at the
corners and at intervals of 100 feet from them. The area
thus marked off formed a rectangle 600 feet long, east-west,
and 300 .feet wide, north-south.
It ran 45 feet west of the
administration building, 50 feet north of the row of officer's
quarters,. 50 feet south of the first enlisted men's row, and
left the well outside the west boundary.
Sun Dial
Close to the center of the north-south axis of the parade
ground and 210 feet east of its .western boundary (as we laid
it out) was a concentration of large flagstones.
This was
partially covered with grass and soil, but one corner was
bare and projected into the modern road. After all the stones
were cleared there appeared a 5 foot square construction of
limestone blocks, laid flat in a single course (Fig. 9, B and
Fig. 10). Large cut stones were placed at each corner and a
fifth one in the center, set a little lower than the others;
smaller stones and mortar fragments filled the intervening
spaces forming a fairly solid construction. Adhering to the
top surf ace of the center stone and the northeast corner stone
was additional mortar. Automobiles had run, over the stone on
the southwest corner and tilted it into the road junction. As
the formation consisted of a single course and there was no
space at all in the square for a flagstaff to be inserted, we
concluded that this must be the base of the sun dial and noted
it as Feature 2.
Embedded in the grass north of the sun dial were a number
of large flat-lying flagstones.
When these were all cleared
they formed a flagstone walkway that ran from the north edge
of the parade ground southward for a distance of 110 feet,
stopping 33 feet short of the sun dial base (Fig. 9, B, C).
The walkway may once have reached as far as the sun dial, but
if so the construction of an old road, whose bed was visible
in the intervening space, must have obliterated it. Many of
the limestone slabs were still in .place, but the most nearly
complete edge bordered the east side; enough stones were undisturbed to indicate that the walk was 6 to 8 feet wide when

-------------------------------------------------

19

VAGN

GRID
N

0

I

.5
I

SCALE: I inch= lfoot

Fig. 10. Sun dial foundation.
Lower, scale drawing.

Upper, close-up view from grid south.

20

it was intact. The flagstones were laid over limestone rubble and gravel, with the crown slightly higher than the sides.
Thirteen of the largest stones were measured and found to average nearly 1.5 feet by 2 feet across. Few artifacts were
found along the walk: a square nail fragment, 3 pieces of
glass (possibly from a beer bottle) , the basal sherd of a green
wine bottle, and a short, flat metal strip. The walkway was
recorded as Feature 3.
On the assumption that this walkway may once have extended
to the south across the present road, we cleared an area of
similar length and breadth in line with it but found no sign
of such an extension. Angling off to the southeast from the
clearing, though, appeared traces of what might have been a
gravel walk. This was not followed out but seemed to be running toward the back of the officer's row.
Flagpole
There was no surface indication of the site of the flagpole, which by all accounts should be near the sun dial somewhere in the center of the parade ground; surface clearing and
troweling revealed no evidence of it. Finally, a backhoe was
provided by the State Parks Department to aid in the search.
We excavated first to the south of the sun dial across the
width of the modern road to a depth of nearly 6 feet, but
there was no sign of the flagpole in the heavy, black, clayey
soil. Then we began digging north of the sun dial into the
old road bed. About 2 feet below ground surface the tip of
a limestone rock was exposed. The backhoe was moved out and
the entire area around the rock was carefully troweled and
brushed, revealing a small formation of flat-laid rocks (Fig.
11). Immediately adjacent to the stones on the north side
was a dark, circular stain in the reddish-brown soil. On the
edge of the stain were two large square nails embedded upright
in the earth with their points down. Another square nail like
these was recovered from the back dirt. The photograph shows
a wooden stake placed beside the nails to mark where they
were. The center of this rock formation was 11 feet north of
the sun dial, slightly east of its center, and 19 feet south
of the flagstone walk, in line with its center. Meager though
the evidence was, we were convinced that this was the site of
the original flagpole foundation.
The spot was in agreement
with its placement on contemporary sketches; the stain suggested a post mold or fill where a large, round pole had been
sunk; and the rocks could have been part of the supporting
structure. At such a depth and location, this association of
stones, soil discoloration, and square nails in situ seemed
to be explained most reasonably as the site or-the flagpole.
No concrete fragments were found, either in the matrix of the
stone formation or in the soil overburden.

21

0
Fig. 11. Site of flagpole. Upper, view toward grid north. Note dark
stain of the post mold and the two square nails in place below the
marker stick. Lower, scale drawing showing relationship with sun dial
and flagstone walk.

22
Administration Building
This structure with its tall chimney is the largest and
most impressive of the standing ruins.
It must have been built
between 1876 (it was not shown on early plans of the fort) and
1879, when it was mentioned in a report of that date. Basing
his information on this report, Graham says (1968: 43):
There was a stone administration building at the
fort being used for offices of the commanding officer,
the adjutant and post quartermaster. It measured 18
by 45 feet and contained three rooms. This structure
was located between the hospital complex and the parade ground almost directly in the center of the
northeast side of the field.
As previously related, the house was occupied at the time it
burned in the early 1920's. It was reported that the man who
lived there stored quantities of broomweed in the house and
made a practice of collecting metal junk which he stored under the floor.
The three rooms of the building were in line, north to
south, with the front (west) side facing the parade ground.
The chimney was incorporated in the partition wall between
the south and middle rooms. Fig. 12, A, B, C shows three
views into the rooms from the back.
"A" is a view of the
structure from the southeast, facing northwest toward the
stone monuments in the parade ground, with the south room in
the foreground.
"B" shows the middle room from the east, and
"C" shows the north room from the southeast.
Archeological investigation here was directed toward recording the building plan and construction details, and, if
possible, locating doors and windows of the fallen walls.
Artifacts that might be recovered could be expected to give
additional information about its construction.
The elevation of the ground on which the building was
situated dropped off to the east, so the upper surface of the
wall foundation was at ground level on the west wall, but lay
above ground along the vestiges of the east wall.
In the
south room the two west quadrants were excavated. Where the
standing walls were entirely missing, along the east side and
the eastern section of the south side, the space next to the
foundation stones was checked for possible evidence of doors
and windows.
In the middle room, the northwest and southeast
quadrants were excavated, the east wall foundation checked,
and the chimney foundation exposed.
In the north room, the
east wall foundation was checked and a test pit was dug outside the east wall near the northeast corner to expose the
depth and construction of the wall foundation.
Fig. 13 illustrates the floor plan as it was developed from the archeological investigation and shows the areas that were excavated.
Artifacts were collected from the surface of all three rooms

c

A

Fig. 12. Administration building. A,
South and middle rooms, facing northwest toward stone monuments on parade
ground. B, Middle room, facing west.
C, North room, facing northwest.
(Grid directions).

B

~

...

I ~.

,,,.id

'·-<!,

/~..J

1;

i

.

l,<'{·f

.

l~

'!

.

·l;l

~

".

I\.)

w

24

ADMINISTRATION

BUILDING

........
.:..............----------------------....;....-----------'-t
. .
.
. - . .
.

.

'

. · •. · · : ·• .' · • FI a·gs 'tone · WaI kw ay · : : •

· ·

+----.,....----- 18.3'-.-·-._·.----,---~~
...

..

window

Te st
Pit

_3_3___,

.·•
.

.i ~

: : • ...,

......

...,

'<I

....

. ·..

window

- ....
'·.

~

'
..c

......,

:

-

0

a..
Q)

...
c;

·.
,·

0

c
0

"'""

I

...,t

0

0

>

..

LL.

0

....

u

-

,.,)

0

door

.·

!

0

Q)

e

E

. . . .. r
· ·. · . :' ·~

·D·

n
LJ

window

--------1 chimney

1---'-----'"'-'I/

...

.·

/' '.
possible
. post·
· molds

){
window

·.
f-3.3~

D Standing

walls, entire or partial

0

~Wall foundation only
1969

Q

Excavated

5 Feet

I

area

VMB

Fig. 13

25
and samples of mortar, plaster, and burned wood were saved.
Soil from the excavated quadrants of the middle room was put
through 1/4 inch screens in order to obtain a sampling of the
smaller specimens that might otherwise be overlooked.
When the space in front of the building just outside the
west wall was cleared of its overburden of soil, grass, and
fallen wall rubble the remains of a flagstone front porch were
revealed. The largest, most nearly undamaged stones were adjacent to the wall, but enough other flagstones, or fragments
thereof, were found in place to indicate a porch about 7.5 to
8 feet wide that ran the length of the west wall. At the
northwest corner of the house it was joined by another, narrower flagstone walkway that ran along the north wall and extended 8 feet westward from.the northwest corner. This side
walk was about 4.0 to 4.5 feet wide. Protected by a heavier
cover of soil and grass, the stones .of the side walk were better preserved than those of the .front porch, and more of them
remained in their original position. The flagstones were set
on a thin layer of gravel mixed with.loose, reddish sandy soil.
Square cut.nails were unearthed in quantity along the line of
the outside .boundary stones of both porch and walkway, with
heavy concentrations of large nails.at the corners ... A careful
search was .made along the outside.edges. of both porch and-walkway for post.holes which would indicate that they.had been
roofed. Two possible post.molds were located alongside the
porch, their centers about a foot beyond the western edge.
They were situated respectively 4 feet and 27.7 feet north of
the southwest corner of the house and were 0.5 to 0.67 foot
in diameter. No such indications of post molds could be.found
at the outside edges of the north walkway, though.
In the
surface.soil .of both areas were many moresquare-nails,.a les~
ser quantity of round wire nails, miscellaneous other.hardware
i terns, window and bottle glass fragments, ceramic sherds.,
metal pieces, gun cartridge cases, .a minie'ball, and other debris, old and.modern, mixed .with mortar, plaster, and stone
rubble from the fallen walls.
The building was constructed almost entirely of dressed
limestone blocks, although occasionally
few sandstone blocks
were .used. Walls and foundations were two stones thick. The
large wall and chimney blocks, with smaller chinking stones in
the interstices, were set in lime mortar that is now a reddishbrown color. Corners of the exterior walls were tied together
by alternating blocks of each course, but the inside partition
walls were tied into the front outer wall in a more varied
pattern at.only every third course or so. Fig. 14, A, illustrates details of the corner construction at the southwest
corner of the south room. The southwest corner walls are
tilted outward at present, the result of a deep pothole dug
in the past by someone who may have been searching for treasure (Fig. 14, C).

a

In each room was an opening for a small drain at the
base of the west wall; the one in the north room shows clearly
on Fig. 14, D).

c

A

"'A

:,;:..---c

Fig. 14. Administration building. A, Clearing flagstone porch on front1 view toward north
with south wall in foreground. B, Details of tie-in between walls, inside northwest corner
of middle room. C, Outside wall of south room facing east1 note tilt of southwest corner
walls. D, Inside south wall of middle room.
(Grid directions).

0

B

IV

°'

27
The chimney that formed part of the wall between the south
and middle rooms was built as a solid block nearly to ceiling
level; there was no open fireplace or hearth. Heat must have
been furnished by a stove set near the chimney with flues to
carry the smoke from the stove out the upper part of the stack.
Openings for the flues could be seen near ceiling height in
both rooms (Figs. 12, A and 14, D). Don Rickey, Jr. (1963:
178). illustrates such a heating arrangement in an 1885 photograph of barracks at Fort Elliott, Texas. Figr 15, A, gives
a detailed view of the chimney facing the south room.
It can
be seen that rough rather than cut stones were used in the
section enclosed by the attic. A small opening in the chimney is obvious, just above present ground level; presumably a
treasure hunter has removed stones from the chimney here. The
stack stood 20 feet high above the wall-foundation, and a
sheet of tin covered the top; this was held in place by wire.
The north side of the chimney, facing the middle room, was
excavated around the base to expose the footing stones (Fig.
16). The northeast cornerstone of the footing was missing.
Fragments of a cast iron stove were found in front of the
chimney, confirming our inference concerning the heating system.
Remnants of plaster adhered to the west corners of both
north and south walls in the middle and north rooms (Fig. 17,
A, B, C). The plaster had evidently been applied in two
layers; the first coat was thoroughly scratched in order to
provide a good surface for bonding the second, smoothed coat.
That the second coat was finished with whitewash was apparent
from chunks of fallen pinkish plaster with one smooth, white
surface. Modern graffitti now mar the remaining plastered
areas.
The only indications of exterior plaster were tiny
spots at a few mortar joints on the west wall.
The south room measured inside about 15 feet square, although it must be recognized that all measurements of the
building could vary by a few fractions of a foot depending
on where a rock was measured.
The south wall of the building
retained 20 standing courses on the outside facade (however,
not all courses ran evenly across the wall) , and 20 courses
on the inside (Fig. 17, D). The west side of the south window
was in fairly good condition; its sill was 2.5 feet above the
foundation footing and the standing height was 6.3 feet from
the sill to the existing top edge.
On the west wall (Fig. 14, C; Fig. 18} there were 19 courses
on the outside and 21 c-ourses on the inside. The window sill
was 2.25 feet above the foundation and the existing height of
the window was 6.8 feet.
The door sill was between 0.4 foot
and 0.5 foot above the foundation, with a present height of
7.8 feet.
The interior north wall (Fig. 15~ A} served as a partition
between the south and middle rooms and included one side of the
chimney. This wall stood 19 courses high, with parts of 3 addi-

I

I
I

I

-,

c

B

Fig. 15. Administration building, construction details. A, Chimney in south room; matching
line between upper and lower sections is indicated. B, Wooden beam of door support in west
wall of south room. C, Plaster adhering to northwest corners of middle and north rooms.
(Grid directions) .

A

~

Im

"'
co

29

A

r ,... J

=
,
'
.J
P:~.):.,,, : '· .. J .
J

~·~
··r:· ··· ···:·:;··.·.·.·•.·.······ ·.·

\;r=·:· . -~i~

"" .... .:,:, , : ...,.:•i
'
r- - - - - - - -"......___.
---

-'-

D

LIMESTONE

('?:\~

MORTAR

S,..._""-.
-~

·.....:.....:..<::?,': .. ~ . .. .,·~ ...'... ~

- - - _,_ - - ---

--

PROFILE OF N.ORTH SIDE OF CHIMNEY
BETWEEN SOUTH ANO MIDDLE ROOMS

B

Fig. 16. Administration building, chimney footing. A, Footing exposed
in grid south wall of middle room. B, Scale drawing of footing showing
details of construction.

A

-

Fig. 17. Administration building, construction details. A, Plaster adhering to inside of
northwest corner, north room. B, Details of plaster on south wall, north room. C, Plaster
on southeast corner wall, north room. D, South wall of building and part of remaining wall
foundation. East edge of standing wall formed side of south window.
(Grid directions).

0

B

w
0

31

A

w
. ·1

I· ·I

."I

.....
.· 1

.....,

.,

E

,..,
.,

,..,

'

I· .

,.., ~
,..
1· ·I

~OOD

>FLOOR BOARDS

~

I·

·I

..
,.

·•

'·

·I

F

,.

I· .

INSERT
BASEBOARD

"r:

/

/FLOOR BOARDS

I· .

:: :/FOUNDATION
'-JOIST

WALL

"-----'-FOUNDATION

W4

•E

PROFILE

PLAN

B

Fig. 18. Administration building. A, Inside grid west wall of
south soom. B, Details of probable floor construction.

32
tional courses on the west side by the chimney. Very little
was left of the wall on the chimney-'s east side--only fragments
of 8 courses remained, with 2 stones protruding from the chimney at the 8th course. Foundation stones, however, outlined
the rest of this wall and the east wall. The doorway between
the south and middle rooms was calculated to be about 3.0 feet.
Only the foundation stones of the east wall remained in
place, but the quantity of burned window glass, nails, and
charcoal discovered at the center of the wall strongly suggested the probability of a window at that spot. Supporting
this conclusion was the statement of a local resident that he
remembered a window there before the house burned (he also
said that there was a door in the center of the east wall in
the middle room). It was assumed that this window was about
the same width of the present windows, so it was projected as
3.3 feet wide.
Fig. 15, B, shows the detail of a wooden beam door support
in the south room. Each of the house doors either had such a
beam in place or there was an obvious space where one was once
installed. Just above the second course of wall stones was a
similar opening in each standing wall of all three rooms;
beams inserted in these places were probably for anchoring a
wide baseboard (Fig. 18, B).
The two quadrants that were excavated in the south room
were dug as a single level to a depth of about a foot. About
5 1/2 pounds of window glass, in various stages of warping and
distortion from burning, were bagged from the excavations in
this room. Glass fragments fused with bits of wire screening
were found beneath the west window and at the projected location of an east window. Along with the glass sherds were
numerous square nails (most of them about 3 inches long) , bits
of charcoal and burned wood, and many metal strips. From the
quantities of these materials that were recovered from the
central part of the southwest quadrant it seemed likely that
the tops of the south and west windows had overlapped in falling. A latch hook about 5 inches long was.found under the
west window, but unfortunately it was left in place for later
recording and photographing and was removed by vandals before
it could be safely put away.
Just east of the door in the west wall were two door butt
hinges; they were of identical size, 2 1/2 by 1 3/4 inches,
but the sides of one were folded over while the other one lay
flat. A complete brown ceramic door knob was found nearby;
it had three holes inside the hub for fastening a metal spindle. This had been re-fired during the conflagration but
closely resembled the tawny brown striped "Mineral" type described in an old hardware catalog (Towne, 1904: 169). It
was stated there that such clay knobs were used only with the
cheapest grades of locks and were never called for by architects. Close to the hinges and the door knob was an assortment of other metal objects: square and wire nails, metal
rings and strips, a large wing nut, a buckle, a length of pipe,

-----------

33
wire fragments, screws, bolts, and miscellaneous scraps of tin
and other metal. There was also a clay marble. Such an unrelated collection of objects could well have been the sort of
cache that the householder was reputed to have stored. Other
losses to vandal activity during excavation were several hardware items that had been set out on a wall block. They had
been found above a section of charred floor beam lying at a
diagonal from the northwest corner of the room.
The middle room was slightly smaller than the south room,
measuring 14.0 feet, north to south, and 15.0 feet, east to
west.
It had at least three doors and one window: a door and
window on the west wall, doors to the south and north rooms,
and a good possibility of a door or window in the center of
the east wall. Evidence for a door was found in the very
heavy concentration of nails there combined with a 3 foot gap
in the second course of wall foundation blocks. The south
side of this room was bisected by the chimney. Apparently
the middle room was last used for the kitchen, as indicated
by the stove fragments previously mentioned. Associated with
these cast iron pieces were two Mason jar lids, tin can fragments, potsherds, square nails, charcoal and wood--all badly
burned.
After surf ace clearing the southeast quadrant was troweled
from ground surface to a depth of about 0.5 foot, recorded as
Level 1. Several small pieces of charred ceiling planks (0.32
to 0.66 foot long) were uncovered in a matrix that· included
large quantities of burned plaster and several baked mud dauber
nests. At this level another complete brown ceramic door knob
was discovered next to the interior door to the south room; the
three fragments of still another door knob, similar to the
others, were scattered in the quadrant. Next to the east wall
at one time stood a trunk or chest.
Its contents--now represented by melted glass, re-fired potsherds, a fork, and various
pieces of wire--were partially enclosed by a l 1/2 inch wide
metal strip that must have reinforced the original container.
A charred floor plank, 1.2 feet long and 0.43 foot wide was
also found in this level; it was oriented east to west near
the central west section of the quadrant.' Other smaller pieces
of charred planks and wood fragments were distributed throughout the level, accompanied by many square nails. Excavation
of this quadrant was completed by shoveling to the level of the
burned floor debris which was about 1.5 feet below the ground
surface. Then this floor surface was troweled again in an unsuccessful attempt to find floor planks.
The northwest quadrant was excavated in two levels: Level
1 was the stratum from ground surface to the top of the burned
roof debris and Level 2 from there to the natural ground level.
The upper part of Level 1 contained much wall plaster,
many nails, and some charcoal; however, this was scattered instead of concentrated in small areas. Along the north end of
the east wall three large stones were uncovered. The northernmost rock was cut and finished, with mortar showing on its

34

upper face, suggesting that it was a block from the partition
wall between the north and middle rooms. Beca,use the three
large rocks were burned on the top and sides, .and because of
the location and arrangement of the nails, it was concluded
that the nails and charcoal were a· part of either the roof or
the north door frame.
The two fire bricks that were found
leaning against the second foundation course of the north wall,
2.5 feet from the east wall of the quadrant, had much charcoal
beneath them, which supported the theory that they were resting directly on the burned floor remains. One brick was covered by the remains of a burned plank or beam about 0.1 foot
thick. Burned wood fragments presented no clear pattern of
alignment to indicate their original position, but the disarrangement was probably due to the great weight of material
that fell during th~ fire.
Hardware from the north interior door was found at this
level: a brown ceramic door knob, a metal door latch hook, a
metal door hinge, and a latch staple. From the position of
the hardware with the hinge and door knob facing up, it was
evident that the partly open door fell into the building when
it burned. Adjacent to the west door on its south side was a
door lock and four large wood screws. The entire assemblage
of door hardware from the northwest quadrant was recorded as
Feature 4.
Level 2 was dug to the natural ground level about a foot
below the bottom of Level 1. At the north door area near the
above-mentioned three large stones, additional door hardware
was discovered. Although this group was about 1.5 feet lower
than Feature 4 it probably was a part of the same assemblage.
It consisted of another brown ceramic door knob and two complete large cast iron butt hinges. These were alike, of the
loose-pin variety with acorn style ornamental tips; they measured 3 5/8 by 4 inches. The sides of one were open with the
four screws in place, points up; the sides of the other were
closed and the heads were up. Ahout 1.5 feet south of the
door was a complete iron key hole escutcheon. Among these
hardware specimens and the bricks and stones were concentrations of nails and charcoal, and all were mixed together with
much wall plaster.
The north room itself was not excavated, but a 3 by 3 foot
test pit was dug just outside the wall at the northeast corner
of the building to expose the wall footing and details of the
construction trench. The stone foundation was 5 courses deep
at this point, measuring just over 2.5 feet.
The 3 upper
courses overhung the 2 lower ones by 0.12 foot, and the bottom courses were inset toward the building. Fig. 19, A, B,
illustrates the foundation wall and the construction trench.
A surf ace collection from the north room produced a large
quantity of melted window glass, some of which from the west
window was fused with wire screening. There were several window shade roller brackets, including one complete set: the
bracket with a hole for insertion of the pin and the bracket

B

A

·i

I

~MORTAR
LSi:J
I'

LIMESTONE

t:t

Q

z

x

~

_J
_J

0

LL

'

/

/

>

>

,
DARK GREY

CJ
--

;;>

/

BROWN

LIGHT

boo

\J

I

Cl

I

r
L

V1

w

/L/

DARK
V
UNDISTURBE?/

'-

7. 7 /

~

Fig. 19. Administration Building, construction details. A, East wall foundation outside
north room near northeast corner. B, Excavated trench showing fill of original construction trench at the east wall, facing north.
(Grid directions).

BUILDING

~

~

PROFILE OF NORTH o
WALL TEST TRENCH
AT EAST WALL OF
ADMINISTRATION
uj

SCALE: I inch= I foot

I

0

D

BUILDING

OF ADMINISTRATION

WALL OF FOUNDATION

PROFILE OF EAST

36
with a slot for the other end. There was even a metal cap to
fit on one end of the roller.
In addition there were the
usual potsherds, miscellaneous bits of glass, scraps of tin,
metal strips, nails, and screws.
Since it was known that the administration building was
occupied well into the 20th century, as a basis for comparison with other buildings, the square cut nails and the round
wire nails were counted separately. Although wire nails had
been manufactured in the United States for a short time previously, it was about 1890 before their use became so general
that they began to outnumber the square nails (Fontana and
Greenleaf, 1962: 55). Of the 1677 nails collected from this
building, about 91.53% (1535 nails) were identifiable as the
square cut type and 8.46% (142 nails) were wire.
In addition,
there were 478 fragments of square nails. Most of the cormnon
cut square nails could not be identified by specialized types,
but brads and fencing, finishing and barrel nails were represented in the collection. The most frequently used sizes were
the 3 1/4 - 3 1/2 inch nails which accounted for about 37.52%
of the total. Other sizes were grouped, with approximate percentages working out as follows:
3
2
1
1

3/4
1/2
1/2
- 1

- 6": 0.45%
- 3": 9. 64% µ
- 2 1/4": 38.63%
1/4": 13.74%

There was some doubt whether much information could be
extracted from the window glass, aside from the knowledge that
it was there in quantity, that much of it was fused and distorted from burning, and that some, at least, of the windows
were screened. So much of it had been melted together that
counting the sherds would offer little or no meaning. A number of the larger flat pieces were measured for thickness and
were found to range from 2/32 to 4/32 of an inch, with the
most frequent thickness being 3/32 inch. Some pieces showed
the extremes of thicknesses on a single sherd.
It appeared,
from the unevenness and the interior bubbles that could sometimes be made out, that most of it was of the hand blown type
called "cylinder glass" which was not supplanted by machine
made glass until 1890 (Scoville, 1948: 15). In this process,
a large cylinder was blown, then one end was reheated causing
it to pop open. The other end was then cracked off from the
blow pipe to which it was attached. The cylinder was next
split and gradually unfolded and smoothed after reheating in
the flattening oven. This technique resulted in a fairly flat
piece of glass, but because the inner circumference was less
than the outer, drawn-out bubbles were apt to be present in
the matrix, and the pieces were somewhat rippled and uneven in
thickness.
Single thickness modern window glass (2/32 to 3/32 inch)
weighs from 16 to 19 ounces a square foot (Ed. Maxey Glass Co.,
Austin, Texas, personal cormnunication). Based on this figure,
a rough approximation could be made concerning the area of

37
glass represented by the collection.
In the south room the 5
pounds and 3 ounces worked out to about 5.15 to 6.12 square
feet of glass; the 6 pounds, 8 ounces from the middle room
represented about 5.47 to 6.50 square feet; and the north
room, with 9 pounds, 6 ounces, provided about 7.89 to 9.37
square feet.
Since the north room was not excavated and the
collections came entirely from the surface, the only explanation that offered itself for the greater amount gathered
from this room in comparison with the others was that it had
the largest proportion of standing walls. Possibly as a result less glass, accordingly, was buried by falling wall material.
If this conjecture were to prove correct, excavation
of the remaining quadrants of the other two rooms should provide a comparable amount of window glass.
It must be assumed that household rurnishings and personal possessions recovered from the administration building
were related to its last occupant or to subsequent visitors.
This is probably true also of the window screening and hardware from the window shades. However, the door knobs and
hinges and the lock parts may well have come from the original building construction. Representative specimens of construction hardware are illustrated in Fig. 20.

38

B

E

A
,

.

1

c
F

G

H

,
~;

. .

~

......

1.

\

...

~

' ,,
.

~

J

..

K

L

Fig. 20. Administration building, hardware. A, B, Identical complete,
acorn tipped butt hinges, in open and closed positions. C, Screw. D,
Large staple. E, Hook. F, Latch pin with loop. G, I, J, Butt hinges.
H, Key escutcheon. K, L, Identical brown clay door knobs, illustrating
both sides. M, Fragment of same type of door knob, showing striations
in body material.

39
Officer's Quarters
The set of officer's quarters that was chosen for complete
excavation was selected because its ruins were more clearly
visible than those of any of the others on the east-west row,
and there was a fair chance that it might turn out to be the
commanding officer's quarters (Graham, 1968: 39; 101, Fig. 2).
However, this was by no means certain for the only way to identify the various houses would be to clear the entire row, an
impossible undertaking in the time available. This house had
two clearly marked chimney mounds at the east and west ends,
discernible stone wall foundations, and the remnants of a flagstone porch that extended across the north side.
It was immediately west of the house where the cellar steps had been previously exposed and therefore may have been the second one from
the east end of the row.
The entire surface area of the house, including the porch
and extending 18 feet south of the structure, was first cleared
of its overburden of fallen chimney stones and rubble, soil,
grass, and other vegetation. This exposed the stone wall and
chimney foundations.
The chimneys were then cleared and their
footings exposed. Two long east-west trenches were dug: one
along the north wall to look for evidence of doors and windows,
and the other through the center of the building to search for
evidence of a possible north-south cross wall. A third shorter
trench was dug from the center of the north wall to the trench
between the chimneys to look for signs of an interior wall running east-west. Finally all of the house fill was excavated to
sterile soil below the floor level. The soil removed by clearing and excavation was put through 1/4 inch screens and the
artifacts recovered were saved along with samples of stone,
mortar, plaster, wood and charcoal. Excavation disclosed that
the house had been destroyed by fire. A trench was dug into a
low mound situated back of the house to test whether it might
be the site of-a latrine.
Fig. 21 is a scale drawing of the house plan as determined by the archeological investigation. The photographs in
Fig. 22 show the ruins after excavation was completed.
Inside
wall dimensions were determined to be 29.7 feet east-west and
22.5 feet north-south, with the front of the house facing north
toward the parade ground. The wall foundations were for the
most part single cut blocks laid directly in the soil without
previous preparation. The walls were in fairly good condition
along most of the north and west sides, and, with some gaps,
along the south side as well. However, the wall blocks had
deteriorated into little more than a line of stone rubble on
the east side and at the north ends of the east and west walls.
Taking into account the width of the remaining foundation
blocks, which averaged about 1.0 to 1.5 feet across, the outside dimensions of the house would have been approximately
31-32 feet by 25 feet.

WALK

-

-

Fig. 21

-

-

-

; - OOM

-

-

q

-

-

-

-

_

LE DOOR

I

~
0

I

I

'i

~

9

GRIDNORTH

f

~

I

OFFICER's QUARTERS

!;PROBABLE Wf.IDOW

:"

lo
~

I

3"1)

INSIDE MEASUREMENTS• 22.5' X 29.6'

-

~tf

I

~(JT~

I

I

: /ROBABLE WINDOW

,

\Q' !:=:_~ --e-qg§to

-"°"'BLE CRDSSWALL- -

WEST HEARTH

/WINDOW
r---~

or:.
0

c

A
B

r-i

"""

Fig. 22. Officer's Quarters. A, House ruins
seen from the west after excavation. B, View
from the east. C, Looking southward across
remains of flagstone porch in foreground.
Trench in background dug through small mound,
Feature 5.
(Grid directions) .

42
Slightly north of center on the east wall stood a large,
almost square limestone chimney (Fig. 23).
Its front face was
aligned with the inner edge of the wall so that most of the
chimney structurewas outside· the house. Although some of the
stone blocks' had· fallen away from the upper courses, what remained stood about 1.9 feet above ground at its maximum height
and comprised most-· of· 4· courses,;· · The large, unfinished cut
stones were' set· in· lime mortar,·· with mortar between· courses
and remaining on the exposed upper surfaces. The chimney
foundation was set so· deeply into· the earth· that the footing
was reached by excavation on the west side only, by means of a
1 foot pit dug with a post hole digger. Fig. 24 shows the west
side after excavation and includes a scale drawing that illustrates the construction~ The· footing at this spot rested on
bedrock 6feet·below ground level. From top to botton 11
courses were represented. This solidly constructed chimney was
similar to the one in the administration building in that it
had no open hearth or hearthstonej but it was much larger,
measuring 4.5 feet deep (east-west) and 4.3 feet wide (northsouth) . A great many large blocks had fallen from the stack
and were lying in piles of earth mixed with mortar and broken
rock rubble all around the standing foundation.
If the complete stack was proportionately as high as the size and depth
of the foundation indicated, it must have been a huge construction when it was built.
On either side of the chimney appeared good evidence for
windows that were probably centered between the chimney and the
house corners. Window glass sherds with many square nails,
burned wood fragments and charcoal were found all along the
vestigial walls, but this material was most heavily concentrated in the 3 foot spaces extending outward north and south
of the chimney. Just east of the wall were found brackets
and an end cap for a roller shade assembly. On the north side
the window glass recovered amounted to 2 pounds, 4 1/2 ounces,
representing (very roughly) about 2 1/2 to 3 square feet of
window pane; on the south side the 1 pound, 8 1/2 ounces accounted for about 1 to 1 1/2 square feet. ' Such figures should
be taken with some reservation, though, for window glass was
distributed throughout the entire house fill and outside the
walls as far as the excavation went. Window glass was weighed
only in the locations where it was heavily concentrated.
It
is most likely that the two windows were the same size and
that additional glass from both was buried in the unexcavated
earth outside the wall.
Sample measurements showed that
glass thickness ranged from 2/32 to 4/32 inch, with most of
it 3/32 inch thick.
The other chimney was precisely centered on the west wall.
It evidently fell to the west when it collapsed, but its rubble was scattered on both north and south sides as well. After
about 20 large fallen chimney blocks were removed from the surface and the foundation was cleared it appeared at first to be
another solid block chimney, constructed of sandstone instead
of limestone blocks in this case (Fig. 25, A, B, C).
Its

0

c

Fig. 23. Officer's quarters, east chimney. A, View from the west showing chimney rubble before clearing. B, East side of chimney after clearing. C, West side of chimney. D, North
side of chimney illustrating position in relation to east wall rubble of house.
(Grid directions).

B

A

ii:.

w

44

A

D

LIMESTONE

k'.:':'.1

MORTAR

rv1 UNEXCAVATED
~I'

·r

I

B

Fig. 24. Officer's quarters, east chimney foundation. A, Grid west side
of chimney excavated to expose footing at bed rock. B, Scale drawing of
same side.

B

LOOKING

EAST

PROFILE OF WEST CHIMNEY,

I

0

MORTAR

[:\ J

·?

I

1'

~ UNDISTURBED

SANDSTONE

D

Fig. 25. Officer's quarters, west chimney. A, Fireplace filled with mortared rubble stone;
view of east side. B, Open hearth fireplace exposed after removal of rubble fill. c, West
side showing chimney foundation. D, Scale drawing of west side.
(Grid directions).

c

A

.i:::.
VI

46
front face was in line with the outside edge of the wall so
that the chimney was completely outside the house. Only the
stones at the hearth level remained here--the rest of the
chimney stack had been demolished. The middle part of the
foundation was filled, not with large stone blacks but with
uncoursed rubble stones mortared together to make a solid construction. This rubble was removed and the original open
hearth fireplace was therby revealed. Smoothly dressed
blocks lined the 1 by 2 foot opening and a large flat stone
served as the floor.
The single course standing above ground
was 0.7 foot high, with mortar adhering to its upper surface.
The hearth measured overall 3.3 feet deep (east-west) and 3.8
feet wide.
In contrast to the east chimney, this one had an
extremely shallow foundation (Fig. 25, C, D). The footing of
sandstone blocks rested directly on the soil about 1.5 feet
below ground surface, with the space between it and the hearth
blocks filled with small rubble stones set in mortar. Most
of the fallen chimney blocks removed from the area around the
hearth were carefully finished, some still bearing tool marks
on their outside faces.
The stones of this chimney and fireplace showed far more extensive damage from burning than did
those of the chimney on the east.
Strewn over a considerable area back of the hearth, outside the west wall, were hundreds of fragments of a cast iron
stove.
Stove parts were found dispersed fairly evenly throughout nearly 2 feet of mounded fill and extended over an expanse
that reached 19 feet north to south and 8 feet east to west
outside the west wall. Much of this stove debris was melted
and fused--a possible indication that the stove was in use
when the house burned. One could speculate that the original
open.hearth fireplace had been filled in by the last occupants of the house at the time the wood burning stove was set
in place in front of it. Among the stove pieces recovered
were an oven door handle, ornamental trimming fragments,
grill parts, a lion-paw foot, several springs, stove-top
parts, and fragments bearing broken remnants of the maker's
identification: the letters 11 ST", "K", "G. F. FILL ... ",
and " .•• TOVE" could be made out. Perhaps 'the stove could be
traced to a manufacturer in St. Louis.
Conclusive evidence of windows on either side of this
fireplace paralleled the situation on the east wall, for
there was the same assemblage of glass sherds, nails, and
charcoal; but in addition there were scraps of window screen
on the north side. Close to the north end of the chimney
was unearthed most of an entire (though shattered) pane of
glass, including several identifiable edge pieces and at
least one corner piece. All of the sherds were patinated
but few showed signs of burning. Fragments measured for
thickness were uniformly 3/32 inch. Nearby, several large
pieces of glass were found in situ with screen wire still
in place above them.
This suggested that if the window fell
outward from the west wall, as seemed probable, the screen
was inside the glass. Such an arrangement might indicate a
casement type of window. Among the artifacts that were

47
found near the north side of the chimney was a small butt
hinge (1 3/4 by 2 inch), complete with two of its screws
in place, that' seemed suitable for a casement window. All
of the window debris was found beneath the fallen chimney
blocks, proving that the north window, at least, fell before
the chimney~ Glass sherds from the north window weighed 5
pounds, 12 ounces, indicating approximately 4 3/4 to 5 3/4
square feet of window pane.
On the south side the window glass was badly burned and
fused. Glass representing about 3 3/4 to 4 1/4 square feet
(4 pounds, 7 1/2 ounces) came from this area. But again,
this must be only part of the glass that was there and the
windows were probably the same size. Several other small
butt hinges of the same type described 'above were found
near the hearth, both inside the house and beyond the west
wall.
The remaining flagstones of the porch floor on the
front of the house indicated that it had extended all the
way from the west to the east side of the front.
The flooring had been badly damaged but many of the stones were still
in place, while others had been shifted out of position or
removed entirely, as was obvious from the potholes left in
the vacancies. It appeared from the largest stones in situ
that the porch must have been about 8 feet wide and 30 feet
long. A flagstone walk ran some 7 feet northward from the
edge of the porch opposite the center front of the house;
and on the porch at the center of the wall was embedded a
large stone that would have been appropriate for a doorstep.
Although no post molds could be found, it is believed that
the porch was probably roofed. J. Howard's drawings
(Graham, 1968: 101} show roofing over the verandas of all
the officer's houses illustrated. A number of thin, flat
sheets of galvanized lead or zinc, some perforated, were
discovered on the porch and within the north section of the
house. There were also some corrugated pieces of a similar
metal. These might have been part of the' roofing material
for the porch and house, but there was no way to tell whether
they were used in the original construction.
Just east of the front doorstep on the veranda was a
rock that had been partially hollowed out to form a halfcylinder that may have held a pivot for the door.
If this
inference was correct, the door would have been hinged on
the right. A large plate for a sliding bolt was found 1.5
feet north of the doorstep.
Inside the north wall among
the artifacts in the wall trench were found such hardware
items as a 4 3/8 inch long door lock plate, a segment from
a white porcelain doorknob, a small latch part or handle,
about half of a 2 1/2 inch square butt hinge, and numerous
square and wire nails, screws, staples, and long spikes.
Judging from the number of window glass sherds that
were strewn along the north wall trench and on the surf ace

48
of the porch it was concluded that there must have been windows on the north wall. Two whole butt hinges and one fragmentary one were found at just about the center of the west
wall between the door and the northwest corner: two were
embedded between the rocks of the wall, and one lay about a
foot or so southeast of the others. About 4.5 feet east of
the doorstep and 3 feet from the inside of the wall lay another hinge, almost identical with the others. All three
of the complete ones measured between 2 1/2 to 3 inches by
3 inches; the half-hinge piece would have been 3 inches
square. From this evidence it appeared that the two windows
were located approximately halfway between the front door
and the house corners.
Beyond the south wall, clearing and excavation in
search of an adjoining kitchen or ell-shaped porch proved
fruitless.
No bordering stone wall foundations and no signs
of wall trenches were revealed. Randomly scattered small
rubble stones were firmly embedded in the hard surf ace soil
back of the house as far as 18 feet south on the west side,
and securely fixed in place among them were two horseshoes,
a harness and a saddle buckle, bottle fragments, potsherds,
flattened metal buckets and their bails, tin can scraps,
an iron kettle leg, a large iron bolt and nut, and a small
lock escutcheon, along with a great amount of miscellaneous
metal scrap, wire, and the like. Several of the bottle
necks were dated as being manufactured after 1881 by the
mold marks on the sides of the necks combined with the handfinished mouths (Lorrain, 1968:
42).
It was in that year
that the semi-automatic bottle machine was developed that
could mold the entire bottle up to the mouch, but the mouths
were still finished by hand.
Included among the potsherds
were two of white glazed ironstone bearing the "Meakin"
maker's mark. One was the mark used between 1870 and 1882
(Godden, 1964:
426), and the other was current between
1891 and 1897 (Godden, 1964:
425). But there were no
stove pieces such as had been found around the west chimney,
and there was no chimney foundation to be· seen.
It is possible that this had been the site of a lean-to addition
used as a tool shed or workshop, but if so all traces of its
outlines had been obliterated.
Evidence for a dividing cross wall between the east
and west sides of the house was tenuous at best and rested
mainly on parallel lines of charcoal that appeared in the
profiles of both the central east-west trench between the
chimneys and the trench that ran along the north wall.
The charcoal deposits in each instance were limited to a
2 foot space between 19 and 21 feet west of the east wall
and could be seen in the wall profiles of the trenches.
Just below the deposit in the wall of the north trench
additional charcoal lay on the subsoil of the trench floor.
The correspondence in the location of these deposits suggested the possibility of a north-south wall, which was
supported to some extent by the discovery of a 3 1/2 by

49
4 1/2 inch butt hinge in the central trench 20.5 feet from
the east chimney and 11 feet from the south wall. This
spot was near the center of the north-south axis of the
house and would have been a logical place for a door between the rooms.
If this were the location of a wall, it
would have been just west of the front door.
More positive information concerning the construction
of the house came from eight charcoal concentrations that
were fairly evenly spaced along the north trench at the
base of the wall foundation.
It was deduced that these
probably indicated the locations of the floor joists. The
centers of the joists would have been about 1.0 to 1.5
feet apart and the joists probably ran north to south.
It
looked as though they were set directly on the ground; the
floor beams consequently would have been placed above them
running from east to west.
The trench dug in the postulated latrine mound provided a few square nails, glass fragments, a potsherd, and
a set of small ratchet gears, but there was nothing to indicate that it was actually a latrine.
The mound was recorded as Feature 5.
A great many more artifacts were recovered here than
at any of the other structures excavated.
The assortment
covered the time period from the military life of the post
until the very last of the 19th century, and possibly even
later.
Examples of the entire range of materials, both in
regard to time and to variety, were found on the surface
or in the fill of every part of the house, front porch,
and back area, as well as in the trenches.
In addition to
the construction materials, potsherds and bottle glass
fragments already mentioned there were sherds of pressed,
molded, and unidentifiable burned glass, horse and wagon
trappings, knives, spoons, and forks (whole or fragmentary),
handles for buckets, pails, and other utensils, the cap
for a kerosene lamp, perforated tin from a pie safe, a
thimble, the right side of a scissors handle, an oval
''granny" type eyeglass lens, and a great many more specimens too numerous to list here (see Appendix) .
There was
also a great quantity of tin and other metal scrap, most
of which was probably from cans, pails, and stove pipes,
and many metal straps of various sizes from barrels, trunks,
and chests; it is possible that some were used around the
windows.
The total assemblage was an excellent representation of the late 19th century material culture that
could be expected from a rural situation. Aside from the
hardware nothing remained intact but the buttons.
The widespread distribution of such a miscellaneous
variety of artifacts at the house probably does not reflect
their provenience when the dwelling burned but was caused
by subsequent clearing and other disturbances during the
years the land was used for grazing.
No doubt these activities could also account for the deterioration and dis-

50
placement of the wall blocks. However, there were about
twice as many artifacts found at the west side of the building as at the east end. As the difference in quantity included the potsherds and miscellaneous glass fragments, and
the stove was certainly in place at the west end, it was
concluded that the west side, whether it was a separate
room or not, must have been used for the kitchen--at least
at the time the house was destroyed. Nothing in the records
indicated that this structure burned during the time the
fort was active, and the presence of bottle necks and potsherds that dated after 1890, the window screening, and the
wire nails leads to the conclusion that most of the artifacts should be attributed to a later civilian occupancy.
Articles that could be related specifically to the miltary occupation were few. These included three metal uniform
buttons and six gun cartridges (or parts of them) , out of a
total of thirty-one ordnance specimens that were found.
Among the specimens remaining from the civilian occupancy
were the .parts of a trunk or chest that stood between the
north window on the west wall and the northwest corner of the
house.
It must have been protected from scattering by the
falling chimney debris, for a number of its metal corners, including at least one with the bottom roller in place; and a
reinforcing metal strap with its hinge and latch piece still
attached, were found all together in a small area. Another
item of special interest was a clay pipe with an impressed
geometric design around the stem; the name "Peter Dobni" was
also impressed. The pipe was complete except for a small
fragment that was broken (but present) from the bowl. Articles that reflected the do-it-yourself life of the period were
a carpenter's plane, a drill bit, and part of a bullet mold.
Nails, both square and wire, were found everywhere, although like the window glass they were most heavily concentrated along the walls. Altogether there were 4349 square
nails (plus 2375 square nail fragments) and 514 wire nails
which worked out (excluding the fragments) to approximately
89.43% square and 10.56% wire. Sizes of the square nails
were apportioned thus (approximate percentages):
3 3/4 - 6 II: 1. 33%
3 1/4 - 3 1/2": 2.75%
2 1/2 - 3":
28.35%
1 1/2 - 2 1/4 11 :
29.45%
13.74%
1 - 1 1/4 11 :
It was obvious that even without the records to confirm
the wooden construction, the quantity of nails would have
proved that this building was made of wood. There were about
three times as many as in the administration building, but the
proportion of square to wire nails was very close.
The entire amount of window glass recovered weighed a
total of 22 pounds, 4 1/2 ounces and represented roughly

51
18 3/4 to 22 1/4 square feet of window panes. Only the window on the north side of the west wall was proved to have
been screened.
Excavation showed that this house did not correspond
exactly with the shape or dimensions of any of the houses
described by Graham from the records, although its measurements and location came closer to his "L 11" (1968:
40;
101, Fig. 1) than to any of the others.
"L 11" was described as "a one-story frame structure, about 24 by 30 feet,
with a hipped roof~
It contained four rooms and a hall.
It
was raised eighteen inches on stone supports, had open fireplaces, and was 'lathed and plastered.'" The front veranda
measured about 6 by 30 feet and the rear yard was enclosed
by a picket fence.
The commanding officer's house, Graham's "L 10" (1968:
39-40; 101, Fig. 2), was third from the east end of the row.
It was a story-and-a-half ell-shaped structure measuring 17
by 30 feet with a 12 by 28 foot kitchen and mess room on the
east side.
It, too, was said to be raised eighteen inches
from the ground on stone foundations and had open fireplaces
and a north veranda.
The veranda, though, was 8 by 38 feet
at this house. The building had a rear cellar and an ellshaped porch, about 4 by 50 feet, on the south. There were
four rooms and a hall on the first floor, and two attic rooms.
It also was lathed and plastered.
The house that was excavated showed no evidence of an
ell-shaped kitchen wing or porch and there was no sign of a
cellar. However, the commanding officer's house was said to
be the only one that was higher than a single story dwelling.
None of the drawings depicted a house with two chimneys of
such different sizes as those discovered at this structure
and the question remains why it was necessary to construct a
chimney as large and deeply set as the east chimney unless it
was for a larger than ordinary building. Aside from this
puzzle, the house corresponded fairly well with the written
description of "L 11" and seemed to be about the same shape
as the second house on the row as shown on the 1871 map.
If
this identification is correct it was the set of quarters occupied by Capt. Geo. L. Choisy, 11th Infantry.
In the end it
must be acknowledged that positive identification of the house
could only be accomplished by clearing the remains of the
structures on either side of it to see how they compared with
the officer's quarters described in the records.
Examples of the building hardware and the strap hinges
are shown in Fig. 26. The uniform buttons, ordnance
specimens that could be related to the military occupation,
the Peter Dobni pipe, the bullet mold, the potsherds bearing
the "Meakin" maker's mark, and two potsherds with unidentified maker's marks are shown in Fig. 27.

52
A

,,._
_..
M

c

G

F

H

....
.-.

41\...r ....
N

p

0

Fig. 26. Officer's quarters, artifacts. A, J, Complete butt hinges,
closed. B, E, Butt hinges, broken, C, D, H, I, Strap hinges. F, K,
P, Complete butt hinges, open. G, Fragment of porcelain door knob.
L, Door plate for sliding bolt. M, Latch hook. N, Latch part or
handle. O, Key escutcheon. Q, Part of door frame hardware.

A

c

B

D

E

F
r~~t11 1 111;1';i111 1 tti 1 .11;•·~>l ~~~;..~..-~~
AT

h6

UO»

··~C)'lt(ft ~

ce---ncu

·-:.,--

G

H
J

K

l

M

N

I
0

..

p

Fig. 27. Officer's quarters, artifacts. A-E, Potsherds with maker's
marks: A, Ironstone, unidentified. B, D, E, Ironstone: B, [Al]fred
Meakin, 1891-97. D, Alfred Meakin, 1891-97. E, Alfred Mea[kin],
1870-82. F, White clay pipe with geometric design and name "Peter
Dobni" impressed on stem. G, H, I, Uniform buttons: G, Scovill,
Waterbury, 1850-70. H, Scovill, Extra, 1840-50. I, J. H. Wilson,
Phila., 1873?. J-N, Cartridges and cases, as Gov't issue. J, .50-70
musket, 1869-72. L, .38 S&W. M, .45 Colt, 1873-92. N, .44 Colt,
1871-73. O, .56 for .56-56 Spencer, 1866-1900. P, Bullet mold.

53
Enlisted Men's Quarters
Enlisted Men's Hut E-I-2
Small single-room frame huts served as barracks for the
enlisted men. Records indicate that there were ten of these
huts to a row, running grid east and west, and there were four
rows of this type, one behind the other, with the southernmost
row facing the parade ground. Each hut was reported to have
had a fireplace and chimney at the back and a door in the
front. Accounts differed as to whether there were one or two
windows, but they were reported to be unglazed. Howarth's
contemporary drawing (Graham, 1968: 100) shows a window located in the east wall a little closer· to the rear than to
the front.
These so-called barracks were said to have measured about 8 1/2 by 13 feet and stood 6 feet high to the
eaves. They had shingled roofs, board floors, and canvas
lined walls.
Each hut was usually reported to have housed
four men, but Rister (1925: 18) refers to an 1867 report
that said six men were compelled to sleep in them.
The hut chosen for complete excavation was the second
from the east end of the first row and was designated E-I-2.
This one and E-I-4 were represented by chimney foundations
that remained more nearly intact than those of the other huts.
Fig. 33, A, shows E-I-4 before the chimney foundation was
cleared; E-I-2 appeared very much like this before it was
cleared.
First, the chimney foundation of E-I-2 was cleared of
grass, soil and loose rubble (Fig. 28, A), then the entire
ground surface of the area that the hut presumably occupied.
All soil from the excavation was put through 1/4 inch screens
to recover as many artifacts as possible. East-west trenches
were dug .at the estimated center of the house in.an effort to
locate the original construction trenches; these could be
identified by.the gravel fill that was .visible in the trench
profiles .on the east and west sides of the house. Another
trench was .dug.in from the south in a search for the construction trench on.the front, .again exposing the gravel fill.
Additional trenches were excavated from north to south alongside
the chimney foundation on both east and west (Fig •. 28, B, c,
D). The north wall thus exposed was shown to extend across
the chimney foundation close.to its.center; the stone blocks
were discolored here in line with.the wall as revealed by the
construction trenches. From this it was clear that the chimney was situated about half inside and.half outside the north
wall. The chimney foundation consisted of a single course
and measured about 4.4 by 4.4 feet (Fig. 29). Dimensions of
the house .were determined by measuring from the center (lowest)
point of the gravel fill in the trenches from north to south
and from east to west.
They worked out to be 12.99 feet in
length (north.to south) and 8.2 feet in width (east to west).
This size corresponded very closely with that given in the
records--that is, about 13 feet long and 8 1/2 feet wide.

D

c

Fig. 28. Enlisted men's hut E-I-2. A, chimney foundation with surface cleared. View toward
north. B, Gravel fill exposed in east-west trench and south end of north-south trench indicates location of original walls. C, West side of excavation; stone at front door visible on
south. D, E-I-2 after excavation was completed, view toward north.
(Grid directions).

B

A

""'

U1

55

Fig. 29. Enlisted men's hut E-I-2, · chimney
foundation, grid west side of chimney.

56
From the chimney foundation alone it was impossible to
be certain whether the· chimney had been an open hearth or a
solid base type, but it was thought to be more likely the
latter.
If this assumption were correct, there probably
would have been a small heating stove set next to the chimney.
A concentration of window glass sherds, square nails, and possible latch pieces found just outside the east wall at the
north edge· of the central test trench gave good·evidence for
a glass window· there. This would have placed it at the north
center of the wall, about where Howarth located it on his
sketch. However, careful-troweling at a corresponding· spot
along the·west·wall produced no window glass at all, although
there were some bottle glass fragments, metal scraps, and a
few nails. The window (or windows) may originally have'been
unglazed~ but if so the east window at least~was glazed, later~
Door hardware was recovered near the corners of the south ·
trench close to the place where the door would have been located in the front~ Atthispoint·there·were·also two small
stone slabs in· place· several inches below ground surface;
these might have been put there to serve as a support for
the door frame~ ·
After the trenches were mapped and the necessary information recorded from the profiles, the entire area of the
house fill was removed. Fig. 28, D, shows the hut site completely cleared, and a scale drawing of the excavation appears
in Fig. 30.
Artifacts recovered were typical of the 1867 to 1881
period and appropriate to the lives of the men who lived
there.
Specimens included uniform buttons dating 1854 to
1870, fragments of contemporary uniform insignia, rings,
buckles and hooks that might have been worn with military
gear, and gun cartridges dating from the immediate post-Civil
War years.
There were non-uniform buttons of metal, bone, and
porcelain; the broken tine end of a 3-tine fork, with part of
the handle; mostof·a triangularmetalfile, and a short
piece of· the longitudinal half of a slate pencil. Several
iron clothes hooks, or fragments of them, and a small wire
hook were found along· the walls, as were many square nails.
Additional square nails, spikes, and heavy wood screws were
scattered over the surface and embedded in the soil fill, but
there were no wire nails to suggest a post-military inhabitant.
A few bottle and earthenware fragments were recovered also.
Samples of mortar and plaster from around the chimney were
saved.
There was no mortar or plaster from any part of the hut
area, however, with the exception of the chimney vicinity.
This tends to confirm the contemporary description of the
hut walls as having been lined with canvas, for had the frame
walls been chinked there should have been a noticeable quantity
of mortar rubble. Square nails and fragments numbered 1143
and ranged in size from 1 to 3 1/4 inches. Window glass collected weighed about 8 ounces; this would represent something

-·--------------------------------------------------

57

ENLISTED

MEN'S

HUT

ROW I, HUT 2

CHIMNEY
FOUNDATION

(---"

\)
0

~0;,0
c() /\..\)
(:)

o

0::5

CHIMNEY
RUBBLE

u ()
(_:ii

[JJ~

~

do
0

WINDOW

{l

HUT'
WALL

~

oO
DOOR

0

2

3Feet

I

I

I

1969

VMB

Fig.

30

58
less than half a square foot, but other fragments may have
been scattered and buried outside the excavated area. Random
sherds were measured for thickness and ranged from 2/32 to 3/32
inch.
This hut did not burn and there was no evidence that anyone lived there after the troops left the fort.
Presumably,
along with the other huts on the row, it simply decayed in
time and disintegrated, with the remains of the chimney stack
subsequently being removed and piled in another place~
Hardware specimens from E-I-2 and examples of gun cartridges not previously illustrated among those from the officer's quarters are shown in Figo 31, along with the file and
the 3-tine fork fragment.
Fragments of branch and unit insignia and an assortment of uniform and other varieties of
buttons are illustrated in Fig. 32. The insignia pieces include remnants of the brass hunting horn that was the symbol
of Infantry until 1875 and the crossed rifles that replaced it,
a hilt from the crossed sabres of the Cavalry, and an "O", that
was probably part of the "10" of the 10th Cavalry unit number
(Brinkerhoff, 1965:
6-9; Plate II, Fig. 7, Plate III, Fig. 8).

Enlisted Men's Hut E-I-4
Activity at this hut was limited to clearing the surface
area and cleaning the chimney foundation so that it was fully
exposed. Gravel on the ground surface outlined the wall
trenches of the hut, as can be seen in Fig. 33, B, C. A flagstone remained embedded on the surface at the site of the
front door. Artifacts recovered from the clearing included an
ivory mouthpiece for a pipe, four uniform buttons, several
cartridge cases, window and bottle sherds, part of a coat hook
similar to those of E-I-2, and the usual square nails, spikes,
and screws. There were 72 square nails, ranging from 1 to
4 1/2 inches long.
One unusual object was carved from a thin
flat piece of bone; it appears to be part of a female leg adorned with a garter and ribbon delicately incised around the
knee and was probably part of one soldier's version of a pinup girl. This is illustrated in Fig. 32.

Stone Foundation Hut
This structure was located at the west end of Enlisted
Men's Row I, its east wall about 25 feet from the E-I-10 rubble.
It was completely excavated.
The visible ruins before
clearing consisted of a large shallow depression filled with
heavy stone rubble, overgrown with tasajilla and prickly pear
cacti and grass and bordered with more cacti, mesquite trees,
and much additional piled stone (Fig. 34, A). This resembled
the kind of cellar depression that was associated with some
of the houses along the east-west officer's row, although it
was larger.

59

D

G

E

H

K
=1lll!Jl!
l l I1i11'11 i 111' 111 1' "-'-t-'11111.U
1"'' ' .J _.u
~
2J~f ..... -;-_J} ......,........... +
C AT

NO

730.)~

S T UDENTS

RULE

,.(J o
C. n''II
l_,

Fig. 31. Enlisted men's hut E-I-2, artifacts. A, Fragment of 3-tine
fork. B, Door latch with nail. C, Clothes hook. D, Fragment of latch
pin. E, Ring. F, Wire object with loop at one end, nut at other
threaded end. G, Triangular file. H, Latch piece. I, .50-70 Benet
inside primer, rimfire cartridge. J, .50 Remington Navy centerfire cartridge. K, .45-70 Gov't internal centerfire cartridge.

60

<(

--cc
B

F

D
E

J

H

G

L

K

0

M

p

a

•

N

R

s

Fig. 32. Enlisted men's huts E-I-2 and E-I-4, artifacts. A, D, F, Fragments of insignia--hunting horn of Infantry, 1861-1875. B, Unidentified
brass fragment, probably insignia piece. c, Rifle fragment from post1875 crossed rifle insignia of Infantry. E, Brass epaulette attachment.
G, Buckle. H, Unit insignia--"O" from 10th Cavalry with spur for attachment.
I, Sabre hilt from Cavalry insignia, 1872 on. J, Hook for attachment of gear. K, Ring for attachment of gear. Three metal uniform buttons: L, Extra Quality, 6 stars, 1850-1870. M, S.H.&G (Schuyler,
Hartley and Graham), 1850. N, Waterbury Button Co., 1849-present. O,
Metal button. P, Porcelain button. Q, R, Bone buttons. S, Flat bone
piece in shape of female leg; note ribbon and garter incised at knee.

c

A

Fig. 33. Enlisted men's hut E-I-4. A,
Chimney foundation before clearing,
looking northeast. B, East side of hut
site showing gravel on surface. C,
west side of hut site with flagstone in
place at front door.
(Grid directions).

B

,_.°'

-

c

A

Fig.
34. Stone foundation hut. A, Site
before clearing, facing north. B, Hut
after excavation, facing north. C, View
toward northeast with site of E-I-10
visible beyond pile of backdirt on east.
(Grid directions).

B

°'
I\)

63
Identification of the structure presented- some problems.
Howarth (Graham, 1968: 100) illustrated a "Cook-House and
Water Tubs at the end of each row of 10 huts" which appeared
to be a fairly small rectangular frame structure with two windows on the long side, a door in the center between them, and
a chimney at the western end. On the other hand, his later
sketch of the fort (Graham, 1968: 104) showed long, narrow
cook houses situated at some distance from the end. Other
fort plans- indicated long, narrow frame- buildings not -far from
the end of- the rows.· Graham (1968:
37) reported these buildings as being-situated 35 yards from- the last hut with·dimen-· sions noted as 20 by 80 feet in one instance, smaller in
others. They were said to have had stone floors, at least in
part.
Another possiblity was that it might be one of the enlisted men's quarters that were built later than the small
ones down the row. Graham (1968: ·· 36) mentioned "a stone hut
that measured approximately 10 by 14 feet or 7 by 12 feet, according to different reports, and picket huts--one 10 by 14
feet, one 12 by 16 feet, and two 11 by 20 feet."
Pending better identification, this structure was temporarily designated ~Kitchen I."
When the surf ace was cleared and the loose stones removed, the limestone wall foundations outlined a rectangular
building 14 feet long and 12 feet wide, with its long axis
running north and south.
Foundation walls were two stones
wide and were mostly complete, although there were gaps along
both east and west walls.
In some places the wall blocks
stood 2 or 3 courses high (Fig. 34, B, C) with lime
mortar adhering to the stones. The foundations were laid on
what at first was thought to be flagstone flooring, but proved
instead to be great uneven slabs of the limestone bedrock.
Several extremely large slabs lay just outside the south wall,
obviously somewhat dislocated, but they could quite logically
have been from a front (south) entrance. Near the center of
the floor was a hole about"2 or 2 1/2 feet wide where a large
stone was missing. A great pile of stones and rubble, overgrown with grass and weeds, mounded in the center of the east
side; this gave promise of being fallen chimney rubble but
turned out after clearing to be nothing more than a pile of
loose stone~
Nowhere along the wall foundations could be
found any evidence of a chimney. A scale drawing of the ruins
appears in Fig. 35.
Trenches were dug along the wall lines outside the building to test for extensions that might indicate additional
rooms, but nothing was found except more bedrock at a foot or
so below the ground surface.
Had this been a kitchen one could expect numerous fragments of dishes, glassware, and kitchen equipment to be present,
but the total inventory of kitchen-associated specimens was:
11 earthenware potsherds, 72 bottle glass fragments, a metal

64

.-------------

STONE

FOUNDATION

HUT

Bedrock
(undulating

Floor

and crocked surface)

O

I

2

3

4 Feet

VM

1969

Fig. 35.

65
knife liner, a small cast iron piece (possibly from a stove),
and a few tin- can fragments including at least three hole-intop cans--a type made from about 1860 to the 1920's (Fontana
and Greenleaf, 1962:
68-69). The holes were sealed with
solder after filling and tne side closing was crimped. This
was the kind of assortment that could be found in any dwelling
of the period and was extremely meager for the size of the
house. There were only 18 window glass sherds (weighing about
1/2 ounce} and 79 square nails, none large than 3 inches. Along the east wall were discovered a hasp hinge; a hasp bent
to a right- angle (possibly blacksmith-made}; a latch fragment,
thumb piece and possible pin section; and a short riveted
metal strip.
There was no evidence of burning on the artifacts, the
exposed foundation walls, or the limestone bedrock, but there
was a large burned mesquite stump just outside the southwest
wall.
Recent clearing activities may account for the burned
stump.
It remained a question whether the large piles of
stone found in the bedrock base- and around the sides of the
structure came originally from this building or had been
gathered from the chimney rubble of the E-I huts. Hardly
enough stone was present to account for a structure of this
size built entirely of stone, but neither was there enough to
represent all the missing fallen stones from the chimneys of
the small huts.
It could be that the building was frame or
picket construction over a stone foundation.
Its dimensions, its location, and the nature of the artifacts just about ruled out an identification as a company
kitchen or mess hall. Except for Howarth's early sketch, for
which no dimensions were given, all the measurements reported
stated that the kitchen-mess halls were much larger places and
were always shown as long, narrow shapes. The depression that
at first suggested a cellar was revealed on excavation to be
the bedrock base on which the wall foundations were laid. Its
proximity to the small huts and the scarcity of kitchen-type
artifacts strongly negated an identification as a kitchen or
mess hall. With no chimney and a paucity of specimens that
could be associated with meals, it seemed very unlikely it
could have been used for the preparation or serving of food
for a large group of people.
Although the 12 by 14 feet dimensions were not exactly
the same as any given for the later enlisted men's quarters
they were close enough, at least to those given for the larger
size, to suggest this· as the most reasonable identification.
If the house was occupied by civilians after the fort was abandoned it must have been for a very short time, judging from
the scarcity of artifacts recovered and the fact that no wire
nails were found.
Aside from a few military buttons and the
square nails, the specimens recovered were not diagnostic of
any particular time period; however, they were in accordance
with what could be expected from a late 19th century dwelling.
The small amount of window glass, absence of wire nails, and

66
scarcity of square nails and other household hardware, suggest
that this house may have been one of theose that had been dismantled and removed soon after the fort was abandoned.
The hardware specimens and one of the hole-in-top cans are illustrated
in Fig. 36.
A search was made for evidence of a long, narrow building
in the area about 35 yards west of E-I-10, but it proved fruitless. Conceivably such a cook house-mess room could be situated even beyond, on the other side of the boundary fence that
encloses the fort area.

67

A

c

.,.,. .,.._

.

."'..

1'a<;

'

fiS) *"

..

D
·_ .l. .·

E

F

Fig. 36. Stone foundation hut, artifacts. A, Hasp hinge. B, Holein-top can. C, Latch pin. D, Thumb latch. E, Metal strap with rivets . .
F, Metal door brace, possibly blacksmith made.

68
Library
The library at the northeast edge of the parade ground
was built between 1870 and 1875, according to Graham's
sources (1968:
47).
It was described as a two-room picket
building 35 feet long and 12 feet wide, and it had a dirt
roof. The building was used as a chapel and schoolroom as
well as for a library.
Before excavation (Fig. 37, A) it was buried under a
grass covered mound of dirt with only a few stones visible.
Complete excavation disclosed rubble and mortar foundation
walls, for the most part, combined with a few larger stones
that indicated a single course foundation.
These foundation
walls, where discernible, bordered a flagstone floored structure. Wall rubble was scattered several feet west of the
west wall, and chimney and wall rubble was tumbled in a pile
outside the south wall. The walls were badly deteriorated,
especially on the east side where they were completely destroyed. Measured from the remaining wall foundations where
possible and from the extreme outside edge of the outermost
flagstones where the walls were gone, the dimensions of the
building were found to be 24 by 15 feet, with the long axis
running east and west.
In the center, dividing the building
into east and west rooms, was a double hearth stone fireplace with one side facing into each room. Fig. 37, B, shows
the entire library after excavation was completed. Fig. 38
is a scale drawing representing the floor plan as determined
from the archeological findings.
Around the perimeter of the structure construction must
have been preceded by the deposition of a leveling fill of
red sand on the original black clayey loam surface. The fill
ranged in depth from approximately 0.7 foot near the west
wall to 0.1 foot near the north wall.
In addition, about 0.1
foot of red sand was laid down beneath the entire building
before construction began. The red sand layer extended outward beyond the outside of the walls to a distance of at
least 5 feet.
The flagstones of the floor were not bedrock in situ, as
in the stone-floored hut on E-I, but were purposelY-cut and
installed to fit in place.
In many instances the small spaces
between the large slabs were filled with sandstone rubble and
then plastered over to make a smooth floor.
However, the
flagstones themselves were worn and smooth and were evidently
not plastered. The complete double hearth was approximately
5 feet long and 4 feet wide (Fig. 39, A).
In the central
area between the east and west sides there were only four to
six large stones visible; mortar and rubble covered the surface.
The hearth facing the west room (Fig. 40, A, C, D) had
its south wall complete with 2 courses standing. There was

A
I

B

I

·-------.

l.O

O"I

Fig. 37. Library. A, Site before excavation, facing northeast. B, Ruins after
excavation: left, west side; right, east
side. Matching line indicated.
(Grid
directions).

~

~
~

~40

%. ~

/"/-'"

~ RUBBLE_%'~

~ 0

[]

!P

~

~Or

Fig. 38.

\PROBABLE
DOOR

-

DOOR

0I

I
I

2I

f)

'

4'
I

PROBABLE DOOR

LIBRARY

~~

LIJo

._,,../'/~

%
/':
1'uBBLE~

~~

~
/'.'.
:::::::

(]

-..J
0

71

LIBRARY - DOUBLE HEARTH

---------4.9----r--,.3-~1

1

GRID
NORTH

WEST HEARTH

=---------4.98-----------

I. .

A

~MORTAR

WEST
END

B

Fig.

39.

A, Detail drawing of complete hearth.

B, Details of north side of hearth.

D

c

Fig. 40. Library, double hearth. A, Hearth in west room. B, Hearth in east room.
North side of entire hearth. D, South side of entire hearth.
(Grid directions).

B

A

C,

-...J
IV

73
evidence of mortar on the uppermost course. Two courses
also remained of the north wall, although the top course
was represented by a single large broken stone. A large
flat hearthstone was still in place. This hearth measured
2.1 feet wide, 1.36 feet deep, and 0.65 foot high.
In the east room too the south wall of the hearth was
intact, but the north wall had only the bottom course in
place (Fig. 40, B, C, D). The hearthstone was complete
but fractured near the north end. Mortar remained on the
top surface of this hearth also.
Its dimensions were:
2.0 feet wide, 1.3 feet deep, and 0.63 foot high (at the
south wall)--almost exactly the same size as the west
hearth.
Mixed in the house fill were numerous chunks of crude
mortar covered with a thin whitewashed plaster. This mortar
was found both inside and outside the building and may
represent material from the ceiling and from walls--chinking
and finishing matter used· to fill spaces between pickets.
Some heavy object must have fallen onto two large floor
stones just south of the chimney and tilted them in toward
each other~
Possibly this tilting was caused by falling
chimney rubble.
A trench was dug along the common wall on either side
of the hearth to check the cross wall construction (Fig.
39, B). Mortar remained here on the north face of the hearth
at its juncture with the dividing wall. The trench profile
showed mortar lumps mixed with and over the sandy fill.
In
the south wall trench a few square nails and three pieces of
a butt hinge indicated the position of an interior door.
There was probably an outside door on the south side of
the east room where a large fractured flagstone remained in
place at the wall foundation; this may have been part of the
stoop or entranceway (Fig. 37, B).
Between this door area
and the cross wall there appeared to have been a window, for
window sherds were found both inside and outside the structure in this location.
Sherds recovered nearby totaled about
21 ounces, indicating roughly a little more than a square
foot of glass. Probably additional glass was mixed in the
unexcavated area beyond the south wall. Another outside door
and window in corresponding positions in the west room were
suggested by two pieces of another door hinge and a much
greater quantity of window glass (31 ounces), estimated to
represent close to two square feet.
Small amounts of window
glass were also scattered along the north wall, so there may
have been one or more windows on that side. These window
glass fragments from the building ranged from 2/32 to 4/32
inch in thickness, but the greater part measured about 3/32
inch.
Some of the larger fragments ranged from 3/32 inch to
4/32 inch on the same piece. This uneven thickness, of course,
was a characteristic of cylinder glass. Most of it was thickly patinated, but none was burned.

74
All excavated material was carefully screened. Samples
of mortar and plaster were saved, as were soil samples from
the fill of the north trench between the rooms. From the
entire building only 147 square nails (1 to 3 inch), 2 spikes,
2 wood screws, and a solid round cast iron key remained of
the construction hardware, aside from the hinge pieces mentioned above. Other artifacts included a small, thin broken
metal strip with partially decipherable lettering, a clay
pipe bowl fragment, two 4 hole non-uniform buttons, several
sherds of a large brown jug ornamented with appliqued orange
oak leaves and acorns, part of a white teapot spout, and a
few miscellaneous bottle sherds and metal scraps.
There was no evidence to show that this building ever
burned. Picket wall construction could neither be proved
nor disproved with certainty, but the amount of mortar rubble suitable for chinking strongly supported the records on
this point. The only sign of wood was a single decayed tree
root running deep in the soil under the hearth.
If the building had had a dirt roof, as described, this might account for
the mounded earth that covered it before excavation.
If the
pickets had been in good enough condition to warrant salvage,
they might have been removed along with the associated hardware and any whole window panes. This would account for the
dearth of nails, screws, and other construction necessities.
There were so few artifacts of any kind that it seemed unlikely that the building had been occupied after the troops
left. What remained after the conjectured dismantling and
removal must simply have crumbled to pieces, leaving only
the stone work. Later clearing may have scattered much of
what stone was left.
The remains of the actual library bore no resemblance
to the 1873 design for a stone structure as shown in Graham's
Fort Griffin study (1968:
96). That structure intended for
school and religious purposes would have been much larger
(25 by 50 feet). An enclosed entrance hall was planned for
it which led into a narrow room extending across its width.
The remainder of the building was to be a single large room
with no outside door; the only door was located in the center
of the short axis of the building. There would have been a
bell tower over the entrance, but no chimney was indicated
on the design. This was no doubt one of the stone buildings
that was proposed for the permanent fort that never materialized.
The hardware specimens and sherds from the brown jug
are shown in Fig. 41.

75

A

G

F

CAT

NO

13035 9TUO£NTS

RUL&

cencu
••

0

••

Ini11!11
ni1ol n1i1rnLin11111lli:111111!!·•llllil11!
21
31 I •\ I ~I I "\ I 71 1I 1.s!i
'\
ll!ldl\d!l!i\;! '· '": 111 •11

Fig. 41. Library, artifacts. A, B, Earthenware sherds from jug with
appliqued design of leaves and acorns. C, Large spike. D, Buckle?
E, Large round key. F, G, H, Hinge fragments.

76

Sutler's Store
This rectangular stone building is situated at the north
edge of the military reservation where the old fort plans
show a complex of two or three frame or picket buildings.
It
appears to be a single-room structure with three standing
walls and a partially standing chimney. The long axis runs
east and west, with one gabled end standing on the south.
The old road to "The Flat" passed in front of the building on
the west side.
No excavations were conducted here, but some clearing
was done, photographs were taken, and details of construction
were noted and sketched. A fence bisects the structure across the north side where the walls have fallen and only the
foundations remain. To facilitate clearing, a gate was built
in this fence just outside the wall foundation west of the
building.
The south wall, most nearly complete of the standing
walls, incorporates three first floor windows and a central
one above. Fig. 42, A, shows the outside face with stone
and wooden lintels visible above the lower three windows.
The number of stones in the lintels varies:

3 - keystone - 3

4 - keystone - 4

vDD D

~:j~\!l

stone

~~~~~\JODDD
c~ ~-+-& * ~ ....,,.,,
w .
[~

wooden boards
center, lower window

southeast window

The entire top section is missing from tre upper window, although the lower stone sill is intact. The lower middle and
southeast windows are sufficiently complete that exact dimensions could be determined, although one large stone is
missing from the lower middle window sill and 2 stone courses
are missing from the bottom sill of the southeast window. As
indicated on the sketch, at point "a'' there are 32 courses of
stone in the south wall facade. At point "c" there are 8
courses from ground level to the bottom of the window sill.
Point "b" is probably the true slant of the wall and roof line.
The walls are 2 courses thick, constructed in an alternate
pattern:

c

I

B

-.

J

8

2

1. SW-SE corner=28.38'
2. Ht. at center (middle
window)=l7.15'
3. Ht. to bottom sill
' (W. window) =4. 75'
4. Ht. to top sill
(W. window)=9.0'
5. Width of W. window=3.2'
6. Thickness of wall=l.7'
7. Ht. at upper SE
corner=l0.85'
8. Ht. to bottom, top
center window-12.0'

Fig. 42. Sutler's store, south wall. A, Wall as seen from the south. B, Wall as seen
from the north. C, Detail drawing of wall as seen from the south.
(Grid directions)

,_

4G·-·li_L_

A

.,~'._:•..-.. ii

,.-·---:7

-..J
-..J

78

The south and east walls are tied in alternately to the top:

On the inside of the south wall, Fig. 42, B, the southeast window is intact at the window head with stone and board
lintels in place:
4 - keystone - 5

wooden boards
The center window is intact at the top:
4 - keystone - 4

nUU1u·u
f\ 'P (17' \ · l f7l
\J:U
1

,'J

1

.
1

_

~+'"'~:a

boards
c:;;;;::;gz .· tt L.: ~
The southwest corner window has its wooden lintel still in
place, along with three blocks of the stone lintel:
keystone and outer stones missing

wooden board
Stone construction on the inside wall face differs from that
on the outside in that smaller blocks with rubble stones for
chinking were used on the inside, resulting in a varied
number of uneven courses. Remnants of wall plaster are still
visible.
On the west wall there is evidence of two windows and
one door (Fig. 43). On the o~tside face the highest point
comprises 16 courses of stone. From ground level to the bottom of the window sills there are 8 courses of stone. Walls
here are also 2 courses thick.
Inside, 1 course is missing
from the lower window sills. As in the south wall, smaller
wall blocks and chinking make the number of wall courses vary.
Here, again, wall plaster remnants can be seen.
As in the west wall, the east wall gives evidence of
two windows and one door (Fig. 44); the southeast corner
walls are intact. The highest points ("f" and "g" in the

79

/

1. Ht. at max. point=9.45'
*2. Ht. of bottom sill
(N. window)=4.4'
3. NW corner to N. side of
door=27.2'
4. Width of door (est)=27.2'
5. NW corner to SW corner=32.5'
6. Width of N. window=3.l'
7. Thickness of wall=l.65'
7
*Ht. to plaster 4:5• and ht.
incl. wood facing ca. 4.65'

Fig. 43. Sutler's store, west wall. View is from grid southeast. Detail drawing as seen from grid west.

80

--- --- ---------

I
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Ht. at max. point=l0.8'
Ht. to bottom N. window=4.3'
Width of N. window=3.l'
SE corner to S. side door=l0.57'
Width of door=3.12
SE corner to NE corner=33.4'
Thickness of wall=l.7'

Fig. 44. Sutler's store, east wall, View is toward grid west
with drawing as seen from the same side.

81
sketch) have 18 courses of stone. From ground level to the
bottom of the window sill, "h", there are 6 courses in the
south window; one course is lacking from the lower sill
level. Graham (1968: 105) reproduces an early photograph
that shows the door and windows with wood framing still in
place. The inside wall is presently in good condition, constructed like the other interior walls with smaller stones
and chinking, and consequently has a varied number of courses.
A greater amount of wall plaster is present here than on the
other walls.
In the interior southeast corner of the building an
open hearth chimney stands 18 courses high; the chimney
breast is 1 course thick. Fig. 45 illustrates the chimney
construction; in the foreground is a acattering of chimney
blocks and chinking stones that were recently removed by
vandals.
Remnants of wall plaster adhere to the upper part
of the chimney.
Because the foundation walls were not completely cleared
and exposed, the entire dimensions of the building were not
determined. The south wall measured on the outside 28.38
feet; the incomplete west wall measured 32.5 feet; and the
incomplete east wall measured 33.4 feet.
No artifacts were collected from the sutler's store.

1.
2.
3.
4.

Ht. of chimney=9.8'
Ht. to mantel=4.45'
Width to stack=2.95'
Width of fireplace:
outside=4.68'
inside=3.0'
5. Depth of stack from
wall-0.7'
6. Distance from SE
corner-2.75'

m; PLASTER

Fig. 45.

REMNANTS ADHERING TO CHIMNEY

Sutler's store, chimney and fireplace.

83
SUMMARY
The Texas Archeological Research Laboratory completed
the following projects at Fort Griffin Military Post:
1. Located and determined the dimensions of the parade
ground. It was a rectangle 600 feet east-west and 300 feet
north-south in the central part of the fort area.
2. Located the site of the original flagpole near.the
center of the parade ground and recorded the adjacent sun
dial foundation still in place south of it.
3. Located the sites of four rows of enlisted men's
huts north of the parade ground and superficially cleared
the surfaces of the ten huts on the first (southernmost) row,
E-I-1 to E-I-10.
4. Completely excavated the second hut from the east
on this row, E-I-2, and determined its size, shape, and some
details of construction. The dimensions were 12.99 feet by
8.2 feet wide with a chimney at the back. It was oriented
with the long side north-south and faced the parade ground.
5. Cleared the vegetation from the entire surface of
the fourth hut on the row to expose its chimney foundation
and wall outlines, as indicated by surface gravel.
6. Completely excavated a structure with a stone foundation west of E-I-10, determined its size and shape, and
identified it as a later type of enlisted men's dwelling.
Its dimensions were 12 by 14 feet, oriented with the long
axis north-south, and probably faced south toward the parade
ground.
7. Located and marked the tentatative sites.of seven
structures on the east-west row of officers' quarters south
of the parade ground.
8. Exposed and recorded three steps leading to the cellar of the set of officer's quarters that appeared to be the
easternmost one on the end of ·the east-west row.
9. Completely excavated a set of-officer's quarters
that was probably the second house on·the·east-west row,
determined its size and shape· and some details of construction.
Its dimensions were approximately 30-31 feet· east-west
and 25 feet north-south.
It faced·toward··the·parade~ground
and had a chimney at the east and west ends-and~a flagstone
porch across the front.
It was tentatively identified as the
house occupied at one time by Capt. Geo. L. Choisy, 11th Infantry.

84

10. Located and completely excavated the library.on the
northeast edge of th~ parade ground and determined its size
and shape and· some· detaiis of· construction.
It was 24 by 15
feet with the long· axis running east~west, and it faced south
toward the parade ground.
It was a two room structure.with.a
central double hearth· fireplace facing· into each room.
11. Recorded the standing ruins of the administration
building, partially excavated the south and middle rooms, and
exposed the wall foundation at the north end of the east wall
to determine details of construction.
It was a three room
building, 18.3 by 45 feet, with· the long axis running northsouth.
It faced west toward the parade ground and had a flagstone porch across the front and a narrower flagstone walkway
along the north side. A standing chimney was located between
the south and'middle rooms.·
12. Recorded the standing ruins of the sutler's store
on the northeast side of the fort area. Dimensions were not
fully determined because much stone forming the foundation
walls of the structure was buried beneath ground surface.
In connection with the archeological investigation a site
map was preparedj numerous scale drawings were Made to record
details of construction, and many· photographs were taken.
Artifacts recovered· were· catalogued and listed, and samples
of mortar, plaster, stone, wood, charcoal, and soil were saved
where it was thought they might be informative for future restoration or reconstruction. Part of the dump area for the
fort was located on the north bluff of the hill and the location of the lime kiln was noted.
The site of the Tonkawa village was tentatively located
and recorded as 41 SF 5 in the TARL files.
The site of the
old town of Fort Griffin was recorded as 41 SF 6.
Surface
collections were made from the dump, the village and the town
which were catalogued and listed but do not constitute a part
of this report.

85

RECOMMENDATIONS
Much remains to be done to develop to its full potential
the site of Fort Griffin as an interesting and significant
historical legacy from the frontier days.
In addition to exposing the ruins of known buildings it would be desirable to
locate, if possible, the specialized structures that could
illustrate the range of activities necessary to support the
army in its defense of the frontier.
The following suggestions
are offered for consideration should additional archeological
investigation be planned or further restoration or reconstruction be proposed:
1.

Restore the main building of the sutler's store and clear
the rest of the building complex associated with it.

2.

Clear the remaining rows of enlisted men's huts and restore one complete row. Make an effort to locate and
clear one of the kitchen-mess halls.

3.

Excavate stables.

4.

Clear the foundations of both rows of officer's houses
and excavate one house on each row.
Of especial interest
would be the house where the lone chimney stands because
it was known to have burned in 1876 and offers a good possibility for the recovery of artifacts from the military
period. Possibly reconstruct one house on each row.

5.

Clear and partially restore the hospital complex.

6.

Clear, excavate, and restore selected shop buildings such
as the forge and the blacksmith shop as well as one of
the laundress's huts.

7.
a

Clear the quartermaster's warehouse and possibly excavate
and reconstruct it.

8.

Locate and excavate one of the large iater barracks buildings and the guard house.

9.

Explore the trash dump areas for recovery of artifacts.

It is strongly recommended that if any archeological work
is contemplated for the future in connection with restoration
or reconstruction it should be scheduled to be completed well
in advance of the commencement of these activities.
In order
to make the most efficient use of the skills of historian,
archeologist, and architect, in terms of economy in time and
money, proposals under consideration should be discussed and
preparations made as long as possible before any project is
undertaken. The architect should have the results of the
archeological investigation available for study before he
makes his plans. This would probably require a lead time of
at least several months, and preferably more, depending on
the amount of work to be done.

86
REFERENCES CITED
A. Baldwin & Co. (Limited)
1891 Hardware Catalogue.

New Orleans.

Barnes, Frank C.
1965 Cartridges of the World.
Chicago.

The Gun Digest Company,

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal
of Science, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 93-116.
Brinkerhoff, Sidney B.
1965 Metal Uniform Insignia of the U. S. Army in the
Southwest 1846-1902. Museum Monograph No. 3,
Arizona Pioneers' Historical Society, Tucson.
Clarke, Ollie D.
1935 Fort Griffin.
Texas.

Albany Chamber of Commerce, Albany,

Crimmins, Col. M. L. (collection)
Texas History Archives, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Fontana, Bernard L., and J. Cameron Greenleaf
1962 Johnny Ward's Ranch: A Study in Historic Archaeology. The Kiva, Vol. 28, Number 1-2.
Godden, Geoffrey A.
1964 Encyclopaedia of British Pottery and Porcelain
Marks. Crown Publishers, Inc., New York.
Godfrey, Curtis L., and Clarence R. Carter and Gordon S. McKee
n.d. Land Resource Areas of Texas. Texas A & M University and United States Department of Agriculture,
B-1070. College Station, Texas.
Graham, Roy E.
1968 Texas Historic Forts, Part IV, Griffin.
Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Jenkins, J. C.
1966 Old West Barb Wire & Patent Dates.
printed, Ft. Worth, Texas.

Texas

Privately

Johnson, David F.
1948 Uniform Buttons: American Armed Forces 1784-1948,
Vols. I and II. Century House, Watkins Glen.
Logan, Herschel C.
1959 Cartridges:
Ammunition.

a Pictorial Digest of Small Arms
Bonanza Books, New York.

87
Lorrain, Dessame
1968 An Archaeologist's Guide to Nineteenth Century
American Glass. Historical Archaeology, Vol. II.
Published by The Society for Historical Archaeology, Mason, Michigan.
Matthews, Sallie Reynolds
1936 Interwoven: A Pioneer Chronicle.

Houston.

Maxwell, Ross A.
1940 Fort Griffin State Park: A Discussion of the
General Geology and the Ground Water Resources.
Unpublished report prepared for the Texas State
Parks Board and the U. S. Dept. of the Interior,
National Parks Service.
'
Rickey, Don, Jr.
1963 Forty Miles a Day on Beans and Hay.
of Oklahoma Press, Norman.

The University

Rister, Carl Coke
1925 Fort Griffin. West Texas State Historical Society
Yearbook, Vol. I, pp. 15-24.
Rye, Edgar
1909 The Quirt and the Spur.
Chicago.

W. B. Conkey Company,

Scoville, Warren C.
1948 Revolution in Glassmaking.
Press, Cambridge.

Harvard University

Sjoberg, Andree F.
1953 The Culture of the Tonkawa, A Texas Indian Tribe.
The Texas Journal of Science, Vol. 5, No. 3,
pp. 280-304.
Towne, Henry R.
1904 Locks and Builders Hardware: A Hand Book for
Architects. John Wiley and Sons, New York.

u.

S. Dept. of Commerce.
1968 Climatography of the United States.
No. 20-41. Washington, D. C.

Publication

U. S. National Archives
Washington, D. C.
Vinson, Carlos
1968 Collecting Shotshells. Gun Digest, Twenty-second
Anniversary Edition. The Gun Digest Company,
Chicago.

88
APPENDIX
List of Specimens
Specimens recovered during the course of the archeological investigation are listed by individual structures or
features but grouped by area rather than in the order in
which the work was done.
Time did not permit the research
that would be necessary for the kind of detailed identification and description which would have been of greatest
value in recording the collection, but in order to present
the list of specimens in an informative manner the materials
have been sorted somewhat arbitrarily into the following
categories: Personal possessions and clothing, Ordnance
items, Military items, Household furnishings, Construction
materials, Miscellaneous (including miscellaneous metal and
other miscellaneous).
The Personal possessions and clothing category covers a
wide range of articles, but is self explanatory. Ordnance
items includes both military and civilian types of gun cartridges and their fragments, bullets, and related objects.
Military items comprises the metal uniform buttons, military
insignia pieces, and other specimens that are believed to
have been a part of the uniform gear. Household furnishings
includes ceramics, all glass with the exception of the window
glass and an eyeglass lens, kitchen utensils, tin cans, pails,
buckets, fragments from stoves, chests, and trunks and the
like. Construction materials includes building hardware,
window glass, and samples of mortar, plaster, and stone used
in construction. The miscellaneous category is the catchall
for everything else and is divided only into miscellaneous
metal and other miscellaneous. No doubt further study would
make possible a more specific, and in many instances a more
accurate, identification than is given here, with the result
that a number of specimens would be changed from one category
to another.
Where specific identification has been made of certain
datable specimens the reference source is given. All of the
military buttons were identified by means of David F. Johnson's
Uniform Buttons, American Armed Forces 1784-1948, Volumes I
and II, published by Century House, 1948. The figures that
appear in parentheses with the button descriptions refer to
these two volumes so that the entire reference is not repeated
each time.
Illustrated specimens are marked with an asterisk
(*) and will be found in the illustrations accompanying the
structures where they were found.

89
Administration Building
Personal possessions and clothing
2 buckles, metal; one with
tongue, 1 4/8" x 1 1/4"
1 button, shell
1 button, porcelain

1 marble, clay
1 silver jewelry chain
1 harmonica mouthpiece

Ordnance items
1 .50-70 centerfire, Cup
Anvil cartridge.
(early
government experimental)
(Logan, 1959: 97)
1 .22 caliber rimfire cartridge casing--Union Metallic Cartridge Co. 1867-1910.
(Fontana and Greenleaf,
1962:
80, footnote 2)
1 .40 or .41 caliber slug,
manufactured by Peters for
Smith & Wesson weapon,
1887.
(Logan, 1959: 9, 10)

2 .JS caliber shell casings
manufactured by Peters
for Smith & Wesson,
weapon, 1887-present.
(Log an , 19 5 9 : 9 , 10 )
4 .38 cartridge casings
for Smith & Wesson Revolver. Made by Remington u.M.C. Co. after 1910.
(Fontana and Greenleaf,
1962:
80)
1 10 gauge shot gun casing,
headstamped U.M.C. Club.
1867-1902.
(Log an , 19 5 9 : 9 , 10 )

Household furnishings
13 bags misc. glass fragments including necks,
bases, and body sherds
from wine and beer bottles, and other unidentified.
There were also
sherds of pressed glass
and molded glass. Much of
it was badly burned and
fused.
28 additional glass fragments, as above
5 7 potsherds:
(cups, saucers,
bowls, plates, jugs, etc.)
including one with maker's
mark, not identified.
1 bag and 6 additional tin
lids, including 2 hole-intop, 1860-1920 1 s (Fontana
and Greenleaf, 1962:
68-69)

1 tin can
1 bag and 13 additional
tin can fragments
1 slotted key for tin can
1 aluminum lid
1 porcelain and metal
curtain pull
1 wire bail for bucket or
pail
2 pieces of metal pail
1 3-tine fork, tine end
1 glass bottle stopper
1 aluminum (?) bottle cap,
ridged sides and hole in
center
1 porcelain drawer pull, l"
3 cast iron stove fragments

90
Construction materials
2013 square nails and fragments, 1 11 -6 11
142 wire nails
21 lbs. 1 oz. window glass
sherds, some with wire
screen
9 hinges and hinge fragments,
including T, Strap, and
*Butt types (5 illustrated)
4 bags and *33 additional
screws (1 is illustrated)
3 hooks - 2 1/4", 1 1/4 11 ,
*4 3/8"
1 brick sample
*6 ceramic door knob fragments (1 is illustrated)
*4 ceramic door knobs (2
are illustrated
2 bags concrete (?)
*l bag and 19 additional
staples - 1 11 to 2 1/2 11
(1 is illustrated)
2 bags and 8 additional
mortar lumps

1 brass flat-head roofing (?)
nail
2 washers
1 iron pin
1 brass (?) rivet
1 bag and 11 additional
bolts
2 nuts, 1 is square and l"
wide, 1 is a wing nut
and 1 1/2 11 wide
*2 lock escutcheons (1 is
illustrated)
6 nuts and bolts together
2 latch pins, *l with
looped end
1 metal handle with screws,
5"
2 shade roller brackets,
slotted end
1 shade roller bracket,
end with hole
15 bags and 25 additional
plaster chunks (2 bags
whitewashed)

Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous, metal:
14 bags and 9 additional
scraps
8 bags and 20 additonal
strips:
2 with nail
heads in place, 3 are
round with slits.
Strips
range from 7/8" to
1 7/8" wide
3 bags and 25 additional
wire pieces, size from
#8 to #16
1 piece ribbon twist barbed
wire (Jenkins, 1966:
51, 53)
1 long iron bar, 8 1/2"
1 round piece hardware with
2 nails
4 pieces hardware
1 heavy iron cylinder, 2 1/2"
diameter, 5/8" thick, with
2 flanges:
pipe sleeve (?)
for grinding (?)
2 springs

2 fragments wire fencing
3 rings:
3 S/8 11 , 1 3/4 11 ,
1 5/8"
1 band with accessories
1 f la,t, heart shaped iron
object, possible bridle
piece
3 perforated strips
1 handle 7 11 long and 2 holes non-household
Miscellaneous, other:
13 dirt daubers nests
11 bags and 13 additional
pieces wood, some charred
2 bags stone
1 grinding stone
2 shale fragments
2 scraps of rubber, 1 burned
2 bags bone
10 pieces stone, 6 slate,

-·------------------------------

91
Miscellaneous, other (cont'd.)
1 limestone, 3 rocks
1 rubber plug-fuse for
model T Ford
1 bag charcoal
2 pieces of natural flint

1 rubber insulated wire
1 burned newspaper, partially
legible
1 bag soil sample - sand fill
in flagstone porch

Officer's Quarters
Personal possessions and clothing
1 pocket knife
1 fragment glass fever
thermometer
*l white kaolin pipe, including bowl and stem.
Small section of bowl is
broken off but present.
Incised design on stem includes mark "Peter Dobni".
2 pipe bowl fragments, burned
2 fragments kaolin pipe stems,
incised design on stem of
one similar to that on
"Peter Dobni"
1 mouthpiece for pipe
(ivory ?)
1 baby button, pearl

2 button fragments, bone
10 buttons, metal
3 buttons, shell
2 buttons, milk glass
1 part of compound
button
1 oval eyeglass lens
1 pen point
1 fragment slate pencil
1 fragment tobacco box
seal with lettering
1 Lincoln penny
5 clothing buckles
1 scissors handle, right
side

Ordnance items
*l bullet mold
1 minie· ball
*l .56 caliber rimfire
cartridge case for .56-56
Spencer, head stamp "H",
1866-1900.
(Barnes,
1965: 281)
*l .50-70 centerfire musket
cartridge, misfired, as
u. S. Government issue
.50, 1869-1873.
(Logan,
1959:
85)
*2 .45-70 Benet inside
primer centerf ire cartridge cases, U. S. Government, about 1868-1872.
(Log an , 19 5 9 : 8 5 )
(1 is illustrated)

*l .45 caliber centerfire
Colt cartridge case as
U. S-. Government issue,
1873-1892.
(Barnes,
1965: 172)
*l .44 caliber centerfire
Colt cartridge case, as
u. S. Government issue,
1871-1873.
(Barnes,
1965: 169)
1 .41 Short rimfire cartridge with bullet, from
about 1863-1864 to just
after WW II.
(Barnes,
1965: 279)
*10 .38 caliber Smith and
Wesson centerf ire cartridge cases with head

92
Ordnance items {cont'd.)

1

1

2

1

1
3

stamp "REM - UMC .38 S&W",
1888 to present.
{Vinson,
1968: 91)
.38 caliber Smith and
Wesson centerf ire cartridge case, no head stamp,
1877 to present.
{Barnes,
1965: 163)
.32 caliber Winchester
Center Fire cartridge
case, head stamp "UMC 30
CFW", 1875-1900.
{Barnes,
1965: 80)
.32 caliber Winchester
Center Fire cartridge
cases, head stamp "WRA co.
32 W.C.F. 11 , about 18751900.
{Barnes, 1965: 80)
.32 caliber Winchester
Center Fire cartridge case,
head stamp "CFW", 18751900.
{Barnes, 1965: 80)
base to 20 gauge centerfire shotgun shell. No
marking
bases to 12 gauge centerf ire shotgun shells, head
stamp "UMC co. Club",
pre-1910.
{Vinson, 1968:
91)

2 bases to 12 gauge centerf ire shotgun shell, head
stamp "WRA Co. STAR",
probably pre-1900.
{Vinson, 1968: 91)
1 base to 12 gauge centerf ire shotgun shell, head
stamp "UMC Co. New Club",
pre-1910 .
(Vinson,
1968: 91)
1 base of 10 gauge inside
primer, centerfire shotgun shell, head stamp
"WRA Rival", 1870's1894(?)
(Vinson, 1968:
91)
1 base of 10 gauge centerf ire shotgun shell, head
stamp "UMC Co. Club",
pre-1910.
{Vinson, 1968:
91)
1 loose .45 caliber bullet,
probably for .45 Gov't,
but identification uncertain because mutilated.

Military items
3 uniform buttons:
*l is Scovill Mfg. Co.,
Waterbury, 1850-1870,
officer type.
{Johnson,
1948: V. I: 66, V. II:
23, #263-A)

*l is Scoville & Co., Extra,
1840-1850.
{V. I: 66,
V. II: 23, #263)
*l is J. H. Wilson,
Philadelphia.
(V. I: 118)

Household furnishings
1 trunk hinge
1 metal trunk band with
nails, rivets, hinge, and
latch attached
4 metal trunk corner reinforcements

cast iron stove parts:
1 box, 7 bags, 297 miscellaneous parts including 2
legs and firebox grill and
fragments marked 11 K11 , 11 0UIS 11 ,
"TOVE", "ST", "G. F. FILL •.. "

93
Household

furnishin~s

(cont'd.)

3 W-shaped pieces, stove
grill ornaments
36 bags miscellaneous glass
fragments including necks,
bases, and body sherds
from wine and beer bottles, panel bottles, and
others unidentified.
There were also sherds of
pressed glass and molded
glass. Much of it was
badly burned and fused.
158 additional glass fragments, as above
39 8 potsherds:
(cups,
saucers, bowls, plates,
jugs, etc.) including
several with maker's marks:
*4 earthenware, ironstone,
(Godden, 1964:
419, 425)
[3 illustrated]
*2 earthenware, unidentified maker's marks
1 metal cabinet lock
1 bucket bottom
4 bucket bail handles
4 flattened tin cans, at
least two of which are
hole-in-top type

2 metal handles for utensil
(saucepan?)
1 slotted metal piece for
metal pin, possibly for
wooden bed
1 carpenter's plane
12 metal bucket ears
l cast iron kettle leg
1 metal drill bit fragment
2 brass screw caps
1 punched tin panel from
pie safe and additional
small fragments of the
same panel
l latch hook - for the pie
safe (?)
1 iron punch
l ring for lard bucket lid
1 brass lock plate (for
trunk?)
1 3-tine fork
1 tablespoon bowl
1 table knife, complete
2 knife fragments
1 wire handle
1 small flat key
1 tin collar for stove pipe

Construction materials
6724 square nails and fragments, 1 -6
514 wire nails
22 lbs. 4 1/2 ozs. window glass
sherds, some fused with
wire screening
*25 hinges and hinge fragments, including T, Strap,
and Butt types (11 are
illustrated)
2 metal brads
16 spikes
104 wood screws (1 with
flattened, perforated
head, 1 with loop, 1
with hook)
6 metal hooks (1 for bolt)
10 bolts, including 1 6
long with a square nut
11

11

11

at each end
l unidentified rectangular
object, possibly harness
piece
l metal door frame part?
3 handles, metal
1 nut
*2 white ceramic door knob
fragments (1 is illustrated
2 iron latch plates (1 with
a hole in the end)
1 lock escutcheon
*l plate for sliding bolt
*l small handle or latch
piece
20 staples, 1 - 1 1/8"
2 tacks
1 rivet
1 barbed roofing nail

94
Construction materials (cont'd.)
1 washer
1 bag and 5 additional
chunks of plaster
1 bag and 11 additional
lumps of mortar

1 burned conglomerate with
a square nail
4 small, 11 large pieces
of corrugated metal roofing?

Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous, metal:
6 springs
2 bags wire fragments
75 additional wire fragments
(including 1 with twisted
loop on end)
1 length of 3 large chain
links
2 metal rings
1 bridle bit snaffle,
(Baldwin, 1891: 615)
1 bag unidentified objects
17 additional unidentified
objects
1 rod with loop
1 threaded brass object
(bullet?)
1 strap with 3 holes and
a concave area
1 wishbone-shaped piece,
possibly harness trapping
1 rectangular iron object
with 3 holes
1 iron object with a long
rivet inserted
1 harness or saddle buckle,
3 1/4"
4 additional harness or
saddle buckles
2 twisted, looped wire
fragments
1 iron object with 3 prongs
(curry comb?)
1 iron hook with loop?
3 horseshoes (1 with 2 nails)
2 brass rings with holes
(flat)
1 bar 1/4" wide, 12" long
(part of stove bolt?)
1 long piece iron (part
of stove bolt?)

1 longitudinal half of a
cast iron cylinder (for
insertion of bolt?)
1 horseshoe-shaped object
l sheet tin, 1 piece perforated tin
2 sheets lead?
l disk with hole in center
l object with perforations
and rivets
l sheet copper
l tin tube
1 piece barbed wire,
"Glidden Winner" (Jenkins,
1966: 31)
3 oxidized fragments,
possibly wire
l possible part of lock
1 long rod with square
head (stove bolt?)
2 bags strips, some folded,
some perforated
1 short thin strip with
tack in place, rounded
ends
6 melted pieces of lead
1 folded strip with wire
hooked through it
1 large, long curved strip
l ratchet gears, set of 2
small
2 heavy cylinders
l lap link (Baldwin, 1891:
529)
l singletree center clip?
38 bags miscellaneous scrap
24 additional pieces miscellaneous scrap
2 fragments iron pipe

95
Miscellaneous, other:
3 bags stone samples
14 additional pieces stone:
shale, limestone, sandstone
74 fragments bone
5 fragments shell (including 3 mussel
1 bag containing contents
of rodent's nest: seeds,
soil, etc.

2 pieces charcoal
1 fragment wooden dowel
8 dirt dauber's nests,
burned
1 polished wooden peg,
unknown use
2 crinoid fossils
1 piece flint

Enlisted Men's Hut E-I-2
Personal possessions and clothing
*2 buttons, bone
3 buttons, shell
*13 buttons, metal (1 is
illustrated)
*2 buttons, porcelain (1 is
illustrated)

1 fragment comb, composition rubber?
1 short longitudinal section of slate pencil
*2 buckles (1 is illustrated)

Military items
*10 fragments of uniform or
hat insignia including
sword hilt; crossed rifles;
hunting horn or bugle; 11 0 11 ,
probably from 10th Cavalry
unit insignia (Brinkerhoff,
1965: 6~9; Plates II &
III); 1 brass ring, 7/8"
and 1 7/16" dia. (all
illustrated)
*l metal hook, and 1 perforated brass oval piece-probably for attachment
of gear (both illustrated)
10 uniform buttons:
4 are Scovills & Co.,
Extra, 1840-1850.
(Johnson,
1948: V. I:
66; V. II: 23,
#263)
*l is Extra Quality, 6 stars.
(V. I: 66; V. II: 22,
#262-A)

2 are Scoville Mfg. Co.,
Waterbury, 1850-1870.
(V. I: 66, V. II: 23,
#263-A)
1 is plain, 1850-1870.
(V. I: 66, V. II: 22,
#261-G)
*l is 'Waterbury Button Co.,
1849-- (V. I: 66, V. II:
23, #263-F)
*l is Schuyler, Hartley,
& Graham, New York, 1850.

96
Ordnance items
S cartridges and 4 cartridge
casings - unidentified
2 bullets
1 centerf ire SO carbine or
.S0-70 musket.
(Barnes,
196S: 114)
*l .4S-70 Government internal
centerfire. Late 1870's.
(Barnes, 196S: 111)
1 .SO U. s. carbine internal
centerfire, post Civil War.
(Barnes, 196S: 114)

*l .SO Remington Navy
centerfire, early inside
prime. 1867-1877.
(Logan, 19S9: 94)
*l .S0-70 Benet, rimfire,
inside prime governmental
experimental, post Civil
War.
(Logan, 19S9: 97)
1 .4S-70 internal prime.
1878? 1880?
(Barnes, 1965: 111)

Household furnishings
1 large bag of metal pieces
to container
4 earthenware fragments
S tin can fragments:
2 lids, 1 bottom
*l 3-tine fork fragment
*l triangular metal file
1 glass stopper for bottle

7 bags miscellaneous glass
fragments including necks,
bases, and body sherds
from wine and beer bottles,
panel bottles, and others
unidentified. There were
also sherds of pressed
and molded glass
35 additional glass fragments, as above

Construction materials
1143 square nails and
fragments
8 oz. window glass
33 screws: 1 with large
flat head
2 plaster fragments
*6 clothes hooks or fragments (1 complete specimen illustrated)

2 other hooks
1 fragment of latch pin
*l metal lock plate with
nail
S tacJ<..s
1 staple
4 rivets
1 metal hinge
*l part of a latch hook

Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous, metals:
1 bag and 21 additional
scraps
5 fragments wire
1 small rectangular piece
with 2 holes
1 long heavy bar with indications of holes

1 strip with perforation
*l wire object with loop at
one end and a nut (?) at
the other, threaded, end;
not identified

97
Miscellaneous, other:
3 shell fragments
mussel shell)
4 pieces stone

(2 are

3 fragments bone
6 utilized flint fragments
6 crinoid fossils

Enlisted Men's Hut E-I-4
Personal possessions and clothing
1 clay pipe bowl fragment
1 mouth piece for pipe,
possibly ivory
1 button, white porcelain
5 buttons, metal

*l piece thin, flat bone
carved into shape of a
portion of female leg including knee, around which
is incised a garter with
ribbon. Hole drilled at
top.

Ordnance items
1 cartridge fragment with
bullet, .56-56 Spencer,
1862-1920 (?)
(Barnes,
1965: 271)

1 fragmentary cartridge
case base, unidentified
but possibly from above
cartridge
2 possible cartridge case
bases

Military items
4 metal uniform buttons:
2 are Scovills & Co.,
Extra, 1840-1850
(Johnson, 1948: V. I:
66;
V. II:
23, #263)
1 is Waterbury Button Co.,
1849-- (V. I:
66; V. II:
23, #263-C)

1 is too fragmentary
for identification
1 metal ring, 7/8" dia.,
possibly for attachment
of gear

Household furnishings
48 misc. glass fragments
2 earthenware potsherds
Construction materials
72 square nails
1 wire nail
2 1/2 oz. window glass sherds

1 screw
1 rivet
1 metal hook

98

Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous, metal:
1 heavy cylinder
4 scraps

Miscellaneous, other:
1 crinoid fossil
1 utilized flint fragment
1 piece shale

Other Enlisted Men's Huts
(All from surface clearing - not separated by categories)
E-I-1
1 button, white shell
2 gun cartridges,
unidentified
1 earthenware fragment
3 miscellaneous glass
fragments

2
5
1
1

tin can fragments
window glass fragments
screw
bag square nails

2
1
1
1

window glass fragments
bag square nails
piece mortar
button, metal

E-I-3
3 miscellaneous glass
fragments
19 miscellaneous metal
scraps
E-I-5
7 square nails
1 miscellaneous metal scrap
E-I-6
17 miscellaneous glass fragments
6 window glass fragments

1 bag square nails
1 miscellaneous metal scrap

E-I-7
7 miscellaneous glass
fragments

3 square nails
1 uniform button

E-I-8
1 miscellaneous glass fragment

1 tin can bottom

99
E-I-9

1 button, metal
2 glass sherds
E-I-10

4 miscellaneous glass
fragments
3 miscellaneous metal scraps

2 window glass fragments
1 bag square nails

Stone Foundation Hut
Personal possessions and clothing
2 buttons, metal
1 copper suspender buckle
Military items
3 uniform buttons:
1 is Scovills & Co., Extra,
1840-1850.
(Johnson, 1948:
V.

I:

66; V.

II:

23,

#263)

1 is Scovill Mfg. Co.,
Waterbury, 1850-1870.
(V. I:

66; V. II:

23,

#263-A)
1 is Waterbury Button Co.,
1849--

(V.

I:

66; V.

II:

23, #263F)
Ordnance items
1 cartridge, unidentified
Household furnishings
5 bags miscellaneous glass
fragments
5 additional glass fragments
3 tin cans, *l is hole-intop, soldered

11 earthenware sherds
1 knife blade
1 bag and 6 additional
tin can fragments

Construction materials
8 1/2 oz. window glass
79 square nails
1 screw
*l thumb latch and
*l possible latch piece

1 rivet
*l hasp for door
2 chunks mortar
1 brass washer
*l door hinge fragment,

100
Construction materials (cont'd.)
hinge-hasp ca. 4 1/2"
long and 1 3/4" wide
Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous, metal:
1 bag and 12 addition
miscellaneous scraps
1 long, heavy strip
1 wire fragment

1 copper (?) ornamental
trim
5 straps of metal,
*2 with rivets (1 is
illustrated)

Miscellaneous, other:
1 burned bone fragment
1 flint flake cortex

1 bag miscellaneous stone

Library
Personal possessions and clothing
2 buttons, metal
1 earthenware pipe bowl
fragment

1 buckle

Household furnishings
72 miscellaneous glass
sherds
7 earthenware sherds from
same dish, *2 with
applique of oak leaves
and acorns

5 other earthenware sherds,
one' is handle fragment
1 wire pail handle
1 tin can top
*l key

Construction materials
3 lb. 4 oz. window glass
148 square nails, *including one 5" spike
1 wire nail

2 screws
*5 pieces of 2 hinges
(3 fragments are
illustrated)
120 plaster chunks

101
Miscellaneous
Miscellaneous, metal:
7 wire fragments, one may
be part of a handle
8 miscellaneous scraps

1 long strip cut or broken

on each end
1 thin strip with writing

Miscellaneous, other:
1 shale fragment
1 smooth rounded rock

3 burned bone fragments
1 utilized flint fragment

F-1 Cellar Steps on Officers' Row
1 bag glass
1 transfer print potsherd
1 bag square nails

1 bone fragment
l sandstone fragment

F-2 Sun Dial - Surface
1 fragment of claw hammer
head

3 square nails

F-3 Flagstone Walk on Parade Ground - Surf ace
1 gun cartridge, not
identified
9 miscellaneous glass
fragments, 1 is bottom
of bottle with writing
1 square nail

1
l
1
1

strip metal
fragment perforated metal
piece petrified wood
glass bottle base with
molded lettering

Random Surf ace - No Provenience
1 heavy iron pipe
1 bag glass

l empty cartridge,
about 1860's-1880's

