TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
TECHNICAL BULLETIN SERIES

AN· ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT OF
THE WEST COLE URANIUM IN SITU PROJECT

.

,

Webb County, Texas

Ray D. Kenmotsu
Bruce A. Nightengale

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

The University of Texas at Austin
Technical Bulletin No. 45

1980

AN ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT OF
THE WEST COLE URANIUM IN SITU PROJECT

Ray D. Kenmotsu
Bruce A. Nightengale

A report submitted to Camp Dresser and McKee, Inc. in partial
fulfillment of the terms of a letter of agreement dated
October 30, 1980

TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY

•¥

SITES
;·e_ISOLATED

,.

fiND

-----­

--",-_ .......

--- o
-'

Figure 1. Location of project area, sites and isolated finds.
(All site numbers preceded by 41 WB)

--~

INTRODUCTION
During the first week of November, 1980, the Texas
Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin,
conducted a cultural resource survey and assessment of the
proposed West Cole Uranium In Situ Project near Bruni in
Webb County, Texas. This was accomplished in conjunction
with an environmental study conducted by Camp Dresser and
McKee, Inc. f~r Tenneco Uranium, Inc. Six hundred acres
were intensively surveyed by TAS staff archeologists Ray
Kenmotsu and Bruce Nightengale. David S. Dibble, TAS
Director, served as the principal investigator.
The objectives of this survey were to:
1) locate,and describe any prehistoric or historic
cultural resources that might exist within the study area;
2) evaluate the archeological and historic potential
of these resources;
3) recommend to the sponsor means 'to circumvent any
disturbance to, or destruction of, the identified cultural
resources; and
4) recommend further evaluation and interpretation
of significant resources which may be beyond the scope of this
survey.
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
The West Cole Uranium Project is located in south­
eastern Webb County approximately 2 miles north of Bruni, Texas.
The project area is a roughly rectangular 600 acre tract of
undulating, semi-desert upland. The general region lies within
the northern portion of the Rio Grande Plain, a South Texas
inclusion of the West Gulf Coastal Plain, and is situated near
the edge'of the Oakville-Kisatchie escarpment, the fourth
major escarpment of the plain (Fenneman 1931). This escarpment
is associated with a major upland summit which is drained by,
and separates, the tributaries of several major fluvial systems.

---~-

--------------

-2­

Numerous headwater and main stem creek channels drain the upper
basin margins and divide perimeter, forming a drainage pattern
which radiates from the divide in all directions. The drainages
flow southwest to the Rio Grande, lead north to the Nueces River
basin, and drain east-southeast toward the coast, thus encircling
the upland region which contains the study area (Groat 1976).
Although the surrounding upland environs are broken and
exhibit deeply incised drainage channels, the survey area is
marked by a relative lack of relief and the absence of surface
drainages. Subtle terrain features are nonetheless recognized
within the study tract; these include undulating flats, gentle
slopes, and shallow depressions. Elevations within the project
range only from 770 to 785 ft. AMSL with most of the area formed
in upland flats of low relief contained between the 780 and 785
ft. contours. Between the broad, flat expanses, gentle slopes
(>5%) grade to the 770 ft. elevation to form large, circular
depressions which serve as water catchments for this internally­
drained area. Although not contained within the project area,
the nearest surface drainage is Arroyo de los Angeles, a south­
eastward flowing tributary of Mesquite Creek, which lies to the
south.
Soil development and distribution in the study area
are closely associated with the recognized topographic features.
Prominent soils of the gentle slopes and undulating upper areas
are included in the Delmita Series, a moderately deep soil formed
in loamy material (Camp Dresser and McKee, Inc. 1980), These
soils exhibit relatively deep surface horizons of reddish sandy
loam which extend to over I meter depth in local areas of the
flats. Within the low circular depressions, surface soils contain
a fine particle fraction derived from weathered materials and
consist of sandy clay loam of the Tela Series. Throughout the
study tract, a cemented pan of calcium carbonate underlies
these surface matrices and constitutes the Ccam horizon.

-3­

Of note in the study area is the absence of lithic source
materials. Local gravels in the form of deposits associated with
present stream channels and Pleistocene terraces are absent; in
addition, lag deposits related to the Tertiary-age "Uvalde
Gravels" (Byrd 1971) are apparently lacking in this section of
south Texas. Recognized as a potential source of lithic raw
materials, these redeposited Tertiary gravels are widely dis­
tributed over portions of Central and South Texas. Throughout
South Texas, these gravels have often been used as quarr s
and lithic reduction areas (Robinson 1980; Creel et at 1979;
Kelly 1979). Additionally, Uvalde Gravel outcrops have been
recognized and delineated in northwestern Webb County (Groat
1976). Falling within a transitional subhumid-semiarid environ­
ment, the area occurs along the 20 in. isohyet; May, June, and
September are the periods of maximum precipitation. Temperature
ranges are exhibited by a mean maximum in July of 99 0 F. and
a mean.minimum in January of 47 0 F. (Belo Corporation 1979).
Record extremes vary from a maximum of 109 0 F. to a low of
12 0 F.
The project area falls within the mesquite-chaparral
region described by Tharp (1952) and is included in Blair's
(1950) Tamaulipan Biotic Province. The upland flora of these
biotic areas is characterized by thorny brush and short-to-mid
grass savannahs. Recognized as a resultant effect of long-term
overgrazing and fire suppression practices, brush invasion and/or
increase are considered the primary historic trends in plant
composition throughout the South Texas Plain (Tharp 1929;
Johnston 1963; Gould 1969). -Major shrubs which have increased
in the region are mesquite, acacias, and prickly pear cacti.
A biological assessment of the project area has been
prepared by Camp Dresser and McKee, Inc (1980). Detailed in­
formation regarding the biotic resources is available from this
work. Briefly, seven plant community subdivisions are based
.more on species densities as effected by historic land-use than
on plant physiognomy and species diversity associated with
terrain or soil characteristics. Varying densities of mesquite,

-4­

prickly pear, and acacias constitute the primary segregating
factors among the five upland flat associations. Additionally,
two discrete associations are recognized within the low, circular
depressions. A retama-rattlebush-devilweed association forms
a dense thicket in the central portion of the northernmost
depression while the ll1hitebrush-blue sage-wolfberry association
constitutes the more common vegetation type.
Major divisions in habitat types can be made between a
general grassland/open rangeland condition and brushland.
The character of these habitats is a result of land use
practices and thus reflects similar vegetation types of
variable species dominance and support substantial populations
of wildlife forms. Wildlife species occurring in the project
area include white-tail deer, cottontail rabbit, jackrabbit,
javelina, coyote, ground squirrel, armadillo, grey fox, and
numerous rodents. Other mammalian species, as well as reptiles
and birqs, have been extensively inventoried and reported in
the biological assessment of the West Cole project area.
Past land management practices in 'the study area have
resulted from the severity of brush invasion which prompted
substantial use of brush control measures including chaining,
mowing, and reportedly, root-plowing. These activities have been
concentrated over one-half of the West Col~ Project area) with
the remainder of the tract supporting open-to-heavy stands of
.esquite or mixed brushland. It is reasonable to assume a partial­
to-complete disturbance of cultural localities directly exposed
to such land modification practices. In addition to disturbances.
related to ranch management, the current condition of land
characteristics has also been affected by numerous construction­
related activities. These include machine cleared or scraped
access roads, control lines, sendero8 (paths), pipelines, drilled
well holes, and structures. The construction of these facilities
is also considered potentially disruptive to the structural integrity
of cultural areas.

~-~ ..... ----~-.-~ ... ---~--

-- - ..

... ..

-

.....----~- .....- - - - . - - -.....- - - -... --~.

- - - - - - ....._ . _ . _ - .

-

.

- - -.....- - -~~.

-5­

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Webb County is located in an archeological region known
as the Rio Grande Plain. This region encompasses an area running
east to west from the Gulf of Mexico to the Rio Grande with the
Edwards Plateau forming the northern boundary and the Guadalupe
River the northeastern. The following regional chronology is
based on Montgomery (1978). Although not definitive, it serves
as a temporal guideline for understanding regional cultural
progression. The four cultural periods are: Paleo indian
(9,200-6,000 B.C.), Archaic (6,000 B.C.-A.D. 1200), Late
Prehistoric (A.D. 1200-1528) and Historic (after A.D. 1528).
THE PALEOINDIAN PERIOd
Early Paleoindian subsistance is thought to have been
based primarily on Pleistocene megafauna such as mammoth and
bison, but due to a lack of clear evidence concerning this
relatiQ~ship in the region, no solid conclusions can be made
(Montgomery 1978: 17). Lanceolate projectile points associated
with this early period are the Clovis and Folsom. After the
extinction of the megafauna, late Paleoindian groups are thought
to have taken up a hunting and gathering mode of subsistance.
Projectile points found in association with this terminal
phase are Scottsbluff, Plainview, Plainview-Golondrina, Angostura,
Meserve, Lerma and Milnesand.
According to Hester and Hil1(197S), Paleoindian sites
have been found on high terraces and upland fringes in the
South Texas region.

,.J

THE ARCHAIC PERIOD
This period is a continuation of the hunting and gathering
mode of subsistence. The tool kit was dominated by triangular,
stemless dart points such as Tortugas and Matamoros types, and
by specialized tools such as the Clear Fork gouge. Occupation
sites for this period found along stream channels have been
interpreted as b~se camps; ,those on the valley margins and upland
areas are seen as satellite hunting and foraging camps (Hester 1976).

-6­

Site types considered to be lithic workshops are located
within access to outcrops of Uvalde gravels on high terraces
and divides (Hester 1976).
THE LATE PREHISTORIC PERIOD
The change from the Archaic Period is marked by the
advent of the bow and arrow, and pottery. Diagnostic arrow
points of this period are the Perdiz and Scallorn types.
Pottery was a bone-tempered plain ware comparable to Leon
Plain ware of Central Texas (Hester and Hill 1975). Although
the technology had altered, the basic subsistence strategy
was still based on generalized hunting and gathering.
THE HISTORIC PERIOD
The beginning of the historic period is marked by
Cabeza de Vaca's journey across Texas. The Rio Grande Plain
at this time was inhabited by more than 200 bands and tribes
of Coah~iltecan speakers; by 1800 these groups had either died
from disease or had been acculturated (Hester 1978).
LOCAL DEVELOPMENTS
On a local level, Webb County's 66 recorded sites span
the four cultural periods for this region of Texas. Most of the
sites listed in the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory files
are located along the Rio Grande and its immediate tributaries.
The earliest reports of prehistoric remains in Webb County are
in the form of letters to the University of Texas at Austin.
In 1932, E.B. Sayles reported the finding of numerous site locales,
mostly lithic scatters, 21 miles west of Laredo along the Rio Grande.
In 1933, another letter describes a possible burial,S miles from
Laredo. The first formally recorded site, 41WB1, was recorded in
1965 by Tyler Ba~tian from the Museum of the Great Plains in Tulsa,
Oklahoma. Artifacts reported from this I-acre terrace site included
three knives or ovate points, scrapers, debitage and possible
Clear Fork gouges. More recently, systematic studies done

-7­

in the county are: Shiner (1969), Hall (1973), Saunders and
Saunders (1978) and Kelly (1979). Results of these studies
indicate Paleoindian through Historic occupations along the
Rio Grande and its immediate tributaries in the western and
northwestern part of the county.
Sites 41WBl through 41WBS and sites 41WB10 and 41WBOO-1
are located within 45 miles of the study area. All were
recorded by amateur archeologists. Most reported assemblages
are dominated by stemless, triangular dart points such as
Tortugas and Matamoros. These sites are located on creek side
terraces and confluences. At 41WB5, located on the western side
of the Retama and San Jacinto Creek confluence, the assemblage
included surface finds of FoZsom and CZovis points along with
Tortugas, AbasoZo, DesmuKe and Langtry dart points. Also included
were late prehistoric artifacts, Perdiz and SeaZZorn arrow
points and pottery sherds. Additional evidence for the prehistoric
occupation of the area surrounding the West Cole Project was
gained from the examination of the collection
of a local amateur
.
archeologist) which contained some several thousand triangular,
stemless dart points and some stemmed dart points of the
Langtry and Frio types.

.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The project area is part of a two league (8856 acres)
survey granted to the "Heirs of Josefa Cl1ellar" on the l'9t11
of December, 1891, as a first class headright (Texas General
Land Office, San Patricio 1st Class File No. 643). The land
office file reveals a more complex story. Included in the file
is a judgement in an 1872 lawsuit brought by William Von
Rosenberg against a number of people with Spanish surnames who
were the heirs of Josefa Cuellar. Von Rosenberg claimed a
portion of the two leagues using Confederate scrip and brought
sui t to evict ;the people living on the land and to recover
damages for their cutting of wood and grazing of cattle.
~

- 8­

The countersuit on behalf of Juan Vela Benevides et at.
claimed that the two leagues called "La Cabeceras de los Angeles"
(the Head of the Angeles) was granted to Josefa Cuellar
in 1834 by the Mexican state of Tamau1ipas and had been in the
possession of the family since that time. The court found the
claim of Von Rosenberg invalid and ruled to sustain the claim
of the heirs.
The final ruling was made in 1891, nineteen years after
the initial suit was brought. Therefore, superficially the grant
appears to be bne of the last made ( Texas, General L~nd Office
1941, Vol. 4, p. 959) instead of one of the first in Webb County.
The story is further complicated by a succession of county line
arrangements in this thinly settled region. Webb County was
formed in 1848 but this portion became part of the ephemeral
Ensinal County which was never actually organized but was shown
on maps in 1860. In 1874 the area was attached to Zapata County
only to be returned to Webb County later .
•
It seems clear, however, that the Cuellar grant was a
frontier- hacienda owned and operated by an extended family from
Laredo over a period of many years. Although settlement of
the county by Anglo American ranchers did not begin until the
1870's when the frontier of Anglo settlement reached the area,
this parcel had been settled in the 1830's on a frontier advancing
from the south.
Although the current study area is included within this
grant, no early historic construction or development is indicated
in the historic record. It is most probable that the area was
used only as rangeland.
METHODS
Prior to field investigations, an archival examination was
conducted to locate and assess any cultural site known to exist
within the vicinity of the study tract. A review of pertinent
materials on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,

-9­

The University of Texas at Austin, revealed no known sites within
the study area and thus no sites on, or nominated to, 'the National
Register of Historic Places.
Field investigations entailed intensive surface inspection
of the entire West Cole Project area. On-ground coverage was
accomplished by means of transects walked at meandering intervals
of thirty to fifty meters, depending on vegetational character­
istics and surface visibility. Narrower intervals were generally
maintained within heavy brushlands and along margins of water
catchment dep~essions. In all instances, cultural areas were
initially indicated by single artifacts occurring in small areas
of surface exposure. Subsequently, efforts to define the nature
of the cultural area and/or delimit vertical and horizontal
perimeters were augmented by a combination of surface inspection
and extensive subsurface soil auger and shovel probes. All
soil matrices from the probes were screened through box screens
of !.i inch mesh.
• Site documentation ut il i zed s tanda,rd Uni vers i ty of Texas
site suryey forms. Generally, qualitativ& assessments of the sites'
attributes, including horizontal and vertical extent, artifact
distributions and contexts, and associations of cultural materials,
are recorded. The locations of the sites were plotted on 1:2400
vegetation mosaic of the study tract and on U.S.G.S. 7.S'
topographic quadrangles.
Material collected during the survey was generally limited
to diagnostic artifacts, very few of which were located or observed.
All materials and site documentation are housed at the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL), the central repository
for site information in the state. The sites found during the
survey were assigned permanent site numbers, 41WB79 and 4lWB80,
following the tri~omial system of site nomenclature. In this
system the first two digits signify the state (41=Texas), the
two letters designate the county CWB=Webb) and the last numbers
indicate the number of the site within the county (79=79th
site recorded in Webb County). The discrepancy between the

-10­

sixty-six sites mentioned in the Archeological Background of
this report, and the two site numbers assigned, is attributable
to sites located in the county but not yet submitted to TARL.
RESULTS AND COMMENTS
The archeological field" investigations were oriented
toward the location and evaluation of cultural resources. Two
prehistoric sites were found and recorded within the West Cole
Project during the course of the survey. Additionally, seven
"isolated finds" of prehistoric lithic material were identified,
but all lacked the material associations, structure, and
environmental context necessary for a site designation. All of
the cultural areas were initially indicated by single artifact
finds in local areas of surface exposure. Definitive relationships
between these single artifacts and other associated materials
were considered necessary for a cultural site designation.
Extensive subsurface probes and screening of the matrix served
to recover additional materials, delineate site perimeters
interpret local soil characteristics, and verify and support
site status.
The two identified cultural sites, located along the
margins of upland flats, are characterized by thin, but locally
discrete, subsurface lithic concentrations distributed within
remnant, presently uncleared brushland. Given the limitations
of surface and limited subsurface assessment and the scant
recovery of materials, functional assignment of the sites is
tenuous. However, the presence of two projectile point fragments
and an end scraper at 4lWB80 suggests site activities supportive
of hunting and food processing. Additionally, the apparent
lack of substantial densities of surface debitage at either site
may be attributable to the absence of a local source of raw
material in this section of the uplands, or, and perhaps more
simply, its concealment by overburden. The latter is plausible

---.-----~---.

-------­

-11­

due to the minimal surface degradation exhibited in this upland
area and the nature of the eolian deposits. The availability
of lithic sources in lower lying areas of the upland divide
along basin margins and within stream contexts would indicate
limited transport of necessary materials to the site areas.
Recommendations for protective maintenance of the cultural
sites 41WB79 and 4lWB80 through avoidance or fencing, are
considered warranted due to their potential for retention of
subsurface structural integrity, and thus, their potential
interpretive value to understanding upland exploitation
strategies.
Descriptions of the cultural sites as well as "isolated
finds" follow.
Sites ana Isolated Finds
41WB79
This site is situated in a small thicket of low mesquite
scrub, north of, and adjacent to, the presently constructed
mining plant area. The site is generally' level, with prior
clearing indicated by low mounds and dead plant material. Some
rodent burrowing was also noted. -Much of the industrial plant
area was scraped and leveled to within 20 meters south of the
site. Vegetation consists of mesquite, prickly pear, candalaria,
and jatropha. Groundcover is mostly three-awn, croton and
herbaceous species. Cultural material recovered and observed
was restricted to lithic debitage. Surface material consisted
of three tertiary chert flakes and one secondary chert flake
found in the scraped area; subsurface material included three
tertiary chert flakes (one flake is potlidded) and one secondary
chert flake. All subsurface material was found during shovel
probes at depths-of between 20 and 40 ems. These probes revealed
reddish brown sandy loam between a and 50 cms., reddish brown sandy
clay loam between 50 and 100 cms., and a layer of indurated
caliche at 1 meter below surface. The size of the relatively
undisturbed site remnant is 20 meters by 20 meters.

-12­

41WB80
This site is situated in a moderately dense scrubland
of mesquite and prickly pear. The area has been substantially
disturbed by sende~o construction. Much of the southern area
has been a
cted by these roads built to facilitate exploratory
and monitor drilling. The site is located atop a northwest­
southeast trending knoll which gently slopes to the west.
Vegetation consists of croton, three-awn, composites and
chloris.
The site consists of two areas of surface lithic
concentration. In the area of the heaviest concentration,
the southeast area, observed artifacts consist of: one chert
dart point of the Toptugas type; one chert arrow point,
possibly a Pepdiz; one chert scraper; three tertiary chert
flakes; and two secondary chert flakes. Subsurface material
found during probes of the area consisted of three tertiary
chert'flakes found at depths between 40 and 50 ems. The
diagnos~ic artifacts indicate at least two periods of
occupation, Late Archaic and Late Prehistoric.
The other surface concentration, to the northwest,
was made up of a few scattered flakes; in addition, two
subsurface chert flakes were recovered during shovel probing
at depths between 2S and 30 ems. Soils consist of a 50 cm.
layer of brownish red sandy clay loam overlying in 'urated
caliche.
Site Summary
The observed surface materials at 4lWB79 and 41WB80
are sparse but the recovery of lithic debitage from subsurface
probes indicates the possible presence of buried deposits.
In addition, these sites do not exhibit the obvious effects
of severe erosional processes common to upland regions.
The record of prehistoric exploitation of these uplands is
notably incomplete. Therefore, avoidance of 41WB79 and 41WB80
is recommended. In the event avoidance or protective maintenance
are not feasible, evaluative sampling is an alternative.

-13­

Isolated Find 1
The recovered material consists of two small tertiary
chert flakes. One was found amid a small mound of possible
rodent backdirt, while the other was recovered from atop a
low, large mound of scraped earth and plant material.
The area on which the find was located is situated on
the western edges of a broad east-west trending rise near
the northeastern boundary of the study area. To the west,
the locale overlooks a gradual slope and low lying depression
which straddles the northernmost perimeter of the prospect.
Landuse characteristics reflect open rangeland of grasses and
herbaceous species interspersed with scrubby mesquite and
prickly pear cactus. Major surface modifications are indicated
by low mounds of disturbed earth and dead plant material; this
is most evident amid a small open thicket of mesquite and cacti.
Shovel probes revealed a surface soil of coarse sandy
textu~e which extended to 70+ cms. below ground surface.
Isoiated Find 2
Two tertiary chert flakes and one possible secondary
flake were found along the eastern edge of a shallow basin­
shaped depression which borders the western slope grading from
Isolated Find 1. The topography is generally level north and
west of the locale. Areas to the east, south, and southwest,
slope gradually upward to form part of the basin perimeter.
The lowest area of the basin, formed by solution of the CaC0 3
bedrock, lies approximately 75 meters westward and is
indicated by a densely vegetated thicket. Vegetation is
characteristic of an open rangeland, grasses interspersed with
scattered mesquite and prickly pear. Land disturbances
include a little used ranch road, cattle trails, and low
mounds of carth from clearing, root plowing, or rodent activity.

-14­

Isolated Find 3
A single tertiary flake was recovered from the surface
of the gently sloping southern edge of a large depression
which straddles the northernmost perimeter of the project
area. The lowest point of the depression is indicated by a
dense thicket of palo verde shrubs growing about 30 meters
north of the site. The surface topography of the area is fairly
even, that is, neither broken nor incised by drainage rills
flowing into the depression. The area is open rangeland;
surface disturbances are restricted to rodent activity and
past land management practices, such as clearing or root
plowing. Soils consist of brown, friable sands, 50 to 60 ems.
deep, overlying~onsolidated CaC0 3 , A few small fragments of
CaC0 3 occur on the surface indicating burrowing, tree uprooting,
or root plowing.
Isolated Find 4
Two, small fragments of burned limestone and one
tertiary chert flake were found in open scrubland on the
northern edge of a large depression which straddles the
northernmost perimeter of the project area. This material
was found near an isolated outcrop of limestone, The surface
is littered with large limestone slabs and small fragments
which appear to have been broken and ripped from the subsurface,
perhaps by root plowing. The area slopes gently south toward
the depression and is incised by a few ;hallow south flowing
rills, which create an undulating, broken relief.
Isolated Find 5
One tertiary chert flake was found about 30 meters
north of a dense treeline which marks the lowest point in
a large depression in the central sector of the project area.
To the immediate north, the generally flat surface of the
site slopes gently upward. Low mounds of dirt evidence some
disturbance. Soils consist of deep (to 80 em.) sands.

-15­

Isolated Find 6
The blade of a contracting stem dart point was found
in the backdirt of a sendero. This east-west oriented path
crosses an open mesquite-prickly pear thicket along the west­
central perimeter of the project area. The topography is
generally level but substantially disturbed by bulldozer
clearing, service roads and control lines. Soils are sands
to a depth exceeding 70 cm.
Isolated Find 7
A tertiary chert flake was found between two parallel
senderos which run east and west about 100 ft. apart. The
area slopes gently to the west with some evidence of clearing
and root plowing; small hummocks of earth and timber are
apparent along the edge of the paths and on the open surface.
A red sand of variable depth, 25 to 60 cm., overlies a
cemented layer of calcium carbonate.
ARTIFACT DESCRIPTIONS
4lWB80
Tortugas dart point
The point is triangular and stemless, with straight
lateral edges. Left hand beveling is apparept on both faces.
The base is concave with longitudinal flake scars. The distal
end appears unfinished.
Maximum dimensions: Length 3.4 cm. Width 2.7 cm. Thickness .6 cm.
Material: chert
Perdiz-like arrow point
This artifact has a triangular blade with serrated
concave lateral edges and straight shoulders. The stem and
point tip are missing.
Maximum dimensions: Length 2.6cm. Width 1.7cms. Thickness .4cm.
Material: chert

-16­

Triangular end scraper
This chert artifact has a steeply beveled scraping edge.
Heavy use is evidenced by attrition and polishing. The distal
end and one lateral edge show extensive retouch. The other
lateral edge shows a unifacially worked notch; although attrition
is present along the remainder of this edge, it is not possible
to determine whether this was intentional.
Isolated Find 6
Unclassified dart point
The artifact is a triangular blade with convex lateral
edges. Shoulders are straight and the remaining stem begins
to contract. Most of the stem is missing, as is the tip and
one shoulder.
Maximum dimensions: Length 4.7 cms. Width 2.7 cms. Thickness .7 cm.
Material: chert
•

-17­

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Beasley, Tom S.
1978 A Late Prehistoric Site in Webb County. La Tierra
5(2), South Texas Archeological Association.
Belo Corporation
1979

Texas Almanac 1980-1981.

Dallas Morning News.

Blair, W. Frank
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Science, 2(1): 93-117.

The Texas Journal of

Byrd, C.D.
1971 Origin and History of the Uvalde Gravel of Central
Texas. Baylor Geological Studies, Bulletin No. 20,
Baylor University Press, Waco.
Camp Dresser and McKee, Inc.
1980 West Col~ Environmental Baseline Survey.
Tenneco Uranium Inc.

Report to

Creel, Darrell, A.J. McGraw, F. Valdez, Jr. and T.C. Kelly
197~ Excavations at 41LKI06, A Late Prehistoric Site in Live
Oak County, Texas. Center for Archeological Research,
Archaeological Survey Report No. 62, The University
of Texas at San Antonio.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1931

Physiography of Western United States.

McGraw~Hill

Book Co., New York
Gould, F.W.
1969 Texas Plants - A Checklist and Ecological Summary.
Texas A & M University and Texas Agricultural
Experiment Station. College Station, Texas.
Groat, C.G.
1976 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Laredo Sheet. Bureau
of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Hall, Grant D.
1973 Report of Archeological Investigations: Zacate Creek
Flood Control Project, Laredo, Texas. Texas Archeo­
logical Survey Technical ~ulletin No.3, The University
of Texas at Austin.

-18­
\

Hester, Thomas R.
1974 Prehistoric Subsistence and Settlement Systems on
the Rio Grande Plain, Southern Texas. Yearbook of
the American PhiZosophicaZ Society 1973: 594-596.
Philadelphia.
1976

The Archaic of Southern Texas. In The Texas Archaic:
A Symposium, T.R. Hester (editor). Center for
Archaeological Research SpeoiaZ Report No.2, The
University of San Antonio.

1978

Background to the Archaeology of Chaparrosa Ranch,
Southern Texas. Center for Archaeological Research
Speoial Report No.6, The University of Texas at
San Antonio.

Hester, T.R. and T.C. Hill, Jr.
1975 Some Aspects of Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric
Archaeology in Southern Texas. Center for Archaeological
Research SpeoiaZ Report No.1, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.
Johnston, Marshall C.
1963 Past and Present Grasslands of South Texas and
.
Northeastern Mexico. Eoology 44: 456-465.
Kelly, Thomas C.
1979 An Archaeological Reconnaissance of the Palafox
Mining Area, Webb County. Center for Archaeological
Research Arohaeologioal Survey Report No.7, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.
Montgomery, John L.
1978 The Mariposa Site: A Late Prehistoric Site on the
Rio Grande Plain of Texas. Center for Archaeologi(8l
Research Speoial Report No.6, Vol. 2.
Nunley, Parker and T.R. Hester
1975 An Assessment of the Archaeological Resources in
Portions of Starr County, Texas. Center for
Archaeological Research Arohaeologioal Survey Report
No.7, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Robinson, David G.
1980 A Cultu~al Resource Survey of the Rhode Ranch, McMullen
County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey Researoh
Report No. 79, The University of Texas at Austin.

-19­

Saunders, John T. and B.L. Saunders
1978 A Ranch Survey in the Upper Santa Isabella Watershed,
Webb County, Texas. South Texas Archeological
Association Newsletter, La Tierra 5(1), San Antonio.
Shiner, J.L.
1969 Component Analysis for Archaic Sites. Bulletin of
Texas Archeological Society 40: 215-230.
Texas, General Land Office
ms.
Land Grant and Field Note Files.
1941

Austin.

Abstract of ALL Original Texas Land Titles Comprising
Grants and Locations to August 31, 1941. 8 vols.

Austin.
Tharp, B.C.
1929 The Vegetation of Texas.
Publications in Natural
Series No.1.
1952

Texas Range Grasses.

Texas Academy of Science
History~

Non-technical

University of Texas Press, Austin.

