AN ASSESSMENT OF PREHISTORIC SITE 41WA208
IN WALKER COUNTY, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit Number 1836

By
William E. Moore

With a contribution by
Linda Wootan Ellis

Brazos Valley Research Associates
Contract Report Number 50

1997

AN ASSESSMENT OF PREHISTORIC SITE 41WA208

IN WALKER COUNTY, TEXAS

BVRA Project 97-02

Principal Investigator: William E. Moore

Prepared for
City of Huntsville
80 Highway 75 North
Huntsville, Texas 77340

By
Brazos Valley Research Associates
813 Beck Street
Bryan, Texas 77803

ABSTRACT
An archeological assessment of prehistoric site 41WA208 in Walker County,
Texas was performed in May 1997 by Brazos Valley Research Associates (BVRA) of
Bryan, Texas under Texas Antiquities Permit 1836. This site is located on land
belonging to the City of Huntsville. It was discovered by a City employee who observed
a concentration of ceramics, a projectile point, and flakes eroding from the west bank of
an unnamed tributary of Hadley Creek adjacent to the airport runway. The City of
Huntsville contracted with BVRA to collect the exposed artifacts and assess the
research potential of this site. The site was examined by shovel testing and probing
and surface examination of the eroded areas along the bank of the creek. Additional
flakes and two bifaces were observed eroding from the creek, and one flake was found
through shovel testing. Based on the presence of pottery, this site is tentatively
assigned to the Late Prehistoric period of Texas prehistory, circa A.D. 700 to historic
contact. The most interesting aspect of site 41WA208 is the presence of a nearly whole
pot that apparently collapsed in place. Unfortunately, a lack of diagnostic, decorative
attributes and the fact that no rim sherds were found makes it difficult to assign the
vessel to any known type. As a result, the vessel can only be described as similar to
the sandy paste Goose Creek types found in the region. It was not restorable. A
corner-notched dart point made of silicified wood found near the pottery concentration
resembles the Edgewood type and may represent an earlier component dating to the
Transitional Archaic period. It is also possible that the pottery and dart point belong to
the same component, and the sandy paste vessel dates to the Transitional Archaic as
well. A Pedernales point in a private collection that was reportedly found on the east
bank of an unnamed tributary on the east side of the runway suggests that prehistoric
bands may have been in the area during the Middle Archaic period (circa 2000 B.C. 1200 B.C.). The pottery concentration appears to be an isolated occurrence or the
remains of a small site that has been greatly disturbed through airport construction.
This site is not eligible for State Archeological Landmark (SAL) status or inclusion to the
National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). No further work in the site area is
recommended. The artifacts and records have been curated at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) in Austin, Texas.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The following individuals are thanked for their participation in this project. The
site was found and reported to City authorities by David Zellar. The cooperation of
several City of Huntsville employees is acknowledged. They are Gene Pipes, City
Manager; Ray Black, Parks and Greenspace Superintendent; Boyd Wilder, Director of
Public Works; Glen Isbell, City Engineer; and Johnny Poteete, Assistant Director of
Public Works. James Patton, Walker County Clerk, was very supportive of the project.
His strong interest in local history is greatly appreciated. It is important to note that the
site area was not threatened by impending construction. Because of the interest in
preserving and recording significant prehistoric and historic sites in Walker County by
city and county officials, funds were made available for this project. Had this project
been delayed, the ceramic vessel described in this report would most certainly be
destroyed through exposure to the elements; and the projectile point would probably
have been picked up by relic collectors or eventually eroded into the drainage ditch.
William A. Dickens visited the site and helped salvage the collapsed ceramic
vessel, and Ray Black assisted with the shovel testing. On a subsequent visit to the site
area, David Zellar showed the Principal Investigator (William E. Moore) where the
projectile point was found and identified other areas where artifacts have been found.
He also assisted with the additional shovel tests designed to determine the boundaries
of the site.
Linda Wootan Ellis of Archeological Consulting Services in Austin, Texas who
also wrote the Ceramics Analysis section of this report, analyzed the ceramics. The
reviewer for this project was Mark H. Denton of the Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission. Carolyn Spock, Head of Records, at the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL) and her staff were very helpful during
the site records investigation. Lili Lyddon of Lyddon Illustrations in College Station
drafted figures 1-2 and pasted up the color photographs, and Pamela J. Headrick of
Archeological Consulting Services illustrated the artifacts that appear in this report.
Their efforts greatly enhanced the quality of this report.

iii

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT ......................................................................................................................ii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS..................................................................................................iii
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. 1
ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING ......................................................................................... 4
ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND ............................................................................ 6
FIELD METHODS ......................................................................................................... 11
CERAMIC ANALYSIS ................................................................................................... 12
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS .................................................................................. 16
RECOMMENDATIONS ................................................................................................. 20
REFERENCES CITED .................................................................................................. 21
Appendix I: Shovel Test Log
Figures
Figure 1. Project Area Depicted on Topographic Maps................................................... 2
Figure 2. Project Area Map ............................................................................................. 3
Figure 3. View of Pottery Concentration Looking South ................................................ 13
Figure 4. Early Stages of Pottery Collection.................................................................. 13
Figure 5. Pottery Concentration .................................................................................... 15
Figure 6. Large Sherds and Base of Pot ....................................................................... 15
Figure 7. Dart Point and Biface from 41WA208 ............................................................ 18

iv

INTRODUCTION
This report documents the results of a Phase I assessment of prehistoric site
41WA208 in central Walker County, Texas. The site area is on a sandy terrace
overlooking an unnamed tributary of Hadley Creek. It is on City of Huntsville property
and is located within the boundaries of the Huntsville Airport. A concentration of
prehistoric ceramics, a projectile point, and lithic debitage were observed by City of
Huntsville employee, David Zellar, who reported his find to James Patton who notified
BVRA. Because of the fragile condition of the pottery and the probability that the
artifacts would be destroyed or removed by relic collectors, the City of Huntsville
contracted with BVRA to visit the site and assess its significance. The site is not being
threatened by construction. Therefore, the project area is restricted to the pottery
concentration and surrounding area examined through shovel testing and probing and
surface examination. A research design was submitted to the Department of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission, and Texas Antiquities Permit number 1836
was issued. The Principal Investigator for this project is William E. Moore. The project
number assigned by BVRA is 97-02.
The site is depicted on topographic quadrangle Pine Prairie (dated 1962);
however, the area investigated includes the Huntsville topographic quadrangle (dated
1963 and photorevised in 1976). Figure 1 shows the location of site 41WA208 and the
area investigated as depicted on the two topographic quadrangles. A detailed map of
the project area showing the location of shovel tests, pottery concentration, and area
where artifacts were found eroding out of the bank of the ditch appears in this report as
Figure 2. This figure was drafted from a map prepared by the City of Huntsville in 1995.
There was some confusion regarding the drainage on which site 41WA208 is
located. The runway, as depicted on the topographic quadrangle, is incorrect. Based
on the plotting on this map, the tributary is 780 feet west of the centerline of the runway
according to City Engineer Glen Isbell. If this is true the site is located on a ditch that
was probably created during runway construction. The drainage as depicted on the
topographic map did not agree with the engineering map prepared by the City of
Huntsville. When asked about this discrepancy, Engineer Glen Isbell stated that the
runway is 5000 feet long. When the runway was measured on the topographic
quadrangle, it was determined that additional construction must have been performed
since the map was photorevised in 1976. When the longer runway is added to the
topographic map, it is obvious that site 41WA208 is on the tributary of Hadley Creek just
to the south of its confluence with this and another unnamed tributary (Figure 1).
Although this report is the result of a collaborative effort by several individuals,
any conclusions presented are the sole responsibility of the Principal Investigator.

1

Figure 1. Project Area Depicted on Topographic Maps

2

Figure 2. Project Area Map

3

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
General
Walker County is located within the Austroriparian biotic province as defined by
Blair (1950) and includes the Gulf coastal plain from the Atlantic Ocean to eastern
Texas. The western boundary of this province in Texas is approximated by a line
running north from western Harris County to western Red River County. The western
boundary of the Austroriparian is also the western boundary of the main body of the
pine and hardwood forests of the eastern Gulf coastal plain (Blair 1950:99). According
to Thornthwaite (1948), these forests are limited on the west by available moisture.
Flora
The Project Area is located within the loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, and upland
hardwood plant community as defined by the United States Forest Service for the four
National Forests in East Texas. According to Ippolito (1983:6-7), the major forest cover
types in this community include loblolly pine, shortleaf pine, slash pine, post oak,
southern red oak, white oak, black oak, blackjack oak, black gum, sweet gum, American
elm, red maple, hickories, and beech. Approximately 70 percent of East Texas is
currently occupied by the Piney Woods with Post Oak Savannah and Blackland Prairie
in the rest of the region (Boyd and Howard 1988:4). Keller (1974:139-156) believes that
deciduous trees may have been more numerous during most of the Holocene and were
probably more important resources to prehistoric populations than the modern flora
would suggest.
Fauna
The vertebrate fauna of the Austroriparian is considered typical of that to the
east. Blair (1950:99) states that at least 47 species of mammals occur or have occurred
there in recent times. Known types include at least 29 species of snakes, 10 lizards, 2
land turtles, 17 anurans, and 18 urodeles. Ippolito (1983:11) states that there is an
inadequate sample of faunal material for the area in an archaeological context.
Therefore, assumptions concerning prehistoric exploitation of animals must be based on
historical accounts and current populations.
A study by Keller (1974:78-81) of the paleoecology of the middle Neches region
lists those mammals most likely to have been hunted in the area. They are Whitetail
deer, Cottontail rabbit, Swamp rabbit, Grey squirrel, Fox squirrel, Flying squirrel,
Raccoon, Opossum, Red fox, Grey fox, Woodchuck, Bobcat, Spotted skunk, Striped
skunk, Mink, Otter, Long-tailed weasel, and Muskrat. According to Ippolito (1983:11),
this list excludes many species of birds, especially migratory fowl, and fish that can still
be found in the area. Species not found in the area today include Black bear, beaver,
and wild turkey. These were once numerous but were eradicated by uncontrolled
hunting and timber harvesting that irreparably altered their habitats.

4

Climate
The following climatic data were taken from McClintock et al. (1979). The
weather in Walker County consists of hot summers and cool winters. An occasional
cold front may cause temperatures to drop below freezing, sometimes quite suddenly.
The average winter temperature is 51 degrees Fahrenheit with an average daily
minimum of 41 degrees. In summer, the average is 82 degrees with an average daily
maximum of 94 degrees. The growing season has 234 days above freezing each year.
Prevailing winds are from the south-southeast. Rainfall is uniformly distributed
throughout the year and snowfall is rare.
Soils
According to the Soil Survey of Walker County (McClintock et al. 1979:Sheet 31),
the Project Area is located within the Falba-Elmina-Arriola mapping unit. The soils in
this area are described by McClintock et al. (1979:11) as Falba fine sandy loam, 1 to 5
percent slopes. This is a moderately deep soil found on convex uplands. Areas are
long to irregularly shaped and range from 14 to 800 acres. The surface layer of this soil
type consists of a very friable, strongly acid, brown fine sandy loam about 5 inches
thick. From 5 to 7 inches this soil is a very friable, very strongly acid, grayish-brown fine
sandy loam. Between 7 and 24 inches it is very firm, very strongly acid, grayish-brown
clay. From 24 to 33 inches it is a very firm, very strongly acid, light brownish-gray sandy
clay loam. The underlying material to 55 inches is very pale brown tuffaceous fine
sandstone. This is a poorly drained soil that is saturated in winter and spring in most
years. Permeability is very slow, and runoff is medium. Rock crops out where the slope
break is abrupt. Small, scattered mounds of loamy fine sand occur in some areas.

5

ARCHAEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Although several significant studies involving prehistoric and historic sites have
been conducted in Walker County, most of the site data are based on survey level
studies with little or no subsurface testing. As a result, much of the information for
Walker County is taken from projects in surrounding areas such as Lake Livingston in
Polk and San Jacinto counties (McClurkan 1968; Ensor and Carlson 1988), Lake
Conroe in Montgomery County (McNatt 1978; Shafer 1968; Shafer and Stearns 1975),
and the Gibbons Creek Mine in Grimes County (Rogers 1993, 1994, 1995). Several
overviews of the area provide valuable data for Walker County and vicinity. Some of
the major works are discussed below.
In 1978 a file and literature search was conducted by TARL in an effort to
prepare an overview of the cultural resources within the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston,
Angelina, and Sabine National Forests of Texas. Information in the TARL files was
compiled by Ross Fields and Rosario Casarez. This report (Fields 1979) provides a
good synthesis of central East Texas prehistory and assesses 17 sites in Walker
County (41WA47-41WA48, 41WA50-41WA51, 41WA54, 41WA57-41WA58,
41WA63-41WA64, 41WA68, 41WA81-41WA86, 41WA88).
John Ippolito (1983), Forest Service Archeologist for the National Forest,
Southern Region, compiled an overview of cultural resources present in the National
Forests of Texas that includes 53,490 acres of the Sam Houston National Forest in
Walker County. This volume presents a short history of Texas forests and discusses
such topics as environment and ecosystems, culture history, past archaeological
activities relevant to the National Forests in Texas, and direction for future cultural
resource investigations. A map depicting areas surveyed within the forest and a list of
compliance projects with acreage, date conducted, and sites found are included.
More recently, five studies have been published which are worthy of mention.
These are Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning Document
compiled by the Department of Antiquities Protection (Kenmotsu and Perttula (1993)
Roger G. Moore's (1995) Ph.D. dissertation entitled The Mossy Grove Model of LongTerm Forager-Collector Adaptations in Inland Southeast Texas; Volume 66 of the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society which reviews the current state of
Archeology in Texas and contains a chapter devoted to Southeast Texas (Patterson
1995); an archaeological study by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department at the
Huntsville Fish Hatchery (Davis et al. 1994:20-33); and a survey for the Trinity River
Authority by Moore Archeological Consulting (Moore and Moore 1995:6-12).

6

The work by Moore Archeological Consulting is particularly noteworthy because
of the database created from encoding site data for all known sites in Walker County at
the time of this project. This database was an attempt to define settlement rules
specific to Walker County through the application of an empirical analysis crosstabulating site data with environmental variables and was based, as stated above, on
the computerization of data from all of the existing TARL site records for the county. A
total of 181 sites was used for this study; however the analyses utilized only those sites
with prehistoric components since the sample size for historic sites is inadequate and
the settlement criteria for historic sites location are much different and currently more
ambiguous than for prehistoric sites.
This study found that prehistoric sites seem to be found throughout the county
where suitable landforms (sandy ridges and knolls) exist in close proximity to
dependable water sources. The only large concentrations of prehistoric sites are the
result of large area surveys. Single sites along major drainages should not be
interpreted as sparse use of an area; rather, these sites were probably recorded by
individuals with restricted access to larger areas.
Chronometric dates for inland Southeast Texas are rare. Many sites in this area
have been assigned to cultural periods by other means such as cross-dating artifacts
with similar types from sites in other areas where absolute dates have been obtained.
Therefore, the dates referred to in the following discussions are estimates and,
according to Story (1981:142), are subject to revision.
The culture history of Southeast Texas begins with the Paleo-Indian period (circa
10,000 B.C. - 6000 B.C.). This is followed by the Archaic period (6000 B.C. - 2000
B.C.), the Early Ceramic period (200 B.C. - A.D. 700), the Late Ceramic period (A.D.
700 - A.D. 1700), and the Historic period which documents those events following
contact with native Indian groups by European explorers and later settlers to the
present. Shafer, although in agreement with these dates, refers to the Paleo-Indian and
Archaic periods as the Early Lithic and Middle Lithic (Shafer et al. 1975:13-25). Under
Shafer's system, the later part of the Paleo-Indian period conforms to his Early Lithic
period; and the Archaic period conforms to his Middle Lithic period.
The Paleo-Indian period is the least understood time in the prehistory of
Southeast Texas. It is typical to think of Paleo-Indians as small bands of hunters
roaming over the landscape in pursuit of mammoth and other megafauna now extinct.
No definite evidence of exploitation of Pleistocene fauna by man has been found in
Southeast Texas. Therefore, other researchers (Shafer and Stearns 1975) believe that
a more mixed resource base was utilized during this time.

7

Information concerning the Archaic period is also sketchy. Archaic sites are
more common than Paleo sites and they tend to be poorly preserved and often mixed
with later materials (Gadus 1988:6). Story (1981) states that Archaic sites in East
Texas do not always provide the associated context needed for a clear definition of
component structure. A population increase during this period is believed to have
occurred based on the fact that more sites are present. Subsistence patterns and
societal structure probably evolved and eventually adapted to changes in the
environment following the Pleistocene. During this period, according to Gadus (1988:6),
"seasonally clustered resources would have been favorable to a trend toward the
reduction of group mobility, an increase in tool variety, and an increase in the
complexity of group organization." Johnson (1962) based his definition of the La Harpe
Aspect on the similarity of tool types and burial methods.
The Late Prehistoric period is marked by the addition of pottery to a lifeway that
was for all practicable purposes Archaic. The temporal placement of this period is
based on a few radiocarbon dates and the presence of pottery from the Lower
Mississippi Valley (Story n.d.:15). According to Fields (1979:13), a primary problem in
the identification of Early Ceramic occupations, especially in the southern portion of
central East Texas, is that of separating them from Late Ceramic components. At sites
near the Sam Houston National Forest the ceramics of the two periods are very similar,
if not identical. In addition to pottery with very sandy paste lacking additional tempering
agents (Shafer 1975:250-251), the contracting-stem dart point remained the most
diagnostic of the chipped stone tools (Shafer et al. 1975:18).
Experimentation with horticulture during this period has been suggested (Wyckoff
1971:15-17). In central East Texas, however, there is no direct evidence to support this
theory (Fields 1979:13). It appears that hunting and gathering remained the primary
lifeway during the Early Ceramic (Shafer et al. 1975:18). Sites typically are found on
small sandy knolls or ridges on or adjacent to stream floodplains of major watercourses
and their tributaries. A population increase may be hypothesized due to the increase in
sites during this period. Early Ceramic sites have been reported from Lake Livingston
(McClurkan 1968), Lake Conroe (Shafer 1968), and the Davy Crockett National Forest
(Fields 1979).
In terms of material culture, significant changes occurred. A shift from the spear
thrower, or atlatl, to the bow and arrow is indicated throughout central East Texas
(Shafer et al. 1975:20). The change was certainly gradual as contracting-stem dart
points continue through parts of this period. The Atakapa-speaking groups retained
many of the traits of the Early Ceramic period. Plain sandy paste ceramics remain the
dominant ware although grog-or bone-tempered pottery does occur. Influence from the
Lower Mississippi Valley, present in Early Ceramic sites, ceased to exist. Caddoan
pottery types are present and suggest interaction between the two groups.

8

Subsistence patterns in the Caddoan area now included horticulture with such
crops as corn, bean, and squash being commonly grown. Although there is no firm
archaeological data for the practice of horticulture in the Atakapa-speaking area, it is
known that by the beginning of the Historic Period corn was being grown (Newcomb
1986:323; Sjoberg 1951:54-55). Fields (1979:18) states "it seems likely that for at least
a portion of the Late Ceramic Period, certain groups south of the Caddo were to some
degree horticultural." In both areas, sites dating to this period tend to be located on the
same landforms as Early Ceramic sites; that is, on sandy ridges and knolls on or
adjacent to the floodplains of major water courses and their tributaries. Occupation was
widespread and, according to Fields (1979:19), "the Late Ceramic appears to have
been the most intensively occupied as well as the most visible to modern researchers."
The first Europeans to encounter native Indian groups in East Texas were
Cabeza de Vaca and his explorers who visited the coast in 1528 and visits by the
survivors of the De Soto expedition to the Caddoan region in 1542. In 1690, Spanish
missionaries established a series of missions across East Texas and signaled the
beginning of European and Indian interaction in the area. Mission San Francisco de los
Tejas was located in Houston County on San Pedro Creek (Newcomb 1986). Early
roads connected the missions and provided trade routes. Later, the Contraband Trace
brought early settlers into Texas. This early road crossed the western edge of the Sam
Houston National Forest in the vicinity of Farm-to-Market Road 149 (Bement et al.
1987:6-5).
Between 1700 and 1835 (when native groups had been removed from East
Texas), Indians in the area underwent rapid and dramatic changes. The Spanish failed
in their efforts to Christianize the Indians of East Texas, but the French were able to
involve them in an extensive trade network (Griffith 1954:135- 152). By 1700, Caddoan
and Atakapan groups began acquiring horses from the Spanish and Indian groups to
the west. The horses were traded to the French or used for hunting deer and bear to
acquire hides and oil which were also traded (Griffith 1954:144-152). In exchange, they
received guns, glass beads, clothing, and alcohol. Griffith (1954:144-154) suggests that
this trading economy upset the established sedentary, horticultural way of life, altered
social systems, and destroyed the self-sufficiency of the East Texas Indians.
Ethnographic data for the Atakapan-speakers are sparse. All groups living
between the Caddo and the Gulf Coast are considered to have been of the Atakapan
linguistic stock (Shafer et al. 1975:22). Groups inhabiting the area near the Sam
Houston National Forest were the Bidai, Deadose, and Patiri (Newcomb 1986). The
Bidai spoke the Caddo language and interacted closely with the Hasinai Caddo in trade
(Griffith 1954:142). The Bidai and Deadose are believed to have farmed in addition to
hunting and gathering (Shafer et al. 1975:22-23; Sjoberg 1951:54- 55).

9

No historic sites of these groups have been recorded in Walker County. A
possible exception is 41WA53. This site is situated on a terrace above the Trinity River
in a location very close to an historic Indian village mentioned in a thesis by John W.
Baldwin (1957) entitled An Early History of Walker County, Texas. This site was shovel
tested by William E. Moore in the late 1960s but no historic or contact period artifacts
were found. Virtually the entire site area had been destroyed by pothunters. The site
is now inundated by Lake Livingston.
The remainder of this period is well documented in history books. When the
Spanish lost their hold over the state, the area began to be settled by Americans from
the United States who entered from the Louisiana Territory. After Texas became a
Republic, a period of frontier development ensued (Gadus 1988). Farming, hunting,
and fishing were the main economic activities (Bond and Moore 1980:40). By the end
of the 19th Century, timber was exploited throughout most of East Texas. This resource
created the need for sawmills and railroads that was accompanied by a rapid increase
in the population (Bement et al. 1987:6-8).

10

FIELD METHODS
Prior to entering the field the Principal Investigator checked the site records at
TARL to ensure that the site had not been previously recorded. Since it was not
present in the TARL site files, the trinomial 41WA208 was assigned to this site, and a
site form was completed.
The main focus of the investigation was the collection and analysis of a collapsed
ceramic vessel and a dart point that were found by City of Huntsville employee, David
Zellar. The ceramic vessel was broken, and the sherds were fragmented and very
fragile. As they were collected, the concentration of sherds was photographed. After all
pieces of the pot were bagged, the area was screened through 1/4 inch hardware cloth
to the underlying clay, a depth of 50 cm, in an attempt to recover additional pieces of
pottery or other cultural materials. The bank of the tributary parallel to the runway
provided excellent visibility of the soil profile of the landform on which site 41WA208 is
situated. This area was closely examined for artifacts eroding from the site. Four
shovel tests (ST 1 - ST 4) were excavated around the area where the ceramic vessel
was found (Figure 2). Shovel Test 2 produced one flake fragment at 18 cm; the
remaining tests were negative. Several shovel probes were dug to the west of positive
shovel test 2, and all were sterile.
During a subsequent visit to the site, an additional shovel tests 5 through 12 were
excavated parallel to the tributary north of the pottery concentration (Figure 2), and the
rest of the creek bank was examined from the location of the pot to the point where it
intersects the main channel of Hadley Creek to the north. The exposed creek bank
south of the pottery concentration was also examined, but no cultural materials were
observed. Three of the four shovel tests surrounding the pottery concentration were
sterile, and it was concluded that part of the site might have been destroyed during
runway construction that appears to have straightened the creek in this area. During
the surface inspection along the creek to the north, two areas containing flakes on the
eroded bank were observed. It was decided to continue the shovel testing from the
pottery concentration parallel to the creek to a point where the landform was closest to
the confluence of the tributary and Hadley Creek.
The area to the west was examined by a surface inspection and shovel probing,
and a surface inspection along the opposite bank of the creek was conducted where
possible. All artifacts collected were bagged for future analysis. All tests were dug to
clay. The project was documented by field notes, shovel test log (Appendix I), color
photography, and plottings on the topographic quadrangle and engineering map
provided by the City of Huntsville.
The pottery fragments were given to Linda Wootan Ellis of Archeological
Consulting Services for analysis. Her findings appear in the Ceramic Analysis section
of this report below. Ms. Ellis is very experienced in ceramic analysis, especially from
sites in Southeast Texas. The Principal Investigator and William A. Dickens analyzed
the lithics.

11

CERAMIC ANALYSIS
Microscopic examination of sherds found in a small, isolated pile of ceramics
indicates that they probably represent the remains of a single vessel. The relatively
tight configuration of the sherds and the fact that many of them could be conjoined
suggests that a whole, or nearly whole, pot may have simply collapsed in place. On
one side of the main concentration, portions of the pile have been displaced, spilling
slightly down slope. Figure 3 depicts the area where the pottery was observed. In this
photograph William A. Dickens is sitting next to the concentration (marked by blue
flagging). The view is to the south. Figure 4 depicts the pottery concentration as
viewed from the creek. The four pieces of sandstone are part of what appears to be a
circle of rocks placed around the pot. Although most of the fragments are in poor
condition, approximately 45 relatively large sherds were collected. A small bag of
heavily eroded sherds, along with some of the surrounding soil, was also collected.
Due to their friable nature, the more eroded sherds were not washed. Two relatively
large chunks of charcoal were found in the surrounding soil.
Examination of the 45 larger and better preserved sherds indicates that the pot
was made from an untempered, fine sandy paste with grain sizes falling predominately
within the 0.125 - 0.25 mm range. After the pot was formed, its exterior surface was
plastered with a heavy clay coating made from the same clay used to form the body of
the vessel. After this veneer surface had dried to the leather-hard stage, the exterior
surface was polished. This veneered exterior was quite obvious because on many of
the sherds the veneer had partially weathered away leaving a distinctive edge across
the surface of the sherd. The interior surface of the pot had been floated and, on some
sherds, scraping marks were still visible across the surface. Not one of the recovered
sherds had been decorated.
The exterior color of the pot was a light, yellowish-brown (10YR6/4), and the
interior was a yellowish-brown (10YR5/4). The paste was a reddish-yellow (7.5YR6/6).
The pot's relatively light color indicates greater oxidation during firing, the presence of
less organic material in the paste, and/or a more constant firing temperature.
Unfortunately, no pieces of the vessel's rim were recovered, and what may have
been the basal portion of the pot crumbled when it was picked up. The curvature of
many of the better preserved sherds suggests they are portions of the lower body.
Although the overall shape of the vessel cannot be determined, measurement of the
larger, more intact sherds indicates that the vessel's lower body ranged in thickness
from 7.9 to 9.5 mm and was at least 27 cm in diameter.
Overall, the vessel section recovered at 41WA208 fits the general description of
sherds found at other Walker County sites as described by Keller and Weir (1979) and
Moore (1990); however, no detailed technological analyses of the ceramics in this
region have been undertaken. Therefore, it cannot be said with any degree of
confidence whether pots with untempered sandy pastes are common to this area.

12

Figure 3. View of Pottery Concentration Looking South

Figure 4. Early Stages of Pottery Collection

13

Figure 5 depicts the pottery concentration after the vegetation had been cleared.
This photograph illustrates the mixture of large and small sherds. The trowel is at the
west end of the concentration, and the tape points to the creek. Figure 6 depicts the
pottery concentration after all of the small sherds had been removed. Present in this
photograph is the main part of the vessel containing the base and the larger sherds.
The tape points to the creek.
Although the vessel section found at 41WA208 has technological attributes that
are strongly reminiscent of the sandy paste Goose Creek types found at sites in the
Galveston Bay area (Aten 1983) and the Conroe/Livingston areas (Shafer 1968;
McClurkan 1968), their lack of distinctive decorative (i.e., one or more horizontal lines)
and/or technological (i.e., hematite inclusions in the paste) elements makes assigning
the 41WA208 pot to any particular type a tenuous endeavor at best.
In conclusion, this apparent isolated find serves to illustrate several interesting
points. First, the occurrence of a whole pot in a relatively isolated context is seemingly
rare. This suggests that there may be a larger site located in the area. Alternatively, it
may simply be a good example of excavation bias in that archaeologists tend to
excavate only where there are substantial numbers of artifacts. Thus, the occurrence of
whole pots in archaeological contexts may not be due to their rarity as much as it may
be due to our not having looked for them. Second, being more attuned to these kinds of
isolated finds might provide us with good opportunities for studying single event, and
possibly functionally specific, sites. Finally, this analysis points out the dearth of
comparative information that is available on Walker County ceramics and, by
implication, how much research remains to be done on ceramic-bearing sites in this
area.

14

Figure 5. Pottery Concentration

Figure 6. Large Sherds and Base of Pot

15

RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS
This study documents a previously unrecorded prehistoric site (41WA208)
located on a sandy terrace above a tributary of Hadley Creek in central Walker County,
Texas. Although one dart point, one complete biface, one biface fragment, and five
flakes were found on the surface of the exposed creek bank in close proximity to the
pottery concentration only one shovel test (ST 2) produced cultural materials (one flake
fragment). Except for the dense concentration of pottery, the artifact assemblage is
quite small. This suggests that part, perhaps a major portion, of the site has been lost
to erosion. The creek where it parallels the airport runway appears to have been
straightened during construction of the runway. If this is the case, the site in the area of
the pottery concentration would have been affected.
The sandy soils that were encountered in the site area and during shovel testing
are relatively shallow with clay found between 20 and 50 cm below the existing ground
surface with clay closer to the surface to the north where the landform slopes to the
creek. It was also noted that the color of the sandy horizon was uniform throughout the
project area with the exception of mottling just above the underlying clay. No evidence
of organic material was observed. If the landform has not been altered due to runway
construction the pottery concentration is very close to the surface. It is surprising that
the pottery has remained this long without being totally destroyed. This suggests that it
may have been exposed by erosion following land contouring which would have
removed some of the sandy soil and made the pot more vulnerable to weathering. If
this is not the case, 41WA208 is a very shallow site. The site is discussed in more
detail below.
Site Type
There is not enough evidence to make a definite statement as to the function of
site 41WA208. Normally the presence of pottery, tools, and lithic debitage are viewed
as indicators of a campsite. However, The presence of what appears to be the remains
of a complete vessel surrounded by sandstone rocks argue for a special activity,
perhaps a burial. No evidence of a burial was found, and it seems more likely that the
pot and other artifacts are the remains of a small campsite or activity area that was
briefly utilized, perhaps seasonally.
Site Size
The area where the pottery concentration was found was measured at 35 cm
wide (north-south) by 100 cm (east-west). Although two flakes were observed on the
eroded creek bank 100 meters north of the pottery concentration (Figure 2), it cannot be
assumed that the site extends to this point. This statement is based on the apparent
lack of cultural materials between the pottery concentration and the two flakes.

16

No artifacts were observed in the creek bank or through shovel testing in this
area; it is possible that the flakes found to the north were washed there by floodwaters.
Therefore, the site boundaries have to be restricted to the immediate area around the
pottery concentration, an area of about two square meters. Erosion may have removed
part of what was once a larger site.
Artifacts Recovered
Most of the artifacts recovered consist of the collapsed ceramic vessel. In the
immediate area of the pottery concentration six flakes, one corner-notched dart point
(Figure 7a), one biface fragment, and one small triangular biface (Figure 7b) were
collected. These specimens are made from locally available materials such as silicified
wood, chert, and quartzite. Two additional flakes (silicified wood and opal) were found
about 100 meters north of the pottery concentration. The only stone tool that can be
considered diagnostic is the dart point. It is made of silicified wood and resembles the
Edgewood type as defined by Turner and Hester (1985:91). This specimen has deep
corner notches, a concave base, and a reworked blade. This type belongs to the
Transitional Archaic period. It is a common type in Northeast Texas but also found in
central and south Texas, including the coast. This specimen also shares some traits
with the Ensor type, another Transitional Archaic point found primarily in Central Texas.
This point is virtually complete and the following measurements were taken: length
33.85 mm; maximum thickness 8 mm; length of blade 35 mm; juncture width 12.5 mm;
length of stem 10 mm. Grinding on the point and cutting edge of the biface is indicated
by dots
The lithic debitage from the site area numbers eleven specimens; one dart point,
one complete biface, one biface fragment, and eight flakes. Overall, it appears that the
occupants of site 41WA208 were utilizing local materials for stone tool manufacture.
The dart point, for example, is made from silicified wood, and the two bifaces are made
of quartzite and chert. The eight flakes were created from opalized wood (1), silicified
wood (1), quartzite (1), and chert (3). The biface fragment is an early stage biface
failure with some cortex present and is made of chert that was heated. The triangular
biface is complete and made from quartzite. It is not viewed as temporally diagnostic,
as many bifacial tools made from local materials are found at sites of different time
periods in Southeast Texas. This specimen, viewed through a magnifying glass,
appears to have been utilized as a tool for gouging. It was apparently hafted, and the
working edge has been resharpened as evidenced by the presence of flake scars that
indicate resharpening. The maximum thickness is 8 mm, and it is 23 x 25 mm in size.

17

Age of Site
Unfortunately, the pot is not complete and not restorable. The lack of diagnostic,
decorative attributes and the fact that no rim sherds were found makes it difficult to
assign the vessel to any known type. Based on the presence of a corner-notched dart
point that resembles the Ensor and Edgewood types, this site could have been
occupied between 300 B.C. and A.D. 700. The presence of pottery suggests a Late
Prehistoric component dating between A.D. 700 and Historic contact. However, the
shallow soils suggest a single component site. Therefore, it is hypothesized that this
site falls somewhere between 300 B.C. and Historic contact. This is based on the
assumption that the dart point and pottery are associated temporally. The presence of
a Pedernales dart point found on the bank of the tributary opposite the runway provides
additional evidence that an Archaic occupation is present, if not at 41WA208 at least in
the area. Pedernales points date to the Middle Archaic, circa 2000 B.C. -1200 B.C.
(Turner and Hester 1985:139-140).

Figure 7. Dart Point and Biface from 41WA208

18

Summary
Site 41WA208 is an enigma in that it is not known how much of the site may
have been removed during airport construction. The lithics are part of this site, but only
those flakes found in close proximity to the pottery concentration can be considered
associated with the site proper. It is probable, however, that the dart point and other
lithic artifacts did in fact eroded from the site area. The fact that Falba soils are usually
found on older terraces dating to the Pleistocene supports the statement that no cultural
materials should be found beneath the underlying clay at site 41WA208. Therefore, the
vertical extent of this site is shallow since the deepest sandy soils were found to be 50
cm above the clay. The presence of a nearly whole pot so close to the existing ground
surface suggests that some of the A Horizon may have been removed through airport
construction.
Basically, site 41WA208 seems to represent either a small isolated pot or activity
area, or the remainder of the landform containing buried cultural materials has been
removed through airport construction which affected either the surface of the landform
or the creek, or both. This site is in an area known to contain additional prehistoric
sites. At least two site locations are present on the east side Hadley Creek and the
other unnamed tributary directly to the east of the airport runway. It is in this area that
the Pedernales point was found.
The location of 41WA208 is consistent with some of the findings by Moore
Archeological Consulting as a result of the computerized database created from the
Walker County site records at TARL. It is located in close proximity to a natural source
of fresh water. According to the database, slightly more than 68 percent of sites in the
county are situated 150 meters or less from water. It is located on an upland terrace
(based on the presence of Falba soils) and, according to the database, 81.3 percent of
Walker County sites occur within landforms unambiguously classifiable as topographic
high points such as hills and ridges. In summary, the environmental setting where site
41WA208 is situated is ideal for prehistoric utilization, an upland sandy terrace
overlooking a confluence of two streams in close proximity to the site area.

19

RECOMMENDATIONS
Prior to this assessment, site 41WA208 contained significant research potential
and would be classified as eligible for nomination as a State Archeological Landmark.
However, the collection of the pottery concentration has removed the most significant
aspect of this site. Shovel testing did not produce any in situ cultural materials except
for one flake. As stated in the site discussion above, it is believed that the remainder of
the site has been destroyed through airport construction and/or erosion. Therefore,
there is little left of this once important site. The work conducted under emergency
permit 1836 may be viewed in some ways as mitigation, and no further work is
recommended. Should future construction threaten the surrounding areas, especially
along Hadley Creek and its tributaries, an archaeological survey may be warranted.
Shovel testing failed to reveal evidence of a site to the north, and shovel probing and
surface examination located no cultural materials to the west for a distance of at least
120 meters.

20

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, Lawrence E.
1983
Indians of the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press. New York.
Baldwin, John W.
1957

An Early History of Walker County, Texas. Unpublished masters
thesis, Sam Houston State Teachers College. Huntsville.

Bement, Leland C., Rolfe D. Mandel, Jesus F. de la Teja, Dan K. Utley, and Solveig A.
Turpin
1987
Buried in the Bottoms: The Archeology of Lake Creek Reservoir,
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey,
Research Report 97.
Blair, W. Frank
1950

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
11(1):93-116.

Bond, Clell L., and William E. Moore
1980
Archeological Investigations in the Davy Crockett National Forest.
Texas A&M University, Cultural Resources Laboratory, Report
Number 1.
Boyd, Douglas K., and Margaret A. Howard
1988
Archeological Testing at 41WA97, Sam Houston National Forest,
Walker County, Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Technical
Reports, Number 3.
Davis, Michael W., Jan Guy, Marybeth S. F. Tomka, and Daniel J. Crouch
1994
Archeological Investigations at Huntsville Fish Hatchery, Walker
County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Cultural
Resources Program. Austin.
Ensor, H. Blaine, and David L. Carlson
1988
The Crawford Site, 41PK69, Central Trinity River Uplands, Polk
County, Texas. Texas State Department of Highways and Public
Transportation, Highway Design Division, Contract Reports in
Archeology Number 4.

21

Fields, Ross C.
1979

Gadus, Eloise F.
1988

Griffith, William J.
1954

Ippolito, John E.
1983

Cultural Resources of the Davy Crockett, Sam Houston, Angelina,
and Sabine National Forests of Texas. Report submitted under
Contract No. 53-432P-8-00219 to the United States Department of
Agriculture, United States Forest Service, by the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

An Archeological Survey of the Existing and Proposed Texas
Eastman Pipeline Easement through Portions of the Sam Houston
and Davy Crockett National Forests, Walker and Houston Counties,
Texas. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Technical Reports, Number 1.

The Hasinai Indians of East Texas as Seen by Europeans,
1687-1772. Reprinted from Middle American Research Institute,
Tulane University Publication, Number 12, pp. 41-168. New
Orleans Philological and Documentary Studies, Vol. II, No. 3.

A Cultural Resource Overview of the National Forests in Texas.
United States Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Lufkin,
Texas.

Johnson, LeRoy, Jr.
1962
The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeastern Texas, with a
Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe Aspect. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 32:141-284.
Keller, John Esten
1974
The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle Neches Region of
East Texas. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Keller, John Esten, and Frank A. Weir
1979
The Strawberry Hill Site. Texas State Department of Highways and
Public Transportation, Publications in Archaeology, Report Number
13.
Kenmotsu, Nancy Adele, and Timothy K. Perttula (editors)
1993
Archeology in the Eastern Planning Region, Texas: A Planning
Document. Department of Antiquities Protection, Cultural Resource
Management Report 3. Texas Historical Commission.

22

McClintock, William R., Jr., Joseph J. Castille, Michael Stewart, and L. E. Andrew
1979
Soil Survey of Walker County, Texas. United States Department of
Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service and Forest Service in
cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
McClurkan, Burney B.
1968
Livingston Reservoir, 1965-66: Late Archaic and Neo-American
Occupations. Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project,
Number 12.
McNatt, Logan D.
1978

Moore, Roger G.
1995

Archeological Investigations at the Kaygal Recreation Area Site
(41WA82), Walker County, Texas. Texas A&M University,
Anthropology Laboratory, Report 44.

The Mossy Grove Model of Long-Term Forager-Collector
Adaptation in Inland Southeast Texas. Unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Rice University, Houston,
Texas.

Moore, William Edward
1990
Archaeological Testing at the Derrick Adams Site (41WA100): A
Late Prehistoric Site in Walker County, Texas. Brazos Valley
Research Associates, Contributions in Archaeology, Number 1.
Moore, William E., and Roger G. Moore
1995
An Archeological Survey of a Proposed Trinity River Authority
Waterline Project, Walker County, Texas. Moore Archeological
Consulting, Report of Investigations Number 171.
Newcomb, William W., Jr.
1986
The Indians of Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern Times. The
University of Texas Press. (Seventh Paperback Printing)
Patterson, Leland W.
1995
The Archeology of Southeast Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:239-264.
Rogers, Robert
1993

Data Recovery of Three Prehistoric Sites at the Gibbons Creek
Third Five-Year Mine Permit Area, Grimes County, Texas. Espey,
Huston & Associates, Inc. Document Number 910529.

23

Rogers, Robert (continued)
1994
Excavations at Site 41GM224 in the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine
Permit 38A Area, Grimes County, Texas. Espey, Huston &
Associates, Inc. Document Number 930476.
1995

Shafer, Harry J.
1968

1975

Archeological Excavations at Prehistoric Sites 41GM166,
41GM281, and 41GM282 in the Gibbons Creek Lignite Mine,
Grimes County, Texas. Espey, Huston & Associates, Inc.
Document Number 940611.

Archeological Investigations in the San Jacinto River Basin,
Montgomery County, Texas. Papers of the Texas Archeological
Salvage Project, Number 13.
Comments on Woodland Cultures of East Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 46:249-254.

Shafer, Harry J., and Thomas B. Stearns
1975
Archeological Investigations at the Scotts Ridge Site (41MQ41),
Montgomery County, Texas. Texas A&M University, Anthropology
Laboratory, Report 17.
Shafer, Harry J., Edward P. Baxter, Thomas B. Stearns, and James Phil Dering
1975
An Archeological Assessment of the Big Thicket National Preserve.
Texas A&M University, Anthropology Laboratory, Report 19.
Sjoberg, Andree F.
1951
The Bidai Indians of Southeastern Texas. Unpublished Masters
thesis, The University of Texas at Austin.
Story, Dee Ann
1981

n.d.

An Overview of the Archaeology of East Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 26(92):139-156.
An Overview of the Archeology of East Texas. Unpublished
manuscript of a paper given at the Plains Conference, November
1978. Denver.

Thornthwaite, C. W.
1948
An Approach Toward a Rational Classification of Climate.
Geography Review 38:55-94.
Wyckoff, Don G.
1971

The Caddoan Culture Area: An Archaeological Perspective.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Norman.

24

APPENDIX I: SHOVEL TEST LOG
________________________________________________________________
Shovel Test
Depth
Results
_______________________________________________________________
1

50 cm

flake

2

50 cm

sterile

3

50 cm

sterile

4

50 cm

sterile

5

50 cm

sterile

6

45 cm

sterile

7

30 cm

sterile

8

30 cm

sterile

9

40 cm

sterile

10

25 cm

sterile

11

40 cm

sterile

12
20 cm
sterile
________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________

