REPORT ON THE 1977 UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS FIELD SCHOOL ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY
IN HOUSTON COUNTY, TEXAS

by
Ross Fields

Report submitted to the United States Forest Service by the Department of
Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin, in fulfillment of a Coopera­
tive Agreement dated May 19, 1977.
February 1979

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Acknowledgements

iii

Introduction

1

Environment
Geology and Topography •

3

Soils

4

Climate

4

Fauna

5

Vegetation

6

Archeological Background

9

Methods
Approach Used

14

Survey Procedures

18

Problems Encountered

23

Areas Surveyed

28

Sites

32

Interpretations, Conclusions, and Recommendations

42

References Cited

48

i

LIST OF FIGURES
Following Page
l.

Davy Crockett National Forest Survey Areas

2.

Survey Areas 1 and 2

3.

Survey Areas 3, 4, 5, and 6

4.

Survey Area 7

5.

Survey Areas 8 and 10

6.

Survey Area 9

7.

Survey Areas 11 and 12

8.

Survey Area 13

····
····

····
·····
····..

2

31
31
31

...·

····

·..·

····
····
····

31
31
31
31

LIST OF TABLES
Page
1.

Original Sampling Scheme and Classification of
Survey Areas

16

····

2.

Survey Areas

3.

Sites Found in 1977

4.

Sites Found Prior to 1977

.·

······

~

ii

···· ··..
·..··

29
34
40

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many persons have contributed to this project.

I am especially

grateful to the U.S. Forest Service and several of its employees, Dwayne
Strock, Dale Bounds, Gary Hartman, Jerry Freehauf, and Herb Steidle.
These men gave freely of their time, advice, and patience.
The residents of Houston County also deserve our thanks.

Mr. and

Mrs. Wilse Brown, Mr. J. E. Tunstall, Mr. and Mrs. C. M. Taylor, Mr. Tom
Barker, and Mr. and Mrs. John Parker, among others, were most hospitable
to us.

Special thanks go to Mary and Mike Fennell for allowing us to

camp on their property.
Dr. Dee Ann Story, Dr. E. MOtt Davis, Mrs. Terrisa Lazicki, and

Ms. Carolyn Spock, all of Texas Archeological Research Laboratory or the
Department of Anthropology, University of Texas at Austin, were most
helpful both during the survey and in the preparation of this report.
However, completion of fieldwork and the report can be attributed
primarily to the students, Mark Cartwright, Bob Coffman, Anita Earnest,
Dan Julien, Greg Sundborg, Steve Thurmond, and Andrea Tucker; our cook,
Billy Waters; and the Field School supervisor, Lee Douthit.

iii

INTRODUCTION
This report is on an archeological survey carried out in Houston
County, Texas from June 3, 1977 to August 2, 1977 by The University of
Texas at Austin Field School.

This survey was located within and adjacent

to the Davy Crockett National Forest and concentrated primarily on portions
of the Hickory Creek drainage basin (Fig. 1).

The work involved locating

and recording archeological sites, both in the National Forest and on
private land.
The goals of this project, as outlined in the research plan sub­
mitted to the U.S. Forest Service, were:

1) to provide students with

experience in conducting archeological surveys; 2) to develop practical
and efficient methodologies for surveying in forested areas; and 3) to
provide the Forest Service with information on the kinds and distributions
of archeological sites in the area.

This final goal was to be approached

within the framework of a study of prehistoric settlement patterns.
The Davy Crockett National Forest was chosen for survey because
it had not been previously studied and archeological information on the
area was lacking.

The Davy Crockett National Forest, which is at the

western edge of the Southern Pine Forest (Texas Forest Service 1963: 4),
is on the southwestern margin of the Caddoan culture area (Davis 1970: 32).
Also, the George C. Davis Site, which is a large, early Caddoan ceremonial
center and village complex, lies in southwest Cherokee County just across
the Neches River from the study area.

Thus, the 1977 Field School was

seen as an excellent opportunity to conduct systematic archeological
survey in a virtually unstudied area very close to a major Caddoan site
on the margin of the Caddoan area.
1

2

Once the Davy Crockett National Forest was selected as the
general location for the survey, it was necessary to decide where within
the Forest the survey would take place.

Since the Field School was

interested in studying settlement patterns, it was felt that a large area
encompassing a variety of topographic and microenvironmental situations
should be the object of investigation.

The Hickory Creek drainage basin

was chosen as the study area because, as a tributary to the Neches River,
it is the major drainage cutting through the northern portion of the
Forest.

In addition, the Field School headquarters was located within

the Hickory Creek valley.
All notes, photographs, and specimens resulting from this survey
are housed at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, University of
Texas at Austin.

Figure 1
Areas surveyed (1-13) are shaded.

(Map section from U.S. Forest Service,

Davy Crockett National Forest, Texas. 1966)

DAVY

CROCKETT NATIONAL FOREST
SURVEY AREAS

a

o

I

o

I
2

3

I
<4

I

I

o

<4
I

7

mil ••

I
N

I

8 kllomlters

QUADRANGLE LOCATION

3

ENVIRONMENT
This chapter is primarily a description of the modern environ­
ment of the Hickory Creek area.

Certain features of the environment

which affected how the survey was done and its results are discussed
further in the section entitled METHODS.

The information presented here

is taken mostly from written sources, but some observations made in the
field have been

inco~porated.

It is by no means complete for no modern

soil survey nor in-depth geological study has been carried out in Houston
County~.

Topography and Geology
The Hickory Creek basin, as well as the rest of East Texas, is
located in the West Gulf Coastal Plain (Fenneman 1938: 102).

This physio­

graphic region consists of marine and terrestrial sediments dating to the
Cenozoic Era and reflecting regression and advancement of the ancestral
Gulf of Mexico.

Thus, in general there exist strata containing coarser

fluvial sediments alternating with strata containing finer-textured
marine sediments (Sellards, Adkins, and Plummer 1932: 526-527).
The geologic strata which outcrop in the areas surveyed are the
Eocene Sparta and Cook Mountain formations (Bureau of Economic Geology
1968).

The former is terrestrial or littoral in origin and consists

primarily of quartz sand.

The latter is marine or littoral and is made

up mostly of fine-grained sediments including clay, shale, and sandy
shale (Sellards, Adkins, and Plummer 1932: 651-662).
The terrain can be characterized as eroded, rolling uplands cut
by intermittent streams which flow into Hickory Creek or its major
tributaries.

Hickory Creek is a permanent stream which has formed a broad

4
floodplain showing numerous meander scars.

Floodplain deposits also

occur along some of the major tributaries to Hickory Creek.

The Hickory

Creek floodplain contains slight rises capped with deep sandy soil which
are probably either eroded upland remnants, small terrace remnants, or
levee deposits.
Soils
With the exception of a survey conducted in 1905 (Carter and
Kocher 1905), detailed soil studies have not been made in the Hickory
Creek area.

However, a general soil map of Houston County (Soil Conser­

vation Service 1963) shows that there are three major soil series in the
portions of the Hickory Creek basin under consideration here.
Lakeland-Cuthbert, Susquehanna-Boswell, and Sawyer-Susquehanna.

These are:
A full

description of these soils is not pertinent to this report, and it is
sufficient to note that, in general, these soils have a shallow, ca. 15­
40 cm. thick, sandy or sandy loam surface layer over subsurface layers
consisting primarily of clay loam, sandy clay, and clay.
<In terms of the 7th approximation, soils in the Hickory Creek
area are most probably Alfisols, Ultisols, and, in floodplains, Entisols.
Fieldwork revealed that the soils in the area fall into three types which,
because recent floodplain deposits are included, do not coincide with the
three soil series listed above:

1) upland soils with shallow sandy or

loamy surface layers overlying clay-rich subsurface layers; 2) floodplain
soils rich in clays and silts; and 3) floodplain erosional remnant, minor
terrace or levee soils with deep sandy or loamy surface layers.
Climate
The information presented here was taken from a report prepared
by Walter Brooks of the U.S. Forest Service (Brooks 1967).

The climate

5

in the Hickory Creek area can be characterized as subtropical with hot,
humid summers and mild winters with occasional hard freezes.

The average

mid-summer temperature is 84° F (28.9° C) while the average mid-winter
temperature is 53° F (11.7° C).

The growing season, or the period between

the average dates of the last winter freeze and the first fall freeze,
is 265 days.

The average annual rainfall is approximately 43 inches

(1092.2 mm).

Precipitation is distributed throughout the year but tends

to be heaviest in the spring and fall months.
Fauna
The faunal resources of the region are both varied and abundant.
While some change has occurred since prehistoric times, it is felt that
most species present in the area today were also present prehistorically
(Keller 1974: 78).

Also, it is known that there are a few important

species, such as black bear (Vrsus americus), beaver (Castor canadensis),
and wild turkey (Meleagris gallopavo), which inhabited the area in the
past but which are no longer found there (Keller 1974: 79-80).
Species which are found today and which may well have been used
by prehistoric peoples include:

whitetail deer (Odocoileus virginiana) ,

cottontail rabbit (Sylvilagus fl ori dan us) , swamp rabbit (Sylvilagus
aquaticus), grey squirrel (Sciurus caroliniana) , fox squirrel (Sciurus
niger), flying squirrel (Glaucomys volans), racoon (Procyon lotor) ,

oppossum (Didelphis virginiana), red fox (Vulpes fulva) , grey fox (Urocyon
cineroargentus) , woodchuck (Marmota mona x) , bobcat (Lynx rufus), spotted

skunk (Spilogale putorius) , striped skunk (Mephitus mephitus) , mink
(Mustela vison) , otter (Lutra canadensis), long-tailed weasel (Mustela
frenata), muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus) , hispid cottonrat (Sigmondus
hispidus) , white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus). short-tailed shrew

6
(Blarina brevicauda) , quail (Colinus virginianus) , mourning dove
(Zenaidura macroura carolinensis) , various species of migratory water

fowl, fish, reptiles, amphibians, and mollusks.
Vegetation
The vegetation in the Hickory Creek area has probably changed
considerably since prehistoric times.
American settlement of the area.

Most of this is due to Anglo­

Those land uses which have most seriously

affected the vegetation are timber production, farming, and livestock
grazing.
The present-day vegetation can be divided into two broad groups
based on land use - pasture and timber.

Relatively little land is

currently used in cultivation of crops other than hay.

While farming

has occupied an important role in the economy of the region, much of the
farmland within the study area has in the last two decades been returned
to forest or planted in grasses for the production of hay and for the
grazing of livestock, primarily cattle.

Natural prairies are known to

exist in Houston County (Carter and Kocher 1905: 9), but the grasslands
included in the archeological survey most probably represent cleared
forest.
As the name implies, pasture vegetation consists primarily of
grasses though rushes
floodplains.

(FamilyJuncacea~

are often found in poorly drained

Hay grasses such as coastal Bermuda are the favored species.

These are often fertilized to increase production, and in some cases up to
four bay harvests are made in a growing season.

The density of ground

cover depends on a number of factors, such as time of year, kind of grass,
climatic conditions, and soils, and thus ranges from fairly low to
extremely high.

However, most of the pasture1and seen during the summer

7

of 1977 supported a dense growth of grass for the entire season.
Exceptions could be found in areas of poor or eroded soil such as upland
pastures or steep slopes.
Forest vegetation shows a great deal more variability than
pasturelands.

The forest in this area has been described as mixed pinel

hardwoods (Blair 1950; Tharp 1926; Texas Forest Service 1963); however,
this is being affected by the current Forest Service emphasis on producing
stands of the more economically important species, the pines.

Specifically,

present-day logging practices in some areas artificially maintain pure
stands of pine at the expense of the hardwoods.

Thus, prehistorically

forests may well have had a greater proportion of hardwoods than they do
today.
Forests in the uplands are dominated by an overstory of pines
(Pinus palustris, P. taeda, or P. echinata).

Mid and understory vegeta­

tion is highly variable depending primarily on the density of the overstory.
In relatively mature stands with a dense overstory, ground level vegeta­
tion is comparatively light.

As the overstory becomes less dense, mid and

understory density increases.

Common mid and understory plants include:

oaks (Quercus spp.) , hickories (Carya spp.), flowering dogwood (Cornus
florida), deciduous holly (Ilex decidua), American beauty-berry (Calli­
carpa americana), wax myrtle (Myrica cerifera) , sweetgum (Liquidamber
styraciflua), briars (Smilax spp.) , poison ivey (Rhus toxicodendron) ,

virginia creeper (Parthenocissus quinquefollia), devil's walkingstick
(Aralia spinosa), and numerous herbaceous species (Tharp 1926: 22-24).

Forests which have been recently c1earcut, burned, and allowed to re­
generate typically have the greatest density of understory vegetation,
especially sweetgum, oaks, wax myrtle, briars. poison
(Stransky et al. 1974).

iv~and

grasses

- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - _ . " " -_

... -

8

Forests in bottomlands tend to be dominated by deciduous species
such as

o~~s{Ouercus

spp.). hickories (Carya spp.) , American hornbeam

(Carpinus caroliniana) , American hophornbeam (Ostrya virginiana), red

mulberry (Moris rubra) , Texas sugarberry (Celtis laevigata) , honey locust
(Gleditsia trlacanthos), cottonwood (Populus deltoides), sweetgUm
{Liquidamber styraciflua} , water elm (Planera aquatica), black walnut
(Juglans nigra),

persi11l1!lon (Diospyros virginiana), sassafras (Sassafras

albidum) , plums (Prunus spp.) and huckleberry (Vaccinium arboneum)

(Kaller 1974: 61, 65, 71; U.S. Forest Service, n.d.).

Mid and understory

vegetation in these areas closely resembles that in the mixed pinel
hardwood areas.

It is important to note that for the most part the

creekside hardwood stands do not seem to be seriously affected by current
timbering practices, at least in the U.S. Forests.

While these areas

have undoubtedly been logged in the past, it is now common practice to
leave bottomland and creekside vegetation undisturbed in an effort to
lessen the impact of clearcutting in upland areas.
Many of the hardwood species listed above produce nuts or fruits
which very probably were used as food by prehistoric inhabitants.

In

addition, there are a number of other plants not listed - various trees,
shrubs, vines, forbs, and grasses - which may well have seen aboriginal
utilization.

Thus, the Hickory Creek area supports a rich natural

vegetation which could have been exploited by native populations.

9

ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
As stated previously, very little was known about the archeology
of Houston County prior to this survey.

A small number of sites, all of

them unstudied, had been recorded through local informants and an unsyste­
matic survey conducted in 1969 (Kegley 1969).

Those previously recorded

sites which are located within the Hickory Creek drainage are described
briefly in Table 4.
Most of the intensive archeological investigations in central
East Texas have been carried out in connection with the impoundment of
waterways to form lakes and reservoirs.

Thus, the sample of areas in­

vestigated is heavily biased toward floodplains and terraces while the
uplands, which are not inundated by reservoir waters, have received
relatively little attention.

It is in part because of this bias that

good settlement pattern studies have not yet been done for East Texas,
and it was felt that the 1977 Field School would be able to avoid this
problem.
Those reservoirs which are closest to the Hickory Creek area and
thus most pertinent to understanding the prehistory of the region are:
Lake Livingston (McClurkan 1967, 1968; Nunley 1963), Lake Palestine
(Anderson 1971; Anderson et al. 1974; Gilmore 1973; Woodall 1969bh Lake
Nacogdoches (Prewitt et al. 1972), Lake Sam Rayburn (Davis and Horn 1964;
Duffield 1963; Jelks 1965; Stephenson 1948; Tunnell 1961), and Toledo
Bend Lake (Benham et al. 1973; McClurkan et al. 1966: Jensen 1968a;
Jensen 1968b; Scurlock 1964; Scurlock and Davis 1962; Woodall 1969a;
1969b).

These lakes are situated to the north, east, and south of the

Davy Crockett National Forest.

While relatively little has been pub­

lished on investigations to the west of the Hickory Creek area, recent

10
work in the proposed Tennessee Colony Lake on the Trinity River should
add greatly to our knowledge of that region (Richner and Lee 1976, 1977).
Additional relevant archeological information has resulted from intensive
investigations at the George C. Davis Site in Cherokee County (Arnold 1973,
1975; Creel 1978; Fields 1978; Fritz 1975; Keller 1974; Newell and Krieger
1949; Shafer 1973, 1974; Spock 1977; Story 1972; Story and Valastro 1977).
While detailed information on previous work in areas surrounding
the Hickory Creek region is available in the sources cited above, the
following general, greatly simplified outline of central East Texas pre­
history is extracted from syntheses written by E. Matt Davis (1970) and
Don Wyckoff (1971) and from a report by Harry Shafer (Shafer et ale 1975).
The cultural sequence in East Texas can be divided into five
stages:
toric.

Paleo-Indian, Archaic, Early Ceramic, Late Prehistoric, and His­
The Paleo-Indian Period, called the Early Lithic by Shafer, is

the earliest stage and is represented in East Texas for the most part by
uncontrolled or surface finds of isolated projectile points and thus is
extremely poorly understood.

However, the fact that apparently early

projectile point types, such as Scottsbluff, Angostura, Plainview, Meserve,
and San Patrice, do occur in this part of Texas provides evidence for very
early occupation (Davis 1970: 36; Duffield 1963: 84; Johnson 1962: 233).
The Archaic Period, called Middle and Late Lithic by Shafer, is
also relatively poorly known.

In general it is seen as resembling the

Archaic throughout the eastern U.S. and as having lasted from the end
of the Paleo-Indian Period, from which it is distinguished on the basis
of projectile point typology, to the beginning of the Early Ceramic
Period (Shafer et al. 1975: 18).

Though the evidence is meager,

11
Archaic peoples are considered to have been semi-nomadic hunters and
g·atherers.

The early Archaic is characterized by expanding-stem dart

points while by the end of this period, contracting-stem dart points are
common.
The Archaic ends with the appearance of ceramics, however Early
Ceramic assemblages appear much like late Archaic assemblages with the
addition of pottery (Shafer et ale 1975: 18).

Thus, Early Ceramic sites

in central and southern East Texas are characterized by contracting-stem
dart points and a very distinctive sandy-paste pottery.

This period

appears to have lasted from ca. 100 B.C. to ca. 800 A.D. (Shafer et al.
1975: 18).

For the central East Texas area, it is not known if these

early pottery-using groups were influenced by early Lower Mississippi
Valley pottery-making groups or were local developments, if they developed
into the Caddo of the Late Prehistoric Period or were displaced by the Caddo.
moving in from elsewhere, or even if they completely predated Caddo or
were at least in part contemporaneous.

In short, this most important

aspect of East Texas prehistory needs further study.
The Early Ceramic Period also saw an Hopewel1ian and Marksvi1lean
expression entering East Texas probably from the Lower Mississippi Valley
(McClurkan et al. 1966: 25; Jelks 1965: 52; Shafer et al. 1975: 19).
This expression is represented in the central East Texas region by two
excavated mound sites, Coral Snake (16 SA 48) and Jonas Short (41 SA 101),
and by at least two unexcavated sites, Westerman (41 HO 15) and Anthony
(16 SA 40).

Westerman merits special notice because it is located on

private land within the Davy Crockett National Forest but outside of the
study area of this project.

12
In spite of the lack of understanding of how the earliest ceramic
occupations in East Texas relate to the origins of the Caddo) it is
apparent t;hat by approximately A.D. 800 a distinctive,horticultural group,
called Caddo by modern researchers, had appeared in

East Texas, northwestern

Louisiana, southeastern Oklahoma and southwestern Arkansas.

The Caddoan occu­

pation, which is included within Shafer's Late Ceramic Period, saw the
introduction of the bow and arrow and a greater diversity in ceramics.
The Caddoan sequence has been divided into two general aspects,
Gibson and Fulton, and into numerous foci.

The Gibson Aspect refers to

early sites while the Fulton Aspect includes late sites.

A relatively

recent re-evaluation of this scheme (Davis 1970: 40) resulted in a fivepart temporal division of the sequence retaining the foci to show spatial
variation.

A review of the entire sequence and all of the foci is beyond
I
1

the scope of this report; however, the C.ddoan
occupation in the area
,
close to the Hickory Creek region is discussed.
The George C. Davis Site, which provided the basis for defining
the Alto Focus of the Gibson Aspect, is just across the Neches River from
the Davy Crockett National Forest.

This site, which is a large ceremonial

and village complex) is one of the earliest Caddoan sites known in East
Texas.

Radiocarbon dating places the primary occupation between A.D. 780

and A.D. 1260 (Story and Valastro 1977).

Few small non-mound Alto Focus

habitation sites are known in the middle Neches region, but it may be
that numerous sites of this kind exist.

In the five-part scheme, the

Alto Focus is included within Caddo I.
According to Wyckoff, the next occupation of the middle Neches
and surrounding areas was in the latter part of the Late Prehistoric
Period, Caddo IV (Wyckoff 1971: l73-l84),and was represented by the

13
Frankston and Angelina Foci (Jelks 1965).

However, it should be noted

that the temporal gap between Caddo I and Caddo IV may be more apparent
than real.

In fact the Frankston and Angelina Foci may have followed

the Alto Focus with little or no gap.

Sites dating to this period have

been interpreted as small hamlets or villages.
The Neches and Angelina River drainages were also occupied in the
Historic Feriod. Caddo V, as represented by the Allen Focus.

As in the

preceding Frankston Focus, these sites were small hamlets or villages.
It is felt that the Allen Focus occupation corresponds at least in part
to the Hasinai Confederacy of the Caddo (Wyckoff 1971: 263).

Historic

native occupation of the middle Neches and Angelina region is well
documented (Swanton 1942; Griffith 1954).

this documentation resulted

from 17th and 18th century visits by French and Spanish explorers.

In

fact, the El Camino Real traversed the uplands between Hickory Creek and
San Pedro Creek, and while precise locations are not known, it is
probable that several Spanish missions were located just north and east
of the Hickory Creek drainage (Bolton 1908: 255-266).
Thus. present evidence suggests that Caddoan occupation of central
East Texas occurred throughout most, if not all, of the Caddoan sequence.
However, the picture presented here is certainly overly simplified and
leaves many questions unanswered.

One of the most glaring uncertainties

is whether the apparent gap noted above between the two periods of
Caddoan occupation is real or if it is a function of too little arche­
ology done in the area.

14
METHODS
Approach Used
As previously stated, one of the goals of this project was to
provide the U.S. Forest Service with an indication of where archeological
sites are most likely to occur within the Davy Crockett National Forest.
While a knowledge of site distribution is valuable for resource management,
a more complete understanding of the prehistory of the Hickory Creek area
can be gained by studying the determinants of, or the reasons for, the
site distributions observed.
Ideally, a study of this kind should examine site distribution
in relation to both changing land use patterns through time and different
land use patterns within a single occupation.

However t to account for

temporal and function&variation in settlement patterns, it is necessary
to be able to assess the archeological sites.

In East Texas accurate

site assessment is rarely, if ever, possible on the basis of reconnaissance
survey.

Thus, this study has adopted the more simplistic approach of

trying to isolate settlement pattern determinants without reference to
temporal or functional variation.
2
Due to the size of the Hickory Creek drainage (ca. 9Omi ) , it
was necessary for this survey to rely on sampling portions of this study
area rather than surveying the entire basin.

It was hoped that by study­

ing selected parts of the drainage, adequate data could be gathered to
permit generalizations about site distributions over the basin as a whole.
Therefore, it was necessary to distribute the areas surveyed over the
range of topographic and microenvironmental situations represented in
the study area.

15
Specifically, Survey Areas had to be selected which represented
all of the following:

Hickory Creek floodplain, terrace or upland

remnant bordering the floodplain, uplands removed from Hickory Creek but
close to a tributary stream, uplands removed from both Hickory Creek and
tributary streams.

Furthermore, it was felt that Survey Areas needed to

be distributed along the long axis of the basin, that is, from the Neches
River-Hickory Creek confluence area westward to the headwaters of the
creek.

Thus in the planning stages of this project, it was felt that the

Hickory Creek basin could be adequately sampled by selecting Survey Areas
to fill all of the cells in Table 1.

It should be noted that while a

stratified sampling approach was used, the areas to be surveyed were not
selected statistically.
Unfortunately, the survey was not able to sample the basin as
completely as had been hoped.

Specific areas or situations which were

sampled minimally or not at all include:
1) the portion of the

basin~outh

of Hickory Creek

2) the extreme upper reaches of the drainage
3) the modern Hickory Creek floodplain

4) the uplands away from Hickory Creek
In fact, the sample was heavily biased toward uplands, terrace remnants,
and levee remnants bordering the Hickory Creek floodplain.

This bias was

the result of an effort on the part of the Field School supervisors to
provide students with intensive experience in dealing with archeological
sites.

That is, in some instances pastures on and bordering the floodplain

were chosen f.or survey over forested areas because sites are more easily
found and investigated in pastures.

However, forested areas were also

surveyed, and it is felt that pasture survey provided valuable insights
into how seriously forest vegetation masks archeological sites.

In addition,

TABLE 1.

ORIGINAL SAMPLING SCHEME AND CLASSIFICATION OF SURVEY AREAS

Lower Reaches

Middle Reaches

Upper Reaches

118 - J-D Ranch

Floodplain of Hickory Creek
Terraces & uplands bordering
Hickory Creek floodplain

·#3 - Walnut Creek
if4 - Best

Uplands removed from Hickory
Creek, but close to a
tributary stream

#3 - Walnut Creek
#7 - Upper Beaver Creek

Uplands removed from both
Hickory Creek and tributary
streams
.

#5 - Clearcut III
#6 - Clearcut #2
#7 - Upper Beaver Creek

118 - J-D Ranch
1110 - Parker

#12 - Taylor-Upland
fl13 - Tunstall

#9 - Joe Branch

fIll - Taylor-Hay
#12 - Taylor-Upland

119 - Joe Branch

#12 - Taylor-Upland

.....
0\

17
pasture survey provides a more complete data base on which to make
generalizations about forested areas.
There are a variety of additional reasons for the shortcomings
listed above.

Bottomlands, except for floodplain knolls, could not be

surveyed because archeological remains are hidden due to sediment deposi­
tion.

Also, several pastures on the south side of Hickory Creek were

examined as potential Survey Areas but were not chosen due to a lack of
gopher mounds or a very dense growth of Bermuda grass.

However, the basic

reason for insufficient coverage is that there was not enough time to
carry out the survey as planned, especially in view of the instructive and
experimental natures of the project.

In spite of the sampling problems,

it is felt that some success was achieved in realizing all three of the
goals of the project.

That is, the students were taught about the diffi­

culty of archeological survey, various methods of carrying out survey were
tested, and the initial steps toward understanding settlement patterns and
determinants in the Hickory Creek area were taken.
Very basic to a project such as this is the concept of the Survey
Area.

The Survey Area, as used here, refers to any spatially contiguous

expanse of land, the boundaries of which are accurately known, which has
been walked over and surveyed.

Of the thirteen Survey Areas used in this

project, eleven are within the primary study area, the Hickory Creek
drainage.

The remaining two overlook the Neches River floodplain north

of the Hickory Creek basin.

The construct is important because it allows

the survey crew to plot accurately what has and has not been surveyed,
and it provides a unit which can be described in terms of intensity of
coverage, where sites are and are not located, microenvironment(s)
represented, and such specific environmental features as vegetation density.

----------------------------------------------------18

The reliability of settlement pattern reconstructions can be known
only when the reliability of the survey is known; and the use of Survey
Areas allows one to characterize each area surveyed and thus compare the
reliability of the survey between areas.

Also it is extremely important

to be able to delineate precisely the boundaries of what has been examined.
The sizes and shapes of the Survey Areas in this project were
highly variable.

They were made small enough so that they were not highly

diverse in terms of vegetation, present land use, and topographic features,
for great diversity would preclude easy characterization and thus defeat
the purpose.

The shapes, and often the sizes, of these areas were usually

dictated by purely arbitrary means such as property boundaries or forest
stand limits; however, these man-imposed boundaries were convenient be­
cause they often coincided with boundaries between vegetative types or
microenvironmental zones.
Survey Procedures
As in any survey, preparation began long before the crew went into
the field.

The archeological literature and site files at the Texas

Archeological Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin, were
searched for information on previous archeology done in Houston and sur­
rounding counties.

Copies of this information were taken into the field

as part of the field library.
Maps of several kinds were collected for use in the survey ­
USGS 7.5' and 15' topographic maps, Davy Crockett National Forest maps,
geological maps, and soil distribution maps.

Also, once the survey was

begun, it was discovered that the Forest Service had maps and timbering
histories which proved to be quite-useful for all parts of the Forest.

19
In addition, several sets of aerial photos, taken in different
years and which covered most of the Forest, were available for use by the
survey crew.

These were generously loaned by the U.S. Forest Service office

in Crockett, Texas or were available for use in that office.

These photos,

taken in 1947, 1970, and 1976 were valuable for studying vegetation and
land-use changes, locating property boundaries, identifying recently clear­
cut areas, and plotting sites and Survey Areas in pastures.
Once the field camp was established, the first week was spent with
all 9 students and instructors working as a group in Survey Areas 1 and 2
becoming familiar with the forest and the terrain.

After this first week,

two survey crews of four or five people each were used.

In general, this

is a maximum crew size when working in the forest as communication is hindered
by the dense vegetation.

Each member of the group typically, though not

always, carried a canteen, trowel, and daypack containing a notebook, food,
and personal gear such as insect repellant and a snake-bite kit.
equipment was also carried for special purposes.

Other

Cameras were taken when

site or area photos were needed; shovels were brought along for survey in
clearcut areas; garden rakes were carried on one occasion to test their
feasibility for clearing the forest floor (they did not work); and 3-inch
bucket augers were used to test soils in all Survey Areas and at some sites.
USGS topographio and Davy Crockett National Forest maps were carried by
each group., however, there were never enough USGS maps.

(I-n forest survey,

every crew member should have a topographic map so that s/he will not become
lost or disoriented.

This was not a problem in pasture survey since comr

munication between crew members is easily maintained.)
Notes were made daily by every crew member in addition to completion
of site survey forms and Survey Area reports.

While some of these notes

20
were done in the field, most took the form of a Daily Journal which was
written after the day's work was done.
Two survey methods, intensive and extensive (see below), were used
in this project
less constant.

even though the method of site recording remained more or
Sites, when first found, were often simply marked so that

the crew could return later for recording.

This was done so that an over­

view of the whole Survey Area could be obtained before trying to define
site boundaries and alotting time to site recording.

Sites were plotted as

accurately as possible on USGS 7.5' topographic maps.

Plottings were double

checked and triple checked for accuracy though it is felt that the maps
themselves are not always accurate for forested areas.
at all but one site, 41 HO 52.
but no artifacts were seen.)

Collections were made

(This site was reported by a local landowner,
Sketch maps were made of most sites showing

things such as artifact concentrations, landform features,and vegetation
Extensive subsurface testing was not attempted at any site though a bucket
auger was used occasionally as a subsurface probe.

Photographs, both color

and black and white, were taken of most sites.
It is important to note that this project was using a minimal site
definition.

That is, any cultural material, either historic or prehistoric,

no matter how small in quantity was called a "site".

Thus, some sites are

represented by nothing more than a single flake of chipped stone.
sites were defined differently by different crew members.

Also,

That is, one

person might label three closely-spaced floodplain knolls all showing cul­
tural debris as three different sites while another might call it a single
site with three distinct areas.

In addition, the delineation of site

boundaries was often affected by property lines.

That is, while sites may

have extended beyond modern property lines, examination of the total site

21
area may have been precluded by prohibited access.

Thus, site recording

proved to be very subjective and somewhat arbitrary; however, these cases
have been noted.

Intensive Survey Method
This method was used in the fol1oT;i("ing Survey Areas:
10, 11, 12, and 13.

4, 5, 6, 8,

It consisted of a skirmish line of surveyors, roughly

10-30 m. apart, traversing an area and checking all animal burrows and doing
trowel or shovel testing at intervals of from 10-30 meters when animal bur­
rows were not present.

Trowel and shovel testing consisted of clearing off

the leaf mat in a small area (ca. 25-50 cm. in diameter) and digging a
shallow hole (ca. 10-20 cm. deep), the dirt from which was searched for arti­
facts.

In pastures, trowel and shovel testing was not used due to the thick

grass cover.

Rather, gopher and ant mounds, in addition to areas with sparse

grass cover, were examined for cultural material.
Using the intensive approach, both likely and unlikely site locations
were checked with equal intensity thus eliminating a common bias found in
many surveys.

This method differed from the extensive method in that it

caused a much smaller area to be surveyed in a given amount of time but
allowed for more intensive coverage thus increasing the reliability of the
survey.

This approach had the added advantage of keeping the survey team

together so that no one became lost and maps could be shared.
The intensive method was most effective in the clearcut and pasture
Survey Areas where a true skirmish line could be maintained and specific
compass bearings could be followed.

·In Survey Area 4, compass bearings could

not be used very well due to the dense vegetation, and a skirmish line was

22

much less practical.

Rather, each member of the survey team was assigned to

follow a certain topographic situation, such as the edge of the floodplain.

Extensive Survey Method
The following areas were surveyed using this method:

3, 7, and 9.

This method consisted of examining large areas using small crews of one,
two, or three persons either walking randomly throughout the areas or fol­
lowing a general compass bearing.

Special attention was given to those

parts of the Survey Areas which were thought to be likely site locations,
such as along streams; however, other areas where also checked.

There was

no attempt to maintain regular spacing between survey teams or team members
and trowel testing was not done at specified intervals.

Trowel testing was

the same as for the intensive method.
The advantage of this method was that it allowed large areas to be
examined in a short time.

The disadvantages were that the areas were covered

very lightly and in a piecemeal fashion.

Specifically, trowel testing was

neither as frequent nor as regularly spaced as in the intensive method.
Also, unless every crew member had a topographic map and used it accurately,
which was often difficult in the forest, it was very easy for some parts of
the Survey Areas to remain unexamined.

In other words, using this method

it was difficult to define precisely where every crew member had walked.
Thus, it was hard to know what had and had not been surveyed and consequently
to define the limits of the Survey Area.

Therefore, the extensive method

is best considered as very cursory in nature, and it should be realized
that the reliability of the survey in these three Survey Areas is lower than
for those areas examined under the

~ensive

method.

23
Problems Encountered
Discussed here are the primary problems encountered in carrying out
this survey.

These are the difficulty of finding sites and, once found,

of assessing them.

The simple locating of sites was complicated by the

dense vegetation and leaf mat and also by sediment accumulation.

The as­

sessment of sites was hindered by the paucity of data on the sites and by
the lack of information on the geomorphology of the study area, especially
the amounts and rates of erosion and sediment deposition.
Vegetation
While survey during the winter might be somewhat easier due to less
dense vegetation, it is felt that the problems discussed here will generally
apply to survey in heavily forested regions regardless of the season.

Dense

vegetation and a thick leaf mat adversely affect survey in the following
ways:
1) The surface of the ground is so obscured that archeological remains
cannot be seen.
2) Understory and extensive root systems inhibit animal burrowing which
can often reveal buried sites.
3) Visibility is reduced so that landforms are difficult to distinguish
and the accurate use of topographic maps is hindered.
4) Low visibility reduces communication between survey crew members.
5) In areas where mid and lower story vegetation is extremely dense, such
as forest stands which have been cut within at least the last 20 years,
survey is impossible.
Thus, in doing survey in forested areas, some stands were auto­
matically excluded due to impenetrable thickets while those stands which
could be examined presented very serious problems.

The methodology used

24

for some of the forested areas in this survey, as previously described, was
effective in that sites were located; however, there is no doubt that some,
if not most, of the sites in the forested Survey Areas were missed completely;
and in addition, any kind of assessment of forest sites is handicapped by the
very low artifact frequencies.
Vegetation presents the fewest problems for survey in forest stands
which have been recently clearcut and burned (no more than one growing
season prior to survey).

These areas start to revegetate quickly after

burning; however, this vegetation consists primarily of young trees, shrubs,
and grasses.
minima~

Ground level vegetation and organic matter mat are both

and conseqqently the ground surface can often be seen.

However,

once regeneration of the area has proceeded beyond a point, survey is made
impossible by the dense vegetation.

Thus, clearcut survey may be effective

assuming that logging has not destroyed the sites.
Pastureland survey is generally much easier than forest survey since
pasture vegetation consists almost solely of grasses.

Because mid and over

story vegetation is absent, there are no problems of crew communication,
restricted access, and visibility of landforms.

Also, aerial photos can

often be used as a valuable supplement to topographic maps in pasture areas.
The primary survey problem is the generally thick grass cover which obscures
the ground surface.

This grass cover, with its dense root system, prevents

the use of trowel-testing.

This problem is countered in some areas by the

abundance of gopher activity which may bring cultural materials to the sur­
face; however, this introduces another problem - the distribution of gopher
mounds.

In grasslands which have a fairly deep sandy or loamy soil, such as

on floodplain rises, little-eroded uplands, and recent terraces,gopher
activity is quite plentiful, and thus survey in these areas may be fairly

25
reliable.

However, gophers generally do not inhabit the clayey flood­

plains and thus examination of these bottomlands is very difficult, if
not impossible.

Also, gophers usually do not like upland pastures which

have been eroded and thus have a very shallow sandy topsoil underlain by
compact clays and often containing high quantities of limonite.

Though

gopher activity is sparse in these areas, this poor soil often supports a
less dense grass growth and if surveyed at the right time, the ground sur­
face can be seen.
Erosion and Deposition
The basic question considered here is, "What effects do erosion
and sediment deposition have on the ability to locate and assess archeo­
logical sites?"

A related question not directly addressed here is, "How

closely does the present topography of the area reflect past topography?"
Of critical importance in interpreting the locations of sites or
the lack of sites is an understanding of how much and how quickly landforms
have changed during and since prehistoric times.

Thus, it is necessary to

have some idea of the rates of erosion and sediment accumulation, particu­
larly as they are affected by Anglo-American land-use practices.

While

this kind of data is not readily available for the Hickorv Creek area, the
survey team was able to make some field observations which may help to
answer some of these Questions.

These observations are discussed below.

Rates of erosion, even on steep slopes. are slow in forested areas
due to the thick

or~anic

matter mat and in pasturelands due to the grass

cover.

However, erosion would increase considerably, at least on slopes.

if this

~round

cover were removed, either by plowing or by timbering.

Since all of the study area has at one time or another been plowed or
timbered, it is possible that in some localities archeologieal sites have

26
been disturbed or destroyed.

This danger applies particularly to upland

sites which may be shallowly buried.
Since the modern floodplain of Hickory Creek is in a depositional
environment, any archeological sites in these bottomlands have very probably
either been deeply buried or washed away.

This deposition, coupled with the

lack of gopher activity, precludes surface survey of the floodplains.
However, exceptions to this rule can be found in the case of floodplain
rises, especially in pastures.

These often-isolated knolls, which may

represent levee deposits, terrace remnants, or upland remnants, usually have
the deep sandy soil favored by gophers and thus can be surveyed.
Deep sandy soils are also found on terrace or upland remnants
bordering the Hickory Creek floodplain, and thus, when in pasture, these
areas can also be surveyed relatively easily.

The fact that these rises or

prominences on and bordering the floodplain have deep sandy or loamy soils
suggests that these areas have experienced some sediment deposition.

Thus

arises the possibility of buried, perhaps well-protected archeological
sites on these topographic features.

However, it should be noted that many

sites were found on these features by local landowners when the land was
being farmed, and thus some erosional disturbance seems certain.
This section has discussed the most significant problems encountered
in trying to find and assess sites in East Texas - those imposed by the
environment.

The problem of processes and rates of landform change is a

general one applying to all archeological investigations.

Before an area

can be assessed culturally, it is necessary to understand how that area
has changed physically.
The problems imposed by vegetation are s'omewhat more specific.
That is, archeological survey will seldom be more difficult than in dense

27

forest such as the Davy Crockett National Forest.

The density of the

vegetation and the degree of ground cover directly affect the intensity
and reliability of the survey.

Survey in pastures may produce fairly

reliable results, though biased by the distribution of gopher activity,
because burrowing brings cultural material to the surface.

In the forest,

cultural remains are seldom brought to the surface, and when they are, the
leaf mat obscures them.

The fact that sites were found indicates that the

survey methodology was at least somewhat sound; however, the small number
of sites and the paucity of information obtained from them shows the great
difficulty of obtaining relatively little information.

As a result of

these investigations, it is felt that forest survey is possible but will
be extremely time-consuming.

28
AREAS SURVEYED

As noted, the basic unit of survey was the Survey Area.
each of these areas is briefly described.
found in one of these Survey Areas.

In Table 2,

All but one site, 41 HO 30, was

41 HO 30 was discovered in a road cut,

and the adjacent pastures were not surveyed due to thick grass.
During the fieldwork, a number of localities withirt the Hickory
Creek basin were examined as potential Survey Areas but were not chosen for
further study due to factors such as inability to secure the landowner's
permission, extremely dense vegetation (e.g., certain c1earcut areas and
certain hay meadows), and a lack of gopher mounds (especially in some
pastures south of Hickory Creek).

The choosing of Survey Areas proved to

be quite costly in terms of time.

That is, many man-hours were spent

simply in finding out that some areas could not be surveyed.

TABLE 2.
Designation

SURVEY AREAS

Land Ownership
and Veget~~on

Location and
Topographic Sit~~tion

Size and
Required

Survey Method
and Results

ffl - Neches
Bluff A
(Fig. 1, 2 Area 1)

U.S. Forest Service; pinel
hardwood forest with light
to heavy undergrowth;
ground surface exposure
very poor

Outside of Hickory Creek
drainage; in uplands
overlooking Neches River
floodplain in vicinity
of Neches Bluff Recrea­
tional Area

13 hectares
(33 acres)
50 man-hours

Somewhat intensive
(was the first
area surveyed); no
sites found; sites
perhaps destroyed
by logging andlor
erosion

112 - Neches
BluffB
(Fig. 1, 2 ­
Area 2)

U.S. Forest Service; pinel
hardwood forest with
generally light under­
growth; ground surface
exposure very poor

Outside of Hickory Creek
drainage; in uplands
overlooking Neches River
floodplain in vicinity
of Neches Bluff Recrea­
tional Area

37 hectares
(101 acres)
20 man-hours

Somewhat intensive;
no sites found;
sites perhaps de­
stroyed by logging
andlor erosion

113 - Walnut
Creek
(Fig. 1, 3 Area 3)

U.S. Forest Service; pinel
hardwood forest with
locally dense under­
growth; ground surface
exposure very poor

North side of Hickory
Creek very close to
Neches River floodplain;
upland, terrace, and
floodplain overlooking
Walnut Creek, Hickory
Creek, and Neches River

136 hectares
(337 acres)
71 man-hours

Extensive; 1 site
found (HO 27)

1/4 - Best
(Fig. 1, 3 Area 4)

U.S. Forest Service; pinel
hardwood forest with
locally dense under­
growth; ground surface
exposure very poor

North side of Hickory
Creek between Beaver
Creek and Walnut Creek;
upland or terrace over­
looking Hickory Creek
f1ooap1ain

25 hectares
(63 acres)
98 man-hours

Intensive; 4 sites
found (HO 26, 28,

Ti~e

29, 51)
N
\0

r

Designation

Land Ownership
and Vegetation

Location and
Topographic S~~~ation

Size and
Time Required

Survey Method
and Results

/IS - Clearcut
1
(Fig. 1, 3 Area 5)

U.s. Forest Service; had
been cut and burned
recently, so vegetation
consisted of young hard­
woods, shrubs, and grasses;
g!ound surface exposure
very good

North side of Hickory
Creek in uplands between
Little Beaver Creek and
Merkel Creek

9 hectares
(22 acres)
42 man-hours

Intensive; no
sites found
(high probability
that no sites
exist)

116 - Clearc:.tt
2
(Fig. 1, 3 Area 6)

U.S. Forest Service;
vegetation same as /IS;
ground surface exposure
good

North side of Hickory
Creek in uplands at
head of Merkel Creek

11 hectares
(27 acres)

Intensive; no
sites found (high
probability no
sites exist)

#7 - Upper
lreaver Creek
(Fig. 1, 4 Area 7)

U.S. Forest Service; pinel
hardwood forest with
locally dense undergrowth
and some regeneration
areas of very dense under­
growth

North side of Hickory
Creek around the head­
waters of Beaver Creek;
Uplands and tributary
stream floodplain

706 hectares

Its - J-D
Ranch
(Fig. 1,. 5 ­
Area 8)

Private; mostly pasture;
ground surface exposure
fair to good (due to
gopher mounds and erosional
features)

North side of Hickory
Creek in vicinity of Gin
Branch and Chinquapin
Branch; terrace or up­
lands bordering Hickory

119 - Joe
Branch
(Fig. 1, 6 ­
Area 9)

.

U.S. ~orest Service; pinel
hardwood forest with
locally dense undergrowth;
ground surface exposure
very poor

Cr~e!<floodplain

South side of Hickory
Creek in upland between
Brown Creek and Joe
Branch; also includes
small por~ion of Joe
Branch floodplain

40 man-hours

(1745 acres)
78 man-hours

Extensive; 1 site
(HO 42) reported
by informant but
none found in
survey

122 hectares
(302 acres)
218 man-hours
(most spent in
recording
sites)

Intensive; 9
sites found
(HO 38-40 and

110 hectares
(272 acres)
49 man-hours

Extensive; 1 site
found (HO 41)

43-48)

w

o

Designation

Land Ownership
and Vegetation

Location and
Topographic Situation

Size and
_1I'ime Required

Method
and Results

Surv~y

fila - Parker
(Fig. 1, 5 ­
Area 10)

Private; pasture; ground
surface exposure fair to
good (due to gopher
mounds and erosional
features)

North side of Hickory
Creek in vicinity of
Parker Branch/Hickory
Creek confluence; terrace
or uplands bordering
Hickory Creek floodplain

59 hectares
(147 acres)
77 man-hours

Intensive; 7
sites found
(HO 31-37)

fill - Taylor­
Hay
(Fig. 1, 7 Area 11)

Private; hay meadow;
ground surface exposure
poor (due to high grass)

North side of Rosy Bayou
just upstream from Hickory
Creek/Rosy Bayou con­
fluence; includes gentle
upland slope between Rosy
Bayou and Gum Creek

21 hectares
(53 acres)
12 man-hours

Intensive
(though thick
grass hid gopher
mounds); no
sites found

1112 - Taylor­
Uplands
(Fig. 1, 7 Area 12)

Private; pasture; ground
surface exposure ranged
from poor (due to grass
cover and lack of gopher
mounds) to good (due to
erosion)

North side of Rosy Bayou
west of Kelly Branch; in­
cludes upland slope from
Rosy Bayou floodplain
northward

133 hectares
(329 acres)
30 man-hours

Intensive (though
lack of gopher
mounds and exces­
sive erosion
presented problems)
2 sites found
(HO 49-50); 1 site
(HO 52) reported
by landowner but
no artifacts were
seen

1113 Tunstall
(Fig. 1" 8 Area 13)

Private; pasture; ground
surface exposure good
(due to gopher mounds
and erosion)

South side of Hickory
Creek upstream from
Hickory Creek/Rosy Bayou
confluence; uplands
bordering Hickory Creek
floodplain

21 hectares
(53 acres)
32 man-hours
(most spent
in recording
site)

Intensive; 1 site
found (HO 53)

W
I-'

SURVEY AREAS

I

a

2 -

NECHES SLUFF OVERLOOK

Figure 2
No archeological sites located.
Texas 1973)

(Map Section from USGS 7.5', Weches,

Figure 3
Archeological Sites HO 9, 10, 11, 26, 27, 28, 29, and 51 (Map Section
from USGS 7.5', Ratcliff, Texas, 1950)

E

•...
•
•e

..

.~

o

o

SURVEY AREA 7 - UPPER BEAVER CREEK

o
I
o

miles
kilometers
N

Figure 4
Archeological Sites HO 12 and 42 (Map Section from USGS 7.5', Ratcliff,
Texas, 1950 and Weches, Texas, 1973)

10 ­ PARKER

o
I

o

miles
kilometers

Figure 5
Archeological Sites HO 31-40, 43-48 (Map Section from USGS 7.5', Ratcliff,
Texas, 1950)

r

N

a

o
I

o

miles
kilometers

N

Figure 6
Archeological Sites HO 30 and 41 (Map Section from USGS 7.5', Ratcliff,
Texas, 1950)

Figure 7
Archeological Sites 7, 49, 50, and 52 (Map Section from USGS 7.5',
Crockett NE, Texas, 1950)

(f)

o

2:

>­

<t
...J

<t 0..
I

:J

Ir

Ir

;;:
<[
I-

...J

l-

I

I

o

0

~

=~
<t <t

w w

a::

<[

Ir
«

>­ >­

W

W

> >
Ir Ir

::::> ::::>

(f)

(f)

SURVEY' AREA r3

Figure 8
rom USGS 7.5' , Crockett NE , Texas ,
Archeolog'l.cal Site HO 53
1950)
(Map Section f

32
SITES
The sites found during this survey and those previously recorded in
the study area are described briefly in Tables 3 and 4 (data on the previ­
ously recorded sites taken from site files at Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin).

In the tables, both the kinds

and frequencies of artifacts from each site are listed.

This is done to

help characterize the sites, but also to demonstrate how little is known
about them.

No detailed interpretation of the sites is attempted here be­

cause they are poorly understood.

Many have small artifact collections

which are too diverse or lack diagnostic specimens.

A general assessment

of these sites is included in the final section of this report.

The arti­

fact categories used in this table are described below.
Artifact Categories
Ceramics:
Sandy paste - pottery with very sandy paste lacking grog or
bone temper
Caddoan - pottery with grog or bone temper - most are un­
decorated and thus none is typeable
Chipped Stone:
Debitage - flakes, spalls, and shatter resulting from
manufacture of tools
Arrow points - small, thin, light points
Dart points - relatively large, thick, heavy points
Bifaces - bifacially worked tools not classifiable as arrow
or dart points - may include projectile point
knives, etc.

pr~forms,

33

Unifaces - specimens showing flaking along one face
Battered Stone:
Hammerstones - cobbles showing battering - perhaps used in
the manufacture of stone tools
Ground Stone:
Milling implements - includes artifacts thought to have been
,

used for processing vegetal materials - milling basins
and slabs, manos
Bone:
A few unidentifiable pieces of bone were found - perhaps not
prehistorically deposited
Wattle-impressed daub:
A few small pieces of fired daub with twig impressions were
found - may represent remains of a prehistoric structure
Historic Material:
A variety of historic material was found (including glass,
metal, and bricks)

TABLE 3.

Site No.

Survey Area,
Vegetation

SITES FOUND IN 1977

Topographic
Situation

Discussion

Artifacts,
Total No. and Kinds

41 HO 26
(Fig. ·3)

114; forest

Recent 'terrace ( ?) at
juncture of upland
slope and Hickory
Creek floodplain

Artifacts found in animal bur­
row and in auger tests; soil
deep, homogeneous, sandy;
site perhaps buried

Lithic debitage (2);
sandy paste sherd(l)

41 HO 27
(Fig. 3)

113; forest

Recent terrace(?)
overlooking con­
fluence of Hickory
Creek and small
tr~butary and Neches
River floodplain

Artifact recovered in trowel
testing ca. 10 cm. below sur­
face; soil deep, homogeneous,
sandy; site perhaps buried;
note proximity to HO 11

Lithic debitage (1)

41 HO 28
(Fig. 3)

#4; forest

Uplands overlooking
Hickory Creek flood­
plain

Artifacts recovered in trowel
testing ca. 5 cm. below sur­
face; soil well developed
(shallow sandy layer over
iron-rich B horizon); site
probably shallowly buried if
at all; note proximity to DO 29,
51 (may be parts of the same
site)

Lithic debitage (2)

41 HO 29
(Fig. 3)

#4; forest

See DO 28

See HO 28

Lithic debit age (1)

41 HO 30
(Fig. 6)

FM 1733
roadcut;
most of
site is in
pasture

Uplands overlooking
Hickory Creek flood­
plain

Artifacts found in roadcut;
adjacent pasture not examined
successfully due to dense grass
and lack of gopher activity

Historic material (2);
Caddoan sherd (1)
W
./!'­

Site No.

Survey Area,
Vegetation

Topographic
Situation

Discussion

Artifacts,
Total No. and Kinds

41 HO 31
(Fig. 5)

1/10; pasture

Terrace or upland
remnant overlooking
Hickory Creek flood­
plain

Artifacts found in gopher
mounds; a series of sites or
parts of the same site found
on knolls or points on this
slope bordering floodplain;
soils generally deep, homoge~
nous, sandy; ,see HO 32-37

Lithic debitage (80);
arrow point (1); mil­
ling implements (3)

41 HO 32
(Fig. 5)

1/10; pasture

See HO 31

See HO 31

Lithic debitage (6);
arrow point (1)

41 HO 33
(Fig. 5)

1/10; pasture

See HO 31; called
floodplain knoll in
fieldnotes

See HO 31

Lithic debitage (66);
arrow point (1);
unifacil andbifacial
tools (4); Caddoan
and sandy paste sherds
(10) ; bone (10)

.41 HO 34
(Fig. 5)

fila; pasture

See HO 31

See HO 31

Lithic debitage (60);
dart points (3)

41 HO 35
(Fig. 5.)

1110; pasture

See HO 31

See HO 31; but differs from
others in that artifacts are
much less abundant

Lithic debitage (6)

41 HO 36
(Fig. 5)

no;

See HO 31; called
floodplain knoll in
fieldnotes

See HO 31

Lithic debitage (102);
dart point (1); bi­
facial tools (4);
milling implement (1);
Caddoan sherds (2)

pasture

W

Ln

Site No.

Survey Area,
Vegetation

Topographic
Situation

Discussion

Artifacts,
Total No. and Kinds

41 HO 37
(Fig. 5)

1110; pasture

See HO 31

See HO 31

Lithic debitage (14);
dart point (1); bi­
facial tools (2);
hammerstone (1)

41 HO 38
(Fig. 5)

fl8; pasture

Terrace or upland
remnant overlooking
Chinquapin Branch
as it enters Hickory
Creek floodplain

Artifacts found in gopher
mounds; not very concentrated;
located on slight ridge be­
tween present creek and linear
depression (perhaps old stream
channel); soil deep, loamy

Lithic debitage (12)

41 HO 39
(Fig. 5)

fl8; pasture
and forest

Terrace or upland
remnant overlooking
confluence of
Chinquapin Branch
and Hickory Creek

Artifacts found in gopher
mounds and on surface; site is
very large and encompasses
several knolls; artifacts con­
centrated on each knoll; con~
centrations recorded as areas
within the site but may represent
separate sites; soil deep,
homogeneous, sandy

Lithic debitage (272);
dart points (2); bi­
facial and unifacial
tools (9); milling
implements (3); Cad­
doan and sandy paste
sherds (10); bone (20);
wattle-impressed daub

41 HO 40
(Fig. 5)

#8; pasture

Terrace or upland
remnant overlooking
Hickory Creek flood­
plain at Hickory
Creek/Chinquapin
Branch confluence

Artifacts found in gopher
mounds and on surface along
eroding terrace or upland edge;
site encompasses a series of
points along this edge but may
well extend onto flat terrace/
upland surface; soil well
developed; note proximity to
HO 47

Lithic debitage (74);
dart point (1); uni­
facial tool (1);
Caddoan sherds (2)

~

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------~

Site No.

Survey Area,
Vegetation

Topographic
Situation

Discussion

Artifacts,
Total No. and Kinds

41 HO 41
(Fig. 6)

f19; pasture

Uplands overlooking
Joe Branch

Artifacts found in animal burrows and in trowel testing ca •.
15 cm. below surface; soil
well developed

Lithic debitage (2)

41 HO 42
(Fig. 4)

fI7; forest

Uplands overlooking
upper reaches of
Beaver Creek

Artifacts found on surface and
in trowel testing; the area
shows signs of logging activity
and erosion; general site loca­
tion provided by local informant;
note proximity to HO 12

Lithic debit age (2)

41 HO 43
(Fig. 5)

#8; pasture
and forest

Terrace or upland
remnant bordering
Hickory Creek
.
floodplain

Artifacts found in gopher mounds;
poison ivy and trees prevented
much investigation; may be part
of HO 44

Lithic debitage (12)

41 HO 44
(Fig. 5)

f18; pasture

Knolls on Hickory
Creek floodplain
(terrace or levee
remnant?)

Artifacts found in gopher
mounds and on surface; site en­
compasses two knolls; note
proximity to HO 43

Lithic debitage (174);
arrow point (1); bi­
facial and unifacial
tools (2); milling
implements (6); hammer
stone (1); Caddoan
sherds (2)

41 HO 45
(Fig. 5)

/18; pasture

Terrace or upland
remnant overlooking
Hickory Creek
floodplain

Artifacts found in gopher
mound; note proximity to HO 47
and HO 48; specimens lost
during processing

Lithic debitage (2)

Vol
.....

Site No.

Survey Area,
Vegetation

Topographic
Situation

41 HD 46

liB; pasture

See HD 45

Historic material found on sur­
fac~; appears to be a house site

Historic bricks;
glass (10)

liB; pasture

See HD 45

Artifacts found in gopher
mounds; note proximity to HD 45
and HD 40

Lithic debitage (7)

lIB; pasture

See HD 45

Artifacts found in gopher
mounds and on the surface; some
erosion evident on this site

Lithic debitage (17)

1112; pasture

Uplands ca. 250 m.
from Kelly Branch;
upstream from Hickory
Creek/Rosy Bayou con­
fluence

Artifacts found on the surface;
site is on a heavily eroded
knoll; ground is littered with
limonite

Lithic debitage (6);
historic sherd (1)

1112; pasture

Upland slope leading
down to Rosy Bayou
(little floodplain
development here)

Artifacts found in cattle trail
and in eroded area; lack of
gopher mounds here; note prox­
imity to HD 52

Lithic debitage (6)

114; forest

Uplands overlooking
small, unnamed creek
where it enters
Hickory Creek flood­
plain

Artifacts found in shallow fire
control ditch; soils well
developed; note' proximity to
HD 28

Lithic debitage (1);
milling implement (1)

(Fig. 5)

41 HD 47
(Fig. 5)

41 HD 48
(Fig. 5)

41 HD 49
(Fig. 7)

41 HD 50
(Fig. 7)

41 HO 51
(Fig. 7)

Discussion

Artifacts,
Total No. and Kinds

(,.oJ

00

Site No.

Survey Area,
Vegetation

41 HO 52
(Fig. 7)

1112; pasture

See HO 50

Landowner reported finding
artifacts here but none found
by survey crew

No materials collected

/113; pasture

Uplands overlooking
Hickory Creek
floodplain

Artifacts found in gopher mounds
and on surface; 3 areas desig­
nated within the site; soils
well developed

Lithic debitage (95);
dart point (1); bi­
facial tool (1);
hammerstones (2);
Caddoan sherd (1);
historic material bricks, metal, glass,
ceramics (119)

41 HO 53
(Fig. 8)

Topographic
Situation

Discussion

Artifacts,
Total No. and Kinds

w

~

TABLE 4.

SITES FOUND PRIOR TO 1977

Topographic
Situation

Artifacts,
Total No. and Kinds

Site No.

Vegetation and
Land Ownership

41 HO 7
(Fig. 7)

Plowed field;
private

Uplands between Gum
Creek and Kelly
Branch

Site is badly eroded; specimens
recovered in surface collection
and test pit; note proximity to
HO 49

Lithic debitage col­
lected (15); large
projectile point,
grooved axe, stone
pipe reported

41 HO 8

Forest; U.S.
Forest Service

Uplands overlooking
Hickory Creek/Neches
River floodplain

Artifacts found in test pits;
possibly undisturbed

Lithic debitage (43)

41 HO 9
(Fig. 3)

Pasture;
private

Floodplain knoll next
to Hickory Creek

Site is on a knoll with deep
sandy soil; artifacts found on
the surface

Lithic debitage (14);
sandy paste sherd (1);
deer tooth (1)

41 HO 10
(Fig. 3)

Pasture;
private

Floodplain knoll or
terrace overlooking
Hickory Creek
floodplain

Site perhaps severely eroded;
artifacts found on surface

Lithic debitage (1);
and milling imple­
ments (2) collected;
ceramics and pro­
jectile points reported
by landowner

41 HO 11
(Fig. 3)

Forest;
U.S. Forest
Service

Terrace overlooking
Walnut Creek/Hickory
Creek/Neches River
floodplain

Site location reported by
local informant; site found
due to recent collector's
pits; artifacts found on sur­
face and in test pits

Lithic debitage (58);
dart point (1); bi­
facial tools (5);
sandy paste pottery (2)

Discussion

~

o

Site No.

Vegetation and
Lang Ownership

Topographic
Situation

Discussion

Artifacts,
Total No. and Kinds

41 HO 12
(Fig. 4)

Forest;
U.S. Forest
Service

Floodplain of upper
Beaver Creek

Site previously cultivated;
site location reported by
local informant; artifacts
found on the surface

41 HO 13

Forest;
U.S. Forest
Service

Upland or terrace
overlooking Beaver
Creek/Hickory Creek
floodplain

Artifacts found on surface and
in test pits

Historic material(24);
lithic debitage (55);
hammerstone (1);
milling implement (1)

41 HO 14

Pasture;
private

Uplands overlooking
Hickory Creek
floodplain

Site location reported by
local informant; little
material seen on the surface
but from local collections
observed, it appears to be a
large Archaic site

Lithic debitage col­
lected (1); dart
points and other tools
observed in local
collections

Lithic debitage (35);
dart point (1);
, arrow point (1);
Caddoan and sandy
paste sherds (5)

.c­

I-'

42
INTERPRETATIONS, CONCLUSIONS, AND RECOMMENDAtIONS
This final section covers three topics.

First. the site distribu­

tions observed and possible reasons for these distributiona are discussed.
I

Second, though site assessment is risky, a.n effort is made Ito evaluate
I

temporally the prehistoric occupation of the Hickory Creek jvalley.
recommendations are offered so that the U.S. Forest

Servic~

Third,

can begin to

I

cope with the potential wealth of archeological informatioJ in the National
Forests of East Texas.
Settlement Patterns and Determinants
I

I

A satisfactory reconstruction of the full prehisto~ic settlement
I

pattern in the Hickory Creek drainage has not been achieve~.

This is be-

I

cause coverage of the basin was neither as complete nor as iintensive as
had been hoped.

However, the data gathered in this survey lean be used to

make suggestions as to where sites are most likely to occur.
It appears, not surprisingly, that the single most 'important factor
in predicting site location is proximity to a potential

wa~er

source.

Specifically, none of the 35 known sites in the Hickory

Cr~ek

drainage are

I

How~ver, in order

more than 0.5 km. from a present-day creek or stream.

I

to make this a meaningful statistic, it is necessary to se, how much land
greater than 0.5 km. from a water source was surveyed.
80 hectares, or 20%, of the 400 hectares intensively

Wh~le approximately

surve~ed

in 1977 lies

farther than 0.5 km. from a creek or stream, all of the 23 Isites found in
these Survey Areas were located within 0.5 km. of water.

1f proximity to

water was not a factor in site placement, we would have exJected to have
found 4 or 5 sites on that 80 hectares (20% of 23).

I

sincelno sites were

found, it is logical to conclude that proximity to a poten1ial water source

43

or riverine resources was a factor in where the prehistoric! inhabitants
chose to live or camp.
Furthermore, it appears that the greatest density
remains can be found on prominences overlooking the
plain.

~f

Hickor~

cultural
Creek flood­

That is, while some sites were found in upland areais close to streams

and small floodplains, the greatest density of sites or
close to the broad, flat floodplain of Hickory Creek.

re~ins

was found

Howerver, i t is im­

portant to note that the gopher mound bias is active here. : That is, gophers
favor the deep sandy soil of the pastures bordering the flolodplain rather
,

than the upland soils.

Also, some of the sites on upland spils, especially

HO 7, 49, 50, and 52, may have been severely eroded.
While it is probable that observed densities of culltural remains
are in part a result of both post-depositional processes

an~

biases in the

I

survey methods, it seems l:ikely that the high density of

re~ins

may also

be partially due to intensive and/or long-term occupation o!f these certain
!

favored localities.

Possible reasons for intensive occupat~on of these

areas would include:

availability of elevated living areas! close to a

,

dependable, year-round water source; availability of a

broa~

agriculture; or availability of certain faunal or floral

floodplain for

re~ources.
,

The second possibility listed, availability of the !floodplain for
cultivation, raises an interesting question.
historic peoples have done their farming?

That is,

wher~

would pre­

According to Cariter and Kocher

(1905), virtually all of the soils which the Hickory Creek

~rcheological

sites are on or near would have been suitable for cultivatipn.

In fact,

some of the upland soils were, in 1905, highly prized for agriculture.
In addition, Carter and Kocher state that the bottomlands c~uld be easily
cultivated and were in some cases highly productive.

Though flooding of

44
these bottomlands could have posed a problem, ethnohistoric!accounts
report that the early historic inhabitants of the area, the: Hasinai, planted
their first crops in late April or early May, subsequent to the rainy season
and thus after the period when flooding would have been
(Griffith 1954: 110).

mos~

probable

Thus, the broad, flat floodplain of Hickory Creek

would well have been used for prehistoric agriculture.
These localities bordering the floodplain may have been choice
dwelling sites for farming peoples because not only were

th~y

close to

permanent water and broad expanses of arable bottomland, but they also pre­
sented elevated areas safe from flooding which could have b.een used both
for dwelling sites and for alternate agricultural fields.

In addition,

they would have been attractive for non-horticulturalists biecause of their
close proximity to both upland and bottomland floral and

f~nal

resources.

Thus, these areas may have experienced relatively intense and/or long-term
prehistoric utilization because they provided easy access to large areas
representing several distinct microenvironments - Hickory Creek itself,
the broad floodplain, and elevated uplands or terraces bordering the
floodplain.
Temporal Placement
While none of the sites discussed here can be fully assessed with
any degree of confidence, it appears from initial artifact examination that
the primary occupation of the Hickory Creek basin occurrediduring the late
Archaic, Early Ceramic, and Late Prehistoric stages.

This is based on the

occurrence of contracting-stem dart points and sandy-pastelpottery, which
may represent late Archaic or Early Ceramic, and the
points and Caddoan pottery.

occur~ence

of arrow

While the Caddoan sherds are few, the lack of

45

bf

brushing on body sherds and the presence of a small number

!

Alto Focus

sherds seem to indicate an early Caddoan occupation, perhaps contemporaneous
with the George C. Davis Site occupation.

It is not known if the Archaic/
I

Early Ceramic occupations were continuous in time, disconti~uous, or perhaps
even in part contemporaneous.
Also, based on materials, especially straight-stem

~nd

slightly

expanding-stem dart points, collected by locals and observe~ both prior to
and during the summer of 1977, it appears that the Hickory Creek area may
have seen an earlier, possibly middle Archaic, occupation.
there is no evidence, in terms of ceramics, for an early

Significantly,

h~storic

Caddoan

occupation of the area.
Recommendations
It is extremely important for the U.S. Forest

Serv~ce
I

to have an

understanding of the cultural resources on land under its control and of
how various forest management practices may affect these resources.
survey should be one phase in a broad program aimed at

obt~ining

Site

this

understanding; but, as discovered during the summer of 1971 and as discus­
sed in this report, survey in the forest is very difficult.

Nonetheless,

I feel that none of the problems of forest survey is insu~ountable.

As

i

demonstrated in Survey Area 4, sites can be found in dense~y forested areas
by systematic searching given ample time and patience.

Ho~ever, though

sites were found in the forest through intensive survey, v~ry little in­
formation was obtained on these sites, and there is no dou~t that most of
the cultural remains were overlooked.

Thus, intensive survey seems best

suited for simply identifying areas of potentially high ar1heologiCal
sensitivity.

The actual assessment of the resources can b~ achieved only

through intensive and widespread testing and excavations.

!

46
I

From the archeological viewpoint, it would be desi~able to conduct
!

D1VY

survey and inventory the resources throughout the entire
National Forest.

However, this would be an enormously

expensive undertaking.

i
ti~

Crockett

consuming and

Thus, the next most desirable approach would be to
I
!

amplify on and refine the project started by the 1977 University of Texas
Field School, including doing thorough geomorphological

an~ soils studies
I

to help understand the physical environment.

I

Specifically ,I a predictive

model for site location should be generated on the basis 01 intensive
survey of selected portions of the drainage basins involved.

In other words,

all of the topographic situations and microenvironments wi~hin each major
drainage basin should be sampled.

A viable option would bi to include
i

privately owned pastures or agricultural fields, as was d01e in this proI

ject, to provide additional, relatively easily obtained,

d~ta

for the

i

I

construction of the site location model.

Once the survey was completed,

testing of sites on U.S. Forest land could be carried out

~o

begin assess­

ment of the resources.
While this predictive model would be useful in pla~ning forest
I

management, it should not take the place of full-scale sur~ey and mitigation
i

projects in areas of high disturbance, such as road

constr~ction. Also, it

should be kept in mind that a model simply presents an hypdthesis or a set
i

of hypotheses which need to be tested with further research.
should not be assumed that an area of low archeological

Thus, it

se~sitivity

ac­

I

cording to the model does, in actuality, contain few or no!sites.

This

I

brings up what may be the strongest recommendation ariSinglfrom this
project - the Forest Service employees who deal directly w.th the forest,
timber markers, harvesters, planters, etc., need to be edu1ated about
archeology.

They need to be taught to recognize sites so that they can

47
avoid disturbing or destroying them.

This is vital becausJ much of the

timbering activity seen in the Hickory Creek study area to k place in the
uplands where archeological sites may be shallowly buried.

Examination of

several recently clearcut areas in the summer of 1977 reve led that clearcutting may be very destructive to the upper soil horizon fd thus also to
archeological sites.

Therefore, archeologically oriented

orest Service

employees, or perhaps even full-time trained archeologists

should be present

when a forest stand is cut or replanted.
,

Thus, the basic recommendations resulting from thi1 survey are:
1) Carry out geomorphological and soils studies to help un1erstand the

natural setting, how it has changed and affected archeo1ogical sites,
and how it may change in the future.
2) Construct a predictive model for site location based on intensive survey
of selected portions of the forest.
3) Conduct intensive testing of selected sites to help und,rstand pre­
historic use of the area and the nature of the sites

th~elves.

4) Avoid modification, or carry out mitigation, of those ateas found or
predicted to be rich in cultural remains.

I

5) Conduct full-scale survey and mitigation projects in ar~as where severe
ground disturbance is guaranteed to occur.
6) Educate Forest Service employees on how to recognize

avoid destruc­

tion of archeological sites.
7) Hire trained archeologists to monitor timbering and rePtanting activities.

48
REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, K. M.
1971 Archaeological Resources of Lake Palestine, exas. Report
submitted by Southern Methodist University t the National
Park Service.
j:
Anderson, K. M., Kathleen Gilmore, Olin F. McCormick III, .nd E. Pierre
Morenon
1974 Archaeological Investigations at Lake Palestine, Texas.
Southern Methodist Universit , Contributions in Anthro 010
No. 11. Dallas.
Arnold, J. Barto III
1973 George C. Davis Site Ceramic Analysis, Excav tions of 1968-70.
M.A. Thesis. The University of Texas at Ausin.
1975

Porosity and Refiring Tests on Ceramics from1the George C.
Davis Site, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Arqheological
Society, Vol. 46, pp. 231-241.

Benham, Blake L., Henry M. Miller, and James V. Sciscenti
1973 Archaeological Research in the Toledo Bend R servoir. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by th Archaeology
Research Program, Department of Anthropology Southern
Methodist University.
Blair, Frank W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas.
Vol. 2, pp. 93-117.

Texas Journal of Science,

Bolton, Herbert E.
1908 The Native Tribes About the East Texas Missi ns. The
uarter1 of the Texas State Historical Asso iation, Vol. XI,
pp. 249-276.
Brooks, Walter
1967 Watershed Management Plan - Part I - Neches Janger District,
DavY Crockett National Forest - National For~sts in Texas.
United States Forest Service.
!

Bureau of Economic Geology
1968 Geologic Atlas of Texas, Palestine Sheet.
Texas at Austin.

U iversity of

Carter, William T. and A. E. Kocher
1905 Soil Survey of Houston County, Texas. U.S.
Agriculture, Bureau of Soils. Washington.

epartment of

Creel, Darrell
1978 A Preliminary Report of Archeological InvestIgations at
Indian Mound Nursery, George C. Davis Site. jReport submitted
to the Texas Antiquities Committee by the AnihrOPOIOgy
Laboratory, Texas A&M University.
I

I

49
Davis, E. Mott
1970 Archaeological and Historical Assessment of the Red River
Basin in Texas. In Archaeological and Histo~ica1 Resources
of the Red River Basin. Edited by H. A. Dav~s. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Research Series, No.1, pp. 25-65.
Davis, William H. and Helen Ruth Horn
1964 The Zavonian Springs Site: An Archaic-Neo­ erican Site in
McGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County, exas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 35, pp. 213-250.
Duffield, Lathe1 F.
1963 The Wo1fshead Site: An Archaic-Neo-American Site in
San Augustine County, Texas. Bulletin of th~ Texas Archeo­
logical Society, Vol. 34, pp. 83-141.
Fenneman, Nevin M.
1938 Physiography of the Eastern United States.
Fields, Ross
1978

I

McGraw-Hill.

Report on the 1977 Investigations at the Geo
Site, caddoan Mounds State Historic Site, Ch
Texas. Report submitted to the Texas Parks
Department by the Texas Archeological Resear
The University of Texas at Austin.

ge C. Davis
rokee County,
nd Wildlife
h Laboratory,

Fritz, Gayle J.
1975 Analysis of Ceramic Pipes, Ear Ornaments, and Effigies from
the George C. Davis Site. M.A. Thesis. The University of
Texas at Austin.
Gilmore, Kathleen K.
1973 Caddoan Interaction in the Neches Valley.
Southern Methodist University. Dallas.
Griffith, Wi111~ J.
1954 The Hasinai
1687-1772.
University.
No.3. New

Pq.D. Dissertation.

Indians of East Texas as seen by Europeans,
Middle American Research Institu e, Tulane
Philo ica1 and Documentar Stud es, Vol. II,
Orleans.

Jelks, Edward B.
1965 The Archaeology of McGee Bend Reservoir, Texas. Ph.D.
Dissertation. The University of Texas at Au4tin.
Jensen, Harald P., Jr.
1968a The Archaeological Investigations in the To edo Bend
Reservoir: 1966-67 - Report submitted to th National Park
Service by the Archaeological Salvage Projec , Southern
Methodist University.
1968b

Coral Snake Mound, X16sA48. Bulletin of the Texas Archeo­
logical Society, Vol. 39, pp. 9-44.

50
Johnson, Leroy, Jr.
1962 The Yarbrough and Miller Sites of Northeast
Texas, with
a Preliminary Definition of the La Harpe As ect. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 32, pp. 141-284.
Kegley, George B.
1969 An Archaeological Survey of the Middle Nech s. Unpublished
manuscript on file at Texas Archeological R~search Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
.
Keller, John E.
1974 The Subsistence Paleoecology of the Middle leches Region of
East Texas. PhD. Dissertation. The
of Texas at
Austin.

univers~ty

McClurkan, Burney B.
1967 Excavations at Livingston Reservoir - 1965 ~eason. Report
submitted to the National Park Service by t e Texas Archeologi­
cal Salvage Project,. The University of Texa at Austin.
1968

Livingston Reservoir, 1965-1966: Late Arch ic and Neo­
American Occupations. Texas Archeological Salvage Project
Papers, No. 12.
•

WOOdal~

McClurkan, Burney B., William T. Field, and J. Ned
1966 Excavations in Toledo Bend Reservoir, 1964- 5. Papers of
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, No 8.
Newell, H. Perry and Alex D. Krieger
i
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, texas.
of the Society for American Archeology, No. is.

Memoirs

Nunley, John P.
1963 Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of Livingston
Reservoir, Polk, San Jacinto, Trinity, and Walker Counties,
Texas. Report submitted to the National Pa~k Service by
the Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Th~ University of
Texas at Austin.
~.
Prewitt, Elton R., John W. Clark, Jr., and David S. Dibbl
1972 An Assessment of the Archeological and Hist rical Resources
of the Bayou Loco Reservoir Area, Nacogdoches County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Salvage Project, Resear$h Report, No. 11.
Richner, Jeffrey and Reed Lee
f·
1976 Cultural Resources at Tennessee Colony Lake
Report sub­
mitted to the National Park Service by the rchaeology
Research Program, Southern Methodist Univer ity.
1977

Archaeological and Ethnohistorica1 Survey al Tennessee
Colony Lake, Texas, 1975. Southern Methodi~t University,
Department of Ant~po1ogy, Archaeolo
Res arch Pro ram,
Research Report 104.

~---------

51
Scurlock, J. Dan
1964 Archeological Reconnaissance at Toledo Bend eservoir,
1962-1963 Season. Report submitted to the
tiona1 Park
Service by the Texas Archeological Salvage P oject, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Scurlock, J. Dan and William A. Davis
1963 Appraisal of the Archeological Resources of t he Toledo Bend
Reservoir, Panola, Newton, Sabine, and She1b Counties,
Texas and Sabine and DeSoto. Parishes, Louisi
Report
submitted to the National Park Service by th Texas Arche­
ological Salvage Project, The University of exas at Austin.
Sellards, E. H., W. S. Adkins, and F. B. Plummer
1932 The Geology of Texas, Vol. 1: Stratigraphy. The Bureau of
Economic Geology, The Universit of Texas Bu 1etin, No. 3232.
Shafer, Harry J.
1973 Lithic Technology at the George C.
County, Texas. PhD. Dissertation.
at Austin.
1974

Lithic Reduction Strategies at the
Louisiana Archaeology, Bulletin of
Society, No.1, pp. 66-74.

Shafer, Harry
1975 An Archeological
Preserve. Texas
Report No. 19.

, Cherokee
rsity of Texas
Davis Site.
ana Archaeological
James Phil Dering
t National
Laborator ,

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Soil Conservation Service
1963 General Soil Map of Houston County, Texas.
Spock, Carolyn
1977 An Analysis of the Architectural and Related Features at the
ersity of Texas
George C. Davis Site. M.A. Thesis.
at Austin.
Stephenson, Robert L.
1948 Archaeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoi
Report. Bulletin of the Texas Archaeo10
logical Society, Vol. 19, pp. 57-73.

A Preliminary
and Pa1eonto­

Story, Dee Ann
1972 A Preliminary Report on the 1968, 1969, and 970 Excavations
at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. A
mimeograph report submitted to Office of Sta e (Texas)
Archaeologist and the National Science Found tion.
Story, Dee Ann and S. Va1astro, Jr.
1977 Radiocarbon Dating and the George C. Davis S'te, Texas.
Journal of Field Arch~ology, Vol. 4, No.1, pp. 63-89.

52
Stransky, J. J., E. S. Nixon, C. L. Burandt, Jr., and R. L. Willett
1974 First-Year Revegetation Following Timber Ha 'st in East
Texas. Southern Forest Experiment Station.
.S. Forest
Service Research Note, SO-173.
Swanton, John R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology pf the Caddo
Indians. Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of ~thnology,
Bulletin. 132.
Texas Forest Service
1963 Forest Trees of Texas - How to Know Them.
Service, Bulletin 20.
Tharp, B. C.
1926

T as Forest

Structure of Texas Vegetation East of the 98 h Meridian.
University of Texas Bulletin 2606, pp. 1-100.

Tunnell, Curtis D.
1961 Evidence of a Late Archaic Horizon at Three ites in the
MCGee Bend Reservoir, San Augustine County,
Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society, Vol. 30, pp. 123-158.

J

United States Forest Service
n.d. Big Slough Area - A Partial Inventory of PIa ts by Soil
Types. A mimeograph plant checklist.
Woodall, J. Ned
1969a Archaeological Excavations in the Toledo Be~d Reservoir,
1966. Southern Methodist University, Contributions in
Anthropology, No.3.

1

1969b

Cultural Ecology of the Caddo. Ph.D. Disse tation.
Southern Methodist University. Dallas.

Wyckoff, Don G.
i
1971 Caddo an Culture Area: An Archaeological Per$pective.
Oklahoma Archeological Survey. Norman.

