A CULTURAL RESOURCE SURVEY AND ASSESSMENT OF A
PROPOSED TRANSMISSION LINE CORRIDOR,
MARTIN LAKE AREA D
Rusk County, Texas

Technical Bulletin 69

Jack M.

Jackson

Principal Investigator:

Solveig A. Turpin

A report submitted to Texas Utilities Services, Inc.

by
Texas Archeological Survey
The University of Texas at Austin
October, 1983

ABSTRACT
During October 1983 the Texas Archeological
Survey,
the
University of Texas at Austin, conducted an intensive level survey of
a proposed transmission line corridor in Rusk County, Texas, for Texas
Utilities Services, Inc., as an extension of our cultural resource
The
impact studies associated with the Martin Lake lignite prospect.
transmission line originates in an area previously surveyed and
reported in 1982 and is part of the larger Martin Lake Area D
Near the northern boundary of the Area D intensive
development.
survey the corridor turns east through
previously unsurveyed
territory.
This section is about 170 ft wide and 2.3 miles long.
Only one site (41RK131), a historic well, was found during the survey.
Avoiding this site should present no special problems in constructing
the transmission line.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract . . . . .

ii

Acknowledgements

iv

Management Summary

v

Introduction

1

Environmental Background

1

Archeological Background

2

Historical Background.

3

Methods and Techniques

4

Site Description

4

Summary and Recommendations

5

References Cited

6

.....

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.

Project and site location map

vi

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author would like to thank Mr. Dick Robertson of the TUSI
environmental office in Dallas and Bill Price t Foy Brown and Karen
Jackson of the TUSI land office in Henderson for their kind
cooperation and assistance on this project. As always I am grateful
to Carol Fabac for assistance in drafting and for editing the
manuscript.

MANAGEMENT SUMMARY
This report covers the intensive level survey of a 2.3 mile
segment of planned transmission line corridor between the previously
surveyed Martin Lake Area D, Intensive Survey 1, and an existing line
which runs north-south on the east side of Highway 782 in Rusk County,
Texas. The project was sponsored by Texas Utilities Services, Inc.,
as part of their continued compliance with the National Historical
Preservation Act and the National Environmental Policy Act and related
regulations.
The intensive level survey was conducted on October 4 and 5, 1983
by Jack M. Jackson. One site, 41RK131, an historic well, was found
in the designated corridor. This site does not appear to meet current
criteria for elegibility for the National Register of Historic Places
and in any case, lies near the southern margin of the corridor, posing
little hindrance to the proposed construction.

Page 1

INTRODUCTION
An intensive level cultural resource survey of a proposed
transmission line corridor in Rusk County, Texas, was conducted for
Texas Utilities Services, Inc. (TUSI), by the Texas Archeological
Survey (TAS), the University of Texas at Austin, on October 4 and 5,
1983. The survey was designed to conform to the criteria and
guidelines set forth by the Texas Historical Commission for intensive
survey. It was also intended to comply with the National Historic
Preservation Act 1966, and its regulations, 36 CFR 800, and the
National Environmental Policy Act and its related regulations, 50 CFR
4, as implemented by the Environmental Protection Agency.
The line originates in an area previously surveyed at the
intensive level and reported in Texas Archeological Survey Research
Report 85 (Jackson 1982). The survey reported here covers only the
2.3 mile portion of the transmission line which originates near Mill
Creek at the northern boundary of the Martin Lake Area 0, Intensive
Survey Area 1, and joins an existing transmission line to the east
(Fig. 1). The corridor is about 170 ft wide at all points along the
projected route.
The center line and boundary lines of the corridor
were clearly marked with survey stakes when the entire length of the
proposed route was walked. To assure good coverage every section was
traversed twice in a random zig-zag pattern between boundary stakes,
terrain and vegetation permitting.
One historic site, a well, was
found within the bounds of the proposed route.
ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND
The environmental background - geomorphology, geology, soils,
hydrology, climate, vegetation and faunal assemblage - of this part of
Rusk County has been detailed in a number of recent publications
(Jackson 1982:3-8;
Moncure and Jackson 1982:3-12;
Moncure and
Jackson 1980; Moncure 1983). A summary of the primary environmental
factors is given in Table 1.
Table 1.

Summary of environmental factors in the study area

Location:
Eastern Rusk County, Texas
Physiography:
Nacogdoches Cuesta/East Texas Timber Belt
Surface Geology: Eocene deposits (except aluvium)
Structural Geology: Sabine Uplift
Soils:
Sandy loams, clay loams and sand
Hydrology:
Carrizo/Wilcox Aquifer
River Basin:
Sabine
Climate:
Mild, wet winters, dry summers
Vegetation Region: Piney woods
Mineral Resources: Industrial clay
Energy Resources: Lignite
Agricultural Uses: Livestock and timber

Page 2
About half of the proposed corridor is covered in second growth,
mixed timber.
The timbered area is concentrated on the west end of
the line near Mill Creek. The eastern section of the line, especially
that portion east of Highway 782, is less wooded with broad improved
A
pastureland dominant except in the bottoms of minor drainages.
large section at the western end of the line shows terracing typical
of deep contour plowing that was done in the 1930s and 1940s to check
erosion.
Smaller sections in the center of the line appear to have
been plowed at one time as well.
The corridor crosses Dry Creek and two other minor drainages.
Each of these small streams is deeply incised into the underlying clay
with a meandering pattern of oxbows cut into the more recent alluvium
of the well-defined flood plain. In general, vegetation tended to be
quite dense on the margins of these streams. The overstory growth in
bottom land areas included a number of hardwood nut species and
relatively few pines. In the drier uplands pines dominate and the
understory vegetation is far less dense.
ARCHEOLOGICAL BACKGROUND
Again, a number of recent reports have summarized previous
archeological investigations and this will not be repeated here. The
most recent report (Jackson 1982) concerned a 6,500 acre survey area
just south of the transmission line corridor that is the subject of
this report. The archeological background was also reviewed in a
recent survey report on another corridor and railroad right-of-way
(Moncure and Jackson 1982:13-18). Moncure's report (in press) on the
Thomas Jefferson Walling Cabin also contains a complete summary of
previous investigations.
Pertinent to this report were the four aboriginal sites recorded
on the flood plain margins of Mill Creek during prior surveys of the
area. These lie just south of the origin of this corridor.
One of
these sites, 41RK106, was initially reported in our 1980 reconnaisance
(Moncure and Jackson 1980). Three others, 41RK109, 41RK110, 41RK111,
were detected by subsurface probes made during the intensive survey
(Jackson 1982). It was suggested at that time that the sites might be
either separate discrete occupations or aspects of a single large
occupation. 41RK106 and 41RK111 are located on the same erosional
remnant, one in the flood plain and the other on the hillside above.
More accurate plotting accomplished during the present transmission
line survey places this remnant south of the location originally
reported. As formerly plotted, the sites would have fallen within or
near the corridor segment under discussion in this report. The
primary significance of this previously reported site data to this
assessment is the high expectation for aboriginal sites on the margins
of Mill Creek. However, no new sites were located.

Page 3
HISTORIC BACKGROUND
The surveyed corridor crosses Highway 782 just over one mile
south of the site of Millville. The exact boundaries of this largely
abandoned townsite have not been firmly established, but it is clear
that the site has potential for nomination to the National Register of
Historic Places (Moncure and Jackson 1980). The history of the land
grants in this vicinity contain many of the same family names
mentioned in our earlier reports. The Wallings again appear as major
early landowners.
The following brief history of each grant crossed
by the proposed transmission line begins with the easternmost tract.
The William Bagget Survey (abstract no.
87) was acquired by
Jesse Walling in June 1852 (Rusk County Deed Book G, p. 143). Jesse
and his wife Ann deeded these 320 acres to their third child, Amelia
Ann Walling Wilson, on January 10, 1859 (Rusk County Deed Book M, p.
193). The Wilsons sold the land to John C. Bell in 1869 (Rusk County
Deed Book R, p.
381). The land remained in the Bell family until
1905 (Rusk County Deed Book 58, p. 184).
The proposed corridor passes out of the Bagget survey and into
the southeast corner of the John T. Bean survey (Abstract no. 132).
Calloway, one
This 320 acre grant was originally patented to W. T.
of the builders of the mill that gave the town of Millville its name.
However, by October 1857, the land had become another of the parcels
held by Jesse Walling and his wife Ann (Rusk County Deed Book L, p.
242). It remained part of the vast Walling holding until after the
Civil War.
The transmission corridor enters the A.
W.
Clark Survey
(Abstract no.
945) just before it crosses Highway 782.
The
relatively high abstract number makes it clear that this long narrow
strip remained part of the public domain long after the surrounding
lands were claimed.
This may be because the original route of
Chickenfeather Road, now Highway 782, ran down almost its entire
length. A section of the older roadway was found during this survey,
in the wooded area 50 m west of the present highway.
A short distance from this old roadway the corridor enters the
smaller of two surveys granted in the name of Delores Solis (Abstract
nos. 698, 699). The route of the line continues along the southern
boundary of the larger Solis grant for a considerable distance. Both
of the Solis grants were actually patented to Jesse Walling in October
1848.
The corridor does not enter the E. R. Jones grant (Abstract no.
466) until it turns parallel to Mill Creek, joining the section of the
line previously covered in an intensive survey of Martin Lake Area D.
The Jones survey, too, was a part of the Walling/ Chisum family
holdings. This 1280-acre parcel was granted on the basis of a Bounty
warrant issued by the Secretary of War of the Republic of Texas on
December 26, 1837, to E. R. Jones for his service in the army of the
Republic from 12 December 1836 to 26 December 1837. Jesse Walling and

~~~

­

........................

Page 4
his father-in-law, Isham Chisum (also spelled Chism and Chisholm),
evidently purchased the warrant and used it to patent this 1280 acre
tract jointly in March, 1848 (Miller 1967:382).
Summary
This brief land history shows that the bulk of the land
transected by the proposed corridor was owned by the Walling family
before the Civil War. This locally significant family is documented
in considerable detail in earlier publications (Moncure and Jackson
1980; Moncure and Jackson 1982; Jackson 1983; Moncure 1983).
The
key points of interest in evaluating the results of this rather modest
survey are that Jesse Walling is known to have lived in the town of
Millville, about one mile north of the area surveyed. Even though
Walling moved to Hill County before the Civil War, most of his large
holdings in Rusk County remained intact until after his death in 1867
(Webb 1952, Vol. 2: 858).
METHODS AND TECHNIQUES
The entire leng th of the proposed transmission line shown on the
map in Figure 1 had been staked and flagged by a TUSI survey crew
shortly before the cultural resource survey was initiated. The north
and south boundaries of the corridor were stakes for the convenience
of the clearing crews. Every section of the 2.3 mile segment was
walked twice in a random zig-zag pattern between the staked bounds.
The sole exception to this was a small section where the corridor
passes between a late 1950s brick house and its barn. Although this
house is TUSI property, a large Doberman who belonged to the current
tenant was not cooperative. This section was covered from the window
of our truck.
The section lies along the border of a county
maintained dirt road and we gained access to the section behind the
house by way of a rear gate. The entire missed area appeared to have
been previously cleared and plowed and is now planted in grass.
Following current guidelines of the Texas Historical Commission, the
house and barn, both clearly less than 50 years old, were not
recorded.
The frequency of recent gopher burrows and their fortuitous
locations made shovel probing unnessesary. Cut banks and erosional
gullies provided more opportunities to examine the subsurface.
SITE DESCRIPTION
Near the point where the corridor crosses the boundary between
the smaller and larger Delores Solis surveys, a large crepe myrtle
tree caught the eye of the survey crew. A historic well was found
about 20 yards west of this tree. The well was open with only a wire
fence around it, evidently to protect livestock, and the mouth was
choked with quite recent trash. The general area around the well was
searched for other evidence of historic occupation, but none was
found. The well may indicate the former location of a house or it may
have been associated with a recent house which is located about 100

Page 5
yards to the north along a dirt road.
The well is located only a few feet from the southern boundary of
the corridor and does not appear to be directly threatened by timber
clearing operations, since this section of the line is relatively
open.
Given the current definition of sites eligible for nomination
to the National Register of Historic Places, this site exhibits little
potential, either for its research value or historical significance.
There is no direct evidence that the site ;s over 50 years old, except
for the size of the crepe myrtle tree.

SUMMARY AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The single historic well site located during this survey has been
assigned a permanent site number, 41RK131, and has been documented and
recorded in the permanent files of the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory.
Although the site does not appear to have great research
potential or any particular historical significance, it is recommended
that the well itself be left intact. Because it is located along the
perimeter of the transmission line corridor, this should pose no great
problem during the construction of the line and would not require the
redesign or rerouting of any portion of the planned construction.

Page 6

REFERENCES CITED
Miller, Thomas L.
1967 Bounty and Donation Land Grants of
University of Texas Press, Austin.

Texas

1835-1888.

Moncure, Henry B.
in press Archeological Excavations and Historical Investigations at
the Thomas Jefferson Walling Cabin, Rusk County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey Research Report No.
88, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Moncure, Henry B. and Jack M. Jackson
1980 A Reconnaissance Survey of Cultural Resources Mill Creek
Area,
Rusk County, Texas.
Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report No. 80, The University of Texas at Austin.
1983

A Cultural Resource
D.
Railroad and
Texas Archeological
University of Texas

Survey of the Proposed Martin Lake Area
Transmission Line, Rusk County, Texas.
Survey Technical Bulletin No.
57, The
at Austin.

Jackson, Jack M.
1982 A Cultural Resource Survey in Martin Lake Area D: Intensive
Survey 1, Rusk County, Texas. Texas Archeological Survey
Research Report No. 85, The University of Texas at Austin.
Rusk County
m.s.
Deed Record Books, County Clerk's Office, Henderson, Texas.
Webb, Walter Prescott (editor)
1952 The Handbook of Texas (2 Vols.).
Association, Austin.

The Texas State Historical

