Enterprise Products Operating LLC (Enterprise) on behalf of Breviloba, LLC (Breviloba), contracted Burns
& McDonnell Engineering Company, Inc. (Burns & McDonnell) to perform a cultural resource survey for
the Shin Oak Pipeline Project (Pipeline) that involves construction of a 24-inch natural gas liquids pipeline
extending across Texas from Midland to Mont Belvieu. One segment of the Pipeline crosses land owned
by the State of Texas in Liberty County near Cleveland. This land is owned by the State of Texas and
therefore the Antiquities Code of Texas applies to this segment of the Pipeline. The survey and report are
being completed under Texas Historical Commission Antiquities Permit No. 8306. The following report
provides information regarding the Liberty County segment of the Pipeline and includes the methods and
results of the cultural resource background review and archaeological survey of the 1.06-acre Area of
Potential Effects (APE). No archaeological sites or other cultural resources were found in the APE. No
impacts to cultural resources are anticipated within this segment of the Pipeline, and no further cultural
resource work is recommended at this location.

1.1
1.2
1.3

Background and Permitting Requirements .......................................................... 1-1
Area of Potential Effects ...................................................................................... 1-1
Project History and Personnel .............................................................................. 1-1

2.1
2.2

Archival Review Methods ................................................................................... 2-1
Cultural Resource Survey Methods ..................................................................... 2-1

3.1
3.2
3.3

Soils, Landforms, and Land Use .......................................................................... 3-1
Previously Recorded Archaeological Surveys and Sites ..................................... 3-1
Historic-Age Non-Archeological Resources ....................................................... 3-1

Table 3-1:

Previously Recorded Archaeological Sites in the Study Area ............................... 3-1

Abbreviation

Term/Phrase/Name

APE

Area of Potential Effects

Burns & McDonnell

Burns & McDonnell Engineering Company, Inc.

m

meters

NRHP

National Register of Historic Places

Pipeline

Shin Oak Pipeline Project

TASA

Texas Archeological Sites Atlas

USGS

U.S. Geological Survey

Enterprise Products Operating LLC (Enterprise) on behalf of Breviloba, LLC (Breviloba) contracted Burns
& McDonnell Engineering Company, Inc. (Burns & McDonnell) to perform a cultural resource survey for
the Shin Oak Pipeline Project (Project) that involves construction of a 24-inch natural gas liquids pipeline
extending across central Texas from Midland to Mont Belvieu. One segment of the Project crosses land
owned by the State of Texas in Liberty County (Survey Area) near Cleveland. This report provides
information regarding the 1.06-acre Survey Area and includes the methods and results of the cultural
resource background review and archaeological survey. No archaeological sites or other cultural resources
were found in the Survey Area. No impacts to cultural resources are anticipated within this segment of the
Pipeline, and no further cultural resource work is recommended at this location.

Enterprise is planning to construct a 24-inch natural gas liquids pipeline across Texas from Midland to
Mont Belvieu (Appendix A: Figure A-1). The Survey Area addressed herein, is a tract of land owned by
the State of Texas in Liberty County. The strictures of the Antiquities Code of Texas apply to this segment
of the Pipeline, and the survey was completed in accordance with Texas Historical Commission Antiquities
Permit No. 8306. These permitting tie-ins require a cultural resource investigation prior to construction, to
identify any significant historic properties and make a preliminary assessment of Pipeline impacts to any
such properties. Because this survey discovered no cultural resources, a short reporting format, as
recommended in the Council of Texas Archaeologists Guidelines, is used here.

The Area of Potential Effects (APE) for archaeological and non-archaeological cultural resources was
evaluated as a 300-foot-wide Survey Area across this tract. The Pipeline crosses this tract a total distance
of 0.08 mile (.13 kilometer); therefore, the lateral APE covers approximately 1.06 acres. The vertical depth
of the APE is the proposed depth of the pipeline trench: approximately 8 feet. No separate APE for access
roads is considered within this tract because all related construction access will be contained entirely within
the 1.06-acre APE.

Burns & McDonnell archaeologists conducted a background review of the APE prior to the commencement
of fieldwork. That review covered the APE and land within a 1-mile radius of the APE. An archaeological
survey of the APE took place on February 7, 2018. The survey was performed by Zach Mayes and Dale
Norton. Mr. Norton served as Principal Investigator.

The objective of this survey was to locate and assess significant historic properties within the APE. Historic
properties include archaeological sites, buildings, structures, etc. that are 50 years of age or older.
Significance is assessed in terms of eligibility for listing on the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP). This chapter reviews the archival sources that were consulted, as well as the methods used during
the cultural resource survey.

A Burns & McDonnell archaeologist performed an initial desktop archival review to identify previously
recorded archaeological sites and other previously identified historic properties or historic-period resources
within the APE and a 1-mile radius around it (Study Area). This review included an examination of the
online Texas Archeological Sites Atlas (TASA). The TASA was also examined to identify previous cultural
resource surveys completed in the Study Area. The archival review also involved an examination of the list
of Official State of Texas Historical Markers. That list includes Recorded Texas Historic Landmarks,
NRHP-listed sites and districts, and historic-age cemeteries.
Additional online sources were also consulted. The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Historic Topographic
Map Explorer, which contains images of old topographic quadrangle maps, was researched. The Web Soil
Survey website of the Natural Resources Conservation Service was examined to obtain soils data for the
Survey Area. Old air photo imagery covering the Survey Area was examined at the Historicaerials.com
website and through Google Earth.

Burns & McDonnell conducted field work according to accepted archaeological survey standards. These
standards are agreed upon by the Texas Historical Commission and the Council of Texas Archeologists.
The standards conform to the Secretary of Interior’s “Standards and Guidelines for Identification and
Evaluation Guidelines for Local Surveys” (National Register Bulletin Number 24).
Subsequent to a review of geology, soils, topographic maps, and previous investigations, it was determined
that the Survey Area was located in a densely wooded landscape with Holocene sediment deposition and
variable ground surface visibility. Burns & McDonnell performed an intensive survey involving a
combination of pedestrian survey and shovel testing. Shovel testing was undertaken in locations with
relative dense vegetation cover and where dry land was observed. Following the minimum survey standards
for Texas, three shovel tests were conducted within the survey area. Shovel tests were placed at distances

of 75 to 115 meters (m) along parallel transects that were spaced 30 m apart. Backdirt from shovel tests
was screened through quarter-inch mesh. All shovel tests were backfilled after inspection and recording.
Shovel test locations were recorded with Global Positioning System equipment. Parts of the Survey Area
with good ground surface visibility were covered using standard pedestrian survey. Pedestrian survey
transects were spaced approximately 30 m apart. No artifacts were collected. Project records and
photographs generated under the Antiquities Permit will be curated at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory.

This background review covers four topic areas. Soils, landforms, and land use within the Survey Area are
briefly described. Previously completed cultural resource survey within the Study Area are reviewed.
Previously recorded archaeological sites in the Study Area are also discussed. Lastly, non-archaeological
cultural resources known within the Study Area are reviewed.

Two soil types are mapped for the Survey Area. They are Lelavale (0 to 1 percent slopes, very poorly
drained) and Waller (0 to 1 percent slopes, poorly drained (NRCS 2013). Both soil series are silty loams
formed in loamy fluviomarine deposits. The Survey Area is located in low seasonally inundated landscape
near Tarkington Bayou, which is located to the east approximately 0.50 miles. Elevation is constant at 137
feet above mean sea level. Historically, land use in the Survey Area appears to have been pasture for
livestock or pine plantations.

Based on a review of TASA, there are no previous surveys within one mile of the APE. There are no
previously recorded archeological sites within the vicinity of the Pipeline at this location. Additionally, no
OTHMS such as RTHLs, NRPH listed sites or districts, SALs, or historic-age cemeteries are within the 1mile buffer (Appendix A: Figure A-2).

Burns & McDonnell examined historic-age topographic maps in comparison with modern aerials and did
not locate any historic period buildings or structures within areas subject to direct impacts from the proposed
Pipeline (Table 2). As a result, the APE was determined to have a low potential for containing historic-era
cultural resources including non-archeological historic-age resources.
Table 3-1: Historic-Age Maps Consulted
Date

Map Name

Agency

1954
1957
1958

Beaumont
Beaumont
Beaumont

USGS
USGS
USGS

Burns & McDonnell archaeologists conducted an intensive cultural survey of the Survey Area on February
7, 2018 (Appendix A: Figure A-3). The field crew found the Survey Area to be low, flat, heavily wooded
and seasonally inundated (see selected field photographs, Appendix B). As noted, the crew excavated three
shovel tests in those areas where the terrain appeared to stay dry for longer parts of the year. The entire
Survey Area was examined for any cultural remains via visual inspection.
No evidence of cultural resources was found in the Survey Area. Shovel tests documented deep, loamy and
clayey soils, some of which were rather wet (Appendix C). Shovel tests ranged from 50 cmbs to 100 cmbs
encountering dark gray silt loam to approximately 50 to 60 cmbs overlying a yellowish-brown loam to 100
cmbs.

The background review and cultural resource survey for the portion of the Pipeline that passes through the
tract owned this State of Texas tract in Liberty County found no evidence for cultural resources. No artifacts
or cultural materials were identified, and the potential for deeply buried archaeological deposits is low. No
further cultural resource work is recommended for the Survey Area.
In the event that previously unidentified cultural resources, such as archaeological sites, historic features,
or human remains are encountered during construction, it is recommended that Enterprise suspend
construction activity at this location and consult with a qualified archaeologist or osteologist. In addition,
it is recommended that Enterprise notify the Texas State Historic Preservation Office as required by law.
Should human skeletal remains be encountered during construction, activities in the area are required to
cease immediately, pursuant to the Texas Administrative Code (Title 13, Part 2, Chapter 22, Rule 22.4 and
Rule 22.5), Texas Health and Safety Code (Title 8, Subtitle C, Chapter 711), and Texas Penal Code (Title
7, Chapter 28; Title 9, Chapter 42). In addition, local law enforcement must be notified and treatment of
any such discovery must proceed in accordance with Texas Administrative Code, Title 13, Part 2, Chapter
26.

National Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
2013 Acreage of Soils by County for Louisiana. 2013 Natural Resources Inventory. U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Washington D.C. Electronic document, http://soildatamart.
nrcs.usda.gov/County.aspx?State=TX, accessed February 2018.
U. S. Geological Survey (USGS)
1954

Beaumont 1:250000 Topographic Quadrangle Map. Reston, VA.

1957

Beaumont 1:250000 Topographic Quadrangle Map. Reston, VA.

1958

Cleveland 1:24000 Topographic Quadrangle Map. Reston, VA.

1976

Cleveland 1:24000 Topographic Quadrangle Map. Reston, VA.

1978

Beaumont 1:62500 Topographic Quadrangle Map. Reston, VA.

1984

Beaumont 1:250000 Topographic Quadrangle Map. Reston, VA.

1985

Conroe 1:100000 Topographic Quadrangle Map. Reston, VA.

1997

Cleveland 1:240000 Topographic Quadrangle Map. Reston, VA.

APPENDIX A - MAP FIGURES

Path: Z:\Clients\ENS\EntProdCo\99612_Shin-Oak-NGL\Studies\Geospatial\DataFiles\ArcDocs\CR Report Maps\TX-LB-0051.00000\Fig1_Project_Location.mxd apbrown 5/14/2018
COPYRIGHT © 2018 BURNS & McDONNELL ENGINEERING COMPANY, INC.
Sources: Esri, HERE, Garmin, USGS, Intermap, INCREMENT P, NRCan, Esri Japan, METI, Esri China (Hong Kong), Esri Korea, Esri (Thailand), NGCC, © OpenStreetMap contributors, and the GIS User Community

TX-LB-0051.00000

Walker

_
^
Polk

Montgomery

_
^

Harris

Shin Oak
Pipeline

Property
Boundary
Tyler

San Jacinto

Hardin

Liberty

Chambers

Survey Area

NORTH

2

1

0

Source: Enterprise Product Partners LP; Burns & McDonnell Engineering Company, Inc.

Miles

2

Figure A-1
Location Map
Liberty County, Texas
Shin Oak Pipeline Project
Enterprise Products Operating LLC

Issued: 5/14/2018

Path: Z:\Clients\ENS\EntProdCo\99612_Shin-Oak-NGL\Studies\Geospatial\DataFiles\ArcDocs\CR Report Maps\TX-LB-0051.00000\Fig2_StudyArea_SurveyArea.mxd apbrown 5/14/2018
COPYRIGHT © 2018 BURNS & McDONNELL ENGINEERING COMPANY, INC.
Service Layer Credit Copyright:© 2013 National Geographic Society, i-cubed

TX-LB-0051.00000

0 6001,200
Feet
Shin Oak Pipeline

NORTH

Survey Area
Study Area

TX-LB-0051.00000
Boundary

0

0.25
Miles

0.5

Source: THC; Enterprise Product Partners LP; Burns & McDonnell Engineering Company, Inc.

Figure A-2
Study Area & Survey Area
Liberty County, Texas
Shin Oak Pipeline Project
Enterprise Products Operating LLC
Issued: 5/14/2018

Path: Z:\Clients\ENS\EntProdCo\99612_Shin-Oak-NGL\Studies\Geospatial\DataFiles\ArcDocs\CR Report Maps\TX-LB-0051.00000\Fig3_Aerial Map.mxd apbrown 5/14/2018
COPYRIGHT © 2018 BURNS & McDONNELL ENGINEERING COMPANY, INC.
Service Layer Credit Source: Esri, DigitalGlobe, GeoEye, Earthstar Geographics, CNES/Airbus DS, USDA, USGS, AeroGRID, IGN, and the GIS User Community

(
( !
!
(!

Shin Oak Pipeline

Survey Area

TX-LB-0051.00000
Boundary

!
(

Negative Shovel Test

NORTH

0

500

Source: THC; Enterprise Product Partners LP; Burns & McDonnell Engineering Company, Inc.

Feet

1,000

Figure A-3
Aerial Map
Liberty County, Texas
Shin Oak Pipeline Project
Enterprise Products Operating LLC

Issued: 5/14/2018

APPENDIX B - PHOTOGRAPHS

Photograph B-1: Vegetation observed in Survey Area, facing north.

Photograph B-2: Overview of Survey Area, facing south.

Shin Oak Pipeline

Representative Photographs
Liberty County, Texas

APPENDIX C – SHOVEL TEST RECORDS

Burns & McDonnell Engineering Company, Inc.
1700 West Loop South
Houston, TX 77027
O 713-622-0227
F 713-622-0224
www.burnsmcd.com

