Archaeological Monitoring of the
Upper Labor Acequia Clean-up Project,
Brackenridge Park, San Antonio, Bexar
County, Texas
By

Harry J. Shafer and Thomas R. Hester
TAC Permit # 5729
Abstract
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants conducted archaeological monitoring of the Upper
Labor Acequia clean-up project in Brackenridge Park for the Parks and Recreation
Department City of San Antonio from August 17 to August 30, 2010. The cleaning was
deemed necessary to eventually provide drainage from the zoo. The monitoring was
carried out to insure that no damage was done to the stone lining of the acequia. It had
mostly been filled in with sediments from erosion and debris from cultural activities in
the park. The project was carried out under TAC Permit No. 5729. The cleaning was
done using a small Bobcat® backhoe and the fill was deposited in front end loaders (John
Deere® and New Holland®). Once loaded onto a dump truck, the fill was disposed of at
the Tessman Road Landfill. The fill contained modern artifacts or trash from nearby
picnic grounds. No artifacts of historic significance were observed. No further
archaeological work is recommended.

1

Introduction
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants (ACC) conducted archaeological monitoring of
the Upper Labor Acequia clean-up project in Brackenridge Park1 for the Parks and
Recreation Department City of San Antonio (see Fig.1). The cleaning was deemed
necessary to eventually provide drainage from the zoo. It had mostly been filled in with
sediments from erosion and debris from cultural activities in the park (Fig. 2). Since the
proposed project is on public land, the work was performed under the Antiquities Code of
Texas, and TAC Permit No. 5729 was issued to ACC prior to field work. The cleaning
was done using a small Bobcat® backhoe and the fill was deposited in front end loaders
(John Deere® and New Holland®). Once loaded onto a dump truck, the fill was disposed
of at the Tessman Road Landfill. The monitoring was carried out to insure that no
damage was done to the stone lining of the acequia. The work was overseen by the
authors from August 17 to August 30, 2010.

The section of the acequia that was mechanically cleaned up is about 430 feet long and
extends south of the old donkey barn parking lot between two park bridges; the western
most bridge borders the San Antonio Zoo (Fig.1). The section beneath eastern bridge (on
Brackenridge Road) and extending to the lily pond was to be cleaned by hand and was
not monitored.

The Upper Labor is one of the acequias associated with the Spanish mission period in
San Antonio, and it was one of the last to be constructed. The construction began in 1776
for the purpose of providing water west of the San Antonio River to San Pedro Creek.
The acequia system has been mapped out by the late Waynne Cox and described in his
book The Spanish Acequias of San Antonio (Cox 2005; see also Cox 1999 for details of
the Upper Labor acequia).

1

For a brief history of Brackenridge Park see Maria Pfeiffer
http://www.sanantonio.gov/sapar/brackhistory.asp?res=1024&ver=true

2

Governor Don Martin de Alarcon ordered the construction of the San Antonio acequias
using, at first, conscript Indian labor. Construction of the acequias began in 1719 by
diverting water from San Pedro Springs. Eventually some 50 miles of ditches were dug,
leading to a network of fields on both sides of the San Antonio River. The acequias
served all of the mission settlements and early San Antonio for over 150 years. The
ditches were used in the downtown area until a few years after 1870 when the first
railroad reached San Antonio. The Alamo acequia was used up to the early 1900s, and
portions of the Espada acequia system continue to be used today.

The current project by the COSA Parks and Recreation Department was to clean out the
sediments and vegetation currently filling the acequia. The COSA Parks and Recreation
Department have determined that the bottom of the acequia was unlined. The original
acequia has been altered through this section of the park and the San Antonio Zoo. At
some time in the early 20th century a now historic rock lining was constructed along the
walls to stabilize the bottom portion. Precisely when this was done is not known, but
presumably it was sometime in the late 1930s, at the time when construction projects
along the river were done by one of the Great Depression labor projects (WPA, CCC, or
NYA) in conjunction with the construction of or improvement in Brackenridge Park and
San Antonio Zoo (Maria Pfeiffer, personal communication, 2010). The purpose of the
monitoring was to insure that no damage is done to the masonry walls lining the lower
portion of the acequia during the clean-up process since the stone walls are now deemed
historic.

Archaeological Background
The best known archaeological remains near downtown San Antonio are related to
the Spanish Colonial and early Mexican and Anglo-European periods of occupation.
Four 18th century Spanish missions along the San Antonio River (Conception, San Jose,
San Juan, and Espada) are now part of the San Antonio Missions National Historical
Park. The former mission of San Antonio de Valero (the Alamo) is state owned and
under the charge of the Daughters of the Texas Revolution. The missions, and features

3

linked to the missions (such as acequias, gristmills and dams), have received a great
deal of archaeological attention since the 1930s.
Additionally, the expansion of 19th century San Antonio saw the rise of
neighborhoods around the missions and adjacent to the river corridor. Eventually, the
construction of railroads, industrial areas, and other facets of urban growth, extensively
modified the original landscape.

Many archaeological sites exist along the banks of the San Antonio River from the
headwater springs to south San Antonio, and extending to the Gulf Coast. Based on
archaeological research in the general region, we know that the remnants of 11,500
years of human occupation are found along the river and adjacent terraces. The earliest
human presence was in the PaleoIndian period, 11,500-8,800 years ago. Indicators of
such occupation are spear points of distinctive style and date, such as Clovis, Folsom,
Golondrina, and Angostura.

Two PaleoIndian locales are known near the Upper Labor acequia in the Olmos
Basin. The first was found during construction at the Olmos Dam in the 1920s has been
reported by Orchard and Campbell (1954). The second area is in the southern Olmos
Basin where A.S. Collier collected a number of early point types (Hester 1975). Types
included Clovis, St. Mary’s Hall, and Angostura.

In the following Archaic period (8,800-1,500 years ago), the Native American
population greatly expanded, and their sites are often found on terraces overlooking
local streams. Use of limestone rock for cooking and for earth-oven techniques often
result in major accumulations of fire-cracked rock fragments. Although “burned rock
middens” typical of northern Bexar County have dropped out of the archaeological
record in the present project area, it would be expected that sites from the long-lived
Archaic would be indicated by burned rock fragments, diagnostic spear points and tools
used in word-working or other tasks, and the flake debris resulting from tool-making.
Nearby Archaic sites include 41BX1 just north of Olmos Dam, a cemetery site dating to

4

late in the Archaic period (Lukowski 1988). The Collier collection from the southern
Olmos Basin reflects a wide range of Archaic occupations, over most of that era.
Diagnostic point types include Andice, Pedernales, Marcos Langtry, Frio, and Carrizo.
Guadalupe tools were also found (see Hester 1975).

The Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 500-1700) is most clearly indicated by the
occurrence of tiny arrow points, indicating the introduction of the bow and arrow into
the area around A.D. 500-700. Later in this period, around A.D. 1250-1700, there was a
regional emphasis on bison-hunting, and the material culture from this era is notable for
the presence of pottery and other distinctive artifacts. Perdiz, Scallorn and Edwards
arrow points are known from the southern Olmos Basin (Hester 1975).

There are several recorded prehistoric archaeological site within Brackenridge Park;
some with artifacts of Archaic and Late Prehistoric, and others, briefly used campsites
(“lithic scatters”). These include, 41BX264, a large prehistoric campsite located in the
Polo Field. Site, 41BX293 just south of Mulberry Street and other nearby sites includes
41BX170, 321, 322, 1425, and 1773. Site, 41BX323 is a partially excavated site near
the Witte Museum.

Site 41BX1798 is perhaps the most pertinent prehistoric site to the project as it is
located immediately to the east across the San Antonio River at the east end of the new
Miraflores Park Bridge (Fig. 1). This site was recently tested by UTSA and while the
findings suggest a mixed deposit, excavations yielded Guadalupe tools, an Early
Triangular point, and Ensor, a possible Tortugas point, burned rock, chipped stone,
butchered bone (Tomka and Dowling 2009). The site does alert planners that buried
archaeological deposits containing artifacts that span much of the Archaic sequence exist
all along the river banks and terraces. In fact, the authors observed occasional flakes,
ancient Rabdotus shells, and other signs of prehistoric occupation along earthen banks of
the acequia. It is unknown if these artifacts were in fact from buried deposits or were redeposited, but there is a great likelihood that a buried site does exist in the terrace parking
lot adjacent to the acequia.

5

The American Indian populations were greatly modified by the 1720s with the
establishment of the Spanish Colonial missions early in the 18 th century, and the arrival
of Lipan Apache and Comanche raiding parties. Local Indians, who went into the San
Antonio missions, were joined by groups from south Texas and northeast Mexico
continued their distinctive bone-tempered pottery, along with stone-tool making,
throughout the Spanish Colonial period. These American Indians would still have used
the San Antonio River for hunting and fishing, for plant food gathering, and for shortterm occupations. It is likely that established Late Prehistoric campsites along this part
of the river would have been reoccupied at different times after Historic contact. Given
the proximity of Mission San Jose and Mission San Juan Capistrano to the south, there
well could be traces of Historic American Indian presence likely dating to the 1700s, in
the project area. For example, the Collier collection from the southern Olmos Basin
contains a Guerrero point, a triangular arrow point characteristic of mission Indians
(Hester 1975).

Acequia de Labores de Arriba

Acequia construction was an important activity in San Antonio beginning in the early
18th century as we noted earlier. Expansion to the north of the center of the city in the
mid-18th century created the need for additional acequias. Indeed, residents in the area
of what is now Brackenridge Park and nearby areas, and many petitions were sent forth
over the decades. Finally, the work was begun on the Acequia de Labores de Arriba in
July 1776 and continued until completion in March 1778. It was decided that a dam
would be necessary on the San Antonio River at the Paso de Tejas (Hildebrand Road) in
order to raise the water level so that it would flow into the acequia. It was not until
1999 that Cox et al. (1999) were able to do some excavations of the original dam and to
determine that it was a diversion dam (a wing that diverted some of the river water into
the acequia). As reported by Cox et al., (1999), the construction of the acequia was
supervised by Angel Galin (paid at the rate of 1 peso per day), utilizing 4 peons (hired
laborers) and 26 men from the local populace, who worked daily on the project.

6

The acequia when completed in 1778 provided enough water to irrigate about 600
acres. The ownership of these farm lands were determined by suertes, the picking of
lots from a container. Water not used for farming was returned to the San Pedro creek
terminus of the acequia.

By 1875, demand for water from the acequia was such that the city contracted to raise
the level of the dam and initial part of the acequia, known for sometime as the “Upper
Labor Ditch.” About 14,850 cubic feet of stonework was needed, equaling “600
perches of stone” (a perch is the volume of a sandstone wall 16.5 feet long, 18 inches
high, and 12 inches thick. How long these improvements lasted is uncertain, as
inspectors judged the results to have inconsistent levels and poor mortar. Sometime
after the turn of the century, ca. 1900, the city ordered that the Upper Labor Ditch be
closed. For details on the Upper Labor dam, its construction, and its routes and
connections to other acequias, see Cox et al. (1999).

Scope of Work
The City of San Antonio has conducted clean-up operations at the location of the Upper
Labor acequia within Brackenridge Park. The purpose of the work was to clean out
primary and secondary vegetation growth and silting in of the channel by sediments. The
clean-up was done with the aid of a backhoe The primary archaeological objective of the
Upper Labor Acequia clean-up project was to monitor the work at the time it was being
done to insure that the stone-lined walls placed on the sides of the acequia are not
damaged or compromised during the process.

To accomplish monitoring work, the following tasks were carried out:

Task 1. Obtained the necessary Texas Antiquities Permit.

Task 2. A vertical cut or profile was made in the sediments in the acequia on the first
morning of the project. With such a cut, we were able to identify what may well have

7

been the bottom when the canal was last cleaned. This contact was used to define the
limits of the present cleaning.

Task 3. Monitored the cleaning process at Brackenridge Park to insure that the stonelined walls and the adjacent earthen slopes were not damaged.

Task 4. With the present report, we offer an overview and assessment of the
monitoring that complies with the Texas Antiquities Code and City of San Antonio
Historic Preservation requirements.

Profile Trench
COSA Parks and Recreation department believes that the bottom of the Upper Labor
acequia was never lined with stone and remains an earthen channel. Task 2 was to handdig a trench across the acequia to expose a profile in hopes of identifying the earthen
bottom of the acequia (Figs. 3 and 4). This task was deemed successful in that we were
able to define a break at the bottom, probably created by the last clean-up project. This
stratigraphic brake was used to establish a depth to follow for this clean-up.

A schematic profile of the trench is shown in Figure 4. The sediments included erosion
from the banks, flood-born (probably from the zoo), and tossed trash and vegetation. We
could define episodic ponding during the course of filling by lines of aquatic snail shells,
quilted melania (Melannoides tuberculet), a species that was introduced in the United
States from the Far East in 1936 (Fig. 5) and commonly occurs in Texas spring-fed
streams and canals. The densest deposit of snails was at the bottom of stratigraphic unit 4
(Fig. 4) that included snails of all ages, especially the very young. It was such a deposit of
snails of all ages (immature and mature) lying on very fine clay sediment at the bottom of
stratigraphic unit 1 (Fig. 4) that identified the bottom of the last clean-up. The
assumption was that snails died when the pond dried up, and such an event would affect
snails of all ages. It was the lowest deposit of snails that caught our attention since it did
occur at a noticeable stratigraphic break.

8

The entire fill consists of sediments and debris containing various concentrations of
recent historic items, aquatic snails, rotted wood, rocks, asphalt chunks, glass, bottles,
and other picnic-related trash. The recognized stratigraphic units are labeled numerically
(1-6) and the various items shown in the profile are labeled with letters (a-d, and s).
The profile obtained the first day of the project helped provide guidelines for protecting
the stone lining and making sure that the stone walls would not be undercut or exposed to
erosion. The diagram in Figure 6 illustrates our suggestion to contour the bottom of the
acequia to protect the stone lining.
.

Monitoring Results
The clean-up process was carried out using a small Bobcat® backhoe which was
small enough to fit in the acequia and with enough clearance to avoid damage to the
stone lining (Figs. 7 and 8). The acequia has an average width of about seven feet (7.12
feet or 2.17 meters) and the backhoe width was about five feet, giving about two feet
clearance for the machine. Care was taken to insure that when pivoting, the machine
was above the wall and did not touch the stone wall.

The experienced backhoe

operator, Rosendo Valdez of the Parks and Recreation staff, conducted the work with
great skill without damaging the wall.

The stone lining exhibits various degrees of preservation, from excellent to damaged
(Figs. 9-12). The damaged sections can be attributed to tree-root expansion (Figs. 10
and 11), and later construction associated with drainage around the eastern bridge (Fig.
9) (Brackenridge Road). The intent of the clean-up process was to remove the
vegetation and upper fill in the acequia, taking care not to expose the bottom of the wall
and allow erosion to undercut the wall. The operator was able to remove fill down the
middle of the acequia and leave a bank along the walls to protect them (Fig. 12).

The bottom of the acequia has doubtless been altered by modification through the
years. When first dug in 1776 it was unlined. We do not know how deep it was at that

9

time, and after it was abandoned after 1900, the stone wall lining the sides was
constructed by during the Great Depression by masons. There has been at least one
City cleaning of the acequia, reportedly about 15-20 years ago. Either this recollection
was in error or there were other similar events since the wall was constructed.

The artifacts removed from the fill give some indication as to how recent the last
clean-up occurred. In other words, artifacts observed during the clean-up process
should date to the time the sediments were being deposited since the last clean-up. This
list of artifacts contains virtually everything families bring to picnics, and include some
of the following: Animal bone (ribs, pork chops, chicken), grills, glass and plastic
bottles (beer, soft-drink), shoes (sneakers, flip-flops), pull tabs, bottle caps, plastic bags,
balls (golf, rubber), along with non-picnic items such as rebar, metal pipes, 8-10 large
concrete “car stops”, chunks of asphalt, and at least two large concrete fragments from
the faux wood similar to that of the footbridge that crosses the acequia at Brackenridge
Park road.

Dating the time of the previous clean-up was attempted using the artifacts observed in
the removed sediments. Four particular items were examined and researched, a beer
can, and four bottles were digitally imaged for further study.

One item was an old Falstaff® beer can that required a can opener (church-key type)
(Fig. 13). This can probably date prior to 1965; the pull-tab was introduced about that
time.

Another was a 6 ½ ounce Coca-Cola® bottle with a painted logo (Fig. 14A).

This particular bottle was made in Mexico. Painted Coca-Cola® bottles were
introduced in 1957 and continue in use. A second bottle is also made by Coca-Cola®
but is a Buck Brand Soda Water® bottle (Fig. 14B). It is labeled “Property of CocaCola Bottling Co. The last is a Grapico Naturally Good® bottle (Fig.14C). This
particular style bottle may date as late as the 1960s. A fourth bottle (Fig. 14D) is from a
16-ounce Frostier® root beer; this bottle also dates at least to the 1970s if not earlier. .

10

Not all of the artifacts observed in the sediments were historic in age. One chert blade
core diagnostic of Late Prehistoric occupation was also noted (Fig. 15). This particular
artifact probably eroded from the banks of the acequia. The authors noted several
prehistoric artifacts (chipped stone flakes, old Rabdotus shells, and fire-cracked rock
exposed along the acequia walls. Our suspicion is that a prehistoric site probably lies
buried in the terrace through which the acequia was cut.

Summary
Abasolo Archaeological Consultants monitored the clean-up process of a section of
the Upper Labor acequia in the northern part of Brackenridge Park in San Antonio. The
clean-up was carried out by COSA Parks and Recreation personnel primarily using a
small Bobcat® backhoe and a front end loader. Some of the more delicate work along
the walls was carried by hand. Prior to the clean-up work, a vertical profile was cut in
an attempt to define the bottom of the acequia. We began with the assumption that we
may be able to define the original bottom. However, it became apparent that the
acequia had been cleaned out previously, and oral history indicated that this had been
done about 20 years ago, although no one on the Parks and Recreation staff knew
exactly when. Historic artifacts recovered during the clean-up process supported the
report of a recent clean-up but it may have occurred earlier than assumed. Cans and
bottles deposited since the last cleaning event date to the 1960s and early 1970s
indicating that the previous clean-up occurred about 40-50 years ago.

The clean-up was successful in removing the vegetation (cattails and small cypress)
and fill to a depth of about two feet; the bottom was sloped up against the stone wall.
The intent was to protect the bottom of the wall and prevent undercutting by erosion.
No damage to the wall occurred during clean-up. Some damage had been done
previously by tree roots and by the construction of a drain near the Brackenridge Park
road bridge near the river, and eventually some stabilization of the wall become
necessary.

References Cited
11

Cox, I. W.

1999

The Spanish Colonial Acequias of San Antonio. Bulletin of
the Texas Archeological Society 70:315-326.

2005

The Spanish Acequias of San Antonio. Maverick Press, San
Antonio, Texas.

Cox, I. W., E. D. Johnson, and C. B. Bousman
1999

Excavations for the Upper Labor Dam Site, Brackenridge
Park, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. Archaeological
Survey Report 268. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hester, T.R.
1975

Notes on the Collier Collection from the Southern Olmos
Basin. In, A. A. Fox, An Archaeological Assessment of the
Southern Portion of the Olmos Basin, Bexar County, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report 9. Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Houk, B. A., K. A. Miller, R. K. Meadows and C. W. Ringstaff
1999

Archaeological Excavations at 41BX323, Brackenridge
Park, San Antonio, Bexar County, Texas. SWCA Cultural
Resource Report 99-67. Austin, Texas.

Lukowski, P.
1988

Archaeological Investigations at 41BX1, Bexar County, Texas.
Archaeological Survey Report 135. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

12

Meskill, F. H. and C. D. Frederick
1995

Archeological Testing at the Witte Museum Science Center
Facility Construction Site: An Archaeological and Geoarchaeological Study on
the East Bank of the San Antonio River. Technical Series 48. Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Tomka, S. and J. J. Dowling
2009

Data Recovery at 41BX1798: The Miraflores Park Bridge Project.
Archeological Report No. 405, University of Texas at San Antonio, Center
for Archaeological Research. San Antonio.

13

Figures

Lily pond

Old donkey barn
41BX1798

Miraflores Park
bridge

Upper Labor Acequia

Figure 1. Aerial map of the Upper Labor acequia project area.

14

Figure 2. Upper Labor acequia prior to clean-up. Note the banks of the original
ditch and the stone walls which were added at a later time.

Figure 3. Profile cut showing stratigraphy. Bottom of the scale is at the presumed
bottom of the acequia at last clean-up several decades in the past.

15

217 mm (85.5”)

Wall
Surface
Wall

6
Wall

5
a
s s s

4
s

s

s

ss

s

s s

s
b

3

d

ss s

s

s

s

a

c
a

s

a
s

2

s

s

Log

s

c

a

a

b

a
1
s

s s

s s s

s s
Bottom of last clean-up

Unexcavated
0

Scale

50 cm

Figure 4. Stratigraphy: The entire fill consists of sediments and debris containing
various concentrations of recent historic items, aquatic snails, rotted wood, rocks, asphalt
chunks, glass, bottles, and other picnic-related trash. The stratigraphic layers are labeled
numerically (1-6) and the various items shown in the profile are labeled with letters (a-d).
Legend
a, rock (light blue)
b, asphalt (gray)
c, glass (dark blue)
d, bottle (red)
s, quilted melania aquatic snail (Fig. 5)
1. Mucky clay with some charcoal, snails, rotted wood grading to very
fine clay at the bottom. The bottom of the last clean-up is defined by
the fine clay and a layer of intrusive quilted melania aquatic snails; hue
10YR3/1
2. Dark clayey sediment with historic trash, plastic, glass, bottles, rocks,
asphalt chunks, and snails throughout but very abundant near the top
of the layer; hue 10YR3/2
3. Lens with no snails
4. Gray stratum, 10yr 4/2
5. Fine coarse sand/gravel lens
6. Dark loose fill with trash, twigs, roots.

16

Figure 5. Intrusive aquatic snail (Melannoides tuberculet) introduced in 1936 and is
common is spring-fed streams and canals in Texas. Thousands of these snail shells
of all ages mark the bottom sediments.

Current level
Stone lining
Sediment

Proposed contour of
acequia bottom

Figure 6. Suggested plan for sediment removal.

17

Figure 7. Upper Labor acequia clean-up operation in progress using small Bobcat
backhoe and John Deere front-end loader.

Figure 8. Final stages of the clean-up operation.

18

Figure 9. Wall damaged by the construction of a drain next to the Brackenridge
Park Road bridge.

Figure 10. Wall segment damaged prior to present clean-up.

19

\
Figure 11. Wall segment damaged by tree roots.

20

Figure 12. Upper Labor acequia clean-up operation completed.

Figure 13. Old Falstaff® beer can showing the use of a can-opener.

21

A

B

C

D

Figure 14. Bottles contained in the acequia sediments. A, Coca-Cola® bottle made
in Mexico with painted logo (Painted logos were introduced in 1957); B, Buck Brand
Soda Water® bottled by the Coca-Cola Bottling Company; C, Grapico® soft drink
bottle; D, Frostie® soft-drank bottle. A-B are 6 ½ ounce bottles; D, is a 16 ounce
bottle.

Figure 15. Chert blade core found in the sediments. Prehistoric artifacts occur
along the banks of the acequia, probably from buried deposits along its banks.

22

