ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT SITES 41FL2 AND 41FL76
CAPROCK CANYONS TRAILWAY STATE PARK FLOYD COUNTY, TEXAS
By Rolla Shaller and Christopher Lintz
and
MONITORING WATER LINE TRENCHES AT BISON PENS
CAPROCK CANYONS STATE PARK BRISCOE COUNTY, TEXAS
By Jeff Indeck

Prepared for:
TEXAS PARKS AND WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
INTERAGENCY COOPERATIVE CONTRACT IACC-(96-97) 346-0401
and
TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT No. 2328
Jeff Indeck, Ph.D., Principal Investigator
PANHANDLE-PLAINS HISTORICAL MUSEUM
Canyon, Texas
2016
Restricted Copy
(site locations included)

PART I: ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
AT SITES 41FL2 AND 41FL76
CAPROCK CANYONS TRAILWAY STATE PARK
FLOYD COUNTY, TEXAS
By Rolla Shaller and Christopher Lintz
And
PART II: MONITORING WATER LINE TRENCHES AT BISON PENS
CAPROCK CANYONS STATE PARK
BRISCOE COUNTY, TEXAS
By Jeff Indeck

Prepared for:
TEXAS PARKS AND
WILDLIFE DEPARTMENT
AUSTIN, TEXAS

INTERAGENCY COOPERATIVE CONTRACT
IACC-(96-97) 346-0401 and
TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMIT No. 2328
Jeff Indeck, Ph.D.
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR
PANHANDLE-PLAINS HISTORICAL MUSEUM

2016

ABSTRACT

Between July 1996 and November 1998, archaeologists from the Panhandle-Plains Historical
Museum (P-PHM), Canyon, were contracted by Texas Parks and Wildlife Department to develop
surface maps, and surface collect artifacts from archeological sites 41FL2 and 41FL76 within the
Caprock Canyon Trailway State Park in Floyd County, Texas. In addition two burned rock
features and one burial pit feature exposed within the abandoned railroad bed cut at 41FL76 were
excavated to render the visible archeological presence less noticeable. At 41FL2, surface artifact
collections from five spatially-distinct areas yielded a modest assemblage indicative of a
campsite intermittently used during the Late Prehistoric I period (Palo Duro complex) through
the Late Prehistoric II (Antelope Creek phase) and possibly the Protohistoric periods (Tierra
Blanca or Edwards/Wheeler complexes). These affiliations are based on arrow points and
prehistoric both cord-marked and plain dark gray pottery; at least one unidentifiable red ware
sherd with volcanic tuff temper was probably made in the Northern Rio Grande region of New
Mexico. The delineation of the site limits within the State Park are much smaller than the extent
of site 41FL2 as originally recorded, and from which also yielded a series of Archaic dart points.

At 41FL76, surface collections were supplemented by two shovel tests. ST-1 documents that
materials on the lower, southeast side of the railroad cut, were largely surficial; whereas ST-2 on
the upper northwest side of the rail cut had intact deposits and depth potential. Other midden
deposits located on the eastern edge of the site were not investigated further. Two exposed
hearth features and a burial pit were excavated to recover information prior to their loss due to
erosion. The two burned rock features were interpreted as possibly a stone boiling hearth, and a
possible earth oven. An elongated or semi-spherical pit contained a single, flexed burial of a
child, 5 to 9 years old, along with marine shell disc beads, and a single olivella shell bead. Based
on the presence of various kinds of prehistoric ceramics, site 41FL76 is also a multi-component
campsite with occupations that might be attributed to the Edwards/Wheeler Complexes of the
Late Ceramic/Protohistoric period. Due to the sparse recovery of diagnostic remains, the

iii

cultural affiliation of these remains to modern groups is not certain. Site 41FL76 with several
kinds of features is a registered State Antiquities Landmark (SAL) property.

P-PHM staff recommends that both sites be periodically monitored to ensure sheet erosion is not
exposing more features and artifacts. Both sites should be managed for preservation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We would like to thank Jeff Indeck, former Curator of Archeology at the Panhandle-Plains
Historical Museum, for his assistance during the final stages of this project, especially his
expertise regarding the recovered human remains and also for his continuous support in the
preparation and editing of this final report. Equal appreciation is expressed to Walt Davis, Millie
Vanover, Fred Oglesby, A. J. Taylor, and the late Billy R. Harrison for their involvements in the
project.

Michael Collins of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory identified the disc

beads as shell, and John Poluhovich, forensic biologist at West Texas A&M University,
examined and provided age estimates based on dentition eruption of the human remains from site
41FL76. The human remains were also examined by physical anthropologist Matthew Taylor
who added other observations. Eran J. Moore drafted the final versions of the two site maps.

The prehistoric pottery sherds were examined by Doug Boyd of Prewitt and Associates, Reg
Wiseman of the Laboratory of Anthropology, Richard Drass of the Oklahoma Archeological
Survey University of Oklahoma, and Tim Perttula of Archeological Environmental Consultants,
Austin. The latter three felt that the sherd sizes were extremely small as was the assemblage
size, which hindered their identifications to named types or manufacturing areas. Subsequently,
the paste and temper from five of the larger prehistoric sherds from 41FL2 and 41FL76 were
identified using point-count petrographic methods under contract to Steve Tomka and Lori
Barkwill‐Love from the University of Texas San Antonio; petrographic funding was provided by

Michael Strutt, Cultural Resource Director of the State Parks Division. Charles Frederick also
reviewed and commented on the petrographic portions for this report. Dr. Veronica Arias also
iv

took a strong interest in the project and offered many suggestions to improve the report.
Photographs of the sherds and the petrographic results were also sent to David Snow of Cross
Cultural Research Systems of Santa Fe for his impressions about sherd types. The petrographic
summary in the present report is a minimally revised section that was published in a summary
article (Lintz and Shaller 2015).

Personnel of Caprock Canyons State Park: Rusty Sargent, Geoff Hulse, Mike Knezek and
Arnold Castillo are thanked for their hospitality, assistance, and support during this project. A
special thanks goes to Lynn Pace, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Resource Coordinator
for Region 6; Kent Hicks, and later Tony Lyle, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department Cultural
Resources Coordinators for Region 6; and the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department for its
patience and understanding during the many interruptions and delays in carrying this project
to completion. Kent and Tony provided useful comments on this report. Finally, we would like
to thank Rich Mahoney for his help in formatting and electronically tagging the report.

Christopher Lintz and Rolla Shaller
January, 2016

v

vi

Table of Contents
PART I: ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS AT SITES 41FL2
AND 41FL76, CAPROCK CANYONS TRAILWAY STATE PARK,
FLOYD COUNTY, TEXAS
Rolla Shaller and Christopher Lintz
Topic

Page

Abstract…………………………………………………………………………………

iii

Acknowledgements…………………………………………………………………….

iv

Part I (Trailways Investigations) Table of Contents…………………………………

vii

Part I (Trailways Investigations) List of Figures………………………………………

x

Part I (Trailways Investigations) List of Tables………………………………………

xi

Part II (Caprock Canyons Bison Pens) Table of Contents…………………………..

xii

Part II (Caprock Canyons Bison Pens) List of Figures………………………………..

xiii

1. Introduction……………………………………………………………………

1

2. Natural and Cultural Background…………………………………………….

7

Envrionmental Background………………………………………………

7

Cultural Background………………………………………………………

10

Paleo-Indian or Paleo-American Period (9,500 - 6,500 B.C.)………

12

Archaic Period (6,500 B.C. – A.D. 500)……………………………….

13

Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 500 – 1550)…………………………….

15

Late Prehistoric I/Early Ceramic (A.D. 500 – 1100)………….

15

Late Prehistoric II/Middle Ceramic (A.D. 1100 – 1550)……..

16

Protohistoric/Late Ceramic

Period (A.D. 1550 – 1760/1860)………

18

Historic Period (A.D. 1760/1860 – present)…………………………..

19

3. Research Methods……………………………………………………………

21

Field Methods……………………………………………………………

21

Laboratory Methods…………………………………………………… …

23

4. Site 41FL2……………………………………………………………………

27

Introduction………………………………………………………………

27

vii

Topic

Page
Mitigation Phase…………………………………………………………

30

Material Culture…………………………………………………………

32

Chipped Stone Implements …………………………………………

32

Nondiagnostic Lithic Remains: Flake Debris, Fire-cracked Rock… …

34

Ceramics ……………………………………………………………..

35

Faunal Remains………………………………………………………

40

Material Distribution by Collection Area……………………………… …

40

Summary and Recommendations……………………………………… …

43

5. Site 41FL76……………………………………………………………………

45

Introduction……………………………………………………………….

45

Mitigation Phase…………………………………………………………..

49

Surface Collection……………………………………………………..

50

Shovel Test 1 (ST 1)…………………………………………………..

51

Shovel Test 2 (ST 2)…………………………………………………..

51

Features…………………………………………………………………….

53

Feature 1: Dispersed Burned Rock Hearth…………………………….

53

Feature 2: Dense Burned Rock Hearth or Oven……………………….

55

Feature 3: Deep, Elongated Burial Pit………………………………….

56

Feature 3 Soil samples…………………………………………

57

Feature 3 Artifacts……………………………………………..

62

Feature 3 Interred Remains……………………………………

62

Human Remains Summary……………………………………

65

Material Culture……………………………………………………………

72

Historic Debris …………………………………………………

73

Chipped Stone Implements……………………………………

73

Ground Stone Implements……………………………………

75

Nondiagnostic Remains: Flake Debris, Fire-cracked Rock……

75

Ceramics…………………………………………………………

76

Faunal Remains…………………………………………………

80

viii

Topic

Page
Material Distributions at 41FL76………………………………………….

82

Summary and Recommendations……………………………………… ….

84

Petrographic Studies of Select Potsherds from 41FL2 and 41FL76…

…

86

6. Assessment and Recommendations……………...………………………

…

95

7. References Cited…………………………………………………………… …

99

Appendix A: Results of Petrographic Analysis of Five Potsherds from 41FL2
and 41FL76, Caprock Canyonlands Trailways State Park, Floyd County
Texas. Lori Barkwill Love, and Steve A. Tomka………………………… …

109

Introduction………………………………………………………….

109

Analysis Methods……………………………………………………

111

Definition of Temper Categories……………………………………

112

Thin Section Descriptions………………………………………… …

113

Thin Section 41FL2-15a-4…..…………………………….. …

113

Thin Section 41FL2-14a-5...……………………………..... ...

115

Thin Section 41FL76-1a-1...…………………………………

116

Thin Section 41FL76-2A-2… ………………………………

118

Thin Section 41FL76-61a-3…………………………………

119

Summary……………………………………………………………..

120

Comparison of Point Count Results………………………………….

123

References Cited……………………………………………………….

127

Appendix B: The August 31st 2014 Field Reconnaissance and Additional
Artifacts from 41FL2 and 41FL76. Christopher Lintz…………………… ….
Introduction………………………………………………………… ….
Site 41FL2: Results from the 2014 Field Inspection…………………

129
129
129

Site 41FL76: Results from the 2014 Field Inspection……………….

132

Recommendations…………………………………………………….

137

ix

Part I: (Trailways Investigations) List of Figures
Figures

Page

1

Caprock Canyon Trailway State Park and location of sites 41FL2 and 41FL76… 2

2

Topographic setting of sites 41FL2 and 41FL76 in upper Quitaque Canyon…

3

3

Trailway railroad bed cut through 41FL2. Facing northeast…………………..

28

4

Trailway railroad bed cut through 41FL2. Facing southeast…………………

28

5

Site map of 41FL2 showing relative locations of surface collection areas……

31

6

Chipped stone implements from 41FL2……………………………………….

33

7

Railroad bed at 41FL76, Features 1 & 3 are near right foreground. Facing west. 46

8

Railroad bed at 41FL76, Feature 2 is on right near top. Facing east…………

46

9

Midden exposed in cutbank southeastern portion of site 41FL76…………….

48

10

Midden profile of railroad cut bank southeast edge of 41FL76……………….

48

11

Plan map of 41FL76 showing locations of features, midden and shovel tests.

49

12

Plan view of ST 1 (left) and ST 2 (right) at 41FL76…………………………

52

13

Profile and plan views of burned hearth Feature 1 (TP 2) at site 41FL76…….

54

14

Profile and plan views of burned hearth Feature 2 (TP 1) at site 41FL76……

56

15

Profile of elongated pit Feature 3 at 41FL76…………………………………

59

16

Location of soil sample collected from vicinity of pit Feature 3………………

60

17

Rodent activity at the bottom of pit Feature 3 at 41FL76……………………

64

18

Field sketch of human remains from elongated pit Feature 3 at 41FL76……

66

19

Diagnostic artifacts from 41FL76…………………………………………….

74

20

Pottery from 41FL2 and 41FL76, Caprock Canyon Trailways Project……..

86

21

Percent of dominant aplastic temper in petrographic sherds…………………

91

A1 Microphotograph of section 41FL2-15a-4 under plane and cross polar light ..…

114

A2 Microphotograph of section 41FL2-14a-5 under plane and cross polar light …

115

A3 Microphotograph of section 41FL76-1a-1 under plane and cross polar light .....

117

A4 Microphotograph of section 41FL76-2A-2 under plane and cross polar light…..

118

A5 Microphotograph of section 41FL76-61a-3 under plane and cross polar light …

119

x

Figures

Page

B-1. Map of 41FL2 along the Caprock Canyon Trailways Project………...………

130

B-2. Typical railroad cut profile at 41FL2; midden caps orange sediments...………

132

B-3. Joe Rogers near caliche hearths 1 & 2 north bank of 41FL2, west end………

133

B-4. Probable hearth Feature 1 at 41FL2…………………………………………

133

B-5. Probable hearth Feature 2 at 41FL2…………………………………………

134

B-6. Plan Map of site 41FL76 developed in 1998…………………………………

134

B-7. Midden deposits with bone fragments, southeastern part of 41FL6…………….

135

B-8. Railroad profile through site 41FL76; midden over leached white deposits…

136

B-9. Bison metacarpal and end scraper in vicinity of Hearth Feature 1 (1996-98)….

138

B-10. Artifacts collected from 41FL76 on August 31, 2014………………………… 140

Part I: (Trailways Investigations) List of Tables
Table

Page

1

Distribution of collected artifacts by area from 41FL2………………………

41

2

Stone materials for tools and manufacturing debris from areas at 41FL2……

43

3

Artifacts from the general surface and ST 1 and ST 2 at 41FL76……………

50

4

Artifacts from hearth Feature 1 (TP 2) at 41FL76…………………………….

55

5

Artifacts from hearth Feature 2 (TP 1) at 41FL76……………………………

57

6

Weight and percent by size grade of sediments from base of pit Feature 3…

62

7

Materials recovered from Feature 3 burial pit (TP 3) at 41FL76……………

63

8

Observations on human remains from Feature 3 at site 41FL76……… …….

67

9

Distribution of all artifacts from 41FL76............................................................

72

10

Petrographic point-count for five sherds from 41FL2 and 41FL76…………

87

A1

Correspondence of aplastic/temper inclusions and simplified inclusions…

113

A-2

Point-count of temper, paste and voids for sherd 41FL2-15a-4…….………

114

A-3

Inclusion size range (mm) of aplastics in sherd 41FL2-15a-4…….………...

115

xi

Table

Page

A-4

Point-count of temper, paste and voids for sherd 41FL2-14a-5……………… 116

A-5

Inclusion size range (mm) of aplastics in sherd 41FL2-14a-5……………...... 116

A-6

Point-count of temper, paste and voids for sherd 41FL76-1a-1……………… 117

A-7

Inclusion size range (mm) of aplastics in sherd 41FL76-1a-1…………….....

117

A-8

Point-count of temper, paste and voids for sherd 41FL76-2A-2..……………

118

A-9

Inclusion size range (mm) of aplastics in sherd 41FL76-2A-2..…………......

119

A-10

Point-count of temper, paste and voids for sherd 41FL76-61a-3.……………

120

A-11

Inclusion size range (mm) of aplastics in sherd 41FL76-61a-3.…………....... 120

A-12

Frequency of inclusions (excluding paste and voids) found in paste….……

A-13

Inclusion comparison of the original and reanalysis for sherd 41FL2-1a-4…………… 124

A-14

Inclusion comparison of the original and reanalysis for sherd 41FL2-14a-5…..……… 124

A-15

Inclusion comparison of the original and reanalysis for sherd 41FL76-1a-1………… 125

A-16

Inclusion comparison of the original and reanalysis for sherd 41FL76-2a-2……….… 125

A-17

Inclusion comparison of the original and reanalysis for sherd 41FL76-61a-3………… 126

B-1

Descripion and dimensions of artifacts collected from 41FL76 in 2014……..

139

B-2

Munsell colors of indigenous pottery from 41FL76 collected in 2014………

139

121

PART II: ARCHEOLOGICAL MONITORING OR LEVELLING AND WATER
LINE TRENCHES AT THE PROPOSED BISON PENS CAPROCK CANYONS
STATE PARK, BRISCOE COUNTY, TEXAS
Jeff Indeck
Topic

Page

Abstract………………………………………………………………………………

141

Introduction…………………………………………………………………………..

142

Environmental Background …………………………………………………………

142

Field Methods…………………………………………………………………………

143

Results………………………………………………………………………………….

148

References Cited……………………………………………………………………….

149

xii

Part II: (Caprock Canyons Bison Pens) List of Figures
Figures

Page

1

Location of the buried water/electric lines bison pen project area…………

144

2

New construction within the working pen area ……………………………. .

146

3

New fence around working pen area………………………………………

146

4

North-South trench in working pen area…………………………………….

147

5

East-West trench in working pen area……………………………………….

147

6

Trench facing south from the veterinary building……………………………..

147

7

Trench facing south towards the maintenance building……………………….

148

xiii

1. INTRODUCTION

Between the summer of 1996 and the fall of 1998, a low-level archeological mitigation project
was conducted on two sites inside the corridor of the Caprock Canyons Trailway State Park
(CCTSP; Trailway State Park) in Floyd County, Texas.

The work was performed by

archeologists from the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum (P-PHM) in Canyon, Texas, for the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD). This project was deemed necessary to document
the cultural resources at sites 41FL2 and 41FL76, and recover information that was being lost to
erosion, and possibly to increased visitor impacts from trail usage. The investigations at State
Park property were conducted under Texas Antiquities Committee Permit (TAC) #2328. This
report documents the activities and results of data recovery conducted at these two sites.
Additionally the results of archeological monitoring of land leveling and backhoe trench
excavations for water and electric lines at bison pens at the adjacent Caprock Canyons State
Park, which were conducted under the same TAC permit number, are described in Part II.

The present data recovery project arose from the January 8, 1993, acquisition from BurlingtonNorthern Railroad, of a 103 km-long portion of the abandoned Fort Worth and Denver Southern
Plains Railroad Right-of-Way (ROW, built ca. 1927 and completed in 1928) by TPWD to create
the Caprock Canyons Trailway State Park. In preparation for the opening of the ROW for the
enjoyment of public use, an intensive archeological pedestrian survey was conducted in 1993 of
the entire CCTSP ROW corridor under Texas Antiquities Committee (TAC) Permit #1217 to
assess and manage cultural resources of this new state park (Bartholomew 1995; Figure 1). This
intensive pedestrian survey began near the town of Estelline, Texas, in east-central Hall County
and following the abandoned railroad ROW southwest through Hall and Briscoe Counties to the
CCTSP termination point at the community of South Plains in north-central Floyd County.

The survey team of three professional archeologists from P-PHM documented five historic, one
mixed historic/prehistoric and ten prehistoric archeological sites within or immediately adjacent
1

to the Trailway corridor. Two of the 16 sites, 41FL2 and 41FL76, were exposed in railroad bed
cuts within the headwater canyon of Quitaque Creek (Figure 2). The presence of exposed lithic
and ceramic artifacts, bones and features in close proximity to the trail was of immediate concern
due to the potential loss of scientific information from erosion or vandalism arising from changes
in public use of the trail (Bartholomew 1995). The site numbers 41FL2 and 41FL76 are the State
of Texas site designations as recorded in the files of the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory in Austin, Texas; these sites are listed as sites A-2219 and A-2221, respectively, in
the files at the P-PHM.

In July 1993, TPWD Region 6 Resource Coordinator, Lynn Pace; Caprock Canyons State Park
Superintendent, Russell Sargent; and P-PHM Contract Archeologists, Billy R. Harrison and
Rolla Shaller visited sites 41FL2 and 41FL76 to assess site condition and discuss possible site
protection, mitigation, and management options and strategies.

The possibility of burying

exposed surface remains and reseeding the surface and cut banks were determined to be cost
prohibitive and an ineffective mitigation measure. An alternative was to collect diagnostic

Figure 1. Caprock Canyon Trailway State Park and location of sites 41FL2 and 41FL76.

2

Figure 2. Topographic setting of sites 41FL2 and 41FL76 in upper Quitaque Canyon.

cultural materials from the surfaces of the sites and to excavate, remove, and backfill the exposed
cultural features as mitigation measures. A proposed budget and work plan was developed by P­
PHM staff and submitted to TPWD to mitigate, through mapping, collection and feature
excavation, the railroad construction and erosion damage at the sites.

Unfortunately, Bill

Harrison, the project Principal Investigator (PI) passed away before the proposal was approved.

On April 20, 1996, a revised proposal was submitted to TPWD. Mr. Walter Davis, the P-PHM
Museum Director, was to serve as the project Principal Investigator (PI). Dr. A. J. Taylor, the P­
PHM Curator of Archeology, would be the project research and laboratory coordinator, while P­
PHM Cultural Resource Specialist, Mr. Fred M. Oglesby, would be the lead field investigator
and principal author of the study. Mr. Rolla H. Shaller would be the project field assistant.

3

On June 4, 1996, Interagency Cooperative Contract #346-0401 between TPWD and P-PHM to
mitigate the surface artifact evidence at sites 41FL2 and 41FL76 was approved. The project
scope of work called for seven tasks:
1) develop a compass and pace map of site 41FL2;
2) collect all surface artifacts and lithic debris from 41FL2;
3) compile a compass and pace map of 41FL76;
4) collect all surface artifacts, faunal remains and lithic debris from 41FL76;
5) excavate two fire hearths and a cache pit exposed in eroded edge of railroad cut;
6) clean, type and catalog the collected artifacts from both sites;
7) produce a report of investigations meeting professional standards and integrate all
comments from the Texas Historical Commission (THC) into a final report.

Funding for the project was derived from Title VIII “National Recreation Trails Trust Fund” as
administered by TPWD as part of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA)
of 1991. Initially, the work was to be conducted under the TAC Annual Permit #1629 issued to
TPWD. Field investigations for an initial phase of the contract were conducted between July 17
and 31, 1996. However, upon completion of partial fieldwork, Fred Oglesby, and his wife, A. J.
Taylor, accepted employment opportunities in Arizona, and left the P-PHM. Inadvertently some
field records, notes, and maps pertaining to this initial project phase became misplaced. Without
professional archeologists at P-PHM, the project languished, and the results were not available
for inclusion in the 1996 TPWD Annual Report to the THC.

The Texas Historical Commission’s Archeology Division staff agreed on February 3, 2000, to
allow Dr. Jeff Indeck, the replacement Curator of Archeology at P-PHM, to serve as the new
project PI and assume responsibility under a new TAC Permit, #2328, issued for this project.

Dr. Indeck and Rolla Shaller revisited and developed maps for both sites and conducted the
excavations at 41FL76 that exposed pit Feature 3. Several report versions were submitted to the
THC for review, but the documents were deemed to have not satisfactorily met professional
standards, so the permit was not retired. The results described herein are based on earlier report
versions, photographs from the original test excavation phase, the field shovel test forms,
4

recovered artifacts and catalog sheets, and results from the more recent field investigations. In
December, 2012, Dr. Indeck left the P-PHM to work for the National Park Service in
Washington D.C. The present report was revised with the help of Chris Lintz. Another draft
manuscript for the project was developed, submitted and approved by the Archaeology Division
of the Texas Historical Commission. Before that report was formatted for final distribution,
Rolla Shaller suggested that additional studies be conducted on the 12 potsherds from the two
sites. With TPWD authorization, P-PHM made loaned arrrangements and the sherds were
shipped to Chris Lintz in Austin, Texas, where a trait attribute analysis of these sherds was
conducted. The sherds were then mailed to Southern Plains and Southwestern archaeologists for
comments and impressions. TPWD securred additional funds to contract for petrographic studies
on the five largest sherds in the two site assemblages to provide data on cultural interactions.
This report is organized into two parts covering different projects conducted under a single TAC
permit. Part I addresses the work at site 41FL2 and 41FL76, and consists of six sections. The
introductory section identifies management aspects and provides the historical background
behind the implementation of site mitigations at archeological sites 41FL2 and 41FL76 along the
Trailway State Park mitigation. Section 2 summarizes the natural and cultural backgrounds of
the project area to provide a context for the two site settings and to delineate the general cultural
sequence, dates and names of the cultures known to occur in the region. Section 3 discusses the
field methods employed at both sites. Section 4 discusses detailed results of site 41FL2, while
Section 5 discusses the same for site 41FL76.

Section 6 provides a summary and

recommendations for continued management of these cultural resources. This is followed by
references cited in this study. Results of pottery petrographic studies conducted by staff at the
Center for Archeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio are discussed in
Appendix A. Further observations made at both sites on an August 31, 2014 field trip, and the
features and materials observed and collected during that visit are discussed in Appendix B.

Part II discusses limited archeological monitoring of ground-disturbing activities associated with
land leveling and the installation of water and electric lines at Caprock Canyon State Park in
Briscoe County, Texas, which was conducted under the same TAC permit number. No cultural
resources were identified during the monitoring process at the Bison Pens.

5

6

2. NATURAL AND CULTURAL BACKGROUND

This section provides the natural setting for the two investigated sites in Floyd County as an
introduction to the physical background of the project. Subsequent sections briefly highlight
prior archeological work in the Texas Panhandle, and then summarize the cultural sequence and
dates of cultures as a means of introducing the ages and cultures relevant for the region.

Environmental Background

The project area is located at the extreme western edge of the Rolling Red Bed Plains unit of the
High Plains Physiographic Province (Fenneman 1931).

The character of the High Plains

developed from the erosion of the Rocky Mountains, which began their uplift formation during
the Tertiary period. The eastward sloping Llano Estacado represents remnants of a series of
overlapping alluvial fans extending towards the mid-continental drainage.

However, the

northward entrenchment of the Pecos River in eastern New Mexico truncated the heads of the
east-draining rivers, and ceased further alluvial sediment contributions to these broad fans.
Subsequent erosion of the Pecos River basin towards the east formed the western escarpment of
the Llano Estacado of the High Plains, while renewed erosion of ancient tributaries and
headwaters of the present Colorado, Brazos, Red, Canadian, and North Canadian Rivers eroded
the fan and formed the eastern escarpment of the Llano Estacado.

The present project area is located within the “Breaks”, “Badlands” or “Caprock Canyonlands”
east of and below the east escarpment of the Llano Estacado in northeastern Floyd County. Sites
41FL2 and 41FL76 are located at the headwaters of Quitaque Creek, which, along with Los
Lingos Creek, flows from an area near Lone Star, Texas, and drains toward the east. Near the
town of South Plains, the creek meanders to the northeast and leaves the county, eventually
flowing into the North Pease and Pease Rivers, which are southern contributions of the Red
River. The sites themselves are only 5 to 6.5 km east of where Quitaque Creek pours over the

7

Llano Estacado escarpment. The incised canyon is 190 and 230 ft. deep canyon at sites 41FL2
and 41FL76, respectively. Numerous small spring fed streams flow year around from along the
base of the escarpment, and the canyons provide protection from inclement weather that
frequently sweep the Plains, especially during winter.

Despite the 1.3 km distance between the two archeological sites, geological maps indicate that
both are stratigraphically at the erosional contact between the bottom of the Ogallala Formation
(the Tertiary age bottom of the alluvial fans), and the eroded top of the Triassic age Dockum
Formation (Eifler et al. 1992). The Ogallala sediments are variously composed of sand, silt, clay
and gravels that may include small cobbles of quartz, quartzites, igneous and metamorphic rock
that have eroded from the Rocky Mountains. Important to prehistoric people were the regional
exposures of Tecovas chert or jasper which outcrops in some of the underlying Triassic age
formations along the escarpment and adjacent creek beds. However, no Tecovas chert outcrops
are currently documented at the two sites under consideration.

The soils in the project areas are identified as Berda loam, occurring on slopes of 5 to 12 percent
and close to drainage ways (Neitsch and Blackstock 1978). The A1 horizon (0-20 centimeters
[cm]) is a brown calcareous loam, the B1 and B1ca horizons (20-81 cm) are brown and light
reddish-brown friable calcareous loam, and the C horizon (81-157 cm) is a reddish-brown, light
reddish-brown, light brown or brown sandy loam. The management concerns for these soils are
conserving moisture and control of erosion, because runoff in this area is medium to rapid.

Flora of the areas include long- and short-stemmed grama grasses (Bouteloua eriopoda,
Bouteloua gracilis, Bouteloua curtipendula), buffalograss (Buchloe dactyloides), along with
yucca (Yucca constricta), prickly-pear (Opuntia lindheimeri), skunkbush (Rhus aromatica)
catclaw (Schrankia uncinata), mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa), hackberry (Celtis occidentalis),
western soapberry (Sapindus saponaria), cottonwood (Populus deltoides), juniper (Juniperus
pinchotii), sand plum (Prunus angustifolia), sunflower (Helianthus annuus) and a variety of
forbes and legumes.

8

Presently, the dominant game includes white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), mule deer
(Odocoileus hemionus), cotton-tail rabbit (Sylvilagus floridanus), jackrabbit (Lepus californicus),
opossum (Didelphis virginiana), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis), bobcat (Lynx rufus), coyote
(Canis latrans), quail (Callipepla squamata, Colinus virginianus), dove (Zenaida macroura),
and several species of duck (Anas crecca, A. platyrhynchos, A. acuta, A. discors). In the past,
bison, pronghorn and perhaps elk were dominant ungulates occupying the region.

According to the Floyd County soil survey manual (Neitsch and Blackstock 1978), the area
presently has a dry steppe climate characterized by hot summers and mild winters. On average
the area received only 18.75 inches (47.6 cm) of precipitation and most of it falls as summer
thunderstorms; such storms occur on average 44 days a year. Record precipitation range from
5.3 inches (1956) to 43.6 inches (1941).

Temperatures are characterized as moderate with average monthly high and low temperatures
ranging from 66.8o F to 93.2o F in July and 23.1o F to 53.4o F in January. Summer afternoon
temperatures tend to be hot, while evenings are mild. Record temperatures range from 109o F
(1953) in summer to -9o F (1963) in winter. Spring brings the greatest variation in weather
conditions. During winter, the area is periodically swept by polar Canadian air masses that
usually significantly drop the temperatures for a few days. Winter evening temperatures hover
below freezing most nights. The county has an average growing season of 213 days between the
end of spring frosts and the beginning of fall freezes.

Prevailing winds are mostly southwesterly during the winter and southerly during the summer.
Wind speeds averages 13.4 miles per hour and noon time humidity averages 42 to 50 % per
season. March and April are the windiest months with strong northwesterly winds that kick up
dust storms. Overall, secluded canyon settings, such as that at the headwaters of Quitaque Creek
offer relief from wind derived from the winter arctic cold fronts.

Despite the variations in modern weather conditions as summarized above, the Southern Plains
has likely experienced some long-term climatic variations throughout the Holocene.

Data

derived from erosional episodes, periods of soil formation, macro-fauna (especially bison)
9

micro-fauna remains (both small rodents and snails), pollen and phytoliths from dated regional
deposits reveal consistent trends, although the timing, duration and intensity of these events are
relative, rather than absolute. These Holocene climatic trends consist of dry periods before
10,500 before present (B.P.), a long moist period from ca. 10,500 to 7,500 B.P., to a long,
moderately intense dry period with two intense peaks separated by some amelioration between
ca. 7,500 and 2,500 B.P. followed by a relatively moist period ca. 2,500 to 1,000 B.P. ending
with a moderately dry period from 1,000 B.P. to present. While these changes in the relative
amount of precipitation can be readily delineated, the fluctuations in corresponding temperature
are harder to reconstruct. Note that cool moist intervals will have much different effect on the
composition of biotic communities than during warm moist intervals. The expressions of these
climatic changes on biotic communities are currently impossible to extrapolate to local
situations. But it is equally important to recognize that plants, animals and the people that used
them were parts of a dynamic system.

Cultural Background

Archeological studies have been conducted for more than a century in the Texas panhandle.
Most investigations have focused on select geographical areas (e.g. the Canadian River valley)
due to unusual and highly visible prehistoric structural remains; other intense levels of
investigations have focused on select time periods and cultures (e.g. Paleo-Indian, and Late
Prehistoric periods). Some culture periods, such as the Archaic period, are not well understood
due, in part, to a lack of sustained funds and research needed to examine the range of sites in
diverse areas and, in part, to geological circumstances that have not preserved sediments
containing archeological sites of the time period.

Archeological excavations in Floyd County are scant. The main published projects include
studies on: The Cogdell Burial in Floyd County Texas (41FL45) (Word and Fox 1975), Floydada
Country Club Site (41FL1) (Word 1963, 1991), The Merrell-Taylor Village Site (41FL19)
(Guffee 1976), The Montgomery Site (41FL17) (Northern 1979; Word 1965), and Coronado’s
Campsite (Flint and Flint 1997; Lintz and Shaller 2011).
10

Considerable archeological work has been conducted in the panhandle region which has led to
the delineation of a cultural sequence to the region. Historically, labor-intensive archeological
and paleontological projects were ideal for such depression era New Deal (1933-1941) programs
as with Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) and the Works Progress
Administration (WPA) to help lift the economy out of the depression and get the country moving
after the Dust Bowl era. These large-scale digs provide considerable data from a few localities.

In general, intense archeological studies have been conducted on public lands, including
reservoirs (e.g. Palo Duro Reservoir, Sanford Reservoir [Lake Meredith], Greenbelt Reservoir,
Tule Reservoir, Lake Allen Henry Reservoir), recreational parks and monuments (e.g. Alibates
National Monument, Palo Duro Canyon State Park, Caprock Canyons State Park, Lubbock Lake
National Historic Landmark), federal and state wildlife refuges and grassland preserves (e.g. Rita
Blanca and Black Kettle National Grasslands, Muleshoe and Buffalo Lake National Wildlife
Refuges, and Gene Howe Wildlife Management Area).

Numerous archeological studies have been conducted on a multitude of energy-related projects
(oil and gas wells, pipelines, wind power projects, power transmission lines, helium plant
projects, etc.), some proposed and existing military related projects (MX-missile project, Pantex
Plant, etc.), and a few Soil Conservation Service impoundment projects (mostly in the Canadian
River Basin). Several archeological studies have also been conducted in conjunction with
highway development projects.

Considerable archaeological information from the upper Texas panhandle region has come from
such avocational groups as the Texas Archeological Society, Norpan Archeological Society, the
Panhandle Archeological Society, and even the Boy Scouts. Other data has come from college
and university field schools and graduate thesis research or salvage contract projects. Over the
past few decades, private landowners have shown considerable interest in funding or allowing
cultural resource excavations on their property.

The studies conducted at the M-Cross Ranch

and Courson Archeological Program are notable recent examples.

11

It is not the intent of this section to pull together the knowledge of prehistoric cultures from these
diverse studies. Fortunately, several excellent regional syntheses have been developed that
provide a useful cultural outline for the Southern Plains region. The most prominent syntheses
covering the span of prehistory in the panhandle have been developed by Hofman et al. (1989),
Hughes (1991) and Boyd (1997). Not all of these summaries have employed the same cultural
names, although the basic sequences are similar. The following culture chronology employs the
sequence and terminology proposed by Boyd (1997). Interested readers are directed to these
sources for detailed discussion on the range of available studies.

The cultural chronology of the Caprock Canyonlands as developed by Boyd (1997) is considered
to be among the best. The cultural sequence consists of six developmental or technological
stages that are sequentially organized into periods. These stages may have one or more dominant
named archeological cultures based on the materials composition.

These cultures do not

conform to modern ethnographic groups, but rather represent people who generally occupied a
contiguous area and had similar diagnostic tools, material goods and subsistence strategies. The
six technological periods consist of Paleoindian period (9,500 B.C. to 6,500 B.C.), Archaic
period (6,500 B.C.-A.D. 500), Late Prehistoric I (A.D. 500 to 1100), Late Prehistoric II (A.D.
1100 to 1541), Protohistoric (A.D. 1541 to 1750/1850), and Historic (A.D. 1750/1850 to 1950).

Paleo-Indian, or Paleo-American, Period (9,500 – 6,500 B.C.).

This period consists of the interval reflecting the earliest cultures known to occur in the
Americas. Considerable interest surrounds the timing and route of the earliest arrival and the
hallmarks or diagnostic implements used by these early cultures. This period is usually defined
by a series of named cultures who coincided and briefly preceeded the extinction of the terminal
Pleistocene mega-fauna (mammoths, mastodons, extinct forms of bison). Recent research has
suggested that there might have been two distinctive cultural traditions—one using stemmed
base points found primarily along the northwest coast and Cascade Range (e.g. Paisley Cave,
Oregon), which rarely moved east of the Great Basin and another using lanceolate points
commonly found in the Eastern United States and Great Plains. The latter sequence of cultures
12

pertain to the present study area. As previously mentioned, the Eastern Tradition included, for
the most part, a series of distinctive lanceolate projectile points with ground stems and bases,
which rarely had corner or basal notches. Other implements included a series of gravers, burins,
spurred end scrapers and knives, as well as bone sewing needles, awls, and bone shaft wrenches
and bone and shell jewelry of notched discs. Their chipped stone implements were often made
of cherts from far-ranging areas, which suggests that they were highly mobile in their residential
patterns. Their subsistence practices were broad-sprectrum, although archaeologists have often
discovered bones of large extinct animals at their sites. The climate was generally believed to be
cooler and moister than at present, but a brief drought (the Younger Dryas interval) has also been
postulated to have occurred during the earlier part of the Paleo-Indian period.

A considerable number of large excavations have been conducted on Paleo-Indian sites across
the Southern Plains. The best stratified example, which delineates a stratified series of cultures
is at Lubbock Lake (Johnson 1988). Based on this and other sites, several named Paleo-Indian
“cultures” have been defined primarily on the technological and morphological form of their
ground stemmed lanceolate dart points. These cultures include Clovis (9,500 to 9,000 B.C.),
Folsom (8,800 to 8,300 B.C.), Plainview (ca. 8,000 B.C.) and Firstview (ca. 6,600 B.C.).

Archaic Period (6,500 B.C. – A.D. 500)

The Archaic period is chiefly characterized by a series of cultures who primarily hunted
essentially modern game using a spear-thrower (atlatl) and large “dart” points. Unlike the
previous lanceolate hunting implements, the Archaic projectile points reflect a range of stemmed
forms with basal, and corner notches, and shoulder barbed-to-non-barbed forms.

Other

diagnostic implements include choppers, gouges, and ground stone basin slabs and manos for
processing grass seeds. The use of hot rock cooking in open hearths and earth ovens developed
during the Archaic period. The paleoclimatic data suggests that conditions were dry throughout
most of the Archaic period and the sizes of the “large game” tended to become much smaller in
response to short grasses growing under drought conditions.

13

Across most of the Southern Plains, the dart points exploded into dozens of forms, many of
which are temporally significant to geographically-restrictive named cultures. The diversity of
cherts used in making tools indicates that Archaic folk were not as mobile as their predecessors,
and the presence of cemeteries in some areas indicates that Archaic people were defining and
maintaining territories. The Archaic lifestyle was largely based on a hunting and gathering way
of life supplemented by limited exchange, although in some areas of Texas and the Southern
Plains, there may be rare occurrence of some exotic goods (e.g. ground stone gorgets,
bannerstones, and lunate stones) that suggest broader interaction, perhaps with ideological
connections to larger areas—especially the to the eastern United States.

Based on the diversity of point styles, the Archaic Period is often divided into three temporal
units: Early, Middle and Late. However, on the Southern Plains, little is known about the Early
and most of the Middle Archaic. Studies at Lake Allen Henry near Justiceburg suggest that the
arid climate resulted in widespread erosion that has removed most deposits containing evidence
of these early cultures (Blum 1989).

Few large-scale excavations have been conducted on Archaic sites near the project area. Those
that have occurred have examined mostly the Late Archaic assemblages, characterized by large
corner notched points (e.g. Marcos, Marshall, and Palmillas dart points), which are often
associated with bison kill sites and campsites. One cultural term applied to sites with these kinds
of points is the Little Sunday Complex based on extremely limited excavations at a site in Palo
Duro Canyon conducted by Jack Hughes (1955). More recently, large scale excavations
conducted on sites in the Canadian River valley have declined to employ the Little Sunday
Complex term, and simply attribute the materials to an undifferentiated Late Archaic occupation
(Quigg et al 2010).

Studies of private collections in and north of the Canadian River suggests that there may be
stronger Archaic affinities with people from the cental and northern Plains than central Texas, as
reflected by the similarities in point forms (e.g. McKean, Oxbow, Mallory, Yonkee, Pelican
Lake, Besant, etc.; Brosowske 2012). Unfortunately, no large-scale excavations have recovered

14

assemblages containing these point types, and no other named cultures are attributed to these
remains.

Late Prehistoric Period (A.D. 500 – 1550)

Sometime between 100 B.C. and A.D. 500 new technologies involving the introduction of
ceramics and the bow and arrow appeared on the Southern High Plains. Jack Hughes refers to
the post-Archaic period as the “Neo-Indian period” as a contrast to “Meso-Indian” (Archaic) and
“Paleo-Indians”, but this term has not won favor outside of some parts of Texas. The appearance
of pottery and the bow and arrow did not occur simultaneously. Furthermore, the earliest pottery
and arrow heads have various styles indicating that they arrived in the area from different
cultural traditions. Possibly the horticultural use of domesticated plants (e.g. initially rye grass,
marsh elder, goosefoot and later corn, beans and perhaps squash) might have coincided with the
arrival of these new technological developments.

Due to clear ceramic diversity, some

contemporaneous cultural differences can be delineated with some precision. Thus, Doug Boyd
(1997) subdivides the Late Prehistoric period into the Late Prehistoric I and Late Prehistoric II
periods. James Gunnerson (1985) uses the culturally neutral terms of Early, Middle periods to
coincide with Boyd’s Periods and applies the Late Ceramic period to what Boyd calls
Protohistoric period.

Late Prehistoric I/Early Ceramic (A.D. 500 to 1100)

The Late Prehistoric I period (equivalent to Gunnerson’s Early Ceramic period) is used to
generally refer to the earliest ceramic and bow/arrow using cultures that occurred during the first
millennium A.D. when the region had abundant moisture.

The common hallmark is

characterized by small corner-notched arrow points (called Scallorn points) that resemble the
large Marcos dart points found in the Late Archaic, and it is clear that both bow/arrow and
atlatl/dart technologies were contemporaneously used for several hundred years.

The new

ceramic and bow/arrow technologies appear to be an addition to the indigenous Late Archaic
15

cultures in the northern part of the Texas panhandle (Hughes 1962; Quigg et al. 1993). Here the
ceramics tend to be thick-walled, large-mouthed, conically-shaped, cord-marked jars that
strongly resemble diagnostic remains from the Plains Woodland complexes (especially the Keith
Focus of Kansas) that ultimately were derived from the westward spread of traits several hundred
years earlier from the Mississippi River Valley. These “Plains Woodland” sites in the Texas
Panhandle occur primarily north of the Canadian River, and the sites with Plains Woodland
ceramics are sometimes called the Lake Creek Complex (Hughes 1962). No houses are currently
known from this complex, and it appears that the Lake Creek folks retained a similar relatively
mobile settlement-subsistence practice to the previous pattern of the Archaic Little Sunday folks,
with the addition of new ceramic and projectile point traits.

In the southern and southeastern plains, a separate culture developed possibly involving an actual
movement of Mogollon people from southeastern New Mexico across the southern Llano
Estacado who settled in the Rolling Redbed Plains and Caprock Canyonland areas. Their pottery
was a smoothed-surface brownware jars, and they used both Scallorn arrrows and a distinctive
Deadman’s arrow points with serrated blades and straight stems. Archaeologists refer to these
folks as the Palo Duro Complex, and excavations at several of their sites have yielded evidence
of rectangular houses.

Domesticated corn is recovered with some frequency in this area.

However, the region is also known for several bison kill sites in which exclusively large Late
Archaic style atlatl dart points were found among bones dating to the first millennium A.D.
Thus, it seems that the atlatl technology was retained as a specialized hunting implement,
whereas the bow/arrow was employed to obtain smaller game animals (Tomka 2013).

Late Prehistoric II/Middle Ceramic (A.D. 1100 to 1550)

The Late Prehistoric II period (sometimes called the Middle Ceramic period) refers to a series of
cultures who evolved different forms of ceramics and arrow points and lived in substantial semi­
permanent houses. Climatic conditions during most of this period tended to be progressively
drier than before. Homestead and hamlet sites of this period especially in the Canadian River
valley have been intensely investigated from multiple excavations largely because these Plains
16

Indians built their houses with stone foundations that were easy to detect. More recent work has
shown that there is a much wider range of known architectural diversity (e.g. masonry and nonmasonry structures and deep to shallow pit houses), and some of the cultural constructs of this
period are being questioned and revised (Brosowske 2002; Lintz 2011; Quigg, et al. 2013).

Most of the defined Late Prehistoric II cultures occur in the upper Panhandle, and comparable
occupations in the Rolling Redbed Plains during this interval are not well understood nor
documented. The named cultures in the upper panhandle include the Antelope Creek phase, the
Buried City Complex, and the Zimms Complex (Brosowske 2002; Hughes 1991; Lintz 2011).
The differences among these relate to slight differences in house forms, frequencies in ceramic
decorations and ceramic temper agents, and the abundance and sources of external contacts
represented by the occurrence of non-local cherts used to make chipped stone tools.

Overall, the diagnostic implements include large elongated-shaped, cord-marked pottery with or
without incised and punctated upper bodies, finger-gouged rims, and impressed or punctated lips.
The large dart points decline markedly during Late Prehistoric II and are replaced by oval to
diamond-shaped “Harehay” knives, drills, end and side scrapers, choppers and axes.

The

projectile points are dominated by small triangular unnotched (Fresno type) points and side
notched forms (Washita and Harrell types). The cultures have a rich and diverse bone tool
assemblage consisting of tibia digging sticks, scapulae trowels and squash knives, awls, shaft
straighteners, and other remains.

There is also a marked increase in trade wares with

Southwestern Puebloan cultures as reflected by painted and glazed pottery, marine shell and
turquoise jewelry, and obsidian.

The semi-sedentary cultures were growing corn and beans much more than during the Late
Prehistoric I period. However wild plant gathering and hunting (especially bison, some deer and
antelope) were the dominant animals in the subsistence resource base. The expansion of trade
networks has been attributed to buffering mechanisms that developed among trade partners over
a wide region so trade partners could supplement foodstuff when localized droughts occurred.
The end of the Late Prehistoric II (ca. A.D. 1500) is attributed to the possible arrival of
Athabascan-speaking (Apachean?) groups and perhaps the intensification of drought conditions.
17

Protohistoric/ Late Ceramic Period (A.D. 1550 to 1760/1860)

The Protohistoric period (sometimes called the Late Ceramic period), coincides with the collapse
of the sedentary cultures marking the Late Prehistoric II and the arrival of the initial Spanish
entradas. Three archeologically-named manifestations existed in western Oklahoma and the
Texas panhandle during the 16th through early 18th centuries.

They are marked by semi­

permanent to relatively moble hunting cultures who relied on dog travois and often thin, dark
gray grit-tempered plainware pottery. In western Oklahoma, the Edwards or Wheeler Complex
and in the lower Texas panhandle, the Garza Complex are marked by a series of sites
characterized by moderately large circular ditch earthworks and an abundance plainware pottery.
In a few places, such as Blanco Canyon in Crosby County, where sweetwater occurred in a
region commonly containing gyp water, regular exchange centers arose, possibly comparable to
the rendevous sites of the northern Plains. In these sheltered canyons, the sites contain abundant
contemporaneous trade goods from the Southwestern Puebloans and Southeastern Caddos.
House forms associated with these complexes are poorly known. In the Palo Duro Canyon and
Canadian valley of Texas is the contemporaneous Tierra Blanca Complex, which has circular
stone foundation structures and plain pottery also associated with abundant Southwestern
exchange pottery. Projectile points are most often the small triangular unnotched arrow point
(Fresno type), and the side and basal notched (Harrell Point) types. The Garza Complex sites in
the lower panhandle often have shouldered and unshouldereed points with a deep basal notch
(Lott and Garza types). Some of these complexes have exceptionally large stone end scrapers,
suggesting that bison hides may have been a major commodity used for exchange. Several of
these semi-sedentary groups may be tentatively linked to historic Wichita or Pawnee groups.
The prolonged contact of indigenous groups and Spanish setttlers in New Mexico, led to the
spread of domestic livestock and animals (horses, cattle, sheep, mules, burros, etc.) beyond the
control of the Spanish settlements. This increased access by indigenous groups to European
trade commodies—especially metal and ceramic containers, glass beads, metal knives, files,
chisles, and metal arrow points. By the latter half of the 18th century, horses became such a
valued commodity, and their abundance attracted numerous First Nations people to change their
settlement-subsistence practices to effectively pursue bison herds.
18

This brief period coincides

with the rise of the classic equestrain Plains Indian culture characterized by a highly nomadic
horse culture involving people living in skin tipis and hunting bison from horseback. Clearly,
the procurement of bison robes for exchange was important to many people residing in and
passing through the area. Although the main tribes claiming the southern Plains region were
Apaches, Comanches and Kiowa, at least 14 other federally-recognized tribes are known to have
periodically visited Spanish settlements in New Mexico via the Plains area to get horses or trade
goods (Winter 1988). The mix of diverse indigenous cultures and languages led groups to
develop fragile alliances that permitted long distance exchanges one season and pitched battles
the next. The period is also marked by a distinctive kind of rock art that depicts tipis, mounted
horsemen, rifles, and other aspects of the “Plains Biographical style.” The end of this period is
often placed at A.D. 1750 due to the settlement of Spanish missions in central Texas; however,
these communities had very little influence on the equestrian nomads occupying and dominating
the Southern High Plains. Cultural changes among the indigenous groups of the region did not
occur until the end of the U.S. Civil War when the government could turn attention to using a
military solution (the Red River War) to solve “the Indian problem.”

Historic Period (A.D. 1760/1860 to present)

Although some researchers regard the start of the Historic Period with the arrival of explorers
leaving the earliest written records, in this case, the historic period begins with Euro-American
attempts to settle and occupy the Southern High Plains, which, until 1860, was controlled by
indigenous equestrian nomads. This phase is reflected in a material culture dominated by
commercially manufactured ceramic dishes and crockery, metal goods and glass materials.

The earliest attempts to occupy the region were by Hispanic and Anglo traders (Comancheros)
who built dugouts and later Hispanic sheep herders (Pastores) from New Mexico who built
masonry plazas (Guffee 1976; Taylor, 1984, 1997). In the case of the New Mexican sheep
herders, permanent settlements in the western Canadian River valley did not occur until the end
of the Red River War in 1874.

After this time, the Southern Plains were opened to Euro-

American settlement and a series of specialized industries, which included ranching, farming, oil

19

and gas field development, and railroads and highways for the commercial development of
newly-established towns, and cities.

20

3. RESEARCH METHODS

This section discusses the field methods used to investigate prehistoric sites 41FL2 and 41FL76.
The fieldwork was conducted between July 1996 and November 1998. Similar surface survey
strategies were conducted at both sites, but the recognition of hearth and pit features at 41FL76
required that excavation strategies be used on the latter site to reduce the visible signature of
these features.

In addition, slight differences in field methods arose from the changes in

principal investigators and staff between the initial and later phases of fieldwork following the
hiatus of several months in which the project was dormant. In a few instances, some aspects of
fieldwork were not consistently followed during the later field phase.

Field Methods

The pedestrian survey was conducted at both site areas within the boundaries of the TPWD
ROW. At both sites, permanent site datum points were established at distinctive railroad features
along the line, and the Universal Trans Mercator (UTM) location of these points served as the
basis for developing site maps. The maps were developed using compass and pace methods.
Archeologists systematically walked 5 m to 10 m wide transects on the relatively flat bench
surfaces at both sides and visually inspected all exposed rail bed cuts and areas of sheet wash for
artifacts and features.

At 41FL2, five concentrations of artifact subareas were mapped to

potentially provide some intra-site patterning for collected artifacts; no subareas were delineated
at 41FL76. Efforts were made to collect all artifacts at 41FL2, but at the request of TPWD State
Park personnel, a large number of unmodified surface bone fragments at 41FL76 was not
collected. Surface artifacts were collected separately and bagged for transport to the laboratory.

The field inspection at 41FL2 showed that no features, ashy midden deposits or buried artifacts
were exposed in the railroad cut profile. Due to relatively good surface visibility, no shovel
testing was conducted on this site to sample subsurface deposits. In contrast, comparable
21

inspections at 41FL76 noted two concentrated burned rock areas, an elongated or semispherically-shaped area of discolored sediments (widest in the middle and narrower near the
surface), some near-surface buried artifacts, and an ashy midden.

These two burned rock

concentrations were designated as Features 1 and 2, and the elongated pit was designated as
Feature 3; all were photographed before and during stages of excavations.

Two 30 x 30 cm shovel tests (ST) were dug to examine separate near-surface artifact areas and a
single 1 x 1 m test pits (TP) were placed over the two burned rock areas and the elongated pit
feature. The test pits were oriented to magnetic north and placed in such a manner that the entire
cultural hearth or elongated pit feature could be exposed in the separate 1 x 1 m TP units. The
fill from the ST and TPs over the two hearth features were excavated in 10 cm thick levels to
culturally-sterile deposits, and the matrix was screened through ¼ inch hardware cloth. The rock
hearth feature clasts and sediment matrices around the two hearths were bagged for analysis and
fine scale (1/8 inch) screening.
Difficulties in locating the pit feature were encountered during the initial testing effort and this
pit was investigated during a separate field trip. Due to the greater depth, as evidenced by the
profile of the elongated shape pit feature, five 15-cm thick excavation levels were used to
investigate the TP placed over pit Feature 3. Vertical depth was measured from the northwest
corner of the test pit. The fill from these upper five levels were field-screened through ¼ inch
mesh hardware cloth. At a depth of 75 cm below surface, human remains were recognized
within the elongated pit fill, and the excavation strategies were modified. The bone elements
were exposed using small hand tools and the elements were left on soil pedestals for
documentation. The sediments around the bone were removed as a single 27 cm-thick unit as
Level 6 (75 to 103 cm below surface). All sediments from Level 6 and associated with the
human remains were collected as a single bulk sample for screening and sorting in the
laboratory. The burial feature was mapped and photographed. Each bone element was assigned
an individual field number as it was removed from the ground; the element was individually
wrapped in tissue for padding, and then placed in a bag and field container to minimize transport
damage back to the museum.

22

Field records consisted of site maps, level forms, select plan and profile sketches for features,
photographic logs, and field notes that included sketches. Color photographs were taken to show
the representative site conditions at both sites and of the ST, TP, and features before, during and
after excavations at 41FL76.

Laboratory Methods

Upon completion of the fieldwork, all artifacts and samples were returned to the P-PHM for
cleaning, processing and analysis. Site records and photographic logs were filed in notebooks.
All artifacts were washed, and individually labeled with an assigned catalog number to track the
provenience of all collected specimens. The site catalog system at P-PHM consists of individual
index cards that list counts to distinct tool types, or groups of similar artifacts from a shovel test,
or test unit level or collection area on a specific field date. The artifacts were inventoried and
counted to develop analysis tables. Lithic materials were identified for tools and chipped stone
debris at 41FL2, but they were not systematically identified during the analysis of chipped sotne
artifacts from 41FL76. Also, no rigorous attempt was made to identify the species or elements of
collected faunal remains. However, bone elements from 41FL76, Feature 3 were examined by a
physical anthropologist and forensic biologist in order to identify and inventory all human
remains.
Soil samples were screened through ¼ and 1/8 inch hardware cloth screen to retrieve the kinds of
artifacts and cobbles that would missed by coarse (¼ inch) screen processing in the field.
Weights of rocks from hearth Features 1 and 2 from 41FL76 were sorted into lithic material
types and individually weighed. The bulk sediment matrix associated with the Feature 3 burial
was similarly screened and sorted for tiny grave good associations. No flotation analysis,
radiocarbon dating, pollen or other specialized studies were conducted under this contract, but
the sediment samples were retained for future study.

These remains are stored in the P-PHM curation facilities along with associated field forms,
photographs, and other records. At one point, a work-study graduate student started to develop
23

an electronic spreadsheet for the remains from 41FL76, Feature 3; however, this effort employed
the P-PHM site numbers and apparently overlapped, reused, and changed catalog numbers from
the index cards. Efforts were made during analysis to eliminate the duplicate use of site numbers
in this report. Similarly, differences in the bone counts per provenience lot most likely reflect
recent breakage. Some caliche pebbles were also deemed to be non-cultural soil formation items
and were discarded. Unfortunately the catalog cards also referred to unmodified flake debris as
“unworked stone” meaning that they were not modified or worked into tools; however, it is
often hard to distingush flake artifacts from natural unworked pebbles from the index cards
alone. In such cases, the collections were sometimes consulted to verify whether they were
indeed flakes, and the reliability of identifications as stated on the catalog cards.

Due to the possibility of obtaining cultural affiliation and temporal data from the prehistoric
ceramic sherds, the pottery from both sites was loaned to Chris Lintz in Austin for attribute
analysis. The sherds were then forwarded to the Office of Archeological Studies of the New
Mexico Department of Cultural Affairs in Santa Fe, where Mr. Reggie Wiseman attempted to
identify the types based on his Southwestern expertise. The sherds were also submitted to Dr.
Richard Drass from the Oklahoma Archeological Survey and Dr. Tim Perttula Archeological and
Environmental Consultants in Austin, to determine if the sherds could be related to defined
ceramic types from the Southwest, western Oklahoma or the Caddo Area.

A ceramic trait attribute analysis was done for each sherd. Attributes recorded consisted of
potsherd provenience, general ware classification (plain vs. decorated by cord-marking or
painting), and vessel portion (jar rim, neck, or jar/bowl body). Sherd size was obtained by
placing the sherd on centimeter graph paper, and the recorded sherd size represents minimum
number of centimeter grid units that encompassing the entire sherd.

Sherd thickness was

measured in mm using a sliding Vernier caliper, and sherd weight was collected with an Ohas
bar scale.
Next, a series of observations were obtained on the breakage characteristics to provide insights
into the quality of paste, and vessel manufacture. These included the shape of the breakage
(straight, curved, irregular) and the crispness or crumbliness of the fracture as is an indication of
paste quality. Low fired ceramics tend to have crumbly paste, while vessels fired at higher
24

temperatures produce straight breaks with crisp edges. Obviously, breakage along clay coils can
also affect the straightness. So the edges were examined to see if the straight edges had
concave/convex profiles or consistency with either the interior or exterior edges tapering in a
consistent direction. If breakage occurs along a coil, then the bonding is not complete. Another
observation related to paste is whether the fracture has step-like or split cross-sections. Sherds
with this trait are believed to have poorly executed paddled melding of coils, such as the interior
or exterior surfaces are compressed relative the compaction of the clays in the middle of the
coils.
The next series of observations relate to the kind, relative abundance, and size of temper
inclusions in the clay pastes. These observations were made with a hand lens, which was only
able to detect only the most obvious non-plastic inclusion. Maximum temper sizes were also
noted. If large chunks of rock (grit), crushed sherds (grog), or organic (bone, shell) inclusions
were present, then the temper was probably intentionally added. But if very fine aplastic temper
was present, then the paste was probably characterized by a natural sandy paste from the raw
material source. The form and color of the temper also indicated the general sources of the
aplastic temper: rounded particles were derived from stream-rolled sediments in modern or
ancient deposits while angular inclusions suggest tempering from crushed rock grit. Some rock
contain bonded multiple minerals suggesting that the rock crushing failed to separate various
grains, so the identification of granite or other compound mineral rocks are possible.
The sherd color on the exterior, interior, and core provides insights into the firing atmosphere. A
Munsell Soil Color Chart (1988 version) was used to standardize data collection. In general,
sherds fired in an oxygen-rich atmosphere tend to be white, red, or brown depending on the clay
sources; while those with darker hues, gray to black, reflect an oxygen-starved or reduced
atmosphere. More information on the firing atmosphere is derived from the combinations of
colors of the paste, and interior and exterior surfaces. The color classifications proposed by
Teltser (1993) were employed in this study to complement information on firing atmosphere.
Finally, a series of observations were made on interior and exterior surface finishes. These
include the presence of polish and polishing striations, degree of smoothing, floating (as
measured by surface temper presence), wiping striations, and occurrence of added slips and
washes for abrupt color changes.
25

Other surface observations relate to the form of decorations, including incising, engraving, or the
addition of nodes, appliques, handles, or impressions for cord-markings. Cord-marking was the
only decoration observed in these site assemblages. Observations on cord-marking included the
depth, clarity and orientation of impressions, as well as the twist and width of the cordage.
Obviously the impressions on clay are mirror images of the cordage, so that Z-twist impressions
are made from S-twist multi-ply cords.
Upon completion of the initial artifact assemblage study from the two sites, five of the largest
prehistoric potsherds, representing single examples of different ceramic wares from each site,
were submitted to the Center for Archeological Research, University of Texas San Antonio, for
petrographic analysis of paste and temper inclusions. The temper identification results from their
petrographic research helped identify probable manufacturing source areas and movements or
interactions of the people briefly occupying these two sites. These results are provided in
Appendix A.
Appendix B reports results of a brief field visit to both sites in August 2014. The recent visits
add information about the site setting and artifact distributions at both sites. Appendix B also
describes and illustrated the handful of new artifacts found at both sites during this recent visit.
The recently collected artifacts were photographed and left at the P-PHM with other artifacts
from the site.

26

4. SITE 41FL2

Introduction

Site 41FL2 is situated at an elevation of 2,960 to 2,990 ft above mean sea level (msl). on a
colluvial bench near the base of the left (north) side of Quitaque Creek near the headwaters of
the canyon incised some 1,130 ft below the High Plains surface. This bench is fairly broad on
both sides of the canyon and might have formed as an erosional remnant along the unconformity
of the Ogallala and Dockum Formations. The site reportedly covers 150 m NE-SW by 80 m
(NW-SE) area on a peninsular-like rise above and north of Quitaque Creek, which is defined by
a looping meander of the Creek on the west and an unnamed drainage on the east. This size fits
very well the dimensions of the peninsular ridge. Whereas the site bench area gently slopes
towards the south, it is prominently defined by steeper slopes nearly 12.2 m (40 ft) tall to the
west, south and east of the peninsula.

The site peninsula has been bisected northeast to southwest by a cut for the rail bed. In addition
to the rail bed cut, much of the site within the TPWD-owned ROW has been borrowed ca. 1927­
1928 to obtain sediments for fill in other areas along the rail bed. In some places, as much as 2
m or more of sediment thickness have been removed, leaving only a small remnant of the site
intact within the Trailway State Park ROW (Figures 3 and 4). Other intact portions of the site
possibly remain, buried up-slope and down-slope on private lands adjacent to the TPWD ROW.

The site was covered in short grass and other vegetation variously consisting of plums, mesquite
and juniper. Observations in 1958 noted that “live water begins” just west and upstream of the
site area. The presence of these seep springs are interpreted to support the presence of the
geological unconformity and the contact with the upper Dockum Formation.

27

Figure 3. Trailway State Park railroad bed cut through site 41FL2. Facing northeast.

Figure 4. Trailway State Park railroad bed and adjacent soil removal disturbance at site 41FL2.
Facing southeast.
28

Site 41FL2 was found and recorded by Mr. James Word of Floydada, Texas, on September 10,
1958. Mr. Word’s site form mentions that he surface-collected several kinds of projectile points,
including one Tortugas point, one Fresno point, five Scallorn points, one Travis-like point, one
unidentified finely-flaked point midsection, and one corner-notched point with an indented base.
Other items from the site include one stemmed knife, one four-beveled (Harahey) knife, five
flake knives; eight scrapers, including “thumb” scrapers, turtle-back scrapers, and end and side
scrapers; one awl or drill stem; one graver; two manos, and several potsherds ranging in color
from cream, black, red and brown.

The range of diagnostic points clearly reflects multi­

component occupations possibly ranging from Middle Archaic (Travis-like) through Late
Prehistoric I and II, and possibly Protohistoric periods. Some diagnostic materials (e.g. Tortugas
point, Travis point) are types that more commonly occur great distances from the Southern
Plains, yet resemble other indigenous tool forms (e.g. Friday Biface knife and resharpened,
shoulder-less varieties of Palmillas, Lange, Marcos or Marshall dart points) occurring with Late
Prehistoric I period bison hunting sites.

Mr. Word's site form is accompanied by a site sketch map showing that it extends over an
expansive area on both sides of Quitaque Creek. The 1958 form does not report the dimensions
of the site, and the generalized configuration of the creek, tributaries, high plains escarpment
edges, and field roads do not accurately reflect the attributes shown on a modern topographic
map. Based on the dimensions of the site area relative to Quitaque Creek, the site perhaps
measures 450 by 450 m area, which represents an area nearly 17 times larger than the current
registered size of 41FL2 in the Texas Site Atlas database. Insofar as the proveniences of the
various diagnostic dart points reported by Word were not recorded, there is no way to attribute
the enigmatic Travis and Tortugas points to the portion of the site currently regarded as 41FL2.

In support of this contention of a smaller site area, the 1993 site form filed for the initial Rails-toTrails survey claims that “Word’s original record probably lumped (together) several sites from
varying ages.” The 1993 CCTSP survey project redefined the site as the smaller peninsular area,
reported above, which predominately contained the Prehistoric I affiliations attributed to the
Woodland/Palo Duro Complex.

These affiliations may be supported by the recovery of a

29

Deadman’s arrow point made of Tecovas jasper, a basal fragment of an unidentifiable light­
weight Alibates agate dart point, a mid-section of a Tecovas jasper four-beveled knife, and a
single bit graver fragment made of Edwards chert (Bartholomew 1995).

Mitigation Phase

The data recovery investigations of erosional impacts at 41FL2 were performed periodically
during July, 1996. These efforts included collecting exposed diagnostic stone tools, ceramics and
debitage. The fieldwork also developed a compass-and-pace map of the site, defining the
boundaries within the TPWD property, and taking photographs to document current conditions.

The pedestrian survey used 5 to 10 m wide transect intervals within the TPWD ROW boundaries
that extended from the south meander of Quitaque Creek to the northern site boundary near the
north creek meander. The 41FL2 site datum was established at the northeast sidewall on the
north end of the concrete bridge over the south meander of Quitaque Creek at UTM location
297544 E, 3789078 N, Zone 14. The TPWD ROW boundaries were also measured from the
center of the rail bed to the east and west ROW fence lines. All exposed rail bed cuts and sheet
wash areas were visually inspected. No features were noted during the 1996 fieldwork, but two
possible hearth rock concentrations were found in the north cut bank. Surface materials were
collected from five distinct arbitrarily defined areas as a means of possibly discerning differences
in culture or activity within the site. These five areas are defined in Figure 5 as follows:
Area I: Surface and exposed cut bank of an elevated rectangular-shaped intact site remnant
measuring about 7.5 by 46 m (ca. 345 m2 area) near the middle of the site southeast of the
rail bed. This area represents remnants of the original geological bench between two
borrow pits (Areas II and III).
Area II: Borrow pit surface, cut bank, and disturbed area southwest of Area I; southeast of the
rail bed.
Area III: Borrow pit surface, cut bank and disturbed area northeast of Area I; southeast of the
rail bed.

30

Area IV: Geological bench surface and cut bank in the southern portion of the northwest of the
rail bed. This relatively intact area is crossed by a field road along the southwest (Figure
5). Not mapped is a 40 to 60 cm tall earthen berm measuring 5 to 6 m wide that parallels
the north side of the railroad cut to prevent slope wash from eroding the railroad cut.
Area V: Surface, cut bank, and disturbed areas within the north portion of the northeast rail bed.

Due to the extensive disturbances within most of the TPWD property, no shovel tests were dug.

Figure 5. Site map of 41FL2 showing relative locations of surface collection areas.

31

Material Culture

The artifact assemblage from 41FL2 contains 139 items that include six chipped stone tools, 77
pieces of flake debitage, six fire-cracked rock fragments three unworked pebbles, three
freshwater mussel shell fragments, 41 fragmentary animal bone scraps, and three potsherds. The
six diagnostic chipped stone tools and three ceramic sherds are regarded as finished tools, tool
fragments or incomplete stages of tool manufacture.

These nine artifacts are individually

described before summaries are provided of non-diagnostic flake debris, and shell and bone
scraps. Following discussions of the artifact assemblage, analysis will focus on the distribution
of these remains by collection area in an effort to discern differences in use or occupations at
various parts of the site within the TPWD property limits of the site.

Chipped Stone Implements
Projectile Point (n=1).
This artifact is the blade portion of a small triangular arrow point that is missing the base and
distal tip (cat no. 41FL2-5; Figure 6A). It is made of a white, fine-grained chert, tentatively
identified as Tecovas. The blade edges are markedly serrated and it has moderate shoulder
barbs, which suggests that it could have been a corner-notched point, possibly a Scallorn or
Deadman’s types. Both of these types were used during the Late Prehistoric I period; Scallorn
points are associated with either the Plains Woodland or Palo Duro Complexes, but Deadman’s
points are more indicative of the Palo Duro Complex. Insofar as the arrow point fragment is not
identified with certainty, no specific cultural assignment is possible.

Thin Bifaces (n=2).

Two thin bifaces were recovered. One specimen (cat no. 41FL2-6) is the distal tip of a biface
with a steeply beveled edge made of Alibates chert (Figure 6B). Steep edge beveling is one

32

characteristic of diamond shaped, alternately-beveled or Harahey knives. Due to the small size,
conclusive identification of this specimen as a beveled knife tip is uncertain; however, if this is a
part of such an implement, it is diagnostic of Late Prehistoric II period.

The second specimen (cat no. 41FL2-10) is simply the edge fragment of a thin biface implement
made of Tecovas chert (Figure 6C). Its form and cultural affiliation are unknown.

End scraper, Uniface (n=1).

This specimen (cat no. 41FL2-13) is a relatively flat end scraper made of Tecovas chert with
retouching on the distal end and sides (Figure 6D). The tip and base are snapped off. End
scrapers are hide-working implements, and this form is not especially diagnostic of any specific
period or culture.

Figure 6. Chipped stone implements from 41FL2. A: Projectile point fragment; B, C: Biface
Fragments; D: End Scraper; E: Unifacial Modified Flake; F: Chopper.
33

Edge Modified Unifacial flake (n=1).

This specimen (cat no. 41FL2-24) is a Tecovas flake with unifacial retouch along one lateral
edge (Figure 6E).

Chopper (n=1).

This specimen (cat no. 41FL2-21) is a moderately large, rounded stream-rolled quartzite cobble
which has a series of flakes bifacially removed from one end to produce a sharp edge (Figure
6F).

Nondiagnostic Lithic Remains: Flake Debris, Fire-Cracked Rock

These materials consist of flake debris from tool manufacturing, and rocks from stone boiling
and roasting activities. They are not considered to be diagnostic remains and provide limited
insights into activities conducted on site. Another group consists of unworked stones that may
not be artifacts or culturally used materials.

Chipped Stone Flake Debris (n=77)

The seventy-seven flakes from the site were classified according to material type and by
collection area in an effort to discern sources of materials used to make or resharpened stone
tools at this locality. The range of chipped stone materials consists of Tecovas chert (n=56,
72.73%), quartzite (n=9, 11.69%), orthoquartzite (n=6, 7.79%), unknown chert type (n=3,
34

3.90%), Potter chert (n=2, 2.60 %), and Edwards chert (n=1, 1.3%). Tecovas chert is a colorful,
fine-grain material that outcrops in several areas along the Caprock Canyonlands and is a local
resource. Most of the other cherts occur as cobbles in the Ogallala Formation gravels and are
also local. The one single flake regarded as non-local is the Edwards chert, whose nearest
bedrock outcrop is at the Callahan divide south of Abilene; however, outwash gravels in northflowing drainages probably contain abundant Edwards chert nodules.

Fire-cracked Rock Debris (n=6)

These six items are pieces of metamorphic quartzite with distinctive angular “saw-tooth
fractures” indicative of thermal shock that occurred when heated stones were dumped into cool
liquids. They are indicative of cooking activities using stone boiling methods, and are indicators
that the site was occupied as a series of camps for various durations.

Unworked Stone (n=3)

Three small quartzite pebbles in the collection from 41FL2, do not appear to be culturally
modified. One of these has a high micaceous content and was mistakenly collected as a piece of
pottery. All are most likely natural occurring pebbles that are probably not associated with
cultural activities.

Ceramics
Three pieces of prehistoric pottery were surface collected from the site. Surface and paste
attributes of each sherd is presented below and the two larger sherds were submitted for
petrographic analysis to identify the aplastic temper and the source areas (Appendix A). Each
sherd apparently represents a different pottery group, which suggests perhaps site occupations
may have been by more than one group and perhaps spanning more than one period.
35

Smoothed-Over Cord-Marked Ware/ Borger Cordmarked, Group 1

This sherd (cat no. 41FL2.14) is from the general surface of Collection Area 3. It is a smoothedover cord-marked body sherd with red to reddish-brown surface color.

Macroscopic

examination of the sherd paste identified sub-angular and rounded clear quartz grit sand and rare
bone.

Petrographic analysis using point-count methods on 304 temper, paste and void

observation locations identified 94 aplastic particles which were dominated by grit (n=91, 29.28
%) and bone (n=5, 1.64%). The grit was further identified as 70 pieces of quartz, 2 pieces
polycrystalline quartz, 9 pieces alkali feldspar, and 8 pieces of weathered grit (quartz and/or
alkali feldspar; Appendix A). Other minerals observed during the sherd scan, but not falling on a
grid point include microcline (scarce), plagioclase (scarce), chert (scarce) and perthite (rare).

This sherd measures <3 x 3 cm in size, 6.0-to-6.9 mm, is thick, and weighs 3.1 g. The broken
sherd edges have relatively crumbly paste with irregular fractures that do not coincide with coils.
One broken edge has a small shelf step break near the interior edge, which suggests that the paste
was differentially compressed near the inner and outer surfaces, but poorly bonded in the middle.
According to the Munsell Color Chart (1988), the exterior surface colors are a red-to-reddish
brown (2.5YR 5/5), the interior surface color is light reddish brown (5YR 6/3), and a core paste
color is gray (5YR 5.5/1). The sherd cross sectional color profile corresponds to Teltser’s (1993)
Type E firing atmosphere caused by incomplete oxidation due to low firing temperatures, or
firing in a partially oxidized atmosphere.

Examination of the smoothed-over cord-marked

surface show shallow, parallel S-twist cordage impressions spaced 2.3 mm apart with moderate
clarity, which suggests that the string wrapped paddle was applied to the clay while it was
relatively soft and pliable. The interior surface is smoothed but not polished.

The cord-marked potsherd is probably made in the Texas panhandle or western Oklahoma. Sand
and bone tempered, cord-marked pottery are diagnostic traits of Borger Cord-marked of the
Antelope Creek phase Late Prehistoric II/Middle Ceramic period in the Canadian River trench
(Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954). Richard Drass indicates that he detects polish in the smoothed
surface obliterating most of the cord-marks and square-rectangular voids in the paste surface
they might be from dislodged grog temper; however, he could not determine if grog temper was
36

actually present in this sherd (Drass November 6, 2013, personal communications).

The

polished surface trait lead Dr. Drass to dismiss Borger cord-marked as the identified type, and
the grog temper might be indicative of Little Deer Plain of the Edwards Complex,
Protohistoric/Late Ceramic Period.

One of the present authors (Lintz) cannot confirm the

presence of grog temper or polish, but smoothed-over cord-marked and bone temper in this sherd
are attributes consistent with Borger Cord-marked pottery of the Antelope Creek Phase, Late
Prehistoric II period.

Dark Gray Plainware/ Utility Plainwares, Group 2

This single specimen (cat no. 41FL2.7) is from the general surface of Collection Area 1. It is a
dark gray, plainware body sherd. Macroscopic examination of the paste identified as sub­
angular and rounded clear quartz sand grit, but no petrographic analysis was conducted on this
sherd to confirm or expand the temper inclusion identifications. The sherd is very small (<1 x 2
cm), measuring 4.9 mm thick and weighing 0.3 g. The broken sherd edges are rounded and
crumbly with straight fractures that do not coincide with coils and the breaks. These edge breaks
do not have a shelf or step cross section, which, if present, would indicate poor welding of the
inner and outer surfaces. The exterior surface color is a very dark gray (2.5YR 3/0), the interior
surface color is dark gray-to-very dark gray (2.5YR 3.5/0), and a core paste color of very dark
gray (2.5YR 3/0; Munsell 1988). The sherd cross sectional color profile corresponds to Teltser’s
(1993) Type B firing atmosphere caused by ceramic firing in an oxygen-poor or reduced
atmosphere. Examination of the smoothed exterior surface noted three short and exceedingly
shallow linear marks that may represent surface debris impressions or perhaps scraping striations
from thinning, rather than any intentional form of decoration.

This one sherd resembles a batch of six other small sherds from 41FL76 (Ceramic Group 2).
Information attributed to Reg Wiseman on the Panhandle-Plains catalog card with this sherd
indicates that this sherd is “reminiscent” of Ochoa Brown pottery. Reg Wiseman (personal
communication October 18, 2013) recently reexamined the sherd and states that it is too small
for certain identification; he goes on to state that the sherd from 41FL2 has sand grains, some of
37

which are glossy, which is a trait similar to the very glossy aeolian sand temper common to
Ochoa Brown but the identification is only tentatively made. If the sherd is Ochoa Brown, then
it may have been manufactured in southeastern New Mexico or the southwestern part of the
lower Texas panhandle during the Late Prehistoric II/Middle Ceramic period.

Based on

megascopic examination of the paste Richard Drass (personal communication November 6,
2013) is of the opinion that the dark gray sherd resembles Edwards Plain pottery from the Little
Deer site due to similarities of surface smoothing, slight polish, fine sand temper and extreme
thinness. The black sandy-paste pottery from Little Deer is by far the most dominant ceramics
from the site whose component was attributed to the Wheeler Complex (Hofman 1978), although
others lump the Wheeler Complex into the Edwards Complex, and attribute them to one of the
Protohistoric period groups that became the Wichita (Baugh 1982:68). The dark gray-to-black
paste color, temper and thinness of the Little Deer sandy/silty paste pottery conforms to and is
largely indistinguishable from a series of utilitarian plainwares manufactured across the southern
Plains and Southwest (Habicht-Mauche 1988). These nearly indistinguishable types include Rio
Grande Striated pottery from the Galisteo pueblos, Perdido Plain from Ojo Perdido in
northeastern New Mexico, Tierra Blanca Plain found in the Tierra Blanca, Garza and
Wheeler/Edwards Complexes, and even Lovitt Plain in the Dismal River Complex of western
Kansas (Baugh 1982; Hofman 1988). In light of the small pottery size, resolution of these
opinions may be hard to resolve, since vessel and lip forms are the main distinguishing attributes
of these ceramic types. The attribution of thin, black, quartz-tempered pottery to so many
different ethnic groups suggests that this pottery is not culturally distinctive. Most researchers
agree that this sherd was probably made during the Protohistoric/Late Ceramic period.

Red Plainware/ Redwares, Group 3.

The third specimen (cat no. 41FL2.15) is from the general surface of Collection Area 3. This is a
well-polished, red plainware body sherd.

Macroscopic examination of the sherd’s temper

identified quartz, feldspar and minute particles of mica. Petrographic analysis using point-count
methods identified 102 aplastic particles from the 335 observations on paste, temper and void on
the mounted thin section slide. The aplastic temper was dominated by grit (n=62, 20.52%),
38

volcanic tuff (n=35, 11.52%) and granite (n=1; 0.33%) (Appendix A). The grid was further
identified as having 39 pieces of quartz, 8 pieces of alkali feldspar, 11 pieces of weathered grit
(quartz /alkali feldspar), one hornblende, and three pieces of microcline. Other counted minor
inclusions not considered to be grit include muscovite mica (n=2), chert (n=1), and hematite
(n=1); minerals observed during the sherd scan, but not falling on an identification grid point
include polycrystalline quartz (rare), plagioclase (uncommon) mafic particles (scarce) and
perthite (scarce).

The sherd is very small (<1 x 2 cm), measures 5.3 to 5.9 mm thick and weighs 0.4 g). The
broken sherd edges are straight and crisp without step or shelf breaks; some of the fractures may
coincide with coils. According to the Munsell Color Chart (1988), the exterior surface color is
red (10R 5/6); the interior surface color is reddish-gray (5YR 5/2), and the core paste color is
light reddish brown (5YR 6/2). The sherd cross sectional color profile corresponds to Teltser’s
(1993) Type G firing atmosphere caused by ceramic firing a reduced or oxygen starved
environment and then removed to an oxygen rich environment while the vessel is still warm. The
exterior surface is smoothed and polished, while the interior surface is simply smoothed.

Based on macroscopic examination, Richard Drass (personal communication November 6, 2013)
complained that this redware sherd was generally too small to say much about possible
manufacturing sources and suggested that it could be either from the Southeast or Southwest.
Tim Perttula (personal communication November 8, 2013) indicated that Caddo redware sherds
are usually tempered with shell or grog but the macroscopic occurrence of grit suggested to Tim
that the sherd was probably not Caddo, although the sherd was below the size that he prefers to
analyze. Reg Wiseman (personal communication October 18, 2013) indicated that it could be
from a base or unpainted portion of a Rio Grande glaze-ware, but the lack of distinguishing
criteria (rim form, glaze/paint) precludes reasonable suggestion of the type or even period. The
petrographic identification of 11% tuff temper, indeed, suggests manufacture in the Rio Grande
region. Most likely this sherd dates between A.D. 1300 and 1700, and is assigned to the Late
Prehistoric/late Middle Ceramic or Protohistoric/Late Ceramic periods (Eckert 2006:37).

David

Snow (personal communication November 20, 2014) reaffirms that the sherd is from the Rio
Grande area, and possibly dates to the 17th century; however he indicates that he would need
39

more information on whether the tuff was vitric, rhyolite, welded or undifferentiated to further
definitively pin-point the source.

Faunal Remains

These materials refer to freshwater mussel shells, probably used as a food resource and animal
bones.

Mussel Shell Debris (n=3)

All three fragments (cat no. 41FL2-20) of freshwater mussel shell are from an unidentified
species. All were collected from a single area and perhaps represents part of a single valve.
They probably represent a mussel valve collected from Quitaque Creek, and discarded following
consumption.

Unmodified Bone Debris (n=44)

These 44 items represent mostly bone splinters and scraps attributed to cultural activities. No
attempts were made to identify elements beyond the mention of one limb bone; nor were animal
species identifications attempted.

Material Distribution by Collection Areas

The range of diagnostic darts/arrow points and ceramics recovered from the previous and current
projects at 41FL2 suggest that the site (and surrounding areas from the former larger site area as
defined by Jim Word) have been repetitively reoccupied as campsites during multiple time
periods perhaps from the Middle Archaic through the Protohistoric periods. No doubt the
presence of springs in a relatively sheltered canyon head was an attractive feature for these

40

occupations. The distribution of artifacts collected from the five sub-site areas during the present
project provides insights into activities and activities occurring within the TPWD property.

A total of 128 of the 139 collected remains are assignable to the five defined collection areas; the
other eleven items (7.9%) are from unspecified site sub-areas (Table 1).
The intact site remnant of Area I, encompasses only a 345 m2 area southeast of the railroad bed,
and yielded the most remains (n=44; 31.65%). These include the small serrated-blade arrow
point, the possible Harahey knife tip, and the plain brown potsherd with temper resembling
Ochoa Plain. The point and pottery are indicative of Late Prehistoric I period, while the bifacial
knife suggests an occupation during the Late Prehistoric II period. Other remains from Area A
include 30 flakes and 11 bones; the bone indicates good faunal preservation in this area.

Table 1. Distribution of collected artifacts by area from 41FL2.

Area I

Area II

Area III

Area IV

Area V

ND

Total

percent

1

1
2
1
1
1

0.72
1.44
0.72
0.72
0.72

1

1
1

0.72
0.72

1

1

0.72

77
6

55.40
4.32

3

2.16

1

41

29.50

1

3

2.16
100.00

Diagnostic Implement
Projectile point
Biface fragments
Biface crude chopper
Uniface, end scraper
Uniface, edge mod.
SW ceramic sherd
Plain ceramic sherd

1
1

1
1
1

1

CM ceramic sherd
Nondiagnostic Debris
Flake Debitage
Fire‐cracked rock

30

4
5

5

12
1

Mussel Shell
Unworked bone

18

8

3
11

5

20

1

1

4

Non‐Cultural Remains
Unworked stone
Total
Percent

44

16

8

37

23

11

139

31.65

11.51

5.76

26.62

16.55

7.91

100.0

41

Area II, the eroded slope south of Area I on the southeast side of the railroad bed, yielded only
16 items (11.51%). These include the broken edge of an unidentified bifacial tool, four flakes,
five fire-cracked rocks, five bone splinter fragments, and one unmodified pebble. This area
yielded the greatest density of burned rocks; but five specimens do not an intact feature make.

Area III, the eroded slope north of Area I on the southeast side of the railroad bed, contained
only eight item (5.76%), consisting of the cord-marked sherd, the red slipped Puebloan trade
sherd, the end scraper, and five flakes. The two potsherds suggest that this portion of the site
contain components associated with the Late Prehistoric II and perhaps the Protohistoric periods.
Area IV, the southern eroded slope northwest of the railroad bed contained some 37 items
(26.62%). Not a single tool or potsherd came from this area. But 12 flakes, one fire-cracked
rock, three freshwater mussel shell fragments, 20 bone fragments, and one unmodified pebble
came from this area. No cultural affiliations are assigned to these materials. The area did yield
the most bone of any site area and indicates good preservation of faunal remains.

Area V, the northern eroded slopes northwest of the railroad bed yielded 23 items (16.55%).
These consist of one chopper, 18 flakes, and four bone fragments. No cultural or temporal
affiliations can be assigned based on the remains from this area.

The 11 items, from unknown sub-areal contexts, consist only of 1 edge-modified unifacial tool
fragment, 8 flakes, 1 bone fragment and 1 unmodified pebble.

Some additional information about site structure is derived from the distribution of identified
stone types used to make chipped stone tools and manufacturing debris (Table 2).

The indigenous Tecovas jasper resource constitutes 66.67% of the chipped stone tools and
72.73% of the flake debitage from the site. The three Tecovas tools attributable to Areas I-III all
occur on the southeast side of the railroad bed. The Tecovas flakes occur in moderately high
densities on both the southeast side (Areas I-III, n=27: 35.06%) and northwest side (Areas IV
and V, n=22; 28.57%) of the railroad bed. As discussed above, all but two of the lithic materials

42

are probably derived from indigenous cobbles from the Ogallala Formation. The two non-local
remains are an Alibates knife fragment with bedrock chert sources from the Canadian River
Valley found in Area I, and single flake of Edwards Plateau chert from distant southeast sources
found in Area III. The Alibates knife probably reflects connections to the north during the Late
Prehistoric II period; the Edwards flake cannot be assigned to a temporal period.

Summary and Recommendations:

The horizontal boundaries of site 41FL2 within TPWD-ROW were established based on the
locations of artifacts and cultural remains from five areas consisting of undisturbed surface and
cut bank profile exposures, and eroding slope-wash derived from machine-bladed areas adjacent

Table 2. Stone materials for tools and manufacturing debris from areas at 41FL2.
Area I

Area II

Area III

1
1

1

1

Area IV

Area V

ND

Total

Percent

1

4
1
0
0
1
0

66.67
16.67
0.00
0.00
16.67
0.00

0

0.00

1

6

100.00

16.67

100.00

7

2

56
0
2
1
9
6

72.73
0.00
2.60
1.30
11.69
7.79

2

3

3.90

8

77

100.00

10.39

100.00

Tools
Tecovas Chert
Alibates Chert
Potter Chert
Edwards Chert
Quartzite
Orthoquartzite

1

Unknown
Total Tools
Percent

2
33.33

1
16.67

1

0

16.67

1

0.00

16.67

8

14

Flake Debitage
Tecovas Chert
Alibates Chert
Potter Chert
Edwards Chert
Quartzite
Orthoquartzite

20

4

3

Unknown

1

Total Flake Debris

30

4

5

12

18

Percent

38.96

5.19

6.49

15.58

23.38

1

1
1

8

1
2

2

43

to the rail bed. The distribution of artifacts suggests that the site limits are about 150 by 80 m
long within the TPWD property of the railroad bed ROW.

Limited surface collections within the Trail ROW suggest that 41FL2 is a multi-component
campsite. Geographic attributes that enhance this camp setting include a broad gently-sloping
surface within a canyon protected from surface winds, and the proximity of springs near the head
of Quitaque Creek. The campsite is on a 40 ft. (12 m) high bench, and thus would not be
subjected to periodic flooding or the harshness of the coldest winter air flowing down the
canyon.

Artifacts from Late Prehistoric I and II period components dominated by Palo Duro Complex
culture mark the site’s components. This is supported by the collections of Deadman’s, Scallorn,
and Fresno point types, fragment of a four-beveled knife, cord-marked, plainware and Southwest
trade ware ceramics from the site. Due to the heavy impact upon the site by rail bed construction
only about 345 m2 of the site’s area remains within the TPWD-ROW. The extent of buried
cultural remains on the adjacent private property is unknown and evaluation of these areas was
not included in the scope of this project. During the 2014 site visit, two small clusters of caliche
were found that represent possible cultural features (Appendix B). The disturbed condition of
remaining portions of the site and the lack of cultural materials on TPWD property could be
limiting factors to possible consideration of the site as a State Antiquities Landmark (SAL) or for
inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). It is recommended that the
TPWD assess their long term uses of this property and prepare a site management plan focusing
on periodic monitoring of the remaining site portions and, if necessary, invoke erosion control
that would prevent impacts to features or other remaining archeological resources that may be
found to be in jeopardy of integrity loss.

44

5. SITE 41FL76

Introduction

Archeological site 41FL76 is located approximately 1.3 kilometers (km) northeast of site 41FL2
within the Trailway corridor. This site is at an elevation of 2,910 to 2,940 ft. above msl. on a
colluvial bench near the middle-lower slope of the left (north) side, and about 18.2 – 21.3 m (60
to 70 ft.) above the Quitaque Creek floodplain. At this location, the south-trending, gentle
canyon slope is demarcated by an incised meander loop of Quitaque Creek to the west and an
unnamed lateral drainage tributary to the east, which define a prominent peninsula north of the
creek. The canyon rim is some 1,170 feet above the site/railroad bed area. The broad slope of
the site may coincide to the same geological Ogallala-Dockum unconformity bench as found at
41FL2. Vegetation on site consists of juniper, mesquite, shrubs, cacti and various grasses.

The site has been bisected by a northeast-southwest cut made for the rail bed that ranges from 50
cm deep at the eastern site boundary to as much as 6 m below ground surface near the center of
the site and gradually returning to surface level beyond the western boundary (Figures 7 and 8).
The defined site area is primarily confined to the State-owned abandoned railroad ROW that
measures about 52 m NW-SE by 118 m SE-NW, although cultural remains undoubtedly extend
onto private lands to the north and south.

In addition to the incised railroad bed, a ranch-road crosses the site and another 40 to 50 cm tall 5
m wide berm has been built paralleling the up-slope fence line to slow surface run-off and keep
colluvial sediments off the tracks. Natural impacts to the site include burrowing rodents and
surface erosion, which continues to expose cultural materials on the surface. Archaeologists
estimated that more than 50% of the site on TPWD lands remains intact.

45

Figure 7. Railroad bed at 41FL76; Features 1 and 3 at near right foreground. Facing west.

Figure 8. Railroad bed at 41FL76; Feature 2 is on right near top. Facing east.

46

Site 41FL76 was recorded on April 29, 1993, during the Caprock Canyon Trailway State Park
survey (Bartholomew 1995) when a distinct buried midden deposit 35-40 cm thick was noticed
in the railroad bed cut bank. The presence of midden deposits and scattered bone splinters on the
surface suggested that this may have been the most intensely occupied of the 11 prehistoric sites
documented during the Trailway State Park survey.

The buried midden deposits, consisting of dark ashy loam 35-40 cm thick, are apparent in the
southeast edge of the railroad cut-bank profile (Figures 9 and 10). The significance and contents
of these midden sediments were not included in the work order tasks of the current project.
Consequently, the vertical and horizontal extent of the ashy deposits remains unknown. Any
relationship these midden deposits have to the excavated features has been obscured by the
removal of intervening site material during construction of the railroad in 1928.

Artifacts collected by the Rails-to-Trails survey team included a Tecovas jasper arrow point
preform, an Edwards flint end scraper, a Tecovas jasper mid-section of a four-beveled (Harahey)
knife, a Tecovas jasper scraper bit fragment, five “Tierra Blanca Plain” potsherds (four body
sherds and one rim sherd), two Puebloan red slip body sherds, a bison mandible fragment and
incisor, and one possible human tibia. The projectile point and pottery types suggest a multi­
component site occupied during the Late Prehistoric II and Protohistoric periods.

The survey crew also noted three exposed features in the railway cut site walls. Features 1 and 2
were burned rock concentrations interpreted as fire hearths on either side of the railway cut.
Feature 3 was an eroded remnant of a sediment-filled, elongated-shaped pit approximately 0.8 m
in depth by 70 cm wide at the top and tapering to 40 cm wide at the bottom. Similarities in
sediment matrix colors rendered the pit fill difficult to distinguish from the surrounding matrix,
except in late afternoon light.
47

Figure 9. Midden exposed in cut bank southeastern portion of 41FL76.

Figure 10. Midden profile in railroad cut bank southeast edge of 41FL76.

48

Mitigation Phase

Due to concerns of intensive trail use and impacts by park visitors, TPWD called for the
development of a site map, collection of surface materials and excavation of the two burned rock
hearths and pit features as mitigation measures to lessen the site’s visibility to the general public.

During the initial visits, a site datum was established on an east-west fence line cedar post
approximately 13.39 m on a line 158o (south-southeast) from the burned rock hearth (Feature 2)
in the south edge of the railroad bed. The datum consists of three 12-penny box nails driven into
the cedar fence post and forming a triangle. The UTM location of the site datum is 298513 E;
3789839 N, Zone 14. This datum was used to develop the site map using compass and pace
methods and reference the locations of all features at the site (Figure 11).

Figure 11. Plan map of 41FL76 showing location of features, midden and shovel tests.
49

Surface Collection

Artifact and material surface collections were made on July 7 and 17, 1996, October 14, 1998,
and November 6 and 7th of 1998 from inside the TPWD boundaries of 41FL76. Due to the depth
of the railway incision, emphasis focused on examining the cut banks, although some pedestrian
transects were walked on the upland flats adjacent to the incised rail beds. Due to the density of
surface bone splinters, TPWD staff indicated that not all bone fragments need to be collected; but
most collections during 1998 focused on gathering bone scraps.

The materials obtained from the general site surface and two small (30 x 30 cm square) shovel
tests are provided in Table 3. A total of 204 surface-collected remains consist of one projectile
point tip, a crude biface, one uniface, 35 flakes, two groundstone mano fragments, four firecracked rocks, two unidentified types of prehistoric pottery, and about 158 animal bone
fragments. A few bones are bison limb fragments, and the catalog cards report a bison tibia
digging stick tip; however, since the specimen lacks both an end socket haft hole and rounded
blade edges, this specimen is now considered to not be digging tool, but simply a distal bison
tibia fragment.

Table 3. Artifacts from the general surface and ST 1 and 2 at 41FL76.
General
Level

Surface

Depth (cm)
Point
Bifaces
Unifaces
Flakes
Manos
Burned rock
Ceramics
Bone

1
1
1
35
2
4
2
158

Total

204

Shovel Test 1 (Southeast)
L-1
0-10

L-2
10-20

L-3
20-30

4

4

Shovel Test 2 (Northwest)
Total

L-1
0-10

4

0

0

4

50

L-2
10-20

L-3
20-30

L-4

Total

4

3

7

2

2

30-40

79

265

114

13

471

79

269

119

13

480

In addition to gathering the surface remains, two shovel tests (ST) were dug, one on each side of
the railroad cut towards the east end of the site to determine the depth and density of cultural
remains. Both shovel tests were 30 x 30 cm square and dug in 10-cm intervals.

Shovel Test 1 (ST 1)

Shovel Test 1 (ST 1), a 30 x 30 cm unit, was excavated inside the southeast edge of the railroad
trench near an area of exposed burned rock and bone (Figure 12). The placement of this shovel
test was based on the density of cultural remains on the slope wash of the rail bed cut. A total of
three 10-cm thick levels were dug in ST 1 before the unit was abandoned in culturally sterile
subsoil. Sediments in the upper 10 cm (Level 1) consisted of grayish brown sandy loam, which
transitioned to grayish brown clay loess in Level 2 (10-20 cm), and persisted with an increase of
white caliche nodules in Level 3 (20-30 cm). A sparse amount (n=4) of chipped stone flakes
were found only in the upper-most level of ST 1; the artifacts from Level 1 consist of four
tertiary flakes of Alibates, Tecovas, and quartzite (Table 3). Perhaps the ST placement inside the
rail cut occurred mostly in sterile subsoil beneath the occupation midden near the surface.

Shovel Test 2 (ST 2)

Shovel Test 2 (ST 2), also a 30 x 30 cm unit, was excavated on top of the sloping edge of the
northern rail bed cut in an area of densely exposed cultural materials (Figure 12). The ground
surface of the shovel test was along the ground slope, not the horizontal surface above the rail
road cut. Four 10-cm levels were excavated to determine the depth of the cultural materials.
The sediments present in ST 2 consisted of surface sheet wash abruptly changing to brown sandy
loam in Level 1 (0-10 cm); a dark grayish brown loam that transitioned to a tan loam by the base
of level 3 (10-ca. 30 cm), and a tan loam grading into a white caliche subsoil by the base of level
4 (40 cm below surface).

51

A total of 480 artifacts were recovered from the four levels of ST 2 (Table 3). Materials from
Level 1 (0-10 cm) consist of no lithic materials but 79 unidentifiable bone fragments-- 12 of
which are burned (six calcined; Table 3). Level 2 yielded two quartzite and two Tecovas chert
flakes; and 265 animal bone fragments. Identifiable bison bone elements include: two scapula
fragments (glenoid fossa), one proximal radius end fragment, one proximal right metacarpal end
fragment, one complete proximal phalanx, one scaphoid, two tooth fragments, and three rib
fragments. There were two bone fragments from small land mammals, possibly rodents. Of the
265 animal bone fragments, 19 were burned (five calcined). Most of these bone fragments have
fresh breaks attributed to excavation damage. Level 3 yielded two quartzite fire-cracked rock
fragments and three Tecovas chert flakes. Also from Level 3 were 114 bone fragments (one
complete bison incisor, and 113 unidentified animal bone fragments, of which 24 appear to be
burned and 10 calcined). Many of these bones also have fresh breaks attributed to excavation
damage. Level 4 had no lithic materials and only 13 animal bone fragments. Of these, four
fragments are burned (one calcined). Visual inspection of several limb bone fragments show
evidence of spiral fractures suggesting green bone breakage during bone processing, perhaps to
extract marrow or grease. Levels 2 and 3 of ST 2 produced the densest concentrations of animal
bone and may indicate the presence of a ca. 20 cm thick cultural zone.

Figure 12. Plan view of ST 1 (left) and ST 2 (right) at 41FL76 (Scales not pointing north).

52

Features

The project called for the excavation of the three cultural features identified during the Rails-toTrails survey. All three features were exposed near the ground surface in cut-bank profiles.
Each feature was photographed before excavation. Single one-meter square test pits (TP) were
set up over each feature oriented to magnetic north and placed to capture their projected extent.
One edge of each square extended over the cut bank so that all excavations of the feature
exposed in the sloping cut bank would be contained within the 1-meter TP unit. The two
shallowly-buried burned rock hearths (Feature 1 exposed within TP 2 and Feature 2 exposed
within TP 1) were excavated in 10 cm thick levels. The deeper elongated-shaped burial pit,
Feature 3, was primarily excavated in a series of 15 cm thick levels. All excavated fill was
screened through 1/4-inch wire-mesh and excavations concluded upon reaching sterile or
undisturbed zones. The only bulk soil samples collected during the project were from the bottom
of Feature 3 for fine screen recovery.

Other sediment samples were collected for soil

1

identification, fine /8-inch screening, and future analysis of the burial fill. No flotation analysis
or radiocarbon dating studies were conducted under this contract although the samples were
retained for possible future investigations.

Feature 1: Dispersed Burned Rock Hearth

Feature 1 was a buried hearth exposed near the surface of the northern railroad cut bank
(Figure 13). Levels 1 through 4 (0 cm-40 cm) of TP 2 used to investigate this hearth feature
were completely excavated; however, only the southern half of Level 5 (40 cm-50 cm), was
excavated to trace out the shallow basin pit outline. Hearth fill was screened through 1/4-inch
wire-mesh screening. All excavated hearth fill and cultural materials were collected. Perhaps
less than one half of the hearth feature remained before excavation; the southern half was lost
during railroad trench construction.

Feature 1 consisted of a dispersed series of nearly two dozen burned quartzite (n=2; 624.0 g) and
caliche (n=19; 4,257.4 g) rocks within a shallow, ca. 12 cm deep basin measuring about 85 cm in
53

Figure 13. Profile and plan views of burned hearth Feature 1 (TP 2) at site 41FL76.

diameter. The basal contact of the feature with sterile soil occurs about 35 to 40 cm below the
present surface. This appears to be a relatively discrete hearth feature or discarded debris from a
hearth feature and the low rock density suggests that the hearth might not have served as an oven
but as a thermal feature used to heat stones for possible boiling activities.

Materials from TP 2 used to explore Feature 1 include one piece of intrusive glass, five
potsherds, 25 chert flakes, 199 unworked animal bone fragments, 57 caliche and quartzite burned
stones, and three chunks of charcoal (Table 4). A 37.5% sample of burned rocks, comprising 19
caliche and two quartzite hearth stones, were weighed to characterize the feature rocks. The
caliche samples ranged from 2 to 2,345.4 grams and the two quartzite fire-cracked rocks weighed
from 508.4 to 115.6 grams (Table 4). The mean rock weight in the sample was 232.45 g.
54

Table 4. Artifacts from hearth Feature 1 (TP 2) at 41FL76.

Glass (Clear)
Projectile Points
Bifaces
Unifaces
Ceramics (Plainware)
Chert Debitage
Bone (Animal)
Hearth Stones, Caliche

Level 1
0-10
cm
1

Level 2
10-20
cm

4

1
10
80

1

Level 4
30-40
cm

14
96
1

1
22

12

4

Level 5
40-50
cm

3

Hearth Stones Quartzite
Charcoal Samples

5

Total

11

102

123

27

Percent

3.79

35.17

42.41

Burned Rock size/wt.

Total
no

Sample
no.

Hearth Stones, Caliche
Hearth Stones Quartzite

23
33
56

19
2
21

Total

11

Level 3
20-30
cm

No Data
0-50 cm

19

Total

Percent

1

0.34

5
25
199
23

1.72
8.62
68.62

2

34
3

6

21

290

9.31

2.07

7.24

100.00

Percent
sample

Total
wt. (g)

mean
wt. (g)

min. wt.
(g)

max wt.
(g)

82.61
6.06
37.5

4,257.4
624.0
4,881.4

224.1
312.0

2.0
115.6

2,345.4
508.4

3

7.93
11.72
1.03
100.00

Feature 2: Burned Rock Hearth or Oven

Feature 2 was a buried rock filled hearth exposed near the surface on the south side of the
railroad cut bank (Figure 14).

Feature 2 was exposed in TP 1; three 10-cm levels were

completely excavated, but only the upper part of Level 4 was excavated as sterile soil was
encountered at 33 cm deep. Hearth fill was screened through 1/4-inch wire-mesh hardware cloth.
All excavated hearth fill and cultural materials were collected.

Feature 2 is a complex thermal feature perhaps composed of the southern edge of an eroded
rock-filled, basin-shaped pit estimated to be about 72 cm in diameter, by about 19 cm deep, with
an amorphous “rake-off” pile of cobbles measuring about 33 by 57 cm to the south of the basin
pit at a slightly higher level (Figure 14). The northern part of the original basin shaped pit was
55

Figure 14. Profile and plan views of burned hearth Feature 2 (TP 1) at site 41FL76.

destroyed during railroad construction and only the southern arc rim measuring about 65 cm long
by 22 cm wide remained in situ. Photographs of the profile seem to show that the layer of
burned rocks lie in matrix above the bottom of the basin pit. The high density of burned rocks
within the basin pit and the adjacent rake-off pile suggests that this feature may have been a
rock-filled earth oven.

56

Materials recovered from Feature 2 number 398 items. They include a biface fragment, two
plainware potsherds, 19 chert flakes, 210 animal bone fragments, and 166 hearth stones, of
which 113 were found near the basal contact of the features. Other materials probably associated
with this feature were collected in 2014 (Appendix B). Analysis of the 113 sample (68.07%) of
hearth stones near the base of Feature 2 delineated the following: sandstone (n=7; 1,491 g;
weight range 64 to 418 g), caliche (n=59; 26,116 g; weight range 47 to 1,843 g), and quartzite
(n=47; 12,926 g; weight range 15 to 556 g) (Table 5). The average rock weighs 358.70 g.

Table 5. Artifacts from the hearth Feature 2 (TP 1) at 41FL76.

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Level 4

No Data

0-10 cm

10-20 cm

20-30 cm

30-33 cm

0-33 cm

Total
Percent

Projectile Points
Biface

1

1

0.25

2

0.50

Uniface
Ceramics

2

Chert Debitage

2

11

3

3

19

4.77

Bone

3

72

91

44

210

52.76

Hearth Stones, Caliche

4

13

24

7

59

107

26.88

Hearth Stones, Quartzite

1

47

52

13.07

7

7

54
13.57

114
28.64

398
100.00

1.76
100.00

Total wt.
(g)

mean wt.
(g)

min. wt.
(g)

max wt.
(g)

4

Hearth Stones, Sandstone
Total
Percent

11
2.76

Burned Rock size/wt.

Total no

98
24.62

122
30.65

Sample
no.

Percent
sample

Hearth Stones, Caliche

107

59

55.10

26,116

442.64

47

1,843

Hearth Stones Quartzite

52

47

90.38

12,926

275.02

30

556

7

7

100.00

1,491

213.00

64

418

166

113

68.07

40,533

Hearth Stones, Sandstone
Total

57

Feature 3: Deep, Elongated Burial Pit

Feature 3 was an exposed elongated pit located on the northern cut bank of the rail bed,
approximately 5 m east of Hearth Feature 1. The top of the pit occurred just under the present
ground surface and extended to a depth of approximately 103 cm. The exposed pit in the cut
bank was 70 cm wide at the top tapering to approximately 40 cm at the bottom. One sunbleached human tibia fragment was exposed in the cut bank near the bottom of the fill. Feature 3
was first discovered in the late evening of April 1993 by the Rails-to-Trails survey crew. During
the initial survey, the pit fill and the surrounding matrix had nearly the same texture and hue as
the surrounding sediments, which made it difficult to see the elongated pit outline in different
lighting situations. Several unsuccessful attempts to see the feature by the field crew and TPWD
personnel resulted in no work being conducted during July, 1996. The pit outline became very
pronounced during mid-October and early November when the sun had a lower arc in the sky
(Figure 15).
Excavations on Feature 3 occurred between November 5th and 7th, 1998. The feature was
investigated using a single 1-meter test pit square. To provide vertical control within the deep
pit, the fill was excavated using five 15-cm thick intervals measured from present ground surface
at the northwest corner of the square. Level 6, the level containing most of the human remains,
was excavated as one 28 cm-thick interval, from 75 to 103 cm below the present ground surface.
The base of the pit was an elongated oval in plan-view and measured about 80 cm (NW-SE) by
112 cm (NE-SW).

Excavation of Level 6 fill as a single 28 cm-thick unit allowed the

relationships of the cranium and other bones to be determined, prior to removing any of the
burial. Efforts were made to expose the bones in place so they could be mapped and individually
removed. All pit fill, with the exception of several bulk samples, was screened on site through
1

/4-inch wire-mesh screen. All sediments from Level 6 were collected. These bulk samples were

later screened in the laboratory through 1/4-inch and 1/8-inch wire-mesh screens to retrieve
possible burial associations. These and other samples were kept for future flotation, dating, or
pollen analysis.

58

Figure 15. Profile of elongated pit Feature 3 at 41FL76.

Feature 3 Soil Samples

Two series of sediment samples were collected from the excavated levels at TP 3. One series
consisting of three soil samples (1 through 3) was collected from level fill during excavations of
general levels to characterize the sediment color and texture. The second series of four samples
(designated 1A through 4A) was obtained upon completion of excavations for identification from
59

Figure 16. Locations of soil samples collected from the vicinity of pit Feature 3.

stratigraphic levels in the north wall profile outside the pit where obvious soil color/texture
separations were observed (Figure 16).

The sediment samples collected during excavation consist of the following:

Sample 1: Approximately 557 g. Sediments collected from Level 1, 0 to 15 cm
deep. This pedogenically-modified upper sediment consisted of very fine dark
reddish gray (5YR 4/2) loam.

Sample 2: About 204 g. Sediments collected from Levels 2-4, 15-60 cm below
surface.

This middle pit fill sediment is a medium-to-very coarse pinkish

gray/light brown (7.5YR 6/3) sandy loam.

60

Sample 3: About 4.1 kg. Sediment collected from Level 5; 60-75 cm, near the
base of the pit but above the bulk sample containing the human remains in Level
6. This lower pit fill is a medium light brownish gray (10YR 6/2) sandy loam with
fine white caliche granules.

The four post-excavation sediment samples from the test pit walls were collected from the north
wall pit profile for color and texture descriptions. Three were from separate stratigraphic zones
outside the pit at unspecified depths and one was from the pit fill.

Sample 1A: (143 g) Obtained from the upper dark brown loam and is comparable
to Sample 1, above; this is a dark reddish gray (5YR 4/2) very fine loam.

Sample 2A: (204 g) Very fine to very coarse pinkish gray/light brown (7.5YR
6/3) sandy loam, comparable to Sample 2.

Sample 3A: (191 g) very fine to very course pinkish gray (7.5YR 7/2) sandy
loam.

Bulk Sample 4A: (24.745 kg) bottom of pit fill from Level 6; 92-103 cm.
Collected for fine screening to retrieve artifacts and to describe sediment color
and texture. It is a light brownish-gray sandy loam.

The bulk sediments from Sample 4A were returned to the laboratory where it was first screened
through 1/4-inch wire mesh hardware cloth. Small human bone fragments were collected from
the screen and placed with the associated human remains from the burial. The 1/4-inch and larger
residue from the screen was bagged and labeled for future analysis. The sediment residues from
the ¼-inch screen were then re-screened through 1/8-inch wire mesh (Table 6). Small bone
fragments and 34 shell disc beads were collected during the second screening process. These
were assumed to be associated with the human burial remains. The sediment residue from the
1

/8-inch screenings were bagged separately and saved for future analysis. Soil analysis from

41FL76, Feature 3 is limited to soil sample weights and soil size grade (Table 6).
61

Table 6. Weight and percent by size grade of sediments at base of pit Feature 3.
Size Grade
Fraction Weight
1
Coarse Grain ( /4 inch or
larger)
+ 879 g

Percent
3.55 %

Medium Grain (1/8 to 1/4 inch)

+ 1,691 g

6.83 %

Fine Grain (less than 1/8 inch)
Total weight:

+ 22,175 g
24,745 g

89.61 %

Feature 3 Artifacts

Levels 1 through 3 produced few artifacts: one chert flake, 14 bone fragments including a large
mammal proximal rib-head fragment, several fragments of unidentified burned and unburned
bone, and three fragments of quartzite fire-cracked rock (Table 7). Levels 4 and 5 produced a
few displaced human teeth and a vertebra.

When these were found, excavations were

temporarily halted and TPWD headquarter personnel were notified to obtain authorization to
continue excavations until the presence of an articulated burial was confirmed. When the human
cranium was exposed at the beginning of Level 6 (75 cm below surface), excavations were again
halted while P-PHM staff notified and secured authorization for burial exposure and removal
from TPWD staff. The agency decided that removal of the human remains was appropriate in
this instance, as persistent erosion and public visitation of the adjacent Trailway placed the burial
in danger of being lost to erosion and/or looting, and the cultural affiliation of this individual was
unknown.

A well-defined elongated oval pit outline in plan-view became apparent near the bottom of Level
5 (Figure 17). Upon the confirmation of a human interment within Level 6, only the burial pit
fill (75-103 cm) was removed to expose the remains in place. Level 6, beginning at 75 cm and
ending at the sterile zone beneath the burial at 103 cm, was excavated and recorded as a single
unit containing the fill associated with the remains.

62

Table 7. Materials recovered from F-3 burial pit (TP 3) at 41FL76.

Level 1
0-15
cm
Projectile Points
Bifaces
Unifaces
Ceramics
Chert Debitage
FCR- Stone
(unworked)
Non-Human Bone
Disc Shell Beads
Olivella Shell Bead
Charcoal
Flora/plant remains

Level 2
15-30
cm

Level 3
30-45
cm

Level 4
45-60
cm

Percent

Level 6
75-103
cm

Total

Percent

3
5

0.96

1

2
1
2
35
1

1.61
6.11
11.25
0.32
0.32
4.18

1
2
12

1

2

3

Human Remains
counts
Total

Level 5
60-75
cm

2

1
6

5

19
35
1
1
13

4

41

189

234

235

311

75.56

100.00

75.24
13
4.18

4
1.29

1

6

0.32

1.93

52
16.72

100.00

Non-human remains recovered from the lower portions of the pit (Levels 5 and 6; 60 to 103 cm
below surface) consist of two chert flakes, two burned rocks, five animal bone fragments, one
piece of charcoal, one recent botanical sample composed of eight tuber fragments, and five
hackberry seeds (Table 7). A total of 234 bone fragments were positively or probably identified
as human skeletal remains from Levels 4 thru 6 (45 – 103 centimeters below surface [cm bs]).

The orientations of the human remains were recorded on field feature forms, level records and
the elements were carefully removed. Each burial bone element was given a field number and
individually wrapped and padded, a depth elevation was taken, each element was then removed
and placed in a field container to minimize damage during transport to the laboratory. Bulk soil
samples were collected from burial pit 75-103 cm and later screened in the laboratory through
1

/4- and 1/8-inch wire-mesh screening to recover small mortuary items.

63

Feature 3 Interred Remains

The individual appears to be a small juvenile approximately 8-10 years of age, based on dental
and other bone growth stages of development. Bone deterioration, rodent activity, and other
bioturbation displaced many of the bones, and the proposed orientation of the burial is based
primarily on the location of the undisturbed elements (Figure 17).

Figure 17. Rodent activity at the bottom of pit Feature 3 at 41FL76.

The orientation of the remains suggests that the body was in a semi-flexed position on the
individual’s right side (Figure 18). The cranium was in the northeast corner of the pit facing
southeast. The torso was oriented northeast-southwest based on the alignment of vertebrae with
at least one arm folded against the body. The legs were not tightly drawn up to the torso, but
rather were nearly at right angles to the spinal alignment. The tibia and fibula (lower leg) limbs
however, were tightly folded back on the femurs (upper leg) and were oriented east-west along
the southern edge of the pit. The cranium and mandible were pedestalled and removed as a
block because of poor bone preservation. Railroad grade excavations, pit erosion and rodent
activities are probably responsible for the disarticulation and loss of some skeletal elements.
64

Recovered associated funerary objects consisted of one ground-spire, but undecorated olivella
marine shell bead with a single marine disc shell bead wedged into the snail shell aperture. It
was found in situ near the southern edge of the burial pit in Level 6 (94 cm), near the ankle or
pelvis elements.

An additional 34 disc-shaped shell beads were recovered loose from the

collected bulk burial fill sediment sample during fine (1/8-inch) screening in the laboratory. The
shell disc bead in the olivella shell aperture clearly indicated that the loose disc beads were part
of the same ornament interred with the body. Also two amorphous, probable bison, bone
fragments measuring less than 5 cm long were found among the human remains also from an
area near the pelvis. However, because these bison elements were not modified tool fragments,
they probably were incidental, non-intentional inclusions into the pit introduced from grave
backfilling or rodent activities. Neither flotation nor dating techniques were conducted on the
burial pit sediment fill or contents. Thus, the antiquity of the burial is unknown.

A total of 26 catalog numbered lots of human bone were recovered from the excavations. The
following presents physical anthropological observations supplemented by data recorded on the
catalog cards. In instances where the physical anthropologist identified several distinct bones
from a single catalog lot, attempts were made to separate each discrete element group wherever
possible. The following descriptions use the terminology of Bass (1979) and present the human
remain descriptions by level/depth and numerical catalog order. Wherever possible, a count of
pieces and weight in grams is provided, along with the identification of the element, metric
dimensions in millimeters, and comments (Table 8).

Human Remains Summary

The human remains were confined to the Feature 3 burial pit. The oval-shaped pit measured
approximately 80 cm (NW-SE) by 112 cm (NE-SW) and was approximately 103 cm deep. The
burial is a single individual facing east and buried in a semi-flexed position. It had been

65

Figure 18. Field sketch of human remains from elongated pit Feature 3 at 41FL76.

disturbed by natural erosion and rodents. The pit was exposed in the railroad cut and one bone
was observed eroding out of the slope face. The lack of duplicative bone elements and absence
of comingled bones indicate that the burial pit held a single individual. Several indicators were
used to estimate this individual’s age. The unfused vertebral epiphyses suggest a young, small,
slight individual. Since epiphyseal closures occur about the age of puberty, this individual is
probably slightly younger than this period of hormonal change and growth. Distal epiphyses on
the humerus usually fuse between the ages of 10 and 15 years, and such fusions are missing on
this individual. Similarly, epiphyseal union in femora usually happens after age 15 and the right
femur of this individual is missing its head and greater trochanter. The pelvic innominate usually
fuses about the 12th year and this part of the pelvis was unfused in this individual. Upper

66

Table 8. Observations on human remains from Feature 3 at site 41FL76.
Cat No.

Level/ Depth
(cm bgs)

Count

Weight
(g)

Identified Material or
Element

Size in millimeters
(mm)

Comment

Possible Tibia(?) fragments

Ln: 97.6 mm.
Mid-shaft diam.:
15 mm.

Specimen is weathered.
(Surface collected in
1993).

Human Remains from the Upper Pit Fill (L-1-5, 0-75 cm)
41FL76-8 (1993)

Trailways
Survey
surface slope

2

10 g

41FL76.83.1

Level 4
(45-60 cm)

1

nd

Possible left upper molar.

Crown Hght.: 7.4
mm. Crown brdth:
11.7 mm. Bucco­
lingual diam.: 12.4
mm.

Level 4, screen. Tooth
has reduced hypocone
& almost unworn. Tip
of one root missing.

41FL76.83.2-1

Level 4
(45-60 cm)
Level 4
(45-60 cm)

1

3g

Cervical vertebra.

2

nd

Vertebrae fragments

Level 4, screen; nearly
complete
Level 4, screen; two
smaller vertebrae
fragments.

41FL76.83.3-1

Level 5
(60-75 cm)

1

nd

Medial phalanx (toe).

41FL76.83.3-2

Level 5
(60-75 cm)
Level 5
(60-75 cm)

2

nd

Fibula fragments

Hght.: 33.5 mm.
Wdth: 36.3 mm.
Vert. body: Ln. 6.5
mm; Wdth 20
mm.; Hght. 11.2
mm.
Ln: 12.3 mm. Wd:
6.9 mm. Hght.:
5.0 mm.
No data

4

nd

Vertebra fragments,
including neural arch

No data

Level 5 screen.

41FL76.83.3-4

Level 5
(60-75 cm)

1

nd

Vertebra body

dorso-ventral
Hght.: 16.3 mm.
Anterior/posterior:
11.8 mm. Wd:
12.3 mm.

Level 5 screen.

41FL76.83.4-1

Level 5
(60-75 cm)

1

nd

Right deciduous upper
molar.

Crown Hght.: 5.7
mm. Crown brdth:
9.9 mm. Bucco­
lingual diam.: 10.7
mm.

Level 5, screen. Molar
is worn, M1?.

41FL76.83.4-2

Level 5
(60-75 cm)

1

nd

Right upper premolar.

Crown Hght.: 6.8
mm. Crown brdth:
7.6 mm. Bucco­
lingual diam.: 10.0
mm.

Level 5 screen.
Premolar is unworn
with an undeveloped
root.

41FL76.83.11

Level 6
(93 cm)

1

1g

Ln: 5 cm.

(Sketch item 3) Costal
groove is present.
Sternal end missing.

41FL76.83.13-1

Level 6
(97 cm)

2

nd

Right rib fragment. Small
rib fragment including
tubercle, angle, and part of
body.
Lumbar vertebra (sacral?).
Vertebra body & fragments

Immature; unfused
sacral edge.

41FL76.83.13-2A

Level 6
(97 cm)
Level 6
(97 cm)

10

nd

Vertebra fragments

Dorso-ventral hght:
20.5 mm.
Anterior/posterior:
21.0 mm. Wd:
26.6 mm.
No data

11

nd

Vertebra fragments

No data

Immature

Level 6
(97 cm)

1

nd

Lumbar Vertebra body.

Dorso-ventral hght:
20.0 mm.
Anterior/posterior:
12.6 mm. Wd:
38.5 mm.

Immature; billowy
edges with no
epiphyses.

41FL76.83.2-2

41FL76.83.3-3

41FL76.83.13-2B
41FL76.83.13-3

67

Level 5 screen.

Level 5 screen.

Immature.

Table 8 continued
Cat No.

Level/ Depth
(cm bgs)
Level 6
(97 cm)

Count
2

Weight
(g)
nd

Identified Material or
Element
Lumbar Vertebra body and
fragment

41FL76.83.13-5

Level 6
(97 cm)

1

4g

Lumbar Vertebra body frag.

41FL76.83.14

Level 6
(95 cm)

1

60 g

Right femur fragment.
Neck and lesser trochanter
present.

Ln 24.3 cm.
Anterior/posterior
mid-shaft diam.:
17.4 mm.
Subtrochanter A/P
diam.: 16.9 mm.
Mid-shaft circumf.:
5.7 cm.

(Sketch Item 5) prox.
and distal epiphyses
missing. Head
epiphysis and greater
trochanter missing;
Distal condyles
missing.

41FL76.83.15

Level 6
(95 cm)

1

8g

Fibula midsection (right?).

Ln: 116 mm. Wd:
12.4 mm.

41FL76.83.16

Level 6
(95 cm)

1

3g

Human limb sectionfibula? (smoothed and
flattened)

Ln: 47.1 mm.
Max. diam.: 12.2
mm. Min.
diameter: 8.4 mm.
circumf.: 3.5 cm.

Sketch item A5.
Specimen exhibits
slight weathering.
(Sketch item 6) This
mid-shaft fragment is
smoothed and flattened.

41FL76.83.17

Level 6
(94-95 cm)

1

28 g

Tibia midsection (right).

Ln: 151 mm. A/P
diam: 20.5 mm.
Mediolateral
diameter at nutrient
foramen: 16.2 mm.

"Sketch item A6"
Weathered on medial
and lateral surfaces.
Nutrient foramen and
popliteal line are
present.

41FL76.83.18

Level 6
(95-97 cm)

5

35 g

Left femur fragments (1
medial shaft & 4 pieces).

Ln: 15 cm. Midshaft circumf.: 5.6
cm. Mid-shaft A/P
diam.: 16.9mm.

(Sketch item 7)
Specimen is weathered
at distal end.

41FL76.83.19

Level 6
(95-97 cm)

6

nd

Phalanges-- Prob. Hand

Max. Ln: 27 mm.
Min. Ln: 10.1 mm.
Max. Wd: 9.2 mm.
Min. Wd: 6.0 mm.

(Sketch item 8) Four
prox., 1 medial and 1
distal pieces

41FL76.83.20

Level 6
(97 cm)

3

nd

Rib fragments. 3
midsections,

Max. Ln: 77.6
mm. Min. Ln:
52.0 mm. Max.
Wd: 12.3 mm.
Min. Wd: 9.2 mm.

(Sketch items 9-11)
One broken with 2
pieces refit. Head and
neck missing in all.
Two are A/P flattened.

41FL76.83.20

Level 6
(97 cm)

1

nd

Rib fragment, 1 head

Wd: 11 mm.

(Sketch item 12)
Sternal end; A/P
flattened.

41FL76.83.21-1

Level 6
(97 cm)

3+

20 g

Pelvis fragments: prob.
right male ilium frag,
ischium frag. (ilium wts 6
g; ischium wts 6 g)

Ln ilium: 72.3
mm. Wd ilium:
44.5 mm. ln
ischium: 46.7 mm.
Wd ischium: 35.2
mm.

(Sketch item 13) Pelvis
fragments and
acetabulum are
unfused. The
acetabulum usually
fuses by age 12 and
pubis fuses by age 7-8.
No iliac crest. Sciatic
notch is narrow,
resembling male form.

41FL76.83.13-4

68

Size in millimeters
(mm)
Dorso-ventral hght:
25.5 mm.
Anterior/posterior:
18.2 mm. Wd:
33.3 mm.
No data

Comment
Immature

Immature

Table 8 continued
Cat No.

Level/ Depth
(cm bgs)

Count

Weight
(g)

Identified Material or
Element

Size in millimeters
(mm)

Comment

41FL76.83.21-2

Level 6
(97 cm)

4

nd

Vertebra fragments (sacral
or coccygeal?)

Ln vertebra. body:
10-12 mm. Wd
vert. body: 23.2
mm. Hght vert.
body: 9-9.2 mm.

(Sketch item 13)
Vertebra fragments are
unfused.

41FL76.83.22-1

Level 6
(97-99 cm)

1

4g

Pelvis fragment (right)

Ln pubis: 47.3
mm. Wd pubis:
43.0 mm.

(Sketch item 14) Pubis
resembles male in short
subpubic angle.

41FL76.83.22-2

Level 6
(97-99 cm)

2

nd

Rib fragments

Ln ribs: 42.3-49
mm. Wd ribs: 9.2­
9.4 mm.

(Sketch item 14)

41FL76.83.23

Level 6
(99 cm)

25 ­
30

nd

Miscellaneous bone
fragments and chips.
(Vertebra. fragments,
sacral? fragments, rib
fragments, cranium?
fragments, unid. fragments.)

Ln vertebra.
fragment: 19.8
mm. Wd vertebra.
fragment: 29.3
mm. Hght vert.
fragment: 12.8
mm.

(Sketch item 14a)
Sacral body is unfused.

41FL76.83.24-1

Level 6
(94 cm)

14

nd

Rib fragments.

83.0 x 9.5 mm,
79.0 x 9.5 mm,
63.0 x 11.3 mm,
51.0 x 9.5 mm.

(Sketch item 15) One
bone may be a sternal
articulation or phalanx
fragment.

41FL76.83.25-1

Level 6
(94 cm)

5

nd

Anterior vertebra fragments

No data

(Sketch item. 16)

41FL76.83.25-2

Level 6
(94 cm)

3

nd

Rib fragments

No data

(Sketch item. 16)

41FL76.83.25-3

Level 6
(94 cm)

13

nd

Unidentified bone chips

No data

(Sketch item. 16)

41FL76.83.26

Level 6
(75-103 cm)

10+

nd

Cranium, Vertebra, and rib
fragments and chips.

No data

(Sketch item 17)
Remains after removal
of cranium. Left
mastoid weighs 13 g.

41FL76.83.27

Level 6
(75-103 cm)

2+

nd

Cranium and mandible.

No data

(Sketch item 15) Roots
penetrate cranial vault;
face is crushed.

41FL76.83.28 No
such
cat
no
exists)

Level 6
(75-103 cm)

1+

nd

Tooth fragment

No data

Tooth and other bone
recovered from
screened residue in
laboratory.

41FL76.83.5

Level 5
(60-75 cm)

32

6g

Unidentifiable bone
fragments.

No data

Level 5 screen. Small
bone fragments; most
unidentified, 1 burned;
most probably human

41FL76.83.6

Level 6
(75-103 cm)

38

11 g

Unidentifiable bone
fragments

No data

Unidentifiable
fragments some
probably human.

41FL76.83.7-1

Level 6
(75-103 cm)

2

nd

Unidentified bone
fragments

No data

Unidentifiable
fragments some
probably human.

69

Table 8 continued.-- Human bones, uncertain proveniences from F-3
Cat No.

Level/ Depth
(cm bgs)

Count

Weight
(g)

Identified Material or
Element

Size in millimeters
(mm)

Comment

41FL76.83.7-2

Level 6
(75-103 cm)

1

nd

Vertebreal neural arch (1)

No data

Sorted from
41FL76.83.7

41FL76.83.7-3

Level 6
(75-103 cm)

1

nd

cranial fragment

No data

Sorted from
41FL76.83.7

41FL76.83.8

Level 6 (Pit
fill)

2

nd

Distal phalanx (finger?)

ln: 8.5-9.3 mm.

Two fragments;
General pit fill

41FL76.83.9-1

Level 6
(93 cm)

8

19 g

Left? humerus fragments.
1) Med.-sized distal supra­
condyloid foramen. prox.
and distal epiphyses are
missing.

Ln: 19 cm
(reconstructed).
Mid-shaft diam.:
11.4 mm (14.5 mm
max). Least
circumf.: 4.4 cm.

(Sketch item 1). Distal
epiphyses usually fuse
between 10 and 15
years of age.

41FL76.83.9-2

Level 6
(93 cm)

2

1g

Bone fragments; possible
vertebrae process fragment;
possible vertebrae
diaphysis.

No data

(Sketch item 1a)
Found associated with
Bone No.1. Prob.
from different
elements fragment
(epiphysis missing).

41FL76.nd

General Pit
fill

1

nd

Right lower premolar?

No data

Unworn and
undeveloped root. 8­
10 years old? General
pit fill.

41FL76.nd

General Pit
fill

nd

17 g

Miscellaneous bone
fragments and chips.

No data

General pit fill

41FL76.nd

Level 6
(75-103 cm)

1

nd

Medial Phalanx (toe?) (size
different from 83.3)

Ln: 15.5 mm.
Wd: 7.4 mm.
Tk: 5.9 mm.

None; This list has 2
Medial Phalanges of
different sizes-catalog only lists 1
medial phalange-­
different bone,
unknown cat

41FL76.nd
(maybe
41FL76.83.24

Level 6
(75-103 cm)

14
(dupe?)

5g

Rib fragments

No data

None (perhaps
duplicate of
41FL78.83.24)

Non‐human/Animal remains found in the burial pit Feature 3
41FL76.72

Level 6
(75-103 cm)

3

13 g

Non-Human-- Bison (?)
long bone fragments

No data

One is burned; Long
bone fragment with
spiral fracture (2
pieces)

41FL76.83.10

Level 6
(93 cm)

1

6g

Non-human-- Unid. bone
frag

No data

(Sketch item 2) Non­
human

41FL76.83.12

Level 6
(93 cm)

1

7g

Non-human-- poss. bison
long bone frag

Ln: 49.9 mm.
Wd: 28.0 mm.

(Sketch item 4) Non­
human- possible bison
long bone fragment.
Bone fragment exhibits
spiral fracture.

41FL76.83.24-2

Level 6
(94 cm)

2

nd

Non-human bone fragments

No data

(Sketch item 15)
Animal Bone

70

premolars are usually erupting by the 10th year, but the premolars of this individual are unworn
and without fully developed roots. The age of this burial is probably 10 years or less based on
epiphyseal fusion, and dental eruption and wear of the deciduous molar and adult premolar
(bicuspid).

Gender determination is problematic, with different elements reflecting both male and female
characteristics. Examination of the cranium revealed eye orbits with sharp edges and a smooth
forehead without brow ridges; both attributes resemble female characteristics, but the brow
ridges become better differentiated in adolescents and adults. The bones are generally small and
slight, which also resemble female characteristics. The pelvis is the best area to identify the
gender of a skeleton. The sciatic notch and sub-pubic angle reflect male characteristics, even
though such gender characteristics differentiate significantly after puberty. On the basis of the
sciatic notch and pubis, this individual is probably a young male that has not yet developed
secondary sexual characteristics. No stature reconstruction was possible because no long bones
were complete. However, the general bone sizes indicate a small, slight individual. Examination
of the remains noted minimal evidence of disease or deformity. The only health problem noted
was that the lateral area of a maxillary sinus appeared “puffy and raised”; this is a possible sign
of periostitis, which is an inflammation of the connective tissue surrounding the bone (Taylor
2008). No trauma or clear cause of death was found.

The pit contained a small amount of non-human and burned bone within the fill. The presence of
14 (73.7%) non-human bones in the upper two levels (30 cm), might indicate that the interrment
occurred early in the site’s occupation sequence before the occupation midden developed. The
five deeper non-human bones could be incidental inclusions that occurred during the pit
backfilling from the habitation level. Associated funerary objects are limited to one unshaped
olivella shell and 35 disc-shaped shell beads. Unfortunately, the recovery of the disc beads from
the bulk matrix sample precludes functional interpretations. The recovery of the olivella shell
bead with one attached disc bead from near the ankle or pelvis suggests that, unless the marine
snail was moved by rodents, the beads may have been part of clothing adornments, or attached to
other perishable funerary objects placed in the grave, rather than as part of a necklace or bracelet.

71

Material Culture

The artifacts collected from all surface areas, cut banks, shovel tests, and the three test pits used
to investigate Features 1 through 3 number about 1,688 items (Table 9).

This section

summarizes each class of recovered artifacts. The artifacts from 41FL76 consist of one piece of
modern glass, four chipped stone tools (one projectile point, two bifaces, one uniface), 95 flakes,
232 hearth stones/fire-cracked rock, two mano fragments, nine prehistoric ceramic sherds, 1,057
animal bone fragments, 35 marine shell disc beads, one marine shell olivella shell bead, 13 non­
cultural floral samples, and four pieces of charcoal. Also recovered were 23 field provenience
lots containing 234 elements and bone fragments from the single interment of the older child or
pre-adolescent boy from burial pit Feature 3. These human remains have been tabulated above
and will not be repeated in this section. The distributions across the various areas are presented

Table 9. Distribution of all artifacts from 41FL76.
General
Surface
Historic Glass
Projectile Points
Bifaces
Unifaces
Flake Debris
Manos
FCR/ Hearth
Stones
Ceramic Sherds
Faunal Bone
Human Remains
Disc Shell Beads
Olivella Shell Bead
Floral Plant
Remains
Charcoal

ST-1

ST-2

F-1
Hearth

F-2
Oven

F-3
Pit

1
1
1
1
35
2
4
2
158

9

471

Percent
0.06
0.06
0.12
0.06
5.63
0.12
13.74

25

19

3

57

166

5

1
1
2
1
95
2
232

5
199

2
210

19
234
35
1
13

9
1057
234
35
1
13

0.59
62.62
13.86
2.07
0.06
0.77

1

4

0.24
100

1
4

Total

3

Total

204

4

480

290

398

311

1688

Percent

12.09

0.24

28.44

17.24

23.58

18.42

100

72

In the next section below. This section describes the various artifact classes from 41FL76 and
provides their respective proveniences from the site. Additional artifacts collected in 2014 are
described in Appendix B.

Historic Debris

Historic Glass (n = 1)

One piece of clear bottle glass (cat no. 41FL76-35) was recovered from Level 1 (0-10 cm) at
Hearth Feature 1. It is a recent addition to the site assemblage and it likely post-dates the
construction of the railroad in 1927-1928. It may have been left by workers removing the track,
or hikers walking the abandoned grade before the trail opened as a park. Other historic ceramics
attributed to the railroad era were collected in August, 2014 from this site (Appendix B).

Chipped Stone Implements

Projectile Point (n = 1; Figure 19A)

One specimen (cat no. 41FL76-9) is the tip fragment of an unidentified type of projectile point
made from Tecovas chert. It was surface collected from the cut bank slope wash below a “bone
concentration,” but the location of such a concentration was not recorded.

The abruptly

contracting blade edges suggest that the specimen may have been resharpened. The lack of the
shoulder and base characteristics prevents classification as to type or period. Based on the size
and shape, it is not possible to even classify the specimen as an arrow or dart point.

Bifaces (n = 2; Figure 19 B, C)

Two implements are crudely shaped bifacial tool fragments made of quartzite. Based on their
crude shape it appears that they may have been broken during early stages of tool manufacture.
One large specimen (cat no. 41FL76-11, Figure 19B) was from the general site surface. The
73

Figure 19. Diagnostic artifacts from site 41FL76. A: projectile point tip; B, C: biface fragments;
D: uniface fragment, E: olivella shell bead; F: shell disc beads; G, H: ground stone mano
fragments; I: distal bison tibia (erroneously thought to be a digging stick tip).

smaller fragment (cat/ no. 41FL76-16, Figure 19C) was recovered from Test Pit 1 (Feature 2),
Level 1. Quartzite is a local lithic material found as cobbles and gravels near the site.

Uniface (n = 1; Figure 19D)

One fragmentary flake (cat no. 41FL76-59) made of Edwards Plateau chert was recovered from
the site’s surface. This specimen exhibits continuous unifacial retouch along the edge. Insofar
as Edwards chert outcrops a considerable distance south and east of the site, its presence suggests
that this uniface was a useful implement carried to the Quitaque Creek region from the south.

74

Ground Stone Implements

Mano Fragments (n=2; Figure 19 G, H)

Two fragmentary quartzite manos, or hand stones (cat no. 41FL76-60) were recovered from the
surface of the site. The presence of manos suggests that some seed or grain processing into meal
or flour was occurring on site. However, the absence of the grinding slabs/metates might suggest
that they may have been recycled into stone boiling cobbles and were discarded as residues of
stone cooking activities.

Nondiagnostic Lithic Remains: Flake Debris, Fire-cracked Rock

Flake Debris (n = 95)

Small amounts of stone tool manufacturing or tool maintenance activities were found from all
areas of the site. No systematic attempt was made to identify the lithic stone materials, although
quartzite, and Tecovas chert are often mentioned in the catalog. Less commonly mentioned are
Alibates chert from the Canadian River basin to the north and Edwards chert from the southeast.
The general impression is that most of the chipped lithic tools and debitage reflect procurement
of local bedrock cherts (Tecovas) and use of relatively local Ogallala gravels (quartzites) with
little movement, or contact with other regions. No obsidian or other exotic imports from the
west are indicated by recovered stone flake assemblage.

Hearth stones/fire-cracked rock (n = 232)

These specimens are angular fractured, blocky chunks of quartzite, some caliche and rare
specimens of sandstone that are regarded as hearth stones used in ovens or stone boiling
technology. Most are from the burned rock oven Feature 2 (n=166; 71.55%), or the rock hearth

75

F-1 (n=57; 24.57%). Only four burned rocks (1.72%) came from the general site surface
whereas another 5 rocks (2.16%) were from the fill of the burial pit Feature 3.

Ceramics (n = 9)

Nine potsherds came from the general site surface (n=2; cat nos. 41FL76-61, 41FL76-62),
associated with thermal hearth Feature 1 (n=5; 41FL76-32, 41FL76-36) or the rock filled oven
and rake-off Feature 2 (n=2; cat no. 41FL76-20). They are all body sherds from plainware
vessels, and are assigned to three types based on visual appearance of sherd color, thickness and
surface treatments. These consist of a smooth, buff-colored, moderately thick, plainware (n=1
sherd), a smooth, dark gray, moderately thin, plainware (n=6 sherds), and a smooth, moderately
thin, redware (n=2 sherds). Petrographic studies were conducted on a single sherd from each
group (Appendix A). Two additional sherds recovered during a 2014 site revisit are not included
in the present discussion, but are described in Appendix B. The following provides further
details on each of the three ceramic groups.

Unidentified Buff-Colored Plainware, Group 1.

Ceramic Group 1 is composed of a single smooth, buff or light brown-colored plainware body
sherd showing minor exterior surface polish. The sherd (cat no. 41FL76-61), possibly from the
lower body part of the vessel was recovered from the surface near Feature 2 on the north side of
the rail road bed. Macroscopic examination of the paste identified clear quartz grit sand temper.
Petrographic analysis using the point-count method at 317 observations points identified 99
aplastic particles which were dominated by grit (23.53%) and granite (2.84%) (Appendix A).
The grit was further identified as 60 pieces of quartz, two pieces polycrystalline quartz, 19 pieces
alkali feldspar, and four pieces of weathered grit (quartz and/or alkali feldspar).

Other minerals

observed during the sherd examination, but not falling on an identification grid point include
hornblende (scarce), microcline (scarce), and mafic inclusions (rare).

76

This single sherd measured <2 x 4 cm, is 6.7 mm thick, and weighs 4.3 g. The broken sherd
edges are straight-to-curvy and the paste is soft and crumbly without shelf or step fractures in
cross section, and the fracture does not seem to coincide with manufacturing coils. According to
the Munsell Color Chart (1988), the exterior surface is a white-light white color (7.5YR 7.5/0),
while the interior surface color is gray (7.5YR 5/1), and the sherd core paste color is a gray to
light gray (7.5YR 6.5/0). The cross sectional color profiles conforms to Teltser’s (1993) Type C
firing atmosphere with a dark core caused by incomplete oxidation due to low firing
temperatures, or partial oxidation. Examination of the exterior surface shows faint overlapping
smoothing striations and mild polish. The interior surface is smooth with many fine temper drag
marks.

No carbon residues are present on either finished surface.

Despite the larger size of this single sherd, few of the regional ceramic specialists ventured a
guess about the type, place of manufacture or period of usage. This single sherd is regarded as
being not culturally diagnostic and not affiliated with any specific manufacturing source.

Dark Gray Plainware/ Utility Plainware, Group 2

Ceramic Group 2 consists of six sherds from subsurface contexts associated with hearth Features
1 (TP-2, level 1 [0-10 cm bs; cat no. 41FL76-32], n=4; and level 2 [10-20 cm bs 41FL76-36],
n=1), and hearth Feature 2 (TP-1, level 2 [10-20 cm bs 41FL76-20], n=1). The recovery of
sherds from the fill of both hearth features suggests that they belong to occupations of the same
period.

The six sherds from Ceramic Group 2 are all generally dark gray to reddish gray, smoothed,
plainware body sherds showing no surface polish. Macroscopic examination of the paste
identified combinations of clear, white and rose quartz grit sand temper; two sherds had rare
mica inclusions. Petrographic analysis of a single sherd, cat no. 41FL76-32.1, from this group
examined 292 counting points and identified 92 aplastic particles which were dominated by grit
(29.45%) and carbonate (1.37%) (Appendix A). The grit was further identified as 56 pieces of
quartz, 14 pieces alkali feldspar, and 15 pieces of weathered grit (quartz and/or alkali feldspar)
77

and one piece of microcline (Appendix A). Rock particles not considered in the grit tabulation
include two pieces biotite mica, three pieces calcite, and one calcium carbonate. Other minerals
observed during the sherd scan, but not falling on an identification grid point include plagioclase
(scarce), chert (rare), chalcedony (rare), mafic (rare) and perthite (scarce).

The six sherds mostly range from <1 x 2 cm (n=4) to <2 x 3 cm; and from 5.1 (n=3), 5.3 (n=2) to
5.9 (n=1) mm thick. They weigh from 0.3 to 2.1 g. The broken sherd edges are mostly straight
and crisp, without shelf or step fractures in cross section, and the fractures that do not coincide
with coils. According to the Munsell Color Chart (1988), the exterior surface colors range from
dusky red (2.5YR 3/2, n=2), dark reddish gray (5YR 4/2, n=2), dark reddish brown (5YR 3/3,
n=1) to gray (2.5YR 5/0, n=1). Interior surface colors range from dusky red (2.5YR 3/2, n=1),
dark reddish gray/dark reddish brown (5YR 3.5/2, n=1), gray/dark gray (5YR 4.5/1, n=1), dark
gray (2.5YR 4/0, 5YR 4/1, n=2), to very dark gray (2.5YR 3/0, n=1). The core paste colors
range from dark brown (7.5YR 3/2, n=1), dark reddish brown (5YR 3/2, n=2), dark gray reddish
brown (5YR 4/3, n=2) to gray (2.5YR 5/0, n=1). The cross sectional color profiles for all six
sherds corresponds to Teltser’s (1993) Type B firing atmosphere with a uniformly very dark
cross section caused by vessel firing in an oxygen poor environment. Examination of the
smoothed exterior surface shows faint wipe marks on three sherds, and no wipe marks on the
other three. The interior surfaces are well smoothed (n=4) or rough smoothed (n=1), with the
interior of one sherd obliterated by the catalog number. None of the sherds have carbon residues
from cooking, but the carbon might have been washed away during the laboratory cleaning
process.

Most of the six dark gray plainware sherds are too small for reliable identifications. They
strongly resemble the single dark gray plainware sherd (Ceramic Group 2) found at 41FL2. Reg
Wiseman suggested that they could be Ochoa Brown Plainware from southeastern New Mexico.
However, Richard Drass (personal communication November 6, 2013) expressed an opinion
based on megascopic examination of the paste that the dark gray sherds resemble Edwards Plain
pottery from the Little Deer site on the basis of surface smoothing, slight polish, fine sand temper
and extreme thinness. Drass felt comfortable with them being assigned to the Protohistoric/Late
Ceramic period. David Snow (personal communication, November 20, 2014) indicated that the
78

calcareous paste combinations are present in both plain and glaze ceramics made near Pecos
Pueblo (Shepard 1936) and the sherd might be a faint striated utility ware.

Red Plainware/ Redware, Group 3

The two body sherds from Ceramic Group 3 are moderately thin, red plainware body sherds
showing no surface polish. One sherd (cat no. 41FL76.62) was found on the surface near
Feature 2 and the other (cat no. 41FL76-20.2) came from level 2 (10-20 cm bs) in TP 1 dug to
expose Feature 2. Macroscopic examination of the paste identified abundant opaque white
quartz grit sand temper in both sherds. Petrographic analysis of sherd 41FL76.62 using pointcount methods identified 106 aplastic particles from 306 paste and temper counting points which
were dominated by grit (n=72, 20.52%) and granite (n=32, 10.46%) inclusions (Appendix A).
The grit was further identified as 41 pieces of quartz, four pieces polycrystalline quartz, 19
pieces alkali feldspar, and six pieces of weathered grit (quartz and/or alkali feldspar). Non-grit
particles counted during petrographic analysis include two pieces of probable hematite. The
sherd scan conducted after the point-count also noted the presence of hornblende (uncommon),
microcline (scarce), biotite mica (uncommon), and chert (rare).

The two sherds measure <1 x 1 cm and <2 x 3 cm; and 4.2 and 4.3 mm thick. The larger sherd
weighs 4.1 g. The broken sherd edges are straight and crisp, without shelf or step fractures in
cross section, and the fractures that do not coincide with coils. The exterior surface colors range
from red (10R 5/6), to weak red (10R 5/3.5; Munsell Color Chart 1988). Interior surface colors
range from red (10R 4.5/6), to weak red (10R 5/3). The core paste colors range from red (10R
5/6) to reddish gray (10R 5.5/1). The cross sectional color profiles corresponds to Teltser’s
(1993) Type C firing atmosphere with a dark core caused by incomplete oxidation due to low
firing temperatures, or partial oxidation. The exterior surfaces are plain and smooth without
striations. The larger sherd had overlapping parallel polish striations and temper drag marks on
the interior. The interior surface of the smaller sherd was obscured by the catalog number.
Neither sherd had carbon residues from cooking.

79

Based on macroscopic examination, Richard Drass (personal communication, November 6,
2013) complained that this redware sherd was too small to say much about possible
manufacturing sources and suggested that it could be either from the Southeast (Caddo Area) or
Southwest (Pueblo Area). Tim Perttula (personal communication, November 8, 2013) indicated
that Caddo redware sherds are usually tempered with shell or grog but the macroscopic
occurrence of grit suggested to Tim that the sherd was probably not Caddo, although the sherd
was smaller than the size that he prefers to analyze. Reg Wiseman (personal communication
October 18, 2013) indicated that the sherd could be an example of a Rio Grande glaze-ware, but
the lack of distinguishing criteria (rim form, glaze/paint) precludes reasonable suggestion of the
type or even period. The major petrographically-identified temper particles consist of grit sand
and granite. The absence of volcanic tuff temper suggests that the single petrographicallystudied sherd and perhaps both redware sherds from 41FL76 were not from the same source as
the redware pottery from 41FL2. David Snow (personal communication, November 20, 2011)
felt that the sherd with quartz and granite-tempered paste could be from a late glaze ware vessel
from the Southwest.

The abundance of grit does suggest that it may be derived from

Southwestern sources, however. Most likely this sherd dates between A.D. 1300 and 1700, and
is assigned to the Late Prehistoric/late Middle Ceramic or Protohistoric/Late Ceramic periods.

Faunal Remains

Bone Debris (n= 1,057)

A considerable quantity of broken animal bone was recovered from the site. No formal attempt
was made to identify the elements; however the larger elements found include fragmentary bison
limb bones (Figure 19I). One catalog card (cat no. 41FL76-14) reports the presence of a tibia
digging stick tip from the surface of the site; but although the distal tibia fragment is indeed
broken into a general shape of a digging stick, it has no burned socket hole in the distal articular
end or a shaped blade edge. Thus, no such bone digging implement is present in the assemblage.
Instead, the fragmentary bone suggests that large bison limb bone elements were broken to
extract marrow. This element is too large to reflect grease rendering activities. A small amount
80

of bone was charred and calcined, indicating that some of the cooking units of meat were roasted
open flame or the bones were discarded as residue into the camp or cooking fires.

Marine shell disc beads (n = 35; Figure 19F)

These disc shell beads (cat no. 41FL76-81) measure about 4 to 5 mm in diameter and are made
from marine shells. Each has a 1.5 to 2 mm diameter conically or bi-conically-drilled central
hole through the disc.

Presumably they represent trade materials from the Southwestern

Puebloan areas of New Mexico or northern Mexico. The typical method for making these beads
is to break shells into small pieces that are each drilled, threaded into strings and the irregularlyshaped pieces are rolled on coarse stone to form the disc shape. Most (n=34) were found during
screening of the bulk sediment matrix sample collected from Level 6 of the Feature 3 burial fill;
one was stuck in the aperture end of the olivella marine snail bead. They are believed to be part
of a funerary ornament.

Olivella shell bead (n = 1; Figure 19E)

A single specimen (cat no. 41FL76-79) is an olivella shell bead found near the south wall of the
Feature 3 grave in Level 6 fill. The marine snail shell measures about 1.6 cm long by 0.8 cm in
maximum diameter and is unembellished without incised decorations. The spire tip of this snail
has been ground off for threading the shell as a bead or pendant. One disc shell bead was
discovered stuck in the aperture opening of this marine snail. The specific olivella snail species
is not identified, but several varieties commonly thrive in the Pacific Ocean, the Gulf of
California, the Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic/Caribbean south of North Carolina (Abbott 1954:
246-247). Based on the abundance of olivella beads from the Greater Southwest (Vokes and
Gregory 2007: 332) relative to their occurrence along the Gulf of Mexico (Steele 1987), the bead
probably is derived from cultures to the southwest. The snail bead was a decorative mortuary
item associated with the child burial.

81

Floral Plant Remains (n=13)

Eight of the 13 cataloged floral remains (cat nos. 41FL76-83 and -84) are unburned and
unidentified tubers recovered from Levels 4 and 5 (45-75 cm bs) of the burial pit Feature 3.
They are most likely modern species of tubers from such plants as ground nuts, bush morning
glories, Maximillian sunflower, or perhaps prairie turnips, etc. that fortuitously grew in the pit
fill.

The other five specimens (cat no. 41FL76.79) are complete and broken fragments of hackberry
seeds recovered from fine screening the bulk sample from Level 6 (75-103 cm bs) that yielded
most of the skeletal remains. Insofar as hackberry seeds are hard and tend to naturally preserve
for a long time, they probably represent relatively recent materials introduced to the lower pit fill
by burrowing rodents. None of the plant remains are regarded as artifacts.

Charcoal (n=4)

Four pieces of charred wood were from Level 5 from Hearth Feature 1 (cat no. 41FL76-49; n=3),
and from the bulk soil matrix of Level 6 from the grave Feature 3 (cat no. 41FL76-73; n=1). No
attempt was made to identify the wood species. These samples are both from cultural contexts
and may be suitable for radiocarbon dating to determine the ages of their respective features.

Material Distributions at 41FL76

The artifact assemblage from 41FL76 number 1,688 items, and consist mostly of animal bone
fragments (n=1,057 bones, 62.62%), fire-cracked rock (n=232, 13.74%), and flake tool
manufacturing debris (n=95, 5.63%). Only four chipped stone tools (one point, two bifaces, one
uniface) were found, and only one biface came from subsurface contexts at Feature 2. The nine
prehistoric potsherds were mostly found to be associated with the two burned rock features (n=7)
or the general site surface. Neither the chipped stone tools nor the pottery are diagnostic of
82

cultural affiliations. Although an ashy midden area was recorded on the site map, insufficient
information is derived from the non-diagnostic artifact assemblage to tell the periods and
frequency of site use during prehistoric times, beyond a general feeling that the occupations
probably occurred during the last 1,000 years (Late Prehistoric II-Protohistoric periods).

Multiple inspections of the general site surface recovered only 204 artifacts of which 158
(77.4%) consisted of animal bone fragments. The non-perishable surface lithic and ceramic
remains only consisted of 35 flakes, three chipped stone tools, two mano fragments, four pieces
of fire-cracked rock and two potsherds. Based on the impression of the non-faunal artifact
abundance, if the faunal remains had decomposed, then the surface archeological signature of the
site would be hard to detect.

One of the most intriguing aspects of this study is that more than a quarter of the artifacts
(n=480, 28.44%) came from ST-2, a small 30 x 30 cm shovel test pit. This high density of
remains, mostly bone splinters, suggests that this small shovel test pit crosscut a midden or
feature.

The two thermal features (Features 1 and 2) were associated with moderate fire-cracked rocks
(57, and 166 fragments from Features 1 and 2, respectively), broken animal bones (199, and 210
fragments) and low quantities of flake debris (25, and 19) and rare pottery (five, and two sherds,
respectively). Small amounts of charcoal came from the area of scattered rock feature, Feature 1,
whereas the sole subsurface chipped stone tool was found at the oven feature, Feature 2. These
remains reflect activities mostly related to subsistence cooking.

The burial pit, Feature 3, consists mostly of human remains (234 specimens) and associated
mortuary goods consisting of marine shell disc beads and an olivella shell bead (n=36 items).
The low density of other remains (no chipped or ground stone tools, three flakes, five hearth
stones, 19 animal bones, and one unit of charcoal) perhaps relate to incidental remains knocked
into the burial pit from the site walls or during the pit refilling. The 13 plant remains consisting
of tubers and hackberry seeds from Feature 3 are all regarded as non-cultural inclusions.

83

Summary and Recommendations

The investigations at 41FL76 clearly show that this is a campsite with multiple burned rock
cooking features and the grave of a juvenile male. Unfortunately no definitive information was
obtained to shed light on the number, duration or span of occupations. The ashy midden area
suggests that one or more of the occupations left anthropomorphically altered midden soils. The
brown ware pottery from the site suggests that this area may have been periodically occupied
during the Late Prehistoric II through Protohistoric periods. The horizontal boundaries of site
41FL76 were established based on the locations of surface collected artifacts and cultural debris
within the TPWD ROW. Vertical depth was determined by visual inspection of cultural material
exposed in cut bank profiles, shovel tests, and mitigation of the features.

Random surface collections were made of the exposed areas of the site within the TPWD ROW.
The heaviest concentrations of exposed cultural material were located north of the rail bed cut.
Slope washing of the northern beveled cut bank has exposed numerous small bone fragments.
The area above and to the north of this sloping cut bank has been continuously disturbed by
rodent activities. Surface collections from 41FL76 include two ground stone mano fragments,
one projectile point tip fragment of Tecovas chert, one biface end fragment of quartzite, one
uniface fragment of Edwards Plateau chert, two ceramic sherds (one buff colored polished
plainware sherd; one trade ware sherd, red over brown exterior), burned and unburned bone
fragments and pieces of lithic debitage.

Project funding did not allow for comprehensive

analysis or identification of the recovered ceramics.

Shovel Test 1 was excavated in three 10 cm levels. Three identifiable tertiary flakes and one
unidentifiable bone fragment were recovered from Level 1 (0-10 cm). There were no cultural
materials recovered from Level 2 (10-20 cm) or Level 3 (20-30 cm).

Shovel Test 2 was excavated in four 10 cm levels. Lithic cultural material recovered from this
shovel test is limited to fire-cracked rock fragments and Tecovas chert flakes. This shovel test
also recovered 271 pieces of unworked bone from Levels 1 and 2 and the bone ceased altogether
in Level 3 at 24 cm below the surface.
84

Feature 1 was an eroding fire hearth located near the top edge of the northern rail bed cut. This
feature was excavated in five 10-cm levels (0-50 cm). While exposing the hearth it became
apparent that the southern portion of the hearth was absent possibly due to rail bed construction
and/or erosion. The remaining portion of the hearth was situated near the edge of the cut bank.
Materials recovered from this feature included four plainware ceramic sherds with quartz temper,
lithic debitage (primarily Tecovas chert), dispersed fire-cracked rocks, bone fragments and
associated hearthstones. The densest concentration of cultural materials was found at depths
between 10 and 40 cm. Soil samples were not collected from Feature 1 although soil color and
texture were noted and recorded during the excavations.

Feature 2 was an eroding fire hearth or rock-filled oven located near the top edge of the southern
rail bed cut. Feature 2 is located approximately 65 meters south west and across the rail bed
from Feature 1. This feature was excavated in four 10 cm levels (0-33 cm). Excavation of Level
4 ceased at 33 cm bs at the contact with sterile sub-soils mixed with caliche. It is not known how
much of the hearth was lost to rail bed construction and/or erosion.

Feature 3, the elongated oval pit, was probably dug strictly as a grave for the juvenile male.
Some insights into the interment relative to the presumed various site occupations might be
derived from the non-mortuary artifacts within the burial pit (Table 7). In addition to the skeletal
remains and associated grave goods, the base of the pit (Level 6) also contained at least two
small unmodified bison bone fragments. These non-human remains might have been either
knocked from the walls of the pit into the grave during pit/filling, or perhaps rodent activities
may have moved artifacts to the base of the grave. The lower pit fill (Levels 3-5; 30 to 75 cm)
contained at least 13 human skeletal remains only from levels 4 and 5, which are attributed to
rodent disturbances, as well as three animal bones, and two unworked stones. These animal
bones and stones may be incidental inclusions during the grave refilling episode or intrusive
artifacts from the upper site occupation fill. The upper pit fill (Levels 1-2; 0-30 cm) contain 14
non-human bones and three lithic flakes. These materials perhaps represent midden occupation
debris post-dating the burial pit. Thus, if the non-funerary artifacts and non-human bones from
the base of the pit fill represent incidental artifacts backfilled during closure of the grave, then
85

the interment does not represent the burial from the earliest occupation of the site; alternatively,
the artifacts from the upper levels of the top of the burial pit suggests that some occupations
occurred after the interment. Without radiocarbon dating of a tooth or other bone elements and
the age estimates of the recovered pottery, the antiquity and cultural affiliation of this individual
remains undetermined.

Petrographic Studies of Select Potsherds from 41FL2 and 41FL76.
The 12 sherds from 41FL2 and 41FL76 were obtained on loan from the P-PHM following
manuscript review by the Texas Historical Commission to conduct petrographic identification of
the sherd’s temper and paste in order to clarify potential vessel manufacturing source areas
(Figure 20). Each sherd was measured and weighed, and observations were made on the interior

Figure 20. Pottery from 41FL2 and 41FL76, Caprock Canyon Trailways Project.

86

Table 10. Petrographic point-count for five sherds from 41FL2 and 41FL76.

41FL2
Group 1

Temper Group
P‐PHM Catalog no.
Petro. Sample no.
Recorded inclusion

41FL76

Cord‐marked

Group 2
Red slipped
Plainware

Group 2
Red slipped
Plainware

Group 3
Dark Gray
Plainware

Group 4
Unid. Light brown
Plainware

Bone
41FL2‐
14
41FL2‐
Count

Tuff
41FL2‐
15
41FL2‐
Count

Granite

Sand/Calcareous

Sand

A2221.32.1
41FL76
61a‐3
Count
Percent

A2221.61
41FL76
Count

2A‐2
Percent

14a‐5
Percent

15a‐4
Percent

A2221.62
41FL76
Count

1a‐1
Percent

Voids
Paste

8
210

2.63
69.08

33
200

10.93
66.23

20
200

6.54
65.36

19
200

6.51
68.49

2
220

0.63
69.4

Aplastic/ temper

94

30.92

102

33.77

106

34.64

92

31.51

99

31.2

41
4
19
6

13.4
1.31
6.21
1.96

56
0
14
15

19.18
4.79
5.14

60
2
19
4

0.34

scarce
scarce
2

0.63

29.45

87

27.44

9
2
1
0

2.84
0.63
0.32

Bone

5

1.64

0

Quartz
Polycrystalline quartz
Alkali feldspar
Weathered grit
(Quartz/Alkali Feldspar)

70
2
9
8

23.03
0.66
2.96
2.63

39
rare
8
11

12.91

1
3

0.33
0.99

Hornblende
Microcline

0
scarce

Plagioclase

scarce

Composite Igneous Grit
Granite
Muscovite Mica
Biotite Mica
Calcite
Calcium Carbonate
Tuff
Chert
Opaques (Hematite)
Chalcedony
Mafic
Perthite

89
0
0
0
0
0
0
scarce
0
0
0

Total Point‐count

94

2.65
3.64

Uncommon
29.28

rare
Total Aplastic

0

62

20.52

1
2
0
0
0
35
1
1
0
scarce

0.33
0.66

11.59
0.33
0.33

scarce
30.92
304

102

0

uncommon
scarce

0
1

2

0.65

scarce

72

23.53

86

10.46

rare
0
2
3
1
0
rare
0
rare
rare

32
0
uncommon
0
0
0
rare
2
0
0

0.65

0
33.77
302

106

0

0.68
1.03
0.34

0
0
0
0
rare

scarce
34.64
306

92

18.93
0.63
5.99
1.26

0
31.51
292

99

31.2
317

and exterior surface colors and surface treatment, and the paste characteristics (Table 10). The
physical sizes of the sherds are small: 66% of the 12 sherds measure less than 2 x 2 cm, and the
largest single sherd measures less than 3 x 3 cm.

Many ceramic analysts would consider

conducting macroscopic trait attribute analysis on the four largest sherds, since some traits (e.g.
coil vs. paddle/anvil manufacturing methods) cannot be made with confidence from small
ceramic fragments. The sherds from the two sites were visually sorted into four provisional
groups based on color and surface characteristics. As discussed above, three ceramic groups

87

were present at 41FL2. Group 1 is the smoothed-over cord-marked sherd (n=1), Group 2 is a red
plainware sherd (n=1), and Group 3 is a dark gray plainware potsherd (n=1). Three ceramic
groups were also provisionally identified from 41FL76: Group 2, red plainware sherds (n=2);
Group 3, dark gray plainware sherds (n=6); and Group 4, a buff colored plainware sherd (n=1).
Petrographic studies were conducted by the staff at the Center for Archeological Research,
University of Texas, San Antonio (Appendix A). Only five of the combined 12 sherds were
sufficiently large to be set in a polymer cube, cut with a rock saw, mounted on a glass slide for
microscopic viewing and ground down to a sufficient thickness for temper, paste and pore/void
quantifications and temper identifications using normal and polarized light. The five sherds
consisted of two sherds from 41FL2: Group 1, the cord-marked sherd (cat no. 41FL2-14; pet.
sample 5), and Group 2 the red plainware sherd (cat no. 41FL2-15; pet. sample 4). The three
sherds from 41FL76 consisted of Group 2, the red plainware sherd (cat no A2221-62/41FL76-62;
pet. sample 1), a Group 3 very dark gray plainware sherd (cat no A2221-32.1/41FL76-32.1; pet.
sample 3) and the Group 4, buff/light brown plainware sherd (cat no. A2221.61/41FL76-61; pet.
sample 2). Each sherd was selected as the largest specimen from each pottery group identified
from the two sites. The only sherd group not represented in the two site assemblages was the
dark gray plainware sherd from 41FL2; but this group visually resembles the dark gray sherd
group from 41FL76 and is assumed to be the same type at both sites.
An initial petrographic study used a point-count method of tabulating paste, voids, and
identifying aplastic/temper at each cross-hair point on a grid imposed over the slide mounted
with a thin slice of the sherd until 100 paste point-counts was achieved. For the five sherds, an
initial petrographic study tabulated 131 to 169 observation points, but of these, only 27 to 67
were identifications of temper or aplastics inclusions.

Due to the wide range of temper

frequency variability (a difference of 40 aplastic/temper points) and especially the low number of
identifications of temper in some sherds (n=27 observations), these initial petrographic results
were felt to provide some accuracy but a low level of precision or confidence. Accordingly, the
mounted sherd cross sections were restudied using the same methods repeated until a paste count
of 200 was achieved. The petrographic restudy results ranged from 311 to 335 point-counts for
the five sherds, but more importantly, the aplastic/temper identifications ranged from 92 to 106,
with a difference of only 14 aplastic temper points among the five sherds. Due to the smaller
88

range of variation and the higher number of aplastic/temper identifications hovering around 100
aplastic/temper points, this second study was regarded as being more accurate and more precise.
In addition to the formal point-counting method, each slide was examined microscopically to
search for other kinds of minerals present that escaped detection using the formal grid pointcount procedures. Unique aplastic mineral types not appearing using the formal point-count
method were ranked by the UTSA petrographers according to their occurrence and arbitrarily
designated as “rare”, “uncommon” and “common.” Mineral types that were noted only once
during this visual scan of the slide were identified as “rare” by the UTSA researchers. Those
kinds of inclusions that occurred once each time the analyst moved the microscopic field-of-view
over the slide were coded by the UTSA researchers as “uncommon”. Inclusions that ranged
from 2-3 occurrences per field of view but not present in the formal point-count were coded as
“common” by the UTSA researchers in Appendix A. However, the present authors feel that if
the mineral is truly common, then it should have been caught in the formal point-count
identification process. To remove this possible terminological contradiction, we feel that a more
accurate series of terms should be “rare” (single occurrence per scan), “scarce” (occurred one per
view of scan field), and “uncommon” if two to three pieces of the mineral were observed during
the microscopic scan. Those aplastic mineral types that exceeded three specimens per field-of­
view were regarded by the present authors as “common”; however, the visual scans produced no
examples of “common” mineral types that were not quantified by point-counts among the five
examined sherds. The authors’ terminology is used in the main body of the report, but the
Appendix A, which is the revised report submitted by UTSA petrographers uses their original
terms. The following summarizes these results from the petrographic reanalyzed study.
The petrographic studies indicate that most identified minerals in all sherds contained
predominately isolated grit components of completely or partly decomposed granite, such as
quartz grit, polycrystalline quartz grit, alkali feldspar grit and, occasionally hornblende,
microcline, plagioclase grit, and both muscovite and biotite forms of mica (Table 10). These
major mineral types have been previously identified in petrographic studies of Antelope Creek
phase pottery in the Canadian River Valley (Lintz and Reese-Taylor 1997). These igneous
materials may be representative of the grit particles commonly found on the High Plains as out­
wash alluvial fan debris from the Rocky Mountain orogeny. Different proportions of granitic
89

minerals as temper in the sherds perhaps relate to distances of temper procurement locations
from the granite outcrop source and the natural sorting of mineral grains by alluvial or aeolian
transport velocities. However, granite also outcrops in exposures of the Washita Mountains in
southwestern Oklahoma.
In the present analyses, these various decomposed granitic grit mineral components were
combined to form a category of “composite igneous grit” that represented the most common
inclusion in all five sherds. They ranged from 20.52 to 29.45% of the paste and aplastic pointcounts (Table 10).
The composite igneous grit was the major aplastic/temper inclusions for all sherds. The presence
of other kinds of aplastic/tempering materials combined with surface treatments provides
possible insights into ceramic manufacturing source areas (Figure 21). For site 41FL2, the use of
bone temper (1.64% of paste and temper) and quartz grit with the smoothed-over cord-marked
treatment of Group 1 sherd (41FL2-14; pet. sample 5) conforms to the surface treatment and
paste characteristics of Borger cord-marked pottery from the upper portions of the Texas
panhandle commonly made by Antelope Creek phase people during the Late Prehistoric/Middle
Ceramic Period (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954). The red plainware Group 2 sherd from the
same site (41FL2-15; pet. sample 4) has some 11.52 % of volcanic tuff and 0.33% of granite grit;
this combination of surface treatment and tuff temper reflects a probable manufacturing source
area from the greater upper Rio Grande region above Santa Fe. Unfortunately without further
clarification of the form of tuff type, the specific sub-regional source of this red plainware
pottery type remains unidentified. This sherd, perhaps from a red plainware, or an undecorated
portion of a glaze ware vessel, is clearly of Southwestern origins; either as plain red trade ware
vessels commonly found in High Plains sites during the Middle Ceramic and Late Ceramic
Periods (Baugh and Swenson 1980; Crabb 1968), or as forays of Southwestern hunters to the
region.
Turning to the petrography results from 41FL76, the aplastics/temper inclusions of the red
plainware Category 2 sherd (A2221.62; pet. sample 1) depart significantly from the red
plainware from 41FL2, by the occurrence of 10.46 % non-deteriorated granite inclusions instead
of tuff. Clearly these two red plainware sherds from different archeological sites are derived
from very different manufacturing sources. The higher percent of non-deteriorated granite from
90

Figure 21. Percent of dominant aplastic temper in petrographic sherds.

the 41FL76 redware might reflect a manufacturing source closer to granite outcrops of
northwestern New Mexico or from the Wichita Mountain region of southwestern Oklahoma or
the intentional addition of granite as a tempering agent. Since other researchers have noted that
some red plainware sherds from north-central Texas are attributed to locally-made sources
(Ferring and Perttula 1987), the use of granite from southern Oklahoma or northern Texas are
possible manufacturing sources.

91

Similarly the light brown/buff plainware Category 4 sherd (A2221-61; pet. sample 2) from
41FL76 has a small but noticeable amount of non-deteriorated granite inclusions (2.84%). The
higher incidence of grit temper relative to granite suggests that it may be from a local high-plains
source. In this instance, the granite might have been an unintentional background inclusion.
The single thin very dark gray plainware Category 3 sherd from 41FL76 (A2221-32.1, pet.
sample 3) is the only sherd with any inclusions of calcite and calcium carbonates (1.37%). Most
likely the aplastic/temper is decomposed caliche or calcium carbonate grit derived from or near
the cap rock escarpments of the High Plains. This inclusion suggests a localized manufacturing
source from the Texas panhandle or western Oklahoma. The sherd color, thickness and surface
treatment of this very dark gray plainware Category 3 sherd from 41FL76 macroscopically
resembles the Category 3 sherd from 41FL2, although the latter sherd was too small for
petrographic analysis. These dark gray plainware sherds from both archeological sites are
perhaps related to the quartz sandy/silty paste dark gray pottery reported from the
Protohistoric/Late Ceramic Period Edwards I and Little Deer sites of the Edwards Complex in
western Oklahoma (Baugh 1982; Hofman 1978). They also bear some similarities with Lovitt
Plain assigned to the Protohistoric Dismal River Complex in the central Plains.

The low

percentage of alkali feldspar (ca. 5%) within the class of composite igneous grit differentiates
these sherds from Perdido Plain (Baugh 1982: 75) and Tierra Blanca Plain of the dark gray
plainware of the Tierra Blanca Complex, a Late Ceramic Period manifestation in the upper Texas
Panhandle (Habicht-Mauche 1991; Spielmann 1982). Unfortunately, many of these dark gray
quartz sand/silt grit ceramic types are identified by variations in rim forms and vessel shapes,
which are lacking in the small sherd assemblages from these two sites (Habicht-Mauche 1988).
Although the petrographic study is based only on five sherds, each from different ceramic groups
from the two sites, the results suggest that the prehistoric occupations of 41FL2 and 41FL76
primarily occurred during the Middle and Late Ceramic Periods; the presence of a possible
Deadman’s point from 41FL2 suggests that Early Ceramic Period component also might be
present. The cord-marked ceramics from 41FL2 suggest affinities with groups to the north
(Canadian River Valley) and the tuff-tempered red plainware with non-local trade goods from
north-central New Mexico. The three sherds from 41FL76 might have been made from local

92

sources by mobile groups that periodically visited southwestern Oklahoma and the Texas
panhandle.
This small project focusing on limited field work at two sites provided insights into the
prehistoric use of bench deposits in short canyons along the eastern edge of the cap rock
escarpment. If Jim Word’s collections surrounding 41FL2 are considered, it is clear these
settings were intermittently used during the Late Archaic through Late Ceramic/Protohistoric
times as temporary camps by mobile indigenous and perhaps foreign groups on the plains.

93

94

6. ASSESSMENT AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Site 41FL2 has been impacted most severely by the rail bed construction and the removal of fill
sediments. Only two small areas of the site remain within the Trailway ROW. An undisturbed
area southeast of the rail bed has a good native grass cover and is exposed in profile on three
sides by cut banks formed from soil removal. Another area northwest of the rail bed has some
cover by native grasses, but it has been disturbed by grading, surface sheet wash, and the
existence of a roadway leading from private property to the north. Diagnostic artifacts and
debitage continue to be exposed by rodent activity, periodic rainfall, and erosion caused by other
natural factors (see Appendix B). It is recommended that the TPWD prepare a preservation plan
for periodic monitoring of the site to determine if erosion is adversely affecting the intact cultural
deposits. If quantities of cultural remains become exposed, a plan for stabilization or reseeding
measures should be implemented to treat eroding areas. A 2014 visit to this site located and
recorded two concentrations of large, unburned caliche cobbles exposed in the upper deposits of
the railroad bed, as discussed in Appendix B. These are most likely cultural features and need
periodic monitoring. Site 41FL2 is not eligible for listing as a State Antiquities Landmark. The
recent recognition of uninvestigated probable cultural features should be investigated before a
final significance determination is formulated.

Ashy midden sediments exposed in rail bed cuts at 41FL76 represent a thick and possibly
slumping unit of cultural deposits and probably indicate extensive cultural occupations. The area
to the north of the rail bed, inside the fenced TPWD right-of-way, has also been impacted by
grading of a service road, as well as by rodent activities.

A berm created by roadway

construction contains cultural materials displaced by sheet wash from up-slope areas of the site
(see Appendix B). Except for these disturbed areas, the ground surface on each side of the rail
bed is stabilized by native grasses, and the effects of erosion from surface sheet wash are

95

minimal. Erosion on both faces of the railroad cut continues to expose cultural materials,
including bone fragments, lithic artifacts and debitage, and prehistoric ceramics.

The excavation of three exposed features at 41FL76 confirms the use of this bench as an
intermittent campsite used by multiple cultural groups over several hundred years. Based on the
pottery and other remains from 41FL76, the components reflect a Late Ceramic/Protohistoric and
perhaps a Middle Ceramic/ Late Prehistoric II period of occupations which probably occurred
between A.D. 1400 and 1600. Tribal or cultural affiliations could not be definitively determined
due to the lack to diagnostic materials, but the site might be affiliated with the local
Wheeler/Edwards, Tierra Blanca or, less likely, Garza Complexes, based on the dark gray
plainware pottery and the proximity of these groups. Analysis of the ceramics indicates that
three or four types of plainware are present. Indigenous utilitarian dark gray plainware sherds
from perhaps several different vessels are present along with some red plainware sherds from the
Puebloan area. The Puebloan ceramics and marine shell jewelry indicate contacts with cultures
to the west. Site 41FL76 with its midden deposits and features appears to be an important site
worthy of preservation and/or further investigations into cultural affiliations and the range of
prehistoric activities conducted there. Additional research would clarify the cultural affiliations
and the range of activities. Although the rail bed has cut through the campsite, 41FL76 still has
research potential on subsistence, other activities, the possibility for locating other unidentified
features and determining whether or not the midden deposits retain integrity and context.

In compliance with sections 5 and 6 of the Native American Graves and Repatriation Act
(NAGPRA), the director of the State Parks Division of TPWD sent lists of human remains and
funerary objects, including those from 41FL76 to three tribes on December 1, 2000. The
submission of lists to the Apache Tribe of Oklahoma, the Comanche Tribe of Oklahoma and the
Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma fulfills the agency obligations under NAGPRA, as the agency
receives and manages federal funds. To date, no response has been received from these First
Nations people. In 2002, site 41FL76 was nominated to and accepted by the Texas Historical
Commission as a designated State Antiquities Landmark (SAL) to enhance its protection from
vandalism.

96

Recommended actions include stabilization of eroding areas (where practical) and periodic
monitoring of the site by TPWD archeologists to evaluate current conditions to see if site
41FL76 is being impacted by erosion or vandalism. A site visit in 2014 identified possible
hearths at 41FL2 and sheet erosion exposing animal bones and tools near the excavations at
hearth features at 41FL76 (Appendix B). If further developments along the Trailway or erosion
increase site impacts, appropriate action should be taken to mitigate these damages and stabilize
the areas to ensure preservation of site information. TPWD personnel should develop and
implement site preservation plans for the management of these resources.

97

98

7. REFERENCES CITED

Abbott, R. Tucker
1954

American Seashells. D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc. New York.

Blum, Michael D.
1989

Chapter 7 Geoarcheological Investigations.

Phase I Cultural Resources

Investigations at Justiceburg Reservoir on the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos
River, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas, Volume I, by Douglas Boyd, Martha Doty
Freeman, Michael D. Blum, Elton Prewitt, and J. Michael Quigg.

Prewitt &

Associates Inc. Report of Investigations 66: 81-106, Austin.

Bartholomew, Wayne S.
1995

Caprock Canyons Rails to Trails Project: A Cultural Resources Inventory along the
Former Fort Worth and Denver Southern Plains Railroad in Portions of Briscoe,
Floyd and Hall Counties, Texas. Unpublished manuscript: on file Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Austin, Texas.

Bass, William M.
1979

Human Osteology: A Laboratory and Field Manual of the Human Skeleton. The
Missouri Archeological Society, Special Publication, 2nd ed., Columbia, Missouri.

Baugh, Timothy G.

With contributions by Susan Thomas Baugh, Jack L. Hofman, Fern

Swenson, and Don Wyckoff
1982

Edwards I (34BK2): Southern Plains Adaptations in the Protohistoric Period.
Studies in Oklahoma's Past No 8, Oklahoma Archeological Survey Norman.

Baugh, Timothy G. and Fern Swenson
1980

Comparative Trade Ceramics: Evidence of the Southern Plains Macro-Economy.
Oklahoma Anthropological Society Bulletin 29: 83-102
99

Brosowske, Scott
2002

What Exactly is the Zimms Complex? A Review and Synthesis of Architectural and
Assemblage Traits. Oklahoma Archeology: Journal of the Oklahoma
Anthropological Society 50(4):20-39.

2012

Identifying Archaic Period Projectile Points of the Texas Panhandle. Pastimes:
Newsletter of the Panhandle Archaeological Society 32(2): 6-8.

Boyd, Douglas K.
1997

Caprock Canyonlands Archeology: A Synthesis of the Late Prehistory and History
of Lake Alan Henry and the Texas Panhandle. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Reports
of Investigations, No. 110, Austin, Texas.

Crabb, Martha Lewis
1968

Some Puebloan Trade Pottery from Panhandle Aspect Sites.

Bulletin of the Texas

Archeological Society 38:83–89.

Eckert, Suzanne
2006

The Production and Distribution of Glaze-painted Pottery in the Pueblo Southwest:
A Synthesis. In: The Social Life of Pots: Glaze wares and Cultural Dynamics in the
Southwest, A.D. 1250-1680. Edited by Judith Habicht-Mauche, Suzanne Eckert and
Deborah L Huntley. Pp. 34-60. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Etchieson, Gerald Meeks, Roberta D. Speer, and Jack T. Hughes
1977

An Archeological Survey of Certain Tracts in and near Caprock Canyons State Park
in Eastern Briscoe County, Texas. Archeological Research Laboratory, Kilgore
Research Center; West Texas State University, Canyon, Texas.

100

Eifler, G.K., J. C. Frye, A.B. Leonard, T.F. Hertz and V. E. Barnes
1992

Geological Atlas of Texas: Plainview Sheet (1:250,000).

Bureau of Economic

Geology, University of Texas, Austin.

Fenneman, Nevin
1931

Physiography of the Western United States. McGraw Hill Books, New York

Ferring, C. Reid and Timothy Perttula
1987

Defining the Provenance of Red Slipped Pottery from Texas and Oklahoma by
Petrographic Methods. Journal of Archeological Science 14(4): 437-456.

Flint, Richard and Shirley Cushing Flint
1997

The Coronado Expedition to Tierra Nueva:

The 1540-1542 Route Across the

Southwest; University Press of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado.

Guffee, Eddie J.
1976

The Merrel-Taylor Village Site:

An Archeological Investigation of Pre-Anglo,

Spanish-American Occupation on Quitaque Creek in Floyd County Texas.
Archeological Research Laboratory; Llano Estacado Museum, Plainview, Texas.

Habicht-Mauche, Judith
1988

An Analysis of Southwestern Style Utility Ware Ceramics from Southern Plains in
the Context of Protohistoric Plains-Pueblo Interaction.

Ph.D. Dissertation in

Anthropology, Harvard, University.

1991

Evidence for the Manufacture of Southwestern-Style Culinary Ceramics on the
Southern Plains. In: Farmers, Hunters, and Colonists: Interactions Between the
Southwest and Southern Plains, edited by Kathrine Spielmann pp 51-70, University
of Arizona Press, Tucson.

101

Hall, Claude V.
1947

The Early History of Floyd County. Panhandle-Plains Historical Society Review 20:
1-138.

Hatch, Stephen L. and Jennifer Pluhar
1993

Texas Range Plants. Texas A&M University Press, College Station, Texas.

Hofman Jack
1978

An Analysis of Surface Materials from the Little Deer site 34CU-10 of Western
Oklahoma: A Further Investigations of the Wheeler Complex. Oklahoma
Anthropological Society Bulletin 27: 1-109.

Hofman, Jack L, Robert L Brooks, Joe S. Hayes, Douglas H. Owsley, Richard L. Jantz, Murry K.
Marks, and Mary H. Manheim
1989

From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great Plains.
Research Series 35, Arkansas Archeological Survey Fayetteville.

Hughes, David
1991

Investigations of the Buried City, Ochiltree County, Texas: With an Emphasis on the Texas
Archeological Society Field Schools of 1987 and 1988. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 60:107–148.

Hughes, Jack T.
1955

Little Sunday: An Archaic Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas
Archaeological and Paleontological Society 26: 55-74.

1962

Lake Creek: A Woodland Site in the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 32:65–84.

1991

Prehistoric Cultural Developments on the Texas High Plains. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society, 60: 1-55.

102

Johnson, Eileen
1988

Lubbock Lake: Late Quaternary Studies on the Southern High Plains. Texas A&M
Press, College Station.

Lintz, Christopher
1986

Architecture and Community Variability within the Antelope Creek Phase of the Texas
Panhandle. Oklahoma Archeological Survey, Studies in Oklahoma’s Past No. 14, Norman.

2011

A Preliminary Report on the 1960 Excavations at the Franklin Ranch Site, 41GY80, Gray
County, Texas. Oklahoma Anthropological Society Bulletin (for 2010) vol. LVIII (58): 47­
60.

Lintz, Christopher and Katherine Reese-Taylor
1997

Migrations, Trade or Replicated Ceramics: Petrographic Study of Collared Rim
Sherds from the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:
273-300.

Lintz, Christopher and Rolla Shaller
2011

Barrett Scraper Preform Cache from the Jimmy Owens Site, 41FL81, Floyd County,
Texas.

Transactions of the 46th Regional Archeological Symposium for

Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas. 46: 33-52.

2015

Archeological Studies at Sites 41FL2 and 41FL76 Caprock Canyons Trailway State
Park, Floyd County, Texas.

Transactions of the 50th Regional Archeological

Symposium for Southeastern New Mexico and Western Texas. 50: 64-84, edited by
Paul Katz and Rolla Shaller, PAS, Amarillo.

Munsell
1988

Munsell Soil Color Chart. Beth-Krollmorgan Company.

103

Neitsch, Conrad L. and Don A. Blackstock
1978

Soil Survey of Floyd County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture Soil
Conservation Service, U.S. Government Printing Office.

Northern, Martin James
1979

Archeological Investigations at the Montgomery Site, Floyd County, Texas. MA
Thesis in Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock.

Quigg, J. Michael, Christopher Lintz, Fred M. Oglesby, Amy C. Earls, Charles Frederick, W. Nicholas
Trierweiler, Douglas Owsley, and Karl Kibler

1993

Historic and Prehistoric Data Recovery at Palo Duro Reservoir, Hansford County, Texas.
Mariah Associates Technical Report Series 485, Mariah Associates, Austin 638 pp.

Quigg, Michael J., Charles D. Frederick, Paul M. Matchen, and Kendra G. DuBois

2010

Landis Property: Data Recovery at Three Prehistoric Sites (41PT185, 41PT186, and
41PT245) in Potter County, Texas. TRC Report No. 150832, Vol. 1. TRC Environmental
Corporation, Austin.

Quigg, J. Michael, Paul Machen, Charles Frederick, Robert Ricklis, Britney Gregory, David Maki and
Mark Bateman
2013

Long View (41RB112): Data Recovery of Two Plains Village Components in Roberts
County, Texas (Two Volumes). TRC Technical Reports No. 174542 and 46557. TRC
Environmental

Corporation,

Austin;

and

Texas

Department

of

Transportation,

Environmental Affairs Division, Archaeological Studies Program Report 147, Austin.

Shepard, Anna O.
1936

The Technology of Pecos Pottery. (Part Two of the Pottery of Pecos, Volume II by
A.V. Kidder and Anna O. Shepard. Papers of the Southwestern Expedition 7,
Department of Archaeology, Phillips Academy, Andover, Massachusetts, Yale
University Press, New Haven.

104

Spielmann, Kathrine.
1982

Inter-Societal Food Acquisition among Egalitarian Societies: An Ecological
Analysis of Plains/Puebloan Interaction in the American Southwest. Unpublished
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Steele, D. Gentry
1987

Utilization of Marine Mollusk by Inhabitants of the Texas Coast. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 58: 215-248.

Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex Krieger and Ed Jelks
1954

Introductory Handbook of Texas Archaeology. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 25 (whole volume).

Taylor, A. J.
1984

New Mexican Pastores and Priests in the Texas Panhandle, 1876-1915. Panhandle-Plains
Historical Review 56:65-79, Canyon.

1997

Hispanic Settlement of the Texas Panhandle-Plains 1876-1884. Panhandle-Plains Historical
Review 69: 87-95, Canyon.

Taylor, Matthew
2008

Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum NAGPRA Related Sub-adult Human Remains
Analysis Forms for site 41FL76. Report on file at the Panhandle Plains Historical
Museum, Canyon.

Teltser, Patricia
1993 An Analytic Strategy for Studying Assemblage-Scale Ceramic Variation: A Case
Study from Southeast Missouri. American Antiquity 58(3): 530-543.

105

Tomka, Steve A.
2013

The Adoption of the Bow and Arrow: A Model Based on Experimental Performance
Characteristics. American Antiquity 78(3): 553-569.

Turner, Ellen Sue and Thomas R. Hester
1985

A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians, Texas Monthly Field Guide
Series; Gulf Publishing Co., Houston, Texas.

Vokes, Arthur and David Gregory
2007

Exchange Networks for Exotic Goods in the Southwest and Zuni Place in It. In Zuni
Origins: Towards a New Synthesis of Southwestern Archeology, pp. 318-361, edited
by David Gregory and David Wilcox. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Word, James H.
1991

The 1975 Field School of the Texas Archeological Society.

Bulletin of the Texas

Archeological Society, 60: 57-106.

1965

The Montgomery Site in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the South Plains
Archeological Society; Volume II: 55-102, Floydada, Texas.

1963

Floydada Country Club Site: 41FL1, Bulletin of the South Plains Archeological
Society; Volume I: 37-63, Floydada, Texas.

1958

Texas Archeological Society Site Survey Form 41FL2. Manuscript on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory; University of Texas, Austin, and the Texas
Historical Commission, Austin, Texas.

Word, James H., and Anne Fox
1975

The Cogdell Burial in Floyd County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 46: 2-63, Austin.

106

Winter, Joseph
1988

Stone Circles, Ancient Forts and Other Antiquities of the Dry Cimarron Valley.
Office of Contract Archeology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

107

108

Appendix A
Results of the Petrographic Analysis of Five Potsherds from 41FL2 and
41FL76, Caprock Canyonland Trailways State Park, Floyd County, Texas
Lori Barkwill Love and Steve A. Tomka

Introduction
Fifteen pottery sherds were obtained from sites 41FL2 and 41FL76 during the 1996-98
mitigation phase conducted by the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum. The samples derive
from both surface collections and excavated contexts. The two sites are part of the inventory of
historic properties found within the Caprock Canyon Trailways State Park. The three sherds
from 41FL2 consist of a red smooth plainware (n=1), a dark gray plainware (n=1) and a smoothover cord-marked sherd (n=1). The nine sherds from 41FL76 consist of dark gray plainwares
(n=6), red smoothed plainware (n=2), and a smoothed buff colored plainware (n=1).

Since few culturally and temporally diagnostic artifacts were recovered from the project,
petrographic analysis of the ceramics was considered a means of possibly refining the age and
cultural affiliations of the occupation(s) at these sites.

In particular, the identification and

quantification of the aplastic constituents of the clay fabric has been demonstrated to yield
insights into various aspects of ceramic manufacturing, including manufacture techniques, and
interaction spheres among people.

Accordingly, State Parks Director, Dr. Michael Strutt,

secured funds from the State Parks program to initiate a petrographic study of the sherd samples.
Subsequently, the services o f t h e Center of Archeological Research (CAR), the University of
Texas San Antonio, were secured through a purchase order to complete the study.

109

Before the sherds were submitted for study, ceramic trait analysis was conducted on all 15
sherds.

General observations included the vessel portion, sherd size, weight, interior and

exterior surface treatment, Munsell colors for interior, exterior surfaces and paste, and fracture
crispness. The sherd assemblages also were photographed. Prior to the submission of the
samples, the CAR staff was consulted regarding the smallest desirable sherd size to be used in
the production of sherd thin sections. It was concluded that ten of the fifteen sherds were too
small to allow the production of suitable petrographic thin sections and slides. Accordingly
only the five largest sherds were shipped to CAR for petrographic studies. The specific sherds
submitted for study were chosen to represent the maximum diversity of surface treatment
and sherd color in the collections from these two sites in the hopes that identification of
mineral/temper inclusions could be used to refine regional interactions, and general cultural
affiliation and temporal periods of occupations at these sites.

Upon receipt of the five sherds, the junior author divided the three largest specimens into two
halves, with a portion retained for curation and the other submitted for petrographic slide
preparation. The three split sherds consisted of 41FL2.14, and sherds A2221.61 and A2221.62
from site 41FL76. These three fragments along with the entire portion of sherds 41FL2.15
and A2221.32.1 from 41FL76 were submitted by CAR to the National Petrographic Laboratory
in Houston for encasing sherds in blue epoxy blocks, the cutting of sherd thin sections,
mounting on glass slides and grinding the sherd to the appropriate thickness for petrographic
analysis. The mounted slides and remaining epoxy blocks were returned to CAR a t
U T S A , and the blocks and slides were returned to the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum
for curation.

The petrographic analysis was thus limited to five of the 15 sherds from the two sites.
Fortunately, these sherds represented most of range of pottery groups from the two sites. The
examined sherds consisted of the red plainware and smoothed-over cord-marked sherds from
41FL2, and one sherd each of a smooth buff plainware, a red plainware, and a dark gray
plainware from 41FL76. Except for the presence of other dark gray plainware sherds from
41FL2, the selected range of sherds from these two sites not examined petrographically appear to
be similar to or redundant with examples that were included by examples in the present study.
110

Analysis Methods

The thin sections were examined with a Leica Petrographic microscope with an attached
mechanical stage. A two-step process was used to examine the thin sections. The first step
involved recording their general characteristics and taking photomicrographs of selected
representative segments of the thin sections. The general characteristics recorded were paste
matrix descriptions, paste color, b- fabric (Stoops 2003:95), and the description of the inner and
outer edges.

Also during this first step, the entire surface of the slide was scanned to identify the range of
aplastic inclusions present in the clay fabric. The aplastic inclusions that were noted in such low
numbers (1-3 pieces) that they would likely not have been counted during the formal pointcounting phase of analysis, were simply noted as present. Such rare aplastic inclusions may, in
some instances, be of value in differentiating parent clay sources.

These relatively rare

inclusions are listed immediately following the point-counting tables, in the remaining text.
Photomicrographs also were taken of representative sections of each thin section, during this
phase of the analysis. For the photomicrographs, at least one set (plane light and cross-polar
light) were taken of each thin section at 4x. Digital images were captured using a Leica DFC 295
Digital Camera attached to a Dell computer.
Following the initial scans of the slides, the systematic point-counting was undertaken using the
Glagolev-Chayes method. The Glagolev-Chayes method involves using the mechanical stage,
which allows one to move the thin section at a set interval beneath the crosshairs in the ocular,
and identifying and recording whether the crosshair landed on clay fabric (paste), aplastic
inclusion, or a void. For the point-counting phase, the microscope was set at 10x magnification,
and the stage was advanced vertically and horizontally in 0.4 mm increments. Paste matrix was
recorded by tally; however, for all voids and non-plastic inclusions, estimated size and shape also
were recorded. Non-plastic inclusions and voids were only counted once even if they were
encountered more than once in the crosshairs.

111

The petrographic analysis of the five thin sections was conducted twice. As part of the first
study, a 100 point-count approach was employed. That is, each thin section was point-counted
until a total of 100 paste points were reached. Stoltman (1989:151-152, 2012:H-1) suggests that
a minimum of 100 points (exclusive of voids) are needed to ensure reliable results, that is, a
representation of some of the rarest aplastic inclusions present in the clay fabric. He further
suggests that point-counting in excess of 200 points yields redundancy in aplastic inclusions in a
thin section. Therefore, prior to the first analysis, it was assumed that the 100 paste point-count
will result in the identification of a representative sample of aplastic inclusions within each thin
section examined. Identifiable temper observations during the initial study only ranged from 27
to 67 temper inclusions per thin section.
Due to the low number of aplastic inclusion observed by using the 100 paste count method,
prompted the concern that the analysis did not produce representative samples of aplastic
inclusions in each slide, a second petrographic analysis was initiated, this time using a target of
200 paste points. During this analysis, the combined (paste, aplastic inclusions voids) number of
paste points counted per slide ranged from 311 to 335. An assessment of the results from the two
petrographic studies is provided at the end of this technical report, following the discussion of
the results which are focused on the results of the second study. Following each of the two
studies, the counts, measurements and paste, voids, and aplastic inclusion types recorded during
point-counting for each thin section were entered into a JMP Pro 10 data table.
The size of the non-plastic inclusion or void was based on the maximum diameter of the
inclusion/void measured with the ocular scale to the nearest whole number. At 10x
magnification, each tick mark on the ocular scale represents 0.02 mm. The raw tick mark count
was recorded for each inclusion, entered into JMP and multiplied by 0.02 to obtain an actual
size.

Definition of Temper Categories

To define temper categories within the small sample of thin sections, the recorded
paste/inclusions were combined into the following simplified categories:

112

Table A1. Correspondence of aplastic/temper inclusions and simplified inclusions.
Recorded Paste/Inclusion
Paste
Bone
Quartz
Polycrystalline quartz
Alkali feldspar
Weathered grit/sand
Hornblende
Chert
Microcline
Plagioclase
Mica
Mica
Calcium carbonate
Calcite
Granite
Tuff
Opaque
Voids

Simplified Inclusion Category
Paste
Bone
Igneous grit
Igneous grit
Igneous grit
Igneous grit
Igneous grit
Igneous grit
Igneous grit
Igneous grit
Mica
Mica
Carbonates
Carbonates
Granite
Tuff
Other
Not Included

A frequency distribution was created for each sherd based on the simplified inclusion
category (voids excluded) to define temper categories. Dark brown to reddish brown opaque
inclusions are likely hematite. Weathered sand includes quartz/feldspar with secondary
alternations (twinning often still present in feldspars). Five paste/temper categories were
defined for these thin-sections (each thin section represented a different category): bone, tuff,
multi-lithic grit, granite, and igneous grit with calcareous paste.
Thin Section Descriptions
Site: 41FL2

Thin Section: 41FL2-15a-4

Temper: Tuff
Paste Matrix (PPL): Continuous
Paste Color (PPL): Yellowish brown (10YR 5/4)
B-Fabric (XPL): Speckled/slightly active
Slip Present: Indeterminate
113

Edges: One edge lighter (yellowish brown 10YR 5/8) – fabric more active on edge
Inclusion Orientation to Rim: Moderately parallel
Mica Present: Common/various forms
Comments: Very porous, feldspars, especially microcline, common

Figure A1. Photomicrograph of section 41FL2-15a-4 under plane (a) and cross-polar (b) light.

a

b

Table A2. Point-count of temper, paste and voids for sherd 41FL2-15a-4

Also present but not counted: plagioclase, perthite, polycrystalline quartz, mafic.

114

Table A3. Inclusion size range (mm) of aplastics in sherd 41FL2-15a-4.

Percentage of grit greater than silt size: 75.49% (n=102). Of these 77 inclusions greater
than silt size, 16 (20.78%) are angular grains.

Site: 41FL2

Thin Section: 41FL2-14a-5

Temper Present: Bone
Paste Matrix (PPL): Continuous with distinct core
Paste Color (PPL): Edges: Brownish yellow (10YR 6/8) – Core: Very dark grayish
brown (10YR 3/2)
B-fabric (XPL): Edges – speckled/slightly active, Core – undifferentiated
Slip present: No
Edges: same as the rest of the paste
Inclusion Orientation to Rim: Random
Mica Present: Common/various forms

Figure A2. Photomicrograph of section 41FL2-14a-5 under plane (a) and cross-polar (b) light.

a

b

115

Table A4. Point-count of temper, paste and voids for sherd 41FL2-14a-5.

Also present but not counted: microcline, perthite, plagioclase, chert.

Table A5. Inclusion size range (mm) of aplastics in sherd 41FL2-14a-5.

Percentage of grit greater than silt size: 53.9% (n=48 of 89). Of these 48 inclusions greater than
silt size, 11 (22.9%) are angular grains.

Site: 41FL76

Thin Section: 41FL76-1a-1

Temper: Granite
Paste Matrix (PPL): Continuous with distinct core
Paste Color (PPL): Edges – Strong brown (7.5YR 5/8) – Core: Dark yellowish brown (10YR
4/4)
B-fabric (XPL): Edges – speckled/slightly active, Core – undifferentiated
Slip Present: No
Edges: same as the rest of the paste
Inclusion Orientation to Rim: Random
Mica Present: Common/various forms

116

Figure A3. Photomicrograph of section 41FL76-1a-1 under plane (a) and cross-polar (b) light.

a

b

Table A6. Point-count of temper, paste and voids for sherd 41FL76-1a-1.

Also present but not counted: microcline, hornblende, biotite, chert.
Table A7. Inclusion size range (mm) of aplastics in sherd 41FL76-1a-1.

Percentage of grit greater than silt size: 72.6% (n=77 of 106). Of these 77 grit grains, 26
(33.77%) are angular specimens.
117

Site: 41FL76

Thin Section: 41FL76-2A-2

Temper: Multi-lithic grit
Paste Matrix (PPL): Continuous with lighter core
Paste Color (PPL): Edges: Dark brown (7.5YR 3/3) – Core: Strong brown (7.5YR 4/6)
B-fabric (XPL): Undifferentiated
Slip Present: No
Edges: One edge is too thinly ground, likely occurred during slide manufacture.
Inclusion Orientation to Rim: Moderately parallel
Mica Present: Common/various forms
Figure A4. Photomicrograph of section 41FL76-2A-2 under plane (a) and cross-polar (b) light.

a

b

Table A8. Point-count of temper, paste and voids for sherd 41FL76-2A-2

Also present but not counted: microcline, hornblende, mafic
118

Table A9. Inclusion size range (mm) of aplastics in sherd 41FL76-2A-2.

Percentage of grit greater than silt size: 63.6% (n=36 of 99). Of these 36 grains greater than silt
size, 15 (41.67%) are angular grains.

Site: 41FL76

Thin Section: 41FL76-61a-3

Temper: Igneous grit/Calcareous paste
Paste Matrix (PPL): Continuous
Paste Color (PPL): Pale Yellow (2.5Y 7/4)
B-fabric (XPL): Undifferentiated
Slip Present: Indeterminate
Edges: One edge slightly darker (Olive brown 2.5Y 4/4)
Inclusion Orientation to Rim: Random
Mica Present: Common/various forms
Comments: Calcareous paste
Figure A5. Photomicrograph of section 41FL76-61a-3 under plane (a) and cross-polar (b) light.

a

b

119

Table A10. Point-count of temper, paste and voids for sherd 41FL76-61a-3.

Also present but not counted: perthite, mafic, granite, chalcedony, chert, plagioclase.

Table A11. Inclusion size range (mm) of aplastics in sherd 41FL76-61a-3.

Percentage of grit greater than silt size is 52.3% (n=46 of 88). Of these 46 grains larger than silt
sized, 13 grains (28.3%) are angular pieces.

Summary
In general, all five of the samples can be described as having a gritty paste, that is, the aplastic
grit inclusion category makes up 20% or more of the point-counting percentages (Table A11).
However all five of these thin section samples have unique paste/temper combinations.
Unfortunately distinguishing between naturally occurring grit in the clay source and grit that
has been added as temper is difficult (Quinn 2013:165). The fact that all samples have unique

120

Table A12. Frequency of inclusions (excluding paste and voids) found in paste*

*Percentages based on point-counting, other minerals with frequency initials are based on
visual inspection of thin sections. (R=rare; U=uncommon; C=common).

paste/temper combinations does not stand out as unusual for the area given that HabichtMauche (1987:183) has suggested that potters used a variety of clays/tempers, such as
andesite/latite, granite, sandstone, limestone, quartzite, quartz-mica schist and gneiss, for
Tierra Blanca Plain ceramics during the proto-historic period in the Texas Panhandle.
Furthermore, a diversity of clay/tempers was often present for the type within a single site.
Therefore it is possible that the potters during the prehistoric period also exploited many
clay/temper resources in the manufacture of their pottery. The range of clays and aplastic
additives may also correlate with and be an indicator of the scale of mobility practiced by these
groups and the access that such mobility offered to various geological formations and clay
resources (see Habicht-Mauche 1987:184-186).
121

The presence of cord-marked pottery suggests that some Middle Ceramic components are
represented among the ceramic site assemblages.

T he range of temper from this project

mirrors the same range of minerals identified by Lintz and Reese Taylor (1997) for Antelope
Creek ceramics. However, the range of “unique minerals” identified by Habicht-Mauche from
the Tierra Blanca site (Habicht-Mauche 1987:183-184; e.g. andesite/latite, granite, sandstone,
limestone, quartzite, quartz-mica schist and gneiss) is not found among sherds of the present
sample suggests that the clays and aplastics from the present sample resembles the High
Plains cord-marked sherds, but may be different from that used by the Tierra Blanca Complex
(a Late Ceramic/Protohistoric component).

T h e unique tempers noted by Habicht-Mauche

in the Tierra Blanca Plain utility ware ceramics are relatively common, often representing
between 3-7 percent of aplastic inclusions (see Figure 8, Habicht-Mauche 1987). The variety
and spatial distribution of tempering materials found in the Tierra Blanca ceramic assemblages
is interpreted as indicative of local ceramic production which in turn was conditioned by
mobility patterns that exposed potters to a range of clays and tempering agents that were
present within the parent materials (Habicht-Mauche 1987:185).

The two samples from 41FL2 have clearly distinctive paste/temper combinations. Sample
41FL2-14a-5 is from a cord-marked vessel and has a very sandy-grit paste with 5.3% bone
added as temper. The use of crushed bone in cord-marked pottery is consistent with temper
descriptions for Borger cord-marked pottery, which is described as having mostly sand (quartz)
with bone, mica, or other inclusions added (Suhm, Krieger and Jelks 1954). This specimen is
similar in terms of petrographic profile to the three sedimentary resource group sherds analyzed
by Lintz and Reese-Taylor (1997) from the Roper Site, the Kit Courson Site, and the Cottonwood
Creek site (Lintz and Reese-Taylor 1997:288-294).

Sample 41FL2-15a-4 is a red-slipped

plainware with a sandy-grit paste and 34.3 % volcanic tuff temper. The high incidence of tuff
indicates that the vessel was not made locally. Possible sources are discussed below. The
volcanic tuff found in this sample in combination with the red slip strongly suggests a nonlocal,
perhaps the greater upper Rio Grande river basin, manufacturing source for the ceramic.

122

The three samples from 41FL76 are more similar to one another yet each is still distinct. Samples
41FL76-1a-1 and 41FL76-2a-2 both have sandy-grit paste and the presence of granite; however,
sample 41FL76-1a-1, the plain redware, has less sand grit and more granite and sample 41FL76­
2a-2, the plain buffware, has considerably more sandy grit and little granite. It is possible that
granitic grit was added as temper to the plain redware sherd, sample (1a-1), whereas the granite
was a component of the grit added to the clay or naturally occurring in the clay in the plain
buffware sherd, sample (2a-2). Sample 41FL76-61a-3 is a dark gray plainware with a
calcareous paste and sand temper. The calcareous paste matrix is easily identifiable by the light,
yellow-brown color in cross-polar light (Quinn 2013:44). Also present is calcite and calcium
carbonate (caliche) nodules. The calcareous paste and presence of calcite/calcium carbonate
suggests the Ogallala Formation outcroppings as a possible source of the clay fabric (HabichtMauche 1987:184). The sedimentary and metamorphic components found in samples 41FL2­
14a-5, 41FL76-1a-1, 41FL76-2a-2, and 41FL76-61a-3 suggest a local Panhandle source for the
ceramics (Habicht-Mauche 1987, Lintz and Reese-Taylor 1997).

Comparison of Point-counting Results

As explained earlier, due to the low count of aplastic inclusions noted during the 100-paste pointcount analysis, and the low-confidence in the representativeness of the results, each thin section
was reanalyzed using a 200-paste point-count target. The comparison of the results of the two
analyses is presented in Tables A13 through A17. The results indicate that the proportion of
aplastic inclusions out of the total point-count per slide increased in the case of two of the five
slides (41FL2-15a-4 and 41FL76-2a-2; Tables A13 and A16). This represents a 40 percent
change across the five sample set. It is worth noting that between the 1st and 2nd studies, sherd
41FL76-1a-1 had a 6.91% difference in the percentage of granite (Table A15). Sherd 41FL76­
2a-2 (Table A16) has a 15.49% difference in alkali feldspar, a 9.77% difference in quartz, and a
5.39% difference in muscovite mica. Major percentages differences are also evident in sherd
41FL2-15a-4, as reflected by a 10.78% variance in weathered grit, and a 5.34% difference in
Muscovite mica. In contrast, the percent differences for all minerals for sherds 41FL76-61a-3
and 41FL2-14a-5 are all less than 5%.

123

Table A13. I n c l u si o n c omparison of the original and reanalysis for sherd 41FL2-15a-4.

Table A14. Inclusion comparison of the original and reanalysis for sherd 41FL2-14a-5.

124

Table A15. I n c l u s i o n c omparison of the original and reanalysis for sherd 41FL76-1a-1.

Table A16. Inclusion comparison of the original and reanalysis for sherd 41FL76-2a-2

125

Table A17. I n c l u s i o n c omparison of the original and reanalysis for sherd 41FL76-61a-3

Original Analysis
Paste/Inclusion
Quartz

Count
33

Percent
62.2

Polycrystalline quartz
Alkali feldspar

1
6

1.9
11.3

Plagioclase
Calcium carbonate
Biotite mica
Weathered grit

1
3
1
8

1.9
5.7
1.9
15.1

Reanalysis
Paste/Inclusions
Quartz

Count
56

Percent
60.9

Microcline
Alkali feldspar

1
14

1.1
15.2

Calcite
Calcium carbonate
Biotite mica
Weathered grit

3
1
2
15

3.3
1.1
2.2
16.2

Total
53
Present but not counted: microcline
(uncommon), mafic (rare), chalcedony
(rare), calcite (uncommon), perthite (rare).

Total
92
Present but not counted: perthite
(uncommon), mafic (rare), granite (rare),
chalcedony (rare), chert (rare), plagioclase
(uncommon).

Total Nonplastic Inclusions – 33.12%

Total Nonplastic Inclusions – 28.62%

Overall then, the repeated point-counting provides a greater level of confidence that the
patterns noted in the analysis are indeed representative of the overall slide. In addition, the
results of the re-analyses strengthen our conclusions regarding the pottery manufacturing
source areas represented within the small sample of sherds.

126

References Cited

Habicht-Mauche, Judith A.
1987 Southwestern-Style Culinary Ceramics on the Southern Plains: A Case Study of
Technological Innovation and Cross-Cultural Interaction. Plains Anthropologist
32(116):175-189.
Lintz, Christopher and Katherine Reese-Taylor
1997 Migration, Trade, or Replicated Ceramics: Petrographic Study of Collared Rim
Sherds from the Texas Panhandle. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
68:273-300.
Perttula, Timothy K.
2002 Chapter 9: Artifacts-Section C: Native American Ceramics. In Nuestra Señora del
Refugio (41RF1), Refugio County, Texas, Volume II, edited by Lee Meadows Jantz,
Richard L. Jantz, Nicholas P. Herrmann, Corey S. Sparks, Katherine E. Wiesensee
and Derinna V. Kopp, pp. 233-260. Archeological Survey Report, No. 315,
Center for Archeological Research, University of Texas at San Antonio.
Quinn, Patrick Sean
2013 Ceramic Petrography: The Interpretation of Archeological Pottery and Related
Artifacts in Thin Section. Archaeopress, Oxford.
Stoltman, James B.
1989 Quantitative Approach to the Petrographic
Sections. American Antiquity 54(1):147-160.
2012

Analysis

of

Ceramic

Thin

Appendix H: Ceramic Thin Section Analyses. In Early Ceramic Occupation along
Blackbird Creek: Archeological Investigations at Blackbird Creek Site (7NC-J­
195D) New Castle County, Delaware, edited by Christopher Bowen, pp. H1-H13.
Cultural Resources Division, Versar, Inc., Springfield, VA.

Stoops, George
2003 Guidelines for Analysis and Description of Soil and Regolith Thin Sections. Soil
Science Society of America, Inc., Madison.

127

128

Appendix B
The August 31st 2014 Field Reconnaissance and
Recovery of Additional Artifacts from 41FL2 and 41FL76
Christopher Lintz

Introduction

The purpose of the Labor Day weekend fieldtrip was to inspect the condition of archeological
sites 41FL2 and 41FL76, which were subjected to data recovery fieldwork in 1996-98 by the P­
PHM. The 1996-98 fieldwork was designed to develop site maps of the TPWD boundaries,
make extensive surface collections and excavate several features from 41FL76 in order to reduce
surface visibility of artifacts that might encourage vandalism after the hiking trail was opened to
the public. The emphasis of Appendix B focuses on observations and descriptions of additional
artifacts collected during the 2-3 hour visit to these sites. Other field activities occurred along
the CCTSP before and after the sites visits, but are not relevant to the present topic. Participants
of the 2014 field work included Texas Historical Commission Stewards Rolla Shaller, Joe
Rogers, and the author. The collection of artifacts in 2014 was made under the TPWD annual
permit No. 6776; all artifacts obtained are accessioned into the collections at the P-PHM, who
holds the previously collected artifacts from these sites in trust for the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department.

Site 41FL2: Results of the 2014 Field Inspection
The inspection of this site lasted about 45 minutes. The primary emphasis focused on inspecting
the 2.5 to 3 m tall railroad cut bank and the upland surfaces bounded on the north and south by
the property fence lines (Figures B1 and B2). Over the past two decades, erosion has exposed
129

relatively few artifacts.

The railroad banks show a ca. 20 to 30 cm thick dark layer of soil

containing sparse artifacts (flakes, burned caliche, bone fragments) capping a culturally-sterile
(?) reddish orange silt loam with caliche nodules. Artifacts photographed and left at the site
include 1) a fragment from an aqua glass telephone insulator, 2) a rather large Alibates flake in

Figure B-1. Map of 41FL2 along the Caprock Canyon Trailways Project.

situ near the southwestern end of the site, in the southeastern bank of the railroad cut at a depth
of ca. 20 cm, and 3) a concentration of very small bone splinters from a large or very large
herbivore along the south bank in the middle-to-eastern portions of the site.
Even though no features were found during the 1996-98 fieldwork, two concentrations of large
burned caliche cobbles were found during the present visit in the northwestern bank of the
railroad cut near the western site edge. Each was considered to be a probable hearth features.

130

Probable Hearth Feature 1 consists of a concentration of five white caliche cobbles about 10 cm
in diameter that are in a single layer confined to a 35-40 cm long area and buried about 25 cm
below the lip of the railroad cut. No bones or chipped stone flakes are exposed near this burned
rock concentration (Figures B3 and B4). The absence of other caliche cobbles in the profile
strongly suggests that these rocks were transported and placed in a cluster.
Probable Hearth Feature 2 is located some 2-3 m east of Probable Hearth Feature 1. This
probable rock hearth feature also consists of a cluster of five large, white caliche cobbles, but
here, two are stacked above two others while one cobble was located to the west. All five rocks
are concentrated in a ca. 30 cm long area and located about 30 cm below the lip of the prairie
surface and near the base of the midden deposit (Figures B3 and B5).
The sediments are predominately sandy silt-to-loam, with calcium carbonate nodules near the
base. Occasional lenses of pea-size gravels in the railroad bed profiles denote where small filled
erosional channels cut N-S across the bench surface. No caliche cap rock or concentrations of
cobbles from the Ogallala Formation were noticed during the visit.
The upland surface adjacent to the northern edge of the railroad cut has a historic earthen berm
about 40-60 cm tall and 5-6 m wide which was probably designed to keep slope wash from
eroding the up-slope bank of the railroad cut. Although overgrown in moderately-dense grass, a
graded road might also have been present adjacent to the north boundary fence line. This graded
road cuts across the berm on the east and west ends of the site, close to incised gullies. Within
this graded road at the extreme eastern edge of the property is a concentration of several score of
metal railroad tie rods, spikes and other railroad track artifacts. Many are bent and some appear
to be burned—it is possible that this concentration might represent the burning of wooden ties
and other materials at this spot during rail demolition activities.
No artifacts or samples were collected from 41FL2 during this visit. All materials were left in
place or returned to their approximate discovery spot.

131

Site 41FL76: Results of the 2014 Field Inspection
Approximately one hour was spent examining this site.

During the 1996-98 project, site

delineation located a concentration of prehistoric cultural remains towards the eastern two-thirds
of the railroad cut bank (Figure B6). The original surface collections consisted of prehistoric
pottery, chipped stone and ground stone artifacts, and bone fragments, and the earlier mitigation
work excavated two burned rock features and a human burial from the railroad cut bank. Surface
observation also documented a borrow area along the south middle edge of the railroad cut, and a
dark midden in the south cut, eastern edge of the site.
During the 2014 site inspection, the midden at the eastern end of the site was either ca. 1 m tall,
or has a drape of midden sediments over older materials on the southeastern side (Figure B7).
Elsewhere the upper 30-40 cm of the terrace is dark gray overlying reddish orange sediments;
however, most of the lower sediments along the 3 to 3.5 m tall railroad cut bank on the north side
are leached white from a probable perched water table and former springs/seeps (Figure B8).
The sediments are typically sandy-to-silt-loam with few quartzite cobbles exposed in the rail bed
profiles. Another ca. 40-50 cm tall by 5 m wide historic earthen berm is present along the
northern edge of the railroad bed intended to reduce surface slope wash from eroding the cut
face. The original site datum was found on the upland bench surface south of the rail road bed.

Figure B-2. Typical railroad cut profile at 41FL2; midden caps orange sediments.
132

Figure B-3. Joe Rogers near caliche Hearth Features 1 & 2 north bank of 41FL2, west end.

Figure B-4. Probable Hearth Feature 1 at 41FL2.

133

Figure B-5. Probable Hearth Feature 2 at 41FL2.

Figure B-6. Plan map of site 41FL76 developed in 1998.
134

Figure B-7. Midden deposits with bone fragments (circled) southeastern part of 41FL76.

No rock concentrations or new hearth features were noticed during the 2014 visit. However,
several prehistoric and historic artifacts were noticed, and seven artifacts were collected because
they were regarded to be desirable to artifact hunters and might be in jeopardy of removal from
the site. The following describes the artifacts observed and collected from 41FL76.

135

Figure B-8. Railroad profile through site 41FL76; midden over leached white deposits.

The low (ca. 1 m tall) midden bank area along the southeastern edge of the railroad bed
contained moderate amounts of small fragments from bison and other bone chips, a few flakes
and small dispersed fragments of burned caliche. Two small potsherds were found and collected
from this midden area.
A series of Tecovas and Alibates flakes and dispersed burned caliche were photographed along
the dark soil area in the middle northern part of the railroad cut.

In the area near the western

limits of the north site boundary as originally defined in 1996-98, a quartzite hammerstone was
photographed and left on site; this ovoid cobble has extensive battering on both ends.
West of the prehistoric site boundary limits was a small area of historic artifacts that were not
described in the 1996-98 fieldwork. From the north side of the railroad cut were two sherds from
a white porcelain saucer with gold-gilded edging; it did not have any maker’s mark even though
the center of the saucer was recovered. The two specimens may be from a single fine china
service saucer, and conceivably it might be from railroad service set. Also from this northern
136

area was a brass cartridge from a .38 caliber shell made by the Union Metallic Cartridge
Company ca. 1889 for a Winchester rifle. The lid of an iron food can and a possible tobacco tag
metal strip were also observed from this northern area. On the south side of the railroad cut and
west of the defined prehistoric site limits was another metal food can. It seems likely that a
temporary historic camp component, possibly related to railroad construction activities and
perhaps dating ca. 1880 to 1930s, exists on this west end of the bench. Historic materials
collected from this area include the two porcelain saucer sherds and the brass cartridge case.
Along the north lip of the railroad cut bed, towards the eastern end of the site, the midden surface
was beveled from erosion. Concentrations of small fragments of burned caliche, whole and
fragmentary bison limb bones, chipped stone debris, and at least two end scrapers were
encountered over a ca 4-5 m long area. The cultural materials were concentrated around a
wooden stake at the edge of an eroded “notch” in the northern railroad cut face, where
presumably Hearth Feature 1 was exposed during the 1996 excavations. The two end scrapers
were collected from this area (Figure B9).
The seven collected artifacts from 41FL76 consist of two gold-gilded porcelain sherds from a
saucer, one UMC 38 caliber brass cartridge case, two prehistoric potsherds, and two end
scrapers.

The dimensions and proveniences of these items are provided in Table B1, the

indigenous pottery colors in Table B2, and all collected artifacts are illustrated in Figure B10.

Recommendations
The brief inspection of prehistoric sites 41FL2 and 41FL76 in August 2014 may be the first
inspection of these sites since the P-PHM excavations in 1996-98. No evidence of modern
vandalism is evident at either site. Periodic revisits to these locations are prudent as erosion of
the deep railroad cuts will persist.
The cultural remains at site 41FL2 are not readily visible to park visitors, although two discrete
concentrations of separate burned caliche concentration are present in the north bank near the
west end of the site. These rocks are probably prehistoric hearth features exposed in the upper
30 cm of the bank. I recommend that the regional State Parks archaeologist revisit the site to

137

assess these features, and install nails driven to the earthen escarpment face as monitoring points
to determine the rate of bank erosion. Insofar as no bone or flakes are readily apparent, and
erosion has not adversely affected the surface beveled surface, any decisions to salvage these
features can be weighed against the rate of erosion. However, since no features were previously
observed on this site during the 1996-98 fieldwork, eventual excavation and perhaps mitigation
of these possible features seems prudent, if their cultural origin is confirmed.
The cultural remains from 41FL76 are more obvious than those from 41FL2. The midden is
quite prominent and contains bone, flakes, aboriginal pottery and charcoal (Figure 5); however,
no spatial patterning or structure is evident to this expansive midden area. In contrast, a dense
concentration of burned and unburned bone, flake debris and at least two end scrapers were
found surrounding the test pit used to expose the hearth Feature 1. While the prior excavations
clearly investigated the context of the hearth feature, no investigations were conducted

Figure B-9. Bison metacarpal and end scraper in vicinity of Hearth Feature 1 (1996-98).

138

Table B-1. Descriptions and dimensions of artifacts collected from 41FL76 in 2014.
Fld
Spec.
No
1

GPS

298583/
3789842

2

298583/
3789842

3

298496/
3789824
298496/
3789824

4

5

No GPS
data.

6

298571/
3789856

7

298578/
3789857

Description

Length
(cm)

Width
(cm)

Thickness
(cm)

Weight
(g)

Indigenous pottery body sherd dark paste
with white exterior slip-- no black paint.
Polished exterior.
Indigenous pottery dark Plainware body
sherd smoothed, not polished.

1.91

1.36

0.61

1.4

1.42

1.29

0.7

1.5

Porcelain saucer rim sherd. Upper surface
gold gilded. No gilded band on lip.
Porcelain saucer base/body sherd middle
with foot ring. No maker's marks. Gold
gild stops at edge opposite foot ring.
Brass Cartridge UMC/38/C.F.W center
fire. Made for Winchester Rifle (ca. 1889)
Found ca. 6 m NW of porcelain saucer.
Large End Scraper, Edwards chert. No
striking platform, single prominent dorsal
ridge, partial cortex. Lateral irregular
trimming on ventral side one edge.
Small End Scraper, Tecovas chert.
Striking platform, single prominent dorsal
ridge. Both ventral lateral edges carefully
retouched.

3.5

2.71

0.29

xx

4.53

3.25

0.22

xx

3.33

1.11

xx

xx

5.63

3.07

1.08

18.3

3.72

2.82

0.72

6.4

Table 2-B. Munsell colors of indigenous pottery from 41FL76 collected in 2014.
FS
No.
1

Trait

Munsell Number

Descriptive Color

slip

10YR 7.5/1

white-light gray

exterior surface

10YR 6/1

gray

interior surface
cx paste

10YR 4/1
10YR 4/2

gray-dark gray
grayish brown

exterior surface

10YR 4.5/1

gray-dark gray

interior surface
cx paste

10YR 5.5/1
10YR 5.5/1

gray
gray

139

Figure B-10. Artifacts collected from 41FL76 on August 31, 2014. (See Table B1 for details).

surrounding the hearth to ascertain activities of the people using the hearth. Subsequent sheet
erosion along the lip of the escarpment has begun to deflate and expose the associated activity
zone, and the associated abundant bones, tools and debris. I recommend that the State Parks
Regional Archaeologist visit the site to examine the eroding and degrading condition of this
activity area. If prudent, then the extent of the associated debris scatter surrounding the hearth
should be assessed, and perhaps a modest block excavation of ca. 2 x 3 m might be able to
salvage information of activities around the hearth before the context and the artifacts associated
with this feature are lost.

140

PART II
Archeological Monitoring of Levelling and Water Line
Trenches at the Proposed Bison Pens
Caprock Canyons State Park, Briscoe County, Texas

Jeff Indeck

Abstract
On April 23, 1998 and July 21, 1998, two archeologists from the Panhandle-Plains Historical
Museum (P-PHM) conducted monitoring of a construction project in Caprock Canyons State
Park, Briscoe County, Texas. The project involved monitoring mechanical blading and leveling
of an area at the State Park that will serve as working pens for a portion of the Texas State Bison
Herd. Also monitored were approximately 244 m (800 feet) of mechanically excavated trenches
for water and power lines. No cultural resources were identified; therefore, no sites eligible for
inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Antiquities Landmark will be
impacted by this project. Despite the absence of observed remains, it was recommended that if
cultural resources are encountered during construction, these should be evaluated by a
professional archeologist.

141

Introduction
The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD) proposed constructing working pens as part
of the State Bison Herd Project at Caprock Canyons State Park (CCSP) near Quitaque,
southeastern Briscoe County, Texas. Consultation with the Texas Historical Commission in July
1997 determined that the installation of bison pen fences should not affect significant cultural
resources. By March, 1998, TPWD was considering a second construction phase that involved
blading an area approximately 77.4 m by 100.6 m (254 feet by 330 feet) to a maximum depth of
30 cm (1 foot) and the excavation of approximately 2,847 m (9,340 feet) of trenches to a
maximum depth of 0.9 m (3 feet). The proposed impact area was estimated to be 2.1 acres.
The bison pen area was surveyed in 1976, long before plans were made to build working pens in
the area (Etchieson et al. 1977). No sites were located within the proposed construction area.
TPWD State Parks staff archeologists had concerns over the potential for intact archeological
deposits within the proposed construction area, because the area is underlain by the Lingos
Formation, which had previously yielded buried cultural resources elsewhere in similar settings
to the proposed bison pen construction site (Howard and McNatt 1998). Consequently, on
March 23, 1998, TPWD proposed to the THC that portions of the ground disturbing excavations
would be monitored by archeologists and if hearths, burials, or other significant features were
encountered, the construction areas would be moved to avoid further site impacts. The THC
Archeology Division staff concurred with TPWD’s proposal for cultural resources monitoring on
March 30, 1998.
In April 1998, TPWD requested personnel from the Panhandle-Plains Historical Museum (P­
PHM) to conduct cultural resource monitoring during construction. This report documents the
monitoring program conducted by P-PHM during April and July 1998 under Texas Antiquities
Permit 2328.
Environmental Background
Caprock Canyons State Park is located within the upper drainage of the Little Red River. It is
near the base of the eastern cap rock escarpment of the Llano Estacado in the south-central

142

portion of the Texas Panhandle. The construction area is part of a broad, Quaternary age
landform flat derived from the cap rock escarpment, which is receding to the west. Soil has
developed on the Quaternary surface. The area is underlain by aeolian and alluvial sediments of
the Quaternary Lingos Formation, the upper portion of which may contain prehistoric cultural
material.

The construction area is adjacent to Holmes Creek and is at an elevation of

approximately 2,580 feet above mean sea level (Figure 1).
The soils in the area are classified as the Berda Series. They are deep, loamy, calcareous soils on
the uplands. A representative profile has a surface unit of brown, calcareous loam 8 inches thick.
The next layer is 40 inches of brown, calcareous clay loam with masses of calcium carbonate and
quartzite pebbles. Below this is light yellowish brown calcareous sandy clay loam that extends
to a depth of 65 inches (Geiger and Mitchell 1977).
The State Park area has a cool temperate, or dry steppe climate with mild winters. Average
annual precipitation is approximately 21 inches, occurring mainly as thunderstorms. Annual and
seasonal variation in rainfall is great. Rapidly moving cold fronts from Canada and the Rocky
Mountains may cause rapid and extreme temperature changes. A drop in temperature of 60
degrees in a 12-hour period is not uncommon.
The project area has some prior disturbance, as discussed below. Restored vegetation probably
included buffalograss, sideoats grama grass, little bluestem, blue grama grass, scattered mesquite
trees, yucca, and other grasses and forbes.

Field Methods
The monitoring program consisted of (1) an intensive pedestrian survey of the construction area,
(2) evaluation of the ground surface as it was exposed by construction equipment, and (3)
evaluation of fill and spoils piles as it was dumped next to the trenches during water/electric line
construction. The pedestrian survey and monitoring was conducted by Rolla Shaller and Jeff
Indeck during a total of four person-days in the field; the project was supervised by Dr. Indeck.

143

Figure 1. Location of the buried water/electric lines bison pen project area.

144

The ground surface was disturbed by prior activities, including placement of a pad for a metal
structure (Figure 2) and a recently installed metal-pipe boundary fence (Figure 3). TPWD
personnel also indicated that this area was the site of controlled burns on several occasions in the
past, with the last one occurring as recently as spring, 1998.
At the time of the pedestrian survey, surface visibility was good. Spring grass was erupting and
did not obscure the ground surface (Figure 3). Blading and leveling of the working pens was
accomplished with a paddle-wheel belly-scraper. Sediments were excavated along the northern
fence line and deposited along the east and south of the pen area. The depth of the cuts was 0-15
cm. To accomplish monitoring, one archeologist walked behind the belly-scraper examining the
newly exposed surface. The other archeologist walked behind the belly-scraper as the sediments
were discharged. The spoils pile was examined with a trowel and shovel. The thickness of the
filled areas was 0-25 cm.
Approximately 244 m (800 linear ft.) trench was excavated with a 30.5 cm (12-inch) wide
backhoe bucket for the installation of buried water and electric lines. The trenches were 0.9 to
1.5 m (3 feet to 5 ft.) deep and located within the area previously surveyed during the leveling
project. The first trench was excavated from the north end of the working pens southeast over a
distance of approximately 60.9 m (200 ft.; Figure 4). It was excavated to approximately 91 cm
(36 inches) deep.

A second trench, approximately 30.5 m (100 ft.) long (east-west) and

intersecting the first trench, was excavated to a depth of 91 cm (36 inches; Figure 5). These
trenches were excavated to bury water lines for water troughs. A third trench was excavated
from the southwest corner of the veterinary building (Figure 6) southward to the maintenance
building (Figure 7). This trench was for the placement of both water and electric lines and was
excavated to a depth of 1.52 to 1.83 m (60 to 72 inches).
One archeologist examined the freshly exposed trench walls and hand-troweled through the
excavated sediments, while the second archeologist screened samples from the spoils pile
through 1/4-inch hardware cloth. Approximately two screens (10 gallons) of sediments were
examined every 2 meters.

145

Figure 2. New construction within the working pen area.

Figure 3. New fence installed around working pen area.
146

Figure 4. North-South trench in working
pen area.

Figure 5. East-West trench in working
pen area.

Figure 6. Trench facing south from the veterinary building.
147

Figure 7. Trench facing south towards the maintenance building.

Results
No prehistoric artifacts or features were identified during these investigations. During leveling,
ash and burned roots from recent controlled burns was observed, but no clusters of rocks or
hearth features were seen. No features were observed and no artifacts were recovered. The
surface sediments consist of a fine, red sandy loam. Occasionally, trenching exposed quartzite
gravels and caliche pebbles. At a depth of 72 inches in the third trench, compact clay was found
mixed with sand.
TPWD has protected site 41BI206 in a similar setting to the north of the construction area
(Howard and McNatt 1998) and these current land leveling and water/electric impacts did not
encroach on that site. Consequently, insofar as no cultural resources were found, the leveling
and water/electric trench excavation phase of the bison pen project will not affect any
archeological sites eligible for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places or eligible for
listing as a Texas State Antiquities Landmark. In the unlikely event that artifacts are noticed

148

during the pipeline and electric line installation, ground disturbing activities should cease and
professional archaeologists be called to assess the unanticipated discovery.

References Cited
Etchieson, Gerald Meeks, Roberta D. Speer, and Jack T. Hughes
1977

An Archeological Survey of Certain Tracts in and Near Caprock Canyons State
Park in Eastern Briscoe County, Texas.

Archeological Research Laboratory,

Kilgore Research Center, West Texas State University, Canyon.

Geiger, Luther C., and Wayburn Mitchell
1977

Soil Survey of Briscoe County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department
of Agriculture, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.

Howard, Margaret and Logan McNatt
1998

Relocation and Assessment of Site 41BI206, within a proposed 366-acre Bison Pen
at Caprock Canyons State Park. In Texas Parks and Wildlife 1997 Annual Report to
the Texas Historical Commission, Antiquities Permit 1778. pp. 227-255. Compiled
by Aina Dodge and Karen Harry, Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Cultural
Resources Program, Austin.

149

