BULVERDE ROAD IMPROVEMENTS – PHASE IV
FROM MARSHALL ROAD TO WILDERNESS OAK
CSJ: 0915-12-509
ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY REPORT
(NON-RESTRICTED)

Steve A. Tomka
Antiquities Permit No. 6883
July 2014

Abstract
Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc. (RKEI) was contracted by Lockwood, Andrews &
Newnam, Inc. (LAN) on behalf of Bexar County to perform an archeological
investigation for Bulverde Road from Marshall Road to Wilderness Oak, a distance of
approximately 1.6 miles. The investigation focused on new roadway right-of-way
(ROW) and three proposed bio-retention basins to be acquired and five existing
drainage easements. These roadway improvements are intended to facilitate traffic flow
and improve drainage conditions along this section of Bulverde Road. An intensive
archeological pedestrian survey was performed under Texas Antiquities Permit Number
6883. Dr. Steve A. Tomka served as Principal Investigator. Kristi Miller Nichols was the
Project Archaeologist, and Chris Murray performed the field work.
The survey was conducted along linear strips of narrow roadway ROW and bioretention basins to be acquired along Bulverde Road and five existing rectangular
drainage easements. The combined strips of ROW measure approximately 10-15 feet
in width and total 1.07 acres. The five existing drainage easements within the survey
area total approximately 2.7 acres. The three proposed locations for water quality
ponds (0.83 acre, 0.40 acre, and 0.53 acre, respectively) that measure a combined 1.76
acres. Right-of-Entry (ROE) to the narrow strips of ROW and the bio-retention basins
could not be obtained from the respective landowners prior to the inception of the
survey. These locations were observed from the edge of the existing drainage
easements (where ROE was not required since they are owned by the County) and the
recommendations in this report are based on these observations and survey results
from this project and previous surveys in the immediate vicinity.
One possible feature was noted during the survey, which is a two-inch pipe that sticks
out of the ground for approximately six inches above the surface. The Texas Water
Development Board records do not indicate the existence of a well in this location. In
addition, no other features suggest that a well was formerly present in the area. It may
simply be the base of a road sign or a metal fence post. However, because the crews
lacked ROE, the feature could not be more adequately inspected. Only one (n=1)
shovel test (ST 4) was excavated during the course of the current project. Three shovel
tests had been excavated within the project area as a whole during the 2010 survey.
The narrow strip of expanded ROW contains utilities along the fence line and exposed
bedrock indicates that top soils are shallow and the burial of cultural deposits is unlikely
in the area. Each of the five county-owned existing drainage easement locations was
inspected for surface material (D-1 through D-5). Only D-1 exhibited a small area of
intact soil. The one shovel test excavated during this project was placed at the northern
edge of the easement, immediately adjacent to the property line that bordered the
proposed water quality basin. No cultural material was encountered in the shovel test.
No artifacts were collected during the course of the project. Records are on file at
RKEI. The bio-retention basins situated immediately adjacent to the existing drainage
easements are unlikely to contain buried cultural deposits due to shallow colluvial soils
in the area and the lack of historic or prehistoric artifacts in the drainage basins situated
in their immediate vicinity.
Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

2

Given the extent of exposed bedrock, disturbances caused by utilities installations
(along the ROW), and the lack of surface-exposed cultural material, the narrow strips of
ROW, the three proposed bio-retention basins and the five existing drainage easements
are unlikely to contain significant intact cultural deposits. Therefore, RKEI recommends
that no further archeological investigations are needed, although the nature of the pipe
fragment sticking out of the ground in the expanded ROW should be clearly determined
prior to the ROW expansion. Once the nature of the surface-exposed pipe fragment
can be determined, the development of the ROW and bio-retention basins can proceed
as planned.
Project Identification


Date: 06/16/2014



Date(s) of Survey:



Archeological Survey Type:

Reconnaissance ☐ Intensive ☒



Report Version:

Draft ☒

Final ☐



Jurisdiction:

Federal ☒

State ☐



Texas Antiquities Permit Number: 6883



District: San Antonio



County or Counties: Bexar



USGS Quadrangle(s): Bulverde, Texas (2998-423)



Highway: Bulverde Road between Marshall Road and Wilderness Oaks



CSJ: 0915-12-509



Report Author(s): Kristi Miller Nichols and Pollyanna Clark



Principal Investigator: Steve A. Tomka

05/21/2014 to 05/22/2014

Texas Historical Commission Approval

Signature

Date
Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

3

Project Description


Project Type: ROW addition



Total Project Impact Acreage: 22.6 acres



New Right-of-Way (ROW) Acreage : 2.83 acres



Existing Easement Acreage: 2.7 acres



Area of Pedestrian Survey:
The estimated depths of impacts across the
project area range from one to 16.5 feet. The majority of the project area has
only inches of accumulated topsoil and therefore, the areas of deep impact will
require excavations into the bedrock that is exposed across much of the Area of
Potential Effect (APE). An estimate of depth of the project ranges from one to
16.5 feet. The area of survey includes strips of proposed ROW of varying widths:
one to 32 feet on the west side; five to 15 feet south of Bulverde Oaks on the
east side; and 22 feet north of Bulverde Oaks on the east side for a total of 1.07
acres. Other areas of survey include three bio-retention ponds totalling 1.76
acres and five existing drainage easements totalling 2.7 acres. The combined
total of area of pedestrian survey is 5.53 acres.



Project Description Impacts: Bexar County plans to expand the existing ROW
in three areas along Bulverde Road. In addition, they plan to construct three
proposed bio-retention basins adjacent to three of the five existing drainage
easements (D-1, D-2 and D-4) along the project area. There are a total of five
existing drainage easements (D-1 through D-5) within the construction limits.
The project falls under the jurisdiction of the Texas Department of Transportation
(CSJ: 0915-12-509).



Area of Potential Effect (APE): The multiple APEs consist of several locations
where the ROW will be expanded either for roadway widening or bio-retention
basins purposes (Figure 1). One of these locations is situated along the western
ROW line of Bulverde Road between Marshall Road and Bulverde Oaks. It
measures 0.74 acres in size. The other two areas of expanded ROW are to the
north and south of the Bulverde Oaks intersection along the east side of the
ROW. In these three locations, the narrow strips of expanded ROW measure
only 10-15 feet in width. The expanded ROWs will serve to accommodate a right
turn off Bulverde Road and an acceleration lane onto Bulverde Road from
Bulverde Oaks and total 0.33 acres. There are five existing drainage easements
(D-1 through D-5) totalling a combined 2.7 acres. These easements are located
on both sides of the Bulverde Road ROW. In addition, three new bio-retention
basins will be constructed along the eastern Bulverde Road ROW. They total
1.76 acres. The southernmost basin is located nearly directly east of the
Marshall Road intersection. It is adjacent to a drainage easement (D-1), and is
0.83 acres in size. The middle pond is immediately north of the Bulverde Oaks
Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

4

and Bulverde Road intersection, is adjacent to existing drainage easement, D-2,
and is 0.40 acres in size. The northernmost pond is roughly 0.2 miles north of
the same intersection, is adjacent to existing drainage easement, D-4, and is
0.53 acres in size. An estimate of depth of the project ranges from one to three
feet. The width of the existing right of way is 88 feet and the length of the project
is approximately 1.6 miles (8448 feet) for an area of 17.07 acres. Therefore the
APE is the exisiting right of way, easements and pond locations (5.53 acres), a
total of 22.6 acres.


Parcel Number(s): Three narrow strips of ROW, five existing drainage
easements and three adjacent bio-retention basins are shown on Figure 2.
Project Area Ownership: Each of the five existing drainage easements are
currently owned by Bexar County. The remaining parcels of land are privately
owned. The areas slated for the ROW expansion and the bio-retention basins
are owned by several different individuals/companies. These are shown in Table
1 below.
Table 1: Parcel number and owners.
Parcel Number

Owner

32

Summit Christian Center
Ciminello, Vito John, and Ciminello, Lauren
Sracic
Haushill, Mark and Laurie C
Zajac, Robert and Rana Chaula J
Ivanna Investment LP
Indian Springs Conservation Association Inc.
Indian Springs Conservation Association Inc.
Indian Springs LTD.
Forestar (USA) Real Estate Group Inc.

31
30
27
53
55
56
57
40
Project Setting


Topography: The APEs fall within the Bulverde USGS 7.5 minute topographic
quadrangle (2998-423). The average elevation of the APE is approximately
1,070 feet above sea level, with the maximum elevations on the surrounding hills
to be 1,202 feet above sea level and a minimum within the drainage areas of
990. Elm Waterhole Creek crosses the upper portion of the project area and
skirts the eastern side. Ephemeral drainages connect to the creek throughout
the APE.



Geology: According to the 1983 Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Antonio Sheet,
the main geologic formation within the project area is the Edwards Limestone
(Ked), which is fine to coarse-grained with abundant chert and fossils that ranges
Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

5

from 300 to 500 feet in thickness. There are extensive outcrops of the Edwards
Limestone formation into the Balcones Fault Zone (Brown et al. 1983).


Soils: According to the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) Web
Soil Survey and the Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas (Taylor et al. 1991), the
soils mapped for the APE include three different soil types: Tarrant association
(TaB), Tarrant association (TaC), and Tarrant association (TaD). All three are
part of the Tarrant Series, which consist of dark grayish-brown, calcareous clay
loam. The soils are moderately permeable, friable when moist, and have rapid
surface drainage with good internal drainage. The surface layer of the Tarrant
Series is made up of 15 to 50 percent limestone fragments. These fragments
can range from a quarter inch in diameter to 24 inches in diameter. The TaB
soils are gently undulating with a one to five percent slope. The TaC soils are
rolling with a five to 15 percent slope and fewer pockets of deeper soils than TaB,
while typically have more stony soil. The TaD soils are hilly with 15 to 30 percent
slopes that occur as ridge tops and hilly to steep slopes with outcrops of bedrock
that make up about 20 percent of the soil.
Tarrant soils found within the project area are rocky clay soils, formed during the
Pleistocene Period or earlier and predate human occupation of the area. These
soils are stable to erosion and have a low probability of containing intact, buried
cultural deposits (Williams et al. 1977). Table 2 presented below outlines the
soils within the APE.
Table 2. Soils
Map Unit
Symbol
TaB
TaC
TaD

Map Unit Name
Eckrant cobbly clay, 1 to 5 percent
slopes
Eckrant cobbly clay, 5 to 15 percent
slopes
Eckrant-Rock outcrop complex, 15 to 60
percent slopes

Percent of APE
37.7
8.1
54.2



Land Use: The portions of the APE that will be acquired are currently privately
owned, undeveloped properties.



Vegetation: The project area is located in the Edwards Plateau Vegetation
Area, which is predominantly rangeland (Gould 1975). The rough rocky areas
typically support a tall or mid-grass understory and a brush overstory complex
made up of live oak (Quercus virginiana), shin oak (Quercus havardi), ash juniper
(Juniperous ashi), and mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa). According to the Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department’s (TPWD) map of The Vegetation Types of Texas,
the project area is within the Live Oak – Ashe Juniper Woods (27), which
supports those plants listed above, as well as, cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia),
Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

6

evergreen sumac (Rhus sempervirens), saw greenbriar (Smilax bona-nox),
poison oak (Rhus toxicodendron), twistleaf yucca (Yucca rupicola), and various
grasses (TPWD 1984).


Estimated Ground Surface Visibility: 95%



Previous Investigations and Known Archeological Sites: No archeological
sites, including any listed in the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) or
designated as State Antiquities Landmarks (SALs), occur within the boundaries
of the APE (THC 2010).
However, a total of fifteen sites (41BX1697, 41BX695, 41BX107, 41BX108,
41BX109, 41BX110, 41BX113, 41BX123, 41BX1560, 41BX105, 41BX106,
41BX104, 41BX114, 41BX115, and 41BX117) have been recorded within a one
mile radius of the project area ((McGraw et al. 1977), THC 2014) (Figure 3).
Fourteen of these sites were recorded in 1977 by the Center for Archeological
Research (CAR) at the University of Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) during the
Encino Park project. CAR performed a reconnaissance survey on over 2,500
acres between U.S. 281 and Bulverde Road and recorded over thirty sites. The
sites appear to represent short-term occupations associated with raw material
procurement and early stage tool manufacture (McGraw et al. 1977).
Only two of these sites are near, but are outside of the boundaries of the current
project. 41BX123, is located on the western easement of Bulverde Road
between Stone Oak Parkway and Marshall Road. The site is described as a
small quarry workshop based on the number of bifaces, cores, and large and
small flakes. It is situated on a hillside slope and measures 250 meters by 250
meters. At the time of the survey, no additional work was recommended
(McGraw et al. 1977). Today, a large business complex sits at the location and
its construction has likely destroyed all remnants of the site.
The second site is 41BX1560 situated about 300 meters southeast of the APE
just south of TPC Parkway. At the time it was described, the site contained a
deflated burned rock midden and lithic scatter located at the confluence of the
Elm Waterhole Creek and an unnamed tributary. The burned rock feature
measures about 10 meters in diameter and 48 centimeters high. No lithic
materials were observed near the mound and very little soil has remained due to
heavy erosion from the creek waters. A shovel test excavated in the midden did
not produce lithic materials and revealed highly eroded deposits. The lithic
scatter located upstream of the midden feature has been impacted by sheet
wash and it was judged to offer little research potential.
Observed cultural materials at the site included chert flakes, burned rocks, a
biface, a possible mano, a Gary projectile point, and Clear Fork Tool. The Gary
projectile point and Clear Fork Tool may indicate Middle to Late Archaic
occupations but defining distinct occupations was not possible given the deflated
nature of the sediments (THC 2014). Site 41BX1560 is situated outside the
Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

7

project APE and will not be impacted by the proposed widening of Bulverde Road
(THC 2010).
In 2006, Raba-Kistner Consultants, Inc. (RKCI) performed a survey within the
existing ROW along Bulverde Road in conjunction with the proposed widening of
Bulverde Road. The survey covered a total of 0.43 miles in length (700 meters)
from Evans Road north to Marshall Road. Shovel tests were placed in areas with
low ground surface visibility. The results of the survey revealed that site
41BX123 extended about one foot into the ROW and covered in length 30
meters (98 feet). Site 41BX123 had been previously determined not eligible for
listing in the NRHP and no further work was recommended. No additional
cultural materials were identified in the survey (THC 2010). Site 41BX123 is
located adjacent to the current APE. The site is situated southwest of the
intersection of Bulverde Road and Marshall Road.
Finally, in 2010, RKEI conducted a pedestrian survey of a portion of Bulverde
Road extending from Marshall Road north for approximately 1.19 miles (6,300
feet) (Figure 4). The survey was conducted under the Texas Antiquities Code,
Permit Number 5808. The survey of the APE entailed visual inspection of the
ground surface coupled with shovel testing where intact soils were present. The
survey revealed that large sections of the APE had been previously disturbed by
utility installations, roadway construction, adjacent development, and naturallyoccurring soil erosion and re-deposition. These previous disturbances have
severely affected or destroyed both surface and subsurface integrity of soil
deposits throughout most of the APE. The only portions of the APE during the
2010 survey that contained soils were found in three locations on the east side of
Bulverde Road. None of the three shovel tests (Figure 4) produced cultural
materials and no prehistoric or historic artifacts were observed on the ground
surface. The survey resulted entirely in negative findings.


Comments on Project Setting: Given the disturbance along the ROW and the
lack of deep soils, the APE as a whole exhibits a lack of potential for producing
significant intact cultural deposits.

Survey Methods


Surveyors: Kristi Miller Nichols and Chris Murray.



Methodological Description: The pedestrian survey of the current APE
consisted of the inspection of the surface to determine if deposits of cultural
material were present and/or soils appeared to be deep enough to allow for
shovel testing. Much of the surface exhibited exposed bedrock.
Only one shovel test (ST 4) was excavated during this survey (Figure 5). For
continuity with the 2010 project, the shovel test excavated in 2014 was
designated ST 4. The shovel test was 30 cm in diameter, and unless prevented
by obstacles or buried features, was to extend to a depth of 80 cmbs. The shovel
Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

8

test was excavated in 10-cm increments, and all soil from each level was
screened through 1/4-inch hardware cloth. No features were encountered. A
shovel test form was completed for the excavated shovel test. Data collected
from the shovel test included the final excavation depth, a tally of all materials
encountered from each 10-cm level, and a brief soil description (texture,
consistency, Munsell color, inclusions). The location was recorded using a
Garmin, hand-held, GPS unit. Any additional observations considered pertinent
were included as comments on the standard shovel test excavation form.


Subsurface Probes (attach map)

Quantity in
Existing ROW

Quantity in
Proposed
New ROW

Quantity in
Existing
Easements

Total Number
per Acre

Shovel
Test Units

0

0

1

0.2

Auger
Test Units

0

0

0

0

Mechanical
Trenching

N/A

N/A

N/A

0

Method



Other Methods: None



Collection and Curation:



Comments on Methods: Exposed bedrock on the surface prevented the
excavation of additional shovel tests. One shovel test was excavated in the area
that had intact soils.

NO ☒

YES ☐ If yes, specify facility.

Survey Results


Project Area Description: The project area is located along Bulverde Road
between Marshall Road and Wilderness Oak. The existing ROW exhibits
evidence of previous construction activities. Utilities were marked prior to the
survey, and gas, electrical, and communications were noted throughout the
length of the western ROW fence line. A water line was marked along the
eastern ROW of Bulverde Road. Bedrock is exposed on much of the surface
(photo on Figure 6). Grasses and shrub-like trees were noted within the
drainage easements, but soils were shallow. The excavated shovel test (ST 4)
revealed that soils were 60 cm deep.



Archeological Materials Identified: One clear glass fragment was noted in ST
4, which was located in the drainage easement (D-1) owned by Bexar County.
Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

9

The fragment was encountered between 40 and 50 cm below surface. The item
was not collected. A pipe fragment sticking out of the ground approximately sixinches was noted within the expanded ROW on the west side of Bulverde Road.
Since ROE had not been granted, the feature was observed from the fence line.
The nature of the pipe and whether it is connected to any subsurface conduit or
is simply the base of a former road sign or fence post could not be determined.
No other cultural material was encountered during the survey.


APE Integrity: Gas, electrical and communication lines run the entire length of
the western ROW. A trench had been cut to allow for the utility installations.
Along the fence line, bedrock was exposed on much of the surface (~95%). The
east side of Bulverde Road has a buried water utility line located within the APE
beginning approximately 0.24 mile (1,260 feet) north of the intersection of
Bulverde Road and Marshall Road and continuing for approximately 0.95 mile
(5,040 feet). The survey revealed that large sections of the APE had been
previously disturbed by utility installations, roadway construction, adjacent
development, and naturally-occurring soil erosion and sedimentation.

Recommendations


Archeological Site Evaluations: The survey of the proposed addition to the
current ROW between Marshall Road and just south of D-4 found that the area
has much exposed bedrock and shallow soils. No shovel tests were excavated
along the western easement of Bulverde Road. Utilities were marked along the
fence line and RKEI had not gained access to the properties prior to the survey.
In addition, observation of the proposed additions from the fence line did not note
cultural material on the surface. A pipe fragment, sticking out of the ground
some six inches, was noted from the fence line on the southern portion of Parcel
27 (photo on Figure 7). The nature of this pipe and whether it represents the
base of a former road sign or fence post or a more extensive feature buried
below the surface needs to be determined prior to the inception of the proposed
road improvements.
Along the eastern ROW of Bulverde Road, a buried water line is marked just to
the west of the fence line. Exposed bedrock is noted throughout much of the
ROW. The survey of the drainage easements noted that bedrock is exposed on
the surface and no cultural material is evident in the immediate vicinity that could
be scanned from the property boundary.
Given the disturbances along the ROW and the lack of deep soils, only one
shovel test was excavated during the course of the survey. This shovel test (ST4) was excavated within but near the northern edge of D-1, and near the
proposed water quality pond. Shovel Test 4 was excavated to a terminal depth
of 62 cmbs where it encountered bedrock. No significant cultural material was
encountered. During the 2010 survey, Shovel Test 1 was located along the
ROW north of D-1. This shovel test is located near the western edge of the
proposed water quality pond associated with D-1. Shovel Test 1 did not contain
Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

10

any cultural material. These two shovel tests (ST 1 and ST 4) indicate that there
are no cultural deposits in the area and that the construction of the water quality
pond located adjacent to D-1 will not encounter any buried significant cultural
deposits.


Comments on Evaluations: None



Further Work: The proposed expansion of the ROW and the construction of the
proposed bio-retention basins will not likely encounter significant archeological
deposits. RKEI staff recommends that no further investigations are needed as
part of this project. However, the pipe segment identified in the road expansion
ROW should be further examined to determine its nature and whether it
represents an isolated feature (i.e., a road sign base or fence post) or is
connected to a buried facility that will require additional investigations. RKEI
recommends that the proposed improvements may proceed as planned. Should
additional changes be made to the project area, further work may be required.



Justification: Given the extent of disturbances within the APE and the lack of
cultural materials identified in the shovel tests, it is highly unlikely that the
proposed construction will encounter or impact intact and significant
archeological deposits, if any, in this disturbed setting.
No significant
archeological or historic sites [36 CFR 800.16(l)] or SALs (13 TAC §26.12) will be
affected by this project. Furthermore, it is also unlikely that cemeteries occur
within the APE and the project will have no effect on marked or unmarked
cemeteries (Health and Safety Code, Title 1, Chapter 711.010, and Title 1,
Chapter 711.035).

References Cited
Blair, W. F.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2(1):93-117.
Brown, T. E., N. B. Waechter, and V. E. Barnes. Robert Hamilton Cuyler
1983 Geologic Atlas of Texas, San Antonio Sheet. Bureau of Economic Geology.
Memorial Edition. 1974; revised 1983; reprinted 2000.
Gould, F.W.
1975 Texas Plants: A Checklist and Ecological Summary.
Experimentation Station, College Station, Texas.

Texas Agricultural

McGraw, A. Joachim, Fred Valdez, Jr. and Wayne Cox
1977 Archeological Survey of Areas Proposed for Modification in the Encino Park
Development, Northern Bexar County, Texas. Center for Archeological
Research, Archeological Survey Report, No. 39. The University of Texas at San
Antonio.

Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

11

Neck, R. W.
1986 The Balcones Fault Zone as a Major Zoogeographic Feature. In The Balcones
Escarpment, Central Texas, edited by P. L. Abbot and C. M. Woodruff, pp. 35-40.
Geological Society of America.
Smith, H. M., and H. K. Buechner
1947 The influence of the Balcones Escarpment on the Distribution of Amphibians and
Reptiles in Texas. Bulletin of the Chicago Academy of Sciences 8(1):1-16.
Taylor, F.B., R. B. Hailey, and D.L. Richmond
1991 Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment
Station.
Texas Historical Commission (THC)
2010 Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/, accessed October
10.
2014 Texas Archeological Sites Atlas, http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/, accessed April 22,
June 2.
Texas Parks and Wildlife
1984 The Vegetation Types of Texas. PWD Bulletin 7000-120. September 1984.
Williams, D., C.M. Thompson, and J.L. Jacobs
1977
Soil Survey of Bexar County, Texas. Soil Conservation Service, U.S.
Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.
Figures
Figure 1. Location of Area of Potential Effect on a current aerial.
Figure 2. Locations of the proposed ROW expansion, drainage basins, water quality
ponds, and Shovel Test 4. The identification of parcels investigated is included.
Figure 3. Location of the 2010 shovel tests.
Figure 4. Location of Shovel Test 4.
Figure 5. Photograph of exposed bedrock.
Figure 6. Photograph of surface-exposed pipe fragment.

Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

12

Figure 1. Location of Area of Potential Effect on a current aerial.

Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

13

Figure 2. Locations of the proposed strips of ROW expansion and bio-retention
basins, existing drainage easements and Shovel Test 4. The identification of
parcels investigated are included.

Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

14

Figure 3. Location of recorded sites within a 1 mile radius of the APE. Site
41BX123 is adjacent to the southern edge of the APE.

Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

15

Figure 4. Location of the 2010 shovel tests.

Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

16

Figure 5. Location of Shovel Test 4.

Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

17

Figure 6. Photograph of exposed bedrock.

Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

18

Figure 7. Photograph of surface-exposed pipe fragment.

This report was written on behalf of the Texas Department of Transportation by
Raba Kistner Environmental, Inc.
12821 W. Golden Lane
San Antonio, TX 78249

Report for Archeology Survey, Environmental Affairs Division, Texas Department of Transportation.

19

