Volume 2 Appendices:
Investigation and Recovery
of USS Westfield (Site 41GV151)
Galveston Bay, Galveston County, Texas

Document No. 100102a
Atkins Job No. 044118606

VOLUME 2 APPENDICES: INVESTIGATION AND
RECOVERY OF USS WESTFIELD (SITE 41GV151)
GALVESTON BAY, GALVESTON COUNTY, TEXAS
U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS
CONTRACT DACW64-03-D-0001
DELIVERY ORDER NOS. 0004, 0005, 0006, MODIFICATIONS 0001,
0002, 0003, AND 0004
TEXAS ANTIQUITIES PERMITS 3878, 4622, AND 5271
NAVY HISTORY AND HERITAGE COMMAND
PERMIT FOR INTRUSIVE ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESEARCH
NOS. PBSJ-2009-001 AND PBSJ-2009-0002
Prepared for:
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
2000 Fort Point Road
Galveston, Texas 77553-1229
Prepared by:
Atkins North America, Inc.
6504 Bridge Point Parkway
Suite 200
Austin, Texas 78730
Project Archeologist:
Amy Borgens

Principal Investigator and Editor:
Robert Gearhart

August 2015

Authors:
Amy Borgens
Justin Parkoff
Robert Gearhart
Sara Laurence
Doug Jones
Jessica Stika

Abstract
This report represents the culmination of fourteen years of marine archeological investigations by PBS&J
(now Atkins North America, Inc.) associated with the Texas City Channel Improvement Project. Over
that time span Atkins’ investigations of the site of USS Westfield (41GV151) have included numerous
remote-sensing surveys using various combinations of marine magnetometer, side-scan sonar, sector-scan
sonar, sub-bottom profiler, and ROV; three diving investigations totaling 64 dives and over 72 hours of
bottom time; and archeological salvage of Westfield resulting in the recovery of at least 8,380 artifacts.
These combined efforts were undertaken in order to satisfy the responsibilities of the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (Public Law 89-665; 16 U.S.C.
470) and the Antiquities Code of Texas (Texas Natural Resource Code, Title 9, Chapter 191). The
archeological investigations reported in this document were conducted under Texas Antiquities
Permits 3878, 4622, and 5271, issued by the Texas Historical Commission, and Federal Permits for
Intrusive Archaeological Research on U.S. Naval Cultural Resources, Nos. PBSJ-2009-001 and PBSJ2009-0002, issued by the U.S. Naval History and Heritage Command. The minimum reporting and
survey requirements for marine archeological studies conducted under a Texas Antiquities Permit
are mandated by The Texas Administrative Code, Title 13, Part 2, Chapters 26 and 28, respectively.
The results of six separate site investigations are reported in this document, including Contract
DACW64-03-D-0001Delivery Orders 0004 and 0005, conducted in 2005 and 2006, respectively,
and additional site assessments and data recovery conducted under Delivery Order 0006 and four
subsequent delivery order modifications in 2007, 2009, and 2010. The results of Delivery Order
0004 conclusively demonstrated that the source of recorded anomaly GV0031 was a shipwreck
(and given the site designation 41GV151), which tentatively matched the time period and
characteristics of Westfield. The results of Delivery Order 0005 further substantiated the identity of
41GV151 as USS Westfield and concluded that the site demonstrates several criteria for eligibility to
the National Register of Historic Places. Delivery Order 0006 resulted in the data recovery
operations, which are the primary focus of this report.

441186/100102a

ii

Contents
Page
Abstract ......................................................................................................................................................... ii
Appendices:
A
Historic Documentation
A-1 Purchase Documentation
A-2 Prize Commission Records
A-3 Renshaw Letter
A-4 Complement of Officers and Crew on Westfield
A-5 Archive Holdings
B
Subcontractor Reports
B-1 Geological Assessment of the USS Westfield Archeological Site
B-2 Navy SUPSALV Report
B-3 DonJon Marine Report
B-4 Phoenix International Report
C
Consultation Letters
C-1 THC Permits
C-2 Navy History and Heritage Command Permit for Intrusive Archaeological Research No. PBSJ2009-001
C-3 Navy History and Heritage Command, Permit for Intrusive Archaeological Research PBSJ-20090002
C-4 Agency Correspondence
D
Nondisclosure Figures
E
Post-Recovery Magnetometer Survey Results

441186/100102a

iii

Appendix A
Historic Documentation

Appendix A-1
Purchase Documentation
National Archives and Records Administration
Record Group 45: U.S. Navy Subject File, 1775–1910

A-1-1

A-1-2

A-1-3

A-1-4

A-1-5

A-1-6

A-1-7

Appendix A-2
Prize Commission Records
Copies furnished by Ed Cotham Jr. from his personal research collection

Letter 1
The Confederate States of America
Eastern District of Texas

To Messrs William Hendley, Peter Norris & Jonathon L. Sleight of
Galveston. Merchants and Master Mariner.
Gent.
The armed gunboat “Westfield”
belonging to the United States government was destroyed during the action between the forces of the
Confederate States & the United States on the 1sr day of January A D 1863 at Galveston and in Galveston Bay,
under the existing laws of the Confederate States it became important for the interest of whom it may concern,
to ascertain the value of said gunboat, her machinery, furniture, tackle, apparel, armament, ammunition and
supplies when destroyed. You are therefore required to ascertain the fair value thereof accordingly, and to
appraise the same and make certain to me said appraisement, that it may be placed in the files of the
Confederate States Court for said District for reference as evidence of said value and for future use.
Witness the Hon W. P. Hill – Judge of said Court for said District
y

Sworn under my hand this day of Jan A D 1863
Philip C. Tucker
Commissioner

A-2-1

Letter 2
To
Philip C. Tucker
C. S. Commissioner of Prize for the Eastern District of Texas
In compliance with your instructions, to me the information in our
possession, having often seen the steamboat called the “Westfield” which was destroyed near Pelican Spit in
Galveston Bay on the 1st day of January A D 1863 – we have appraised the value of the steamboat called the
Westfield, her machinery, armament & furniture – and are oath[?] to estimate the same to have been worth on
the 31st day of December A D 1862 [illegible] coin the sum of one hundred and fifty thousand dollars.
$150.000.00
m

W

Hendley

Peter Norris
John L. Sleight
y

Jan 19th 1863
Sworn & [illegible]
Philip C. Tucker
Comm

A-2-2

AD 10
In the matter of the U.S. armed gunboat called the “Westfield”
Warrant of appraisement & appraiser’s report
Filed Feb 3/63 In [illegible] Clerk by Bobbi [illegible]

A-2-3

Letter 3
1st Interrogatory
Please state your name, age, residence for the last few years – avocation – and to what state or
government do you owe allegiance
2nd-Interrogatory –
Did you know or have you any further knowledge of a steamer, steamboat,
or steam ship in the waters of Texas called the “Westfield” if yes, please state where you knew said
vessel – what manner of vessel was she – in what service was she employed – under what flag did she
sail or steam – to whom did she belong, who commanded her – where was she built – What was her
tonnage – what was her machinery? How was she rigged – What was her tackle, apparel & furniture?
What was her armament? Had she cargo? And of what did it consist? How long did you know her?
And what was her value on the 31st day of December A D 1862? And your means of knowledge?
3rd Interrogatory
When did you last see said steamer called the Westfield – What was her fate?
4th Interrogatory – Please state the circumstances of the destruction of the “Westfield” – was she
being fought, or was not in action Was her destruction caused by Confederate States forces, or was she
voluntarily destroyed by her officers – Was it occasioned by accident or design – were any lives lost?
Was she afloat or ashore at the time you mention in your last answer? Was she in tide water, navigable
waters or inland waters – How came she in her then position? Had you seen her at an earlier hour that
morning, if yes, state when & where.
5th Interrogatory
Please state the names of all the vessels flying the United States flag that you saw on the waters of
Galveston Bay on the morning of 1st January A D 1863.
6th Interrogatory
Please state the names of any & all vessels of the Confederate States that you saw in the waters of
Galveston Bay on the morning of the 1st day of January A D 1863 or that claim to belong to the forces
of said Confederacy.
7th Interrogatory
Do you know who commanded said Confederate states forces – of what did they consist – or who
commanded said steamboats
Lastly –

A-2-4

If you know any matter or thing touching the matter herein interrogated please state the same fully &
particularly

A-2-5

Letter 4
In the matter of the
Confederate States
vs
The armed Steam vessel
Called the Westfield
Evidence taken before our commission of Prize for the Eastern District of Texas at Galveston in obedience to
our order of our Hon District Court of the Confederate States for said District acting as a court of Admiralty on
the day of
A D 1863, Hon W. P. [Hale] – Judge
According to the course of Admiralty in Prize cases
August 24, A D 1863
Commissioners court opened
Present –
Philip C. Tucker
Commissioner of Prizes
William T. Austin
C. S. Marshal
Charles Reynold
as actuary

Answers of Jer Smith a witness brought before the commission of the Marshal

A-2-6

Answer to 1st Interrogatory
I am Jeremiah Smith – My age is sixty seven I have resided in Galveston for eighteen years – I have
been a sailor most my life and master mariner for twenty five years – I owe allegiance to the State of Texas and
Confederate States of America
Ans – to 2nd – Int –
I know the steam boat in the waters of Galveston Bay Gulf of Mexico called the Westfield in the fall
and winter of 1862 – She was a single decked steam – boat of the kind usually known as a New – York and
Williamsburg ferry boat of the largest class – The Westfield was in the U.S. service as a gun – boat – she carried
the U.S. flag – and belonged to the government of the U.S – She was commanded by Commodore Renshaw of
the U.S. N – She was the flag - ship of the of the U.S. squadron at Galveston – Commander Renshaw being the
senior commander at that station – I understood she was built at New – York – Her tonnage was about 800 tons
Custom House measurement – She had a single acting walking beam marine engine – She was schooner rigged
– She had the usual complement of boats, sails, rigging – ground tackle – etc. – of a seagoing United Sta
[damaged] gun – boat – I should think that her complement of men all told was 150 – I think she carried a heavy
armament of about eleven guns – shell and rifle – I do not know whether she carried spare guns between under
decks – It is customary for such vessels to carry small arms I never was on her deck – I knew her about three
months – She carried no cargo with the exception at her ship stores and small stores for the subsistence of the
men and officers – As to her armament I cannot state its value having no knowledge of those matters – I have
been familiar with steam ship building for many years having myself been a steam ship owner – and having also
been for many years in the employment of the Southern Steamship Company – I estimate said vessel without
armament on the 31st day of December 1862 the day preceding her destruction to have been of the value of one
hundred thousand dollars – During the time she was in Galveston harbor I saw her daily – being all that time a
resident of Galveston – She generally lay about a hundred yards from the wharf – She being an enemy vessel I
noticed her particularly –
Aus. To 3rd – Int.
I saw her from the observatory on the top of my house – on the 1st of January 1863 about eight o’clock
in the morning – she was lying outside of the government wharf at Pelican Spit – She was all on fire and
destroyed by fire and explosion –
Ans to 4th. IntThe Westfield was not actually engaged in the action of the 1st of January in the waters of Galveston
Bay – She was voluntarily destroyed by their officers to prevent her falling in the hands of the confederate
services – She seemed from her position to have got aground in attempting to pass out of Bolivar Channel into
the Galveston Channel – She was just out on the edge of the channel called Bolivar channel in the waters of
Galveston Bay – I was on my observatory at daylight that morning and saw all the vessels on the waters of
Galveston Bay – Before I saw her on fire I do not recollect noticing the position of the Westfield - I only know
from common report that any lives were lost on board –

A-2-7

Ans. to 5th. Int –
The Steamship Harriet Lane (captured at daylight – by the forces of the Confederate States) The
Westfield – The gun-boat Owasco – the gun-boat Sachem – The Pilot boat Lecompte – a clipper schooner name
unknown – gun boat Clifton – The armed steam transport Saxon – The transport Boardman – Two supply barks
the Cavallo – and Pike –
Ans. to 6th. Int –
On the morning of the 1st of January 1863 – I saw the steam-boat Neptune – Steamboat Bayou City –
both with cannon and armed forces of the Confederate States on board – I also saw the Steamboats John F. Carr
and Lucy Guinn [Gwin] – with men on board supposed to be tenders to the first two vessels – I saw them in the
channel opposite to the city –
Ans. to 7th. Int.
I have no personal knowledge thereof
Lastly –
I cannot
J Smith

A-2-8

Letter 5
Commissioners Prize Court
August 25th A D 1863
In the matter of the
Steamer called the
“Westfield”

Present
Phillip C. Tucker
Our Commissioner of Prize
Charles Reynold
as actuary
W. J Austin C S. Marshal at Galveston
A. W. Williams C. S. Deputy Marshal

Examination continued
Witnesses
Thomas M. League
Andrew Thompson
Dan Phillips

A-2-9

Letter 6
Answers of Thomas M. League a witness brought before the Commissioners by the Marshal.
Answer to1st. Interrogatory.
Thomas M. League-Fifty seven-seventeen years-gentleman in early life a mariner-the state of Texas
and Confederate StatesAns. to 2nd Int.
I knew a steamer called the Westfield in the waters of Galveston Bay-in the fall of 1862-She was a low
pressure Northern ferry steamer-she was in the U.S. service-she sailed under the U.S. flag-belonged to the U.S.
government-commanded by Commodore Renshaw-I do not know where she was built-I do not know what was
her tonnage-low pressure engine-I do not know how to describe her rig-I do not know as to her tackle, apparel
and furniture-She had a large pivot gun on her stern aft-and two other large guns abaft her shaft-I cannot say as
to her further armament-she had no cargo on board to my knowledge-I cannot estimate her value-I was on board
of her twice in Galveston harbor-I went on board the first time as one of the Deputation with the mayor of the
town when she first came in relation to the protection to be extended to the citizens. The second time I went on
board with Mrs. Stromer the wife of a Confederate citizen a prisoner on board at the insistence of the mayor.
Ans. to 3rd IntOn or about the first of December last-I only knew from a common report she was destroyed on the
first of January 1863 in Galveston harbor
Ans. to 4th IntAt the time the Westfield is reported to have been destroyed I was residing in Houston and have no
personal knowledge of anything furtherAns. to 5th IntI was not in Galveston at the time and have no personal knowledge of what occurred
Ans. to 6th IntSame answer
Ans. to 7th IntI have no personal knowledge
Lastly
I have no further knowledge as to the matters inquired aboutThomas League
A-2-10

Letter 7

Answers of Andrew Thompson a witness brought before the Commissioners by the Marshal.

Answer to 1st. Interrogatory:
Andrew Thompson Fifty two-Galveston for the last eighteen years-sailor all my life-born at sea-I was
born under the British flag-and have resided so many years in Texas that I consider myself as owing allegiance
to the state of Texas and the Confederate states of America-I am now in the Confederate States transport
service-

Ans. to 2nd Int.
I knew a steamer in the waters of Texas called the Westfield-I knew her in the fall of 1862-She was
built expressly for a ferry boat but had been converted into a gun boat-She was employed in the Federal service
and carried the U.S. flag-she carried the U.S. flag-and was commanded by Commodore Renshaw-She was the
flag ship of the U.S. Squadron in the Bay-She was built at Brooklyn or Hoboken in the state of New York-Her
tonnage I think was about seven hundred tons customs house measurement-Her machinery was a beam marine
engine low pressure-She had one small signal staff forward-I cannot state as to her tackle apparel and furniture
generally-I know that she had ground tackle and four quarter boats-One of her boats was painted lead colour, the
other three were painted black-Her armament consisted of six guns-one rifle gun 6 in bore-One smoothbore or
nine inch shell gun or Dahlgren-the other four eight inch columbiads-She had no cargo-only provisions and fuel
for the use of the ship – I knew her from the time of her arrival – I cannot estimate her value – I knew her from
seeing her at anchor in the Bay when the harbor was occupied by the federals – Since her loss I was employed
by the Col. Sulakouski Chief Engineer at Galveston and Major Kellesburg of the Engineer Department to work
aboard of the wreck sometime in May last – to search the wreck of the Westfield then lying in Galveston Bay
near Pelican Spit and to save whatever was of value on board said wreck – I found the wreck to consist of about
one half of the hull of the vessel embedded in the sand and in about six feet of water – The decks were burned
off of her forward and the stern part blown off about sixty yards (the main part of the stern) I worked on the
wreck for about a month – There were assisting me – Henry Pinn– William Taylor – Henry Storits – The
Steamboat Col - Stele a government boat was there by agreement to render us assistance – By agreement under
Col. Sulakouski and Major Kellesburg myself and the men named above were to receive one hundred dollars in
gold bounty on every gun saved and landed at Galveston – and proper salvage on every thing saved guns
included. I acted as diver descending under water and directing the labor – I found portions of her armament,
provisions and fuel embedded in the sand under water – with great labor we removed the sand, raised from the
water, placed on board the Steamboat Col – Stele and sent to Galveston – One nine inch Dahlgren gun – three
eight inch – the carriage and part of a chassis belonging to a nine inch gun –and in a damaged condition two
carriages for eight inch guns – A large quantity of boiler iron consisting of her plates – a large quantity of eight
inch round shell and a quantity of conical shells – Five barrels of meat (provisions) two composition compresses
A-2-11

– one bolt – six gun tackles for ship carriages, complete – two lifting rods – one rudder complete coppered eight
feet – Two composition pintels – Previous to my going to work at the wreck others had saved two guns – The
iron and copper of her upper works and her chimney stack had been taken from her and removed to Galveston –
and I have understood in possession of the Engineer Department – The property I saved was delivered to the
Chief of the Engineer Dept – at Galveston – All the compensation we have received has been the equivalent of
one hundred dollars in gold – in Confederate currency being the bounty for one gun –
Ans. to 3rd Int.
I last time I saw the Westfield afloat was on the 31st day of December 1862. She was destroyed by fire
and the explosion of her magazine on the morning of the 1st day of January A.D. 1863 –
Ans. to 4th Int.
I saw the Westfield burning from the deck of the Harriet Lane on the morning of the 1st of
January 1863 – I had been ordered after the capture of the Harriet Lane – on board said vessel by Captain T. C.
Saunders who was the officer in charge thereof to assist in working ship – The Westfield was aground when on
fire – From what others saw, and from my own subsequent examination of the wreck I am of opinion that she
got aground in attempting to pass from Bolivar channel to Galveston Channel by passage between Pelican
Island and [Hannah’s] reef by the way of half Moon channel – to cut off the Confederate gun boats – had she
succeeded she would have been in their rear – I have no doubt – that she was destroyed by her officers and crew
as she was aground and unmanageable – It was reported at the time that Commodore Renshaw – Lieut.
Limmernann [sic, Zimmerman] and fourteen men lost their lives by the explosion – Portions of human bodies
have been seen afloat near the wreck – The Westfield took no active part in the action except the attempt made
as above – and was not engaged by our forces –
Ans. to 5th Int.
Steam gunboat Harriet Lane (sidewheel) – The Clifton and Westfield – side wheel low pressure steam
gun-boats – The propeller gunboat Owasco – The propeller two masted gunboat Sachem – The schooner Fairy
– The prize pilotboat Lecompte – The Steam transports Saxon and Boardman – The two supply barks Cavallo
and Elias Pike
Ans. to 6th Int.
The armed steamboat Neptune and Bayou City carrying Confederate forces and cannon – also the
transport Lucy Gwinn and John F. Carr –
Ans. to 7th Int.
The Bayou City was commanded by Major Leon Smith and Henry Lubbock as sailing master – There
was on board the Bayou City in charge of the guns and as sharp-shooters Company B Cooks artillery command
by Capt – Weir – There were volunteers on board – The steamboat Neptune was commanded by Capt Thomas
C. Saunders fighting captain and Capt. William Sangster sailing master – There were artillerists and sharp
shooters on board also volunteers but I do not know of what command – These were the only two boats actually
A-2-12

in action – The steamboat John F. Carr was commanded by Capt. John Lawless she had a company of
sharpshooters on board but no artillery – The Lucy Gwinn [sic, Gwin] I heard was commanded by Major
McKee –
Lastly:
When I went on board the prize ship Harriet Lane, the morning of her capture, I found Capt. Thomas C.
Saunders in command of the ship. Thomas Seymour in charge of the engine – Saunders was working captain
and mate – Lieut Patton of Pyron Regiment was assisting Seymour – There were about twenty men aboard in
the engine department [?] a – The principal labor was done by negroes from the shore – The day after the
capture Major Leon Smith went to Houston - For about a week it required the active labor of a great number of
men to save the vessel – During that time the officers named above in this answer were in actual charge of and
worked to repair and save the vessel – The Harriet Lane was injured by the shots of the enemy – her starboard
wheel and [illegible] block broken, her sail was torn of [illegible] by shot requiring for repairs the labors of
carpenters, blacksmiths, caulkers etc – who were engaged thereon –
(signed by mark) Andrew Thompson
Witness
Chas Russignol

A-2-13

Letter 8

Commissioner’s prize court for the examination of witnesses in prizes cases in the C. S. District Court for
Eastern District of Texas – in Admiralty continued from 24th of August AD 1863
August 27, 1863
Present
Our Commissioner of Prize
Philip C. Tucker
Charles Reynold Esq
As Actuary
Col. W. J Austin, C. S. Marshal at Galveston
A. W. Williams Deputy of C. S. Marshal

Witness brought in [illegible] offices
Daniel Phillips

A-2-14

Answers of Daniel Phillips a witness brought before the Commission by the Marshal
Answer to the First Int.
Daniel Phillips – 34 years – Mariner – resided in Texas 21 years – Texas, and Confederate States –
Answer to 2nd. Int –
I have – I have personal knowledge of said vessel from the 26th day of December 1862 to the 1st of
January 1863 – She was propelled by steam – originally constructed as a ferry boat to ply in the waters of the
state of New York – She was employed in the U.S. service – sailed under the U.S. flag and belonged to the so
called US. Government – She was commanded by Commander Wm H. Renshaw U.S. N – I cannot say – Her
tonnage I think was about 500 tons custom house measurement – Her machinery was a low pressure beam
engine – She was not rigged to be propelled by wind or sail – She had two king posts on which were erected
staffs for setting signals – She carried four quarter boats, anchors (2) and two chains and the usual amount of
tackle and furniture usually carried by vessels of her class – Her armament consisted of four eight inch guns on
her fore castle – Two nine inch guns on her quarter deck – one rifle thirty two (rifled) shifting gun – with small
arms consisting of Enfield rifles, bayonets, pistols, boarding pikes, cutlasses, and accountrements [sic] sufficient
for a crew of ninety five men outside of the officers – officers and equipment as officers usually are in vessels
of her class – Her value with her armament all told of the 31st day of December 1862 was in opinion was one
hundred and seventy five thousand dollars – I was a prisoner on board from the 25th of December 1862 to the 1st
day of January 1863 –
Answer to 3rd – Int.
I saw her on the morning of the 1st day of January – she was destroyed by order of her commanding
officer –
Answer to the 4th - Int –
On the morning of the 1st of January – about 8 o’clock the commanding officer of the steamer
Westfield ordered Zimmerman the executive officer to order the crew to transfer their baggage and effects to the
Marion P. Boardman – for as soon as he saw the rebel ram getting up steam to attack him, he intended to set fire
to the vessel – the crew were then transferred to the Marion P. Boardman and in her vessel lying in the harbor –
a short time after the crew left the vessel she blew up – I was among the last to leave the vessel – The Westfield
was not in the action – She was voluntarily destroyed by her officers – She was destroyed by design – Eleven
lives were lost by the explosion, including the commanding officer – the first lieutenant, chief engineer Gunner
and Gunner’s mate, the crew of the Captains gig – and two other [illegible] persons one black and one white
rank not known – She was ashore – She was aground – occurred by the negligence of her sailing master – She
was in tide water – ashore in Bolivar Channel – In running up the channel for the purpose of [illegible] to and
running out she got aground – I was on board of her during the action and when she got aground – till the orders
to transfer were executed – Commodore Renshaw took no part in the action although commanding the squadron
A-2-15

– His sole endeavours [sic] were to get his vessel off – he set no signals whatever except a signal for assistance
and one inquiring about the fate of the Harriet Lane –
Ans to 5th . Int.
The Harriet Lane was captured just before day – the other vessels of the US squadron were the
Owasco a propeller gun boat – schooner rigged The steam ferry boat Clifton consort of the Westfield mounting
6 guns – The steam propeller gunboat Sachem schooner rigged mounting 3 guns – The schooner Cory Phaeus
[Corypheus] mounting two guns – The transport Mary P. Boardman (propeller). The steam propeller Saxon –
The schooner Fairy, the transport bark Cavallo – The transport bark Elias Pike, and the pilot boat Lecompte
Ans to 6th . Int
Being four miles and the hour so early I could not distinguish –
Ans to the 7th Int.
Of my personal knowledge I cannot state –
Lastly:
I know nothing more
Dan Phillips

Dan Phillips acct

of the destruction

of the

Westfield

A-2-16

Letter 9

Answers of W. Grover-a witness brought before the Commissioner by the Marshal –
Answer to 1st Int.
George W. Grover-near forty-three-Galveston-Merchant-State of Texas –
Answer to 2nd Int.
I know of a vessel called the Westfield-Saw her enter the Galveston harbor in the early part of October
– knew her from then until January 1863- She was a gunboat – She was a steamvessel-an armed vessel of the
U.S – carrying the flag of the U.S – The property of the U.S – I was informed she was commanded by
Commodore Renshaw and was the flagship of the squadron- I know not where she was built – I am unable to
say what was her tonnage- She was a low pressure boat with a walking beam-she was schooner rigged – I am
unable to say what was her apparel or furniture – Her armament consisted of a heavy bow and stern gun-on
either side a heavy shell gun forward and aft of the wheelhouse-making six guns on the main deck – I am unable
to say whether she had more guns on the main deck – From the wheelhouse forward as well as aft she had
wooden curtains cased within iron which could be raised or depressed at pleasure-displaying no portholes – She
had another gun forward of her stack on the hurricane deck – I knew nothing about her ammunition or small
arms-She was an armed vessel without cargo – I am unable to estimate her value- I was residing at Galveston
acting Mayor at the City during the time she lay in Galveston Bay-she was in the harbor of Galveston – I saw
her almost daily from the observation on my house at a distance of a half mile and from my store at a distance of
four hundred yards my store being on the strand –
Ans. to 3rd Int.
I saw her on the morning of the 1st Jan - 1863 about eight o’clock where and when she blew up-I was
on the top of [illegible] Frederich HouseAns. to 4th Int.
On the morning of the 1st January at day light she was stationed a little to the west of the wharf on
Pelican Spit – She was not in action – She was not destroyed by the Confederate forces but from some cause
originating with those on board – Do not know whether it was caused by accident or design – I only know from
hearsay as to the loss of life – I am unable to say whether she was aground or afloat – She was in or near a ship
channel called Bolivar Channel in Galveston Bay – I am unable to say how she got in that position except that
she was there stationed to guard that channel – I had not seen her previously that morning to the time
mentioned
Ans. to 5th Int.

A-2-17

Steamship Harriet Lane-Steam Gunboat Owasca – Steam Gunboat Clifton-Steam Gunboat SachemSteam gunboat Westfield – A schooner mortar boat supposed to be the Fairy – Armed steam transport Saxon–
another steamer name unknown – Supply ship Cavallo and Pike and prize schooner Lecompte
Ans. to 6th Int.
Steamboat called Bayou City – Neptune-Lucy Gwinn – and the John F. Carr – The first had
confederate forces on board and were armed with cannonAns. to 7th Int.
I cannot state of my own knowledge
Lastly
I have stated all I know about the subject

Geo. W. Grover

A-2-18

Letter 10

[1st Interrogatory]
Please state your name, age, residence, avocation, and to what country you owe allegiance
2nd Interrogatory - Have you any knowledge of a vessel in the waters of Texas called the
Westfield? If yes – describe the vessel state to whom she belonged – and what became of her.
3rd Interrogatory – If you know what became of her – who has or had possession of – any part of the steamer
called the Westfield in Jany A D 1863 or if her armament, ship stores, small stores, or of any articles on board
when said vessel was wrecked or destroyed \ if so wrecked or destroyed state the cause, and how said article or
articles came into the possession of such person or persons and by what authority? State fully and particularly

A-2-19

Letter 11

Commissioners court for the examination of evidence in prizes case in the matter of the Westfield
Galveston August 28, 1863
Present
Phillip C. Tucker
Commissioner of Prize
Charles Reynold Esq
As actuary
A W Williams Esq
Deputy C. S. Marshal at Galveston
Subpoena returned –
Witness of J. E. Haviland disobeyed the subpoena
Adjourned

Galveston Aug 29, 1863
Commissioners Prize Examination continued
Present
Same officers as yesterday
Witness James E. Haviland

A-2-20

Answers of James E. Haviland – a witness brought before the Commissioner by the Marshal.
Answers to the First Interrogatory.
James E. Haviland aged fifty – three-have resided in Galveston area twenty five years-master mariner
of late employed in the engineer department of the confederate states – [illegible] allegiance to the state of
Texas and the Confederate States
Ans. to 2nd Int.
I knew a vessel in Galveston harbor called the Westfield-she was a U.S. vessel-mounting 6 guns –
propelled by her pressure engine-side wheels – She was destroyed on the morning of the first of January 1863
near Pelican Spit-by the explosion of her magazines – just as the U.S. fleet left the harbor.
Ans. to 3rd Int.
By order of Gen. Magruder I raised and took on shore six cannon belonging in the wreck-They were
imbedded in the sand – The Engineer Dept. furnished a steamboat and the necessary mechanical appliances to
effect the purpose – I turned the six cannon over to the Engineer Department of which Col. [illegible] Rawski
was the chief-and by the Engineer department they were immediately turned over to the Ordnance Department
– The guns were one six inch rifled gun – one nine inch Dahlgren smooth bore-Four eight inch shell guns-and
also portions of gun carriages broken up-also blocks and tackles the tackles useless from decay – The blocks
were good – There were also turned over at the same time and saved from the wreck-shells for the rifle guns
from eighty to one hundred-also about one hundred eight inch shells – a few nine inch shells. Also several tons
of iron consisting of bars and rods, iron plating, portions of the engine- Also about a thousand pounds of brass –
Three or four barrels of beef or pork-Three of which turned over to the Engineer Department – The remainder
consumed by those employed in working on the wreck. I also understood that a barrel of beans was saved-about
three dozen handcuffs
The value of the Westfield before her wreck, independent of her [illegible] and armament I should estimate at
seventy thousand dollars – The iron saved in ordinary times would have been worth about forty dollars a ton –
The brass would have been worth twenty cents a pound – Owing to the demand for such material at this time
they were of great value to the government but the labor of raising the said iron and brass and the expense far
exceeded their value – In peace times the Dahlgren would have cost about one thousand dollars at a foundry –
The rifled gun about the same and the four shell guns at about eight hundred dollars a piece-but owing to the
existing war their value cannot be estimated to the confederacy on account of the difficulty of procuring the
material at this time
Lastly:
I am not aware that I have any other knowledge relating to the transaction that I not already disclosed.

J.E. Haviland
A-2-21

Letter 12

Confederate States
Vs
The steamer called the
“Westfield”

Evidence taken under order for further proof
September 1st A D 1863

Present

Phillip C. Tucker
C. S. Commissoiner of Prize
Charles Reynold
As actuary

A. W. Williams Esq
C. S. Deputy
Marshal

A-2-22

Letter 13
Reference

Interrogatories to Hiram Close in the matter of the
Confederate States
Vs
The steamer Westfield

1st Interrogatory
Please state your name, age, residence, avocation, and to which state or sovereignty
you owe allegiance.
2nd Interrogatory
Have you seen the cannon & iron work saved from the wreck of the Westfield? If yes,
please estimate the value therein in coin.
3rd Interrogatory – Please estimate the value of the brass saved from the wreck of the Westfield.

A-2-23

Answers of Hiram Close a witness brought before the Commissioners by the Marshal.
Answer to First Interrogatory
Hiram Close – sixty seven – avocation iron and brass founder – and machinist – State of Texas
Ans – to 2nd Int.
I have seen the cannon of the Westfield they are worth about ten cents a pound – Their weight I do not
know – The value of the iron saved from the wreck is worth four cents a pound – The brass is worth twelve
cents a pound – These estimates of value refer to peace time valuation –
Hiram Close
Submitted & sworn to
Sept 1, 1863
Before

Philip C. Tucker
[illegible] Prize Commissioner

A-2-24

Letter 14

Confederate States
vs
The Steamer Westfield
Galveston Sept 2, 1863
Evidence under order for further proof in above case
Present
Philip C Tucker
Commissioner of Prize
Charles Reynold Esq
As actuary
A W Williams
Deputy C S Marshal at Galveston
Witness
William Taylor

A-2-25

Answers of William Taylor, a witness brought before the commissioner by the Marshal
Answer to the First Interrogatory:
William Taylor – thirty two – resided in Texas since 1851 – avocation mariner but for a few years past
have been steamboating in the waters of Texas – I am a confederate citizen – an Englishman by birth
Ans. to 2nd – Int –
I never saw the Westfield afloat – I saw her since she was wrecked – I have no knowledge as to her
nationality her officers, tackle apparel tonnage or machinery –
Ans. to 3rd – Int –
I am a member of Col. Cook’s Reg Company E First heavy artillery – I was detailed about the 1st of
April to go to the wreck with Mr. Mason in search of materials from the wreck – After examination Mr. Mason
abandoned the enterprise – Major Kellesberg – told the witness that if he would go get some assistance he
would give him one hundred dollars in specie for every gun [illegible] raised and delivered – also the customary
salvage therein - The government to furnish a steamboat to raise the guns and bring them to Galveston – The
first gun raised was a 68 pounder Dahlgren gun without carriage – We also raised and delivered two other 68’
smoothbore – and one 9 inch gun – We got parts of three carriages – We raised a quantity or iron work
belonging to the boat, also some brass connected with the guns and carriages all of which was delivered to
Major Kellesburg – I have no knowledge of any materials taken from the wreck and converted to their own use
by any person whatsoever. The iron work and guns were embedded in the water and sand and it became
necessary for the parties engaged in raising of the same to descend in diving suits to work at them – The first
gun was raised by myself Andrew Thompson – Henry Pinn – Henry Storits – The other guns were raised by the
same parties just now mentioned assisted by the crew of the Stell – Capt. James E. Haviland – We received the
hundred dollar bounty for the first gun, but no salvage – Previous to going over with Mason I had been stationed
at Pelican Spit, and with others often visited the wreck – we fished up some thirty shells (loaded) A brass wheel
about twenty inches in diameter with a screw attached let into some fine wood – Also a hawser about 4 inch
round – These articles were taken to town by a Government steamboat – During the time the Col. Stell was
employed on the wreck there were five barrels of meat fished up – one barrel was consumed on board the boat –
the remainder was sent to Galveston
While the Stele was wrecking there was picked up a large amount of round and conical shell and shot - also a
quantity of grape and canister in bags - I think at least two hundred – I have no further knowledge While I was
stationed at the spit and before I worked on the wreck a schooner called the Mary which I understood was in
Government employ was frequently at the wreck and carried off considerable from the wreck – I have know
further knowledge – connected with the wreck of the Westfield –
William Taylor

A-2-26

Letter 15

Answers of Alexander Pitt – a witness brought before the Commissioner by the Marshal –
Answer to the First Interrogatory –
Alexander Pitt – age forty seven – resided in Texas nearly thirty years – avocation sailor – State of
Texas
Answer – to 2nd Int –
I do not know that I have any knowledge of the Westfield except that a vessel of that name was
destroyed in Bolivar channel of the 1st of January 1863 –
Answer to 3rd – Int –
On the 2nd of January I was ordered by the Prize Commissioner at Galveston to act in the absence of the
Confederate States Marshal in the capacity of a special Baliff to assist in securing and preserving captured
property – A few days after he ordered me to Houston to report to the Marshal who appointed me a deputy
Marshal and ordered me to act in the same duty – While on this duty I had a special charge of most of the sails
running rigging and apparel of the Barks Cavallo and Elias Pike – The Depository for this class of property was
a set of buildings of sheds in Houston known as Longeopes buildings and used as a government warehouse –
No saved material from the wreck of the Westfield were sent to that house – but I saw and handled some of the
materials saved from the wreck at H J Trube’s store in Houston – Mr. Trube was one of the Confederate States
Deputy Marshals – There were six coils of sisal rope – 540 feet to the coil – They were from one inch to one
inch and a half diameter and each coiled would weigh from 120 to 180 pounds – Also a half a coil of new
Manilla [sic] rope three quarter inch diameter – This cordage was worth two dollars and a half per pound – it
was raised from the wreck by Christopher Delany who claimed salvage thereon – There was other captured
property at Trubes and the Confederate States Marshal informed me that he would continue to place any
captured property at Trubes – and did this to prevent property being taken by violence from him, as it had been
at the other place – subsequently I was at Mr. Trubes and found that the above property had been removed but I
do not know where – I know that a quantity of the property was saved from the wreck by persons acting under
the orders of Major Kellesburg who received the same – I called upon him as a Deputy Confederate States
Marshal by order of the Prize Commissioner to allow me to take an account of the same which he refused to do
– I have no further knowledge about the wreck of the Westfield [illegible] that I know that property is being
continually removed there from – and that an attempt is about to be made by the government to remove the
shafts – they will weigh about ten thousand pounds a piece – and judging from the price we used to pay in the
market the iron would be worth five cents in specie per pound – and further I say not –

Alex Pitt

A-2-27

Letter 16

[illegible] Dept
1-6-in rifled gun
1 9 “” Dahlgren – smooth bore
4 8 “” shell guns
Blocks & tackles
90 shells for rifle gun
100 8 inch shells
a few nine inch shells
several tons of iron – in bars, rods, [illegible]
plating, - portions of engine –
1000 lbs brass
5 barrels beef & pork
1 Bl beans
3 doz handcuffs
Iron value in peace x 40 per ton – brass 20 cts per lb
Labor of saving exceeded value
Guns in peace cost at foundry
x 1000
Shell guns
x 800
Value to C S cannot be estimated
4 inch [illegible]
30 shells
Brass wheel
C S marshal rec’d – Trubes store
6 coil sisal rope 540 feet to the coil
coil – 1 – ½ [or 1/3 –hard to read] – weighs 120 to 180 lbs
½ coil new Manilla [sic] rope ¾ inch dia.
worth 2 – 50 per ft.
Christopher Delany
2 shafts [illegible] 10000 lbs each – 54/2 lb in [specie?]
1 white qr Boat

A-2-28

salvors

Andrew Thompson
Henry Pinn
William Taylor
Henry Storits

For gun bounty

Westfield – Description
Single decked steamboat – like NY & [illegible] ferry boat (1st Class)
Double ender – US gun boat – US Commander
WH
Renshaw Master – flagship 600 tons c h measurement
Single acting walking beam marine engine – schooner
rigged – carried 150 men – Complete in sails rigging
[illegible]
JS
11 guns Value 31st Dec 1862 Complete of 100.00 6 “”
$188.00 7 “”
Recorded
1 – 9 inch Dahlgren gun
3 8
Do
Carriage & portion of chain of 9 inch gun
2 damaged carriages for 8 inch
(The a/c for Iron [illegible]
5 barrels of beef & pork
2 composition compresses
One fighting bolt [used for ‘portable’ howitzers and their carriages]
6 gun tackles for ship carriages complete
2 [lifting?] rods
1 Rudder complete copper for 8 feet
2 composition pintels

2 guns
Iron & copper from upper works
Chimney stack

Haviland 6 guns

A-2-29

J. C. Saunders
[Illegible]
[Illegible]

[Illegible]
Pyrons [Illegible]
With labor to [Illegible] [Illegible]
100.00
175.00
100.00
375
125

A-2-30

Letter 17
Duplicates
Account of the Brass, Iron, Boiler Iron etc. etc. removed from the Wreck of Steamer “Westfield” by the
Engineer Department Eastn Sub Div. of Texas
9718 lbs of Iron
at 20 ¢ p. lb.
$1943, 60.
424 “ Brass and Copper “ 75 ¢ “”
318, 00.
3300 “ Boiler Iron
“ 60 ¢ “”
1980, 00.
21, 13 inch Shells 210 lbs each
4410 lbs at 5 ¢ p. lb.
220, 50.
26, 8 inch shells at 64 lbs each
1664 lbs at 5 ¢ p. lb.
83, 20. $4545, 30.

Pnd
Pnd

8 inch Columbiad Gun at $1200, 00
32 pdr Rifle
1000, 00
$ 2200, 00

Actual Expenses on the Recovery of the a[damaged] specified Articles.
For Services of Capt. J. E. Haviland and
use of his Sub Marine Armour
$300, 00.
Services of Capt. C. B. Leo
[damaged]
Do Diver Charles Garland & [damaged]
Repairs of Submarine Armour
[damaged]
Charter of Schooner “Mary”
[damaged]
Hire and Subsistence of [damaged]
Of said Schooner

I verify that the above account [damaged] have been actually incurred by [damaged] above specified articles

Chief [damaged]

A-2-31

Westfield & Loose Boats
Report of
C. S. Marshal

Letter 18

A-2-32

Inventory of the Property taken from the wreck of [damaged] Str Westfield by the Engineers Department at
Galveston and reported to W. J. Austin C. S. Marshal
1st
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

1 Large Launch Boat
1987 lb Iron
424 lb Brass & Copper
3300 lb Boiler Iron
21 – 13 Inch Shells 210 lb Each
26 – 8 Inch Do
64 lb Each
1
8 inch Columbiad Gun
1 – 32 Pounder Rifle Gun

Other articles have been taken from the wreck by the Engineers Department at Galveston which can be reported
by Col. Sulokouski or Maj Kellesburger
William J. Austin
C. S Marshal

The following described small Boats were found by Caps Alex Pitt belonging to the effects captured at
Galveston Jan 1st 1863
1 White Boat taken for the use of the Post at Galveston
1 [illegible] Boat taken for the service at Pelican Spit
1 Boat 1 Complete Wreck on the wharf at Houston
These Boats which were taken by the military authorities have been appraised in a formal manner &
the appraisement handed to me by the proper officers respectively
Wm J Austin
C.S. Marshal

A-2-33

Appendix A-3
Renshaw Letter
National Archives and Records Administration
Record Group M625, Microfilm Collection

December 15th ‘62
My dear Rector,
I received your letter by the last steamer and had these strong hopes that I would have
been able to answer it in person and eat my chicken as dinner with you – Alas! That hope has
fled – our admiral thinking. I cannot at pursuit be spared.
At the same time I received your letter, one came from my friend Porter informing me of
the good news of his appointment as rear Admiral – his command and of his Mississippi Flotilla
and his strong desire to have me with him. Stating at the same time also that the dept had granted
him his request that I might be ordered to join him and that my orders for that service would be
sent out by the Connecticut – From what I can learn they were sent out, but in a qualified form
authorizing the admiral to retain me for a time should my services be required by him – Had I
received those orders at the time Porter presumed I would [think] I could have had a nice visit of
four or five weeks – the glorious fellow promising to let me [have] that long for a good time
among my friends – How long I will be kept I cannot image but unless my orders are
countermanded I can’t be longer than the first of February I think I cannot tell you how I long to be returned from my present course? And when I came
down here to make the attack it was with the understanding that troops would be sent
immediately to occupy the city should I succeed - I did succeed that not a soldier has yet made
his appearance – One success (I am happy to say without any encouragement from sin for I was
resolved not to promise protection without seeing [nay] way clear to fulfill it) brought out a
great deal of anxious feeling and when these poor [imprudent] creatures found out that I could
not occupy the city but only hold the harbor, and prevent by the labor of my guns the enemy
again taking possession of it. Their terror was pitiable & numbers of them left their houses and
lived in a store house at the end of a wharf commanded by our guns – They have been almost
reduced to a state of starvation – indeed the whole city are suffering for food - and the appeals
made to us have been most touching – I can’t stand it any longer – and at my own risk have
chartered a barque that brought us coal, and will send them to New Orleans –
I have begged and urged the Admiral & Genl Butler to send troops – but no, come they
don’t – the fact of our acts having caused so much suffering appearing to have but little effect
upon them - Much my sympathy for these poor creatures and constant anxiety lest I should at
night be attacked by their steamers / I have understood they intend to try and overpower us by
boarding – placing several hundred men upon each steamer & sending two of them to board each
one of our gun boats / has nearly worn me out – I assure you I don’t feel very amicable towards
our admiral for leaving me here so long without relief – To the rebels we put a bold face upon
the matter, throwing a shell at them whenever we get an opportunity, and by this means may
stand off an attack – I am thus daily looking for-d – May heaven be pleased to grant us success, if
it should be made – For one, I confess I am tired of the war, and constantly hope something may
turn up to successfully terminate it – a hope. I can see but dire prospects of being realized

A-3-1

About [straws] time I have a great deal of official writing – and between the periods of
their arrival my thoughts are so constantly occupied, that I feel but little like letter writing –
This must be my excuse to all who think I neglect them – It is no small responsibility, to hold a
city in the face of five thousand men commanded by Genl Magruder with some twenty pieces of
artillery and only four Gun boats to do it with – Our brainless admiral can’t realize the
importance of the conquest (Galveston is the next largest city to NO that has been captured this
war by the Navy, and is the only harbor that has more than Eight feet water upon its bar) or the
necessity of keeping it –
My warmest love to all – tell Gert she must hurry up that baby and have it better looking
than its mother was the first time I saw her – I can’t play the hypocrite a second time – I should
like to see Molly as a grand-mama – We are all getting old!
Affectionately W.B.R

A-3-2

Appendix A-4
Complement of Officers and Crew on Westfield

Compliment of Officers and Crew on Westfield
From the collection of the National Archives in New York, RG 181, Entry 250, Box 5

A-4-1

A-4-2

Appendix A-5
Archive Holdings

Appendix A‐5: Archive Holdings

Repository
National Archives and
Records Administration,
Washington, D.C.

Major Archive Division or Collection
Area File of the Naval Collection,
1775–1910 (Microfilm) M625

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58
Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58
Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58

A‐5‐1

Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58
Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58

Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58
Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58
Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58

Notes and Summaries
Letter from Renshaw to Lt. Cmdr. Wainwright on Harriet Lane,
giving orders for operations in Pensacola, and Mississippi Sound
(August 1862).
Letter from Renshaw to his friend "Davis", saying that they had
taken Galveston without much of a fight. Describes taking and
remounting the Quaker guns. Renshaw obviously in low morale
about the war and being in Galveston (October 1862).
Letter to Renshaw from Foreign Consul in Galveston asking if his
slaves will be returned to him if they escape and seek asylum from
Renshaw. Renshaw's reply: Not a chance, particularly since none of
the govt's the foreign consul represented recognize slavery
(October 1862).
Letter from acting Mayor to the commander of Harriet Lane,
complaining that he fired on civilians without cause recently,
destroying property and nearly killing family.
Letter from commander of the Kittatinny (?) to Admiral Farragut
explaining why he hasn't been able to complete orders to go to
Pensacola. Renshaw ordered him to go to Pass Cavallo, where he
must remain to protect vulnerable mortar boat until relieved.
Details of capturing many prize vessels while he was there
(December 1862).
Letter from acting commander of naval forces at Sabine Pass to
Commanding Officer Naval Forces Galveston, requesting
reinforcements for impending attack from General Macgruder.
News of attack comes from local informant (December 1862).
Report to Renshaw from the Clifton – which was sent to Sabine to
help with above situation. Heavy confederate activity in Sabine
(December 1862).
Copy of Richmond Examiner article describing events of January 1,
1863. Typo calling Westfield, "Westervelt", and says that Renshaw
and crew decided to blow themselves up on purpose. Mention of
cotton clads.

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

Major Archive Division or Collection

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58
Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58
Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58
Area 6: May
1862–Feb. 1863,
Roll 58

(Microfilm) M124

A-5-2
Miscellaneous Letters Received by
Secretary of the Navy 1801–1884
(Microfilm) M124:

Box 392, Misc.
letters December
1–9, 1861

Box 392, Misc.
letters December
1–9, 1861
Box 392, Misc.
letters December
1–9, 1861
Roll 389, Nov. 1–
10 1861

Roll 389, Nov. 1–
10 1861

Notes and Summaries
Reprint of letter from General Macgruder (from the Richmond
Enquirer) describing Battle of Galveston. No direct mention of
Westfield.
A good, detailed Letter from commander of the Corypheus,
describing events of battle. Sheds a lot of light on the question of
whether the Union was illegally retreating under flag of
surrender/truce.
Letter to Farragut from the commander of the Owasco, giving
detailed info of battle. More info on surrender/truce, and
Owasco's actions during the day.
Steamer Cambria carrying cavalry and refugees from New Orleans
to Galveston arrives off bar on Jan. 2nd and has run–in with fake
pilot (confederate collaborator). Cambria figures out plot and
escapes.
Letter from George Morgan to Assistant Secretary of the Navy,
Gustavus Fox recommending not buying a particular vessel
because it is a weak platform, and not as good as Westfield and
Clifton. Also suggests having Westervelt do necessary repairs since
Navy yard is busy (December 1862).
Dec. 1861 letter from George Morgan to Asst. Sec Nav Fox
recommending purchase of Southfield. Compares it favorably to
Clifton and gives very good construction details.
Another letter from Morgan praising the Southfield.

Letter from Morgan, Nov. 1861, describing Westfield in detail.
Highly suggests buying boat, but its size and expense requires
approval. Vanderbuilt wants $90K. Gives some construction
details, and calls it the best seaboat in the harbor. (See reprint in
entry 30)
Letter from Morgan describing purchase of Westfield. (See reprint
in entry 31)

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

Major Archive Division or Collection

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
Roll 390, Nov. 11–
19, 1861
Roll 390, Nov. 11–
19, 1861
Roll 390, Nov. 11–
19, 1861
Roll 390, Nov. 11–
19, 1861
Roll 390, Nov. 11–
19, 1861
Roll 390, Nov. 11–
19, 1861
Roll 390, Nov. 11–
19, 1861
Roll 391, Nov. 20–
30, 1861

A-5-3
Roll 391, Nov. 20–
30, 1861

Roll 391, Nov. 20–
30, 1861
Roll 391, Nov. 20–
30, 1861

Notes and Summaries
Letter from Morgan talking in the abstract about alterations to
Westfield and Jackson. Morgan wants to do more than was
originally planned on.
Letter from Copeland saying he will do the proposed changes on
Westfield for $29,400.
Letter from Copeland giving extensive detail on recommended
alterations to Westfield.
Sketches of ferry boats Ethan Allen and Comodore Perry, as altered
for guns.
Letter from Copeland saying he has talked to a Mr. Rowland in
Baltimore about building the carriages for the 9–inch shell guns.
Letter from Copeland describing other construction/engine details
of Westfield, Clifton and Jackson, and proposed alterations.
Letter from Copeland giving extensive detail on recommended
alterations to Jackson. Basically identical to letter about alterations
to Westfield.
Letter from Copeland (difficult to read). He is proposing building
two new boats, built specifically for intended service, instead of
using the ferry boats. His boats would be cheaper and wouldn't
take much longer to build than to fit out the ferries. He gives good
details on construction of his boats––could be similar
characteristics to what Westfield actually had.
Letter from Morgan saying he purchased the Clifton for $90K, and
will offer $25K to Copeland to do the proposed alterations. If
Copeland doesn't accept, Morgan advises contacting Jerry
Simonson to do the work. (See entry 33)
Letter from Morgan suggesting giving the Westfield and Clifton
alterations to Copeland if Delano hasn't already given it to
Westervelt.
Long, detailed Letter from Morgan describing program of
inspecting and purchasing merchant vessels in New York for the
navy. Info on which types of vessels were chosen and why, how
they were acquired. List of every vessel Morgan bought, including
name of owner, tonnage, price asked and price paid.

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

Major Archive Division or Collection
Subject File, U.S. Navy, 1775–1910,
RG45:

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
Box 106, AR –
Repairs to U.S.
Ships 1860–1870.
Misc. Material.
Box 128, Folder
AY, Purchase of
Merchant Vessels.
Bills of sale, etc.
Part I.

Notes and Summaries
Misc. material relative to repairs, U.S. Ships. No mention of
Westfield but a document from Simonson's shipyard.

License, enrollment and Bill of Sale for Westfield.

A-5-4

Box 128, Folder
AY. Part I.
Box 128, Folder
AY. Part I.
Box 128, Folder
AY, Purchase of
Merchant Vessels
by the U.S. Navy
Dept. Misc.
Correspondence.
Part II.

Bill of Sale and Enrollment for the Southfield.

Box 128, Folder
AY. Part II.
Box 128, Folder
AY. Part II.

Reprint of letter from Morgan, describing actual purchase of
Westfield.. (See entry 17)
Letter from Morgan describing discussions he has had with
Copleand about doing the alterations to Westfield. Morgan wants
to hire him.
Reprint of entry 27.

Box 128, Folder
AY. Part II.
Box 128, Folder
AY. Part II.
Box 175, HA
1862–64, Battle
of Sabine Pass &
Galveston, Jan.
21, 1863

Letter from Morgan describing the purchase of the Hunchback and
Southfield.
Reprint of letter from Morgan, recommending purchase of
Westfield. (See entry 16)

Letter from Morgan listing some vessel transactions, including
Westfield and Clifton.
Official report from Conf. general Magruder on the battles. Not
much detail on the Westfield, but excellent account of the
confederate side of the battle. Also detail on the Battle of Sabine
Pass.

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

National Archives and
Records
Administration–New
York

Major Archive Division or Collection
Report of the Secretary of the Navy,
Containing Reports from Officers.
Letters Sent to the Secretary of the
Navy. RG 181, Series 249

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
December 1863
February 1862–
September 1863

February 1862–
September 1863

Letters Received from the Secretary of
the Navy Nov. 1861–April 1862, RG
181, Series 250, Box 5

February 1862–
September 1863
February 1862–
September 1863
Nov. 1861–April
1862

A-5-5

Nov. 1861–April
1862
Nov. 1861–April
1862
Nov. 1861–April
1862

Letters and Telegrams sent to the
Navy Department Bureaus 1844–
1865, RG 181, Series 252

Nov. 1861–April
1862
Nov. 1861–April
1862
vol. 9 and 10, Nov
16, 1861–October
12, 1865
vol. 9 and 10, Nov
16, 1861–October
12, 1865

Notes and Summaries
Official Records–style reports of events at Galveston. Multiple eye–
witness reports from surviving officers.
Three crew assignments to the Westfield, Departure of the Clifton
and Westfield from New York Navy yard.

Paulding to Welles. Nestell assigned to Clifton; Charles Walden
(acting assistant paymaster) and E.H. Allis (acting assistant
surgeon) to the Westfield (February 12, 1862).
Paulding to Welles. Acting midshipmen H.B. Rumsey and H.J.
French to Clifton; S.A. McCarty to Westfield (February 14, 1862).
Paulding to Wells. Clifton, Westfield, J.P. Jackson, and R.B. Forbes
went to sea on the evening of the 22 (February 24, 1862).
Designation of the type of crew required on the Clifton and
Westfield. Request to assign personnel to the Westfield.
Wells to Paulding. Westfield and Jackson ready for officers (January
30, 1862).
Fox telegraph requesting a Normandy Patent condensor be put on
the vessel Flambeau (November 26, 1861).
Paulding to Welles. Letter enclosing report of the work done on
the Clifton. The report was not included in the archive (February
11, 1862).
Welles to Paulding requesting three crew from the St. Lawrence be
assigned to the Clifton, Westfield and Oneida (February 12, 1862).
Welles to Paulding. Complement of officers and crew allowed on
Westfield and Clifton (February 30, 1862).
Purchase of the Clifton II (135), and the cost of its conversion by
Simonson (134), delivery of Clifton II at yard (144), crew to Clifton
II (145).
Paulding to Lenthal. Westervelt will recopper the Jackson (p 210;
January 9, 1862).

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

Major Archive Division or Collection

A-5-6

Letters Received from the Bureau of
Construction and Repair 1842–1896,
RG 181, Series 254

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
vol. 9 and 10, Nov
16, 1861–October
12, 1865
vol. 9 and 10, Nov
16, 1861–October
12, 1865
vol. 9 and 10, Nov
16, 1861–October
12, 1865
vol. 9 and 10, Nov
16, 1861–October
12, 1865
vol. 9 and 10, Nov
16, 1861–October
12, 1865
vol. 9 and 10, Nov
16, 1861–October
12, 1865
1842–June 1861
(Box 13)
June 10 1861 to
January 20 1862
(Box 14) book 1
June 10 1861 to
January 20 1862
(Box 14) book 1
June 10 1861 to
January 20 1862
(Box 14) book 1

Notes and Summaries
Paulding to Lenthal. Cost of stripping and recoppering Jackson is
approved for $1265.94. Repairing the Jackson is $19,000
(January 28, 1862).
Paulding to Lenthal. Roanoke work to be given to Novelty Iron
Works (March 29, 1862).
Paulding to Lenthal. Accept Simonson offer for $35,000 for the
Alterations on the Clifton II (April 4, 1863).
Lenthal to Paulding. Papers enclosed (not included) for the
purchase of the Clifton II from George Law, president of the Staten
Island Ferry Co.
Paulding to Lenthal. Shockokon (Clifton II) has been delivered to
Navy yard (May 6, 1863).
Radford to Foote. A crew has been detail to the Shockokon
(May 12, 1863).
This box of letters predates Westfield's purchase.

John Lenthall to Hiram Paulding requesting to proceed with the
work on the Jackson as proposed by Westervelt and as understood
by Delano (November 16, 1861).
John Lenthall to Hiram Paulding. Copeland & Howe has a proposal
for the work on the Westfield. Lenthall wants to contact other
'responsible parties' for a lower price for the work. The Copeland
proposal was submitted on November 11th (November 16, 1861).
Lenthal to Paulding requesting Westervelt fit out the Westfield.
The Clifton has been purchased and will be fitted out by Copeland
& Co. for the same price. The work will be done under the same
conditions and supervised by Delano (November 22, 1861).

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

Major Archive Division or Collection

A-5-7

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
June 10 1861 to
January 20 1862
(Box 14) book 1
June 10 1861 to
January 20 1862
(Box 14) book 1
January 1862 to
December 1862
(box 14) book 2
January 1862 to
December 1862
(box 14) book 2
January 1862 to
December 1862
(box 14) book 2
January 1862 to
December 1862
(box 14) book 2
January 1862 to
December 1862
(box 14) book 2
January 1862 to
December 1862
(box 14) book 2
January 1862 to
December 1862
(box 14) book 2
January 1862 to
December 1862
(box 14) book 2
January 1862 to
December 1862
(box 14) book 2

Notes and Summaries
Lenthal to Paulding requesting Westfield dimensions for the
Custom House tonnage (December 2, 1861).
Lenthal to Paulding. Four of the Normandy Condensor will be put
in the Vermont and Boston(December 25, 1861)..
Lenthal to Paulding requesting the Clifton be outfitted with a fresh
water condensor if not already equipped with one (February 12,
1862)..
Conversion of the Roanoke to an iron clad (March 21, 1862;
March 24, March 26; March 27, March 28, 1862).
Lenthal to Paulding. Roanoke work contracted with Novelty Iron
Works (March 31, 1862).
Lenthal to Paulding. Drawing (not included) of the condensor to be
placed on Susquehannah (April 8, 1862).
Lenthal to Paulding. Plates on the side of Ticonderoga to be 4
inches thick and the deck with iron 1 1/4 inches thick (April 23,
1862).
Lenthal to Paulding. Decision to not convert Ticonderoga to an iron
plated vessel (May 8, 1862).
Lenthal to Paulding. Navy yard work contracted to Morgan Iron
Works (June 28, 1862).
Lenthal to Paulding. More ferry purchases (July 23, 1862).

Lenthal to Paulding. Purchase of the Ella (July 26, 1862).

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

Major Archive Division or Collection

A-5-8

Letters Received from the Bureau of
Equipment and Recruiting 1862–1896,
RG 181, series 256

Letters and Telegrams received from
the Bureau of Ordnance 1845–1896,
RG 181, series 265
Letters Received from the Bureau of
Steam Machinery 1862–1896, RG 181,
Series 270, box 1

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
January 1862 to
December 1862
(box 14) book 2
December 1862–
June 1, 1864 (Box
15)
December 1862–
June 1, 1864 (Box
15)
December 1862–
June 1, 1864 (Box
15)
December 1862–
June 1, 1864 (Box
15)
December 1862–
June 1, 1864 (Box
15)
September 24,
1862–April 19,
1864
September 24,
1862–April 19,
1864
September 24,
1862–April 19,
1864

August 29, 1862–
may 26, 1866

Notes and Summaries
Lenthal to Paulding. Name of the two ferries that were purchased
to be Commodore Morris and Commodore McDonough
(September 8, 1862).
Lenthal to Paulding. Purchase of the Clifton II for 100,000$. They
are requesting one 50-lb rifled gun at each end. The guards will be
reduced at each end but she will not be plated (March 25, 1863).
Lenthal to Paulding. Telegram discussing the payment of $100,00o
to George Law for the Clifton (March 25, 1863).
Lenthal to Paulding. Navy Yard will make the boat Algonquin on
the plans of the Shamrock. Machinery to be made by Morgan Iron
Works. Vessel to have hinged iron plates at the bulwarks
(March 28, 1863).
Lenthal to Paulding. Lenthal received the paperwork and bills for
the purchase of the Shockokon (Clifton II) (April 11, 1863)
Lenthal to Paulding. Accept Simonson's offer for 25 days at
$35,000 with a reduction of four hundred dollars per day for the
first 5 days etc (April 30, 1862).
NY Archives does not have an early enough period to include our
vessel and the crew list for the Clifton II is not included.
Foote to Paulding. Request for an estimate of the compliment of
men to be placed on the Commodore Morris and Commodore
McDonough (November 19, 1862). Includes a list.
Radford to Foote. A crew has been detail to the Shockokon
(May 12, 1863).
Discusses gun carriages, ordnance equipped on vessels, and
munitions. There were very few letters for the months we were
researching.
Work on the machinery on the Roanoke to be completed by
Novelty Iron Works (August 29, 1862).

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

Major Archive Division or Collection

Letter and Telegrams Received from
the Navy Agents and the New York
Office of Supplies And Transportation
Relating to Contracts for Supplies
1843–1865, RG 181, Series 280
Letters Received from the Navy
Constructor, RG 181, series 296

New York Historical
Society

Library Manuscript Collection

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
August 29, 1862–
may 26, 1866
August 29, 1862–
may 26, 1866
August 29, 1862–
may 26, 1866
August 23 1855–
June 5, 1865

Notes and Summaries
Shaft and other machinery of the Florida was made at Novelty Iron
Works (November 7, 1862).
"Brady's Shot proof condensed hair" from the Quaker City
(August 14, 1863).
Bracing for boilers (June 16, 1864).
Only a few letters in this collection during the months the
Westfield was at the NYNY. Nothing pertains to this vessel.

A-5-9

1843–1861

Letters in this group predated the study period. One letter was
copied from this group from Delano to Breese discussing the
removal of the pilot houses on two steamers, Caledonia and
Atlanta, because the decks were too weak when the guns were
being used (1858).

Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1,
Letters Received
from Gustavus V.
Fox 1838–1861.

Letter from Charles Copeland to Fox suggesting they use boiler iron
to reinforce the bulwarks on the ferries (August 20, 1861). This
letter has an illustration.

Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1

Letter from Abraham Lincoln appointing Fox acting Secretary of
the Navy during the absence of Gideon Welles (September 4,
1861).
Morgan to Fox stating that Commander Dupont has seen a new
ferry and would desire to have the boat though it is as not as
strong as a Brooklyn ferry for supporting artillery. The ferry has
more room for accommodations and cooking (September 9, 1861).
Morgan to Fox reminding Fox to send a telegraph about the
purchase of the two ferry boats for Dupont (September 24, 1861).
Morgan to Fox about purchasing the John P. Jackson over the John
Darcey. Both are coppered and the Jackson was built within the
year. McKimball prefers the Jackson's boiler (October 25, 1861).

Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1

Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1
Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

Major Archive Division or Collection

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1
Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1
Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1
Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1
Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1
Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1

Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1
A-5-10
Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1
Gustavus V. Fox
Papers Box 1
Gustavus V. Fox ,
Box 3, Letters
Received 1861 A–
K:
Gustavus V. Fox,
Box 4 Letters
Received 1861 L–

Notes and Summaries
Morgan to Fox stating he is looking at more ferry boats for
Copeland (November 6, 1861).
Morgan to Fox about the Westfield. The Westfield should be fitted
up, is she good for any sea weather and is equal to one of the new
steamers being built. She is iron braced (November 11, 1861).
Morgan to Fox. Morgan has requested examination of Vanderbilt's
other boat Clifton(November 16, 1861).
Morgan to Fox. Copeland would like both the Westfield and Clifton
fitted up (November 23, 1861).
Morgan to Fox. Vanderbilt has one or two more ferry boats he
wishes to fit for government service (November 30, 1861).
Morgan to Fox. Morgan will take two new boats being built by the
Ferry Co., Copeland and Howe have estimated their worth at $140
per ton. Two new boats will be built in the same style for and will
be ready by February 1st for $120 per ton (November 30, 1861).
Morgan to Fox. Suggesting they close the commission as there will
not be many more purchases 'here' (in New York). Vanderbilt
declined to build iron bulwark ferries fitted for naval service at
110$ and hurry them. Morgan considers the Westfield and Clifton
the best yet bought, they are iron wheels and much faster 4 to 5
miles per hour than others fitting out at Copeland & Howe.
Copeland is having Clifton fitted out by Vanderbilt's man
(December 9, 1861).
Morgan to Fox. Draft of the Hunchback and Southfield
(December 28, 1861).
Morgan to Fox. Southfield leaves on this day (December 30, 1861).
Proposal for the construction of a double–ended vessel (May 1862)
possibly modeled after the New York ferries.–about 20 pages long
and very detailed.
Porter to Fox. Discussion of activities. Mentions coal needed for
the Westfield and Clifton (March 28, 1862).

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

Major Archive Division or Collection

A-5-11
Department of Prints, Photographs,
and Architectural Collection

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
Z

Notes and Summaries

Gustavus V. Fox,
Box 4
New York City
Directory
New York City
Directory
New York City
Directory
New York City
Directory
New York City
Directory
New York City
Directory
New York City
Directory
New York City
Directory
PR002–177.1
Album File

Porter. List of vessels in Morter Flotilla (no date).

PR020
Geographic File,
Box 2

File Folders reviewed: New York Harbor Views, 19th Century Prints;
New York Bay from Staten Island; and New York Harbor Views,
19th Century Photos. The latter file included photographs of the
harbor with the passing of ferries but these are small and
unidentifiable.
File Folders reviewed: South Ferry Terminal and Building
Transportation Stations–General. One image of a ferry at the South
Terminal in 1888. Can not read the name. Did not copy this image.

PR020
Geographic File,
Box 85

1832–1833: Listing for Joseph Bishop, No listing for Charles or
Cornelius (Jeremiah) Simonson.
1833–1834: Listing for Joseph Bishop, Charles Simonson, Cornelius
(Jeremiah) Simonson, and Bishop Simonson.
1835–1836: Listing for Joseph Bishop, Charles Simonson, Cornelius
(Jeremiah) Simonson, and Bishop Simonson.
1838–1839: Charles M. Simonson not listed that year.
1848–1849: Listing for Bishop and Simonson, Charles Simonson,
Joseph Bishop, and Jeremiah Simonson.
1849–1850: No Listing of Bishop and Simonson, Joseph Bishop is
listed.
1850–1851: Listing for Jeremiah and Charles Simonson.
1867–1868: Last Listing of Jeremiah Simonson.
Album presented by N.A. Green on April 18, 1950. Invaluable
source of images of ferryboats though these are primarily from the
early 1900s and later. Some images did pertain to our research
including Skeritts drawings of Westfield and Commodore Barney
and a construction sketch of Southfield II.

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

New York Public Library

Major Archive Division or Collection

The Irma and Paul Milstein Division of
United States History, Local History
and Genealogy

A-5-12
Science, Industry, and Business Library

Staten Island Institute
of Arts and Sciences

Images

Newspapers (microfilm)

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
PR100 Maritime
History Collection
Stereographs Box
28
Stereographs Box
72
The Memorial of
the History of
New York (book)
1895
Genealogical
Data; Library
Accessible Online
Sources
Wealthy Citizens
of the City of New
York 1855
Literary Digest
(journal)
Historic
Greenpoint
(book) 1919
Franklin Institute
Journal, 1863
Franklin Institute
Journal 1871
Stereographs,
Postcards
Photographs
Engraving
Richmond County
Gazette (1838,
1861)

Notes and Summaries
Image of the Commodore Perry (Xeroxed).
File Folders reviewed: United States, New York Harbor group 281–
285. Did not locate useful images.
File Folders reviewed: Civil War Navy. Images of the Mendota and
Farragut (Xeroxed).
Bibliographical Information on Cornelius Vanderbilt.

1850, 1860, 1870 Census Records for Jeremiah Simonson. Wedding
Record.

Small paragraph on Vanderbilt and his accumulated wealth at that
time.
Article and photograph of the Southfield II.
Mentions Jeremiah Simonson in a list of local ship–builders.

Article about ships being built in New York, it describes the Clifton
II.
Discussion of the explosion on the Westfield II with an illustration
of the boiler.
Middletown , Southfield (Xeroxed)
Northfield, Westfield II (Xeroxed)
Image from Harpers Weekly of Westfield II Explosion (Xeroxed)
Launch dates for Clifton and Westfield as well as Ferry Service
Schedule .

Appendix A-5 (Cont’d)

Repository

Major Archive Division or Collection

Books

Misc.

Sub–Collection, or
Manuscript
Richmond County
Mirror (1838)
Staten Island
Gazette (1883)
Annuals of Staten
Island (book)
1877
Dinsmore's Thirty
Miles Around New
York (1857)
The Staten Island
Ferry (1964)
File Folder

Notes and Summaries
Vanderbilt purchases Westervelt's Shares.
Interview with Jacob Westervelt's Widow.
Biography of the Simonson Family.

Description of Southfield I.

List of ferry fleet and builders.
Staten Island Institutes file information on Westfield and Clifton
compiled by Hugh Powell.

A-5-13

Appendix B
Subcontractor Reports

Appendix B-1
Geological Assessment of the USS Westfield Archeological Site

Pelican Natural Resources, LLC
RR4 Box 225 E3, Galveston, TX 77554 (409) 737-9661

Technical Memorandum
To: Robert Gearhart, Group Manager
Hydrographic Survey, Nautical Archeology
PBS&J
6504 Bridge Point Parkway, Suite 200
Austin, TX 78730
From: Dr. Timothy M. Dellapenna
July 16, 2009
Subject: Geological Assessment of the USS Westfield archeological Site- off of the Texas City
Ship Channel
Introduction
This technical memorandum has been prepared at the request of PBS&J and the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers as a literature review to address the causes of erosion and the seabed stability
of the bay bottom around the USS Westfield, a Civil War–era ship. On January 1, 1863, the
Westfield ran aground in less 7 feet (ft) (2 meters [m]) of water, is now in 46 ft (14 m) of water.
To address the erosion of the seabed around the Westfield site, this memorandum briefly reviews
the history of anthropogenic alterations of the area around the site, potential sources of energy
which would create the erosion observed at the site, and the geology of the lower bay, which
provides a context for what is found today at the site allow for a prediction of what may happen
in the future at the site.
Background and Site Description
According to Gearhart et al. (2007), the USS Westfield ran aground during the battle of
Galveston on January 1, 1863, by running aground on a shoal. In an effort to prevent the
Westfield from falling under Confederate control, the Westfield was blown up. Numerous
geophysical and diving surveys have revealed that the study site (Herein referred to as the
Westfield Site, as seen on Figure 1 in Gearhart et al. (2007), contains numerous pieces of ship
debris, 70% of which occupy an area 82 x 164 ft (25 x 50 m), and consists nearly exclusively of
disarticulated metal artifacts, including a 9-inch Dahlgren cannon, fragmented elements of
machinery, iron plating, numerous cannon shot, and assorted hull fasteners. There were no
wooden fragments or pieces of hull found. Sediment probing revealed that the artifacts sit on a
layer of dense hard clay. The average depth of the Westfield Site is -46 ft (-14 m) USACE MLT.
B-1-1

The Westfield Site is triangular, with its eastern margin being the Houston-Galveston Ship
Channel, the northern side being the GICWW and its western margin being the Texas City Ship
Channel.
Historical Changes to the Study Site
Gearhart et al. (2007) present a series of georeferenced historical charts to reconstruct the
changes in bathymetry at the Westfield Site (Figures 14–19, ibid). Figure 15 shows the
Westfield site on a large shoal, on part of what appears to be the flood tidal delta of the
Galveston Bay inlet (Bolivar Roads). Based on these maps, it appears that the seabed around the
Westfield site remained relatively stable, with only modest erosion through the nineteenth
century. With the wreck situated in shallow water, prior to channel dredging, most of the erosion
was probably mainly due to hydrologic jump. This happens when an object sticks above the
bottom but not out of the water and water flowing over and around the object becomes more
turbulent, eroding sediment around the object. On a very large scale, we see this with seamounts
in the open ocean, with moats around the seamounts due to this process. We also see this with
large holes behind boulders in rivers.
The Texas City ship channel was originally dredged in 1893 as an 8-ft Gulf channel to Texas
City (Benham, 2008). In 1900, with federal funding, dredging began to deepen the channel to
25 ft. Work was halted as a result of the 1900 Hurricane, but was eventually completed in 1905.
This channel was subsequently deepened to create a 1.5-mile-long 40-ft-deep channel. Today,
the Port of Texas City is the eighth busiest port in the USA, with water borne tonnage exceeding
78 million net tons per year (http://www.railporttc.com/).
The Houston Ship Channel was originally dredged to a depth of 6 ft, was 100 ft wide, and was
dredged between 1874–1876. In 1897 the US Congress approved the deepening of the channel
to 22 ft, by 1909 it was only dredged to 18.5 ft. Dredging to 25 ft was finally completed in 1919.
Initial efforts to widen and deepen the channel to 300 ft wide and 44 ft deep began in 1945, with
additional funds provided in 1957 (Sibley, 2008). By 2007 the Houston Ship channel had been
widened to 530 ft (160 m) and 45 ft (14 m) deep, and 50 miles (80 kilometers [km]) long
(Wikipedia.com).
In 2002, the Port of Houston was ranked sixth in the world in terms of total metric tons of cargo
and number one in the United States, with 1.61 x 108 metric tons of cargo (McConville, 2004).
According to Navigating the Houston Ship Channel-a reference for commercial users
(http://www.foretinc.com/Houston%20Ship%20Channel%20Brochure.pdf), the Houston Ship
Channel hosts more than 50 ships and 300 barge movements each day, hosting ships with drafts
as deep as 38 ft. The majority of these would travel past the Westfield Site. According to the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the Houston Ship Channel is one of the busiest waterways in the
world, with over 250,000 transits per year, including an estimated 20,000 ships and 120,000 tow
transits (http://www.swg.usace.army.mil/so/articles/sharethebay.asp).
B-1-2

The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway (GICWW), which cuts across the northern margin of the
Westfield Site, was completed in 1942 as a channel 12 ft deep and 125 ft wide (Alperin, 1983).
Although no exact numbers were found in regards to the number of tows per day, the traffic
along the GICWW is steady with a nearly constant flow of barges, many of which are four or
more barges tied together, fully loaded, moving past the site. As previously stated, the
Westfield Site is triangular, with its eastern margin being the Houston-Galveston Ship Channel,
the northern side being the GICWW and its western margin being the Texas City Ship Channel.
As a result of these channels, the Westfield Site resides within a narrow section of bay bottom
between some of the busiest shipping lanes in the world, and has been purported by locals as the
busiest shipping intersection in the world.
Sources of energy which can cause bay bottom erosion in lower Galveston Bay
There are five significant sources of energy other which create erosion in Galveston Bay besides
dredging, these are 1) shrimp trawling; 2) passage of cold fronts, 3) passage of tropical storms
and hurricanes; 4) tidal currents; 5) ship wakes. In regards to nearly 40 ft of erosion found at the
Westfield Site, we can easily discount shrimp trawling, although a significant source of
suspended sediment, it would not the cause of the erosion found at the site. We have measured
currents as strong as 3 kts (6 m/sec) and likely currents can be much higher. Tidal energy may
have exacerbated the impact of erosion from other sources, but it is also doubtful that tidal
energy is the primary cause of erosion on found at this site. Although the tidal energy is higher
in this area than other parts of the bay, there are other sources of energy, discussed below, which
appear to have the potential for orders of magnitude greater impact than tidal currents.
Meteorological Impacts
Cold fronts occur at 3–10 day intervals in a given year and are characterized by a pre-frontal
phase of high-energy southeasterly winds for 1–2 days, followed by a 12–24 hour period of
strong northwesterly to northeasterly winds following passage of the front (Co-ops, 2005). The
Westfield Site is very exposed in the lower portion of the bay and experiences the brunt of these
fronts.
Gearhart et al. (2007) provide a detailed list of the 25 hurricane and tropical storms which have
directly impacted this site over since 1863. In addition, on the average, there are 46 cold fronts a
year which pass through the Northern GOM (Henry, 1979). As we saw during Hurricane Ike,
there are two phases to a hurricane, the pre-frontal phase, which occurs prior to the storm making
landfall and extends until the front passes, and the post-frontal phase, which occurs after the
front passes. To use Ike as an example, the pre-frontal phase lasted for over 24 hours, with the
storm surge building in the bay and with surf building in the Gulf of Mexico. During this period
of time, the wind was directed northward, up the bay, driving the storm surge landward. As the
eye passed, the wind dropped from 40 m/sec to 3 m/sec for approximately 1.5 hours, during
which it increased to about 10 m/sec. As the back half of the eye passed, marking the postB-1-3

frontal phase, the wind went from a southerly wind to a northerly wind, shifting 180o and
increased from 10 to 40 m/sec in less than one minute. During the passage of the eye, the storm
surge dropped 20 to 50 centimeters (cm). Estimations of the storm surge within the City of
Galveston found that the post-frontal storm surge was 0-30 cm lower than the pre-frontal surge.
What is most significant though is that the pre-frontal surge built over the course of 24 or more
hours, whereas the post-frontal surge came in as a wave of water in less than a minute, with the
water level dropping over a meter in less than 15 minutes. As a result, the shear stress on the
seabed would have been orders of magnitude higher during the post-frontal phase than the prefrontal phase, and had the potential of generating significant erosion of the bay bottom. In fact it
did, nearly 85% of the oyster reefs in Galveston Bay were buried in mud as a result of this surge.
Scour by the passage of fronts, either northern fronts or tropical storms and hurricanes, would
likely have impacted the site primarily when the water was shallower. As a deep site, these
events more likely provide the sediment which is deposited within the site rather than as a source
of erosion. This is because frontal passage causes erosion primarily by the generation of wind
waves and the deeper the water, the less the impact. Areas which are anomalously deep would
likely be areas where mud would accumulate as a result of these processes.
Shipwakes
The passage of deep draft vessels create both a bow wave, which can break and cause a dramatic
increase in the shear stress on the seabed, as well as the prop wash. According to the USACE,
“wheel wash” or “suction” is a strong underwater current caused by a towboat or ship traffic that
can result in severe turbulence hundreds of feet around a large vessel. The Houston Ship
Channel has an average of 50 to 60 deep-draft vessel passages a day (U.S. Coast Guard, 2006, in
Tate, 2007). Since vessel movement can generate high shear stresses on the bed as well as create
waves in shallower regions outside of the channel, the vessel traffic in the channel is likely to
have a significant impact on erosion rates and locations of shoaling. Tate et al. (2007) generated
a series of computer simulations of a vessel moving through the Houston Ship Channel to
determine the effect the passage has on channel erosion. “The typical vessel represented in these
simulations has a length of 232 m, width of 32.3 m, draft of 9.3 m, and speed of 4.5 m/s. The
movement of the vessel generates a return current that moves out and around the vessel and
returns to the channel behind the vessel. The return currents alone can be significant enough to
cause erosion of the channel and the resulting long waves that move into the shallows can cause
erosion of those areas as well. The ADH simulation generates the velocity pattern around the
vessel caused by the return current and into the surrounding shallows. As the long wave
generated by the vessel propagates into the shallows, it will form a bore.” The passage of a single
vessel would create significant shear stress on the seabed; however, the passage of multiple
vessels, traveling in multiple directions, through multiple channels, with their wakes interacting
would have the potential of significantly enhancing the bed shear stress on the Westfield Site,
sitting between these channels. In addition to the enhanced shear stress of the seabed due to the
velocities generated by the wake, the ship is moving through a dredged channel with sidewalls.
B-1-4

As the ship moves through the channel, the momentum of the ship along with the pressure of the
bow wave increases the pore pressure within the sediments of the channel wall. An increase in
pore pressure greatly reduces the critical shear stress of the sediment, making it much more
susceptible to erosion. As the ship passes, water flows behind the boat to replace its
displacement, creating suction at the same time the propwash is adding turbulence. The
continual compression and dilatation of the sediment also reduces the cohesiveness of the
sediment. This gets more complicated as ships traveling in reciprocal directions pass each other
in the channel. The net effect is to greatly enhance side wall erosion of the channel. In addition
to the erosion, the ship wake also prevents deposition of mud within the channel, by continually
providing enough shear stress to resuspend any mud which deposits between ship passages.
There were a few different estimates provided in this report in terms of ship traffic in the
Houston Ship Channel. The Port of Houston estimates a 20,000 deep draft transits per year and
120,000 tows per year. If we consider these numbers to have been constant for the past 40 years
then we would have had 5,600,000 transits since 1969. The USACE, in their simulation studies,
used the number of 50 deep draft transits per day, if we use that number, we get 730,000 transits
since 1969. These are just estimates for the Houston Ship Channel, not the Texas City Channel
or the GICWW. Taken together, this is a tremendous amount of shear stress applied to the small
area located between these channels and this shear stress would be orders of magnitude greater
than the other sources of energy considered in this study.
Geology of the Westfield Site
On June 1, 2009, Dellapenna visited the Westfield Site and attempted to collect grab samples
using a small Vanderveen style clam grab and also found the bottom to be composed of hard
clay. The bottom was so hard that the grab sampler would not close, but we were able recover
hard clay on the side of the sampler, confirming a hard clay bottom. We were able to recover a
bit of coarse shell lag, consistent with a hard, scoured bottom.
The USS Westfield ran aground in 1863 on what was at that time the flood tidal delta of the
Galveston Bay entrance. From a geological perspective, Galveston Bay started out as the incised
valley of the Trinity and San Jacinto Rivers, which during the last low stand in sea level, was
approximately 330 ft below current sea level and which began to rise, approximately 20,000
years ago. The entire region which now makes up Galveston Bay and the continental shelf
would have been exposed during this period of time, roughly from 120,000–20,000 years before
present (B.P.). As a result, of this area is underlain by a hard, dense clay, called the Beaumont
Clay, which represents the Pleistocene surface. The Holocene, which began approximately
20,000 B.P., represents the period of time when sea level began to rise and younger estuarine and
marine sediments were deposited. During the Holocene, as sea level rose, Galveston Bay began
to become inundated with seawater approximately 9,600 B.P. (Anderson et al., 2008). During
this period of time, the Westfield site was probably a flood plain, with the main channel to the
east. Between 9,600 and 7,400 B.P., the Westfield Site was likely where a bayhead delta was
depositing. From 7,400-present, the site was occupied by alternating open bay and tidal delta
B-1-5

environments, depositing muds and sands. In this area, the Pleistocene surface would have been
approximately 14 m below sea level, which is approximately the present day depth of the site.
The Pleistocene surface has a substantially higher critical shear stress than any Holocene marine
sediments found in this area. As a result, it is much harder to erode. Not only is it a cohesive
clay, it is densely packed. As a result, it is likely that at the Westfield Site, the more easily
eroded Holocene sediment has mostly been eroded. The site now appears to be largely devoid of
Holocene sediment, and the surface mainly consists of the dense Pleistocene aged clay, and a
modern shell lag deposit. The cohesive Pleistocene clay likely has too high of a critical shear
stress for shipwakes to directly erode it, however, the movement of the shell lag may abrade the
seabed and contribute to continual erosion, but at a much lower rate than the erosion of the
Holocene sediment. Any mud found at this site is either ephemerally deposited estuarine mud,
or what is left of the Holocene deposits which have yet to be eroded. The metal artifacts found at
the surface of the seabed are too large to be moved by the shipwake and all of the sediment
around them has been scoured.
Conclusions
The Westfield Site sits in a triangle between the Houston-Galveston Ship Channel, the Texas
City Ship Channel and the Gulf Intra Coastal Waterway. The Houston-Galveston Ship Channel
is the busiest shipping lane in North America, the Texas City Port is the eighth busiest port in the
United States and the GICWW is also a very active shipping lane. As a result, the Westfield Site
sits in the middle of one of the busiest shipping intersections in the world. Just along the
Houston Ship Channel, on the average, 50 deep draft vessels a day pass the site, heavily loaded
barges travel the GICWW and deep draft tankers go up the Texas City Channel. As a result,
there is a tremendous amount of energy generated due to bow wakes and prop wash at the
Westfield Site. Originally, the Westfield ran aground on a sand shoal, which was part of the flood
tidal delta of Galveston Bay. The area had more easily erodable sediment down to
approximately 14 m, which is the surface of the more dense Pleistocene clay. It is likely that
mainly in the past 40–50 years, that the passage of all of these ships has created enough energy
to erode the Westfield Site from 7.2 to 40-46 ft deep, removing much of the Holocene sediment.
Once all of the Holocene sediment has been eroded, it is unlikely that the site will deepen much
more, as the Pleistocene clay has a much higher critical shear stress and is unlikely that ship
wakes can create a shear stress higher than the critical shear stress of the Pliestocene deposits.
However, the shell lag which will likely deposit on the seabed may be able to abrade the clay as
it shifts back and forth as bedload, but this erosion rate will likely be much lower than the rate
seen within the Holocene sediment. It should also be noted that the original archeological
surveys of the Westfield Site found the site to be 40 ft deep, which was the same depth as that of
the Houston Ship Channel. The ship channel was deepened to 45 ft and follow up work after the
deepening of the channel found that the site had deepened to approximately 45 ft. It is doubtful
that erosion due to the ship wake would erode the site deeper than the ship channel, but it is

B-1-6

likely that it would erode it to the same depth as the channel. It just happens to be that the depth
of the ship channel also roughly coincides with the depth of the Pleistocene clay.
References Cited
Alperin, L.M., 1983. History of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway. Navigation History NWS-839, National Waterways Study, U.S. Army Engineer Water Resources Support Center,
Institute for Water Resources.
Anderson, J.B., A.B. Rodriguez, K.T. Milliken, and M. Taviani. 2008. The Holocene evolution
of the Galveston estuary complex, Texas: Evidence for rapid change in estuarine
environments, In J.B. Anderson and A.B. Rodriguez, eds., Response of Upper Gulf Coast
Estuaries to Holocene Climate Change and Sea-Level Rise: Geological Society of
America Special Paper 443, p. 89–104.
Benham, P M. 2008. Texas City, Texas. In the Handbook of Texas Online,
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/TT/hdt3.html.
Co-ops. 2005. Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and Services, U. S. National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration, On-line Data-base, WWW page,
http://co-ops.nos.noaa.gov/index.html station, Station 8771341 Galveston Bay Entrance,
North Jetty, Texas.
Henry, W.K. 1979. Some aspects of the fate of cold fronts in the Gulf of Mexico, Notes and
Correspondence, Monthly Weather Review, American Meteorological Society 107:10781082.
McConville, J. 2004. ISL Shipping Statistics Yearbook 2003. Institute of Shipping Economics
and Logistics, Bremen, Germany, 409 pp.
Sibley, M.M. 2008. Houston Ship Channel. In the Handbook of Texas Online,
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/HH/rhh11.html.
Tate, J.N., R.C. Berger, and C.G. Ross. 2007. Houston-Galveston Navigation Channels, Texas
Project- Navigation Channel Sedimentation Study, Phase 2. USCOE, ERDC/CHL TR07-X, 192 pp.

B-1-7

Appendix B-2
Navy SUPSALV Report

GPC

A Joint Venture

Naval Sea Systems Command
SEA OOC1
2531 Jefferson Davis Highway
Arlington, VA 22242-5160

January 28, 2010

ATTN:

T. Robinson-Gore

SUBJ:

FINAL REPORT- PART I-OPERATIONAL DELIEVERY ORDER
# 0544 N00024-07-D-4130, CONTRACT VALUE $ 265,713.00

INFO:

Rick Thiel (NAVSEA 00C21)

ATTACH:

Photograph Appendix

a.

Summary of Project: The contractor assisted the Supervisor of Salvage (SUPSALV) and
United States Navy (USN) Diving Operations, by preparing and shipping salvage equipment
to support the removal of a Civil War era shipwreck, the USS Westfield. The USS Westfield
was lost in the city shipping channel of Galveston Bay, Texas. The contractor procured
material and fabricated identified systems for the salvage of the USS Westfield.

b.

Chronology of Events:

November 15, 2009
Travel Day: Lloyd Saner, Paul Schadow, Jim Thompson, Jessie Theiland, and Tommy Goens
from Cheatham ESSM Base, Williamsburg VA. Rex Avila and Isidro Campos
from Port Hueneme ESSM Base, CA, arrived at the Hotel Galvez.
November 16, 2009
0700: The GPC crew arrived at the Army Corp of Engineers Base and checked into the Hotel
Galvez. After check-in the trucks transporting ESSM equipment were confirmed to have
arrived at the Army Corps of Engineers Base. Mr. Lloyd Saner made arrangements with
the U.S. Coast Guard for crane and forklift support to assist in off-loading the
transportation trucks and deploying the boats.
0800: Commenced off-loading of ESSM equipment from transportation trucks.
0900: Began placing the boats (one 32′ Equipment Transfer Boat (ETB) and one Rigid Hull
Inflatable Boat (RHIB)) into the water then secured them to the Army Corp dock.
1

1200: Completed all equipment off-loads. All boats were placed in the water.
1230: Transported personnel from J&S Contractor to the crane barge anchored in the Galveston
shipping channel. Checked the 30-kW Generator (that was already on the barge), to
ensure that it was properly connected to the Command Van and had fuel.
1600: Secured all boats and equipment for the day.
November 17, 2009
0700: Arrived at the Army Corp Base and checked the boats and the generator. Removed
Explosive Ordinance Disposal (EOD) equipment from the container and transported it to
the Army Corps storage shed for inventory. The all-terrain vehicle (ATV) and tractor was
placed in the Army Corps storage shed.
0730: The boats got underway to the crane barge with the barge crew.
0920: The crane barge dropped its first anchor.
1523: The last anchor was dropped.
1630: All crown buoy marker lights were installed.
1730: All boats returned to the Army Corp dock and were secured for the night.
November 18, 2009
0700: Arrived at Army Corp Base.
0730: Checked boats. All were secure.
0800: Move bomb box for EOD to site and the Army Corps dozers placed soil around the bomb
box.
0830: The boats proceeded to the barge anchor site to inspect the buoy marker light; it was
found that the radar reflectors were either damaged or missing. The light brackets were
not designed to hold the radar reflectors. Since the buoys are made of steel, it was
determined that no reflectors would be required.
1200: The boats were on site for security.
1230: The press boat (Vollert) was on site.
1630: Secured all boats at Army Corp dock for the night.

2

November 19, 2009
0700: Arrived at the Army Corp Base.
0730: The boats proceeded to Galveston City Marina for fuel.
0800: The ETB proceeded to the barge site for security. The 24′ RHIB returned to the Army
Corp dock. The RHIB was then secured.
0830: Procured material for deck safety.
0900: The ESSM boat crews assisted the barge crew with setting up and operation of Jetting
Pump.
1630: All the boats were secured at the Army Corp dock for the night.
November 20, 2009
0700: Arrived at the Army Corp Base.
0730: Both boats proceeded to barge site.
0830: The damaged jetting pump hose appeared to have been smashed between the vessels.
The hose was removed and transported to dock for repairs.
1200: Accomplished repairing of hose.
1630: All boats returned to dock and were secured for the night.
November 21, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0730: Sent the ETB out with the repaired jetting pump hose. The RHIB remained at the dock.
0830: The divers had problems with jetting pump. The boat crew assisted with the operation of
jetting pump.
0930: Received new marker lights and buoys. ESSM personnel went to West Marine and
bought carabiners and polypro line for the marker buoy.
1200: Secured the line to the buoy.

3

1300: The winds were about 20 to 30 mph with 3 to 4 foot seas.
1330: All the boats returned to dock on standby until the high winds died down.
1630: Secured all boats at Army Corp dock for the night.
November 22, 2009
0700: Arrived at the Army Corp Base. Checked the 30-kW Generator (on the barge), to ensure
that it was operating properly and had enough fuel. All the boats were checked. All
equipment checked out okay.
0730: Sent both boats out to transfer personnel, tend the buoys for tugs, and assist the divers as
needed.
1730: The USS Westfield cannon was hoisted out of the water. The cannon came up by sling
load.
2020: The ESSM boats returned to dock. The RHIB needed work lights for night operations.
November 23, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0730: Installed two work lights on the RHIBs. Also installed hand-held spot lamps on both
boats.
0830: Procured dry bags for RHIB personnel gear on board.
0930: Procured T-fitting and ball valves for the jetting pump for emergency overboard
discharges.
1200: The first pick up of the day was accomplished using the magnet attachment on the crane.
Pieces of the USS Westfield’s engine room boiler came up from the wreckage along with
copper spikes. Both boats were used for security patrol.
1630: Fueled both boats and returned to the dock for the night.
November 24, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.

4

0800: Assembled the T-fitting valve and ball valves for jetting pump. The ETB carried the new
valves out to the jetting pump for installation.
0900: A call over the radio was received stating the 30-kW generator on the barge had a fuel
problem.
0930: GPC personnel investigated the fuel problem. Water was found in the fuel system. All
the jetting pump fuel filters were removed and replaced with new filters from the spare
parts kit. The generator was down for approximately 15 minutes. GPC personnel also
checked the tug boat’s fuel. The fuel looked okay at the stripper in the tug boat. The fuel
discharge hose coming from the tug boat was found to have an intermittent discoloration
of fuel (changing from red to pink).
1630: The boats returned to the docks and were secured for the night.
November 25, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base and checked out all the boats and other
ESSM equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0730: Checked the ATV and tractor’s fuel and oil.
0800: Sent both boats out to the site to support the recovery process. The RHIB produced an
unfamiliar noise in the outdrive. GPC recovered the RHIB from the water later to
determine what was causing the noise; otherwise the boat was still operational.
0830: The tractor was used in an attempt to level and stabilize the parking lot where a tractor
trailer (transporting the cannon) had gotten stuck in mud.
0900: GPC personnel proceeded to Houston TX, J&S Construction to obtain a new hydraulic
motor for the small crane.
1230: Obtained two mattresses for Donjon Marine Co. (to be used for transport of the cannon).
1928: All boats were secured at dock for the night.
November 26, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0730: Checked the ATV, and tractor oil, fuel, and water. All the equipment checked out okay.
0930: Sent both boats out to the barge site.

5

1200: The ETB delivered five cannon balls.
1230: The Navy EOD transported the cannon balls using an unauthorized route. GPC personnel
had a discussion with the Navy EOD about the incorrect transport of the cannon balls;
they seemed not to be concerned. Also had a discussion with Judd Southworth about the
transport route EOD used. Mr. Southworth took corrective action.
1300: Cleared the shed at the front of the Army Corps for X-ray technicians. GPC personnel
attempted to find sand to fill sand bags for EOD. A permit was required from the
Environmental Support Army Corps to obtain sand from the beach.
1700: All the boats were secured at dock for the night.
November 27, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0800: The RHIB was taken to the marina and removed from the water onto a trailer. GPC
personnel could not determine the origin of the unusual noise. The RHIB was placed
back into the water, re-fueled, and put back into service.
1000: The ETB arrived at the dock with two cannon balls. The Navy EOD transported the
cannon balls to the spoil site. The tractor was used to assist the final lift of the 13″
cannon ball. The cannon ball weighed 265 lbs plus the weight of the water and the 40
gallon barrel.
1700: All boats were secured at dock for the night.
November 28, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0800: Re-fueled the ETB.
0830: Both boats shuttled the crew out to the barge.
0930: Attempted to retrieve the lost crown buoy line with no success. The crown buoy was on
the bottom, with its line wrapped around the mooring leg.
1130: The ETB delivered three cannon balls. The Navy EOD transported the cannon balls to
the spoil site.
1230: The Marines arrived.

6

1300: GPC procured a hydraulic hose that had been constructed for the J&S Construction’s
crane motor.
1700: The boats returned to dock and were secured for the night.
November 29, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0730: Both boats departed in route to the barge site.
0800: The Brown Water tug took on water over the stern and into engine room causing engines
to fail while trying to push the barges around. Her bow slipped up on the barge and the
stern. Both ESSM boats were on site and ready to assist the Brown Water tug crew if
needed.
0830: Brown Water was recovered and towed to the port by another tug.
1630: The ETB delivered four cannon balls. The Navy EOD transported the cannon balls to the
spoil site.
1800: ESSM personnel began transport of the Army Corps guards to the spoil site.
1830: Both boats returned and were secured for the night.
November 30, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base and transported the Army Corps guards to
spoil site.
0700: Checked all boats for operation.
0730: Both boats transported barge crew to the site. The Brown Water tug hit the crane boom
causing minor damage.
0800: The boats pulled security patrols around site. Bad weather (cool and wet winds around
20 mph) arrived.
1300: All the boats were secured at dock due to bad weather.
1800: Provided transport of the Army Corps guards to the spoil site.
1830: Secured all the boats at the dock for the night.

7

December 1, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base. Transportation was provided for the
Army Corps guard to the spoil site.
0700: Checked all boats for operation.
0730: The boats took barge crew across the harbor then followed the tug and the barge out to
site.
1430: Secured all the boats at the dock due to bad weather (seas 4 to 6 feet with winds 30 to 50
mph).
1800: Transportation was provided for the Army Corps guard to the spoil site.
1830: Pressure-washed the ATV and secured it for the night.
December 2, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base. Transportation was provided for the
Army Corps guard to the spoil site.
0700: Checked all the boats for operation.
0730: Both boats departed for the barge site. The weather got worse. More 9″ cannon balls
were found in the wreckage.
1330: The rain and wind picked up.
1430: The ETB returned to the dock with the cannon balls. The Navy EOD transported the
cannon balls to the spoil site.
1530: Secured the boats at the dock. Operations were discontinued due to weather conditions.
1600: Secured all the boats for the day.
December 3, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base. Transportation was provided for the
Army Corps guard to the spoil site.
0700: Checked all the boats for operation.
0730: The crane barge got underway.

8

0830: GPC personnel departed to procure supplies (lumber and a pressure washer).
1350: Returned to Army Corp Base with procured supplies.
1450: The ETB returned with three cannon balls. The Navy EOD transported the cannon balls
to spoil site. The ATV was pressure-washed.
1830: Secured all boats for the day.
December 4, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all boats and other ESSM
equipment. Bad weather (high winds and rain) were noted.
0800: ESSM boats and the barge crew went out to check working conditions.
0830: The boats returned for the day. The weather was too rough (30 to 40 mph winds, 4 to 6
foot seas, and rain).
1000: Secured all for the day.
December 5, 2009
0700: GPC crew arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all boats and other ESSM
equipment. The weather was bad (high winds and rain).
0800: Both boats got underway to the site.
0900: GPC personnel departed to procure parts (filters for the 30-kW generator and crane).
1300: Returned to base and passed bottled water on to the ETB and RHIB crews. The RHIB
took the filters for the barge gear (30-kW generator and crane).
1830: Secured the boats at dock.
December 6, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0800: The boats got underway to the job site with crane crew.
0830: GPC personnel departed to procure hydraulic hoses for the J&S Construction equipment.

9

0930: Upon return, the ETB transported the hydraulic hoses to the crane crew. The operation
was shut down due to bad weather conditions. The crane crew remained at the site to do
the needed repairs.
1500: The barge crew called GPC for small boat transfer.
1530: The ETB responded.
1700: Secured the boats at dock for the night.
December 7, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0620: The boats got underway to the marina for fuel.
0830: The boats arrived on site; there was heavy fog and rain.
0900: GPC personnel departed to procure material required on the barge.
1500: The ETB returned with a cannon ball. EOD and ESSM transported the cannon ball to the
spoil site.
1700: The boats were secured at dock for the night.
December 8, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0630: Both boats got underway to the site. There was fog again, slight rain, winds 10 to 20
mph.
0730: The batteries in the marker lights were changed (charged batteries last about 5 days).
1600: Secured all boats at dock for the day.
December 9, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0700: The boats got underway to the barge site, transporting crews and materials.

10

1300: The local news crew reporters came to the site.
1330: GPC personnel assisted with the changing out of containers on the barge. The crane
lifted two full containers from the barge and boomed them onshore. The containers were
replaced by two empty containers.
1400: A security perimeter was placed around the USS Westfield dump boxes (quantity 2) once
they were brought on land.
1700: The boats were secured at the dock for the day.
December 10, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0700: The boats got underway with the crew for the barge. Winds were around 30 to 40 mph.
The crew was on standby.
1300: The boats worked at the site with winds at 10 to 20 mph. The boats transferred personnel
all day and maintained the security perimeter.
1900: The boats were secured at the dock for the day.
December 11, 2009
0700: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0730: Bad weather conditions again. The boats were put on standby at dock.
1030: Transported the crane boss out to the barge. The water was very rough.
1320: The crew was on standby at docks.
1400: The boats got underway for personnel transfer and removed the marker lights from the
crown buoy so the tugs could hang off the buoys.
1630: The boats were secured at the dock for the day.
December 12, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.

11

0900: Began transport of personnel to the barge site. There was heavy fog. The boats
transported personnel all day. No cannon balls were recovered.
1900: The boats were secured at the dock for the day. GPC personnel cleaned and pressure
washed ESSM gear (including the ATV and the tractor).
December 13, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0630: The operator had difficulty starting the RHIB. After cycling the neutral safety switch a
few times the boat started.
0700: The RHIB was taken to the marina and placed onto a trailer.
0900: The ETB was on site for anchor recovery.
1600: Secured the ETB at the dock.
1630: Started to clean and load the Beach Transfer System for demobilization.
December 14, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base, checked out all the boats and other ESSM
equipment. All the equipment checked out okay.
0700: The ETB departed for the barge to assist in the Army Corps recovery job.
0730: The remaining crew started demobilization of the Marine Corps spoil site.
0830: Spent the remainder of the day cleaning everything for load-out.
1930: All equipment and ETB was secured for the day.
December 15, 2009
0600: GPC personnel arrived at the Army Corp Base.
0700: GPC personnel from Port Hueneme departed for their home base.
0730: GPC personnel from Cheatham Annex, Williamsburg, started loading out Galveston gear
and demobilizing ETB boat. The U.S. Coast Guard crane was available for the day.
1300: All ESSM gear was loaded and destined for home base (Cheatham Annex).

12

1330: Departed for Freeport to demobilize the gear from the barges.
1430: The barge had not yet arrived.
1500: Checked into a new motel while awaiting the barge.
1600: The barge arrived and gear removal began.
1830: Equipment was secured for the day. ESSM personnel departed from the port for the
hotel.
December 16, 2009
0700: Arrived at the Freeport yard to do inventory and demobilizing of the gear.
0730: Prepared for the load-out.
1630: All gear was ready for the load-out.
December 17, 2009
0600: Three transportation trucks arrived for the load-out.
0630: Began loading the trucks. The J&S crane crews were very helpful with the load-out.
Attempted to load-out the gear the same as it was upon arrival. There was rain again.
The crew worked in a mud pit again.
0800: A forth truck arrived.
1300: All the trucks were loaded.
December 18, 2009
0700: GPC personnel departed the motel for the airport.
c.

Problems Encountered:
1) There was water in the fuel supply from the onsite tug for 30-kW generator.
2) The marker floats used for marking mooring leg buoys were inadequate and had to be
replaced.
3) Weather caused delays in the operations. The 24′ RHIB boat batteries had to be
replaced.

13

d.

Lesson Learned and Recommendations:
1) Marker floats for mooring leg buoys should be added to the system.
2) Floats should be constructed of a more durable material, similar to the marker floats
used in long line fishing nets.
3) Some type of davit should be added to all ETBs.

e.

Equipment Utilized:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

f.

One 24′ RHIB
One 32′ ETB
One Beach Transfer System
One Lighting Kit
Four Mooring Legs
Two 20′ Command Vans
One 30-KW Generator
One 175 cfm Air Compressor
One Air Lift System

Equipment Evaluation:
The marker floats for mooring legs were destroyed and had to be replaced.

g.

Appendix: Photographs attached.

h.

Follow-on Data: Refurbishment data will follow in part II of this report.
Sincerely,
Lloyd L. Saner
Program Manager

P.O. Box JK, Williamsburg, VA 23187 (757) 887-7402 FAX (757) 888-0478

14

APPENDIX – PHOTOGRAPHS

Figure 1. USS Westfield Cannon Ball

Figure 2. ATV for EOD Transport Assistance

1

Figure 3. Tractor Assisting in Ground Leveling Support
and Lifting the Cannon Balls

Figure 4. Securing ETB at Army Corp Dock

2

Figure 5. ETB and RHIB

Figure 6. RHIB Security Patrol Assistance for the Barge Site

3

Figure 7. The Cannon Being Hoisted From the Water by Sling Load

Figure 8. Cannon Secured for Donjon Transport

4

Figure 9. ETB Leaving the Barge in High Winds

Figure 10. Cannon Ball from the USS Westfield

5

Figure 11. The EOD Spoil Site

Figure 12. ATV Support at the Spoil Site

6

Figure 13. The USS Westfield Cannon Being Prepped for Transport

Figure 14. Transportation Truck Awaiting the USS Westfield Cannon

7

GPC

A Joint Venture
CAX/LS/da
30 March 2010

Naval Sea Systems Command
Code 00C1
1333 Isaac Hull Ave. SE Stop 1071
Washington Navy Yard, DC 20376-1071
ATTN:

T. Robinson-Gore

SUBJ:

FINAL REPORT PART 2–OPERATIONAL DELIVERY ORDER 0544/D029,
N00024-07-D-4130, CONTRACT VALUE - $ 244,026.00

INFO:

R. Thiel (00C21), NAVSEA Project Manager

a.

Executive Summary: This Delivery Order was established to assist the Supervisor of Salvage
and Diving (SUPSALV), USN, by providing people and equipment necessary to support the
salvage of the Civil War Era shipwreck USS WESTFIELD, lost in the Texas City Shipping
Channel, Galveston Bay, Texas. Funding provided to prep and ship ESSM equipment and
also, to procure material and fabricate identified systems for the SALVOPS.

g.

Appendices as Required: All equipment has been refurbished and returned to RFI Condition.
Cost of Refurbishment is $9,280.81, No major repairs required just preventive maintenance.

Sincerely,
Lloyd L. Saner
Program Manager

P.O. Box JK, Williamsburg, VA 23187 (757) 637-9000 FAX (757) 637-9089

Appendix B-3
DonJon Marine Report

SALVAGE OF THE USS WESTFIELD
OCTOBER THROUGH DECEMBER 2009

PERFORMED FOR:
SEA 00C2
NAVAL SEA SYSTEMS COMMAND
OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF OCEAN ENGINEERING
SUPERVISOR OF SALVAGE AND DIVING
1333 ISAAC HULL AVENUE
WASHINGTON NAVY YARD, DC 20376-2030
UNDER:
CONTRACT N00024-03-D-4204
DELIVERY ORDER 0022

BY:
DONJON MARINE CO., INC.
100 CENTRAL AVENUE
HILLSIDE, NJ 07205

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
On September 15th, 2009, Commander, Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA),
Supervisor of Salvage (SUPSALV) requested that its East Zone salvage contractor,
DONJON MARINE CO., INC., provide assistance to SUPSALV. This request was to
provide technical assistance and conduct the removal of the historic remains of the USS
Westfield that lie within the Texas City deep-draft navigation channel near the
intersection of the Houston Ship Channel in Galveston Bay, Texas.
The request for specific assistance under contract N00024-03-D-4204, delivery order
0022 included provision of a crane for large artifact removal, assist tugs, barges, roll-off
boxes, fabricated screening devices, and ½ acre of land for artifact screening. The
request for specific assistance also included provision and coordination of diving, truck
transportation, transport permits, and the handling of Civil War ordnance. Along with the
handling of ordnance, other areas of concern were the historical sensitivity of the remains
and artifacts, as well as critical time constraints to avoid the impacting the scheduled
Texas City Channel deepening.
The contractor provided personnel to work with the archeologists (Navy and PBS&J),
Army Corps of Engineers, and SUPSALV to develop the on water recovery plan, landside screening operations, and make all preparations necessary to complete the recovery
operations. Other considerations and planning included EOD procedures along with
structural fortification to protect the crew in the event of an explosion, a dive safety plan,
and preparations for conducting operations in a very high vessel traffic area.
Coordination was conducted with USCG Vessel Traffic to close the Texas City Channel
during diving and certain lifting operations. Subcontracted crane barge and other floating
assets, along with crews, were provided by J&S Marine Services. Subcontracted assist
tug services were provided by Brown Water Marine Service. Diving services provided

by Phoenix International. Cable Arm provided the environmental dredging equipment,
including the Cable Arm Environmental Clamshell and ClamVision Positioning
Software. SMIT Salvage provided an electromagnet and two personnel. Transport
containers for recovered material were furnished by Rain for Rent.
The work was conducted in phases as follows:
Large Artifact Retrieval


A pre-work briefing of contractor personnel was conducted to ensure that all workers
at the site understood the fragility and historical significance of the artifacts to be
recovered, and the requirement to work with Galveston District’s archeological
consultant (PBSJ) to maintain the provenience of all recovered items, and the
requirement to work with the active–duty Navy and Marine Corps EOD to properly
identify and record, and inert or dispose of MEC.



Prior to the recovery of sediment
from the wreck site, large artifacts
such as the 9,200 pound cannon and
wreck fragments were recovered
from the seafloor. The cannon and
other large but fragile artifacts were
raised by crane from a barge placed
four point moored adjacent to the
channel.



This phase of fieldwork required
mooring of a crane barge and
materials barge(s) at the north edge of the channel next to the wreck; a tugs were
needed to reposition the spud barge occasionally as needed, and to tow the materials
barge to shore.



The barge was sited and moored to avoid impacting a portion of the wreck that
extends north of the channel.



Commercial divers were used to clear sediment from around and beneath the large
artifacts (excluding ordnance), and attach straps or cradles to facilitate lifting without
damage.



Use of a large industrial magnet was used to raise large metal artifacts with minimal
damage the artifacts. This allowed the retrieval of ordnance during the large artifact
retrieval phase, and provided more time for the inerting of ordnance for conservation.



Large artifacts were placed in water-filled roll-off boxes on materials barges, and
trucked to CRL (about 150 miles, one-way).

Clam Shell Recovery
 After large artifacts, such as the
canon, were recovered, clam shell
recovery of sediment from site
41GV151 will commenced.


The dredging was conducted from
the crane barge at the north edge of
the channel, and material was placed
in water tight containers on a
materials barge.



Sediment was systematically recovered in a grid pattern using a 3-cubic-yard smooth
environmental clamshell bucket that was lowered to the seafloor by crane. Dredging
was conducted “at grade” with the goal of removing the upper 1.0 to 1.5 ft of
sediment from the bay bottom at the site. Positioning of the clamshell bucket was
recorded by GPS devices and GIS software, providing mapping.



The sediment and shell hash removed by the clamshell bucket was deposited into
water tight 20 x 8 x 4 ft roll-off boxes stored on a materials barge. The clamshell
bucket was lowered into the roll-off box before opening to minimize any impact or
interaction between the artifacts and metal container. Each box held multiple bucket
lifts.



PBSJ archeologists were present to maintain a record of provenience for each bucket
load and roll-off container, and assign an artifact lot number to each roll off box as it
is filled.



An initial water-screening of the sediment using a 6-inch screen was conducted to
identify MEC as the material was placed in specialized filter roll-off boxes. Donjon
Marine designed and fabricated the 6-inch screen, which hung inside the box,
allowing room for the sediment to settle below. The 6-inch screen size was selected
based on historical research that has determined that ordnance known to have been on
the ship is larger than 6 inches in diameter.



After MEC and larger artifacts caught by the 6-inch screen are recorded and removed
to separate water-filled containers, clay and silt sediment was removed from the shell

hash/artifact matrix. Water was sprayed over the sediment, and clay-silt slurry was
filtered and drained through metal screens that line the roll-off box. After the
sediment was removed as best possible, water from the bay was pumped in to cover
the shell hash for transport.


After MEC was removed from the roll-off containers as described above, PBSJ
archeologists monitored each bucket sample as it is emptied into the roll-off box. If
artifacts were observed on the screen, they were removed from the box and placed
into water-filled containers labeled with the corresponding lot number.



Navy EOD specialists and PBSJ archeologists recorded the number and types of
MEC as they were collected, after consultation with PBSJ and Navy archeologists.



Navy EOD specialists stockpiled the MEC in a secure location in the SJPA, taking
care to store the MEC in water until they are either 1) turned over to Marine Corps
specialists to be inerted and conserved; or 2) deliberately detonated.



Filled materials barges were towed to a fenced, land-based work area at a marine yard
in Freeport, Texas. Each box was lifted and moved to a predetermined storage area at
this location. The smaller storage containers full of artifacts that were removed
during the initial screening during dredging were also transported to the fenced, landbased work area.

The requested services were provided during the period October 2009 to December,
2010.

CHRONOLOGY OF EVENTS
Mobilization and Fabrication
21 – 22 October, 2009 – USS Westfield salvage operation site survey. Representatives
from all parties involved in the operations visited site locations and reviewed
documentation and procedures for the salvage operations to be conducted.
1-16 October, 2009 – Fabrication and mobilization of equipment and barges in Freeport,
TX. Dive equipment, ESSM container, electromagnet, roll-off containers and various
other equipment placed and secured to the barge fleet.

Six inch screen for roll-off containers

Electromagnet

17 November, 2009 – J&S crane barge four point moored on site at edge of the Texas
City Ship Channel.

Large Item Recovery
18 November, 2009 – Diving operations commence.
22 November, 2009 – Recovered cannon and placed in a roll-off watertight box,
submerged in water.

25 November, 2009 – Recovered the bearing block and fire box, and magnet was utilized
for the recovery.

Clamshell Dredging
27 November, 2009 – Completed magnet operations recovering fragments of firebox
grates, iron plate, length of chain, one boiler mount, small I-beam and numerous iron
concretions. Reconfigured barge for clamshell operations, and lifting of sediment loads
and along with MEC begin.

Clamshell operations

Explosive Ordinance
13 December, 2009 – Completed dredging operations in areas accessible from the four
point moor. Recovered four point moor and prepared for dredge operations in the
channel.
14 December, 2009 – Completed dredging operations inside of channel, and for the
project. Recovered 24 foot 24 inch diameter pipe.

Sifting
30 November, 2009 – Sifting operations commence in Freeport by PBS&J.

One of the belt buckles recovered by clamshell operations during sifting operations
Disposal and Demobilization
16 December, 2009 – Commenced demobilization of barges and equipment. Barges
towed back to Freeport.

TASK PARTICULARS
TASK:
DONJON MARINE CO., INC., provide assistance to SUPSALV to recover artifacts
from the USS Westfield, in Galveston Bay, Texas.
KEY PERSONNEL:
SUPSALVREP
DONJON PROJECT MANAGER
DONJON ASSISTANT SALVAGE MASTER

RICHARD THIEL
PAUL HANKINS
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON

Appendix B-4
Phoenix International Report

TRANSMITTAL LETTER
This report documents the work performed by Phoenix International Holdings, Inc., during the
USS WESTFIELD (State Site #: 41GV151) artifact recovery in November to December 2009.

PREPARED BY:

James S. Schmidt
Senior Technical Writer

REVIEWED BY:

Peter LeHardy
Diving Services Program Manager

Prepared under Contract N00024-03-D-4030, Delivery Order 0162, for the Naval Sea Systems
Command, Code 00C5. Enclosed is the final report, submitted on 13 January 2010.

UNDERWATER SHIP HUSBANDRY
OPERATIONS REPORT
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
ARTIFACT RECOVERY

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
ARTIFACT RECOVERY
NOVEMBER TO DECEMBER 2009

PERFORMED FOR:
Department of the Navy
Naval Sea Systems Command (SEA 00C5)
1333 Isaac Hull Ave. SE (Stop 1075)
Washington Navy Yard, DC 20376

UNDER:
Contract N00024-03-D-4030
Delivery Order 0162

BY:
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
9301 Largo Drive West
Largo, MD 20774
(301) 341-7800

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
In November 2009, the Supervisor of Salvage and Diving, Underwater Ship Husbandry Division
(Code 00C5) of the Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA) directed Phoenix International
Holdings, Inc. (Phoenix) to perform salvage activities (artifact recovery) to USS WESTFIELD
(State Site #: 41GV151). The work was performed under contract N00024-03-D-4030 Delivery
Order (D.O.) 0162, in the Texas City Channel, Galveston County, Texas. On site project
management was performed by ESSM Salvage PM, Richard Thiel, 00C21, and LCDR G.T.
Southworth, Assistant Supervisor of Salvage and Diving.
The effort to salvage WESTFIELD is part of a dredging project that will deepen the Texas City
Ship Channel. The dredging is part of a Federal deep-draft navigation project to deepen and
enlarge the 6.7-mile long channel to 50 feet by 600 feet. The project is overseen by the United
States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE).
Channel surface conditions or the sea state, in the project area, affected both the divers and
personnel topside. The most limiting factors affecting productivity of diving operations and
recovery activities were tidal flow, wind, and wave heights. Strong northerly winds coincided
with unusually significant ebb and flood tide velocities, reaching >2.27 knots along-channel.
The wind-driven tidal surges had a significant affect on the stability of the barge moorings. The
energy of these intense tides and currents was clearly demonstrated on 29 November, when the
tug BROWNWATER 10 became perched on the dive barge and heeled over at least 35-40
degrees.
The strong tidal flows also affected plans to use a remotely operated vehicle (ROV) to provide
observation capabilities, assistance, and quality control measures during the diving and dredging
phases of the operations. Phoenix tested the ROV, a VideoRay Pro 3 XEGTO, in its operational
configuration (with 2D imaging sonar) but determined it could not be successfully utilized as an
observation tool in the predominately strong currents. Following the ROV deployment, Phoenix
conducted field assessments of the ROV unit‟s 2D imaging sonar and Smart Tether navigation
system, in optional configurations (Appendix L).
The salvage team personnel performed 19.75 hours of bottom time without any accidents or
injuries. USACE and Donjon-Smit personnel were responsive and provided valuable assistance
throughout salvage operations.
PHASE I
On 12 and 15 November 2009, Phoenix and C&C Technologies conducted a multi-component
remote-sensing survey of the Civil War shipwreck USS WESTFIELD state (Site#: 41GV151) in
the Texas City Channel, Galveston County, Texas. The survey also included a barge off-loading
area at the USACE (Galveston District) Hopper Dredge Dock at nearby Fort Point.
The WESTFIELD survey design incorporated a pre-planned line file, which contained twodimensional (2-D) position coordinate information, providing overlapping coverage and accurate
positional control. The remote-sensing records revealed 35 targets in the project area; but none
with any discernable characteristics (Appendix L). The magnetic anomalies clustered near the
center of the wreck site likely represented artifacts associated with WESTFIELD.

PIHI - 09157

ii

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
The planned survey of the USACE Hopper Dredge Dock area included seven (7) pre-planned
survey lines spaced at 10-meter transects to provide overlapping sounding coverage and accurate
positional control; however, shallow water depths and vessel constraints within the USACE
small boat basin, prevented 100-percent coverage. The multi-beam data collected along the pier
front indicated water depths ranging from 5 to 13 meters. The side scan sonar data indicated six
targets, which appeared to be associated with pilings and features of the USACE Hopper Dredge
Dock (Appendix L).
PHASE II
On 14 November 2009, Phoenix diving and navigation personnel deployed to Freeport, Texas to
start artifact recovery (salvage) operations on WESTFIELD. Phoenix personnel mobilized its
surface supply air equipment on the salvage barge at JNS Contractors. The barge, operated by
Donjon-Smit, served as Phoenix‟s dive platform throughout the recovery operations. Phoenix
divers used a water jet to free artifacts from the bottom sediments and allow rigging to assist in
the recoveries. By managing the water jet at low pressure, there was little site disturbance while
clearing the overburden and embedded sediments.
In addition to using traditional salvage techniques, salvage operations included the use of a crane
operated electromagnet. This activity required close coordination between the Diving
Supervisor, Phoenix navigation personnel, and the crane operator. The navigation software
(WinFrog) provided subsea guidance by showing the diver, crane boom, and electromagnet
relative to the barge and artifact positions. Working together, divers carefully rigged artifacts to
the electromagnet and the crane operator hoisted the artifacts to the surface.
During this phase of the operation, divers successfully rigged six large artifacts to the crane and
these items were successfully recovered to the surface. The large artifacts recovered included a
IX-inch Dahlgren cannon, a steam chest, a bearing block, pieces of the firebox, a steel plate, and
a large concretion of various historical objects.
PHASE III
On 26 November 2009, the dive team departed and the Phoenix navigation crew focused their
attention on providing navigation and positioning data to the crane barge and clamshell
operators. At the start of this phase, Donjon-Smit personnel followed Navy EOD direction and
installed ~2-inch thick clear Plexiglas panels to protect the crane operator and two steel plates at
the entrance to the control van to protect personnel from possible impacts while recovering
unexploded ordnance.
Phoenix navigation/survey personnel utilized Sonardyne acoustic beacons, placed on the crane
bucket, crane, and bottom references, to provide accurate subsea positioning. The WinFrog
software suite provided guidance by displaying the crane boom and clamshell relative to the
barge and subsea grid positions. Accurate positioning data allowed the archaeologists to
maintain artifact provenience (location and depth) within a pre-defined excavation grid. Artifact
provenience is important because it allows archaeologists to examine site formation processes
over time and interpret the artifacts within a primary context. Clamshell operations recovered a
variety of small artifacts.
As part of this phase of the operation, Phoenix navigation/survey personnel deployed two
seafloor sonar reference markers 100 feet apart to establish a known baseline across the site.
These reference beacons helped to integrate data from the sector-scanning sonar and data from

PIHI - 09157

iii

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
the crane. This data integration provided topside personnel with a clear picture of the underwater
salvage site. In addition, software associated with the crane operated clamshell helped to
position the clamshell (also known as the “Smart Bucket” due to the associated positioning
software that provides the location of the clamshell to topside personnel) on sonar targets outside
of the pre-defined recovery area. The project concluded on 15 December, when USACE
representatives directed all involved to commence demobilizing from the site.

PIHI - 09157

iv

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... ii
1.0
BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................ 1
2.0
CHRONOLOGY............................................................................................................. 2
3.0
PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED, RESOLUTION, AND RECOMMENDATIONS ..... 9
APPENDIX A .............................................................................................................................. 11
DIVE OPERATIONS PLAN AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN
APPENDIX B .............................................................................................................................. 39
DEPARTURE(S) FROM SPECIFICATION
APPENDIX C .............................................................................................................................. 41
FIELD COMPLETED FWP AND OTHER QUALITY DOCUMENTS
APPENDIX D .............................................................................................................................. 43
INSPECTION AND REPAIR DRAWINGS
APPENDIX E .............................................................................................................................. 46
PHOTOGRAPHIC CHRONOLOGY
APPENDIX F .............................................................................................................................. 60
PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT
APPENDIX G.............................................................................................................................. 63
SUBCONTRACTORS
APPENDIX H.............................................................................................................................. 65
CONSUMABLES INCLUDING CORRODED OR LOST ITEMS
APPENDIX I ............................................................................................................................... 67
JOB LOG
APPENDIX J ............................................................................................................................... 82
VIDEO LOG
APPENDIX K.............................................................................................................................. 84
SUB-CONTRACTOR SURVEY REPORT
APPENDIX L ............................................................................................................................ 131
KCF SMART TETHER AND BLUEVIEW P900 2D IMAGING SONAR FIELD
ASSESSMENT REPORT

PIHI - 09157

v

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

1.0

BACKGROUND

In November 2009, the USACE requested assistance from NAVSEA to perform survey and
salvage operations (artifact recovery) on USS WESTFIELD (State Site #: 41GV151). Phoenix
International Holdings, Inc. was tasked by NAVSEA to accomplish the salvage activities.
The effort to salvage WESTFIELD is part of a $71 million dredging project that will deepen the
Texas City Ship Channel. The Texas City Channel is a Federal deep-draft navigation project
serving the port of Texas City in Galveston County, Texas. The Texas City Channel
Improvement Project (TCCIP), in part, provides for deepening and enlarging the 6.7-mile long
Texas City Channel to 50 feet by 600 feet. Federal stimulus money is paying for part of the
project, overseen by the USACE.
Section 110(a)(1) of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) (16 U.S. Code §470f)
establishes Federal agency responsibility for the preservation of historic properties under their
control. SECNAVINST 4000.35A assigns NHPA responsibilities within the Department of the
Navy to fulfill its preservation obligations. The Naval History and Heritage Command Center
functions as the principle advisor to the Navy and is responsible for the management of historic
shipwrecks and aircraft under Navy jurisdiction. Because the USACE undertaking (TCCIP)
would impact WESTFIELD (a historic Navy property), it became the USACE‟s responsibility to
mitigate their undertaking in accordance with the NHPA.

PIHI- 09157

1

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

2.0

CHRONOLOGY

Thursday, 12 November. The Phoenix Technical Writer (TW) departed Maryland for Galveston,
Texas, to assist a multi-component remote-sensing survey in the Texas City Channel,
Galveston County, Texas. The survey provided the USACE magnetometer, side scan
sonar, single beam and multi-beam bathymetry on the USS WESTFIELD wreck site.
Upon arrival in Houston, the TW traveled to Galveston, Texas, to meet with C&C
Technologies and schedule the survey activities.
Friday, 13 November. Weather – South wind 4 to 6 knots. Phoenix TW met with C&C
Technology‟s personnel James Wade and Jacques Voorhies, Paul Hankins (VP
Operations, Donjon-Smit), and LCDR G.T. Southworth to discuss a survey strategy.
After the meeting, Phoenix‟s TW and C&C Technologies personnel traveled to the
Galveston Yacht Basin and mobilized R/V C-WOLF. The on-site survey commenced
after completing sound velocity profiles to enhance data positional accuracy for single
and multibeam echo-sounding units. The survey team ensonified the wreck site and
surveyed the USACE Hopper Dredge Dock at Fort Point.
Saturday, 14 November. C&C Technologies reviewed the survey data and determined a cross
track error in the side scan sonar data may have compromised the positional accuracy of
ensonified targets on the wreck site. In discussing the situation with the Phoenix Project
Manager, it was determined to collect additional side scan sonar data on WESTFIELD.
Sunday, 15 November. Weather – SSE wind 5 to 10 knots. The Phoenix TW met C&C
Technology‟s personnel, Scott Croft (VP Geosciences Division), James Wade and
Jacques Voorhies, at the Galveston Yacht Club and mobilized R/V C-WOLF to conduct
the side scan sonar survey. The revised survey tactic included modifying the sensor
layback in an attempt to compensate for strong current velocities. Following the survey,
the Phoenix TW and Scott Croft reviewed the raw survey data. It was quickly
determined to focus on post-processing the multibeam echo-sounding (MBES) data, due
to the high degree of positional accuracy. The process created a BASE map providing a
highly accurate (0.5-meter resolution) surface.
Monday, 16 November. Weather – NNW wind 18 knots and gusting to 27 knots. The Phoenix
TW, Dive Supervisor Scott Andersen, and surveyors William Mauck and Evan Tanner,
met to review the survey results before providing the BASE map to Robert Gearhart, the
project archaeologist from PBS&J. A cold front bringing strong, SSE winds (gusting >19
knots) prevented the barge from anchoring on the WESTFIELD site. Phoenix shifted its
focus and attention on complying with USACE requirements for updating the dive safety
and operations plans.
Tuesday, 17 November. Weather – strong NW/WNW wind 11 to 14 knots. Phoenix survey
personnel, William Mauck and Evan Tanner, met with Dave Kraige, Senior Mechanical
Engineer, KCF Technologies, Inc., to discuss setting-up and operating the Smart Tether
System. The Smart Tether includes a series of sensors and nodes embedded in a tether
for orientation and pressure sensors to measure the tether shape and track the position and

PIHI- 09157

2

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
heading of a remote-operated vehicle or diver. This data is then transmitted to a control
box and displayed on its computer screen in real time.
Phoenix personnel mustered and headed to the USACE headquarters to meet with David
Petit, the USACE Dive Supervisor. The meeting, held on the M/V FLING, included a
dive safety meeting. Attendants included Rich Thiel, Paul Hankins, Jim Joblin (Texas
A&M University) and PBS&J archaeologists. In addition, Hankins conducted a brief
safety meeting about the barge and crane operations. Strong WNW winds prevented
anchoring the barge and working the site.
Wednesday, 18 November. Weather – light W/NW wind 2 to 4 knots. Phoenix divers
performed an initial site survey on WESTFIELD. The divers and survey crew integrated
the Smart Tether into the diver‟s umbilical, but it proved too short to be useful.
Operations terminated as the slack tide window (1200-1600) closed and current velocities
increased making dive and barge/crane operations too unsafe.
Thursday, 19 November. Weather – SE to ESE wind 11 knots (sustained) with strong gusts.
Phoenix personnel set up on the dive barge and held a safety meeting just prior to
receiving notification that no diving could take place due to rough seas and gusting
winds. Phoenix personnel went on standby as the J&S crew moved the dive barge
outside the spread, to the leeward side. After completing the barge set up, Phoenix
personnel began diving, taking advantage of the slack tide window (1300-1700);
however, within an hour, rough seas and unsafe conditions for crane operations
compelled the Dive Supervisor to secure the dive station.
Friday, 20 November. Weather – East to ESE wind12 to 20 knots, gusting to 25 knots. Dive
Supervisor met with PBS&J and Donjon on board M/V FLING to discuss daily
operations. The Phoenix crew went on standby due to a continuing trend in inclement
weather until 1130, and then departed for M/V FLING. Dive operations were cancelled
when the weather did not improve and winds continued gusting.
Saturday, 21 November. Weather – NNE wind 20- 23 knots, subsiding to 13 knots by afternoon.
Phoenix personnel set up the dive station to meet the tide window (1400-1800). Phoenix
divers quickly located the cannon and marked it with a buoy. However, within about 30
minutes of marking the cannon, the Diving Supervisor secured the dive station due to
unexpected vessel traffic.
Sunday, 22 November. Weather – WNW wind 4 to 6 knots. Phoenix crew set up the dive
station, and then waited on positioning the crane barge. Phoenix made two dives to
excavate the cannon free of bottom sediments and placed slings on it for recovery. Once
the cannon cleared the water and was safely placed in an artifact container, the Diving
Supervisor secured the dive station.
Monday, 23 November. Weather – ESE wind 4 to 10 knots. Phoenix personnel recovered a 5foot x 6-foot piece of iron plating and then secured the dive station as the channel reopened to ship traffic. After the ship channel closed, the crew started working to recover
a steam chest. The crane operator set-up the electromagnet, but ship traffic prevented its
deployment and compelled Phoenix to secure the dive station.
Tuesday, 24 November. Weather – East to NE wind 7 to 12 knots. Phoenix personnel rigged an
unidentified artifact for recovery using the electromagnet. The electromagnet picked up
PIHI- 09157

3

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
the target with the help of lifting slings. The divers jetted and rigged the steam chest, but
due to its eroded condition, used the lifting slings, without the electromagnet. Stormy
weather, including lightening, delayed the recovery of a condenser (later identified as part
of the firebox).
Wednesday, 25 November. Weather – NNE wind 15-19 knots. Phoenix personnel began by
jetting out a bearing block to prepare it for recovery. While waiting on the Donjon crew
to ready and deploy the electromagnet, Phoenix divers jetted around the condenser.
Donjon topside personnel fine-tuned the electromagnet and with additional support
straps, lowered the magnet to recover the condenser. Ship traffic delayed the recovery
for about 30 minutes.
Thursday, 26 November. Weather – North wind 12 to 18 knots, turning NE in the afternoon.
Phoenix divers recovered two acoustic beacons (one USBL heading reference beacon and
the salvage basket/beacon), and then secured the dive station. The Diving Supervisor
instructed the crew to demobilize the dive station. Meanwhile, Phoenix survey personnel
deployed two seafloor sonar reference markers 100 feet apart to establish a known
baseline. The reference beacons, integrated with a sector scanning sonar and WinFrog
navigation suite, helped to position the Smart Bucket on sonar targets outside of the
recovery area. Phoenix survey personnel stood by as Donjon prepared and installed ~2inch thick clear Plexiglas panels to protect the crane operator and two steel plates to
protect the control van from possible ordinance explosion. Used the electromagnet to
recover artifacts – started at grid intersection 132/133 and completed 12 recoveries.
Friday, 27 November. Weather – NW winds 4 to 6 knots. Phoenix personnel arrived on site to
find that Donjon replaced the dive barge with a container barge. Because of optimal site
conditions, it was decided to test the VideoRay PRO 3 XEGTO ROV with the BlueView
2D imaging sonar off the bow of one container barge. Yet, even with a negligible current
the ROV could not descend to the channel bottom; therefore, it would be unsuitable for
supporting inspections. By mid-day electromagnet operations ceased and Donjon
demobilized the magnet. Smart Bucket operations carried though the afternoon. At one
time, a passing tanker, GENMAR CONSTANTINE (Monrovia), lost its engines as it
approached the barge layout. The entire crew went on alert in case of collision.
Saturday, 28 November. Weather – SE wind 11 to13 knots. M/V FLING for an early start, but
discovered one of the barges had not returned from Freeport, which caused a 1½-hour
delay. Mid morning, Phoenix installed the Smart Tether onto the scanning sonar tripod to
compare its accuracy to that of the USBL - discovered about a 5-foot offset. Morning
operations with the Smart Bucket completed 12 grabs, but UXO suspended operations for
about an hour around noon. In the afternoon, Smart Bucket operations completed another
12 grabs, thereby finishing grids 104, 105, and 124.
Sunday, 29 November. Weather – SE wind 6 to 8 knots, gusting to 12 knots. On arrival at the
work site while on M/V FLING, we discovered the smaller “push” tug BROWNWATER
10 perched on the dive barge and heeled over at least 35-40 degrees due to high outbound
currents encountered trying to secure the dive barge to the crane/dredge barge. The
Donjon crew worked to re-orient the barges, reducing the effect of current and thereby
enabling the tug operator to move off the barge. This was serious because if the tug went
under, the dive barge could have followed.

PIHI- 09157

4

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Once on board the dive barge, Phoenix inspected the dive spread and re-compression
chamber to ensure no damage. Although there were some rub marks on the recompression chamber and one tire/bumper eye/cleat bent over on the barge, it couldn‟t
really be attributed to the tug. Reliable on-scene witnesses doubted that the tug was ever
near the chamber or control van.
Prior to bucket operations, Phoenix installed the 2D imaging and Simrad scanning sonar
on a tripod and compared the imagery between the two (900-kHz) units. The BlueView
sonar produced poor image quality at various range and threshold settings. The
comparison of seafloor presentation between the BlueView and Simrad was on the order
on night and day. The tripod remained on the bottom and provided sonar imagery of
dredge bucket seafloor position and debris removal progress.
Phoenix personnel and PBS&J went on standby at noon, so the Navy could deal with
unexploded ordnance (UXO) and examine the rudder on one of the tugs. By early
afternoon, bucket operations completed grids 106, 107, 122, and 123. Grid 122,
completed just before securing the navigation station, contained a US belt buckle, port
hole and several unidentified artifacts.
Monday, 30 November. Weather - winds N to NNE at 17 to 21 knots and bay waters choppy to
rough. Phoenix, NAVSEA, and Donjon met at M/V FLING and were told to report back
tomorrow morning due to inclement weather. Over the night of 29/30 November, the
stand-by tug guarding the moored crane barge either slipped off the can buoy or dragged
the anchor and collided with the cradle-secured barge crane boom. The collision
damaged a couple of cross members and a field load test will be performed. If the load
test is passed, limited operations will proceed with the safety of the crew in mind.
Dredge loads will be brought aboard into the open containers but the boom will be
lowered before the archaeologists can investigate its contents.
Tuesday, 1 December. Weather - winds ENE 19-21 knots and bay waters choppy. As directed,
Phoenix arrived at M/V FLING for a 0800 departure, but we were told to standby and
return for a noon departure. At 1130 we arrived back on M/V FLING. SMIT and
Donjon-Smit attempted to tie up the container barge to the 4-point moored crane barge,
but did not make it past Pelican Island. They reported conditions too hazardous for work,
wind gusts >23 knots. Phoenix personnel went on standby until 2 December.
Wednesday, 2 December. Weather – winds West 15-20 knots, gusting to 30 knots, and wave
heights 5.15 feet. Phoenix waited on board M/V FLING at the dredge dock until the
Donjon crew evaluated on site conditions. Phoenix learned that when the standby tug hit
the crane boom the other night, the USBL transceiver pole assembly was damaged, but
still on the barge. When Phoenix arrived on site and M/V FLING tied off to a standby
buoy, it became evident that the USBL transceiver deck cable was all that was left on the
barge, the pole mount was on the seafloor. At 1000 the Donjon crew transferred to the
crane barge to test the recently repaired crane boom by lifting the bucket and dredge spoil
steel sieve platforms. Phoenix transferred at 1100 via one of the small Navy RHIB boats
to a tugboat - container barge - crane barge. The USBL transceiver deck cable was
buoyed off for later recovery. Dredge operations continued throughout the morning until
the UXO came up and operations temporarily ceased. Bucket operations resumed
approximately one hour later, completing grids 108 and 121, until the sea state made

PIHI- 09157

5

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
further work too hazardous. Phoenix transferred off the crane barge via the container
barge - tug - RHIB - RHIB - M/V FLING.
Thursday, 3 December. Winds and sea state settled down considerably compared to the previous
day. With favorable site conditions, the barge continued bucket operations throughout
the day. The Donjon crew used the dive barge crane to recover hydrophone and cable.
The hydrophone appeared undamaged, but the cable parted at the water line and was
unusable.
Friday, 4 December. Weather –NE winds 20 to 23 knots, rain, seas 4 feet (4 seconds). Due to
inclement weather and a forecast predicting winds increasing to 25 knots in the afternoon,
snow, and rough waters, no work on site occurred.
Saturday, 5 December. Weather – NE winds 5 to 10 knots, bay waters smooth. Dredging
operations continued throughout the day without interruptions. With improved weather
and site conditions, the bucket operations completed grids 131, 132, 133 and 139.
Sunday, 6 December. Weather - SE winds 10 to 15 knots, bay waters slightly choppy. On
arrival at the work site, Donjon informed Phoenix that the dive and container barges
could not be tied up to the dredge barge due to 20-25 knot winds, seas with a 4 foot
swells and high currents. M/V FLING returned to USACOE dredge dock and waited for
a weather update. The weather continued to build with gusts 25 to 30 knots. Donjon
deemed dredge bucket operations not worth trying and we were placed on weather
standby.
Monday, 7 December. Weather - North winds around 10 knots becoming NE in the afternoon,
bay waters smooth to slightly choppy. A dreary day was spent recovering artifacts with
the dredge bucket. Four grids were completed. The work day was cut short by a full
container barge and the arrival of another cannonball in the last bucket recovery.
Tuesday, 8 December. Weather - South winds 15 to 20 knots, seas 3 to 5 feet and a dense fog
advisory. Bucket operations completed seven grids and 45 artifacts were recovered
above the 6-inch sieves. The work day was cut short again by a full container barge
(seven open containers that each contained debris from ONLY ONE grid).
Wednesday, 9 December. Weather - North winds 15 to 20 knots, seas 3 to 5 feet, and dense fog
in the morning. Phoenix personnel arrived on M/V FLING at 0715 and stood by for
more favorable weather. The weather check at 1000 revealed conditions not favorable
for operations. Another weather check at 1200 revealed improving conditions. M/V
FLING underway for work area at 1240. Dredge operations started before Phoenix
arrived on the barge at 1315. Four grids were completed. The dive barge was brought
out long enough for any PBS&J equipment to be transferred to the dredge barge.
Phoenix took that time to transfer ALL Seatronics equipment cases and the sonar cable
reel to the dive equipment van. The work day was cut short due to weather building up
and having to move the barge in the moor.
Thursday, 10 December. Weather - moderate NNE winds 15 to 25 knots becoming 15 to 20
knots in the afternoon, and seas 3 to 5 feet. Phoenix arrived on the M/V FLING at 0715,
and went on standby dockside until the container barge was configured with newly
arrived empty containers. M/V FLING made its way to the work area at 1230. The

PIHI- 09157

6

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
ESSM generator needed another fuel filter due to poor fuel supply from tug boats.
Bucket operations completed four grids.
Friday, 11 December. Weather – moderate to strong NE winds (20 to 25 knots) persisting
throughout the day and seas 5 to 7 feet. Phoenix personnel went on standby at the Hotel
Galvez for inclement weather. Arrived on M/V FLING at 1245 and transferred to the
dredge barge. Phoenix personnel were running both WinFrog and the Smart Bucket
software package due to the Cable Arm operator having the flu. Weather and seas were
not conducive for operations and the barge was positioned for expected overnight
weather.
Saturday, 12 December. Weather – East winds 5 to 10 knots and seas 2 to 4 feet, but subsiding
with the winds. Phoenix personnel stationed on the dredge barge ran WinFrog, the Smart
Bucket software package, and the tripod mounted scanning sonar due to the cable arm
operator still having the flu. The ESSM generator failed due to water in fuel filter and
destroyed the Cable Arm computer hard drive (not protected by a UPS). Transferred one
of the WinFrog monitors to the crane operator and carried on operations while Evan
Tanner spent a few hours getting the Cable Arm sonar computer to run the Cable Arm
software. This was not required but was done as a back-up. Dredge operations were
finalized with scanning sonar verification of a cleared operations area.
This completed the phase of bucket operations for the archaeologists. There are contacts
on the South side of the Texas City Channel that are probably not of historic interest but
large enough to damage a dredge cutter head. Phoenix personnel will assist Donjon to
remove these objects with an "orange peel" grapnel.
Sunday, 13 December. Weather - West winds 5 to 10 knots becoming southwest in the
afternoon, and seas 1 to 2 feet. Phoenix personnel were standing by while the dredge
barge crew recovered the four anchors and tied up the barge along the Galveston Ship
Channel to change dredge buckets.
Monday, 14 December. Weather - SE winds 5 to 10 knots and seas 2 feet, with patchy dense
fog. The Texas City Channel was closed to shipping traffic due to a heavy fog. Dredge
operations began with contact labeled "1.4m Diam" target. After five clay filled picks,
the current had subsided so that the scanning sonar could be deployed. Found an
insignificant sonar target and recovered another load of clay. Donjon moved the barge to
recover target "6.5m long pipe”. Phoenix personnel deployed the sonar and guided the
grapnel onto a 20-foot section of sewer pipe. Donjon recovered the anchors and moved
the barges to the next target labeled “2.2m Long”. Three picks were made with nothing
but clay in return. The target was either clay or driven into the seafloor.
Donjon recovered the anchors to move the barges to the South side of the channel for
target labeled "6.6m Long". Five picks were made on a scanning sonar linear contact,
which was probably the leading edge of a metal plate. It appears that the target could not
be pulled from the clay with the grapnel. Anchors crossed when the tide suddenly
shifted, swinging the barge 180 degrees. The scanning sonar tripod was caught and the
interface cable damaged. The barge cleared the Texas City Channel to sort the fouled
anchors. A single anchor was deployed and two tugs used to hold position on the “6.6m
Long” worked over previously - recovered a short section of wire rope. The scanning

PIHI- 09157

7

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
sonar was repaired but the currents were too strong for deployment. Two picks were
made recovering clay. After a total of 22 picks, operations secured and the barge tied up
along the Galveston Channel.
Tuesday, 15 December. Phoenix personnel departed for Freeport, Texas, to meet the crane barge
and transfer GFE into transit cases for shipping out (demobilization). The navigation and
positioning station was broken down, and arrangements made to truck the equipment on
16 December between 1300 and 1600.
Wednesday, 16 December. SUPSALV and ESSM teams supervised loading the two GFE
shipping containers onto a truck for return transportation to Phoenix‟s Largo facility. The
Seatronics and Smart Tether equipment shipped via FedEx. Phoenix personnel in transit
to home facilities.

PIHI- 09157

8

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

3.0

PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED, RESOLUTION, AND
RECOMMENDATIONS

3.1
Problem: The heading sensor in the hydrophone was unreliable. When winching in and
out from the wreck site, the heading changed and the offset was significant.
Resolution: Following the manufacturer‟s recommendation to set a fixed reference
transducer on the bottom, Phoenix divers used a probe with sensor attached and
hammered it into the bottom for one fixed point. The second fixed point came from a
sensor attached to the artifact basket.
Recommendation: If working from a vessel, follow manufacturer‟s specifications and
calibration procedures. If this is not possible, use at least two fixed beacons (points) on
the seafloor.
3.2
Problem: The lack of continuing diver support made a Long Baseline (LBL) acoustic
positioning system impractical due to the placement / recovery of the seafloor beacons.
In addition, there were no acoustic release beacons available in the southwest region of
the US.
Resolution: A 100-foot baseline was established by dropping sonar shapes from known
positions outboard of the dive and container barges. This allowed for the use of a
distance-to-distance intersect to position the magnet/bucket. With this configuration,
both the magnet and the smart bucket position for artifact removal could be monitored.
The Smart Tether was used to compensate for unknown set and drift.
Recommendation: For future use, have an acoustic release compatible with the USBL
system in operation. This would allow for the deployment of a reference beacon in
different positions as required and eliminate dependency on divers.
3.3
Problem: The VideoRay ROV system was not adequate for the environmental
conditions (excessive current) on site.
Resolution: Employed a sector scanning sonar and subsea acoustic beacons to determine
orientation, range, and positioning of the environmental bucket and seafloor targets. This
allowed the archaeologists to verify each area of the seafloor grid had been effectively
cleared by the environmental bucket.
Recommendation: Select an ROV system compatible with the environmental
constraints and project requirements.
3.4
Problem: The hydrophone used on this project incorporated a compass and heading
output, which could be configured through software. However, in calculating a heading

PIHI- 09157

9

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
offset, the unit used a calculation which could not be altered. This inability to override
the transponders compass and input a third-party heading caused daily errors in heading.
Resolution: None available, while one can input a heading offset, the system software
still used incorrect information from the built-in compass to calculate a corrected
position.
Recommendation: Acquire a more advanced system allowing more user
configurability.
3.5
Problem: A hydrophone sank to the bottom during tug operations in a rough sea state.
Tug impact and rough seas caused the hydrophone mount welded to the deck to part from
the stern of the barge. Based on speaking with Donjon-Smit crewmembers, one of the
tugs impacted the pole mount and probably cracked the welds, since the mount remained
after the impact. It‟s possible that high current velocities put additional torque on the
welds, causing the break.
Resolution: The barge crane used the hydrophone cable, although it wasn‟t a strength
member, to lift the sensor off the channel bed. This allowed the Donjon-Smit crew to
recover enough cable length, until they could grab the strain relief line and attach it to the
crane hook. Once on deck, Phoenix examined the hydrophone, and it appeared
undamaged.
Recommendation: Use appropriate strain relief on cables to allow emergent recovery if
required.

PIHI- 09157

10

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX A
DIVE OPERATIONS PLAN AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN
(Excluding all Appendices)

PIHI- 09157

11

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix followed its Dive Operations Plan, which describes the approach, methods, and
operational procedures specific to salvage of USS WESTFIELD. This plan met the requirements
associated with the USACE Safety and Health Requirements Manual, EM 385-1-1 (Section
30.A.17). Both the Phoenix Dive Operations Plan (excluding all appendices) and the Phoenix
Emergency Management Plan WESTFIELD (excluding all appendices) are included in this
appendix.

PIHI- 09157

12

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

An Employee Owned Company

DIVE OPERATIONS PLAN
USS WESTFIELD ARTIFACT RECOVERY
GALVESTON, TEXAS
For
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
2000 Fort Point Road
Galveston, TX 77550
Date ofPlan Submission: 11/16/2009

Contact Information:
Scott Andersen, Diving Supervisor/Project Manager
Cell#: 985-513-2643
Office #: 985-399-0606
Fax#: 985-399-0604

PHOENIX INTERNATIONAL HOLDrNGS, rNC.
www.phnx-intemational.com

This document and the information disclosed herein are the property of Phoenix International Holdings, Inc. This
document is confidential and is intended for the sole use ofthe person to whom it is delivered. Any reproduction,
transmission, distribution, or disclosure ofthis document, whether in whole or in part, to any person other than such
person and his authorized agents as provided by written agreement with Phoenix International Holdings, Inc., is
strictly prohibited. By receipt of this document, the person to whom this document is delivered agrees to return it
upon request.

PIHI- 09157

13

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Date oflssue: 16 November 2009

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS WESTFIELD
Job No. 09157

Dive Operations Plan

TABLE OF REVISIONS
REV.
No.

REV.
DATE

01

11/13/09

02

11/16/09

REV. DESCRIPTION

Draft- Dive Operations Plan for USS WESTFIELD, Artifact
Recovery, Galveston, Texas
Dive Operations Plan for USS WESTFIELD, Artifact Recovery,
Galveston, Texas- edit to incorporate USACE comments

ISSUED
BY

CHECKED
BY

APPROVED
BY PHOENIX

JSS

CLT

PKL

JSS

PKL

PKL

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.

PIHI- 09157

14

Page2 of82

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS WESTFIELD
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 16 November 2009
Dive Operations Plan

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0

INTR.ODUCTION ...............................................................................................................4

2.0

APPLICABILITY................................................................................................................4

3.0

REFERENCES ....................................................................................................................4

4.0

COMMUNICATIONS ........................................................................................................4

5.0
DIVING ASSIGNMENTS ..................................................................................................4
5.1
NAMES AND DUTIES OF ON-SITE DIVE TEAM MEMBERS................................ 4
6.0

TYPE OF WORK PLATFORM TO BE USED ..................................................................?

7.0
DESCRIPTION OF DIVING MISSION.............................................................................7
7.1
DIVE SCHEDULE ......................................................................................................... 7
DIVING MODE.............................................................................................................. 7
7.2
7.3
ROV MISSION............................................................................................................... 7
7.4
DIVINGWITHROV'S.................................................................................................. 8
NATURE OF WORK TO BE PERFORMED................................................................ 8
7.5
7.6
ANTICIPATED SURFACEANDUNDERWATERCONDITIONS ........................... 9
7.7
DIVE LIMITS................................................................................................................. 9
7.8
PRE-DIVEMEETING ................................................................................................. 10
7.9
DIVE PLAN ALTERATION ....................................................................................... 10
APPENDIX A: PERSONNEL QUALIFICATIONS ....................................................................11
APPENDIX B: AIR QUALITY CERTIFICATIONS...................................................................45
APPENDIX C: EQUIPMENT CERTIFICATIONS .....................................................................49

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page3 of82

PIHI- 09157

15

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS WESTFIELD
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 16 November 2009
Dive Operations Plan

1.0
INTRODUCTION
This Dive Operations Plan describes the approach, methods, and operational procedures specific
to salvage ofUSS WESTFIELD at Galveston, Texas by Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
(Phoenix). This plan meets the requirements associated with Section 30.A.17 of EM 385-1-1
(reference a).
2.0
APPLICABILITY
All personnel will be required to understand this plan and any referenced documents to gain
general awareness of the safety requirements associated with this project. Any person or
parties subject to this document shall contact the Diving Supervisor (or designate) with
questions or clarifications.
3.0

REFERENCES
(a) EM 385-1-1, US Army Corps of Engineers Safety and Health Requirements Manual
(b) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-10F, Emergency Contacts and Information Form
(c) Phoenix, OPS-DIVE-001M & 002M, Safe Diving and Operations Manual Vol. 1 & 2
(d) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-011P, Safety Leader Program
(e) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-007P, Job Safety Environmental Analysis Program

4.0
COMMUNICATIONS
For logistical and safety reasons, reliable communications are paramount throughout this
project. Mobile phone services provide a direct communications link between the diving crew
operating on the crane barge (dive platform) and personnel operations on support craft or land.
The dive platform captain can also utilize the vessel's VHF radio to communicate on a ship-toship and ship-to shore basis. For non-emergency communications, dive platform personnel
shall monitor VHF channel16 and 12. For direct contact see table below:
Name
Paul Hankins
Scott Andersen
LCDR Judd Southworth
Louis Petit
David Petit
5.0

Company and Position
DonJon
Phoenix Diving Supervisor
NAVSEA Representative
USACE Agency Diving Coordinator
USACE Alternate Diving Coordinator

Phone
908-482-0293
985-513-2643
571-228-7160
409-682-7552
409-766-3032

DIVING ASSIGNMENTS

5.1
NAMES AND DUTIES OF ON-SITE DIVE TEAM MEMBERS
The Phoenix Safe Diving and Operations Manual (Vol. 1), reference (c), provides
qualifications, minimum training standards, medical requirements, duty assignments and
responsibilities for personnel engaged in diving/ROY operations. The artifact recovery project

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Pa!!:e4 of82

PIHI- 09157

16

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS WESTFIELD
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 16 November 2009
Dive Operations Plan

requires a topside support and dive crew manning levels sufficient to complete the required
excavations/recoveries (Table 1).
Team Member I
Andersen, Scott
DeGrew, Chad
Erghott, Whitney
Kuch, Stanley
LaFont, Earl
Martin, Nathan
Veigel, Gary
5.1.1

Table 1: Phoenix Dive/ROV Team Members
Position
I Dive Physical I First Aid I
CPR
Exp.Date
Exp.Date
Exp.Date
Diving Supervisor
10/14/2010
11/13/2011 11/13/2011
Tender
6/15/2010
11/2010
11/2010
Tender
8/31/2010
6/26/2011
6/26/2011
Diver
10/21/2010
10/28/2010 10/28/2010
Diver
4/28/2010
11/13/2011 11/13/2011
Diver
7/28/2010
11/13/2011 11/13/2011
Diver
11/11/2010
1017/2011
1017/2011

Oxygen
Exp.Date
11/13/2011
11/13/2011
11/13/2011
11/13/2011
11/13/2011
11/13/2011
11/13/2011

Diving Supervisor (Diving)
•

The Diving Supervisor has the overall responsibility to ensure the WESTFIELD
operation is completed safely. These responsibilities include job planning,
coordination, record keeping, and proper response to any job-related emergency, as
well as knowledge of the appropriate governmental regulatory agency regulation.

•

The Diving Supervisor is responsible for ensuring daily safety meetings are held and
documented at the start of each day. These meetings shall address anticipated hazards
for that day and a review of applicable JSEAs. All employees involved in daily
operational activities must attend this meeting and sign the meeting record sheet.

•

The Diving Supervisor shall be made known to the vessel captain through personal
communication before the commencement of any diving operation.

• When diving operations are conducted in concert with ROV operations, the Diving
Supervisor shall exercise overall control of all underwater operations and shall be the
individual empowered to terminate operations to preserve the health and safety of
divers in the water.

5.1.2

Safety Leader
• Per the Phoenix Safety Leader Program (SAF-SAFE-OllP), reference (d), the Safety
Leader (SL) will directly represent the Diving Supervisor and, in so doing, ensures
adherence to Phoenix policies and procedures.
• The SL will be in and around the work performed, and in a position to detect and
correct an unsafe condition or at-risk behavior before it causes an injury or illness.
• The SL will routinely inspect job site, pre-shift, and regularly during shift, to ensure no
safety issues arise.

5.1.3

Life Support Supervisor
•

The Life Support Supervisor (LSS) is directly responsible to the Diving Supervisor for
the operation and control of the decompression chamber and associated equipment.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 5 of82

PIHI- 09157

17

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS WESTFIELD
Job No. 09157
•
5.1.4

Date oflssue: 16 November 2009
Dive Operations Plan

The LSS must be competent to carry out all the necessary emergency procedures,
which ensure safety of divers under his control.
Divers

• Per the Phoenix Safe Diving and Operations Manual C:vol. 1), reference (c), individuals
assigned the position of Diver must be medically certified 'fit to dive', have a thorough
knowledge of diving practice and theory, a full understanding of the diving equipment
in use, and of the tasks assigned.
•

5.1.5

Each Diver in carrying their responsibilities shall accomplish all tasks assigned by the
Diving Supervisor. In the event the Diver is assigned a task for which they do not
consider themselves qualified by either training and/or experience, they shall
immediately inform the Diving Supervisor.
ROV Senior Pilot/Technician

•

The ROV Senior Pilot/Technician shall carry out his normal duties and responsibilities
as detailed by management (i.e., Diving Supervisor) and applicable Safe
Practices/Operations Manuals.

•

The ROV Senior Pilot/Technician shall be prepared to manage the ROV team during an
emergency.

5.1.6

ROV Pilot/Technician
•

Completed the pre-requisites necessary to advance from the level of Entry-Level ROV
Pilot/Technician.

•

Shall carry out their normal duties and responsibilities as detailed by management and
applicable Safe Practices/Operations Manuals.

• Assist the supervision of launch and recovery operations and coordination of the dive
records video, audio, and written.
5.1.7

Standby Divers (rotate w/divers)
• Per the Phoenix Safe Diving and Operations ·Manual ('v'ol. 1), reference (c), individuals
assigned the position of Standby Diver shall possess the required training and
experience to enter the water at the diving station in order to render assistance to a
stricken diver.
•

5.1.8

The Standby Diver shall be capable and qualified to carry out all of the duties and
responsibilities of the diver as set forth above.
Tenders

•

Per the Phoenix Safe Diving and Operations Manual (Vol. 1), reference (c), the position
of Tender is assigned by the Diving Supervisor to continuously tend a diver.

•

Tenders shall devote full time and attention to tending their assigned diver from the
preparation of the dive until its completion, including any in-water decompression
required.

•

Tenders shall not be assigned any other task while the diver is underwater.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page6 of82

PIHI- 09157

18

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Date oflssue: 16 November 2009

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS WESTFIELD
Job No. 09157

6.0

Dive Operations Plan

TYPE OF WORK PLATFORM TO BE USED

Phoenix will conduct diving/ROY operations from a dive platform barge. The dive platform
barge provides a safe means for divers to enter and leave the water. Its open deck plan
provides adequate space to support readily accessible diving systems, ROV operations, and
salvage equipment. The dive platform barge will be moored alongside the large Donjon-Smit
crane barge that will be secured with a 4 point anchor moor. The dive platform will be secured
to the crane barge by a bow line, stem line, and various spring lines as needed.

7.0

DESCRIPTION OF DIVING MISSION

7.1
DIVE SCHEDULE
In general, Phoenix will conduct daily operations contingent upon USCG channel closure times
(a six-hour window); however, the Diving Supervisor will make all decisions on whether to dive
or not by thoroughly assessing all environmental factors. The daily operation will occur from
November 16th 2009 to November 25th 2009. The six hour window will be dependent
on tidal and current condition that will vary from day to day and the channel closure times.
The operations will take place in the Texas Shipping Channel and with the right-of-way of the
channel.
7.2

DIVING MODE
1. Surface supplied air operations shall be conducted iaw the Phoenix Safe Diving and
Operations Manual, reference (c).
2. The diving station shall provide an adequate quantity of air and suitable equipment
for supplying the mixture to the divers during the dive, decompression, and treatment,
if required. No mixed gas diving will be conducted, however, there will be a
decompression chamber on site.
3. Certification for the primary and back up air supplies are provided in Appendix B.
The Diving Supervisor will alternate between the two air supplies.
4. The diving station shall be suitably equipped to ensure a reserve supply of the
appropriate breathing air is readily available for use in th.e event ofemergency.
5. During all dives, the diver shall carry a fully charged bailout bottle of sufficient
capacity to return safely to the surface; reach another source of breathing gas; or be
reached by the Standby Diver equipped with another source ofbreathing gas.
6. The Diving Supervisor shall ensure that the diving equipment designated for use is:
A. Suitable for the planned diving operation.
B. Inspected before each dive and in good working order.
C. Subject to periodic testing. (The equipment certifications are provided in
Appendix C.)

7.3
ROV MISSION
The primary mission of the ROV is to provide observation capabilities, assistance, and quality
control measures during the diving and dredging phases of operations on WESTFIELD.
Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page7 of82

PIHI- 09157

19

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Date oflssue: 16 November 2009

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS WESTFIELD
Job No. 09157

Dive Operations Plan

Phoenix specifically configured the ROV, a VideoRay Pro, for its commercial diving
operations to quickly and effectively perform a variety of inspection and observation tasks.
The VideoRay will be equipped with scanning and imaging sonar for the low-visibility
environment, and an ultra-short baseline (USBL) positioning system. The USBL system will
allow the Diving Supervisor and ROV pilot to track the vehicle in real-time.
The ROV team consists of William Mauck, ROV Senior Pilot/Technician, and Evan Tanner,
ROV Pilot/Technician.
7.4

DIVING WITH ROY'S

7.4.1

The divers and a ROV may be working in the water at the same time. The use of an
ROV to monitor diver activities enhances the safety of manned diving operations.
Procedural guidelines (must be established before mutual operations begin. The
following items should be discussed by the divers, Diving Supervisor, and ROV
Pilot/Technicians before any dual diving/vehicle operations commence:
1. Establish a clear chain of command. All ROV operations must be coordinated through
the Diving Supervisor.
2. Set up two-way voice communications between the Diving Supervisor and ROV Pilot
(and the Vessel Master, iflive boating, or on DP operations). An ROV video monitor
should be set up at the diving station. If communications are lost, the ROV must
maintain position. Notify the diver immediately.
3. No crane operations will be conducted without having established communications
with the Diving Supervisor via 2 way radio or line of sight.
4. All ROV movements (launch, recovery, and movement around work site) must be
cleared through the Diving Supervisor if a diver is in the water.
5. The ROV must never approach a diver without warning. Neither should the diver
approach, handle, or ride a vehicle without first informing topside and receiving
permission. The diver should be aware that some ROVs may pose a serious electrical
shock hazard.
6. Care must be taken to ensure that the diver umbilical and ROV umbilical do not
become crossed. If the diver's hose and ROV umbilical become entangled, the ROV
must maintain station until the diver can survey the situation.
7. The diver should not use the ROY's tether as a down line.
8. If the ROV pilot cannot determine the position of the ROV due to poor visibility, high
currents, or any technical reason, they must inform the Diving Supervisor immediately

7.5

NATURE OF WORK TO BE PERFORMED

The primary goal of this project is to recover large artifacts associated with the gunboat USS
WESTFIELD (1862-1863). The tasking has Phoenix working cooperatively with NAVSEA,
DonJon, US Army Corps of Engineers, and PBS&J.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 8 of82

PIHI- 09157

20

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS WESTFIELD
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 16 November 2009
Dive Operations Plan

Phoenix will employ a series of USBL transponders to provide topside personnel accurate and
fast data to position vessel and diver operations. A series of strategically placed transponders
will allow the Diving Supervisor complete barge crane/hook and diver positioning for safer and
more efficient subsea artifact recovery. These transponders can also be used to accurately and
efficiently mark and relocate underwater targets (artifacts).
Table 2lists the principal tools and materials Phoenix divers are required to handle and/or
install during the artifact recovery project.

Table 2: Tools and Materials
Tools/Materials

4" Air Lift
120-300 PSI Jetting System
VideoRay

Sonardyne Scout USBL
BlueView D900 Sonar w/Tripod

Kongsberg MS 1000 Sonar w/Tripod

Description

Hand-held induction dredge used to remove
overburden and excavate soils
Water jetting system used to remove deep overburden
Remote-operated vehicle (ROV) for observation,
assistance and QC during diving and dredging
activities
USBL system for diver and vehicle (ROV) tracking
A dual frequency miniature multibeam imaging
system integrated into the ROV equipment or tripod
mounted to provide navigation and short-range highresolution imaging
Sector scanning sonar, tripod mounted, used to
provide navigation and obstacle avoidance/detection

ANTICIPATED SURFACE AND UNDERWATER CONDITIONS
7.6
Navigation charts and previous experience indicate that water depth across the project area
varies between 30 and 50 feet at mean low water. Water temperatures should average between
67 and 74 degrees Fahrenheit. The near surface current velocities range between 0.4-2.4 knots,
based on information provided by the Galveston Bay Operational Forecast System (GBOFS).
On site, the bottom visibility is expected to vary from zero (0) to less than five (5) feet. Sea
state, wind, and current velocities have a critical influence on safe diving operations. In
deciding whether to dive or not the Diving Supervisor must thoroughly assess all these factors
and determine if they present a hazard to the divers, equipment and topside personnel.
Topside conditions for November are typically favorable: the Galveston Bay surface winds
average 12.4 mph (south-southeasterly); average maximum air temperature is 78 degrees
Fahrenheit; and the average minimum air temperature is 66 degrees Fahrenheit.
7.7
DIVE LIMITS
Total bottom times are normally not to exceed the Phoenix Depth/Time Limits iaw reference
(c). The Diving Supervisor may permit exposures beyond these denoted time limits only under
special conditions, taking into consideration that such exposures increase the risk of
decompression illness. The maximum anticipated depth is 50 feet and the maximum
anticipated bottom time is 118 minutes.
Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page9 of82

PIHI- 09157

21

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Date oflssue: 16 November 2009

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS WESTFIELD
Job No. 09157
7.8

Dive Operations Plan

PRE-DIVE MEETING

The Diving Supervisor shall conduct a pre-dive meeting prior to each dive for all dive team
members concerning:
1. A description of the tasks to be undertaken, including a review of all data (i.e.,
drawings, photographs, etc) pertinent to the mission and equipment that are to be
installed as part of the mission.
2. On-site safety and emergency procedures.
3. A discussion of the AHA/JSEA and any unusual hazards or environmental conditions
likely to affect the safety of the diving operation. Job hazard reviews are to be
conducted for all phases of the work and procedures introduced to minimize these
hazards. Job hazard identification reports are to be recorded on the appropriate Phoenix
form.
4. Any modification to operating procedures necessitated by the specific task of operation.
5. At this briefing, the Diving Supervisor shall inquire into the dive team member's
current state of physical fitness, and indicate to the dive team members the procedure
for reporting physical problems or adverse physiological effects during and after the
dive.
7.9

DIVE PLAN ALTERATION

If for a.ny reason the dive pla.n is altered in mission, depth, personnel, or equipment, the DDC
will be contacted in order to review and accept the alteration prior to actual operation.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 10 of82

PIHI- 09157

22

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN (EMP)
FOR
USS WESTFIELD
ARTIFACT RECOVERY
GALVESTON, TEXAS

PHOENIX INTERNATIONAL HOLDINGS, INC.
www.phnx-intemational.com

This document and the information disclosed herein are the property of Phoenix International Holdings, Inc. This
document is confidential and is intended for the sole use ofthe person to whom it is delivered. Any reproduction,
transmission, distribution, or disclosure ofthis document, whether in whole or in part, to any person other than such
person and his authorized agents as provided by written agreement with Phoenix International Holdings, Inc., is
strictly prohibited. By receipt ofthis document, the person to whom this document is delivered agrees to return it
upon request.

PIHI- 09157

23

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Date oflssue: 10 November 2009

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

TABLE OF REVISIONS
REV.
No.

REV.
DATE

01

11/10/09

REV. DESCRIPTION

Emergency Management Plan (EMP)
for USS Westfield Artifact Recovery, Galveston, Texas

ISSUED
BY

CHECKED
BY

APPROVED
BY PHOENIX

JSS

PKL

PKL

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.

PIHI- 09157

24

Page2 of26

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 10 November 2009
Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
10.0
11.0
12.0
13.0
14.0
15.0
16.0
17.0
18.0
19.0
20.0
21.0
22.0
23.0

TI TR.ODUCTION .................................................................................................. 4
APPLICABILITY................................................................................................... 4
REFERENCES ....................................................................................................... 4
TERMS AND DEFINITIONS................................................................................ 5
AUTHORITIES AND RESPONSffiiLITIES ........................................................ 6
EMERGENCY RESPONSE PROCEDURES........................................................ 7
ACCIDENT REPORTING AND RECORD KEEPING ........................................ 7
MEDICAL FACILITIES ........................................................................................ 7
EMERGENCY INFORMATION AND CONTACTS........................................... 8
HAZARD ASSESSMENT AND SAFETY............................................................ 9
JOB SAFETY ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS (JSEA) .................................. 10
PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT ........................................................ 10
FALL PROTECTION........................................................................................... 11
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION ........................................................ 13
HOT WORK ......................................................................................................... 13
HAND AND POWER TOOLS ............................................................................ 14
RIGGING.............................................................................................................. 14
CRANES AND HOISTING EQUIPMENT ......................................................... 15
MOTOR VEHICLES, MACHINERY AND MECHANIZED EQUIPMENT .... 15
DIVE OPERATIONS ........................................................................................... 16
REMOTE OPERATED VECHICLE (ROV) OPERATIONS ............................. 16
FLOATING PLANT AND MARINE WORK ..................................................... 17
SEVERE WEATHER........................................................................................... 17

APPENDIX A: SAMPLE JSEA FORM........................................................................... 19
APPENDIX B: WESTFIELD ARTIFACT RECOVERY JSEAs............................22

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 3 of26

PIHI- 09157

25

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Date oflssue: 10 November 2009

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

1.0

Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

INTRODUCTION

This Emergency Management Plan details the safety measures that will be established and
maintained by Phoenix International Holdings, Inc. (Phoenix) during work performed on the
USS Westfield, in the Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas. Tnis plan meets the requirements
associated with Section 30.A.19 of EM 385-1-1 (reference (g)). This plan is based on (and is
supplemental to) the Phoenix safe practice manuals and other standards and regulations listed
as references below.
2.0

APPLICABILITY

All personnel will be required to understand this plan and any referenced documents to gain
general awareness of the safety requirements associated with this project. Any person or
parties subject to this document shall contact the Diving Supervisor (or designate) with
questions or clarifications.
3.0

REFERENCES
(a) OSHA 29 CFR 1926 Subpart I- Tools-Hand and Power
(b) OSHA 29 CFR 1926.251 -Rigging Equipment for Material Handling
(c) OSHA 29 CFR 1910.184- Slings
(d) OSHA 29 CFR 1926 Subpart N - Cranes, Derricks, Hoists, Elevators and Conveyors
(e) OSHA 29 CFR Part 1918, Safety and Health Regulations for Longshoring
(f) OSHA 29 CFR 1926.605, Marine Operations and Equipment
(g) EM 385-1-1, US Army Corps of Engineers Safety and Health Requirements Manual
(h) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-011P, Safety Leader Program
(i) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-004P, Accident/Incident Investigation and Reporting Program

G) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-010F, Emergency Contacts and Information Form
(k) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-031P, Hazard Assessment Program

(1) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-007P, Job Safety Environmental Analysis Program
(m) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-007F, Job Safety and Environment Analysis Form
(n) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-012F, Record of Safety Meeting
(o) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-005P, Personal Protective Equipment Program
(p) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-014P, Hearing Conservation Program
(q) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-016P, Fall Protection Program
(r) Phoenix, SAF-FACL-001P, Fire Safety and Prevention Program
(s) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-032P, Hot Work Fire Watch Program
(t) Phoenix, OPS-OPS-001P, Crane Operations
Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page4 of26

PIHI- 09157

26

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 10 November 2009
Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

(u) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-020P, Driver and Vehicle Operations Policy
(v) Phoenix, OPS-DIVE-OOlM & 002M, Safe Diving and Operations Manual Vol. 1 & 2
(w) Phoenix, SAF-SAFE-022P, Guidelines for Severe Weather

4.0

TERMS AND DEFINITIONS

The following terms, defmitions, and abbreviations are used in this document.
ADCI

Association of Diving Contractors International is a non-profit organization
dedicated to the establishment of industry-wide safe standards for commercial
diving.

ANSI

American National Standards Institute is a private non-profit organization that
oversees the development of voluntary consensus standards for products,
services, processes, systems, and personnel in the United States.

ASME

American Society of Mechanical Engineers is a professional body,
specifically an engineering society, focused on mechanical engineering.

CPR

Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is an emergency medical procedure for
a victim of cardiac arrest or, in some circumstances, respiratory arrest.

DOT

United States Department of Transportation is a Federal agency setting and
enforcing standards related to transportation and includes the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), and the Maritime
Administration (MARAD).

EMP

Emergency Management Plan

EPA

United States Environmental Protection Agency (sometimes USEPA) is a
Federal agency regulating chemicals and protect human health by
safeguarding the natural environment: air, water, and land.

GSM

Global System for Mobile communications is a standard for mobile network
operators.

JSEA

Job Safety Environmental Analysis

NFPA

National Fire Protection Association is charged with creating and maintaining
minimum standards and requirements for fire prevention and suppression
activities, training, and equipment, as well as other life-safety codes and
standards.
United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration is a Federal
Agency, under the Department of Labor. OSHA promotes the safety and
health of America's workers by setting and enforcing standards; providing
training, outreach and education; establishing partnerships; and encouraging
continual process improvement in workplace safety and health.

OSHA

PPE

Personal Protective Equipment

USACE

United States Army Corps of Engineers is a Federal agency and a major Army

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 5 of26

PIHI- 09157

27

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Date oflssue: 10 November 2009

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

command responsible for investigating, developing and maintaining the
nation's water and related environmental resources.
USCG

5.0

United States Coast Guard is a military, multi-mission, maritime service
within the Department of Homeland Security, involved in maritime law
enforcement, mariner assistance, search and rescue, and national defense.

AUTHORITIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
1. The Diving Supervisor responsibilities:
• The Diving Supervisor has the overall responsibility to ensure the Westfield project
is completed safely. These responsibilities include job planning, coordination, record
keeping, and proper response to any job-related emergency, as well as knowledge of
the appropriate governmental regulatory agency regulation.
• The Diving Supervisor is responsible for ensuring daily safety meetings are held
and documented at the start of each day. These meetings shall address anticipated
hazards for that day and a review of applicable JSEAs. All employees involved in
daily operational activities must attend this meeting and sign the meeting record
sheet.
• The Diving Supervisor shall be made known to the vessel captain through personal
communication before the commencement of any diving operation.
• Further guidance specific to diving operations is located in the Dive Safety Plan for
this project.

• When diving operations are conducted in concert with ROV operations, the
Diving Supervisor shall exercise overall control of all underwater operations
and shall be the individual empowered to terminate operations to preserve the
health and safety of divers in the water.
2. Safety Leader responsibilities:
• Per the Phoenix Safety Leader Program (SAF-SAFE-OllP), reference (h), the
Safety Leader (SL) will directly represent the Diving Supervisor and, in so doing,
will ensure Phoenix policies and procedures are adhered to.
• The SL will be in and around the work performed, and in a position to detect and
correct an unsafe condition or at-risk behavior before it causes an injury or illness.
• The SL will routinely inspect the job site, pre-shift and regularly during shift, to
ensure no safety issues arise.
3. Life Support Supervisor responsibilities:
• Per Phoenix' OPS-DIVE-OOlM (Vol. 1), reference (v), the Life Support Supervisor
(LSS) shall be appointed in writing having been confirmed as qualified and
competent for these duties.
• The LSS is directly responsible to the Diving Supervisor for the operation and
control of the decompression chamber and associated equipment.
Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 6 of26

PIHI- 09157

28

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 10 November 2009
Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

• LSS must be competent to carry out all the necessary emergency procedures, which
ensure safety of divers under his control. These include:
a.
b.

c.
6.0

Sound understanding of emergency procedures
Therapeutic treatment tables
Recognition of the basic decompression sickness symptoms and treatment
procedures

EMERGENCY RESPONSE PROCEDURES

In the event of an emergency involving an injury or other mishap requiring medical services,
Phoenix personnel shall follow the EMP to ensure that rapid action and response will control
the initial event and prevent further injury.
The Diving Supervisor, or ranking employee on the scene, shall issue instructions to all
employees, contractors and support personnel, and will be responsible for immediate response
and act as the Emergency Response Coordinator until relieved.
If additional assistance is needed beyond the capabilities of the Phoenix personnel on-site, the
local emergency medical services (EMS) shall be contacted for assistance. If deemed
appropriate, the injured person shall be transferred to shore via small boat for treatment at a
local hospital for additional care. If required, the local hospital can request an airlift to support
the rapid transfer of the injured person.
In the event of an emergency, the contact numbers listed in Table 1 should be used to
communicate as applicable to address the given situation.
Details regarding the emergency response procedures associated with this project are provided
within the JSEAs listed in Appendix B.
7.0

ACCIDENT REPORTING AND RECORD KEEPING

Phoenix' SAF-SAFE-004P Accident/Incident Investigation and Reporting Program, reference
(i), applies to all operations and activities on locations where Phoenix employees are present.
The program requirements apply to all employees at Phoenix sites, regardless of the worker's
employment status, previous experience, or qualifications. The Diving Supervisor will report
all accidents and injuries iaw Phoenix's Accident/Incident Investigation and Reporting
Program (SAF-SAFE-004P).
8.0

MEDICAL FACILITIES

Phoenix provides equipment and supplies for rendering first aid and medical assistance. First
aid shall be easily accessible and include personal protective equipment (PPE) (i.e., gloves,
gowns, face shields, masks and eye protection) to prevent occupational exposure to blood
borne pathogens.
All Phoenix operational personnel are regularly trained in first aid and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR). This training, coupled with experience gained through previous
operational projects, makes Phoenix personnel ideal candidates to provide on site standard first
aid treatment during emergencies.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 7 of26

PIHI- 09157

29

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Date oflssue: 10 November 2009

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

As mentioned earlier, Phoenix shall assign an LSS for the project to handle all cases of
decompression illness. This individual may also assist control of the on-site decompression
chamber. The LSS shall confer with the shift Diving Supervisor concerning all matters that
could effect initiation of decompression, treatment of decompression illness, and generally,
ensure t..lJ.e safety a..TJ.d \x1ell being of divers is not compromised.
If additional medical services are required, personnel should refer to the contact information in
Table 1 and the details contained within section 6.0 (Emergency Response Procedures) of this
plan.
9.0

EMERGENCY INFORMATION AND CONTACTS

Phoenix' SAF-SAFE-lOF Emergency Contacts and Information Form, reference G), provides a
record of emergency contact information and is posted at every Phoenix jobsite. The
information includes, but is not limited to:
Phoenix Supervisor & Designates
Scott Andersen- Diving Supervisor: 985-513-2643
Steve Schmidt- Technical Writer: 410-940-9049
Client Point of Contact
LCDR Judd Southworth- NAVSEA Rep: 571-288-7160
Emergency Medical Services (see Table 1)
Site-specific emergency equipment (see Table 1)
Fire, Police, and other support groups (see Table 1)
Table 1 provides a list of currently known emergency numbers.

Table 1: Emergency Nurnbers
Type

Medical (EMS)

Hyperbaric Chamber
Facilities

Facility/Agency!Funcfion
Mainland Medical Center
6801 Emmett F. Lowry Expwy
Texas City, TX 77591
Galveston EMS
Galveston Medical Transport

Telephone 1
409-938-5050

Telephone 2
409-938-5000

1-409-765-2524
1-409-744-2141

Air Med One, Galveston, TX

1-409-765-3703

Hermann Hospital, Life Flight

1-713-797-4014

Halo Flight, Corpus Christi, TX

1-361-265-0509

Divers Alert Network

(919) 684-9111

UTMB Galveston
Clear Lake Regional Medical Center
500 Medical Center Blvd
Webster, TX 77598

(409) 772-2222

1-713-704-3590

(800) 917-8906

281-332-2511

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.

Page 8 of26

Page 30 of26

PIHI- 09157

31

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157
Type

US Coast Guard
(Emergency Centers)

Date oflssue: 10 November 2009
Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

Facility/A2ency!Funcfion
Memorial Hermann-Texas Medical Center
6411 Fannin St.
Houston, TX
Marine Safety Unit (MSU) Galveston
Sector Command Center (24 HR)
3101 FM2004
Texas City, Texas 77591
U.S. Coast Guard
Station Galveston- Search and Rescue
1 Ferry Road
Galveston, Texas 77553
Houston District, Emergency Operations,
Duty Officer
Galveston Bolivar Ferries
SR 87, Galveston , TX

Vessel Traffic

Port Operations

Pilot Station Galveston-Texas City
1301 Pelican Island
Galveston, TX 77554
Pilot Station Houston
906 Harborside Drive
Galveston, TX 77550
Gulf of Mexico Pilots
3741 Memorial Blvd
Port Author, TX 77640
Port of Texas City
2425 Hwy 146 N
Texas City, TX 77590
Port of Texas City, Harbormaster
1560 Dock Rd, Texas City, TX
Port of Houston Authority
111 East Loop, N.
Houston, TX 77029

10.0

Telephone 1

Telephone 2

713-704-4268

713-704-4000

1-713-671-5113

http://www.uscg.mil
/d8/msuGalveston/d
efault.asp

1-409-766-5633

1-409-776-4718
(FAX)

1-713-671-5000

1-713-671-5113

409-795-2230

1-740-3336

Marine Ch 13/16

1-409-762-2011

Marine Ch 13/16

1-409-982-2961

1-409- 945-4461

http://www.railportt
c.com/default.html

1-409-945-5011

1-409-945-4461

1-713-670-2400

http://www.portofho
uston.com/maritime/
maritime.html

HAZARD ASSESSMENT AND SAFETY

The Diving Supervisor or designated Qualified Person shall conduct a Job Site Hazard
Assessment per the Phoenix SAF-SAFE-031P Hazard Assessment Program, reference (k), to
determine where hazards exist or may exist and could cause injury to employees. This
assessment determines the applicable standards, regulations, and Phoenix programs required to
perform the job and each task safely. The results of the hazard assessment will determine the
appropriate administrative and engineering controls necessary to protect personnel, equipment,
property, and the environment.
In addition, there are standard sets of safety programs in force on every Phoenix job such as:
Job Safety Environmental Analysis
Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 9 of26

PIHI- 09157

31

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Date oflssue: 10 November 2009

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

Personal Protective Equipment Program
Safe Diving Operations
Hot Work Fire Watch Program
Driver and Vehicle Operations Policy
Fire Safety and Prevention Program
Hearing Conservation Program
Guidelines for Severe Weather
A key component of the Phoenix safety program as a whole is the understanding that every
Phoenix employee and subcontractor has Stop Work Authority, in the event they recognize an
unsafe situation or condition.

11.0

JOB SAFETY ENVIRONMENTAL ANALYSIS (JSEA)

Phoenix's SAF-SAFE-007P Job Safety Environmental Analysis, reference (1), program requires
the development of a JSEA for each day's tasking. The JSEA provides a system of controls for
all personnel performing tasks and duties that may have the potential to cause harm to personnel,
property, environment, or a combination of the above. The JSEA is a tool that applies all
identified hazards to a management process that addresses each hazard at each step of the
proposed task. This process is documented on a SAF-SAFE-007F Job Safety and Environment
Analysis Form, reference (m). A sample JSEA Form is provided in Appendix A.
The content of the JSEA is delivered to the crew at the start of each shift during the safety
meeting. The safety meeting is documented and all crewmembers must sign the SAF-SAFE012F Record of Safety Meeting, reference (n).
The Westfield project will require numerous JSEAs. These JSEAs will be developed during the
project- as the Diving Supervisor (or other dive team personnel) recognizes potential hazards
and the need to address those hazards through the JSEA program. Some specific areas that will
likely require JSEAs during the Westfield project include:
Crane Operations
Shipboard

Safety

Rigging
Recompression Chamber Operations

12.0

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT

Phoenix' SAF-SAFE-005P Personal Protective Equipment Program, reference (o), establishes
requirements for use and selection of personal protective equipment (PPE). PPE is required
when administrative and engineering controls are insufficient in reducing potential hazards.
The hazard assessment and JSEA may determine PPE requirements beyond standard
practices.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 10 of26

PIHI- 09157

32

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 10 November 2009
Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

Supervisors are responsible for ensuring employees under their charge comply with this
policy.
All employees working in areas designated for required PPE, by either briefing or signs, are
required to wear the appropriate PPE, per reference (o), or other relevant regulations.
12.1

EYE AND FACE PROTECTION

All employees working in areas designated for eye or face protection are required to wear
approved ANSI Z87.1-2003 safety glasses, goggles, or face shields to help prevent eye and
face injuries, including those resulting from flying particles, molten metal, liquid chemicals,
acids or caustic liquids, chemical gases or vapors, or light radiation.
All employees are required to wear goggles, safety glasses, and welding or face shields in any
work area where welding, cutting, grinding, chipping or any task may create a flying hazard is
performed.
12.2

FOOT PROTECTION

All employees are required to wear well fitting safety shoes. All safety shoes or boots must
comply with ANSI Z41-1991/1999, to help prevent foot injuries, ankle injuries, slips, and falls.
No open-toed shoes or shoes with cutaway heels are permitted.
12.3

HAND PROTECTION

All employees are required to wear gloves, as appropriate to help prevent hand injuries,
including cuts, pu.11cture, bu.rns, che!Ilical exposu.re, or biological exposu.re.

12.4

HEAD PROTECTION

All employees working in designated hardhat areas are required to wear approved ANSI
Z89.1-2003 hard hats or safety helmets to help prevent head injuries, including those resulting
from falling objects, bumping the head against a fixed object, or electrical shock.
All employees required to wear hard hats must routinely inspect and properly care for their
hard hats.
12.5

LIFE JACKETS AND WORK VESTS

No employee is to work over water or outside vessel, platform, or ships side/deck boundary
without a safety harness and inertia reel or tended lifeline.
Deck personnel will wear approved life jackets whenever the Captain/Shipmaster, client, or
nature of the operation dictates.
12.6

HEARING PROTECTION

Phoenix provides hearing protection, per SAF-SAFE-014P Hearing Conservation Program,
reference (p), to guard against exposure to occupational noise levels that might cause noiseinduced hearing loss and to comply with various Federal and State requirements pertaining to
employee safety and health.

13.0

FALL PROTECTION

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 11 of26

PIHI- 09157

33

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Date oflssue: 10 November 2009

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

Per the Phoenix SAF-SAFE-016P Fall Protection Program, reference (q), fall protection
harnesses must be worn when there is a danger of falling from high exposed positions.
The free end of a lifeline must be attached to an approved connection point equal to or greater
than the safety factor of the lifeline and harness.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 12 of26

PIHI- 09157

34

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 10 November 2009
Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

Ensuring proper fire protection is available and is properly located at the site

16.0

HAND AND POWER TOOLS

All hand and power tool use shall be per USACE Safety and Health Requirements Manual,
reference (g), and OSHA safety regulations, 29 CFR 1926 Subpart I, Tools-Hand and Power,
reference (a).
1. Protective equipment, including personal protective equipment for eyes, face, head, and
extremities, protective clothing, respiratory devices, and protective shields and barriers,
shall be used when determined the activity presents a hazard.
2. Hand and power tools shall be inspected and maintained lAW the manufacturer
instructions.
3. All tools shall be determined to be in safe operating condition before each use.
4. All tools shall be operated within the manufacturer's guidelines (i.e., operating
pressures) and recommendations.
5. Electric power-operated tools shall either be of the approved grounded or doubleinsulated type.
6. Pneumatically powered tools shall have safety devices to prevent the tool from
becoming accidentally disconnected or discharged.

17.0

RIGGING

All rigging shall be per USACE Safety and Health Requirements Manual, reference (g), and
OSHA, references (b) and (c), and American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
standards (as applicable).
1. Rigging equipment shall be maintained and inspected, as specified by the manufacturer,
before use on each shift and as necessary during its use to ensure that it is safe.
Defective rigging shall be taken out of service.
2. Hooks, shackles, rings, pad eyes, and other fittings revealing excessive wear or that
have been bent, twisted, or otherwise damaged shall be taken out of service
3. Wire rope must be inspected, maintained, and removed from service if dangerous
deficiencies appear (e.g., kinking, crushing, un-stranding, bird-caging, main strand
displacement, core failure or protrusion between the outer strands).
4. Chain shall be inspected for wear and corrosion before initial use and weekly thereafter.
5. Fiber rope shall be inspected for visible damage, discoloration or rotting, or other signs
that cause doubt as to the strength of the rope before its use.
6. Slings and their fittings and fastenings shall be carefully inspected before use and
during each shift as deemed necessary.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 14 of26

PIHI- 09157

35

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 10 November 2009
Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

Longshoring operations include the loading, unloading, moving, or handling of construction
materials, equipment and supplies, etc. into, in, on, or out of any vessel from a fixed structure
or shore-to-vessel, vessel-to-shore or fixed structure or vessel-to-vessel.
Employees shall not be permitted to pass fore and aft, over, or around deck loads, unless there
is a safe passage.
The deck and other working surfaces shall be maintained in a safe condition.
20.0

DIVE OPERATIONS

Phoenix' OPS-DIVE-001M and 002M, Safe Diving and Operations Manual (Volume 1 & 2),
reference (v), provides codes of practice for all Phoenix diving operations and is a mandatory
requirement for all personnel involved with diving operations to be familiar with the
instructions contained therein.
Phoenix diving operations comply with all appropriate safety and security laws and regulations
such as those established by:
The Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA)
The United States Coast Guard (USCG)
Association of Diving Contractors International (ADCI) Consensus Standards for
Commercial Diving Operations
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
Department of Transportation (DOT)
All other applicable federal, state, and local safety and health regulations
Detailed information regarding the diving operations for this project is included in the Dive
Operations Plan for the USS WESTFIELD Artifact Recovery. Reference (v) section 1.13 also
provides additional guidance on conducting safe diving operations.
21.0

REMOTE OPERATED VECIDCLE (ROV) OPERATIONS

Phoenix' OPS-DIVE-001M and 002M, Safe Diving and Operations Manual (Volume 1 & 2),
reference (v), provides guidance directed to the use ofROVs within the commercial diving and
underwater industry and to provide general material intended to contribute to the highest
possible degree of safety during ROV operations.
Implementation of these guidelines will vary dependent upon the class ofROV used and it is
important to recognize that the great diversity and variety of vehicles make it difficult to
definitively state into which class a particular ROV may fall.
The ROV Phoenix plans using on the Westfield project is a Class 1 -Pure Observationvehicle. Pure observation vehicles are generally considered to be physically limited to video
observation and fitted with a video camera, lights, and thrusters. However, this is not a fixed
"rule" and these types of vehicles have evolved to have an ability to perform other tasks if
properly fitted with additional sensing devices.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 16 of26

PIHI- 09157

36

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157

Date oflssue: 10 November 2009
Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

To ensure safety and efficiency of the intended operation on USS Westfield, it is necessary to
take into consideration both the probable and unanticipated environmental considerations of
the intended work site. These considerations include:
Water conditions (i.e., visibility, temperature, etc)
Currents
Sea state and swell
Weather
Seabed characteristics
It is the responsibility of the ROV Supervisor to assess all available information before
deciding to conduct the ROV operation.

22.0

FLOATING PLANT AND MARINE WORK

22.1

COMMUNICATIONS

Communications are a key component of a safe workplace. At a minimum, the following
communication tools shall be used:
The Diving Supervisor shall ensure good voice communications between all
responsible parties.
The Emergency Contacts and Information Form shall be posted at appropriate locations
like the dive station, operations office, etc. See 9.0 for more detail.
The daily shift safety meeting shall be held and documented. See 11.0 for more detail.
22.2

WEATHER PRECAUTIONS

Due regard should be paid to any indications of impending weather changes, in particular
sudden wind shifts and/or gusts. See 23.0 for more detail.
22.3

PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUPMENT (PPE)

Protective equipment and safety appliances must always be worn whenever the nature of the
operation has the potential to, or creates a risk, to the health or general well being of the
individual. See 12.0 for more detail.
23.0

SEVERE WEATHER

Phoenix' SAF-SAFE-022P Guidelines for Severe Weather, reference (w), provides company
guidelines to assist management. Onshore and offshore personnel determine the appropriate
response when severe weather threatens Phoenix personnel or operations.
The on-site saferf meeting includes discussions of predicted weather patterns, escape route(s),

and safety zone(s).
The Phoenix Diving Supervisor will monitor the weather and update project personnel on a
daily basis of the expected weather conditions for the coming 24/48172 hour periods. In the
event of severe weather warnings, or indications of severe weather, the Supervisor shall obtain
regular weather updates and take appropriate precautions to protect personnel and property.
Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 17 of26

PIHI- 09157

37

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
USS Westfield
Job No. 09157
23.1

Date oflssue: 10 November 2009
Emergency Management Plan (EMP)

WEATHER CONTACT INFOMATION

Phoenix will obtain local weather forecasts and weather emergency data through the National
Weather Service's Houston/ Galveston National Weather Service Office, which is responsible
for the programming of FIVE Weather Radios: Galveston, Houston, College Station, Bay City
and Onalaska. In addition, the latest marine weather forecasts are also available online at
http://www.srh.noaa.gov/hgx/index.php.

Use or disclosure of information contained on this sheet is subject to the restrictions described on the title page of this document.
Page 18 of26

PIHI- 09157

38

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX 8
DEPARTURE(S) FROM SPECIFICATION

PIHI- 09157

39

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Summary of Departure from Specification Submitted:
No Departure from Specification was submitted.

PIHI- 09157

40

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX C
FIELD COMPLETED FWP AND OTHER QUALITY DOCUMENTS

PIHI- 09157

41

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
There are no QA forms. No FWP required for this project.

PIHI- 09157

42

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX D
INSPECTION AND REPAIR DRAWINGS

PIHI- 09157

43

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

•

,

...

AN,- roL
, l'- Doo'

"'b

LEC.. ;)or/

W D "'"" "
rT

0 ooR

l§J [§]
V /W

,_.C)

r-

-tE+

-<

....

[§_-J
..

•••

iiD
;!!

l<

!

,- ®
r

1
_, <

""'

..

JP

0

(j\

v

_!_

I-"'

rn
I

lcJ>I

JDRAWN
ENGINEER
APPROVED

PIHI- 09157

:·I

I
I

I

I

i Jl

I

b

I

r--

<: e

'--

...

oo!aI

James Schmidt

I
I
SWBS

I

t{o'

<§

J

!'I> A IIoU!!"

r,

---1
PROJECT TITLE:USS WESTFIELD Artifact Recoverv
JOB NO: 09157
ECONO:
FILE NAME:Barae Lavoot 09157.()()1

44

Barge Layout

S
H

EET

DRAWING NO:

09157-001

1 OF 1

UNDERWATER SOLUTIONS WO
Pho e nix Int e rnationa l Hold in2s , In t., 9301 Lari!O Drive Wesl, L1r2o. MD

PIHI- 09157

I

REV

DO NOT SCALE THIS DRAWING

20774 Phone 301.341.7800 I Fa301.499.0027 I ww·.ohn.t•il'llf'rnalional.com

44

USS WES1FIELD (STATESI1E#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

r

r-

r

...

C L E P...tl WATER

LAB

I

'WI!:

WIER

TNik-

/NJJL.

GA.LVESTON

GAY

+

rt-

SCRHNING
AREA

)

/

1-

\

f\LIE(I.. OX

f/fJ. I

i:l\s<: Ei"

t

Pun.P s

P:JLTE"

tJo:.

'{4J..--r'fP...

?->"1<+

,svc..-rt < W
......

/

-

'- TNiA e
ILT R
N. "l.

!>urnJIS

'l

FIL-n;ll, t
J(o.'f

L

\

4-

'

PIIOEliX
IMT •• MATIOfifAI.

DRAWN
I James Schmidt
ENGINEER I
APPROVED I
SIZE

A

UNDERWAT1!R SOLUTIONS WOR
P h onix Int e rnat i ona l Ho l dinu . I nc., 9 30 1

PHil- 09157

I

CAGE COOE

4ZW54

I

SVIBS

I

PROJECT TITLE: USS WESTFIELD Artifact Recove<V
JOB NO:09157
ECONO:
FILE NAME:BarQe MoolillQ 09157.002
SHEET

DRAWING NO:

09157-002

toFt

I

Barge Mooring

REV

DO NOT SCALE THIS DRAWING

Larao l)rh• e West, Larno, Ml> 20774 Phon e 30 1 .34 1.7800 I Fax 30 1.499.0027 I www.pbnx-int e rnati ona l .com

45

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX E
PHOTOGRAPHIC CHRONOLOGY

PIHI - 09157

46

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 1: Survey Craft R/V C-Wolf

Photograph 2: USACE Hopper Dredge Dock, Fort Point

PIHI - 09157

47

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 3: Tugs Positioning Barges

Photograph 4: Tending Diver

PIHI - 09157

48

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 5: Phoenix Diver on Ladder

Photograph 6: Recovering Dahlgren Cannon
PIHI - 09157

49

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 7: Recovering Iron Plate

Photograph 8: Deploying Electromagnet

Pili!- 09157

50

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 9: Electromagnet Recovering Unidentified Artifact

Photograph 10: Recovering the Steam Chest

PIHI - 09157

51

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 11: Recovering the Bearing Block

Photograph 12: Bearing Block on Deck
PIHI - 09157

52

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 13: Recovering the Ship’s Firebox

Photograph 14: Barge Evolution – Last Day of Diving
PIHI - 09157

53

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 15: Mounting Plexiglas to Crane for Protection from UXO

Photograph 16: Steel Plate Protecting Personnel in the Control Van
PIHI - 09157

54

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 17: Depositing Artifacts into Container

Photograph 18: Deploying the Smart Bucket

PIHI - 09157

55

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 19: GENMAR CONSTANTINE Lost its Engines on Approach – All Alerted

Photograph 20: USBL Fixed on Smart Bucket
PIHI - 09157

56

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 21: Tug Heeled over onto Dive Barge

Photograph 22: Rough Weather- Operations on 2 December, During >30 mph Winds and
5-Foot Seas. Tugs BROWN TIDE and BROWN WATER X Positioning Barges.

PII--II- 09157

57

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 23: Placing the Artifact Screen in a Container

Photograph 24: Recovering the Damaged Hydrophone/Mount

PIHI- 09157

58

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Photograph 25: Hydrophone Cable Damaged Overnight in Rough Seas

PIHI- 09157

59

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX F
PERSONNEL AND EQUIPMENT

PIHI- 09157

60

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

PERSONNEL
NAVSEA Representative:

LCDR George Southworth

Phoenix International Holdings, Inc.
Diving Supervisor:

Scott Andersen

Project Manager (Search)

William Mauck

Divers:

Stanley Kuch
Earl LaFont
Nathan Martin
Gary Veigel

Senior Technician (Search)

Evan Tanner

Tenders:

Chad DeGrew
Whitney Erghott

Technical Writer:

James Schmidt

C&C Technologies
Senior Surveyor:
Certified Hydrographer:
Junior Surveyor:

PIHI- 09157

Scott Croft
Jim Wade
Jacques Voorhies

61

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

EQUIPMENT
Phoenix Equipment

Quantity

NAVSEA Equipment

Quantity

300 ft. Umbilical

3

Remote Operated Vehicle

1

Air System

1

Fly Away Navigation System

2

Diver Air Radio

6

Marine GPS

2

Diver Heating Unit

1

Hp Air System

1

Subcontracted Equipment

UHF Radio

1

Port-a-let

Underwater Lights

3

USBL System

1

Underwater Video System

1

USBL Beacons

6

Remote Operated Vehicle

1

2D Imaging Sonar

2

PIHI- 09157

62

Quantity

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX G
SUBCONTRACTORS

PIHI- 09157

63

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

SUBCONTRACTORS
Vender and Address

Service or Equipment Supplied

Phone Numbers

David Kraige
KCF Technologies
112 W. Foster Avenue
State College, PA 16801

Smart Tether

Voice: 814-867-4097
Fax: 814-690-1579
Cell: 814-933-9428
E-mail: dkraige.kcftech.com

Seatronics, Inc.
719 Highway 90E
New Iberia, LA 70560

BlueView P900E-20 Sonar
EXC-300 Extender Bottle
800 Ft. Sonar Cable

Voice: 337-365-8335
Fax: 337-365-8705
E-mail: newiberia@seatronicsgroup.com

Air Cartage Express,
LLC
P.O. Box 16678
Washington, DC 20041

Return Transport of GFE shipping
containers

Voice: 703-464-5960

PIHI- 09157

64

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX H
CONSUMABLES INCLUDING CORRODED OR LOST ITEMS

PIHI- 09157

65

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CONSUMABLES
Item

Quantity

Unit

BAGS
Garbage bags, large
Trash bags
Zip lock bags

2 each
3 each
1 each

BATTERIES
AAA batteries

8 each

TAPE
Black duct tape
Grey duct tape

4 roll(s)
2 roll(s)

ROPE AND LINE
1/2 inch poly line
1/4 inch poly line

1 roll(s) 250 ft.
1 roll(s) 1200 ft.

OFFICE EQUIPMENT
Computer disk (DVD)

2 each

PIHI- 09157

66

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX I
JOB LOG

PIHI- 09157

67

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

JOB LOG
CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
11/12/09
0945 Phoenix Technical Writer departed home facility for Galveston, Texas.
1430 Arrived Galveston, Texas.
1600 Contacted C&C Technologies to confirm the bathymetric survey
schedule.
1930 Met LCDR G.T. Southworth and discussed changes to the survey
parameters within the USACE boat basin.
11/13/09
0600 Met with LCDR G.T. Southworth and C&C Technologies to discuss
survey strategy.
0730 Departed hotel for Galveston Yacht Club and R/V C-WOLF.
0820 Departed yacht club dock for the WESTFIELD wreck site.
0845 Trouble shooting sound velocity profile (SVP) files.
1100 Returned to Galveston Yacht Club and retrieved corrections for the
corrupt SVP files.
1300 R/V C-WOLF departed the Galveston Yacht Club for the Westfield
survey area.
1330 Deployed magnetometer, side scan sonar, multibeam and single beam
echo sounding units; observed heavy commercial vessel traffic.
1700 Departed WESTFIELD for the USACE Hopper Dredge Dock and boat
basin.
1748 Deployed side scan sonar, multibeam and single beam echo sounding
units. Survey lines ran parallel to USACE Hopper Dredge Dock.
1839 Started survey (multibeam echo sounding ONLY) inside the USACE
boat basin.
1910 Depart job site. Completed the Westfield and USACE survey areas and
headed back to the Galveston Yacht Club, backed up the data collection
and demobilized R/V C-WOLF.
2000 Departed Galveston Yacht Club for hotel.
11/14/09
0600 Departed hotel for Galveston Yacht Club.
0600 Assisted demobilization of R/V C-WOLF. Navigation crew departed for
Houston, IAH.
0800 Departed Galveston Yacht Club for hotel.
1200 Dive crew departed Bayou Vista for Freeport, Texas.
1630 Discussed conducting additional survey work to correct for cross track
errors in sonar data resulting from high current velocities in the Texas
City Channel.
2000 All diving hands (Dive and Navigation) in Freeport.
11/15/09
0700 Dive crew departed hotel for load out location in Freeport.
0800 Phoenix Technical Writer departed for Galveston Yacht Club.
Dive crew held safety meeting in Freeport.
0830 Dive crew begins load out of gear onto Donjon-Smit barges.

PIHI- 09157

68

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
0900 Technical Writer and survey crew mobilized R/V C-WOLF at the
Galveston Yacht Club.
1130 Departed Galveston Yacht Club for the WESTFIELD site.
1230 Started run lines on the WESTFIELD site – magnetometer and side scan
sonar only.
1600 Completed run lines on WESTFIELD, started working new run lines to
cover barge anchor points.
Loaded dive gear and secured kit onto barge. Phoenix
Diving/Navigation personnel departed Freeport and underway to
Galveston.
1700 Completed all run lines and departed site for Galveston Yacht Basin.
1800 Started processing data and digitizing targets.
2200 Completed data processing on WESTFIELD.
11/16/09
0800 Working on dive plan, hazard analysis, and emergency plan. Phoenix
personnel standing by.
11/17/09
1030 Phoenix navigation personnel met Dave Kraige, KCF, and discussed
applying the Smart Tether System.
1130 Phoenix personnel departed the hotel for the USACE Hopper Dredge
Dock at Fort Point.
1230 Notified that no diving would be taking place due to weather concerns.
1300 Met with all pertinent parties to discuss diving plan and specific
archaeological concerns.
1500 Phoenix personnel on standby.
11/18/09
1030 Phoenix personnel departed hotel for USACE Hopper Dredge Dock.
1130 Underway on M/V FLING to Donjon-Smit barges.
1200 Arrived on Donjon-Smit barges and set up dive station.
1300 Held safety meeting.
1347 Diver #1, Martin, left surface to perform initial survey.
1445 Diver #1 reaches surface, No D, OK. 50/60.
1450 Removed smart tether from dive umbilical due to inadequate length,
barge re-set an anchor, and waited on ship traffic to clear the channel.
1546 Diver #2, LaFont, leaves surface to continue survey.
1611 Diver #2 returns to surface, No D, OK.
1630 Current running too fast to continue operations, deciding to breakdown
for the day and begin at 0800 in the morning.
1700 Onboard M/V FLING for transport to USACE Hopper Dredge Dock.
1800 In transit to hotel.
11/19/09
0730 In transit to USACE Hopper Dredge Dock.
0745 Onboard M/V FLING and ready to get underway to Donjon-Smit barge.
0815 M/V FLING underway to barge.
0845 On barge and setting up dive station.
0900 Safety meeting.

PIHI- 09157

69

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
0930 Set-up for diving, contacting ESSM about fuel tank for the jet pump.
Waiting on barge.
1130 Notified that no diving would be taking place due to rough seas.
1155 Notified to stand by, possibly diving.
1230 Moving dive barge to outside of spread.
1300 Barge tied up, setting up to dive.
1347 Diver #3, Veigel, leaves surface to begin salvage.
1420 Sea state too rough for crane operations.
1426 Diver #3 returns to surface, No D, OK. 50/40.
1430 Secured dive station.
1600 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
1630 In transit to hotel.
11/20/09
0800 Supervisors meeting onboard M/V FLING.
1200 Meeting over. Standing by on weather.
11/21/09
0830 Departed hotel for USACE dredge dock.
0930 Instructed to be back at 1130 due to weather. Returned to hotel.
1110 Departed hotel for USACE dredge dock.
1130 All hands onboard M/V FLING and standing by.
1510 Onboard Donjon barge and setting up dive station.
1520 Safety meeting.
1545 Ready to dive, waiting on barge.
1655 Diver #4, Kuch, leaves surface to locate and begin salvage effort on
cannon.
1750 Notified that we need to secure for ship traffic.
1754 Diver #4 returns to surface, No D, OK, 50/60. Cannon located and
marked with buoy.
1830 Secured dive station.
1900 Phoenix personnel transferred to M/V FLING for transport back to
USACE dredge dock.
2000 Arrived at USACE dredge dock.
2030 Phoenix personnel in transit to hotel.
11/22/09
1030 Phoenix personnel in transit to USACE dredge dock.
1100 On board M/V FLING for transport to work site.
1130 On location at site. Safety meeting.
1145 Set up dive station.
1215 Ready to dive, waiting on barge.
1345 Barge in position, port control notified; dressing divers.
1357 Diver #5, Martin, leaves surface to salvage cannon.
1450 Diver on deck to fix communications.
1459 Diver back in water, working jet nozzle over to cannon.
1536 Diver #5 returns to surface, No D, OK, 50/100. Started jetting work to
recover cannon.
PIHI- 09157

70

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
1557 Diver #6, Lafont, leaves surface to continue excavating cannon for
recovery.
1715 Cannon slung up and ready for recovery.
1723 Diver #6 returns to surface, No D, OK, 50/90.
1730 Cannon clear of the water and being placed in an artifact container.
1800 Secured dive station. Waiting on transportation to USACE dredge dock.
2000 Phoenix personnel in transit to hotel.
11/23/09
0530 Phoenix personnel departed hotel for USACE dredge dock.
0600 On board M/V FLING and underway to work site.
0700 On location at site. Set up dive station.
0730 Safety meeting.
0745 Ready for diving, waiting on barge.
0815 Diver #7, Veigel, leaves surface to continue archeological salvage.
0923 Recovered an artifact. Diver on deck.
0943 Diver #8, Veigel, back in the water.
1000 Recovered artifact – iron plate.
1004 Diver #8, returns to surface, No D, OK, 50/100.
1005 Notified that ship channel is re-opening, secured dive station.
1010 Marrying Smart Tether umbilical into dive hose. Standing by for ship
channel to close.
1356 Diver #9, Kuch, leaves surface to continue salvage.
1455 Recovered two (2) artifacts to surface.
1528 Secured line to artifact (steam chest) for recovery on the next dive.
1534 Diver #9 returns to surface, No D, OK, 50/100. Waiting on barge
personnel to set up electromagnet.
1645 Electromagnet lowered onto site.
1655 Electromagnet at – 40 feet, jumping diver.
1658 Diver #10, Martin, leaves surface to line up magnet.
1705 Notified that we need to pick up divers due to ship traffic incoming in
the channel.
1707 Diver #10 returns to surface, No D, OK, 50/10.
1710 Secured dive station.
1745 Phoenix personnel waiting for transport to USACE dredge dock.
1815 Arrived USACE dredge dock.
1830 In transit to hotel.
11/24/09
0430 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
0450 Phoenix personnel onboard M/V FLING for transport to work site.
0540 M/V FLING underway to worksite.
0615 Arrived at worksite, setting up dive station.
0630 Safety meeting.
0645 Ready to dive, waiting on barge to move into position and deploy
magnet.
PIHI- 09157

71

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
0738 Diver #11, Lafont, leaves surface to locate artifact prior to deploying
electromagnet.
0757 Artifact located, diver on deck while deploying magnet.
0808 Diver back in water to center magnet on artifact.
0837 Diver has magnet set and is on deck for recovery of artifact.
0845 Magnet failed to recover target.
0854 Diver back in water to evaluate target and potential rigging points.
0916 Diver #11 returns to surface, NoD, OK, 50/100. Lines attached to a
secondary artifact for recovery.
0920 Crane down due to lightening, waiting on weather.
1045 Ship channel opening up at 1100. Waiting on a scheduled ship
movement.
1144 Diver #12, Veigel, leaves surface to re-locate artifact and make ready for
rigging.
1315 Steam chest located and re-rigged.
1316 Diver #12 returns to surface, NoD, OK, 50/100.
1320 Recovered steam chest.
1402 Diver #13, Kuch, leaves surface to locate condenser and jet it out for
recovery.
1445 Condenser located. Starting to jet clear.
1539 Diver #13 returns to surface, NoD, OK, 50/100. Moving barge into
position to deploy electromagnet on condenser (actually part of the
firebox).
1610 Diver #14, Martin, leaves surface to continue jetting firebox for
recovery.
1749 Diver #14 returns to surface, NoD, OK, 50/100. Firebox jetted for
recovery.
1750 Secured dive station.
1815 Travelling back to USACE dredge dock.
1840 In transit to hotel.
11/25/09
0700 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
0715 Onboard M/V FLING at USACE dredge dock.
0740 Underway to site.
0810 Arrived at site, fueling, setting up dive station while waiting for traffic to
clear the channel.
0845 Safety meeting.
0920 Ship traffic clear, dive plan set, dressing diver.
0945 Diver #15, Lafont, leaves surface to locate bearing block.
1005 Bearing block located, line run to it and starting to jet out.
1050 Bearing block jetted out, moving to condenser.
1124 Diver #15 returns to surface, NoD, OK, 50/100.
1140 Waiting on direction.

PIHI- 09157

72

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
1205 Dressing diver to attempt to set electromagnet for recovery of bearing
block.
1216 Diver #16, Veigel, leaves surface to set electromagnet for bearing block
recovery.
1301 Diver #16 returns to surface, No D, OK, 50/50.
1312 Bearing block on deck, successful magnet recovery.
1333 Diver #17, Veigel, leaves surface to prep bearing block for recovery.
1412 Electromagnet set on condenser.
1415 Diver #17 returns to surface, No D, OK, 50/100.
1427 Diver #18, Kuch, leaves surface to fine tune electromagnet alignment
and attempt to set an additional support strap on the condenser.
1508 Diver on deck for ship traffic.
1536 Diver #19, Kuch, back in water to set electromagnet.
1629 Diver #19 returns to surface, No D, OK. 50/90. Magnet set and strapped
down. Waiting on ship traffic to clear the channel to attempt to recover
the condenser.
1645 Remains of condenser on deck, top has ripped off. Waiting on outbound
ship traffic to retrieve beacons and scrap basket.
1735 Cleared to dive, dressing diver.
1746 Diver #20, Martin, leaves surface to recover beacon and scrap basket.
1752 Picking up divers due to ship traffic.
1754 Diver #20 returns to surface, No D, OK, 50/10.
1800 Secured dive station.
11/26/09
0745 In transit to USACE pier.
0800 Onboard M/V FLING.
0845 Underway to site.
0930 Arrived at work site, setting up dive station.
1000 Recovered acoustic beacons.
1100 Secured dive station, began demobilization.
1100 Preparing 2-inch thick Plexiglas to protect crane during operations.
1200 Preparing steel plates for unexploded ordnance (UXO) shelter.
1300 Completed demobilization, Phoenix dive personnel underway to USACE
pier.
1330 Standing by as Donjon crew completes UXO shelter.
1345 Dropped two cross beam markers, one from the outer end of the dive
barge and one off the bucket barge.
1400 Started artifact recovery using electromagnet.
1420 Started sector scan to assist crane operations and positioning.
1530 Part of the fire box came up with the electromagnet.
1610 UXO came up with the electromagnet.
1650 Breaking down equipment.

PIHI- 09157

73

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
1730 Secured navigation station. M/V FLING departed barge for USACE
dredge dock.
1800 Phoenix survey crew off and headed to hotel.
11/27/09
0600 Phoenix navigation crew departed hotel.
0630 Onboard M/V FLING.
0700 Departed USACE dredge dock, underway to site.
0735 Arrived at work site, setting up survey station.
0815 Deployed tripod with scanning sonar.
0820 Electromagnet deployed, starting at grid #119.
1000 Tested the VideoRay with BlueView sonar from one container barge.
1100 Waiting on removal of unexploded ordnance.
1200 Moving electromagnet for removal to Freeport.
1300 Preparing the environmental bucket.
1400 Placed A Beacon on the sector scan tripod.
1530 Tanker, GENMAR CONSTANTINE (Monrovia), lost engines as
passing, all on board put on alert.
1535 Started Smart Bucket operations. First load grabbed grid #104.
1700 Secured navigation station and in transit to hotel.
11/28/09
0600 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
0615 Standing by for crew boat M/V FLING.
0700 Onboard crew boat and headed to work site.
0800 On site and waiting on container/dive barges before tying up.
0900 Onboard barge and setting up navigation station.
1000 Used Smart Tether to cross-validate position of sector scan tripod and
USBL.
1030 Smart Bucket operations begin.
1020 Completed collection of position data with Smart Tether.
1200 Bucket operations suspended due to possible UXO (cannon ball).
1245 Resumed bucket operations.
1420 Rebar H came up in grid #105.
1500 Worked on sonar tripod to add BlueView head and electronics bottle.
1620 Completed 24 bucket operations (grids 104, 105, 124, and part of 106
and 123).
1625 Secured navigation station.
1730 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
1800 In transit to hotel.
11/29/09
0530 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
0545 Onboard M/V FLING, standing by.
0630 Departed USACE dredge dock to work site.
0700 On site, standing by and waiting to come along side the barges.
0730 Tug ran up on dive barge and heeled over about 40 degrees.
0830 Onboard dive barge and looking over the equipment for damage.
PIHI- 09157

74

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
0930 Deployed BlueView sonar on tripod.
0945 USBL detached from bucket.
1130 Waiting to clear unexploded ordnance before continuing bucket
operations.
1145 Waiting on diver to clear rudder on tug.
1200 Phoenix personnel on standby.
1230 Current changed direction, picked up, and pulled sonar tripod off the
bottom. Attempted to recover tripod, but current too strong.
1300 Completed grids 106 and 123.
1420 Completed grid #107.
1430 Waiting on archaeologists to change out screens in containers.
1619 Completed grid 122, found belt buckle, porthole, and unidentified
artifacts.
1700 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
11/30/09
0730 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
0800 Met with Donjon and J&S. Weather too poor, standing down.
0900 Returned rental car to Hertz in League City.
12/1/09
0700 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
0730 Arrived USACE dredge dock and boarded M/V FLING.
0830 Informed seas to dangerous for work. Told to stand by until 1200.
1100 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
1130 Arrived at pier and boarded M/V FLING.
1200 Donjon crew departed on tug to access weather/sea state
1230 Departed M/V FLING for hotel.
12/2/09
0730 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
0800 Met with Donjon and J&S on board M/V FLING. Standing by due to
weather.
0900 Standing by off the site waiting on the barge crew to access the situation.
1000 Barge crew load testing crane.
1100 Phoenix transferred from M/V FLING to crane barge via Navy RHIB.
1115 Phoenix crew set up navigation station. Providing navigation services.
1230 On standby due to unexploded ordnance.
1330 Resumed Smart Bucket operations.
1420 Smart Bucket operations completed grids 108 and 121. Operations
terminated due to weather.
1500 Transferred from barge via Navy RHIB to M/V FLING.
1530 In transit on board M/V FLING to USACE dredge dock.
1600 Depart USACE dredge dock and in transit to hotel.
12/3/09
0600 In transit to USACE dredge dock.
0630 Arrived, onboard M/V FLING.
0730 M/V FLING departed USACE dredge dock for work site.
0800 Arrived at work site, transferred to Navy RHIB and crane barge
PIHI- 09157

75

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
0830 Setting up navigation station.
0900 Removed BlueView and tether from tripod mount.
1000 Crane/bucket operations completed grid #120.
1120 Crane/bucket operations completed grid #119.
1145 Operations standing by as Donjon crew repairs crane.
1240 Crane/bucket operations resumed. Working grid #118.
1345 Crane/bucket operations completed grid #118.
1400 Donjon crew with dive barge/crane recovered hydrophone and mount.
1447 Started working crane/bucket operations on grid #130.
1540 Crane/bucket operations completed grid #130, moving to grid #131.
1600 Daily operations completed, secured navigation station.
1630 In transit on board dive and container barge via tug to barge dock.
1700 Arrived at barge dock and transferred to USACE dredge dock.
1720 In transit to hotel.
12/4/09
0600 Stand by for weather.
0900 Steve Schmidt requested to depart project.
1100 Dropped off Steve Schmidt at HOU airport in a snow storm.
1800 Stand down at Hotel Galvez.
12/5/09
0700 In transit to USACE pier.
0715 Arrived, on board Fling.
0835 M/V FLING departed USACE dredge dock for work site.
0925 Arrived at work site, transferred to Navy RHIB and crane barge.
0930 Setting up navigation station. Winch barge on to location for grids
131,132,133 and 130.
0937 Commence Bucket operations with grab #116 in grid #131.
1034 Finished grid #131; started grid #132.
1200 Continue recovering artifacts from grid #132.
1357 Completed grid #132, started grid #133.
1533 Finished grid #133; started grid #139.
1540 Assist in deploying Cable Arm scanning sonar tripod.
1641 Tripod in on bottom Scanning with Sonar.
1614 Complete grid #139 at pick #158 and go back to grid #133 with pick
#159.
1640 Secure dredge ops at pick #160 in grid #132.
1700 Onboard M/V FLING. Completed grids 131, 132, 133, 139.
1705 M/V FLING departs work site for USACE dredge dock.
1725 M/V FLING tied up, depart for Hotel Galvez.
12/06/09
700
In transit to USACE dredge dock.
0715 Arrived, on board M/V FLING.
800
M/V FLING departed USACE dredge dock for work site.

PIHI- 09157

76

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
830
M/V FLING on site. Container and dive barges returning to channel.
Winds SE at 20 to 25kts, seas choppy and currents are too high for
securing barges to dredge barge. Stand by on M/V FLING on location.
930
M/V FLING at USACE dredge dock. Stand by until 1200 for a final
decision.
1200 Weather building, stand by for weather.
1245 At Hotel Galvez, stand by for weather.
12/07/09
0700 Departed Hotel Galvez for USACE dredge dock.
0715 Onboard M/V FLING.
0800 Departed USACE dredge dock for the work site.
0830 Transfer to dredge barge via RHIB.
0849 Dredge operations commence with bucket #162 in grid #109 and grid
#110.
0945 Completed grid #109, continue dredging in grid #110.
1038 Completed grid #110 with bucket #175. Started grid #111.
1151 Completed grid #111 with bucket #184.
1215 Secure for lunch and wait for rain squalls to pass.
1315 Rain showers have passed, winch the barge into position for a new grid
box.
1342 Dredge bucket #185 in grid #140.
1442 Last bucket for the day is #192 with a cannonball in grid #140. Total of
four grids completed.
1530 Onboard M/V FLING.
1545 M/V FLING at USACE dredge dock; departed for Hotel Galvez.
12/08/09
0700 Departed Hotel Galvez for USACE dredge dock.
0715 Onboard M/V FLING.
0800 Departed USACE dredge dock for the work site.
0830 Transferred to dredge barge via RHIB.
0840 Winch into location for grids 136, 137, 138, 134, 135 and 117. WX is
foggy with ~100m visibility, winds South at 10 to 20 kts. Seas a light
chop and building.
0905 Started dredge operations with bucket #193 in grid 138.
138 done
1001 Completed grid #138 with bucket pick #199.
1007 Started grid #137 with bucket pick #200.
137 done
1059 Completed grid #137 with bucket pick #205. Nothing on the 6” screen.
1106 Started grid #136 with bucket pick #206.
136 done
1140 Completed grid #136 with bucket pick #211. Break for lunch on M/V
FLING.
1301 Started grid #134 with bucket pick #207.
134 done
1340 Completed grid #134 with bucket pick #217.
1347 Started grid #135 with bucket pick #218.
135 done
1416 Completed grid #135 with bucket pick #223.
PIHI- 09157

77

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
1423 Started grid #117 with bucket pick #224.
117 done
1459 Completed grid #117 with bucket pick #229.
1505 Started grid #116 with bucket pick #230.
116 done
1531 Completed grid #116 with bucket pick #235.
12/09/09
0700 Departed Hotel Galvez for USACE dredge dock.
0715 Onboard M/V FLING. Standing by for weather. Winds and seas too
high.
1000 SUPSALV and Rick Thiel onboard; weather still too rough for
operations.
1200 Weather improving, standing by.
1240 Departed USACE dredge dock for the work site.
1248 First pick made before we arrived on site, bucket #236 in grid #113 and
picked one bucket from grids 237 in grid 114 and 238 in grid #115.
1315 Transferred to dredge barge via RHIB.
1320 Operational stand by for more dredge picks.
113 done
1344 Completed grid #113 with bucket pick #243.
1348 Started grid #114 with pick 244. Grid 114 started before we boarded at
1253 with pick #237.
114 done
1404 Completed grid #114 with bucket pick #248.
1412 Started grid #115 with pick 249. Grid #115 started at 1258 with bucket
pick #238.
115 done
1443 Completed grid #115 with bucket pick #253.
1505 Started grid # 112 with bucket pick #254.
1536 Completed grid #112 with bucket pick #259.
1600 Secured dredge operations.
1610 Transferred to M/V FLING via RHIB.
1640 M/V FLING underway to the USACE dredge dock.
1700 Departed the USACE dredge dock for the Hotel Galvez.
12/10/09
0700 Departed Hotel Galvez for USACE dredge dock.
0715 On board M/V FLING. Stand by for weather. Winds and seas too high.
0800 Waiting for the container barge to on load empty containers.
1240 Departed USACE dredge dock for the work site.
1305 Transferred from M/V FLING to dredge barge via RHIB.
1310 ESSM generator not running smoothly, secure and stand by for ESSM
personnel to rectify.
1345 Start Grid #102 with bucket pick #260.
102 done
1426 Completed grid #102 with bucket pick #267.
1431 Started grid #103 with bucket pick #268.
1520 Started grid #125 with bucket pick #276.
125 done
1605 Completed grid #125 with bucket pick #284.
103 done
1612 Completed grid #103 with bucket pick #285.
1624 Start grid #128 with bucket pick #286.
PIHI- 09157

78

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
128 Done 1649 Completed grid #128 with bucket pick #291.
1655 Stopped dredge operations, prepared to transit to M/V FLING via RHIB.
1715 Departed the dredge barge for M/V FLING via RHIB.
1720 Onboard the M/V FLING.
1745 Depart work area for USACE dredge dock.
1800 Arrived at the USACE dredge dock; departed for the Hotel Galvez.
12/11/09
0700 Stand by for weather.
0818 Scott Andersen calls from Freeport to verify what SUPSALV equipment
stays on the dive barge while his crew de-mobes the dive spread.
1245 Depart the Hotel Galvez.
1300 On M/V FLING, underway for the worksite.
1320 Transferred to the dredge barge via RHIB.
1330 Phoenix personnel running both WinFrog and Cable Arm software.
1405 Winch dredge barge into position.
1500 Repositioned barge for expected overnight weather.
1600 On board M/V FLING.
1645 Departed USACE dredge dock for the Hotel Galvez.
12/12/09
0700 Arrived on M/V FLING at the USACE dredge dock.
0800 Underway for the work location.
0830 Transferred to the dredge barge via RHIB. Phoenix personnel operating
WinFrog and Cable Arm software.
0845 Container barge to transit to work site from Galveston Channel.
0906 Container barge tug has lost all steering. Stand by tug is underway to
assist.
0910 Standby tug Brown Water has control of the container barge. Brown
Tide X headed back to the channel to repair steering.
0915 Container barge alongside.
0920 ESSM generator dies.
0942 Generator filter changed, operational.
1035 Started grid #129 with bucket pick #292.
1100 Deployed scanning sonar tripod.
129 done
1136 Completed grid #129 with pick #298.
1145 Started grid #141 with bucket pick #299.
141 done
1227 Completed grid #141 with bucket pick #304.
1240 Break for lunch.
1330 Moving barge for grids 144, 151, 152, 153.
1411 Started grid #152 with bucket pick #305.
1415 Deployed scanning sonar. Current tipped over the tripod, recover.
152 done
1443 Completed grid #152 with bucket pick #310.
1450 Shifting container sieves.
1508 Started grid #153 with bucket pick #311.
153 done
1540 Completed grid #153 with bucket pick #315.
PIHI- 09157

79

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
1545 Started grid #151 with bucket pick #316.
1612 Deployed scanning sonar.
1615 Completed grid #151 with bucket pick #322.
1525 Started grid #144 with bucket pick #323.
1646 Completed grid #144 with bucket pick #328.
1750 Transferred to M/V FLING via RHIB.
1800 Onboard M/V FLING, underway to USACE dredge dock.
1815 Arrive at USACE dredge dock. Investigate contacts to be recovered in
Texas City Channel Monday.
1840 Departed for Hotel Galvez.
12-13-09
Stand by while dredge barge recovers anchors and ties up along the
Galveston Channel to change out dredge buckets for target recovery of
objects located in the Texas City Channel found during the C&C
Technologies survey of the work site.
12-14-09
0700 Departed the Hotel Galvez for the USACE dredge dock.
0715 Transferred to the dredge barge.
0810 Dredge barge underway for work area to deploy one anchor. There are 8
total contacts deemed worthy of recovering. We have until the fog lifts
and traffic is coming to complete the picks or make a best effort.
0850 Port anchor away.
0855 Starboard anchor away.
0900 Rigging the orange peel grapnel.
First pick is “1.4m Diam” target.
0912 First pick made.
0925 Deployed scanning sonar after 5 empty picks.
0930 Maneuvered the bucket to a sonar target.
0940 Grabbed the sonar target. Mud lump.
0945 Recovered the sonar to a short stay and moved barge for a linear contact
“6.5m long pipe”.
0950 Making a pick for contact “6.5m”.
1002 Grabbed sonar target. Pick P7.
1005 Contact was a 20‟ pipe.
1021 Made grab P8 for a scanning sonar target. Nothing found.
1030 Recovered anchors to move onto target “2.2m long”.
1039 Port Anchor Away.
1041 Starboard Anchor Away.
1050 Maneuvered the grapnel to a scanning sonar target.
1056 Close grapnel on pick P9.
1104 Close grapnel on pick P10. Nothing but mud.
1110 Close grapnel on pick P11. Nothing but mud.
1118 Recovered anchors to move to the South side of the channel.
1129 Starboard and Port Anchors Away.
PIHI- 09157

80

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CLIENT:
NAVSEA
LOCATION:
Texas City Channel, Galveston, Texas
VESSEL:
USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
JOB #:
09157
Date
Time
1140 Guiding the grapnel towards a scanning sonar target but the barge is
swinging and knocking over the tripod.
1200 Thunderstorms in the area. Continued guiding the grapnel to the target
labeled “6.6m Long”.
1217 Close the grapnel for pick P12. Nothing found, re-try.
1223 Close grapnel for pick P13. Nothing found, re-try.
1227 Close grapnel for pick P14. Nothing found, re-try.
1233 Close grapnel for pick P15. Nothing found but we are dredging around
what might be a plate of metal standing upright.
1246 Close grapnel for pick P16.
1314 Pulling Anchors
1334 Anchor Cables twisted and sector scan cable damaged.
1335 Stopped logging WinFrog data. Sonar onboard and moving the barge to
the South side of the Texas City Channel. Will rectify crossed anchors.
1420 Out of channel, working on anchors.
1455 Setting on one anchor with two tugs pushing.
1613 Going to continue trying for the target left off with pick P16.
1651 Recovered a piece of wire, continue.
1658 Close grapnel on pick P21.
1715 Secured operations with pick P22. Recovered anchors.
1730 Underway to tie up in along the Galveston Channel.
1800 Tied up along the Galveston Channel.
1900 At the Hotel Galvez.
12/15/09
700
Tug boats and barges will depart Galveston within the hour. Will meet
them in Freeport and de-mobilize. Truck has been notified that shipping
will take place tomorrow.
1140 Departed Galveston for Freeport to demobilize Phoenix equipment from
the crane barge.
1800 Transferred equipment shipment to FedEx.
1950 At the IAH hotel.
12/16/09
0800 In transit to home facilities.

PIHI- 09157

81

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX J
VIDEO LOG

PIHI- 09157

82

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
VIDEO LOG
*Turbid bottom conditions prevented taking video.

PIHI- 09157

83

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX K
SUB-CONTRACTOR SURVEY REPORT

PIHI- 09157

84

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

INTERNATIONAL

PHOENIX INTERNATIONAL
SHIPWRECK INVESTIGATION
U.S.S. WESTFIELD SURVEY
Galveston Bay
Project No. 097599

SUBMITTED BY

730 EAST KALISTE SALOOM ROAD
LAFAYETTE, LOUISIANA 70508
December 2009

Robert F. Westrick
Marine Archaeologist

PIHI- 09157

85

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
• A shipwreck investigation survey was conducted for Phoenix International by C & C
Technologies, Inc. on November 13 and 15,2009.
•

The survey area covers the U.S.S. Westfield, a Civil War shipwreck (Site #41GV151) located
in Galveston Bay, Texas. The survey also included an area to be used as a barge off-loading
dock nearby.

•

The shallowest water depth in the survey area is 6.5 feet Below Mean Sea Level, which
occurs near the dock.

•

The deepest water depth in the survey area is 56 feet Below Mean Sea Level, which occurs in
the Texas City Channel.

•

Thirty-five (35) sonar contacts were recorded within the survey area. The majority of these
are small targets without any measurable seafloor relief.

•

Withm the shipwreck survey area, One Hundred-Eight (108) magnetic anomalies were
recorded within the area near the wreck site. The majority of targets were relatively small
anomalies and only eight anomalies had amplitudes greater than 50 gammas. Most of the
magnetic anomalies were found in clusters near the central portion of the wreck site.

PIHI- 09157

86

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
ACQUISITION DATA PARAMETERS FOR THE 2009 COVERAGE AREA
•

AREA:

Shipwreck Investigation
U.S.S. Westfield
Galveston Bay

•

SURVEY DATES:

November 13 and 15,2009

•

SURVEY VESSEL:

RIV C-Wolf

•

DEPTH:

8-9 meters below surface

• LINE SPACING:

10 meters

• PRIMARY POSITIONING SYSTEM:

C-NavDGPS

• MULTIBEAM ECHOSOUNDER:

Simrad EM3002 (293 kHz)

•

SIDE SCAN SONAR:

GeoAcustics Side Scan Sonar

•

SIDE SCAN SONAR PING RATE:

30Hz

•

SIDE SCAN SONAR FREQUENCY:

500kHz

•

SIDE SCAN SONAR RANGE:

50 meters per channel

11

Pll-11- 09157

87

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
TABLE OF CONTENTS

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................. i
ACQUISITION DATA PARAMETERS FOR COVERAGE AREA............................................ ii
1.0
2.0
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
4.0
5.0

INTRODUCTION ..............................................................................................................1
HISTORIC BACKGROUND .............................................................................................2
ASSESSMENT OF DATA.................................................................................................3
Bathymetry Record .............................................................................................................3
Side Scan Sonar Record......................................................................................................3
Magnetometer Record.........................................................................................................4
CONCLUSIONS.................................................................................................................4
REFERENCES ...................................................................................................................5

LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Figure No.1 Map Survey Area- U.S.S. Westfield- Site #41GV151area ....................................1
Figure No.2 Map Survey Area- Barge Off-Loading Area and Dock .........................................2

111

PIHI- 09157

88

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
APPENDICES
APPENDIX A
APPENDIXB
APPENDIXC
APPENDIXD
APPENDIXE

Sonar Contact Report
Magnetic Anomaly Table
Bathymetry Interpretation
Equipment Descriptions
Survey Vessel Specifications
Survey Personnel

INSERTS
SheetNo. 1
Sheet No.2
Sheet No.3
Sheet No.4
Sheet No.5

Color Shaded Bathymetry Map (Shipwreck Site)
Side Scan Sonar Mosaic Map (Shipwreck Site)
Magnetic Amplitude Map (Shipwreck Site)
Color Shaded Bathymetry Map (Dock Area)
Side Scan Sonar Mosaic Map (Dock Area)

IV

PIHI- 09157

89

1: 1,500
1: 1,500
1: 1,500
1: 1,500
1: 1,500

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
SIDPWRECK INVESTIGATION SURVEY
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Phoenix International contracted C & C Technologies, Inc. (C & C) to perform a shipwreck
investigation survey of the U.S.S. Westfield (Site #41GV151) located in Galveston Bay, Texas.
The data for this survey was acquired using remote sensing equipment, which included a
Geometries Cesium Magnetometer, GeoAcoustics Side Scan Sonar, and SIMRAD EM3002
Multibeam Echo Sounder.

The survey was conducted from RIV C-Wolf on November 13 and 15, 2009.

The survey

provided coverage over theacre wreck area as well as the off-loading barge area (Figures No.
1 and No. 2). The survey over the wreck site consisted of eight northwest-southeast tracklines
(Line Nos. 101-108) and nine northeast-southwest tracklines (109-114). The first set of line ran
parallel to the second set and crisscrossed the wreck site.

Eight additional survey lines (Line

Nos. 201-206) were run over the barge off-loading and dock area.

Figure No. I: Survey Area -U.S.S. Westfield - Site #41GVI51.

PIHI- 09157

90

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Figure No. 2: Survey Area -Barge Off-Loading Area and Dock.

2.0 HISTORIC BACKGROUND
The Union side-wheel steamer U.S.S. Wesifield, 6-guns, 891-tons, under the command of
Commander William B. Renshaw, ran aground off Pelican Island during the recapture of the city
of Galveston on January 1, 1863.1 The Yankees set fire to the vessel to prevent her from being
captured by the Neptune Camp and C.S.S. Bayou City, which had just captured the U.S.S.
Harriet Lane.

Before they could make their escape, however, the powder magazine blew up

prematurely killing Renshaw and thirteen others (Rush 1894-1927; Hemphill 1998; and Gaines
2008).

The Wesifield was originally built as a ferryboat and launched at Brooklyn, New York in 1861.
She was purchased by the Union Navy from Cornelius Vanderbilt on December 2, 1861.

The

navy converted her into a gunboat and she was commissioned U.S.S. Wesifield. She was armed
with four 8-inch smooth bore ca-TJ....11ons, one 9-inch Da-lJ.lgren a-11d one 100-pmmder Pa-rrott rifle.
The gunboat served as flagship of the West Gulf Blockading Squadron (Department of the Navy
1959 and Mitchell1975).
1

Union troops occupied Galveston Island and Confederate steamers launched an attack to regain the island.

2
PIHI- 09157

91

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
For more than a century, the scoured remains of the Westfield slowly rusted on the bottom of the
Texas City Channel.

In November 2009 in preparation for a planned 5-foot deepening of the

ship channelled to a rescue recovery operation. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston
District and the U.S. Navy became involved since dredging would damage or destroy the
archaeological site. According to Bob Neyland of the Naval History and Heritage Command at
the Washington Naval Yard, "During the time of the Civil War, the area north of Pelican Island
was only about seven feet deep, but, after the construction of the Texas City Dike many years
later, the depth grew to about forty-seven." The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers will begin the
$71 million dredging project once the archaeology project is completed. (The Daily News Galveston County, November 19, 2009).

3.0 ASSESSMENT OF DATA
3.1 Bathymetry Record
The Simrad EM-1002 multibeam data was processed to 0.1-meter bin centers on the wreck site
and 3-meter bin centers at the dock site. The depth values are referenced to Mean Sea Level
(MSL) and are contoured at- foot intervals on the Bathemetry Map (Sheets 1 and 4). Water
depths range from 31 to 55 feet below MSL near the wreck site and 6.5 to 46 feet below MSL
along the barge off-loading and dock area.

Ten (10) targets displayed discemable relief in

bathymetry. The targets (labeled A-J) are depicted in Appendix C.

3.2 Side Scan Sonar Record
Thirty-five (35) sonar contacts were recorded within the project area.
sonar contacts were recorded within the shipwreck area.

Of these, 29 unidentified

The three largest of which are, Sonar

Contact No.l4 (4.5 x .92 meters); Sonar Contact No. 21 (3.06 x 1.3 meters); and Sonar Contact No
26 (3.67 x 1.32 meters). The remaining contacts were relatively small (less than 3 meters in length).
None of the contacts displayed any measurable height. Six additional sonar contacts were recorded
near the barge off-loading/dock area. These contacts range in size from 2.04 meters to 10.76 meters
and appear to be associated with pilings and dock features. Sonar Contact No.4 displays a shadow
measuring 19.58 meters. It was identified as a possible anchor or buoy line in the water column.
The contacts are shown on the sonar mosaic maps (Sheets 2 and 4), and described in the sonar
contact report in Appendix A
3

PIHI- 09157

92

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
3.3 Magnetometer Record

The magnetometer recorded 108 magnetic anomalies within the wreck site survey area. The
largest magnetic anomaly displays an amplitude of 247 gammas with a duration of 54. The other
anomalies displayed magnetic deflections measuring between 1 to 90 gammas.

The vast

majority of targets were relatively small as only eight anomalies had amplitudes greater than 50
gammas. Most of the magnetic anomalies were found in clusters near the central portion of the
wreck site. The location and characteristics of all the unidentified magnetic anomalies are shown
on the magnetometer anomaly map (Sheet 5), and in the Magnetic Anomaly Table in Appendix
B.

4.0 CONCLUSIONS

The survey revealed 35 sonar contacts within the project areas.
unidentified sonar contacts were recorded in the shipwreck area.

Twenty-nine (29) of the
These contacts appear to be

scattered debris and may represent disarticulated portions of the U.S.S. Westfield or modem
debris associated with shipping, or previous dredging activity.
identifiable structural components of the gunboat.
recorded along the barge off-loading/dock area.
anomalies within the wreck site survey area.

The survey revealed no

The six remaining sonar contacts were
The magnetometer recorded 108 magnetic

Most of the magnetic anomalies were found in

clusters near the central portion of the wreck site. The survey revealed 10 targets that showed
discemable relief in the bathymetry record. Eight (8) of these were primarily located within four
clusters near the central portion of the wreck site.

4

PIHI- 09157

93

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
5.0 REFERENCES
Cenegy, Nick. "Crews Search for Civil War History" The Daily News - Galveston County.
November 19, 2009.
Department of the Navy. 1959. Dictionary of American Naval Fighting Ships. U.S. Government
Printing Office, Washington D.C.
Gaines, \V. Craig. 2008. Encyclopedia of Civil War Shipwrecks.
Press, Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

Louisiana State University·

Hemphill, James E. 1998. Beneath the Waters: A Guide to Civil War Shipwrecks. Burd Street
Press, Shippensburg, Pennsylvania.
Mitchell, C. Bradford, editor. 1975. Merchant Steam Vessels of the United States: 1790-1868.
"The Lytle-Holdcamper List" Steamboat Historical Society of America, Staten Island, New
York.
Rush, Richard et. al., eds. 1894-1927. Official Records ofthe Union and Confederate Navies in
the War of the Rebellion. 31 vols. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C.

5
PIHI- 09157

94

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

PIHI- 09157

95

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Sonar Contact Report
Shipwreck Site
etlnfo

User Entered Info

Contact1

Dimensions

• Sonar Time atTarget:11/151200913:03:11
• Click Position (LatWGS84):29" 21.18406' N
• Clck Position (Lon WGS84):094" 47.51580'W
• Clck Position (Lat NAD27):29" 21.16994' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):0941" 47.50403' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X):326,047.71
• Click Position (Y): 3,248,437.21
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r105-1.xtf
• Ping Number:111822
• Range to Target:29.24 Meters
• Fish Height: 8.00 Meters
• Event Number:3
• Line Name:r105-1

Target Height= tO.OO Meters
Target Length:2.25 Meters
Target Shadow: 0.00 Meters
Target Width:1.20 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Contact2

D
imensions

•
•
•
•

Target Height= tO.OO Meters
Target Length:1.08 Meters
Target Shadow: 0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.44 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Sonar Time atTarget: 11/15/2009 12:44:08
Clck Position (Lat WGS84):29" 21.17888' N
Clck Position (Lon WGS84):094" 47.49011'
Clck Position (LaN
! AD27):29" 21.16476' N

w

• Click Position (Lon NAD27):0941" 47.47834' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
• Clck Position (X):326,089.13
• Clck Position (Y): 3,248,427.00
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r103-1.xtf
• Ping Number:1547
• Range to Target: 22.13 Meters
• Fish Height: 7.72 Meters
• Event Number:3
• Line Name:r103-1

PIHI- 09157

Contact3

Dimensions

• Sonar Time atTarget: 11/15/2009 13:03:13
• Clck Position (Lat WGS84):29" 21.17693' N
• Clck Position (Lon WGS84):094" 47.52200'W
• Click Position (LaN
! AD27):29" 21
.16282' N
• Clck Position (Lon NAD27):0941" 47.51022' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X):326,037.48
• Clck Position (Y): 3,248,424.21
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r105-1.xtf
• Ping Number:111781
• Range to Target: 13.11Meters
• Fish Height:7.93 Meters
• Event Number:3
• Line Name:r105-1

Target Height= tO.OO Meters
Target Length:1.40 Meters
Target Shadow: 0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.35 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1: Classification
2: Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Un dentified Sonar
Contact

96

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Contact4

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/200913:03:11
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29• 21.17660' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.52092' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.16249' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.50914'
• Map Proj: WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North, Meter
• Click Position (X): 326,039.22
• Click Position (Y): 3,248,423.57
• Acoustic Source Flie:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r105-1.xtf
• Ping Number:111807
• Range to Target: 13.23 Meters
• Fish Height: 8.07 Meters
• Event Number:3
• Line Name: r105-1

Target Height = 0.00 Meters
Target Length:1.20 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 0.44 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description: Unidentified Sonar
Contact

w

PIHI- 09157

Contacts

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/200913:03:13
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29• 21.16143' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.47276' w
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.14732' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.46099' w
• Map Proj: WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North, Meter
• Click Position (X): 326,116.71
• Click Position (Y): 3,248,394.35
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r104-1.xtf
• Ping Number:5325
• Range to Target: 15.18 Meters
• Fish Height:7.68 Meters
• Event Number:3
• Line Name: r104-1

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:1.12 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 0.47 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description: Unidentified Sonar
Contact

ContactS

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/2009 13:03:11
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29• 21.15992' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.46837' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.14580' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.45659' W
• Map Proj: WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North, Meter
• Click Position (X): 326,123.78
• Click Position (Y): 3,248,391.44
• Acoustic Source Flie:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r105-1.xtf
• Ping Number:113986
• Range to Target:22.88 Meters
• Fish Height: 7.38 Meters
• Event Number:3
• Line Name: r105-1

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:1.53 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 0.87 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1: Classification
2: Area:Galveston Bay
Description: Unidentified Sonar
Contact

97

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

·.

1'
-

·::f

a
-.

•c'-·:-··= ·

/

-i.
'-

Contact7
·• Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/2009 14:27:41
·• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 21.13604' N
·• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 47.36727' W
·• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.12192' N
·• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.35550' w
·• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
·• Click Position (X):326,286.70
·• Click Position (Y): 3,248,344.83
·• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r109-1.xtf
·• Ping Number:3370
·• Range to Target: 20.42 Meters
·• FishHeight: 8.84 Meters
·• Event Number:1
·• Line Name:r109-1

Dimensions
Target Height = 0.00 Meters
Target Length:0.44 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.31Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

ContactS
Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/2009 12:50:57
Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 21.13180' N
Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 47.39090' w
Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.11768' N
Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.37913' W
Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
Click Position (X):326,248.35
Click Position (Y): 3,248,337.59
Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r103-1.xtf
·• Ping Number:4730
·• Range to Target: 15.68 Meters
·• Fish Height: 8.40 Meters
·• Event Number:3
·• Line Name: r103-1

Dimensions
Target Height = 0.00 Meters
Target Length:1.10 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.63 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Contact9
·• Sonar Time at Target:11/15/2009 13:35:17
·• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 21.12845' N
·• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 47.49183' W
·• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.11434'N
·• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.48005' W
·• Map Proj: WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North, Meter
·• Click Position (X):326,084.93
·• Click Position (Y): 3,248,333.91

Dimensions
Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:0.35 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:2.90 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

·• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r107-1.xtf
·• Ping Number:2403
·• Range to Target:18.97 Meters
·• FishHeight: 8.63 Meters
·• Event Number:3
·• Line Name: r107-1

PIHI- 09157

98

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

PIHI- 09157

Contact10
• Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/200914:11:49
• Cilck Position (Lat WGS84):29• 21.11738' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.43288' w
• Cilck Position (Lat NAD27): 29• 21.10326' N
• Cilck Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.42111' W
• Map Proj: WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North,Meter
• Cilck Position (X):326,180.00
• Cilck Position (Y):3,248,311.99
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r108-1.xtf
• Ping Number:187623
• Range to Target: 10.67 Meters
• Fish Height:5.88 Meters
• Event Number:2
• Line Name: r108-1

Dimensions
Target Height = 0.00 Meters
Target Length: 0.44 Meters
Target Shadow: 0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.19 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description: Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Contact11
• Sonar Time atTarget: 11/1512009 12:41:25
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29• 21.11766' N
• Cilck Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.35317' W
• Cilck Position (Lat NAD27): 29• 21.10354' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.34140' w
• Map Proj: WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North,Meter
• Cilck Position (X):326,309.01
• Cilck Position (Y):3,248,310.53
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r102-1.xtf
• Ping Number:3446
• Range to Target: 8.97 Meters
• Fish Height: 5.20 Meters
• Event Number:1
• Line Name: r102-1

Dimensions
Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length: 1.53 Meters
Target Shadow: 0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.78 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1: Classification
2: Area:Galveston Bay
Description: Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Contact12
• Sonar Time atTarget: 11/1512009 14:11:51
• Cilck Position (Lat WGS84):29• 21.11597' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.43173' w
• Cilck Position (Lat NAD27): 29• 21.10185' N
• Cilck Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.41996' W
• Map Proj: WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X):326,181.82
• Cilck Position (Y):3,248,309.35
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r108-1.xtf
• Ping Number:187597
• Range to Target: 9.09 Meters
• Fish Height: 5.88 Meters
• Event Number:2
• Line Name: r108-1

Dimensions
Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length: 0.11Meters
Target Shadow: 0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.13 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description: Unidentified Sonar
Contact

99

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Contact13

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/2009 14:11:51
• Click Position (Lat WGS84): 29" 21.11285' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84): 094" 47.41982' w
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 21.09873' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27): 094" 47.40805' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North, Meter
• Click Position (X): 326,201.01
• Click Position (Y):3,248,303.30
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r108-1.xtf
• Ping Number:187411
• Range to Target: 12.18 Meters
• Fish Height: 5.65 Meters
• Event Number:2
• Line Name:r108-1

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:0.74 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 0.43 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area: Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Contact14

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target: 11/1512009 14:59:10
• Click Position (Lat WGS84): 29" 21.11066' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 47.36370' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 21.09654' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27): 094" 47.35194'
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North, Meter
• Click Position (X): 326,291.75
• Click Position (Y):3,248,297.86
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r111-1.xtf
• Ping Number:6535
• Range to Target: 18.72 Meters
• Fish Height: 7.80 Meters
• Event Number:1
• Line Name:r111-1

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:4.50 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 0.92 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area: Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

w

PIHI- 09157

Contact15

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target:11/1512009 12:41:25
• Click Position (LatWGS84): 29" 21.10788' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84): 094" 47.36920' w
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 21.09376' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27): 094" 47.35743' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North, Meter
• Click Position (X): 326,282.79
• Click Position (Y):3,248,292.86
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r102-1.xtf
• Ping Number:3646
• Range to Target: 19.24 Meters
• Fish Height: 5.15 Meters
• Event Number:1
• Line Name:r102-1

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:2.86 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 1.15 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area: Galveston Bay
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area: Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

100

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Contact16
• Sonar Time at Target: 11115/200912:41:25
• Click Position (Lat WGS84): 29• 21.10566' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84): 094• 47.36743'
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.09155' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27): 094" 47.35566' W
• Map Proj: WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X):326,285.58
• Click Position (Y): 3,248,288.73
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r102-1.xtf
• Ping Number:3575
• Range to Target: 21.69 Meters
• Fish Height:5.13 Meters
• Event Number:1
• Line Name: r102-1

w

Contact17
• Sonar Time at Target: 11115/200914:27:42
• Click Position (Lat WGS84): 29• 21.10537' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84): 094• 47.35297' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.09125' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27): 094" 47.34120' w
• Map Proj: WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X): 326,308.98
• Click Position (Y):3,248,287.82
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r109-1.xtf
• Ping Number:3930
• Range to Target: 25.26 Meters
• Fish Height: 9.37 Meters
• Event Number:1
• Line Name: r109-1

Contact18
• Sonar Time at Target: 11115/200914:27:41
• Click Position (Lat WGS84): 29• 21.09854' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84): 094• 47.36165'
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.08442' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27): 094" 47.34988' W
• Map Proj: WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X):326,294.73
• Click Position (Y): 3,248,275.43
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r109-1.xtf
• Ping Number:4215
• Range to Target:17.30 Meters
• Fish Height: 9.61 Meters
• Event Number:1
• Line Name: r109-1

w

PIHI- 09157

101

Dimensions
Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length: 1.78 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:1.07 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description: Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Dimensions
Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length: 0.25 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.18 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1: Classification
2: Area:Galveston Bay
Description: Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Dimensions
Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length: 4.62 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.60 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description: Unidentified Sonar
Contact

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

PIHI- 09157

Contact19

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target: 11115/2009 12:41:27
• Click Position (Lat WGS84): 29• 21.09463' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.32945' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.08051' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27): 094" 47.31768' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North, Meter
• Click Position (X):326,346.74
• Click Position (Y):3,248,267.40
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r102-1.xtf
• Ping Number:2761
• Range to Target: 12.48 Meters
• Fish Height: 5.40 Meters
• Event Number:1
• Line Name:r102-1

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:0.42 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 0.36 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area: Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Contact20

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target: 11115/2009 12:41:25
• Click Position (Lat WGS84): 29• 21.09353' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84): 094• 47.32294' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.07941' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27): 094" 47.31117' w
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North, Meter
• Click Position (X): 326,357.24
• Click Position (Y):3,248,265.22
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r102-1.xtf
• Ping Number:2607
• Range to Target:10.54 Meters
• Fish Height: 5.43 Meters
• Event Number:1
• Line Name:r102-1

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:0.67 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 0.30 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area: Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Contact21

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target:11115/2009 14:59:10
• Click Position (Lat WGS84): 29• 21.08757' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.35026' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.07345' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27): 094• 47.33849' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North, Meter
• Click Position (X):326,312.86
• Click Position (Y): 3,248,254.88
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r111-1.xtf
• Ping Number:7078
• Range to Target: 20.80 Meters
• Fish Height: 8.13 Meters
• Event Number:1
• Line Name:r111-1

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:3.06 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 1.30 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area: Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

102

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Contact22

D
imenso
i ns

• Sonar Time at Target: 11/1512009 13:17:23
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 21 07525' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84): 094" 47.27962' W
• Click Position (La!NAD27):29" 21.06113' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094" 47.26786' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X):326,426.81
• Click Position (Y):3,248,230.37
• Acoustic Source Flie:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r105-1.xtf
• Ping Number:12712
• Range to Target: 20.21Meters
• Fish Height: 8.30 Meters
• Event Number:1
• Line Name:r105-1

Target He ght 0.00 Meters
Target Length:0.51 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.21Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classificato
i n 1:
Classificato
i n 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

=

Contact23

Dimenso
i ns

• Sonar Time at Target:11/1512009 14:09:55
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 21.06688' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 47.31284' w
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 21.05276' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094" 47.30107' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X): 326,372.83
• Click Position (Y): 3,248,215.73
• Acoustic Source Flie:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r1081.xtf
• Ping Number:185630
• Range to Target: 13.69 Meters
• Fish Height: 5.57 Meters
• Event Number:0
• Line Name:r108-1

Target He ght = 0.00 Meters
Target Length:0.83 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.67 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1: Classificato
in
2: Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

D
imenso
i ns
Contact24
• Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/2009 14:09:55
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 21 06523' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84): 094" 47.30897' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 21.05111' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094" 47.29721'W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X):326,379.04
• Click Position (Y): 3,248,212.60
• Acoustic Source Flie:
F\:097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r108-1.xtf
• Ping Number:185563
• Range to Target: 13.54 Meters
• Fish Height: 5.68 Meters
• Event Number:0
• Line Name:r108-1

PIHI- 09157

103

Target He ght = 0.00 Meters
Target Length:1.36 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:1.17 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classificato
i n 1:
Classificato
i n 2:
Area:Ga veston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

-.
-

Contact25

Dimensions

• SonarTimeatTarget: 11/151200913:59:11
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29• 21.05420' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.26710' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27): 29• 21.04008' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.25534' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North, Meter
• Click Position (X): 326,446.48

Target Height = 0.00 Meters
Target Length: 0.21 Meters
Target Shadow: 0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.17 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

• Click Position (Y): 3,248,191.19
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r107-1.xtf
• Ping Number: 16697
• Range to Target: 14.12 Meters
• Fish Height: 8.45 Meters
• Event Number: 1
• Line Name:r107-1

Contact26

Dimensions

•
•
•
•
•
•

Target Height = 0.00 Meters
Target Length: 3.67 Meters
Target Shadow: 0.00 Meters
Target Width:1.32 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/2009 14:03:04
Click Position (Lat WGS84):29• 21.04272' N
Click Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.23605' W
Click Position (Lat NAD27): 29• 21.02860' N
Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.22429' W
Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North, Meter

• Click Position (X): 326,496.41

<..

'\

1-.

• Click Position (Y): 3,248,169.21
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r108-1.xtf
• Ping Number: 454
• Range to Target: 26.21 Meters
• Fish Height: 5.80 Meters
• Event Number: 0
• Line Name:r108-1

Contact27

Dimensions

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Target Height = 0.00 Meters
Target Length:2.83 Meters
Target Shadow: 0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.32 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/200913:59:11
Click Position (Lat WGS84):29• 21.03713' N
Click Position (Lon WGS84):094• 47.27035' W
Click Position (Lat NAD27): 29• 21.02301' N
Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 47.25859' w
Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North, Meter
Click Position (X): 326,440.74
Click Position (Y): 3,248,159.74

• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r107-1.xtf
• Ping Number: 17162
• Range to Target: 15.94 Meters
• Fish Height: 8.60 Meters
• Event Number: 1
• Line Name:r107-1

PIHI- 09157

104

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Contact28

Dimensions

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:0.97 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 0.71Meters
Mag Anoma y:
Avoidance Area:
Classiification 1:
Classiification 2:
Area: Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar

Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/2009 13:19:51
Click Position (Lat WGS84):29° 21 03682' N
Click Position (Lon WGS84):094° 47.20301'
Click Position (Lat NAD27):29° 21.02270' N
Click Position (Lon NA.D27):094• 47.19125' w
Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North,Meter
Click Position (X):326 549.71
Click Position (Y):3,248,157.50
Acoustic Source File:

w

F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r106-1.xtf
•
•
•
•
•

PIHI- 09157

Ping Number:15
Range to Target: 12.62 Meters
Fish Height: 6.80 Meters
Event Number:0
Line Name:r106-1

Contact

Contact29

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target: 11/15/2009 14:33:13
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29° 21 03097' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094° 47.38956'W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29• 21.01685' N
• Click Position (Lon NA.D27):094• 47.37779' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X):326 247.66
• Click Position (Y):3,248,151.32
• Acoustic Source File:
F:\097599\091115\SonarWiz\XTF\r110-1.xtf
• Ping Number:940
• Range to Target: 25.29 Meters
• Fish Height: 6.93 Meters
• Event Number:3
• Line Name:r110-1

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:2.21Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters

105

Target Width:0.21Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classiification 1:
Classiification 2:
Area: Galveston Bay
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Sonar Contact Report
Barge Off-Loading Area

)

Contact1

Dimensions

• Sonar Time at Target: 11/13/2009 23:24:45
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 19.88661' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 46.44953'W
o Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 19.87245' N
o Click Position (Lon NAD27):094" 46.43780' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
o Click Position (X):327,736.77
o Click Position (Y): 3,246,014.38
• Acoustic Source File:J:\097599\field·
data\SonarWiz\XTF\205-·1.xtf
• Ping Number:1130
• Range to Target: 2.93 Meters
o Fish Height: 3.46 Meters
o Event Number:1
• Line Name:205-1

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:7.04 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 0.82 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:
Block:
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Contact2

Dimensions

o Sonar Time at Target: 11/1312009 23:24:56

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:6.15 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:1.26 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:
Block:
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

o Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 19.87359'

N

• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 46.45706'W
o Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 19.85944' N
Click Position (Lon NAD27):094" 46.44534' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X):327,724.21
o Click Position (Y):3,245,990.53
o Acoustic Source File:J:\097599\field·
data\SonarWiz\XTF\205-·1.xtf
o Ping Number:1295
• Range to Target: 5.47 Meters
• Fish Height: 3.47 Meters
• Event Number:1
o Line Name:205-1

Contact3

Dimensions

o Sonar Time at Target: 11/13/2009 23:20:24

Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:4.90 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width: 3.56 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:
Block:
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

•
•
•
•

Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 19.85253' N
Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 46.49435' W
Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 19.83837' N
Click Position (Lon NAD27):094" 46.48262' W
o Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
o Click Position (X):327,663.27
• Click Position (Y):3,245,952.54
o Acoustic Source File:J:\097599\field·
data\SonarWiz\XTF\204-·1.xtf
o Ping Number:2046
• Range to Target: 39.38 Meters
o Fish Height:3.77 Meters
• Event Number:2
o Line Name:204-1

PIHI- 09157

106

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

..

PIHI- 09157

Contact4
• Sonar Time at Target: 11/13/2009 23:26:05
• Click Position (LatWGS84):29" 19.79050' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 46.47838' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 19.77634' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094• 46.46665' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM,Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X): 327,687.38
• Click Position (Y): 3,245,837.58
• Acoustic Source File: J:\097599\fielddata\SonarWiz\XTF\205-1.xtf
• Ping Number:2322
• Range to Target: 13.20 Meters
• Fish Height: 3.54 Meters
• Event Number:2
• Line Name:205-1

Dimensions
Target Height= 2.10 Meters
Target Length:2.04 Meters
Target Shadow:19.58 Meters
Target Width: 1.25 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:
Block:
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Contacts
• Sonar Time at Target: 11/13/2009 23:18:54
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 19.72233' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 46.52498' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 19.70817' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094" 46.51325' W
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X): 327,610.05
• Click Position (Y): 3,245,712.81
• Acoustic Source File: J:\097599\fielddata\SonarWiz\XTF\204-1.xtf
• Ping Number:709
• Range to Target: 7.92 Meters
• Fish Height: 3.66 Meters
• Event Number: 4
• Line Name:204-1

Dimensions
Target Height= 0.00 Meters
Target Length:8.39 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:0.31 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:
Block:
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

Contact6
• Sonar Time atTarget: 11/13/2009 23:18:14
• Click Position (Lat WGS84):29" 19.67792' N
• Click Position (Lon WGS84):094" 46.55477' W
• Click Position (Lat NAD27):29" 19.66376' N
• Click Position (Lon NAD27):094" 46.54304' w
• Map Proj:WGS 1984 UTM, Zone 15 North,Meter
• Click Position (X): 327,560.58
• Click Position (Y): 3,245,631.51
• Acoustic Source File: J:\097599\fielddata\SonarWiz\XTF\204-1.xtf
• Ping Number:107
• Range to Target: 25.57 Meters
• Fish Height: 4.47 Meters
• Event Number:0
• Line Name:204-1

Dimensions
Target Height= 0.05 Meters
Target Length:10.76 Meters
Target Shadow:0.00 Meters
Target Width:2.41 Meters
Mag Anomaly:
Avoidance Area:
Classification 1:
Classification 2:
Area:
Block:
Description:Unidentified Sonar
Contact

107

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

PIHI- 09157

108

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Ref.
No.

2
3
4
5
6
7

8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43

44
45

Corrected
Event No.
0.36
0.48
0.89
1.02
1.25
i.6
1.83
2.19
2.67
0.08
0.33
0.58
0.73
1.13
1.42
1.53
1.86
2.13
2.26
2.51
3.25
0.17
0.28
0.48
0.94
1.12
1.44
1.71
1.99
2.24
2.45
2.53
2.64
2.87
0.12
0.24
0.39
0.49
0.66
0.79
0.97
1.12
1.31
1.52
1.99

PIHI- 09157

Coordinate

X
326105.886
326520.865
326388.156
326373.822
326348.657
326309.899
326283.616
326244.151
326191.906
326518.996
326478.392
326437.721
326413.269
326355.181
326322.159
326309.833
326272.71
326243.257
326228.614
326201.336
326127.458
326457.815
326491.955
326422.583
326371.496
326351.843
326316.796
326287.091
326255.823
326195.478
326143.194
326120.973
326094.361
326037.426
326517.501
326496.234
326468.852
326450.245
326420.784
326397.522
326363.308
326345.776
326324.032
326300.815
326248.877

y
3248416
3248209
3248273
3248280
3248293
32483i2
3248326
3248347
3248376
3248196
3248216
3248236
3248248
3248276
3248292
3248298
3248316
3248331
3248339
3248354
3248394
3248211
3248196
3248229
3248256
3248266
3248284
3248300
3248316
3248350
3248378
3248390
3248405
3248436
3248174
3248184
3248197
3248205
3248218
3248229
3248245
3248254
3248266
3248278
3248307

Line Description
Signature Amplitude Duration Sensor
Type
Gamma
Feet
Alt. (Ft.)
No.
2
28
10.45 R101-1
Debris
10.55
Rl01-1
Debris
D
35
3
D
2
9.42 RlOl-1
Debris
30
M
12
I
9.35 R101-1 Debris
16
40
9.28 R101-1
Debris
M
Nf
42
8.52 RiOi-1
Debris
4
M
17
8.25 R101-1
Debris
M
17
10.42 R101-1
Debris
M
2
20
10.77 R101-1
Debris
M
18
7.67 R102-1
Debris
46
42.55 R102-1
Debris
D
4
1
M
6.81 R102-1
Debris
13
73.39 R102-1
Debris
3
38
D
27
25.02 R102-1
Debris
D
9
M
12
57
30.37 R102-1
Debris
M
16
79.49 R102-1
Debris
6
32
40
6.45
R102-1
Debris
D
M
5
17
25.29 R102-1
Debris
M
2
18
68.58 R102-1
Debris
40
55.54 R102-1
Debris
D
33
M
4
17
51.22 R102-1
Debris
M
22
10.23 R103-1
Debris
3
29
10.91 R103-1
Debris
M
4
M
27
10.3 R103-1
Debris
8
M
191
10.06 R103-1
Debris
68
29
9.91 R103-1
Debris
13
D
M
31
49
10.11 R103-1
Debris
D
17
30
10.13 R103-1
Debris
D
8
37
9.84 R103-1
Debris
10
9.89 R103-1
Debris
D
35
M
2
21
9.59 R103-1
Debris
M
17
9.2
R103-1
Debris
5
34
33.18 R103-1
Debris
D
7
M
5
34
9.5 R103-1
Debris
11
35.62 R104-1
Debris
37
D
D
18
23
27.25 R104-1
Debris
22
5.79 R104-1
Debris
D
7
M
13
20
67.97 R104-1
Debris
24
50.44 R104-1
Debris
D
6
M
10
19.02 R104-1
Debris
3
6.4 R104-1
Debris
D
33
33
D
18
43.85 R104-1
Debris
6
M
19
69.9 R104-1
Debris
38
247
54
30.32 R104-1
Debris
D
D
6
30
56.03 R104-1
Debris

109

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Ref. Corrected
No. Event No.
46
2.19
47
2.85
48
0.04
49
0.32
50
0.87
51
1.02
52
1.39
1.46
53
54
2.01
2.08
55
2.36
56
2.75
57
0.55
58
1.39
59
0.82
60
61
1.43
62
1.76
1.94
63
64
2.19
2.93
65
1.09
66
1.7
67
2.04
68
2.33
69
2.72
70
71
2.94
3.69
72
1.03
73
74
1.3
2.05
75
2.26
76
3.02
77
0.66
78
1.53
79
2.19
80
81
0.61
82
1.35
1.49
83
84
1.97
2.08
85
2.11
86
2.87
87
1.35
88
1.74
89
2.09
90
91
2.17

PIHI- 09157

Coordinate

X
326227.236
326) 53.901
326468.587
326432.005
326371.628
326355.405
326312.673
326304.45
326239.723
326220.924
326143.701
326032.897
326435.822
326308.047
326366.562
326298.725
326263.035
326243.219
326198.761
326051.464
326330.703
326264.089
326227.081
326194.685
326150.179
326125.23
326046.922
326308.442
326291.829
326247.444
326235.462
326193.082
326339.625
326286.967
326241.228
326364.737
326305.635
326298.31
326270.982
326264.692
326261.844
326225.518
326292.419
326279.5
326266.002
326262.423

y
32483) 8
3248357
3248183
3248202
3248236
3248244
3248263
3248267
3248295
3248306
3248348
3248409
3248196
3248257
3248213
3248248
3248267
3248277
3248300
3248373
3248221
3248256
3248276
3248292
3248314
3248326
3248369
3248338
3248307
3248225
3248202
3248118
3248375
3248280
3248200
3248407
3248294
3248279
3248224
3248211
3248209
3248107
3248302
3248254
3248211
3248203

Signature Amplitude Duration Sensor
Line Description
Type
Gamma
Feet
Alt. (Ft.) No.
D
4
9.57 RJ04-J
28
Debris
M
6
33
10.03 R104-1 Debris
M
4
40
56.01 R105-1
Debris
M
3
44
10.3 R105-1
Debris
17
9.94 R105-1
Debris
M
3
M
23
9.79 RJ05-1
Debris
9
9.5 R105-1
Debris
D
72
73
M
20
9.64 R105-1
Debris
70
M
23
9.38 R105-1
Debris
6
M
27
8.74 R105-1
Debris
6
42
9.3 R105-1
Debris
D
3
M
26
9.45 R105-1
Debris
3
M
24
49.05 R106-1
Debris
4
M
9.5 R106-1
Debris
30
87
M
19
24.63 R107-1
Debris
2
M
16
84
9.3 R107-1
Debris
32
9.81 R107-1
Debris
D
7
M
11
51
10.25 R107-1
Debris
M
21
10.18
R107-1
Debris
2
M
10.35 R107-1
Debris
3
33
21
47.95 R108-1
Debris
D
24
7.37 R108-1
Debris
D
1
M
21
61.5
R108-1
Debris
6
11
7.06 R108-1
Debris
D
44
M
20
7.08 R108-1
Debris
3
25
7.32 R108-1
Debris
D
3
31
33.2 R108-1
Debris
D
4
M
20
10.47 R109-1
Debris
M
11.3 R109-1
Debris
13
59
M
45
11.82 R109-1
Debris
5
M
46
11.23 R109-1
Debris
8
M
7.84 R109-1
Debris
37
M
2
23
10.33 R110-1
Debris
23
12.26 R110-1
Debris
D
85
16
12.33 R110-1
Debris
D
98
2
8.96 R111-1
Debris
D
30
42
9.64 R111-1
Debris
D
67
51
37.74 R111-1
Debris
D
39
M
14
48.88 R111-1
Debris
22
45
74
10.57 R111-1
Debris
D
11.57 R112-1
Debris
D
69
22
22
53.25 Rll2-1
Debris
M
3
9.28 R112-2
Debris
D
13
50
9.23 Rll2-2
Debris
D
3
33
M
10.47
R112-2
Debris
3
7
10.69 Rll2-2
Debris
D
35
76

110

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Ref. Corrected
No. Event No.
92
1.08
93
1.39
2.04
94
2.82
95
2.06
96
2.33
97
2.45
98
2.73
99
100
2.83
101
1.13
102
1.54
103
2.11
104
2.45
105
2.89
106
1.4
107
2.34
108
2.89

PIHI- 09157

Coordinate
X

326331.447
326313.799
326276.023
326232.664
326282.562
326259.637
326310.473
326224.754
326215.952
326331.69
326310.464
326281.501
326264.137
326233.408
326334.268
326280.05
326248.415

Signature Amplitude Duration Sensor
Line Description
Type
Gamma
Feet
Alt. (Ft.)
No.
D
34
3248319
9.94 R112-3
6
Debris
3248285
D
67
10.21 R112-3
Debris
107
3248212
D
16
10.62 R112-3
Debris
59
3248125
D
2
56.98 R112-3
Debris
39
3248204
D
31
12.43 R113-1
Debris
3
3248162
64
12.33 R113-1
Debris
M
8
3248265
D
49
11.96 R113-1
Debris
90
3248097
D
28
48.93 R113-1
Debris
6
3248081
D
40
53.91 R113-1
Debris
9
3248312
16
10.33 R113-2
Debris
M
3
3248265
D
11.06 R113-2
Debris
53
95
3248201
D
27
12.01 R113-2
Debris
3
3248162
11.72 R113-2
Debris
M
7
60
3248096
D
32
64
7.93 R113-2
Debris
3248273
D
106
49.44 R114-1
Debris
90
3248168
D
14
10.42 R114-1
Debris
36
3248107
4
19
38.18 R114-1
Debris
M
y

Ill

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

PIHI- 09157

112

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

PIHI- 09157

113

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

PIHI- 09157

114

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
MARINE CESIUM MAGNETOMETER MODEL G-800 SERIES
The Geometries cesium magnetometer provides a scalar measurement of the earth's magnetic
field intensity expressed in nano-Teslas (nT) or gammas (y). In the marine environment, geology
and man made objects create an external magnetic field, which disturbs the earth's primary
magnetic field. This change affects the rate of energy transition (Larmor frequency) of cesium
atoms from a higher to a lower excitation level in which case, the magnetic field is determined
exclusively by the strength of the external field.

The G-880 cesium magnetometer has a very high
sensitivity and sample rate due to the accuracy of the
larmor frequency counter, (i.e. 0.001 nT at 10 samples
per second). The frequency readings can be acquired
and concatenated from up to six individual sensors to
provide a

sequential RS-232 data

stream for

transmittal through a tow cable as long as 2,500 feet.
Additionally, the system is capable of providing
digital readings such as depth, altitude and water
temperature by providing each larmor counter with up
to eight AID converters that alJow analog inputs from
transducers or sensors. The data can be transmitted locally to a host CPU to interface with a side
scan sonar or a ROV system. Also, one of the main advantages of the cesium magnetometer
design is that the "Doppler Effect" given by the rotation of the sensor in rough seas is an order of
magnitude less for cesium since it has inherent low noise characteristics; therefore, the system is
more tolerable to movement reducing the source of troublesome noise.

Pll-11- 09157

115

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Adjustments to get the cesium sensor in the operating "active zone" include mounting the sensor
in such a way that the earth's magnetic field is not less than 15 degrees from the sensor's
centerlines of length and width. This is generally achieved at the beginning of a survey by tilting
or rolling the sensor, or rotating the shifting keel weight. When two or more sensors are used,
magnetic gradient data is obtained, which offers enhanced detection of small anomalies, diurnal
free total field profiles and improved noise rejection.During field operation, the incoming signal
amplitude is stored in files by lines with a Julian date and time, line number, voltage, and
ambient magnetic field. A graphic presentation of the magnetometer data is displayed in realtime, and a hard copy output of the recording is sent to a line printer. The magnetometer is also
equipped with a depth sensor, and the depth is output periodically on the hard copy record.
Specifications:
Operating Principle
Operating Range
Heading Error
Sensitivity

Operating Zones

Gradient Tolerance
Data Output
Larmor Counter

Pll-11- 09157

Self-oscillating split-beam cesium vapor (non-radioactive Cs133) with
automatic hemisphere switching.
17,000 nT to 100,000 nT
+I- 0.5 nT
90% of all readings will fall within the following peak-to-peak
envelopes
1. 0.05 nT at 0.1 sec cycle rate
2. 0.03 nT at 0.2 sec cycle rate
3. 0.01 nT at 1.0 sec cycle rate
For highest signal-to-noise ratio, the sensor long axis should be oriented at
45° +I- 30° to the earth's field angle, but operation will continue through
45° +I- 35°
>500 nT I inch; >20,000 nT I meter
Three wire RS232, magnetics, up to 6 AID channels for other
sensors if present
Integrated into sensor electronics in 'fish'
Ref Osc: Nominal 22 MHz
Output data concatenated with other counters or data
sources if present
AID converters: 3 single and 3 differential, 12 bit resolution
Control functions: Keyboard commands from surface

116

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

MULTIBEAM

Multibeam echo sounder
The new generation high performance shallow water
m1 ultibeam

PIHI- 09157

117

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Key facts
ThF.\I. 002 is a nw atlvanc tl multih am echo
sow1dr with xtt· mly high r solu tion and dynamically !ocu>ed beam>. 11 is very well suited for detailed
sealloor mapping and inspL Iion with water depths
ti-o m less than I meter up to typically 150 mc:tc:rs in the
ocean. \laximum depth capability i> mongly tkpemlalll on wata Lemperaturand salinity. up LO .>00 meters
is poss ih leo undr taYorahle conditions. Duto its c:lc:ctronic pitch compensation system and roll s\abilized

sys1.:m. Th incr ase in proc ssi11g power mak s
it possible to apply sophisticatd and c:xact signal
processing algorilhms lor beamlonning, beam stabilisation, and houom d"!euion_ Th..: hollom d..:t.:uion
algorithm is capable of xtmcting and proc ssing th
signals from only a pan of each beam. 1hus making i1
possible w obtain imlepend..:m smmdings even wlw1
ba ms arov rlappi ng.
l::._\.1 3002 wi 11 in addi lion 10 bathymelric sounding>.

wc:arhr conditions_
The spacing be\ween >oundings as well as the
acoustic 1\mlprinl'i can he sel nearly con>Lalll over the
swath in ordr to provide a un i fotm and high detection
and mapping perlomMnce. Dynamic locming of all
n.:cei ,-e b..:am> optimizs the >ystem perlonmmc:md
resolution lilr shon range applicmions such as umkr"·mer inspec Lions.

is ohtaind by combining tbc acoustic return signals
inside each beam. thus improving signal to noise ratio
consid"mhly, as well as eliminating several anitac\s
rlated to cotw ntional sid scan sonars_ Thacoustic
image is compensated lor the transmission source
kvcl, r ceiwr >ensitivily and signal allcnuution in
th..: waler column. so thm r..:liahlc hollom hackscau..:r
levels in dB ure obtained.
The acous1ic seabed image is compcn>aletl for
acouslic rayh ntling and 1hus compkkly geo-r..:l
erenced. so that preparation of a sonar mosaic fur
a survey area based upon da \a from sn·eral sctrvey
lines is easy. Objec\s oh> ned on 1he seabed image
arcotT cll y locatd and thi r positions Gill hr.:adi I y
ckrived_

Typical applications
• .\1apping of harbours. inland waterways ami shipping cha1mds >-vi th critical ked clearance
• \nspec Lion o j' underwmer inlras\ntnure
• Detee\ ion and mapping or ckbri s and ot h.:r und rwater ohJ L'Cls
• Detailed swTcy> rcl U\Lxl 10 underwater c\mslrut ion

work or d.r.odging

Operator Station

• bnironmemal seabed and habitat mapping
• \1apping ol'hiomass in the wa\er column

The Operawr Station is a ruggedized l'C workstation running on either l.inmJ' or .\1icrosol't \\'imlows
xp.R. The Operator Station software. SJS. has been
compleLdy redesigned and expanded compared to the
E\-1 3000 >oft ware, adding 3D graphics. n:al-Lime data

Features
The E\-1 3001 >ystem uses onof thre" a' uilubk

tl·.oqu.oncies in tlw 300 kHz bnnd.. This is an idea1

cleaning and electronic map bnckground..

frequency lor shallo"· water applicalions, as the high
Jl·equency ensures narrow beams with small physica 1

The E\-1 3002 can be set Hp lo use other operational
soft\\·are \han SIS, lor example (li'S "(ll:\Cy" or

d inwnsions. At the same time. 300 kHz secures n high

Coastal Oceanographics ''HYPACK \-lax". and is also

maximum runge capabilily and robustness under condition> wi1h high comcms of particles in the water.

supported by software from Triton Elics lnlenwtional.
E1VA and 01hers.
;.,·ore that Kongsberg 'vlaritime AS does not take

E\1 3002 us.os a n.ow and very powerful sonar
processor in combination wi til the same sonar head
used with 1hc popular and highly acclaimed E\-1 3000

• l'ull swath width accuracy to the latest
standard
Swath width up to 10 x water depth or 200m
• Depth range from< 1 meter to> 150 meters

IUO

any responsibility for system malfunction caused by
third-pany software.

• 100% bouom coverage even at more thm1 I 0 knots

vcsse1 speed
Real-time ray bending and attitude compensation
• Seabed image (sidescan) data output
Sonar head" ii1r SOO or 1500 meter'< depth rating

Rotlom detection hy pha"e or amplitude

PIHI- 09157

118

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Interfac-es:
Sound Son:«>r

TIJEt
Cen\er depth outpu\

=====> Storage
media

Serial intcrl'.a<ocs:

Positior.ingsyst.ems
Att.itud e(roll,phd• af'ld heave-)

Headir.g
CloCk
Spcc<ill in1crfaces:

Trlg;p&r h1pu t/ootpm
CJ.oek s,l•Ch roniz&k:n
Supply •ollage:
115 01230 Vao 5()'60 Hz

r··--"'"- -r-

.t .......................................•...
I·
Sae¢1\d Son.vM
(<'Ptiona )

Typical system cor':ftguration with desktop Operator Station,
Processing Unit and one or· two SoM r Heads.

.•.

....

-...
n

.,

This is an example on how the SIS software can be used.

PIHI- 09157

119

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

Operational specifications

Environmental and EMC specifications

Fn.:quenci.:s ................................... 293 ..100..>07
kllz
'<umber of sounding> per ping:
Single smmr hem\
'vbx 2S4

·rhe system meet> a II requirements of the lACS I: I 0
sp.cci lication_ Th.c ( )pcmtor Station. ]_( ·D monitor and
l'rocc<;<;ing \}niL arc all 11'22 raLcd.

DLLal sonar h uds ........................."........ 'vlux 5 m;
'vlaximum ping rate
40 liz
'vlaximum angulur coverage:
Singl.c sonar h.cml _ _
_ _

_

_

Dimensions and weights
Sonar head:
Shape .

l.10 d.cgrc.cs

Dua I sonar h uds ..........
.... 200 degr.:es
Pitch stabilisation....
.. ....... Yes
Roll sta hi Ii smion ... ..
.. ....... Yes
Heave compensation
......... Yes
. ... 150 _us
Pulse length.............
Range 'iampl ing rate
............... I 4. 14.-'. l 4.6 kl lz
D.cpth r.c-;olution
. I em
Transduc.cr geom.ct ry ..
\·1 i lis cross
Heam pattem .
. . . J -:quidi slant or equiangular
Beaml(mning:
• Time delay with slmding
• Dynamical] y !(JCused receive beams

. _. .

..

. .

..

. .

. (·y Iindrical

... Titanium
Diameter
'' ..'' ' ...'.'.' '' .. '' ...'.'.' '' ..'' ' ... J 31IlIll
!Ieight..................
. ................... I 19mm
Weight ...................... 25 kg in air. I 5 kg in water
Pressure rating ................ 500 m { I 500 m option)
Sonar Processing Pn it:
Width
Deplh _. .. . _. . ..

427 mm

. .

..

. .

..

.102 111m

IIeight .................................................... 177 mm
Weight
14 ') kg
Operator S tmion:
Width .. ..
Depth .. ..
!lei ghl .. . _. .

Seabed image data
• Composed ti·mn beaml(H-med >ignal amplitudes
.. Range resohnion _.:;

..

Ilousing mm.:rial ..

-Ll11.

• Compensated 1\n source lc,-cl ami receiver -;emi ti vity. a\ well a-; ultenuation and spherical spreading in
the water column.
• Amplitude r.csolut ion: 0.5 dB.

.......... 427
..

. .

..

. .

..

17_r industl'ial LC [) monitor:
Wid lh _. .. . _. . ..
. . ..
Deplh

IIeight ...

• Pmition
• I leading
• \lotion sensor (Pitch. rol I ami hea,-e)
• Sound ,cJocity profile
• Sound ,-elocity at transducer.
• Clock sync hroni sati on { I PI'S)

Weight...
Resolution

I 2 7 111m

.... 20 kg

Weight.. ................ .............

External sensors

lllnl

.......... "'Ko mm

. .

..

4MI nm1
7]

111m

..... "'00 mm
........9.2 kg
12KO x l 024 pixels

All surltLCe units ure rack moulllu blc. Dimensions
exclude handles and brackets.

Kongsberg Maritime is engaged in continuous development of its products, and reserves the right to alter the spccifications without further notice_ "HYPACK Max" is a trademark of Coastal Oceanographics Inc. "QINSy" is a trademark
of QPS.

Kongsberg Maritime AS
Strand pro me naden SO
P.O.Box 111
N-3191 Harten,
Norway

Telephone: +4 7 33 02 38 oo
Telefax: -t4 7 33 04 4 7 53

www.kongsberg.com
E- ma i I: subsea @kongsberg .com

SIMRAD EM-3002 MULTIBEAM
Frequency = 300 kHz
Ping Rate = up to 25 per second
Number of Beams Per Ping= 127 per ping
Beam Width = 1.5 degrees X 1.5 degrees
Pulse Length = 150 millisecond

Pllii- 09157

120

m
.

I

KONGSBERG

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
GEOACOUSTICS SIDE SCAN SONAR
The GeoAcoustics Side Scan Sonar System is an industry standard high-resolution search and
survey instrument designed both object location and the study of sea floor geology.
The
GeoAcoustics Side Scan Sonar System employs a surface based Model SS981 Transceiver and
Model 159 Tow Vehicle with two Model 196D Transducers and a Model SS982 Sub-surface
Electronic bottle. A real time data acquisition and processing system can be used to provide
high-resolution graphics, digital data storage, and imaging processing. The system offers
frequency operation modes of low frequency (114kHz) and a high frequency (410kHz).
The GeoAcoustics dual frequency Side Scan Sonar system is a multiplexed system. All power,
control signals and received sonar signals as well as optional data telemetry are multiplexed onto
a standard armoured single coaxial cable, which also act as the tow-cable. This simplified towcable configuration virtually eliminates cross talk between channels.
The Deck Unit is used to control
and condition the signals from the
tow-fish.
With the addition of a
thermal paper recorder the data can
be printed out in real time.
The compact subsea electronic
pressure vessel (GeoAcoustics
Model No. SS982) contains side
scan sonar transmitter and receiver
modules. It can be fit onto the
standard GeoAcoustic 159 side
scan to-fish or on a standard
profiler tow-fish when used as part
of a combined side scan and
profiler system. The port and
starboard side scan transducer units
are fitted on either side of the towfish. Each containing two arrays,
operating at 114 kHz or 410 kHz. These side scan transducers convert electronic energy to
acoustic signals of high intensity.
These acoustic signals travel through the water at
approximately 1500 ms-1 until they reach the seabed, where some of the energy is returned back
to the transducers. This acoustic return energy is converted by the same transducer to a much
lower voltage electronic signal which is accepted by the receiver electronics and processed using
time varied gain (TVG) and then converted to separate frequencies and transmitted back to the
surface unit.

PIHI- 09157

121

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
Specifications:
Transceiver - Model SS981:
General
Power requirements
Size
Weight
Temperature Storage:
Humidity
Mounting

110/240 VAC switchable, 40-60Hz, 50 W, optional24 VDC.
43.2 em W x 45.7 em D x 18.7 em H.
16kg.
-20 to 75 °C Operating: -5 to 50 °C.
10% to 95% RH, non-condensing.
The unit is suitable for either bench or rack mounting.

Operating Specification
Power output to tow vehicle 150 VDC ±3 VDC, 100 rnA average, 320 rnA peak.
Key burst out
455kHz, pulse width selectable 16 Vpp, PRR determined by key source.
Key input
Positive CMOS or TTL, 10 kW input impedance.
Receivers
Modulation frequency
Port 135kHz, Starboard 65kHz.
Bandwidth
15kHz.
Sensitivity
6 mV rms input produces 800 mV rms output with a 20 dB signal-to-noise
ratio (all gain maximum).
Input impedance
5kW.
Output impedance
600 W on all outputs.
Dynamic range Gain: adjustable over 60 dB range. TVG: -20 to +20 dB maximum AGC: -34 dB
maximum.
Selectable signal envelope or amplitude modulated 12 kHz.
Output
TVGdelay
3.3 ms minimum, 330 ms maximum.
Event mark
5 Vpp, 12kHz, front panel push button or BNC input requiring CMOS or
TTL level pulse. Produces visual mark on recording media.
0.6 ms CMOS/TTL compatible.
Key out
Modes
100 kHz and 500 kHz operation. Raw signal and processed signal.

PIHI- 09157

122

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
C-Wolf

Vessel Particulars

• Official # LA 2935 FS
• Dimensions:
o Length: 30ft
o Beam: 8.5 ft
o Draft: 2ft
• Construction: Aluminum -Built 2007
• Propulsion
o (2) Yamaha 150 HP (4 stroke)
• Electronics
o Radar: Furuno
o VHF: Raytheon
o Chart Plotter I Depth Finder
o 7.1 KW water cooled genset 110 volts
o (2) 1400 btu AC units
o Phone: 337-504-0889
Positioning & Geophysical Equipment
• (2) C-Nav Satellite Based Differential GPS System
• Kongsberg EM3002 Multibeam Sonar (threw hull moon pool)
• Coda Fl80 Intemial Navigation System
• Geo Acoustics side scan sonar (200/500 kHz)

- Optional equipment • Edgetech SB-424 Subbottom Profiler
• Odem 200/24 KHz single beam echo sounder
• Geometric Model 880 Cesium Magnetometer

PIIII- 09157

123

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

PIHI - 09157

124

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162
PROJECT PERSONNEL
C & C Technologies

Field Personnel
Scott Croft- Senior Surveyor
Jim Wade- Certified Hydrographer
Jacques Voorhies - Junior Surveyor
Office Personnel
Scott Croft - Vice President, Geosciences Division
Jay Northcutt- Geophysical Projects Manager
Tony George- Geosciences Manager
Doug Pierrottie - Senior AutoCAD Supervisor
Robert Westrick - Marine Archaeologist
Ave McBride - Lead AutoCAD & Micro-Station Operator
Cortnie Lae - Geophysical Assistant

Pllii- 09157

125

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

+

+

+

=
.. =
- ...... _J?not

-\lm·" "-""-"-.,...
..........

.._

•40-.&

"-'

...........w.w-...

···+

... ... +

+

+·

+

·+ .

+

+

.

+
GALVESTON 8AY

.. ··+·· .

.. ..+

+..

..··+
HIGHR£SOLU110N HAZARf) SURVEY
AROUND wRECK SfTE
CW.VESTOINBAY, TEXAS

r

PIHI- 09157

126

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

+

+

+

+

. .

. .•

+

. +

·+

+

.. ... . +

·+ .

+ .....

.. + ""-(-

+

GALVESTON BAY

+

+

+

.·+

+·

+
l't011RESOUJTJO..

MOUNDWR£CK SITE
OH..vESTON BAY,TExAS
etwfr8CAl-E1;1,a10

i

PIHI- 09157

127

t

•

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

+

+··

·+

+

,.

...,.

.,..

..

·+ ·

·+

+·

+

.".'

.

·+

+

+

+

·+

+

,

... ...- .•
.

·+

!!14

·+·
GALVESTON BAY

.j.

+

+·

HIOHIRESOWTlON I1'ZNW SlRYEY
AROUND WRECK SrTE

GALvESTONBAY. 1'EAAS
C2Wtr U.aa

b

T

··-------PIHI- 09157

128

j

T

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

CIIII-diGIGH)Ito"""
IM!InaNOM

ecn ar. ·u:z oo
a;.••• 3"'*-ct-1' ._1}
&.n ·O"

AVIIWIUJW.tmfiJ fOITU
.
.
.
pt

+

"""'""''w
.. ..,.,.
......'-""
•·+U-

......_t..,...,•<OO.IW

OOCKf DIQITIZEO

fftOM IMTA

+·

·+

"1.l

+·

..

+

+

GALVESTON
ISLAND

.

· il
+

-+

+·

+

PIHI- 09157

+

·+··

+

129

--

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE#: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

·+

+. .

+·

+·

·+··· ..

+

12{ij

PI

+

GALVESTON
ISLAND

$!
+

PIHI- 09157

...

+

.. +

+

130

+

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

APPENDIX L
KCF SMART TETHER AND BLUEVIEW P900 2D IMAGING SONAR FIELD
ASSESSMENT REPORT

PIHI - 09157

131

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

KCF SMART TETHER AND BLUEVIEW P900 2D IMAGING SONAR
FIELD ASSESSMENT REPORT
As sidebar to performing salvage activities to USS WESTFIELD (State Site #41GV151),
NAVSEA requested Phoenix to conduct field assessments of the new KCF Smart Tether and
BlueView P900 imaging sonar. NAVSEA intended to use these assessments in determining if
the equipment would be beneficial assets to future Navy missions. Unfortunately, the channel
surface conditions, which affected productivity of diving operations and recovery activities, also
limited assessment opportunities.

KCF SMART TETHER
The KCF Technologies Smart Tether is a subsea navigation system for use with divers, ROVs,
and deployed instruments. The basic Smart Tether is 40 meters in length with a series of
embedded, slim nodes which use acceleration, magnetic, and rate-gyro sensors to measure the
orientation and track the tether‟s position. The system includes a touch-screen Windows based
hand-held controller to generate and display real-time positions of the tether in the water column.
The Smart Tether is easy to mobilize and operate. The basic system includes a GPS antenna that
is positioned closest to the point where the tether is deployed overboard. As a tender pays-out or
hauls in the tether, the operator updates the number of nodes that are in the water column.
To assess the Smart Tether‟s applicability (accuracy/repeatability) to diver operations, Phoenix
married the 40-meter tether into the diver‟s umbilical but, quickly found it to be too short in
length for operations due to strong currents and long offset distances to targets. Although the
recorded positions were valid for the diver, it was decided to strip the Smart Tether from the dive
hose until KCF could provide an 80 meter extension (no embedded sensors).
The diving portion of the project was almost complete when conditions permitted deploying the
Smart Tether (with the 80 meter extension) on another series of dives. The operator tracked the
diver„s position, but observed some error and lack of repeatability. The system requires a realtime output to a proper navigation software package to be useful. KCF plans to include this I/O
capability in the next generation controller. In addition, it proved difficult to accurately monitor
the nodes as the tender managed the tether slack.
Smart Tether is advertised to be an ROV navigation system. It is designed for use primarily with
the VideoRay ROV system. The high water currents experienced in the work site were too high
for successful ROV deployment. Integrating the Smart Tether with the deployment of a
scanning sonar tripod positioned using a USBL beacon, allowed additional comparisons of the
tether‟s positional accuracy versus Sonardyne Scout USBL. Verifying position accuracies
required post-processing of all Smart Tether data files. The results of this post processing
confirmed that the Smart Tether positions were placed within a couple feet of the USBL
positions for the scanning sonar tripod.
Once KCF updates the Smart Tether with an output position string to a navigation software
system, it would be useful in tracking ROV and side-scan sonar systems in shallow inland and
coastal waters.

PIHI - 09157

132

USS WESTFIELD (STATE SITE #: 41GV151)
DELIVERY ORDER NO. 0162

BLUEVIEW P900 2D IMAGING SONAR
The BlueView P900 series sonar is forward-looking sonar (900 kHz) designed for underwater
detection and identification tasks. The unit is specifically is designed with increased search rates
(15 Hz) to provide both mid-range detection and close-range identification capabilities in low
and/or zero visibility conditions from moving or stationary platforms. BlueView ProViewer™
Software provided a 2D imaging sonar interface.
The ROV (VideoRay Pro 3 XEGTO) operational configuration included a BlueView P900,
integrated via the ROV‟s accessory connector to 40 meters of umbilical. The strong tidal flows,
which prevented the ROVs use, also meant that Phoenix could not provide a valid assessment of
the sonar‟s capability when mounted on a moving platform.
The static (tripod) operational configuration included a BlueView P900, 800 feet of cable, and an
Ethernet Extender Kit, which allowed the P900 to communicate several thousand feet. The twobody configuration (sonar unit/extender) provided multiple mounting options, and is an ideal
solution for many applications.
To perform a valid assessment, Phoenix deployed the P900 and a Kongsberg-Mesotech MS 1000
(scanning sonar) on the same tripod to observe clamshell operations. In the opinion of Phoenix,
the P900 static configuration fell short of providing any advantages over the MS 1000. In
comparison, the BlueView sonar presented a poor field of view and undefined details of the work
area and specific targets; although, the unit‟s high refresh rate could track the clamshell in realtime quicker than the MS 1000. In addition, the P900 has a very limited range (maximum 180
feet) in comparison to the MS 1000 (5 to 500 meters).
Overall, the BlueView P900 performed poorly in the Texas City Channel environment, and
while ProViewer™ Software proved to be user friendly it, offered minimal controls, and
restricted export functions - JPG and AVI only.

PIHI - 09157

133

Appendix C
Consultation Letters

Appendix C-1
THC Permits

Gearhart, Bob L
Steve Hoyt [Steve. Hoyt@thc.state.tx.us]
Tuesday, May 25, 2010 2:03 PM
Gearhart, Bob L
Lillie Thompson
FW: Antiquities Permits 3878, 4622 and 5271

From:
Sent:
To:
Cc:
Subject:

Bob,
I concur. We will make a note on permits 3878, 4622, and 5271 stating that they will all be covered under one
draft report. I have already discussed this with Lithe Thompson, keeper of the permit records, and wilt copy this
email to her for the record. Please make sure that the report clearly states that it covers all three permits.
Steve
Steven D. Hoyt, MA
State Marine Archeologist
Archeology Division
Texas Historical Commission
P0 Box 12276
Austin, TX 78711-2276
512-927-7882
fax 512-927-9797

www.thc.state.tx.us

I4

TEXAS HISTORICAL COMMISSION

i’I JId44I

IIt4f

v.,1

nsks

From: Gearhart, Bob L [mailto:blgearhart@pbsj.com]
Sent: Tuesday, May 25, 2010 1:52 PM
To: Steve Hoyt
Cc: Borgens, Amy A
Subject: Antiquities Permits 3878, 4622 and 5271
Steve,
The above referenced permits all pertain to aspects of the ongoing investigations of USS Westfield. The Galveston
District Corps of Engineers has requested that PBS&J incorporate the results of investigations conducted under those
three permits into a single comprehensive report. In order to facilitate review and record-keeping for THC, we want to
make sure that alt three permit files contain a reference to your approval for dealing with this complex project in such a
manner. I would appreciate if you would reply with your concurrence on this matter.
Bob

Bob Gearhart
Group Manager I PBS&J

1

Hydrographic Survey I Nautical Archaeology
Direct: 512.342.3339
Cell: 512-517-8564
This electronic mail communication may contain privileged, confidential, and/or proprietary information
which is the property of either The PBS] Corporation or one of its affiliates. If you are not the intended
recipient or an authorized agent of the intended recipient please delete this communication and notify the
sender that you have received it in error.

2

CLILI))

o6

State of Texas

TEXAS ANTIQUITIES COMMITTEE
ARCHEOLOGYPERMIT#

5271

This permit is issued by the Texas Historical Commission, hereafter referred to as the Commission,
represented herein by and through its duly authorized and empowered representatives. The
Commission, under authority of the Texas Natural Resources Code, Title 9, Chapter 191, and subject to
the conditions hereinafter set forth, grants this permit for:
Data Recovery

To be performed on a potential or designated landmark or other public land known
Title:
USS Westfield (41GV151) Wreck Additional Investigations
County: Galveston
Location: Texas City Channel

Owned or Controlled by: (hereafter known as the Permittee):
Texas General Land Office
1700 N. Congress, Room 720
Austin, TX 77550
Sponsored by (hereafter known as the Sponsor
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District
2000 Foil Point Road
Galveston, TX 77550

The Principal Investigator/Investigation Firm representing the Owner or Sponsor is:
Robert Gearhart
PBS&J
6504 Bridge Point Parkway, Suite 200
Austin, TX 78730
This permit is to be in effect for a period of:
4 Years and 0 Months
and Will Expire on:
04/30/2013
During the preseivation, analysis, and preparation of a final report or until further notice by the
Commission, artifacts, field notes, and other data gathered during the investigation will be kept
temporarily at:
CR1.- TA&MU, College Station
Upon completion of the final permit report, the same artifacts, field notes, and other data will be placed
in a permanent curatorial repositoiy at:
U.S. Govemment-TBD

Scope of Work under this permit shall consist of:
Underwater Sfte Excavation (Date Recovery). For details, see research design submitted with permit
application.

ARCHEOLOGYPER&fIT# 5271

This permit is granted on the following terms and conditions:
1) This project must be carried out in such a manner that the maximum amount of historic, scientific, archeological, and
educational information will be recovered and preserved and must include the scientific, techniques for recovery, recording,
preservation and analysis commonly used in archeological investigations.
2) The Principal Investigator/Investigation Firm, serving for the Owner/Permittee and/or the Project Sponsor, is responsible for
insuring that specimens, samples, artifacts, materials and records that are collected as a result of this permit are appropriately
cleaned, and cataloged for curation. These tasks will be accompllshed at no charge to the Commission, and all specimens,
artifacts, materials, samples, and original field notes, maps, drawings, and photographs resulting from the investigations remain
the property of the State of Texas, or its political subdivision, and must be curated at an appropriate repository. Verification of
curation by the repository is also required, and duplicate copies of any requested records shall be furnished to the Commission
before any permit will be considered complete.
3) The Principal Investigator/Investigation Firm serving for the Owner/Permittee, and/or the Project Sponsor is responsible for
the publication of results of the investigations in a thorough technical report containing relevant descriptions, maps, documents,
drawings, and photographs. A draft copy of the report must be submitted to the Commission for review and approvaL Any
changes to the draft report requested by the Commission must be made or addressed in the report, or under separate written
response to the Commission. Once a draft has been approved by Commission, twenty (20) copies of the final report shall be
furnished to the Commission.
4) If the Owner/Permittee, Project Sponsor or Principal Investigator/Investigation Firm falls to comply with any of the
Commission’s Rules of Practice and Procedure or with any of the specific terms of this permit, or falls to properly conduct or
complete this project within the allotted time, the permit will fall into default status and/or the Commission may cancel the permit
until such time that the terms of the permit are properly completed. Notification of Cancellation shall be sent to the
Owner/Permittee and the Principal Investigator/Investigation Firm, and all work associated with the permit must then stop
immediately upon receipt of the notice. Notification of Default status shall be sent to the Principal Investigator/Investigation
Firm, and the Principal Investigator will not be eligible to be issued any new permits until such time that the conditions of this
permit are complete.
5) The Owner/Permittee, Project Sponsor, and Principal Investigator/Investigation Firm, in the conduct of the activities hereby
authorizes, must comply with all laws, ordinances and regulations of the State of Texas and of its political subdivisions
including, but not limited to, the Antiquities Code of Texas; they must conduct the investigation in such a manner as to afford
protection to the rights of any and all lessees or easement holders or other persons having an interest in the property and they
must return the property to its original condition insofar as possible, to leaves it in a state which will not create hazard to life nor
contribute to the deterioration of the site or adjacent lands by natural forces.
6) Any duly authorized and empowered representative of the Commission may, at anytime, visit the site to inspect the fieldwork
as well as the field records, materials, and specimens being recovered.
7) For reasons of site security associated with nautical historical resources, the Project Sponsor (if not the Owner/Permittee),
Principal Investigator, and Investigation Firm shall not issue any press releases, or dWulge to the news media, either directly or
indirectly, information regarding the specific location of, other information that might endanger those resources, or their
associated artifacts without first consulting with the Commission, and the State agency or political subdivision of the State that
owns or controls the land where the resource has been discovered.
8) This permit may not be assigned by the Principal Investigator/Investigation Firm, Owner/Permittee, or Project Sponsor in
whole, or in part to any other individual, organization, or corporation not specifically mentioned in this permit without the written
consent of the Commission.
9) Hold Harmless: The Owner/Permittee hereby expressly releases the State and agrees that Owner/Permittee will hold
harmless, indemnify, and defend (including reasonable attorney’s fees and cost of litigation) the State, its officers, agents, and
employees in their official and/or individual capacities from every liability, loss, or claim for damages to persons or property,
director indirect of whatsoever nature arising out of, or in any way connected with, any of the activities covered under this
permit. The provisions of this paragraph are solely for the benefit of the State and the Texas Historical Commission and are not
intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity.
10) Addendum: The Owner/Permittee, Project Sponsor and Principal Investigator/Investigation Firm must abide by any
addenda hereto attached.
Upon a finding that it is in the best interest of the State, this permit is issued on 04/30/2009.

7Ja

(r

c E. Brueth, for the
HLtoricai Commission

Appendix C-2
Navy History and Heritage Command
Permit for Intrusive Archaeological Research PBSJ-2009-001

Permit for Intrusive Archaeological Research on
U.S. Naval Cultural Resources
PERMITEE NAME- Robert L. Gearhart
ADDRESS- 6504 Bridge Point Parkway, Suite 200, Austin, TX, 78730
PHONE- (512) 342-2453 FAX (512) 327-2453
E-MAIL ADDRESS- blgearhart@pbsj.com
AFFILIATION- PBS&J
PROJECT TITLE- Additional Investigations on the Wreck of the USS Wesfle/d
PROJECT’S NHHC ASSIGNED NUMBER- PBS&J-2009-001
SCOPE OF INTRUSIVE WORK ALLOWED- Permission is subject to permitce obtaining all local government
pcrmits. Copies of such permits will be included in the final report to the N l—{HC. USS W’es’le/d site disturbance to include
systematic exposure, mapping, and artifact recovery. Any human remains that are discovered will be carefully secured,
stored in water, and transferred to an identification facility specified by NHI-JC. Costs associated with artifact conservation,

to

packing, transportation, and accession are the responsibility of the permittcc. I’he final disposition of the recovered artifacts
an appropriate facility will be coordinated by US \( I nd the pcrmittcc with final apprm al by N FIH(

LOCATION, INCLUDING LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE AND/OR UTM DATA- UTM 15
(meters): 326300 (casting), 3248285 (northing)

NAME OF THE SHIPWRECK OR BUREAU NUMBER OF THE AIRCRAFT WRECK- USS
Wes’JIeId
NAME OF PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR IF DIFFERENT THAN APPLICANTNAME, ADDRESS, AFFILIATION AND RELATIONSHIP OF COLLEAGUES TO BE
COVERED BY PERMIT- Amy A. Borgens, Doug S. Jones, Sara G. Hoskins, Dan L. Hudson of PBS&J,
6504 Bridge Point Parkway, Suite 200, Austin, TX, 78730.
Conservation Research Laboratory, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX.
DURATION OF PERMIT- 23 March 2009 —22 March 2010
Si-nature of Permittee on this permit denotes acceptance ofNa val History & Heritage Command terms and guidelines
applying to t
it. Permittee cepts r ponsibility for all damages and liabilities incurred during permitted activity.

Signed
4pp/scem1

7&3 /

44’

Signed
Dr. Robert S. Ney/and, I lead, UnderwaterA rc/iaes/syy I3raoc//

Date

Y,t7/°T

Date 3)

/ô,
3

Appendix C-3
Navy History and Heritage Command
Permit for Intrusive Archaeological Research, PBSJ-2009-0002

I

NAVAL

HISTORY&
HEMThGE
*COMMAND*

NHHC Archaeological Research Permit
For

Ship and Aircraft Wrecks under the Jurisdiction of the Department of the Navy
NHHC PERMIT NUMBER:

PBSi

—

2009

NAME OF PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:

—

0002

ROBERT L GEARHART

PBS&J
6504 BRIDGE POINT PARKWAY, SUITE 200, AUSTIN, TX, 78730
PHONE: (512) 342 3339 FAX: (512) 327 -2453 E-MAIL ADDRESS: LGEARHART@PBSJ.COM

AFFILIATION:
ADDRESS:

-

ADDITIONAL INVESTIGATIONS ON THE WRECK OF THE USS WESTFIELD
USS WESTFIELD
LOCATION (LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE AND/OR UTM DATA): UTM (meters) 326300 (e), 3248285 (n)

PROJECT TITLE:

NAME OF THE SHIP WRECK OR BUREAU NUMBER OF THE AIRCRAFT WRECK:

NAME, ADDRESS, AFFILIATION AND RELATIONSHIP OF COLLEAGUES TO BE COVERED BY PERMIT:
-

-

AMY A. BORGENS; DOUG S. JON ES; SARA G. HOSKINS; DAN 1. HUDSON; AND QUALIFIED
CONTRACT HIRES (PBS&J).
CONSERVATION RESEARCH LABORATORY, TEXAS A&M UNIVERSITY, COLLEGE STATION, TX.

FUNDING SOURCE:

U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS, GALVESTON DISTRICT

EXTENSIVE ARTIFACT RECOVERY AS PER THE METHODOLOGY
STIPULATED IN PERMIT APPLICATION SIGNED ON NOVEMBER 4, 2009.
SCOPE OF INTRUSTIVE WORK ALLOWED:

DURATION OF PERMIT:

NOVEMBER 10, 2009 TO NOVEMBER 10, 2010

Signature of Permittee on this permit denotes acceptance of Naval History & Heritage Command terms and
guidelines applying to this permit. Permittee accepts responsibility for all damages and liabilities incurred
during permitted activity.

APPLICANT SIGNATURE

DATE

DIRECTOR, NHHC SIGNATURE

DATE

By Direction

It

/

7,-I-,

Appendix C-4
Agency Correspondence

TExAs
HI STO RI CAL
C 0MM I S SI 0 N

RICK PERRY, GOVERNOR
JOHN L. NAU, Ill, CHAIRMAN
F. LAWERENCE OAKS, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

The State Agencyfor Historic Preservation

November 8, 2005

Mr. Robert L. Gearhart U
Program Manager
PBS&J
6504 Bridge Point Parkway, Suite 200
Austin, TX 78730
Project review under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and the
Re:
Antiquities Code of Texas
Draft Report: Diving Assessment of Two Anomaliesfor Historic properties Investigations, Texas
City Channel Improvements Project, Galveston County, Galveston Bay, Texas. Texas Antiquities
Permit # 3878
COE-VD
Dear Mr. Gearhart

Thank you for your correspondence describing the above referenced project. This letter serves as
comment on the proposed federal undertaking from the State Historic Preservation Officer, the Executive
Director of the Texas Historical Commission. As the state agency responsible for administering the
Antiquities Code of Texas, these comments also provide recommendations on compliance with state
antiquities laws and regulations.
The review stafl led by State Marine Archeologist Steven D. Hoyt, has completed its review. We concur
with the fmdings and recommendations of the authors. Anomaly GV0032 was not generated by historic
deposits and needs no further investigation. GVOO3 1, identified as wreckage from the USS Wes’fleld
(41 GV 151), is eligible for the National Register of Historic Places. The argument for NRFIP eligibility is
well developed and supported. Additional work will be required on the site prior to proceeding with the
proposed project. We look forward to working with you, the Corps of Engineers and the Naval Historical
Office as this project develops. Congratulations on ajob well done.
Please note in your report that the Westfield (THC #69) is also a State Archeological Landmark,
designated as such on June 28, 1993. Some discussion of the need for conservation and curation of
artifacts would also be appropriate in the Recommendations section of the report.
We look forward to further consultation with your office and hope to maintain a partnership that will
foster effective historic preservation. Thank you for your cooperation in this federal and state review
process, and for your efforts to preserve the irreplaceable heritage of Texas. If you have any questions
concerning our review or if we can be of further assistance, please contact Steve Hoyt at 5 12/9277882.
Sincerely,

Officer

for F. Lawerence Oaks, State

P.O. BOX 12276

.

AUSTIN, TX 78711-2276 512/463-6100 FAX 512/475-4872
www.thc.state.tx.us
.

.

TDD 1-800/735.2989

DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
GALVESTON DISTRICT, CORPS OF ENGINEERS
P. 0. BOX 1229
GALVESTON, 'TEXAS 77553-1229
DECEMBER 15,2006

I3nvironmental Section

James E. Bruseth, Ph.D.
Ileputy State Historic
I'reservation Officer
Texas Historical Commission
P.0. Box 12276
Austin, Texas 787 11
Dear Dr. Bruseth:
The US Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District (CE), proposes to initiate a
E'rogrammatic Agreement (PA) pursuant to 36CFR800.6 and 36CFR800.14 (b)(3) to address
impacts associated with improving navigation on the existing Texas City Channel, Galveston
County, Texas. A Draft Environmental Assessment (EA) of the proposed improvements is
planned to be released for public comment in late December, 2006. We find it necessary to
negotiate a programmatic agreement because effects on historic properties cannot be fully
dletermined prior to approval of this complex undertaking.
The following improvements are proposed in association with the Texas City Channel
4.5-Foot Project (TCC): 1) enlarging the existing channel to 45-feet deep and incidental widening
im areas; 2) constructing two hydraulic fill groins on the north end of the Texas City Dike and
filling the 90-acre area with dredged material to expand water-oriented recreational area; and, 3)
a Dredged Material Management Plan (DMMP) for the disposal of new work and maintenance
materials. All of these proposed improvements are shown on the maps provided as Enclosure 1.
The location of these improvements corresponds to the area of potential effects (APE).
Most, but not all, of the APE has been surveyed for historic properties (Jones et al. 2002;
Gearhart et al. 2005; Enright et al. 2005; Gearhart et a1 2006). These reports have already been
provided to you. The reports also summarize historical research, nautical remote-sensing
surveys and dive assessments which located a shipwreck which has been identified as the
remains of the USS WestJield (41GV151). The USS Westfield is a U.S. Navy flagship that ran
aground during the Battle of Galveston and was scuttled to prevent capture on January 1, 1863.
We believe that evidence provided in the reports support a determination of eligibility under
National Register criteria A, B, and D (36 CFR 60) and request your concurrence in this
determination pursuant to 36 CFR 63.
The CE proposes negotiation of a PA which outlines procedures to be followed to
complete identification, evaluation and assessment investigations of the area of potential effects,
and to address adverse effects to the wreck of the USS WestJield. This is the only eligible

historic property that has been identified to date in the APE. The USS WestJield will be
adversely affected by channel deepening as the wreck is situated partially within the navigation
channel proposed for deepening. Avoidance is not possible because the location of the channel
is controlled by existing jetties.
We are proposing a four-party PA (Enclosure 2), to be negotiated among the CE, the City
of Texas City (City), the U.S. Naval Historical Center (NHC), and the Texas State Historic
I'reservation Office (SHPO). The draft PA is being coordinated concurrently with all consulting
parties and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation (ACHP). The intent of the PA is to
avoid or mitigate impacts to historic properties in areas directly affected by new dredging and
channel construction, construction staging and access areas, new or extensions of existing
placement areas, areas affected by the beneficial uses of dredged material, and ongoing
rnaintenance dredging activities relate to the TCC and to guide the development of a Treatment
I'lan for the remains of the USS WestJield to resolve adverse effects in accordance with 36 CFR
€100.6.
In summary, the CE requests your review of the enclosed PA. Please provide a copy of
your comments to all of the consulting parties (addresses provided below). Upon receipt of your
comments and finalization of the draft PA in consultation with your office, the City and the
NHC, the CE will coordinate a final draft PA with interested Native American Indian tribes in
accordance with 36 CFR 800.3 (f)(2). Public coordination required by 9 800.3 (a) will be
accomplished by inclusion of the final draft PA in the Draft EA, which will be made available
for public review and comment. We also request your concurrence in our determination that the
IJSS Westfield (41GV15 1) is eligible for the National Register of Historic Places under criteria
11 B, and D. If you have any questions, please don't hesitate to call Ms. Nicole Minnichbach at
4.09-766-3878.

Sincerely,

+%
Carolyn urphy
chief, ~nviro-ental

Enclosures:
1 Maps
2 Draft PA
(:C wlo Enclosures
Ads. Barbara Voulgaris
The Naval Historical Center
805 Kidder Breese St., SE
Washington Navy Yard, DC 20374-5060

Section

Mayor Matthew T. Doyle
CC at same address Mr. Douglas Hoover
The City of Texas City
1801 91hAvenue North
FB.O.Drawer 2608
Texas City, TX 77592-2608
Mr. Don Klima
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
Office of Federal Agency Programs
Old Post Office Building
1100 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Suite 803
Washington, DC 20004
Ms. Janelle Stokes
CESWG-PE-PR
h4s. Nikki Minnichbach
C1ESWG-PE-PR

-References

Enright, J.J. and J.M. Enright and R.L. Gearhart I1 and D.S. Jones
2005 Diving Assessment of Two Anomalies for Historic Properties Investigations,
Texas City Channel Improvements Project, Galveston County, Galveston Bay, Texas.
Prepared for USACE, Galveston District
Gearhart, R.L. I1 and D.S. Jones and J.M. Enright and J. Enright and T. Summe
2005 Close-Order Remote-Sensing Survey of Five Anomalies and
Modifications for Historic Properties Investigations, Texas City
Galveston Bay, Texas. Prepared for USACE, Galveston District.
Jones. D.S. and J.M. Enright and J. Watts and R.L Gearhart 11.
2002 Side-Scan Sonar, Magnetometer and Bathymetry survey
and Submerged Cultural Resources for the Proposed Shoal Point
Galveston Bay, Texas. Prepared for the City of Texas City.
Gearhart, R.L. I1 and J.J. Enright and A. Borgens and S. Hoskins and D. Jones ard J. Enright
2006 Diving Assessment of Two Anomalies for Historic Properties Investigations and
National Register Assessment of Site 41GV15 1 (USS Westfield), Texas Clity Channel
Improvements, Galveston Bay, Texas. Prepared for USACE, Galveston District.

I{l(:h: I'IXRY. (;OVERNOR
I O I I N I. N,\[I, 111, (:IIAII{MAN
F. IA'XJEItI<N(,Ii O A K S , l X E ( ; t l T I \ T l ~ I I t l ~ ~ ~ I ~ O I t

Thr >dateAgencv.for Historic Presertlation
-

-----

-

p
p

January 23, 2007
Ms. Carolyn Murphy
Chief, Environmental Section
Galveston District, Corps of Engineers
P.O. Box 1229
Galveston, TX 77553-1229
RE:
Project review under Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 and
the Antiquities Code of Texas
Draft Programmatic Agreement for Construction and Maintenance of the 45-foot Project,
Texas City Channel, Galveston County, Texas.
COE-VD

Dear Ms. Murphy:
Thank you for your correspondence describing the above referenced PA. This letter serves as
comment from the State Historic Preservation Officer, the Executive Director of the Texas
Historical Commission. As the state agency responsible for administering the Antiquities Code
of Texas, these comments also provide recommendations on compliance with state antiquities
laws and regulations.
We have reviewed the draft PA referenced above find it acceptable without hrther comment.
We also concur that the US S WestJieid(4 1GV 15 1) is eligible for the National Register of
Historic Places under criteria A, B, and D.
We look forward to hrther consultation with your ofice and hope to maintain a partnership that
will foster effective historic preservation. Thank you for your cooperation in this federal and
state review process, and for your efforts to preserve the irreplaceable heritage of Texas. If you
have any questions concerning our review or if we can be of further assistance, please
contact Steve Hoyt at 5121463-7188.
Sincerely,
/
L
'

for F. Lawerence Oa

reservation Officer

cc: Ms Barbara Voulgaris, Naval Historical Center
Mayor Matthew T. Doyle, The City of Texas City
Mr. Douglas Hoover, The City of Texas City
Mr. Don Klima, Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
h s . Janelle Stokes, US Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District
Ms Nikki Minnichbach, US Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District

DEPARTMENT O F THE NAVY
NAVALHISTORICALCENTER
8 0 5 KIDDER BREESE STREET SE
WASHINGTONNAVYYARD D C 2 0 3 7 4 - 5 0 6 0
IN REPLY REFER TO

5000
Ser F0/00013
February 15, 2007
Ms. Carolyn Murphy
Chief, Environmental Section
Galveston District, Army Corps of Engineers
P.0. Box 1229
Galveston, TX 77553 -1229
Dear Ms. Murphy:
I am writing in response to your letter dated December 15, 2006,
irequesting comments on the draft programmatic agreement (PA) for the
Construction and Maintenance of the 45-foot Project, Texas City Channel,
Galveston County, Texas. This letter serves as comment from the U.S.
Navy, Naval Historical Center, the Navy command responsible for the
management of the U.S. Navy's historic ship and aircraft wrecks.
It has been determined that the Civil War shipwreck USS W e s t f i e l d
(41GV151),a historic property under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Navy,
will be adversely affected by this undertaking. We agree with the
findings that W e s t f i e l d is eligible for listing on the National Register
under criteria A, B, and D. We have reviewed the PA and find it
sufficient in addressing the adverse affects on W e s t f i e l d and therefore
have no further comment.
We look forward to continuing our partnership throughout the
consultation process in order to preserve this important piece of history
for Texas, the U.S. Navy, and the nation. Thank you for the opportunity to
review the draft PA. If you have any questions please contact Ms. Barbara
Troulgaris at 202-433-7562.
Sincerely,

P. 0. WHEELER
Captain, U.S. Navy
Deputy Director of Naval History
(lopy to:
blr. Steve Hoyt, Texas Historical Commission
blayor Matthew Doyle, The City of Texas City
blr. Douglas Hoover, The City of Texas
blr. Don Klima, Advisory Council on Historic Preservation
bIs. Janelle Stokes, USACE, Galveston District
bls. Nikki Minnichbach, USACE, Galveston District

Appendix D
Nondisclosure Figures

Appendix D: Nondisclosure Figures

Figure D-1. Sonar with channel toe

D-1

Appendix D (Cont’d)

FIGURE D-2. SIDE-SCAN SONAR (FIGURE BY BOB GEARHART).

FIGURE D-3. SONAR DEBRIS FIELD (FIGURE BY BOB GEARHART).

D-2

Appendix D (Cont’d)

FIGURE D-4. 41GV151 CHIRP SUB-BOTTOM PROFILER RESULTS (FIGURE BY BOB GEARHART).

Figure D-5. Dive Coverage (Figure by Bob Gearhart).

D-3

Appendix D (Cont’d)

Figure D-6. Artifact Target Numbers (Figure by Bob Gearhart).

Figure D-7. Horizontal Distribution of Shallow Probes (Figure by Bob Gearhart).

D-4

Appendix D (Cont’d)

FIGURE D-8. HORIZONTAL DISTRIBUTION OF DEEP PROBES (FIGURE BY BOB GEARHART).

Figure D-9. Proposed Work Area for May 2009 Fieldwork (Image by Amy Borgens).

D-5

Appendix D (Cont’d)

Figure D-10. Results of the May 2009 Field Session (Figure by Amy Borgens).

Figure D-11. Grid Configuration for Galveston Fieldwork, Fall 2009 (Image by Amy Borgens).

D-6

Appendix D (Cont’d)

D-12. Clamshell Coverage (Image by Sara Laurence and Amy Borgens).

D-13. Distribution of All Artifacts (Image by Sara Laurence and Amy Borgens).

D-7

Appendix D (Cont’d)

Figure D-14. Distribution of All Concretions (Image by Sara Laurence and Amy Borgens).

D-8

Appendix E
Post-Recovery Magnetometer Survey Results

Appendix E: Post-Recovery Magnetometer Survey Results
On February 25, 2010, PBS&J conducted a post-recovery magnetometer survey over the wreck site.
Two remote-sensing surveys were performed by Robert Gearhart and Justin Sandlin from the
25-foot (ft) survey vessel Howard Post. The purpose of the post-recovery surveys was to assess the
amount of iron remaining on the seafloor following artifact recovery operations. The first
magnetometer survey in February 2010 was conducted with the magnetometer towed 3–7 ft off the
seafloor with a line interval of 10-ft (Figure 1a). This is similar but does not exactly replicate the
2007 ordnance survey (10-ft line interval and 3–12 ft off the seafloor, Figure 1b) to which it is
compared in Figure 1. The second survey in February 2010 was conducted using a survey
methodology typical for close-order magnetometer surveys of shipwrecks (30–ft line interval with
the sensor 20 ft from the seafloor). For comparison, Figure 2 shows the data from the February
2010 post-recovery survey at the 30-ft line interval (a) compared to a pre-recovery magnetometer
survey conducted for the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) in 2007 (b), in which the
survey line interval and sensor depth were identical.
The survey data from 2010 indicate that the site retains a large magnetic anomaly with some higher
amplitude peaks than pre-recovery surveys conducted in 2007, despite the removal of over 7,800
artifacts, a large portion of which are iron. A cursory comparison of magnetic contour maps from
before (Figure 1a) and after (Figure 1b) the artifact recovery operation suggests results contrary to
expectations, considering that such a large quantity of iron artifacts was removed from the site
prior to the 2010 surveys. However closer comparison of the surveys is consistent with the fact that
a substantial amount of iron has been removed from the site. For example, 17 of 20 anomaly peaks
(both positive and negative poles considered) from the 2007 ordnance survey (see Figure 1b)
experienced a reduction in amplitude, that is to say a value closer to zero, when surveyed in 2010
following removal of artifacts from the site (see Figure 1a). The average amplitude reduction was
61 percent. Nevertheless, 3 of the 20 amplitude peaks from 2007 increased substantially in 2010,
and several new amplitude peaks occurred in 2010 in other areas of the site grid previously
reporting lower values.
Unfortunately, the results have proved inconclusive for their stated purpose, and the fact that some
amplitudes increased over portions of the site requires an explanation. At least three factors are
believed responsible for the overall appearance of increased amplitude following the recovery of
artifacts from the site. These include (1) differences in height of the magnetometer sensor between
the 2007 and 2010 surveys, (2) slightly different paths of the sensor across the site in 2007 versus
2010, and (3) reduction in the complexity of the anomaly source by removal of iron artifacts from
the site.

441186/100102

E-1

Appendix E (Cont’d)

Figure 1: Magnetometer Data at 10-ft Line Intervals. (a) USACE Survey 2010; (b) USACE Survey 2007).

DIFFERENCES IN SENSOR HEIGHT
The amplitude of magnetic anomalies is commonly considered a direct indication of the mass of
iron present on a site; however, the distance of the magnetometer sensor from the anomaly source
is equally important in determining anomaly amplitude. Amplitude of a dipole is inversely
proportional to the cube of distance from the source (Breiner 1973:20). Thus if the mass of a source
is held constant but the distance between the source and the sensor is reduced by half, the
amplitude should be approximately eight times greater. Though both surveys employed the same
line interval, the magnetometer was typically closer to the seafloor, within the area of the site grid,
during the 2010 survey. Differences in sensor elevations between the two surveys are illustrated on
Figure 3. Gray contours indicate areas where the sensor was closer to the seafloor in 2010, while
441186/100102

E-2

Appendix E (Cont’d)
green contours indicate areas where the sensor was higher. The sensor was closer to the seafloor
over 35 of 43 excavated grid units (all except 102–105, 114, 151, and 153). The closer proximity of
the magnetometer to the remaining artifact debris field in the 2010 survey has potential to
significantly increase observed amplitudes despite the fact that substantially less metal is present
now than prior to recovery fieldwork. Had the mass of iron remained unchanged, amplitudes
should have increased from about 2 to 3.7 times over at least 19 grid units. Yet some new amplitude
peaks were 25 to 100 times that recorded at the same locations by the 2007 survey. While a
meaningful comparison of the two surveys is problematic because of the differences in sensor
height at such close proximity to iron objects, differences in the distance from the sensor to the
source clearly are not sufficient to explain all of the amplitude increases observed on the site.
Realizing that sensor height was difficult to control and that inconsistencies in sensor height had
potential to skew results, an additional survey was conducted (Figure 2a) using a sensor height of
approximately 20 ft off the seafloor. This height was chosen as more typical of a magnetometer
survey designed to search for a shipwreck and because it would allow a valid comparison with a
2007 magnetometer survey over Westfield (Figure 2b) reported in Borgens et al. (2007). A
comparison of the results shows that four of five peaks in the 2007 data decreased in amplitude by
a factor of 1/2 to 1/10, while one increased by a factor of 1.3. Three peaks occurred in the 2010
data at new locations, exceeding the 2007 amplitudes by 3 to 8 times. In particular, removal of the
cannon from Unit 123, the boiler flues from Unit 122, and a complete 5-x-5-ft iron plate from Unit
121 significantly reduced anomaly amplitudes in that part of the site. A slight change in the sensor
altitude at a distance of 20 ft from a magnetic source has far less effect than it would at a range of
say 3 ft, so variations in amplitude between Figure 2a and 2b must primarily be due to other
factors.

DIFFERENCES IN SENSOR PATH
When towing the sensor as close as 3 ft to an iron source, a small horizontal deviation in the sensor
path has potential to result in substantially different anomaly amplitudes. Without knowledge of
the location, size, and orientation of large sources, it is impossible to estimate the degree to which
this factor contributed to differences in anomaly amplitudes from 2007 and 2010. Such an analysis
would be an extremely daunting challenge for an anomaly source as complex as Westfield. Since the
number and locations of iron objects remaining on the seabed in 2010 are unknown, suffice it to say
that differences between the sensor paths of the two surveys undoubtedly affected the appearance
of the resulting anomaly contours.

441186/100102

E-3

Appendix E (Cont’d)

Figure 2: Magnetometer Data at 30-ft Line Intervals. (a) USACE Survey 2010; (b) TxDOT Survey 2007).

441186/100102

E-4

Appendix E (Cont’d)

Figure 3: Differences in magnetometer sensor height between the 2007 and 2010 surveys
illustrated on figures 1a and 1b. Contour interval is 1 foot.
Gray contours indicate areas where the sensor was closer to the seafloor in 2010.
Green contours indicate areas where the sensor was closer to the seafloor in 2007.

REDUCTION IN ANOMALY SOURCE COMPLEXITY
Contrary to reasoning, a reduction in the mass of iron on a site actually may result in an increase in
anomaly amplitude. This phenomenon can be explained by the cancellation of remnant
(permanent) magnetic fields in a complex source. Complexity refers to high numbers and high
randomness of individual iron elements composing a magnetic anomaly source. Breiner (1973:44)
states that “. . . the more component parts an object has, the more these individual permanent
magnetic moments tend to cancel, leaving only the induced magnetization.” Thus the larger the
number of ferromagnetic elements in a complex source (i.e., the site before artifact recovery), the
more destructive interference occurs between their remnant magnetic fields and the more the
anomaly is dominated by their induced magnetic fields. But an object’s induced magnetic field may
be less than one-tenth the strength of its permanent field (Breiner 1973:9), thus a larger number of
ferromagnetic elements in a complex source tends to result in lower anomaly amplitude. Likewise a
higher degree of randomness in a complex source results in an increased level of destructive
interference between remnant magnetic fields, resulting in lower anomaly amplitude.
To demonstrate the cancellation of remnant magnetic fields, Figure 4a shows a magnetometer
survey conducted 4 inches above a single ½-inch wire nail. Figure 4b shows a second survey
conducted following the addition of another identical nail beside the first but with the two nails
oriented in opposite directions. The anomaly amplitude produced by the single nail measured
+35/–29 nanoTeslas (nT), whereas the anomaly associated with two nails registered only
+8/−6 nT. Thus a 78 percent reduction in amplitude was achieved by doubling the mass, due to the
441186/100102

E-5

Appendix E (Cont’d)
partial cancellation of each nail’s remnant magnetic field. If the nails had been pointed in the same
direction, there should have been a resulting increase over the original anomaly amplitude due to
constructive interference.
This phenomenon may be partially responsible for the amplitude increases observed over portions
of the site on Figure 2a. For example, a handful of iron objects the size of a fire box grate might
produce larger anomaly amplitude than the entire firebox filled with dozens of grates. Based on the
coverage of the clamshell operation and the quantity of artifacts recovered, it is presumed that the
vast majority of ferromagnetic material has been removed from the site. Thus, the mass of the
anomaly source has been greatly reduced. At the same time, however, the number and randomness
of remnant magnetic fields destructively interfering with one another has also been greatly
reduced, contributing to an increase in magnetic anomaly amplitude in the vicinity of larger objects
remaining on the seafloor.

Figure 4: Destructive Interference in Magnetometer Targets

CONCLUSIONS
While portions of the Westfield anomaly exhibited diminished amplitude following recovery of
artifacts in 2009, amplitude increased in other areas. Recovery of iron artifacts has substantially
reduced the mass of the magnetic anomaly source present at the Westfield site. Reduction of iron
441186/100102

E-6

Appendix E (Cont’d)
mass is commonly equated to a lowering of anomaly amplitude; however, other factors, including
sensor altitude, sensor path, and source complexity, are believed to have contributed to localized
increases in amplitude. Unfortunately, one cannot reliably judge the amount of material remaining
on the seafloor on the basis of the magnetometer surveys, due to the complications associated with
those factors discussed above.

441186/100102

E-7

Appendix E (Cont’d)
Borgens, Amy, Dan Hudson, Doug Jones, and Robert Gearhart
2007
Marine Remote-Sensing Survey of the Proposed Texas City Dike Groins and the
Additional Close-Order Survey and Archival Investigation for the Wreck of the USS
Westfield for Historic Properties Investigations, Texas City Channel Improvements
Project, Galveston County, Galveston Bay, Texas. Document No. 070203. Interim
report prepared for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston District, by PBS&J,
Austin.
Breiner, S.
1973

441186/100102

Applications Manual for Portable Magnetometers. Geometrics, Inc., Sunnyvale,
California.

E-8

