A CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY OF
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL NO. 13
TRAVIS AND WILLIAMSON COUNTIES, TEXAS

Document No. 020089
PBS&J Job No. 441002.00

A CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY OF
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL NO. 13
TRAVIS AND WILLIAMSON COUNTIES, TEXAS

Texas Antiquities Permit No. 2814

Prepared for:
Leander Independent School District
P.O. Box 218
Leander, Texas 78641

Prepared by:
PBS&J
206 Wild Basin Road
Suite 300
Austin, Texas 78746-3343
Principal Investigator:
Wayne Glander

Author:
Eric Morley

May 2002

Printed on recycled paper

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section

Page
List of Figures

iii

I.

Abstract
INTRODUCTION

iv
1

II.

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

3

GEOLOGY

3

CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGY

4

FLORA

4

FAUNA

5

RESEARCH DESIGN
CULTURAL BACKGROUND

7
8

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS

8

CULTURAL CHRONOLOGY

9

III.
IV.

V.
VI.

RESULTS
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

12
16

VII.

REFERENCES CITED

17

441002/020089

ii

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure

Page

1

Project Location

2
3

Shovel Test Locations
Site 41WM655 Impacted by Development

441002/020089

2

iii

13
14

ABSTRACT
At the request of the Leander Independent School District, PBS&J conducted a cultural
resources survey of a 14.4-acre (5.8 hectare) area in Travis and Williamson counties, Texas, in March
2002. The project area is proposed for future construction of an elementary school and related facilities.
A previously recorded archeological site is located adjacent to the property.
The pedestrian survey of the proposed development area did not locate any deposits or
cultural features eligible for the National Register of Historic Places or inclusion as a State Archeological
Landmark. Shovel testing within the project area near the reported location of previously recorded site
41WM655 encountered only a small number of wire and metal fragments near the ground surface. Due to
the paucity of artifacts and the shallow upland soils that dominate the project area, the likelihood of
significant unlocated cultural resources eligible for the National Register of Historic Places or official
designation as a State Archeological Landmark within the project area is thought to be minimal. No
further investigation or special precautions are thought to be necessary and cultural resource clearance is
recommended for this project.

441002/020089

iv

I. INTRODUCTION
On March 13, 2002, PBS&J conducted a cultural resource survey of the proposed
14.4-acre (5.5 hectare [ha]) project area (Figure 1) under Antiquities Permit No. 2814. The project
location is proposed for future construction of an elementary school and related facilities for the Leander
Independent School District. The project area is located near the summit of a broad, sloping hill, which
forms the divide between the Colorado River and Brazos River basins. Characterized by grassland and
oak motte vegetation, the deltoid-shaped acreage edges across the Travis and Williamson County line,
and is bounded along its east margin by the recently constructed extension of Anderson Mill Road. In
contrast to its present state of rapid development, the area is known to have seen patchy habitation in both
historic and prehistoric times. The purpose of the investigation was to locate, describe and document, and
assess all existing cultural resources that would be affected by the project. The investigation included a
site records search, a review of historic maps, and an intensive pedestrian survey with subsurface shovel
testing.
Eric Morley and Emily Hilley conducted the pedestrian survey on March 13, 2002,
expending a total of two person days on the field portion of the survey. Work was conducted in
compliance with the Antiquities Code of Texas (Title 9, Chapter 191, Texas Natural Resources Code of
1977) and other appropriate cultural resources legislation and guidelines, as well as the guidelines set
forth by the Register of Professional Archaeologists and the Council of Texas Archeologists (Council of
Texas Archeologists 1992). The report is divided into several sections. Following this introduction is an
environmental background that describes the natural setting of the project location, including relevant
information on the underlying geology, hydrology, and flora and fauna of the area. Details on the
research objectives and field methods are provided in Section III. Previous investigations to place the
project within the proper cultural resource framework and an overview of the region’s archaeological
background is provided in Section IV. Results of the survey are presented in Section V. Conclusions and
recommendations are provided in Section VI. Lastly, references cited in the text are listed in Section VII.

441002/020089

1

441002/020089

2

II. ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
GEOLOGY
The Edwards Plateau is a southern extension of the Great Plains. It is an erosional region
characterized by thin Pliocene and Pleistocene deposits over Cretaceous limestone. East of the Colorado
River is an extension of the Edwards Plateau, known locally as the Jollyville Plateau. The Jollyville
Plateau appears as an irregularly shaped piece of upland overlooking the Colorado River. The Plateau is
heavily dissected along its edges by Cypress Creek to the west, Bull and West Bull Creeks to the east, and
several unnamed drainages feeding into the Colorado. The underlying limestone is karstic, resulting in
topography dotted with minor sinkholes. The project area is topographically situated near the summit of a
broad, sloping hill at the northern tip of the Jollyville Plateau. Elevation ranges between 990 and 1010
feet (302 and 308 meters [m]) above mean sea level (see Figure 1).
Soil in the project area can be generally characterized as shallow loamy clay or clay. In
classifying the soil, difficulties arise because the project area includes portions of two counties. Soil
surveys for these counties were done nearly ten years apart. Over this time, improved mapping methods,
soil knowledge, and modified classifications have produced different naming conventions for soil
arbitrarily divided by the county line (Werchan and Coker 1983). Since the majority of the project area
lies within Travis County, soil classifications are drawn more heavily from soil descriptions of this
county.
Soils of the Tarrant-Speck association comprise much of the project area. Tarrant soil
overlies limestone and is shallow to very shallow, well drained and stoney. The soil has a surface layer of
dark grayish brown clay approximately 10 inches (25 centimeters [cm]) thick overlying limestone. Speck
soil has a surface layer of reddish brown clay loam overlying a layer of dark reddish brown gravelly clay
over hard limestone. The surface layer is reddish brown clay loam about 14 inches (36 cm) thick.
Underlying this is dark reddish brown gravelly clay approximately 4 inches (11 cm) thick over limestone
bedrock (Werchan et al. 1974).
Soil mapped in the portion of the project area in southwest Williamson County is
identified as soil of the Denton-Eckrant-Doss association. In general, these are described as moderately
deep, shallow and very shallow, calcareous, clayey, cobbly and stony soils formed in indurated fractured
limestone on uplands (Werchan and Coker 1983). These descriptions are not dissimilar to those of the
older Travis County soil survey.

441002/020089

3

CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGY
The prevailing environmental conditions of Travis and Williamson counties characterize
the area as subtropical. Temperatures in the area range from an average high of approximately 96F
(36C) in July to an average low of 36F (2C) in January. Rainfall is recorded as 32 inches (81 cm) and
34 inches (86 cm) annually for these counties respectively. Growing season averages between 258 and
270 days a year (Ramos 1996).
The project area is located on the divide between the Colorado River and Brazos River
basins. At this point, the Colorado River has a relatively narrow basin, through which it carves a
meandering path bisecting Travis County. Cypress Creek, approximately 250 m to the southwest, flows
south to Lake Travis on the Colorado. The Brazos River basin is much wider. Several lesser rivers
including the San Gabriel River, which likewise bisects Williamson County, feed it. Buttercup Creek to
the northeast is a tributary of the San Gabriel, and is the closest major drainage of the Brazos River basin
to the project area.
Precipitation on the shallow, clayey soils throughout much of this area provides for a
moderate amount of runoff. Drainage of the project area flows to the southwest. Numerous springs in the
area also provide a reliable water source. One such spring feeds the upper reaches of Cypress Creek and
is located approximately 800 m to the northwest.
FLORA
The following information on the project area’s flora and fauna is based on an
Environmental Inspection Report (McVey 2002) conducted by PBS&J, as well as some generalized
studies of the central Texas region in and around Williamson and Travis counties.
Williamson and Travis counties are located near the boundaries of three major
vegetational areas. The Cross-Timbers and Prairies area extends from central Williamson and Travis
counties to the west and north. Likewise, the Blackland Prairies area extends to the east, roughly
delineated by the Balcones fault line (Hatch et al. 1990). To the south is the Edwards Plateau. Although
the current project area falls within the Cross-Timbers and Prairies areas, it also occupies a transitional
zone that shares the characteristics of all three areas.
Historically, the climax vegetation of this region consisted of big bluestem (Andropogon
gerardii), little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium), indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans), switchgrass
(Panicum virgatum), sideoats grama (Bouteloua curtipendula), and buffalograss (Buchloe dactyloides).
Overgrazing and suppression of naturally occurring wild fires have led to the increase of woody species
such as Ashe juniper (Juniperus ashei), honey mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa), and live oak (Quercus
fusiformis), with an understory composed of saw greenbriar (Smilax bona-nox), fragrant sumac (Rhus

441002/020089

4

aromatica), and bumelia (Bumelia lanuginosa). Prairie forbs once common in this region included
western ragweed (Ambrosia psilostachya), gayfeathers (Liatris spp.), bushclover (Lespedeza sp.), and
various sunflowers (Asteraceae); however, croton (Croton spp.), Mexican hat (Ratibida columnaris), and
nightshades (Solanum spp.) have generally increased in abundance in recent times (Gould 1975; Vines
1960).
The project area contains a mosaic of grasslands and oak mottes with no midstory
development. Common herbaceous species in the open grassland areas include annual broomweed
(Amphiachyris dracunculoides), oneseed croton (Croton monanthogynus), common curly mesquite
(Hilaria belangeri), longspike silver bluestem (Bothriochloa longipaniculata), little bluestem, dallisgrass
(Paspalum dilatatum), and bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon). The oak mottes occurring on the property
were primarily composed of live oak (Quercus virginiana), post oak (Quercus stellata), sugar hackberry
(Celtis laevigata), and cedar elm (Ulmus crassifolia). Herbaceous species in and immediately
surrounding the oak mottes included Texas winter-grass (Stipa leucotricha), white crown-beard
(Verbesina virginica), sideoats grama, mistletoe (Phoradendron tomentosum), and ballmoss (Tillandsia
recurvata).
FAUNA
The project area lies at the interface of the Texan and Balconian biotic provinces as
described by Blair (1950). The fauna of the project area is representative of the ecotone between these
two provinces, with many species reaching their respective eastern or western distribution limits in this
area. Wildlife habitat types closely coincide with the upland woodlands and grassland vegetational
communities described above.
The upland woods around the project area are typical live oak-ashe juniper woodlands.
Characteristic woodland fauna may include white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus), eastern cottontail
(Sylvilagus floridanus), common raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis), and avian
species such as the Carolina chickadee (Pachouli carolinensis), northern cardinal (Cardinalis cardinalis),
western scrub jay (Aphelocoma coerulescens), ladder-backed woodpecker (Picoides scalaris), and
mourning dove (Zenaida macroura). Common herpetofauna include the green anole (Anolis
carolinensis), Texas spiny lizard (Scleoporus olivaceus), ground skink (Scincella lateralis), and broadbanded copperhead (Agkistrodon contortrix laticinctus) (Davis and Schmidly 1994; Dickinson 1999;
Dixon 2000).
Grassland habitats within the project area may support faunal species common to the
region. Mammalian species characteristic of this habitat type include the eastern cottontail, hispid cotton
rat (Sigmodon hispidus), white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), and the nine-banded armadillo
(Dasypus novemcinctus). Common birds include the northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus), eastern
meadowlark (Sturnella magna), mourning dove, and killdeer (Charadrius vociferus). Herpetofauna

441002/020089

5

(amphibians and reptiles) typical of this habitat include the six-lined racerunner (Cnemidophorous
sexlineatus), Texas rat snake (Elaphe obsoleta lindheimerii), and the Gulf Coast toad (Bufo valliceps)
(Davis and Schmidly 1994; Dickinson 1999; Dixon 2000).

441002/020089

6

III. RESEARCH DESIGN
The program of site definition was conducted in accordance with the National Park
Service criteria (35 CFR, Part 60.4), which present the guidelines for determining eligibility of a cultural
resource for nomination to the National Register of Historic Places. The objectives of the program were
1) to locate any archaeological resources within the area of potential effect from the proposed
construction; 2) to assess their potential for National Register of Historical Places (NRHP) eligibility or
official designation as a State Archaeological Landmark (SAL); 3) to assess the effect of the proposed
construction on located resources; and 4) to provide resource-specific recommendations for mitigation of
adverse impact to significant properties.
On March 8, 2002, PBS&J conducted a records search at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) and the Texas Historical Commission for the identification of previous
cultural resource investigations and previously recorded sites, including sites listed or eligible for
inclusion on the NRHP or designated as SALs.
Typical central Texas prehistoric sites are generally composed of accumulations of
chipped stone, burned rock, and utilitarian objects that are the residue of prehistoric occupations. Historic
sites may be characterized by trash middens or structural remains associated with either residences or
agricultural activity. In areas with shallow soils, evidence of prehistoric or historic inhabitants is often
visible on the surface. PBS&J conducted a 100 percent survey of the project area utilizing regular
pedestrian transects spaced approximately 30 m apart. Shovel testing was done in areas observed to
possess relatively deep soil deposits. All shovel tests were excavated to underlying bedrock.

441002/020089

7

IV. CULTURAL BACKGROUND
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Previous archeological investigations proximate to the current project area are few.
Broadening the search to encompass approximately a 1-mile radius, the general nature of sites that may
be encountered in this setting is clarified by the results of several previous surveys.
In 1984 Prewitt and Associates conducted a cultural resources survey of the 685-acre
(277 ha) Cypress Mill Joint Venture Tract. This survey of the upper Buttercup Creek watershed resulted
in the recording of eight sites. Three of the sites were sparse, surficial scatters of lithic tools and debitage,
four were early to mid-twentieth-century farmsteads, and one was a scatter of early-twentieth-century
artifacts and foundation remnants mixed with a sparse scatter of prehistoric lithic tools (Fields et al.
1985).
Prewitt and Associates also conducted a survey of 206 acres (83 ha) within portions of
the Buttercup Creek Subdivision (Mercado-Allinger et al. 1984). This survey identified 13 archeological
sites comprised of 10 prehistoric sites and 3 historic sites. The historic sites were composed of a possible
root cellar and two house site complexes. Three of the prehistoric sites produced artifacts dating to the
Archaic, Neoarchaic, and early Archaic periods. The remaining sites did not produce time-diagnostic
artifacts. Three of the sites composed of lithic scatters were associated with karstic sinkholes.
In October of 1984, Prewitt and Associates conducted NRHP assessment testing of sites
in the Buttercup Creek Subdivision. In addition to mapping several sites, test units were excavated in
karst sinkholes associated with lithic artifact scatters at sites 41WM572 and 41WM580. Additionally,
excavation was conducted of the depression thought to be a gravesite or root cellar associated with a
historic house site at 41WM574. None of the excavations encountered deposits considered worthy of
nomination to the NRHP. Surface collections at a two-midden site (site 41WM570) did reveal substantial
intact deposits and it was subsequently recommended for nomination (Coffman and Prewitt 1985).
A 1985 inventory of cultural resources in the Buttercup Creek II subdivision was
conducted by Prewitt and Associates (Baily et al. 1986). Approximately 630 acres (255 ha) of land were
surveyed identifying 11 prehistoric sites. Two of the sites are sparse surficial debitage scatters, five are
sparse scatters of lithic tools and debitage, and the remaining four are moderately dense scatters of lithic
tools and debitage. None of the sites were judged eligible for nomination to the NRHP.
Prewitt and Associates personnel conducted a cultural resources survey of the Ideal Basic
Tract. The 550-acre (223-ha) tract survey recorded three previously unknown sites consisting of one
large, surficial lithic scatter with dispersed concentrations of lithic tools and debitage, one twentieth-

441002/020089

8

century farmstead, and a small scatter of early-twentieth-century artifacts. Additionally the survey
revisited a multicomponent site consisting of a surficial scatter of historic and prehistoric artifacts. None
of the sites were assessed as eligible for the NRHP.
Alton Briggs recorded three historic sites (including one with a prehistoric lithic scatter)
in 1987 for the Slurry Transmission Line survey. None of these sites were subsequently recommended
for nomination (Briggs 1987).
In late 2000, members of the Texas Archeological Society recorded a number of
archeological sites within the Travis Audubon Society’s Baker Sanctuary, located at the head of Cypress
Creek. At least eight sites were recorded near the upland slope; all were lithic scatters. Some fragments
of formal tools tentatively dated to the Archaic were recovered, as were ground stone artifacts and burned
rock. None of these sites were deemed eligible for nomination to the NRHP (TARL 2002).
Based on the results of previous investigations, the types of sites most likely to be
encountered in this area are sparse upland scatters of lithic debitage or middens with an occasional tool,
dating to the Archaic period. Additionally, early-twentieth-century homesites and associated trash
scatters are likely. Most sites are limited to the upper reaches of tributary drainages for Buttercup Creek
to the northeast and Cypress Creek to the west.
CULTURAL CHRONOLOGY
Native Americans have occupied central Texas for more than 11,000 years. What is
known of these early inhabitants is based on a continually evolving assessment of the archeological
record. Foremost in the quest for understanding is the effort to develop a chronology. The diverse
environmental setting and the multitude of cultures that occupied this area in the past make the
establishment of definite period indicators difficult. This is compounded when sites possess few
diagnostic tools or multiple occupations are intermixed. Following is an overview of the nearly complete
continuum of habitation for the central Texas area. Because of the fluid nature of any regional
chronology, and because the results of the present investigation do not contribute any significant detail to
the development of the chronology, the archeological background is general and reflects only the most
common period divisions that traditionally have been used for central Texas. Traditionally, the
prehistoric cultural sequence is divided into several temporal periods based on observed differences in
tools or site patterns. These are the Paleoindian, Archaic, Late Prehistoric, and Historic periods.
The Paleoindian period (pre-10,000 to ca. 6500 B.C.) is the earliest known prehistoric
cultural sequence in the central Texas archaeological area. Traditionally, this stage has been
characterized by highly mobile bands of people who relied heavily on big game hunting of Pleistocene
megafauna. However, the paucity of Paleoindian sites containing megafaunal remains (such as Bison
antiquus) combined with the data collected over the past few decades of central Texas archeology

441002/020089

9

indicate that the traditional view is oversimplified. Paleoindian sites commonly occur as small, dispersed
lithic scatters, usually located in upland areas near drainages. Such sites are thought to represent
temporary campsites, resource procurement loci, or tool making stations of small groups of people.
Projectile points such as the Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview points are characteristic of this stage and are
distinguished by their lanceolate shape and basal fluting.
A diversification in subsistence strategies is present in the archeological record, marking
the beginning of the Archaic period (6500 B.C. to A.D. 700). This long period of time represents a
successful adaptive strategy of prehistoric inhabitants who began exploiting a wider variety of small game
in addition to foraging for edible plants. Projectile point types representative of the Early Archaic period
include Wells, Gower, Bandy, Martindale, and Tortugas. These diverse projectile point types are
indicators that different cultural groups were developing around 5000 B.C. The presence of large scatters
of burned rock, a byproduct of starchy food processing, is common to the earlier part of this stage. Later
settlements continued to occupy terrace locations, and rockshelters became increasingly utilized. Point
types such as Darl, Ensor, and Frio are characteristic of the Late Archaic.
In central Texas, the Late Prehistoric period (A.D. 700 to European contact) is a
continuation of mobile hunting-and-gathering sustenance strategies of previous stages. Small projectile
points associated with the advent of bow-and-arrow technology make an appearance in the archeological
record, as do ceramics and agriculture, brought about by more-sedentary settlement patterns. The Late
Prehistoric stage is represented by the Austin and Toyah phases. The Austin phase (ca. A.D. 700–1300) is
characterized by expanding-stemmed and small subtriangular points (such as Scallorn and Granbury),
serrated flakes, and Friday-type bifaces. Diagnostic artifacts of the later Toyah phase (ca. A.D. 1300–
1750) include small pointed-stemmed points (Perdiz and Clifton), Covington-type knives, drills, and tools
made from bison bone. The latter part of this stage is evidenced by the appearance of limited ceramic
usage and cemeteries. Ceramics associated with this stage are of the bone-tempered Leon Plain type.
During the early portion of the Historic period, at the time of initial European contact and
settlement, central Texas was inhabited by numerous aboriginal groups including the Jumano, Tonkawa,
Lipan Apache, and Comanche (Newcomb 1961). Native tribes of the eastern United States were
displaced from their traditional homelands by the westward spread of Anglo-American and European
groups in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and immigrant Indian tribes, such as the Delaware,
moved to central Texas. Trade items such as glass beads, European-made ceramics, gun parts, and metal
projectile points are indicative of a contact-period occupation, although such sites are relatively rare.
Ultimately, the hostility of Apache and Comanche tribes who frequented central Texas
forced the abandonment of most Spanish missions in Texas. Following Mexico's defeat of the Spanish
Empire in 1821, these tribes still maintained a presence in the area. No permanent settlement north of San

441002/020089

10

Antonio was attempted until 1805 when the Spanish established a garrison at the road ford of the
Colorado River at the present location of the city of Bastrop.
In the Republic period (1836–1845), the earliest land grants issued in what would become
Williamson County were typically issued to men who had participated in the war for independence from
Mexico. Early Anglo settlement in Williamson County tended to be from the southern states of the
United States, primarily from Tennessee and Arkansas. Williamson County was formed in 1848, and in
the early 1870s settlers had established a community at the present-day site of Cedar Park. Known as
Running Brushy Spring and later as Brueggerhoff, the community developed on an economy of cedar
post production and limestone quarrying (Wynn 1997).
Travis County was established in 1840, just days after the newly named city of Austin
was selected as the republic’s new capital. Because of the status Austin possessed as a capitol city, it
outpaced the rest of the county in development. Nevertheless, most of the county’s population resided in
small communities at the start of the Civil War (Smyrl 1997a). Anderson Mill was one such community,
having developed around a gunpowder mill built by Virginian Thomas Anderson. After the war, the mill
was converted to a gristmill, serving the local area’s grain farmers (Smyrl 1997b).

441002/020089

11

V. RESULTS
A search of the records revealed a total of 14 previously recorded sites located within 1
mile of the project area, although none have been recorded within the project area. These sites are
41TV1925, 41TV1926, 41TV1927, 41TV1929, 41TV1930, 41TV1931, 41TV1932, 41TV1952,
41WM655, 41WM656, 41WM657, 41WM702, 41WM745, and 41WM746. One site, 41WM655, is
recorded just outside of the property boundary’s northern tip, and is the closest site to the present survey.
Seven of the previously recorded sites are located on uplands at the headwaters of
Cypress Creek to the west. These sites are on forested property owned by the Travis Audubon Society,
which has received periodic survey work by local archeologists. One site, 41TV1925, is located on the
backslope of a hill away from Cypress Creek on Travis Audubon Society property. The remaining sites
are scattered on the rolling upland hills to the east, overlooking Buttercup Creek.
A review of several United States Geological Survey (USGS) and highway maps found
the project area lies between the historic communities of Anderson Mill and Cedar Park. These maps
depict several interpretations of a roadway connecting these communities passing through the vicinity of
the project area. These maps depict a single or a pair of structures near the top of a hill in approximately
the same location as on modern USGS maps. This structure or structures may be the structures that once
were located on previously recorded site 41WM655.
During the current survey effort, a total of 37 shovel tests were excavated (Figure 2). Of
these, 17 shovel tests terminated in less than 20 cm of soil. Maximum depth encountered was 41 cm. All
shovel tests terminated in indurated limestone bedrock. Surface visibility of the project area ranged from
about 20 to 100 percent, averaging about 60 percent. Soil in the project area was generally shallow loamy
clay to clay overlying decomposing limestone bedrock.
Six shovel tests were concentrated in the northern tip of the property with the intent to
locate any remains of site 41WM655. This site is recorded at TARL as adjacent to the property’s
northeastern tip. Observation of the area revealed that road construction and residential property
development has destroyed the site (Figure 3). No signs of the previously recorded historic artifact scatter
were encountered, either by inspection of the roadside or surface inspection within the property. Shovel
testing produced only two artifacts that may be related to the site. Shovel Tests 3 and 6 produced one
artifact each in the first 10 cm of excavation, consisting of a wire fragment and a metal fragment,
respectively. A single fragment of fence wire was recovered from Shovel Test 21, located west of the
caliche road.

441002/020089

12

441002/020089

13

Figure 3. Site 41WM655 Impacted by Development
No discrete artifact concentrations were encountered in the project area; however, five
cultural features were examined. These features consist of the caliche road, a stone wall, a filled well or
cistern, and two rock piles. The caliche road bisects the property, running roughly north-south. This road
is depicted on topographic and road maps dating back as far as 1910 (USGS 1910), and by 1930 it is
mapped as a graded county road (Anonymous 1930). Anderson Mill was a small community that
developed in the 1860s approximately 3 miles to the south. There, a spring-fed Civil War–era gunpowder
mill was later converted to grind grain. The mill attracted local grain farmers through the 1870s (Smyrl
1997b). The caliche road passing through the current project area may have been the link between
Anderson Mill and the community of Cedar Park. No unique characteristics of the road were observed,
and its interest may lie solely in the fact that the road once served as a local trade route for corn farmers in
the late nineteenth century.
A low stone wall extends into the southern third of the property. It is roughly parallel to
the caliche road. The wall is constructed of loosely piled limestone rocks that form little more than a low
berm. This wall is noted to extend a short distance to the south, where it crosses a road intersection and
turns southeast along a property line. The age of the wall is estimated to be at least 50 years, based on
tree growth that has disrupted portions of the wall.
The wall’s north end tapers into a loose scattering of stones a few meters short of the
filled well or cistern. A simple wooden-framed rail spans the feature, and scraps of pipe are found
sticking from the ground.

441002/020089

14

Two piles of rock were observed on the property. These consist of limestone rocks that
appear to have been pushed into a pile, probably in the course of clearing deadfall from the field for
burning. One pile was noted on the property’s north end (near Shovel Test 12) and another was observed
in the southwest corner (near Shovel Test 34). The southern pile shows evidence of recent burning;
however, no artifacts were observed in the vicinity of either pile.

441002/020089

15

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The pedestrian survey of the proposed development area did not locate any deposits or
cultural features eligible for the NRHP or inclusion as a SAL. Due to the paucity of surficial cultural
deposits and the shallow upland soils that dominate the project area, the likelihood of significant
unlocated cultural resources eligible for the NRHP or official designation as a SAL within the project area
is thought to be minimal. No further investigation or special precautions are thought to be necessary and
cultural resource clearance is recommended for this project.
If, during construction and maintenance, previously unrecorded cultural resources are
encountered, the State Historic Preservation Officer should be contacted to assess the remains and provide
recommendations for dealing with the site under the state’s Historic Preservation Plan.

441002/020089

16

VII. REFERENCES CITED
Anonymous
1930

Topographic and Road Map, Travis County.

Bailey, G.L., R.C. Fields, and M.D. Freeman
1986
Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at the Buttercup Creek II Subdivision,
Williamson County, Texas. Report of Investigations 50. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Blair, W.F.
1950
Briggs, A.K.
1987

The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science 2:93–117.
An Archeological and Historical Survey of a Sixty-foot Corridor for the Proposed Slurry
Recovery Project, Travis and Williamson Counties, Texas. Lone Star Archeological
Services, Georgetown.

Coffman, R., and E.R. Prewitt
1985
Phase 2 Cultural Resources Investigations in Portions of the Buttercup Creek
Subdivision, Williamson County, Texas. Report of Investigations 36. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Coffman, R.J., M.D. Freeman, and R.C. Fields
1985
Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at the Ideal Basic Tract, Williamson
County, Texas. Report of Investigations 38. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Council of Texas Archeologist
1992
Council of Texas Archeologists Guidelines (Performance, Curation, and Reports).
Council of Texas Archeologists, Austin.
Davis, W.B., and D.J. Schmidly
1994
The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Press, Austin,
Dickinson, M.B. (ed.)
1999
Field Guide to the Birds of North America.
Washington, D.C.
Dixon, J.R.
2000

3rd ed. National Geographic Society,

Amphibians and Reptiles of Texas. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

Fields, Ross C., M.D. Freeman, and R.J. Coffman
1985
Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at the Cypress Mill Joint Venture Tract,
Williamson and Travis Counties, Texas. Report of Investigations 37. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Gould, F.W.
1975

441002/020089

The Grasses of Texas. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.

17

Hatch, S.L., K.N. Gandhi, and L.E. Brown.
1990
Checklist of the Vascular Plants of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas
A&M University, College Station.
McVey, S.
2002

Environmental Inspection Report of the Proposed Leander ISD Elementary School #12
Project, Travis and Williamson Counties, Texas. PBS&J, Austin.

Mercado-Allinger, P.A., E.R. Prewitt, and C.S. Ragsdale
1984
Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources in Portions of the Buttercup Creek
Subdivision, Williamson County, Texas. Report of Investigations 30. Prewitt and
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961
The Indians of Texas. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Ramos, M.G. (ed.)
1996-1997 Texas Almanac. The Dallas Morning News.
Smyrl, V.E.
1997a
1997b

Travis County. In The Handbook of Texas vol. 6, p. 553. Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.
Anderson Mill, Texas. In The Handbook of Texas vol. 1, p. 173. Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.1

Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
2002
Site forms on file, Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory, Austin.
United States Geological Survey
1910
Austin, Texas 30’ Quadrangle. United States Geological Survey.
Vines, R.A.
1960

Trees, Shrubs and Woody Vines of the Southwest. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Werchan, Leroy E., A.C. Lowther, and Robert N. Ramsey
1974
Soil Survey of Travis County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Werchan, Leroy E., and John L. Coker
1983
Soil Survey of Williamson County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service, in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
Wynn, F.W.
1997

441002/020089

Cedar Park, Texas. In The Handbook of Texas vol. 2, p. 8. Texas State Historical
Association, Austin.

18

