A CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY OF
THE PROPOSED POHL-BROWN PROPERTIES
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
WILLIAMSON COUNTY, TEXAS

Document No. 010174
PBS&J Job No. 440867

A CULTURAL RESOURCES SURVEY OF
THE PROPOSED POHL-BROWN PROPERTIES
DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
WILLIAMSON COUNTY, TEXAS
Antiquities Permit No. 2599

Prepared for:
Leander Independent School District
P.O. Box 218
Leander, Texas 78641

Prepared by:
PBS&J
206 Wild Basin Road
Suite 300
Austin, Texas 78746

Principal Investigator:
Michael A. Nash

Authors:
Michael A. Nash
Eric R. Morley

June 2001
Printed on recycled paper

Contributing Authors:
David Lyter
Mike Horvath

ABSTRACT
At the request of the Leander Independent School District, PBS&J conducted a cultural
resources survey of a 70.4-acre (28.5 hectare) area in Williamson County, Texas in May 2001. The project
area is proposed for future construction of a middle school, high school, and related sports facilities. No
temporally diagnostic artifacts, features, or discrete artifact concentrations were observed. No further
investigation is recommended and cultural resources clearance is recommended for the project.

440867/010174

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section

Page
Abstract

ii

List of Figures

iv

I.

INTRODUCTION

1

II.

ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING

3

GEOLOGY

3

CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGY

3

FLORA

4

FAUNA

5

III.

RESEARCH DESIGN

6

IV.

CULTURAL BACKGROUND

7

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS

7

CULTURAL CHRONOLOGY

8

V.

RESULTS

10

VI.

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS

12

VII.

REFERENCES CITED

13

440867/010174

iii

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure
1

440867/010174

Page
Project Location Map

2

iv

I. INTRODUCTION
In May 2001, PBS&J conducted a cultural resource survey of the proposed Pohl-Brown
Properties Development Project under Antiquities Permit No. 2599. The project area is proposed for future
construction of a middle school, a high school and related sports facilities for the Leander Independent School
District. The purpose of the investigation was to locate, describe and document, and assess all existing cultural
resources that would be affected by the project. The investigation included a site records search, a review of
historic maps, and an intensive pedestrian survey with limited subsurface testing of an area of approximately
70.4 acres (28.5 hectares [ha]). Rolling, hilly brush land of the Western Plains characterizes the southwest part
of Williamson County. The project area is located on the top of an east-west trending ridge, which forms the
divide between Brushy and South Brushy creeks. The acreage is squared on three sides, with the north side
forming an angular point (Figure 1).
The pedestrian survey was conducted by Eric Morley on May 18 and 21, 2001, expending a
total of two person days on the field portion of the survey. Work was conducted in compliance with the
Antiquities Code of Texas (Title 9, Chapter 191, Texas Natural Resources Code of 1977) and other appropriate
cultural resources legislation and guidelines, as well as the guidelines set forth by the Register of Professional
Archaeologists and the Council of Texas Archeologists (1992). This report is divided into several sections.
Following the introduction is an environmental background that describes the natural setting of the project
area, including relevant information on the hydrology, underlying geology, flora and fauna of the area. Details
on the research objectives and field methods are provided in Section III. Previous investigations to place the
project within the proper cultural resource framework and an overview of the region’s archeological
background is provided in Section IV. Results of the survey are presented in Section V. Conclusions and
recommendations are provided in Section VI. Lastly, references cited in the text are listed in Section VII.

440867/010174

1

440867/010174

2

II. ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING
GEOLOGY
Williamson County is bisected by the Balcones escarpment, which forms a line between the
city of Jarrell in the north, through Georgetown, and into Round Rock in the south. This geologic fault zone
demarcates the Western Plains to the west from the Coastal Plains that extend to the gulf in the southeast.
Situated in the southwest part of the county, the project area lies among the low, undulating hills of brush land
characteristic of the Western Plains. Elevation ranges between 890 and 915 feet (270 and 279 meters [m]
above mean sea level.
Eckrant-Georgetown soils comprise the gently sloping, dissected uplands north of South
Brushy Creek.

In general, these upland soils are very shallow to moderately deep calcareous, and

noncalcareous, stony, cobbly, and loamy soils formed on indurated fractured limestone (Werchan and Coker
1983). The northeastern part of the tract is the gently sloping head of an unnamed drainageway composed of
Eckrant extremely stony clay. This soil occurs on slopes ranging from 1 to 30 percent on uplands and consists
of very dark gray, extremely stony clay about 11 inches (28 centimeters [cm]) thick and becoming increasingly
stony with depth over indurated limestone bedrock. Most of the project area is composed of the thin Crawford
clays and Georgetown stony clay loams. Both of these relatively shallow upland soils occur on level upland
areas. The Crawford clay, comprising the majority of the tract, is described as a gently sloping (1 to 3 percent
slopes) soil found on mesas, foot slopes, and at the heads of drainageways on uplands. Typically, the upper
most layer consist of brown to dark reddish brown clay about 27 inches (69 cm) thick. The Georgetown stony
clay loam occurs in the southwest corner of the tract. It is described as gently sloping (1 to 3 percent slopes)
soil formed mainly on the higher parts of uplands. The soil is typically slightly acid, brown stony clay loam at
the surface to about 7 inches (18 cm). The subsoil extends to a depth of 35 inches (89 cm) and consists of
reddish brown clay and cobbly clay.
CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGY
The climate of Williamson County is subtropical with a growing season averaging 258 days.
Temperatures in the area range from an average high of 96F (36C) in July to an average low of 36F (2C) in
January. Rainfall averages 34 inches (86 cm) annually onto well-drained soils, providing a medium amount of
runoff (Ramos 1996). A shallow ephemeral drainage drains the project area to the northeast and feeds into the
stream channel of Brushy Creek further northeast. A small pond and associated wetland area is located on
level upland on the southern margin of the project area, but it is not fed by any drainage.

440867/010174

3

FLORA
Williamson County is located on the boundary between the Blackland Prairies and Cross
Timbers and Prairies vegetational areas of Texas (Hatch et. al. 1990). The Edwards Plateau vegetational area
borders these two areas on the southwest. The Williamson County region represents an ecotone between these
three vegetational areas. Historically, the climax vegetation of this region consisted of big bluestem
(Andropogon gerardii), little bluestem (Schizachyrium scoparium), indiangrass (Sorghastrum nutans),
switchgrass (Panicum virgatum), side-oats gramma (Bouteloua curtipendula), and buffalograss (Buchloe
dactyloides). Overgrazing and suppression of naturally occurring wild fires have led to the increase of woody
species such as Ashe juniper (Juniperus ashei), honey mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa), and live oak (Quercus
fusiformis), with an understory composed of saw greenbriar (Smilax bona-nox), fragrant sumac (Rhus
aromatica), and bumelia (Bumelia lanuginosa). Prairie forbs once common in this region included western
ragweed (Ambrosia psilostachya), gayfeathers (Liatris spp.), bushclover (Lespedeza sp.), and various
sunflowers (Asteraceae); however, croton (Croton spp.), Mexican hat (Ratibida columnaris), and nightshades
(Solanum spp.) have generally increased in abundance in recent times (Gould 1975; Vines 1960).
The project area is predominately composed of upland woodland vegetation with small areas
of open grassland located in the northeast and central parts of the tract. The most commonly encountered trees
in the upland woodland community are live oak (Quercus fusiformis), Ashe juniper and cedar elm (Ulmus
crassifolia). Texas red oak (Quercus buckleyi), post oak (Quercus stellata), and sugar hackberry (Celtis
laevigata) may also occur in this community type. The shrub layer in this community, though often sparse,
may include Texas persimmon (Diospyros texana), yaupon (Ilex vomitoria), elbowbush (Forestiera
pubescens), agarito (Berberis trifoliata), fragrant sumac, flameleaf sumac (Rhus lanceolata), and American
beautyberry (Callicarpa americana). Common woody vines of this region include saw greenbriar (Smilax
bona-nox), common greenbriar (Smilax rotundifolia), southern dewberry (Rubus trivialis), Japanese
honeysuckle (Lonicera japonica), mustang grape (Vitis mustangensis), Virginia creeper (Parthenocissus
cinquefolia), and poison-ivy (Toxicodendron radicans). Typical herbaceous species include little bluestem,
panicums (Panicum spp.), Texas winter-grass (Stipa leucotricha), Mexican hat, and pricklypear (Opuntia
lindheimeri), among others (Vines 1960). Common grasses of these communities include little bluestem, silver
bluestem (Bothriochloa laguroides), King Ranch bluestem (Bothriochloa ischaemum), switchgrass (Panicum
virgatum), johnsongrass (Sorghum halepense), bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon), brome grasses (Bromus
spp.), dallisgrass (Paspalum dilatatum), and perennial ryegrass (Lolium perenne), among others. Typical forb
species include Mexican hat, Indian blanket (Gaillardia pulchella), Dakota verbena (Verbena bipinnatifida),
Texas dandelion (Pyrrhopappus multicaulis), lemon beebalm (Monarda citriodora), plantain (Plantago sp.),
evening primrose (Oenothera speciosa), and goldenrods (Solidago spp.), among others. Brush species such as
eastern baccharis (Baccharis halimifolia), Texas persimmon, Ashe juniper, tickle-tongue (Zanthoxylum
hirsutum), agarito, and pricklypear also occur in unimproved grasslands. (Gould 1975; Vines 1960).

440867/010174

4

FAUNA
Williamson County lies at the interface of the Texan and Balconian biotic provinces as
described by Blair (1950). The fauna of the project area is representative of the ecotone between these two
provinces, with many species reaching their respective eastern or western distribution limits in this area.
Wildlife habitat types closely coincide with the upland woodlands and grassland vegetational communities
described above.
The upland woods within the project area are typical live oak-Ashe juniper woodlands.
Characteristic woodland fauna include white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginanus), eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus
floridanus), common raccoon (Procyon lotor), striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis), and avian species such as the
Carolina chickadee (Pachouli carolinensis), northern cardinal (Cardinalis cardinalis), western scrub jay
(Aphelocoma coerulescens), ladder-backed woodpecker (Picoides scalaris), and mourning dove (Zenaida
macroura).

Common herpetofaun include the green anole (Anolis carolinensis), Texas spiny lizard

(Scleoporus olivaceus), ground skink (Scincella lateralis), and broad-banded copperhead (Agkistrodon
contortrix laticinctus) (Davis and Schmidly 1994; Dickinson 1999; Dixon 2000).
Grassland habitats within the project area may support faunal species common to the region.
Mammalian species characteristic of this habitat type include the eastern cottontail (Sylvilagus floridanus),
hispid cotton rat (Sigmodon hispidus), white-footed mouse (Peromyscus leucopus), and the nine-banded
armadillo (Dasypus novemcinctus). Common birds include the northern bobwhite (Colinus virginianus),
eastern meadowlark (Sturnella magna), mourning dove (Zenaida macroura), and killdeer (Charadrius
vociferus). Herpetofauna (amphibians and reptiles) typical of this habitat include the six-lined racerunner
(Cnemidophorous sexlineatus), Texas rat snake (Elaphe obsoleta lindheimerii), and the Gulf Coast toad (Bufo
valliceps) (Davis and Schmidly 1994; Dickinson 1999; Dixon 2000).

440867/010174

5

III. RESEARCH DESIGN
The program of site definition was conducted in accordance with the National Park Service
criteria (35 CFR, Part 60.4) which present the guidelines for determining eligibility of a cultural resource for
nomination to the National Register of Historic Places (NRHP). The objectives of the program were: 1) to
locate any archaeological resources within the area of potential effect from the proposed construction; 2) to
assess their potential for NRHP eligibility or official designation as a State Archaeological Landmark (SAL); 3)
to assess the effect of the proposed construction on located resources; and 4) to provide resource specific
recommendations for mitigation of adverse impact to significant properties.
On May 4, 2001, PBS&J conducted a records search at the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory (TARL) for the identification of previous cultural resource investigations and previously recorded
sites, including sites listed or eligible for inclusion on the NRHP or designated as SALs.
Typical Central Texas sites are generally composed of accumulations of chipped stone, burned
rock, and utilitarian objects that are the residue of prehistoric occupations. In areas with shallow soils,
evidence of prehistoric inhabitants is often visible on the surface. On May 18 and 21, 2001, PBS&J conducted
a 100-percent survey of the project area. Parallel pedestrian transects spaced approximately 30 m apart were
utilized for most of the project area. An area of 32,000 m2 in the northwest part of the tract had been hand
cleared in the recent past, leaving large piles of brush that impeded both movement and ground surface
observation. For this part of the survey, meandering transects between the brush piles were employed. Visual
inspection of the ground surface was augmented by inspection of numerous access roads, trails, and cleared
areas resulting from contractor activity. Five shovel tests were placed in areas judged to have a high
probability of containing cultural deposits. Four were placed at the headwaters of the only drainage in the
project area (Figure 1). Each shovel test was excavated in 10-cm levels to a depth when clearly sterile
substrates were encountered.

440867/010174

6

IV. CULTURAL BACKGROUND
PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
The Brushy Creek watershed has long been noted for its archaeological resources. Between
1918 and 1930, J.E. Pearce and Roy Bedichek conducted excavations along Brushy Creek and its tributaries
including the Walsh estate site (41WM11), a group of four burned rock middens on Lake Creek south of
Round Rock (Pearce 1938:3-11, 25-30). In 1959, nine burned rock middens were identified northeast of the
project area on Chandler Branch at the Dedear Site (identified by two trinomials: 41WM15 and 41WM239).
Limited salvage excavations were conducted on one of the middens at the Dedear Site in 1964 by the Travis
County Archeological Society (TARL files).
In 1981, the Texas Department of Water Resources (TDWR) conducted a cultural resources
survey along Brushy Creek east of the project area. They identified and recorded ten archaeological sites
(41WM12 and 41WM462-41WM470) representing both prehistoric and historic period occupations. Sites
41WM12, 41WM463, 41WM467 and 41WM468 were recommended for testing to determine significance and
41WM465 (Kenney's Fort) was considered to be archeologically significant and potentially eligible for
nomination to the NRHP (Fox et al. 1981).
During a cultural resources survey in preparation of an extension of Farm-to-Market
Road 1431, three sites were encountered along Brushy and Spanish Oak creeks about .9 mile (1.5 kilometers
[km]) north of the project area. One of these sites, the Wilson Leonard Site (41WM235) has subsequently
been excavated and contains the most complete temporal sequence of prehistoric archeological assemblages
from a single site in Central Texas (Masson and Collins 1995; Collins 1998).
In the South Brushy Creek drainage south of the project area, three archaeological
reconnaissance surveys were conducted by the TDWR.

The surveys were for proposed wastewater

improvements and totaled 901 acres (365 ha). Conducted in 1980, 1981 and 1984, the surveys resulted in the
location of 19 cultural resources sites: 41WM439-41WM441; 41WM444-41WM456; and 41WM54341WM545, respectively, including 15 prehistoric sites and four multicomponent historic/prehistoric period
sites. Additional testing to determine possible significance for NRHP eligibility was recommended for eight
sites: 41WM439, 41WM446, 41WM447, 41WM451, and 41WM453-41WM456 (Whitsett 1981).
In 1984, Prewitt and Associates conducted a survey known as the Ideal Basic Tract, which
encompassed a broad transect running north to south from South Brushy Creek across adjacent lowlands and
into the uplands. Three sites were recorded, including sites 41WM653 and 41WM654, that are in proximity to
the present project area. None of these sites were recommended for further investigation (Coffman et al.
1985).

440867/010174

7

In January of 2001, PBS&J conducted a cultural resource survey of the Robinson Properties
tract located south, and adjacent to, the current project area. This survey recorded a single archeological site
(41WM984) on a low limestone hill at the head of a small drainage. The site is a sparse surface lithic scatter
with no temporally diagnostic artifacts, features or artifact concentrations. No further investigation was
recommended for the site.
CULTURAL CHRONOLOGY
Native Americans have occupied Central Texas for more than 11,000 years. What is known of
these early inhabitants is based on a continually evolving assessment of the archeological record. Foremost in
the quest for understanding is the effort put into developing a chronology. The diverse environmental setting
and the multitude of cultures, which occupied this area in the past, makes the establishment of definite period
indicators difficult. This is compounded when sites possess few diagnostic tools or multiple occupations are
intermixed. Following is an overview of the nearly complete continuum of habitation for the Central Texas
area. Because of the fluid nature of any regional chronology, and because the results of the present
investigation do not contribute any significant detail to the development of the chronology, the archeological
background is general and reflects only those time period divisions that have traditionally have been used for
Central Texas.
Traditionally, the prehistoric cultural sequence is divided into several sections based on
observed differences in tools or site patterns. These stages are the Paleo-Indian stage, Archaic stage, Late
Prehistoric stage, and Historic stage.
The Paleo-Indian stage (pre-10,000 to ca. 6500 B.C.) is the earliest known prehistoric cultural
sequence in the Central Texas archaeological area. Traditionally, this stage has been characterized by highly
mobile bands of people that relied heavily on big game hunting of Pleistocene megafauna. However, the
paucity of Paloeo-Indian sites containing megafaunal remains (such as Bison antiquus) combined with the data
collected over the past few decades of central Texas archeology indicate that the traditional view is
oversimplified. In Central Texas, Paleo-Indian sites commonly occur as small, dispersed lithic scatters, usually
located in upland areas near drainages. Such sites are thought to represent temporary campsites, resource
procurement loci, or tool making stations of small groups of people. Projectile points such as the Clovis,
Folsom and Plainview points are characteristic of this stage and are distinguished by their lanceolate shape and
basil fluting.
A diversification in subsistence strategies is present in the archeological record, marking the
beginning of the Archaic stage (6500 B.C. to A.D. 700). This long period of time represents a successful
adaptive strategy of prehistoric inhabitants who began exploiting a wider variety of small game in addition to
foraging for edible plants. Projectile point types representative of the Early Archaic period include Wells,
Gower, Bandy, Martindale, and Tortugas. These diverse projectile point types are indicators that different

440867/010174

8

cultural groups were developing around 5000 B.C. The presence of large scatters of burned rock, a by-product
of starchy food processing, is common to the earlier part of this stage. Later settlements continued to occupy
terrace locations, and rock shelters became increasingly utilized. Point types such as Darl, Ensor, and Frio are
characteristic of the Late Archaic.
In Central Texas, the Late Prehistoric stage (A.D. 700 to European Contact) is a continuation
of mobile hunting and gathering sustenance strategies of previous stages. Small projectile points associated
with the advent of bow-and-arrow technology make an appearance in the archeological record, as do ceramics
and agriculture, brought about by more sedentary settlement patterns. The Late Prehistoric stage is represented
by the Austin and Toyah phases. The Austin phase (ca. A.D. 700-1300) is characterized by expandingstemmed and small subtriangular points (such as Scallorn and Granbury), serrated flakes, and Friday-type
bifaces. Diagnostic artifacts of the later Toyah phase (ca. A.D. 1300-1750) include small pointed-stemmed
points (Perdiz and Clifton), Covington-type knives, drills, and tools made from bison bone. The latter part of
this stage is evidenced by the appearance of limited ceramic usage and cemeteries. Ceramics associated with
this stage are of the bone-tempered Leon Plain type.
During the early portion of the Historic stage (time of European contact to present), at the time
of initial European contact and settlement, Central Texas was inhabited by numerous aboriginal groups
including the Jumano, Tonkawa, Lipan Apache, and Comanche (Newcomb 1961). Native tribes of the eastern
United States were displaced from their traditional homelands by the westward spread of Anglo-American and
European groups in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries and immigrant Indian tribes, such as the Delaware,
moved to Central Texas. Trade items such as glass beads, European-made ceramics, gun parts and metal
projectile points are indicative of a contact-period occupation, although such sites are relatively rare.
Ultimately, the hostility of Apache and Comanche tribes who frequented Central Texas forced
the abandonment of most Spanish missions in Texas. Following Mexico's defeat of the Spanish Empire in
1821, these tribes still maintained a presence in the area. No permanent settlement north of San Antonio was
attempted until 1805 when the Spanish established a garrison at the road ford of the Colorado River at the
present location of the city of Bastrop. In the Republic period (1836-1845), the earliest land grants issued in
what would become Williamson County were typically issued to men who had participated in the war for
independence from Mexico. Early Anglo settlement in Williamson County tended to be from the southern
states of the United States, primarily from Tennessee and Arkansas. Shortly after the formation of Williamson
County in 1848, the small settlement of Brushy was selected to be the county seat. Cedar Park, originally
named Running Brushy, began as a settlement in the early 1870s. In 1882 the Austin and Northwestern
Railroad was completed from Austin to Burnet, and crossed through the settlement. At this time the railroad
company changed the name of the community to Brueggerhoff, and by 1887 the town was renamed Cedar
Park, after its park-like surroundings (Wynn 1997).

440867/010174

9

V. RESULTS
The records search revealed a cluster of previously recorded prehistoric sites along Brushy
Creek and Spanish Oak Creek to the north of the project area and South Brushy Creek to the south of the
project area. Nineteen previously recorded sites are located within 1 km of the project area although none have
been recorded within the project area prior to the present survey. Most of the previously recorded sites located
in these watersheds occupy a position on the floodplain or in close proximity to tributary drainages. Common
to these locations is that their respective positions on the landscape are largely depositional and at relatively
lower elevations.
A review of the 1893 U.S. Geological Survey Georgetown 30-minute Quadrangle shows the
town of Cedar Park about 1.2 miles (2 km) to the west, but no roads or developed areas in the project vicinity.
The 1936 Williamson County Road Map shows a road at the southern edge of the project area along the route
of present Brushy Creek Road, but no residences within .3 mile (500 m) of the project area.
Topographically, the project area is situated on the top of an east-west trending ridge, which
forms the divide between Brushy and South Brushy creeks. Most of the project area is level upland with the
exception of the northeast corner. A shallow, ephemeral tributary of Brushy Creek drains this corner of the
project area and is the nearest possible source of surface water. Brushy Creek, a large seasonal stream, is
located about 1.1 miles (1.7 km) northeast of the project area at its nearest point.
Vegetation of the project area consisted primarily of juniper and live oak trees with tall grasses
and other shrubby vegetation. Surface visibility of the project area ranged from 0 percent in brushy, overgrown
areas, to 100 percent visibility in cleared areas and along access roads. Average ground surface visibility was
approximately 30 percent.
No temporally diagnostic artifacts, evidence of features, or discrete artifact concentrations
were observed during the survey. A single, isolated biface (not collected) was located in a densely wooded
area in the southwest corner of the tract. Close inspection of the ground in the vicinity of the artifact did not
identify any additional cultural deposits. Although not numerous, isolated artifacts and sites composed of
sparse lithic scatters lacking diagnostic points, features, or deposits of significant depth have been recorded in
the Brushy Creek, Spanish Oak Creek, and South Brushy Creek watersheds. Sites such as 41WM944,
41WM774, 41WM775, 41WM939 and 41WM984 share similar settings on eroded upland hill-slopes above
drainages.
During the current survey effort, five shovel tests were excavated (Figure 1). One shovel test
was excavated in the immediate vicinity of the isolated biface. This shove test was excavated to 40 cm in
reddish-brown clay with fragments of limestone. Four additional shovel tests were excavated at 30 m intervals

440867/010174

10

in the northeast part of the tract, at a point where the property line bisects the unnamed tributary to Brushy
Creek. Shovel tests were terminated when indurated limestone bedrock was encountered at a depth of
approximately 50 cm. No artifacts were encountered in any of the shovel tests.
During the survey, no cultural deposits were observed which could warrant a recommendation
of NRHP eligibility or listing as a SAL. Due to the absence of intact features or deposits and a lack of
temporally diagnostic artifacts, it is doubtful that further, more intensive investigation will yield any significant
amount of information. Therefore, no further investigation is recommended.

440867/010174

11

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The pedestrian survey of the proposed development area did not locate any cultural deposits
eligible for the NRHP or inclusion as a SAL. Due to the shallow upland soils, which dominate the project
area, the likelihood of significant unlocated cultural resources eligible for the NRHP or official designation as a
SAL within the project area is thought to be minimal. No further investigation or special precautions are
thought to be necessary and cultural resource clearance is recommended for this project.
If, during construction and maintenance, previously unrecorded cultural resources are
encountered, the State Historic Preservation Officer should be contacted to assess the remains and provide
recommendations as to how to deal with the site under the state’s historic preservation plan.

440867/010174

12

VII. REFERENCES CITED
Blair, W.F.
1950 The biotic provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of Science.
Council of Texas Archeologists
1992 Council of Texas Archeologists Guidelines (Performance, Curation, and Reports). Council of
Texas Archeologists, Austin.
Coffman, R.J., M.D. Freeman, and R.C. Fields
1985 Inventory and Assessment of Cultural Resources at the Ideal Basic Tract, Williamson County,
Texas. Report of Investigations 38. Prewitt and Associates, Inc., Austin.
Collins, M.B., ed.
1998 Wilson-Leonard: An 11,000-year Archeological Record of Hunter-Gatherers in Central Texas,
Volume I: Introduction, Background, and Syntheses. Studies in Archeology 31, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas, Austin.
Davis, W.B. and D.J. Schmidly
1994 The Mammals of Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Press, Austin,
Dickinson, M.B. (ed.)
1999 Field Guide to the Birds of North America. Third edition. National Geographic Society,
Washington, D.C.
Dixon, J.R.
2000 Amphibians and Reptiles of Texas. Texas A&M Press. College Station, Texas.
Fox, D.E., W.H. Whitsett, and C.J. Jurgens
1981 An Archeological Reconnaissance at the City of Round Rock, Williamson County, Texas,
C-48-1462. Texas Department of Water Resources, Construction Grants and Water Quality
Planning Division, Austin.
Gould, F.W.
1975 The grasses of Texas. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Hatch, S.L., K.N. Gandhi, and L.E. Brown.
1990 Checklist of the vascular plants of Texas. Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Masson, M.A. and M.B. Collins
1995 The Wilson-Leonard Site (41WM235). Cultural Resource Management News and Views
7(1):6-10. Texas Historic Commission, Austin.
Newcomb, W.W.
1961 The Indians of Texas. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Pearce, J.E.
1938 The Burnt-Rock Midden -- Mounds of Central and West Texas. Ms on File, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, University of Texas at Austin (written in 1920, revised 1925 and 1938).

440867/010174

13

Ramos, Mary G., ed.
1996 1996-1997 Texas Almanac. The Dallas Morning News.
Vines, R.A.
1960 Trees, shrubs and woody vines of the southwest. The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Werchan, L.E. and J.L. Coker
1983 Soil Survey of Williamson County, Texas. United States Department of Agriculture, Soil
Conservation Service.
Whitsett, W.H.
1981 An Archeological Reconnaissance at Cedar Park, Williamson County, Texas, C-48-1552-01.
Texas Department of Water Resources, Construction Grants and Water Quality Planning
Division, Austin.
Wynn, F.W.
1997 The Handbook of Texas. Vol. 2, p. 8. Texas State Historical Association.

440867/010174

14

