Tierras Antíguas Archaeological Investigations
David L. Nickels
495 West Ridge
Martindale, TX 78655
Ph: (210) 386-3831
e-mail: tierrasantiguas@yahoo.com

April 2, 2012
Subject: Final Letter Report # 2012-9: A Cultural Resources Background Review of the 605-Meter
Blakeway Unit E 2H Pipeline in Southeastern Dimmit County, Texas
Mr. David Black
Senior Project Manager
Flatrock Engineering & Environmental, Ltd.
18615 Tuscany Stone, Suite 380
San Antonio, Texas 78258
Dear Mr. Black,
This letter provides a Final Report of our findings during a cultural resources background review
of the Blakeway Unit E 2H Pipeline right-of-way (Figures 1 and 2).

Background Review
Old Maps, Aerial Photographs, Historic Research
Diagnostic projectile points such as Clovis, Folsom, and Plainview types found in Dimmit County
indicate that the area has been occupied for about 11,000 years. Plentiful food sources such as wild
game, fruits, seeds, and roots made the land hospitable. Early technology included tools from wood
and stone, woven basketry, sewed rabbitskin robes, and a very effective weapon was the atlatl, a
throwing stick that greatly increased the deadliness of their spears (Hester 1984; Leffler 1996).
Perhaps as early as 1,300 years ago, they learned to make pottery and to hunt with bows and arrows.
“During the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, the Coahuiltecan Indians native to Dimmit County
were squeezed out by other Indian who were migrating into the area and by the Spanish, who were
moving up from the south. Many of the Coahuiltecans were taken to San Juan Bautista in Coahuila.
Apaches and Comanches moved in to take their place” (Leffler 1996).
“No permanent Spanish settlement seems to have been established in the future Dimmit County.
Beginning in the late 1600s, however, Spaniards passed through the area on the Old San Antonio
Road, a camino real, to and from other Spanish settlements in Texas. After the Mexican War of
Independence the Mexican government used land grants to encourage its citizens to settle in Texas.
Perhaps as many as seven grants were made between 1832 and 1834 that included territory now in
Dimmit County. None of the recipients seems to have made use of the land, however. By 1836, when

Texas became independent
from Mexico, the area
remained populated almost
solely by Indians”
(Leffler 1996).
Between the Texas
Revolution and the Mexican
War (1836–46), most of
Dimmit County lay in the
disputed area between the
Rio Grande and the Nueces
River, and it became a
h aven for des perate
characters until about 1865.
Carrizo Springs was
founded in 1865, with the
new settlers who lived in
jacals or dugouts frequently
being harrassed by hostile
Indians and outlaws. Due in
part tobeing pursued by the
Texas Rangers, and being
decimated by disease, the
Indians were forced to leave
Dimmit County by 1877,
and in 1880 Carrizo Springs
became the county seat for
the newly formed county.
By 1880, cattle ranching
was firmly established, and
although sheep ranching Figure 1. Blakeway Unit E 2H Pipeline on large topographic map.
was also an important part
of the economy at the time, by 1900 extended droughts and an increase in predators combined to
make sheep ranching a tough and dwindling business (Leffler 1996).
Although the residents of Dimmit County learned to cope with the sparse annual rainfall, artesian
wells ushered in an era of large vegetable truck farms in the 1890s, and Dimmit County became
known as part of the Texas Winter Garden Region, one of the most prolific vegetable-growing areas
in the country.
As with rest of the nation, the Great Depression many of the county’s farmers were forced to cut
back their once-lucrative vegetable production during the depression, and fell back on raising
poultry, hogs, and dairy cattle (Leffler 1996). The discovery of large oil and gas fields in the county
in the 1950s certainly bolstered Dimmit County’s economy, and although large ranches lay claim
to most of the land in the county, the production of oil and gas are very much a progressively
increasing part of the county’s development (Leffler 1996).

Archaeological Atlas Site Results
Other than early work done by A. T. Jackson in 1932, perhaps the earliest systematic archaeological
survey in Dimmit County was conducted by Thomas Hester and Parker Nunley in 1964 and 1965.
Their work resulted in the documentation of 24 archaeological sites in the county, ranging in age
from the Early Archaic through the Late Prehistoric Toyah phase (Nunley and Hester 1966).
However, other surveys in the county since that time have resulted in a total of 153 archaeological
sites being documented in the county as of February 1, 2012. Of these, 99 are prehistoric open
campsites ranging in age from the Paleoindian through Late Prehistoric periods. Prehistoric burials
have been discovered at four of these campsites. Prehistoric lithic scatters and lithic procurement
sites account for 50 of those documented. Historic sites documented in the county include houses
from the 1800s built of stone (one with a cowboy burial), farmstead operations, and a railroad berm
from the 1800s. Other sites of interest include a carved Indian petroglyph, and other petroglyphs near
Campo de los Cuervos. The only designated State Archaeological landmark in the county is the
Dimmit County Courthouse (Atlas 2012).
A review of the
Texas Historical
Commission’s Atlas
o f
T e x a s
Archeological sites
indicates that no
professional
archaeological
surveys have been
conducted within
one mile (1,609
meters), and no
archaeological sites
have been recorded
within one mile.
However, as shown
in Figure 2, Tierras
A n t i g u a s
Archaeological
Investigations has
recently conducted
surveys of moderate Figure 2. Blakeway Unit E 2H Pipeline on Catarina (1982) USGS
and high probability 7.5' topographic map.
areas along the
Stumberg Lateral, and the Blakeway B 1H; no archaeological sites were found along either of these
lines (Nickels 2011a, b).

Soils Map
The Blakeway E 2H Pipeline crosses two soil types that vary in depth. Figure 3 shows the soils that
are to be intersected by the Blakeway E 2H Pipeline (Web Soil Survey 2012). Table 1 then presents
a brief description of each type, and their potential to contain buried and intact cultural deposits.
Although Brundage fine sandy loam normally has the potential to possess deeply buried and intact
archaeological deposits, our personal knowledge of the immediate area based upon previous surveys
indicates that there is at best a minimal probability for archaeological sites to exist.

Figure 3. Soils to be dissected by the Blakeway E 2H Pipeline.
Table 1. Soils Dissected by the Blakeway E 2H Pipeline.
Soil Series

Typical Soils, Areas and Depths

Buried and Intact Archaeological
Potential

Brundage fine sandy loam (Br,

Deep loamy soils on terraces adjacent

Moderate to High to about 26

Bu)

to small creeks

inches below the surface

Pryor sandy clay loam (PyB)

Moderately deep loamy soils on gently

Minimal to moderate to about 9

undulating uplands

inches below the surface

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations
Based upon the negative findings of known archaeological sites within the area, and our past
observations of the immediate area, it appears that there is at best a moderate potential for significant
archaeological deposits to exist in these upland soils. Therefore, we recommend that construction
of the Blakeway E 2H Pipeline as currently aligned be allowed to proceed as planned, with no further
archaeological investigations. However, we further advise that if any previously undiscovered
cultural resources are encountered during development of the pipeline, such finds should be
examined and evaluated by Tierras Antiguas, or by any qualified archaeological consultant.
If there any questions at all, please do not hesitate to contact me.
Sincerely,

David L. Nickels
Principal Investigator/Project Archaeologist

References Cited
Atlas
2012

The Texas Atlas of Archeological Sites. http://nueces.thc.state.tx.us/ [Accessed
April 2, 2012].

Hester, T. R.
1984 Fragments, Flints, and Footprints: The Prehistory of Dimmit County. In Dimmit
County Mesquite Roots, Volume I, pp. 1-6, edited by L. K. Tidwell. Wind River
Press. Austin, TX.
Leffler, J.
1996

Dimmit County. The New Handbook of Texas, Volume 2, pp. 645-648.
Texas State Historical Association, Austin.

Nickels, D. L.
2011a A Cultural Resources Survey of the 8.0-Mile Stumberg Lateral in Dimmit County,
Texas, October 26, 2011. Interim Letter Report submitted to Flatrock Engineering
and Environmental, Ltd. By Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations,
Martindale, Texas.
2011b Cultural Resources Surveys of the 2.3-Mile Blakeway Lateral and Blakeway B 1H
Pipeline, and the 5.6-Mile Catarina to Velocity Oil Trunkline in Dimmit County,
Texas. Archaeology Report #37. Tierras Antiguas Archaeological Investigations,
Martindale, Texas.
Nunley, P., and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit County, Texas. The Texas
Journal of Science, Vol. XVIII, No. 3, pp. 233-253.
Web Soil Survey
2012 Dimmit County, Texas.
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/WebSoilSurvey.aspx [Accessed April 2,
2012].

