ABSTRACT
Late Quaternary History of the Waco Mammoth Site: Environmental Reconstruction
and Interpreting the Cause of Death
John D. Bongino, M.S.
Mentor: Lee C. Nordt, Ph.D.

The Waco Mammoth site is thought to be the largest single-herd, non-human related
mammoth death site in the World. Previous research has failed to determine an undisputed
age and cause of death of 22 Columbian mammoths (Mammuthus columbi) uncovered at the
site. The purpose of this study is to produce the most accurate age and interpretation of the
environmental events occurring before, during, and after the death of the Waco Mammoths.
Soils, sediments, and allostratigraphic units were described using several vertical measured
sections. Data collected from measured sections included stratal thickness, allostratigraphic
boundaries, grain size, sedimentary and pedogenic features, and the spatial and temporal
ordering of stratigraphic units. Particle size distribution and micromorphologic analyses
were performed to create a microstratigraphic and pedologic history of the site. This study
concludes that the Waco mammoths represent at least two separate death events occurring in
a tributary of the ancestral Bosque River between 53 to 73 ka B.P.

Late Quaternary History of the Waco Mammoth Site: Environmental Reconstruction
and Determining the Cause of Death
by
John D. Bongino, B.A.
A Thesis
Approved by the Department of Geology
___________________________________
Steven G. Driese, Ph.D., Chairperson
Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of
Baylor University in Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree
of
Master of Science

Approved by the Department of Geology
___________________________________
Lee C. Nordt, Ph.D., Chairperson
___________________________________
Steven G. Driese, Ph.D.
___________________________________
Ellie B. Caston, Ph.D.

Accepted by the Graduate School
August 2007
___________________________________
J. Larry Lyon, Ph.D., Dean

Page bearing signatures is kept on file in the Graduate School.

Copyright 2007 © by John D. Bongino
All rights reserved

TABLE OF CONTENTS

LIST OF FIGURES

vi

LIST OF TABLES

viii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

ix

CHAPTER ONE

1

Introduction

1

Study Area

4

Location

4

Physiography

4

Geology

6

Hydrology

7

Soils

12

CHAPTER TWO

15

Related and Previous Work

15

Columbian Mammoths

15

Taxonomy and Evolution

15

Other North American Mammoth Sites

16

Previous Work

19

CHAPTER THREE

23

Methodology

23

Field Description and Sampling

23

Laboratory Analyses

26
iii

Particle-size distribution

26

Micromorphology

27

Dating

27

Carbon and Oxygen Isotopes

31

Electrical Resistivity

31

CHAPTER FOUR

35

Results

35

Stratigraphy

35

Unit I

36

Unit II

43

Unit III

48

Unit IV

50

Unit V

52

Optically Stimulated Luminescence Ages

55

Stable Isotope Analysis

55

CHAPTER FIVE

60

Discussion

60

Stratigraphic Interpretation

60

Micromorphologic Interpretation

63

Environmental Reconstruction

66

Climate/Ecosystem Reconstruction

66

Paleohydrology

69

Age of the Mammoths

74

iv

Death Events

75

CHAPTER SIX

81

Conclusion

81

APPENDIX A

86

APPENDIX B

97

APPENDIX C

104

APPENDIX D

107

APPENDIX E

111

APPENDIX F

119

APPENDIX G

122

APPENDIX H

124

REFERENCES

128

v

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure

Page

1.

Plan map of Waco Mammoth Site bone bed

2

2.

Location of Waco Mammoth Site

5

3.

Physiographic map showing Waco Mammoth Site

8

4.

Map of drainage basins associated with Waco Mammoth Site

9

5.

Geologic map of Waco Mammoth Site

10

6.

Map of study area showing associated terraces

11

7.

Cross section of T2 and T3 alluvial terraces

12

8.

McLennan County Soil Survey showing soil series distributions
within and surrounding the Waco Mammoth Site

14

Columbian Mammoth distribution in North America

17

9.

10. View of the Waco Mammoth Site Phase II and III excavation area

25

11. Aerial photograph of Waco Mammoth Site area

26

12. Cross section of T2 and T3 alluvial terraces associated with
terrace elevations, core, auger, and test trench locations

27

13. Electrode arrays and corresponding geometric factors for
Schlumberger and dipole-dipole electrode configurations

34

14. Geologic cross section of Waco Mammoth Site showing
allostratigraphic units and associated facies

38

15. Geologic cross section of excavation area showing
spatial distribution of faunal remains

40

16. Electrical resistivity inversion of subsurface data from
two transects across the Waco Mammoth Site

41

17. Correlation of test trench and auger data

45

vi

18. Photomicrographs of thin section samples

48

19. Photomicrographs of thin section samples

51

20. Geologic cross section of the Waco Mammoth Site showing
locations of OSL ages within the excavation area

55

21. Probability density distribution analysis of all OSL ages

58

22. δ13C and δ18O values of pedogenic carbonate nodules for
paleoenvironmental analysis

61

23. Map of study area showing measured reach of the
modern Bosque River and associated tributary

75

24. HEC RAS 4.0 Beta steady flow model of randomly selected
Bosque River channel cross sections

77

25. Stacked Marine Oxygen Isotope Stages showing associated
mammoth habitation and terrace deposition

78

26. Conceptual geographic map showing location of
The Waco Mammoth Site and associated Bosque River

80

27. Environmental reconstruction of three separate death events

81

vii

LIST OF TABLES

Table

Page

1.

Optically Stimulated Luminescence Ages

56

2.

Carbon and oxygen isotopic values from pedogenic
carbonate nodules

59

Peak stream flow discharge for the modern North Bosque River

76

3.

viii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This manuscript is the product of many years of determination, continued support,
and love. If not for the loving support of my family and friends, this manuscript would
have never met completion. I would like to express my great appreciation to Dr. Lee
Nordt for giving me the opportunity to work on such an amazing site and all his patience,
expertise, and time. I would like to thank Dr. Steve Driese for his generous assistance
and for reviewing this manuscript. I also wish to thank Dr. Ellie Caston for her open
mindedness and support in this project.
My appreciation goes to Dr. John Dubar and Sikiru Amidu for their genial
assistance with resistivity surveys and processing the raw data. I want to thank Dr. Steve
Forman for his help with interpreting the age of the Waco Mammoth Site using OSL age
dating. I would like to thank Dr. Peter Allen for his enthusiastic interest in this study and
his continued help with several aspects of this project. I express my gratitude to the
entire Geology faculty for their support and kindness during the completion of this
manuscript.

I extend a special thank you to Paulette Penney for her unbelievable

kindness and endless help throughout my time at Baylor. She is an irreplaceable asset to
the Department of Geology.
My sincere appreciation goes to President Emeritus Herbert H. Reynolds for his
generous financial support toward this study. The majority of this project would have not
been possible without Dr. Reynold’s support. I would also like to thank the Geological
Society of America for a sizable grant, allowing me to expand my analytical
opportunities.
ix

I especially want to thank Anita Benedict for her assistance in my study. Anita
provided a wealth of information and documentation that proved invaluable. I extend my
gratitude towards Dr. Greg McDonald for his expertise in Pleistocene paleotology. My
appreciation also extends to Bill Walker for his gracious help in digging out profiles.
Lastly I would like to express my sincere gratitude to my fiancée Stephanie for
her support through my Masters and my parents for their never-ending support and love.

x

CHAPTER ONE
Introduction

The Waco Mammoth Site was discovered in 1978 in a gully dissecting an alluvial
terrace within the confluence of the Brazos and Bosque Rivers in McLennan County,
Texas (Figure 1). During the initial Phase I excavation (1978-1987), 16 articulated to
semi-articulated female and juvenile Columbian mammoths (Mammuthus columbi) were
unearthed (Fox et al., 1992) (Figure 1). During Phase II and III excavations (1991-1997),
the remains of an additional five female and one bull mammoths, and a fully articulated
camel (Camelops hesternus) (Greg Mcdonald 2005, pers. comm.), and an unidentified
large-tooth feline were uncovered (Anita Benedict 2005, Personal Communication)
(Figure 1). Subsurface coring by Hilliard (1997), approximately 23 m northeast of the
Phase II & III excavation area, encountered bone from another mammoth buried
approximately four meters beneath the coring surface, bringing the total number of
known mammoths at the site to 23.
After excavation was completed in 1990, several hypotheses were formulated
concerning the cause of death of the mammoths. Early investigation (Naryshkin, 1982;
Hiernrich, 1985) of the sediments surrounding the mammoth bones suggested that the
mammoths did not die in situ from rapid burial, but rather were transported and buried
over time by finely laminated sediments. Conversely, Fox et al. (1992) concluded that
taphonomic data and the in situ nature of the bone bed suggested a quick burial by flashflood-derived sediments, causing the mammoths to form a defensive posture around the
younger females and juveniles.
1

2

Figure 1. Waco Mammoth Site bone bed, showing locations of excavated mammoths
and camel. Adapted from original plan map of Phase I, II, and III excavations
by Ralph Vincent. Out of view to the north are Mammoths #22 and #23.

According to Naryshkin (1982), Heinrich (1985), and Fox et al. (1992), the Waco
Mammoth site is buried in Brazos River alluvium.
Three dating techniques have been employed at the Waco Mammoth site since its
discovery in 1978.

Initial standard radiocarbon dating of bone apatite performed

approximately twenty years ago positioned the death of one mammoth from the Phase I
excavation at the site to 28,670 ± 720 14C yr B.P. (SMU-155C). Two uranium series ages
retained from mammoth tooth enamel in 1990 (SMU-198E2b, 198E1) and four Optically
Stimulated Lumenescense ages from associated sediment (UIC1345-1348) obtained in

3
2004 (Lee Nordt 2005, pers. comm.) both indicate that the demise of the herd occurred
sometime between 58,000 and 73,000 yr B.P.
The Waco Mammoth Site is a unique Columbian mammoth site, because it is
proposed as the largest single herd, non-human-related death site discovered in the world.
However, since its discovery in 1978, scientific studies (Naryshkin, 1981; Heinrich,
1985; Strickland, 1988; Fox et al., 1992; Hilliard, 1997; Hoppe, 2004) have produced
differing interpretations, leading to controversy over the absolute age of the site and
cause of death. The purpose of this paper is to (1) construct an allostratigraphic and
chronostratigraphic framework to interpret the depositional history and age of the site, (2)
investigate the cause of death of the Waco mammoths through environmental
reconstruction, and (3) to determine whether all the mammoths died during a single event
or if several individual death assemblages exist.
More specifically, the following are objectives of the Waco Mammoth Site study
are:
1. Refine the most current age estimates of the mammoths using additional
optically stimulated luminescence dating,
2. Reconstruct the paleoenvironment in which the mammoths lived and died
(using geomorphological, sedimentological, stratigraphic and pedological
approaches),
3. Determine the environmental mechanisms resulting in the mammoths deaths
(using depositional characteristics, and stable carbon and oxygen isotope
analysis for climate conditions and approaches listed above), and
4. Determine whether the 22 mammoths existed collectively as a single herd or
as a number of smaller, individual assemblages separated spatially and
temporally.

4
Study Area

Location
The Waco Mammoth Site (WMS) is situated in a narrow valley (~100 meters
wide) inset to a large paired alluvial terrace of the Brazos and Bosques rivers in
northwest Waco of central Mclennan County, Texas (Figure 2). The WMS is located at
31°36’N, 97°11’W, and mapped on the northeast quadrant of the Waco West USGS 7.5”
quadrangle (USGS photo revised, 1975). The WMS is approximately 2 km north of the
present confluence of the Brazos and Bosque Rivers. The site lies within a large meander
loop known as Steinbeck Bend, approximately 0.6 km and 3 km from the Bosque and
Brazos rivers, respectively (Fox et al., 1992) (Figure 2).

Physiography
The WMS is positioned on the interior margin of the Gulf Coastal Plain, at the
border where the Blackland Prairie, Grand Prairie and northeast corner of the Edwards
Plateau physiographic regions meet (Figure 3).

The Blackland Prairie is an

approximately 80-kilometer wide, north-south trending belt spanning Central Texas from
just north of San Antonio to the Red River in North Texas (Flawn and Burket, 1965)
(Figure 3). The WMS is within the Brazos River basin containing the Brazos and Bosque
River systems, which is bordered to the east and northeast by the Trinity River Basin
(Figure 4).

The Brazos River basin upstream from the Waco Mammoth Site

encompasses other physiographic regions that influence its hydrology and sediment
sourcing. Provinces included within the upper Brazos River basin are the North Central
Plains and the High Plains (Figure 3).

5

Figure 2. Location of the Waco Mammoth Site approximately 2 km north of the
confluence of the Brazos and Bosque rivers, within the northern city limits of
Waco in McLennan County, Texas.

6
The topography consists of gentle rolling hills with deep clayey soils (Blackland Prairie)
in the east grading into a more rolling prairie (Washita Prairie – part of the Grand Praire)
with shallow calcareous soils to the west (Flawn and Burket, 1965).
Geology
The Blackland Prairie region is underlain by Cretaceous shales and limestones of
the Eagle Ford Group, Austin Chalk and Taylor Marl (Flawn and Burket, 1965). The
neighboring Washita Prairie to the west lies above the Washita Group, which consists of
Cretaceous limestones of the Buda, Del Rio, and Georgetown formations (Flawn and
Burket, 1965). The two prairie systems are separated by the Bosque Escarpment, a fault
line scarp extending across the northwest portion of Waco (Flawn and Burket, 1965)
(Figures 3 and 5). This stair-stepped, fault-controlled feature is part of the much larger
and longer White Rock escarpment, a northeastern trending two-stepped topographic
escarpment spanning across Central Texas. The White Rock escarpment and its smaller
counterpart, the Bosque escarpment are capped on their high step primarily by the
Cretaceous Austin Chalk with the lower step being supported by limestones of the Eagle
Ford Group (Flawn and Burket, 1965).
Brazos River alluvium is mapped at the site as Fluviatile terrace deposits (Qta) on
the Geologic Atlas of Texas Waco sheet (Figure 5). Flawn and Burket (1965) mapped
these deposits as Brazos Terrace (Qbrl).

North of the excavation area, the Brazos

alluvium is directly underlain by the Eagle Ford Group and Early Gulfian (Cretaceous)
shales with limestone fragments (Figure 5). The central and southern portions of the site
are underlain by Cretaceous-age Austin Chalk (Kau), which is exposed at the surface to
the south, west and north of the site (Figure 5).

7
The Brazos and Bosque rivers are both meandering streams, creating a series of
three alluvial fill terraces that represent older, abandoned floodplains.

The Waco

Mammoth Site is inset to the third and highest terrace of a well defined three-level
system of terraces between the Brazos and Bosque rivers (Figure 6). These terraces are
labeled T1 through T3 and are 11 m, 16 m, and 24 m above mean river elevation
correspondingly (Flawn and Burkett, 1965; Hilliard, 1997). The mammoth and other
faunal remains were excavated within and adjacent to a modern low-order tributary that
has cut down through the T3 terrace.

Hydrology
The Brazos drainage basin begins with its headwaters in central-eastern New
Mexico and continues southeastward through Texas, where it terminates into the Gulf of
Mexico (Figure 4). Beginning from its headwaters to where the Brazos and Bosque
Rivers converge, the Brazos basin drains approximately 110,703 km2, with 8,611 km2
considered noncontributing (Greiner, 1978).

Flowing southeast through Erath,

Somervell, Bosque, Hamilton, Coryell, and McLennan counties, the Bosque River is
bounded by the Leon River to the west, the Brazos River to the east, and the White Rock
escarpment to the southeast (Bishop, 1977). The Bosque River drainage basin, within the
larger Brazos River basin, drains approximately 4,286 km2.

8

Figure 3. The location of the Waco Mammoth Site, shown on the physiographic
map of Texas. Adapted from Bureau of Economic Geology, Austin, Texas
(1996).

9

Waco Mammoth
Site

Brazos
River
Basin

Trinity
River
Basin

!

0 50 100

200 Kilometers

Figure 4. Map showing location of Waco Mammoth Site within the Brazos River
Basin. The Brazos River basin is bordered to the north and northeast by the
Trinity River basin.

10

Figure 5. Geologic map of the Waco Mammoth Site and surrounding area, including the
associated reaches of the Brazos and Bosque Rivers. One centimeter equals
2.5 km (adapted from the Bureau of Economic Geology, Waco sheet, 1979).

11

Figure 6. Map of study area showing Brazos/Bosque River alluvial terraces. Terrace
boundaries based on USGS Waco West 7.5” topographic quadrangle (1975 ),
with cross section transect (A to A`) and cross section transect (B to B`)
(adapted from Hilliard, 1979). Transects A to A` and B to B` are shown in
Figures 6 and 13, respectively.

12

Figure 7. Cross section of T2 and T3 alluvial terraces derived from the USGS Waco
West 7.5” quadrangle (photo revised 1975) along transect A to A` (see Figure
6) (Adapted from Hilliard, 1997).

Soils
Soils principally associated with the Bosque River terrace alluvium to the south of
the site are calcareous and clayey Mollisols formed under grassland prairies (Figure 8).
These soils contain organic-rich mineral surface horizons, typically underlain by clayey
and carbonitic subsurface horizons that include the Burleson, Sunev, Queeny, Lewisville,
and Frio series (USDA, 2001) (Figure 8). The southern (Bosque River side) portion of
the Waco Mammoth Site is dominated by the Sunev series in the uplands (fine-loamy,
carbonatic, thermic Udic Calciustolls) and the Frio series in the floodplain (fine,
montmorillonitic, thermic Cumulic Haplustolls) (USDA, 2001) (Figure 8).
The Brazos River soils on the north side of the Waco Mammoth site are Alfisols
formed under oak-grassland savanna with deep, loamy-siliceous properties containing a
greater abundance of quartz derived from the Paluxy Formation of the Fredricksburg
Group (Hilliard, 1997) (Figure 8). Brazos alluvium-parented soils in the study area are
members of the Bastil, Wilson, McLennan, Gholson, Payne, Branyon, Burleson,

Figure 8. McLennan County Soil Survey map showing soil series distributions within and surrounding the
Waco Mammoth Site. Adapted from the NRCS Web Soil Survey (2007).

13

14
Weswood, and Yahola soils series (USDA, 2001) (Figure 8). The primary soil series are
the Bastil series (fine-loamy, siliceous, thermic Udic Paleustalfs) and the Wilson series
(fine, montmorillonitic, thermic Oxyaquic Vertic Haplustalfs) (USDA, 2001) (Figure 8).

CHAPTER TWO
Related and Previous Work
Columbian Mammoths

Taxonomy and Evolution
Classified by Falconer (1857) as Mammuthus columbi, Columbian mammoths
existed in North American for close to 1.9 million years (Saunders, 1990). Identified
primarily based on the frequency and number of lamellar plates and enamel thickness
(range of 5 – 8 plates/100 mm and a range of 8 – 20+ plates; Osborn, 1922; Hay 1924;
Lundelius, 1972; Maglio, 1973; Kurten and Anderson, 1980; Graham, 1986; Dalquest
and Schultz, 1992; Fox et al., 1992; Webb, 1992; Finsley, 1996), the Columbian
mammoth (Mammuthus columbi) was one of the largest species of mammoth
(Mammuthus) measuring from 300 to 400 cm tall at the shoulder (Agenbroad, 1984;
Haynes, 1991; Lister and Bahn, 1994; Dutrow, 1980) with adults weighing up to 7,700 kg
(Shipman, 1992). Columbian mammoth (M. columbi) evolved from its Early Pleistocene
ancestor Mammuthus meridionalis (approximately 1.9 mya) (Agenbroad, 1984; Haynes,
1991; Lister and Bahn, 1994). Unlike its colder-adapted Eurasian cousin the Wooly
mammoth (M. primigenius), the Columbian mammoth moved southward from Asia (via
the land bridge Beringia), across North America, adapting to more temperate open
grazing environments (Fox et al., 1992; Haynes, 1991; Lister and Bahn, 1994; Webb,
1992) stretching from the southwest states, then northeastward to the Great Lakes region
(Agenbroad, 1984) (Figure 9).

15

16

Columbian mammoths (Mammuthus columbi) migrated into Texas approximately 1.2-1.3
my B.P. (Izett, 1977; Madden, 1983; Morgan et al., 1998).

Figure 9. Columbian Mammoth (Mammuthus columbi) distribution in North American
from known excavations (Agenbroad, 1984). Contour interval = 20
individuals. Adapted from Agenbroad, (1984).

Other North American Mammoth Sites
Several sites containing Mammuthus columbi remains have been discovered
throughout Texas and surrounding Western states, including Arizona, New Mexico, and
Colorado (Agenbroad, 1984a). Notable Columbian Mammoth sites in Texas include the
Duewall-Newberry Site in Brazos County (Carlson et al., 1984; Steele and Carlson,

17
1989a, 1989b; Haynes, 1991; Fox and Smith, 1992; Fox et al., 1992; Carlson and Steele,
1992), the Friesenhahn Cave Site in Bexar County (Milstead, 1956; Glen and Grayson,
1961), and the Maimi Site in Roberts County (Steele and Carlson, 1989a, 1989b;
Graham, 1976; Sellards, 1952; Holliday et al., 1994). During excavation of the DuewallNewberry Site, the remains of a single mammoth were found on the muddy sand
sediments of a buried natural levee of the Brazos River, which was estimated to date
12,000 to 10,000 years ago, however, collagen present in the bone was not sufficient to
obtain an accurate radiocarbon age estimate (Carlson and Steele, 1992). The Friesenhahn
Cave Site, a one-room cave carved into the Edwards Limestone in south-central Texas,
has yielded 300 whole and 200 broken Columbian Mammoth teeth, along with the
remains of several other large fauna (Graham, 1976). Radiocarbon ages produced at the
Friesenhahn Cave Site suggest that large assemblage habitation occurred from 10,000 yr
B.P. to 20,000 yr B.P. (Graham, 1976). The Friesenhahn Site contains an abundance of
sabertoothed cat (Homotherium serum) remains, suggesting that this site was a sabertoothed cat den (Graham, 1976; Marean and Ehrhardt 1995). The Miami Site, located
near the eastern boundary of the Southern High Plains contains the partial remains of five
Columbian mammoths dating from 10,000 yr B.P. to 11,400 yr B.P., all found resting on
the surface of silty clay sediments deposited in a shallow ephemeral pond (Sellards, 1952;
Holliday et al., 1994).
Several similar studies have been performed on Columbian mammoth sites in
Texas, Iowa, and Oklahoma. A mammoth site dating to 22,000 yr B.P. located in
Pattawattamie County, Iowa was investigated by Davis et al. (1972), who was concerned
with placing the mammoth stratigraphically within its Pleistocene sediments to determine

18
potential associations with prehistoric man or other mammals. Similar to the Waco
Mammoth Site, the stratigraphic investigation revealed no apparent evidence to support a
fluvial redeposition of the mammoth after their death.

The bones were, however,

fragmented and disarticulated suggesting weathering and possible scavenger activity.
The La Paloma Mammoth Site, containing 145 partially articulated bones
relatively undisturbed by moving water or scavenging activity, was discovered buried in
fluvial sediments in Kenedy County, Texas, (Weir, 1978).

Sedimentological and

stratigraphic evidence retained from the site suggests the possibility of rapid burial,
which has also been suggested at the Waco Mammoth Site.
The Hajny Mammoth Site, Dewey County, Oklahoma has been extensively
studied by Wyckoff et al. (1992), who focused on geological and paleontological aspects.
Located in a Quaternary alluvial terrace, the Hajny Site contains the remains of two adult
Imperial or Columbian mammoths, of which a definite classification has not been made
(Wyckoff et al., 1992). The study of this site included the application of site stratigraphy,
radiocarbon dating, and local geomorphology to determine the age, local stratigraphic
and spatial contexts of the site. The Hajny Site mammoths died in sediments associated
with a natural spring, with two sizably different dates; one radiocarbon age of
approximately 9,000 yr B.P. and one uranium/thorium age range of 140,000 to 165,000
yr B.P. (Wyckoff et al., 1992), resulting in a conflict concerning the absolute age of the
site. Regardless of the unresolved age of the Hajny Site, the geological implications and
methodology was used to interpret the paleoenvironmental conditions during the Hajny
Site mammoth occupation (Wyckoff et al., 1992).

19
Several human-related mammoth kill sites dating to the Late Pleistocene and
Early Holocene transition (10,000 to 15,000 yr B.P.), contain useful depositional
information for comparison with the Waco Mammoth Site. These sites include: the
Taylor Ranch Mammoth Site in Kleberg County, Texas (Suhm, 1979); the Naco
Mammoth Site, southeastern Arizona (Haury, 1953); and the Rawlins Mammoth Site in
Wyoming (McGrew, 1961). All of these sites are located in fluvial environments and
contain depositional evidence similar to that found at the Waco Mammoth Site.

Previous Work
Since its discovery in 1978, several phases of research have been employed at the
Waco Mammoth Site including excavation, classification and casting of most of the 22
mammoths, two tortoises, a large-tooth feline and one camel (Camelops hesternus),
absolute dating of faunal material and sediment, initial stratigraphic and soil analysis and
stable isotope analysis (Naryshkin, 1981; Hienrich, 1985; Strickland, 1988, Fox et al.,
1992; Haynes, 1992; Hoppe, 2004). Three dating techniques have been employed at the
Waco Mammoth Site. Initial standard radiocarbon dating of bone apatite performed
approximately twenty years ago positioned the death of one mammoth at the site at
approximately 29,000 14C yr B.P. (SMU-155C). Two uranium series ages retained from
mammoth tooth enamel in 1990 (SMU-198E2b, 198E1) and four Optically Stimulated
Luminescence ages from associated sediment (UIC1345-1348) obtained in 2004 both
indicate that the herd died sometime between 58,000 and 73,000 yr B.P.
Preliminary investigations were initiated by Fox et al. (1992) and Haynes (1992)
concerning the herd dynamics of the Waco Mammoth Site using data collected from
1978 to 1987. Their study produced evidence suggesting that the mammoths were part of

20
a single matriarchal herd all dying during the same event (Fox et al., 1992). The position
of the mammoths, sexual dimorphism, and ages suggest that the 16 adult females and
juveniles were all members of a single family assemblage (Haynes, 1991, 1992; Fox et
al., 1992). Fox et al. (1992) used stratigraphic, faunal, and spatial evidence to compose a
number of potential hypotheses explaining the cause of the mammoths’ deaths. Evidence
assembled by Fox et al. (1992) was also used to challenge previous hypotheses
(Naryshkin, 1981; Hienrich, 1985; Strickland, 1988) indicating that the mammoths died
not in situ from drowning and slow burial. Fox et al. (1992) concluded that the Waco
mammoth bones were naturally preserved in situ likely due to a sudden catastrophic
event resulting in immediate burial. However, Fox et al. (1992) suggested that the exact
cause of death of the mammoths remains problematic.
A taphonomic study on 10 of the mammoths from the Waco Mammoth Site was
conducted by Haynes (1992).

Haynes (1992) determined the life-ages of the 10

individuals and found that at least two of the mammoths were juveniles and
approximately 20-30% were subadults. According to Haynes (1991), modern elephant
populations consist of approximately 30-50% subadults within the population. Based on
the lack of sexually productive mammoths and skeletal size and bone lengths, Haynes
(1992) concluded that the Waco mammoths may have suffered from environmental
stresses or significant predation.
Two faculty-supported undergraduate research studies through Baylor University,
(Naryshkin, 1981; Hilliard, 1997), were completed on the Waco site, both concentrating
on the geologic investigation and age of the site.

Naryshkin (1981) attempted to

determine the site’s significance to the Pleistocene history of Central Texas.

He

21
combined fossil and sedimentary data in an effort to form an environmental interpretation
of the site by determining any relationships between the Pleistocene history of the site
and the alluvial terrace history of the Brazos River Valley. Naryshkin (1981) concluded
that lithologic evidence suggested that the herd met their demise upstream and were
transported downstream, where they were deposited on a point bar.
Additionally, two brief studies (Hienrich, 1985; Strickland, 1988) focusing on the
stratigraphy and site formation processes were carried out on the Waco Mammoth Site.
Hienrich (1985) suggested that the stratigraphy of the site was not consistent with a single
episodic event, but rather a more systematic series of depositional events that over time
completely buried the 16 mammoths from the first phase of excavation. He proposed that
the mammoths were situated on an abandoned channel, once part of an active floodplain
of the Bosque River. The mammoths were partially buried by approximately 25 cm of
finely laminated flood deposits, leaving bone exposed to be weathered. Hienrich (1985)
suggested that the depositional sequence of events may have resulted from the infilling of
an abandoned meander loop of the Bosque River.

Furthermore, Hienrich (1985)

concluded that the flood history of the Bosque River should be considered in the
interpretation of the cause of death.
Strickland (1988) studied site formation processes at the Waco Mammoth Site,
considering the mammoths as a thanatocose (i.e. animals present died in in situ). This
study compared the previous works of Naryshkin (1981), Heinrich (1985), and Haynes
(1987). Strickland (1988) concluded that the mammoths were likely part of a single
family group and recommended the application of microenvironmental analysis to the
interpretation of the Waco mammoth death event.

22
A study by Hoppe (2004) presented isotopic analyses of several known
Pleistocene mammoth sites, including the Waco Mammoth Site. Hoppe (2004) focused
on mammoth herd structure, migration patterns, and Clovis hunting strategies using
carbon, oxygen, and strontium isotope ratios in mammoth tooth enamel. Isotopic ratios
from the Waco Mammoth Site were compared to the Friesenhahn Cave site (a natural
accumulation of non-related Columbian mammoths) in South Texas. For the Waco
Mammoth Site, 17 samples were obtained from molars representing 12 mammoths
(Hoppe, 2004). Carbon and oxygen isotopic ratios were measured from all samples
except one and strontium ratios were measured from 11 of the 17 samples (Hoppe, 2004).
The Waco mammoths showed little variability of either carbon or oxygen isotope values
(Hoppe, 2004).

Strontium isotopic ratios were determined not to be sufficient for

identifying related individuals among the Waco mammoths; however, these ratios
suggest an influence from sediments associated with the Bosque River (Hoppe, 2004).
Oxygen isotopes suggested that the mammoths drank from a variety of source areas and
were not traceable to any one source (Hoppe, 2004). Hoppe (2004) concluded that the
close range of carbon isotope ratios from the Waco mammoth teeth suggested a similar
diet of primarily C4 (warm season grasses) vegetation among the mammoths.
Conversely, the unrelated individuals at the Friesenhahn Cave site showed a wider range
of δ13C values, suggesting those individuals were from different areas, or lived at
different times (Hoppe, 2004).

CHAPTER THREE
Methodology

Field Description and Sampling
Locations for field description, sampling, and geology map were chosen using
topographic sheets, aerial photographs, the Soil Survey of McLennan County, Texas
(2001), the Environmental Atlas of McLennan County (Yelderman and Cervenka, 1992),
the Geologic Atlas of Texas, Waco sheet (1970), and field observations. Seven vertical
sediment profiles, eight backhoe trenches, and nine subsurface cores (Figures 10, 11 and
12; Appendices A, B, and C) were used for description and identification of
unconformably bound stratigraphic units, associated depositional facies, and surface and
buried soils. Depositional facies and soils were described in the field using texture grainsize and color, sedimentary structures, and reaction to HCl. Backhoe trenches were dug
to depths of 2 to 4 meters depending on machine capabilities.
Detailed soil descriptions were completed on seven existing vertical soil profiles
within the excavation area (Figure 10; Appendix B).

In addition, detailed soil

descriptions were completed on all backhoe trenches excavated (Figures 11 and 12;
Appendices A and B). Soil characteristics from the vertical profiles and soil trenches
were identified and described in correspondence with the standards and procedures of the
Soil Survey Division Staff (1993), including: texture, structure, consistence, color,
reaction to HCl, carbonate content, coarse fragments, and other diagnostic features such
as reduction/oxidation, rooting, and slickensides.

23

24
Bulk samples were collected from each soil horizon and associated parent
material for particle-size distribution, thin-section analysis, and δ13C and δ18O isotopic
analysis. Thin section samples with natural integrity were also collected from each soil
horizon for micromorphological analysis. Samples for optically stimulated luminescence
(OSL) dating were taken from sandy sediment layers associated with the six mammoths,
camel, large-tooth feline, and turtle excavated during the Phase II and III excavations.
OSL samples were excavated using a 30 cm long hollow galvanized metal pipe that was
capped on one end to assure the capture of unexposed sandy sediment.

Figure 10. View of the Waco Mammoth Site Phase III excavation area showing locations
of exposed vertical wall profiles, with view to the north.

25

Figure 11. Aerial photograph of Waco Mammoth Site area, showing locations of soil
test trenches and T3 and T2 alluvial terraces (Aerial photo adapted from
Google Earth, 2006).

Sediment was collected using a 12 in (~30 cm) by 1.25 in (~3 cm) cylindrical metal tube,
which was hammered perpendicular into the center of each sediment layer to a depth of at
least 30 cm. Sediment was also collected within a 20 cm radius around each sample core
for dose rate determinations and to check samples for proper particle size (4-11 µm) and
mineralogy (quartz and/or feldspar), prior to analysis.

26

Figure 12. Cross section of T2 and T3 alluvial terraces associated with Waco Mammoth
Site, showing terrace elevations and (A) Core (Hilliard, 1997) and Auger
flight localities (2005 to 2006), and (B) Soil Trench locations, relative to the
positions of the Brazos and Bosque Rivers (Adapted from Hilliard, 1997).

Laboratory Analyses
Particle-Size Distribution
Particle-size distribution was completed using the hydrometer method following
the standards and procedures of Gee and Bauder (1986). For this study, the 40-second
hydrometer reading for sand fraction calculations was not performed. Alternatively,
samples were washed over a 52 µm sieve after the 6-hour reading for clay content, dried
and weighed. Dried samples were then placed in a sieve shaker device and sieved for 15
minutes each for sand size separates. Sample fractions used for this study include sand
(2-0.062 mm), silt (0.062-0.0039 mm), and clay (> 0.0039). Particle size distributions

27
were computed for each profile and test trench sampled.

Soil texture was also

determined using particle size.

Micromorphology
Micromorphologic description and identification were made on 42 (2 X 3 inch
formatted) thin section samples taken from several identified soil horizons (from both
vertical soil profiles and soil trenches) within study area.

For this study,

micromorphologic analysis was focused on the identification of diagnostic features
associated with morphological and sedimentological similarities to correlate sedimentary
beds and/or units and interpret the environments of deposition across the study area.
Furthermore, morphological analysis was used to determine the influences of the soil
forming factors and environmental controls on pedogenesis for the surface and buried
soils.

Terminology used for the micromorphological description of thin sections is

derived from Brewer’s (1976) and Bullock et al. (1985).

Dating
14

C and Uranium/Thorium age dating. In 1985, one standard radiocarbon age of

28,670 ± 720 yr B.P. was estimated on a bone sample from the Waco Mammoth Site by
the Southern Methodist University Radiocarbon Laboratory, Dallas, Texas. Due to an
insufficient amount of organic material (bone collagen), three mineral fractions
(hydroxyapatite) were extracted and dated using standard Accelerated Mass Spectrometry
(AMS)

14

C dating. The first fraction was assumed to be contaminated by secondary

carbonate, the second fraction was dated as a check and the third fraction yielded the
~29,000 yr B.P. age (Herbert Haas 1998, pers.comm.). Four additional samples were

28
obtained for further AMS dating, which included bone from Mammoth #17 (1997.1), the
camel (1997.2), and Mammoth #23 (1997.3) and a bulk sediment sample from below
Mammoth #21. All of these additional samples were determined to have insufficient
datable carbon (collagen) for dating by either AMS or standard methods because of
extreme chemical degradation (Thomas W. Stafford, Jr., Ph.D. 2000, pers. comm.). A
study by Grun et al. (1997) suggested that AMS dating of hydroxyapatite from human
teeth uncovered from archaeological sites when compared to ages estimated from
collagen or inorganic carbon, resulted in serious age underestimations.
Two Uranium-series (230Th/234U ) ages were estimated from enamel extracted
from an unidentified molar of an unidentified mammoth from the Phase I excavation
(SMU McKinney, 1990). The two estimated ages were calculated from enamel from an
interior and exterior portion of the molar and are 70,924 ± 5261 yr B.P. (198E1) and
73,442 ± 2735 yr B.P. (198E2b), respectively.

The Uranium series dating method

(Ivanovich and Harmon, 1982) was extensively tested by McKinney (1991), who focused
on the reliability of Uranium-series dating of enamel, bone, and dentine. McKinney
(1977) argued that enamel was a better material for Uranum-series dating than bone,
because of enamel has a much more dense crystal structure. Uranium content in enamel
seems to be limited to the outer edges of the enamel, and, in cases when enamel is
weathered, the Uranium content tends to be highest in the weathered zone, commonly
resulting in overestimated ages (McKinney, 1991). McKinney (1991) concluded that
when used with multiple samples and repeated analysis, U-series dating of enamel can be
reliable.

29
Optically stimulated luminescence. Optically stimulated luminescence dating is
dependent on the time-dependent dosimetric properties of silicate minerals, especially
quartz and feldspar (Aitken, 1985, 1998). The reliability of dating fluvial sediments
using OSL has been addressed in several studies over the past eight years (Olley et al.,
1999; Wallinga et al., 2001; Wallinga, 2002; Zhang et al., 2003; Feathers et al., 2006). A
common problem that arises with OSL dating of fluvial sediments is that sand in fluvial
systems may receive inadequate light exposure during transport, resulting in incomplete
resetting of the OSL signal by incomplete bleaching prior to burial (Olley et al., 1999;
Wallinga et al., 2001; Wallinga, 2002; Zhang et al., 2003; Feathers et al., 2006). This can
result in overestimations of the actual burial ages. To avoid overestimation of OSL ages
due to possible variability in radiation exposure (degree of resetting), it is recommended
to use small subsamples or aliquots of a single to few grains to determine if the radiation
dose rate from cosmic rays (grays/1000 yr) or equivalent dose (De) is sufficient to
produce consistent burial ages (Olley et al., 1999; Wallinga et al., 2001; Wallinga, 2002;
Zhang et al., 2003; Feathers et al., 2006). However the multiple aliquot additive dose
method (MAAD) is most commonly used for fine-grained polymineral or quartz fraction
and is a more suitable method for fluvial sediments (Singhvi et al., 1982; Forman and
Pierson, 2002). This method consists of applying additional doses (beta or gamma) to
separate aliquots of a larger sample to build a dose response curve and ultimately
simulating an equivalent dose (De) to the solar reset level (Singhvi et al., 1982; Forman
and Pierson, 2002). For this study, the multiple aliquot additive dose method of Singhvi
et al. (1982) and Forman and Pierson (2002) was used on the polymineral fraction of the
bulk sediment samples.

30
Bulk sediment samples obtained for OSL dating were analyzed by the
Luminescence Dating Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois. Four samples were analyzed in 2004 and nine samples were analyzed in 2006.
The 4-11 µm polymineral fractions from both the 2004 and 2006 samples were analyzed
using the multiple aliquot additive dose method from Singhvi et al. (1982) and Forman
and Pierson (2002). The Uranium (U) and Thorium (Th) content from all samples were
determined by thick-source alpha counting in order to determine dosing rates (Sjostrand
and Prescott, 2002). Uranium, Thorium, and Potassium oxide of the 2006 samples were
assayed using an Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) at Activation
Laboratories, Ontario, Canada.

The 2006 samples were designated either GR for

excitation by green light (514 ± 20 nm) or IR for excitation by infrared wavelengths (880
± 80 nm), with the equivalent dose determined by the multiple aliquot regenerative dose
technique (Jain et al., 2003). All calculated ages (2004 and 2006 samples) include a
cosmic ray dose rate of 16 mGray/ka determined from calculations of Prescott and
Hutton (1994). Each age also included an assumed burial moisture content of 20 ± 5%
and a measured alpha efficiency factor, which is defined by Aitken and Bowman (1975).
The moisture content affects the dose rate by absorbing ionizing radiation. The wetter
the sample, the more moisture in pore spaces and thus the greater absorption of generated
alpha, beta and gamma particles to varying degrees (dependent on particle energy). The
wetter the sample, the lower the dose rate, and ultimately the greater the age estimate.
The reliability of OSL dating is dependent on the suitability of the sandy sediments and
the preferred sediments for OSL dating are those that (1) less than one hour of sunlight
exposure, (2) accumulated as a relatively homogeneous unit, and (3) have not undergone

31
significant water-content variations or diagenetic alteration during burial (Steve Forman
2005, pers. comm.). After OSL sampling at the Waco Mammoth Site in 2004, the
sediments were determined to be suitable for dating (Steve Forman 2005, pers. comm.).

Carbon and oxygen isotopes. A total of 21 whole pedogenic carbonate nodules
were collected from soil trenches and exposed wall profiles, representing soil horizons
and sediment layers throughout the site. Isotopic ratios of 18O and 16O and 13C and 12C of
each sample was measured using a VG SIRA Model 12 dual-inlet continuous gas-source
mass spectrometer operated by Coastal Science Laboratories in Austin, Texas. Isotopic
ratios of oxygen and carbon were analyzed by liberating CO2 gas from the bulk carbonate
samples using a weak acid. The ratios of 18O to 16O and 13C to 12C measured from CO2 is
expressed as the per mil (‰) difference relative to the Pee Dee Belemnite (PDB)
standard, as represented by the δ18O and δ13C notations, respectively. For this study,
carbon and oxygen measurements are accurate to ± 0.2‰ PDB (CSL Ref.#FP44).

Electrical Resistivity
Electrical-resistivity surveys measure the electrical resistive properties of earthen
materials, where by variations in resistivity are correlated to subsurface geologic,
hydrologic and chemical properties. In archaeological studies, the method is widely used
for detecting, mapping, and studying the characteristics of various types of objects and
structures in the subsurface as well as in mapping subsurface stratigraphy (Darwin et al.,
1990; Scollar et al., 1990; Osella et al., 2005; Papadopoulos et al., 2006)
Conventionally, artificially generated electric current is injected into the ground
through a pair of current electrodes and the resulting potential difference is measured

32
through a pair of potential electrodes. The relationship between the injected current,
measured potential difference and the electrical resistivity is given as:

ρa =

∆V
K
I

where, ρ a is known as apparent resistivity, V is voltage, I is current, and K = 2π f (r ) is
known as the geometric or form factor whose values depend on the type of electrode
configuration used. Figure 13 shows the electrode arrangements and the corresponding
geometric factors for the dipole-dipole and Schlumberger arrays used in this study. In the
dipole-dipole array, current and potential electrodes are located on either side of the
array, whereas for the Schlumberger array, the current electrodes are placed between the
two potential electrodes. By increasing the distance between the electrodes, the depth of
investigation increases and deeper zones within the subsurface can be studied. The
dipole-dipole array has low EM (electromagnetic) coupling between the potential and
current circuits and is sensitive to horizontal changes in resistivity, whereas the
Schlumberger array is sensitive to vertical changes in resistivity (Loke, 2000; Furman et
al., 2003; Dhalin and Zhou, 2004). By combining the two arrays for the resistivity survey
in this study, it is presumed that the horizontal and vertical changes in resistivity are
optimally resolved.
The field survey was carried out with an AGI SuperSting R8 resistivity system
(Advanced Geosciences Inc. AGI, Austin, Texas). The system consists of a portable
earth resistivity meter with 28 smart electrodes in a cable segment. The system was preprogrammed before the field survey for automatic resistivity measurements using the
dipole-dipole and Schlumberger arrays at a minimum dipole and electrode spacings of 5
m. Two-cycle stacking was used for the measurements. For each reading, the resistivity

33

ρa = π(L2 – l2) _ V
2l
I

ρa = m(n +1)(n + 2)aV
I
Figure 13. Electrode arrays and corresponding geometric factors for (a) Schlumberger
and (b) Dipole-dipole electrode configuration, used in this study. A
and B are the current electrodes and M and N are the potential electrodes.

meter recorded the apparent resistivity value and the corresponding standard error from
The error values were less than 5% throughout the survey.
The measured apparent resistivity data required numerical modeling and
inversion, to obtain the true two-dimensional (2D) distribution of resistivity within the
subsurface. This was carried out using the program EarthImager 2D (AGI, 2006). This
is a computer program that automatically determines a 2D resistivity model of the
subsurface for the input-apparent resistivity data.

The program uses an array of

rectangular blocks (finite elements) to model the subsurface, and by forward modeling,
calculates resistivity values that agree with the actual measurements (Loke and Barker,
1996). An optimization method, which may be a least-squares or robust scheme, is then

34
used to adjust the resistivity of the model blocks and iteratively reduce the difference
between the calculated and measured apparent resistivity values. The robust method,
which attempts to minimize the sum of the absolute values of the spatial changes in the
model resistivity, was used for the data inversion (Claerbout and Muir, 1973; Olayinka
and Yaramanci, 2000; Loke et al., 2003). This generated a model in which the features in
the resistivity section were delineated by relatively constant resistivity values, and were
separated from each other by sharp boundaries (Loke et al., 2003).

The observed

resistivity distribution in the inverted resistivity section was then tied to available
geological and paleontological information at the site.

CHAPTER FOUR
Results

Stratigraphy

The Waco Mammoth Site is associated with two Late Pleistocene paired alluvial
landforms: T3 terrace and T2 terrace (Figure 14). Represented in seven vertical profiles
(Figure 15), eight soil test-trench exposures (Figure 14) and nine subsurface cores (Figure
14), the Late Quaternary sediments in the terrace system are divided into five major
allostratigraphic units, labeled I to V, from oldest to youngest (Figure 14). The five
unconformably-bound alluvial stratigraphic units include: Pleistocene channel gravels
(Ia) and floodplain alluvium (Ib and Ic) beneath T3, Late Pleistocene channel gravels (IIa
and IIb) and floodplain alluvium (IIc) beneath T2, Late Pleistocene floodplain alluvium
(III) beneath T2, Late Pleistocene floodplain alluvium (IV) facies, and Late Pleistocene
floodplain alluvium (V) overlying Unit IV. The Pleistocene and Late Pleistocene gravels
were labeled as subunits of the larger allostratigraphic units (i.e., Ia, IIa, and IIb). The
two channel facies (IIa and IIb) of Unit II fill two separate channels that are deeply
incised into Cretaceous bedrock (Figure 14). All of the faunal remains uncovered at the
Waco Mammoth Site are associated with Unit III (Figure 15). Particle size and soil
textural analysis data for several vertical exposures and test trenches are presented in
Appendix D.
In addition to vertical profiles, test trench and core exposures, electrical resistivity
increases the resolution of the subsurface geometry, providing a continuous view of
subsurface features at greater depths than either trenching or coring. (Figure 16). An
35

36
inversion of the electrical resistivity data shows a large continuous, highly resistant body
of material (approximately 125-466 ohm m) that spans from the southern boundary of the
excavation area southward, terminating against bedrock and alluvium of T3 terrace
(Figure 16). The continuous body appears to have two channels incised deeper into
surrounding, less resistant material (Figure 16).

The channel located under the

excavation area shows a distinctive body of highly resistant material in the shape of a
narrowly incised channel (Figure 16).

This subsurface body is consistent with the

previously interpreted channel that lies beneath the Phase I mammoth bone bed based on
gravels encountered during hand augering and unit excavation.

Unit I

The oldest unit in the study area is Unit I (T3) and is identified in cores MC2 and
MC5 (Hilliard, 1997), augers MA1 and MA4 and test trenches 1, 5, 7, and 8 (Figures 12,
14, and 17). Unit I is approximately 6.4 m and 5.0 m thick to the north and south,
respectively.

Unit I is unconformably underlain by the Cretaceous Austin Chalk

Formation (Figure 14). Unit I consists of three dominant facies, including a channel
facies (Unit Ia to the north) and two sandy clay to silty clay floodplain facies (Ib, Ic).
The channel facies (Ia) consists of well sorted, subrounded to subangular, grainsupported siliceous and carbonatic gravels (~3 mm – 10 mm in diameter), with
intermittent sand beds that thicken towards the surface (0.5 m – 1.5 m). The channel
facies of Unit I appears to be laterally confined by the limestone bedrock (Figure 14).
The sand and gravel deposits (Ia) are conformably overlain by a layer of vertical
accretion deposits (Ib) that grade upward into well developed soils. These soils are

37

Figure 14. Geologic cross section of the Waco Mammoth Site along transect B-B`,
showing four major allostratigraphic units and associated facies and the
T2/T3 terrace boundary. The geologic cross-section was drafted using
vertical exposures, soil test trenches, subsurface cores, and electrical
resistivity.

38

39

Figure 15. Geologic cross-section of the excavation area showing the spatial distribution
of faunal remains in relation to allostratigraphic units and locations of
vertical profiles within the Phase II/III excavation area.

40

Figure 16. Electrical resistivity inversion of (A) Dipole-Dipole/Schlumberger combined
array of a transect trending north to south from the south end of the
excavation tent to north edge of T3 terrace and (B) Dipole-Dipole array
of a transect trending north to south covering the entire excavation area.
Resistivity is measured in Ohm meters.

41

42
relatively thick (>1.5 m) and siliceous-dominated Alfisols (Bastil series) to the north (Ib)
and thick (>2 m) carbonitic Mollisols (Sunev series) to the south (Ic) (Figures 8 and 14).
The Alfisol (Test Trench 1) in Unit Ib contains a thin surface (A) horizon and
subsurface Bt1, Bt2, Btss, and Btg horizons (Appendices A and B). The entire soil
profile down to the Ck horizon was completely decalcified, showing no reaction to
Hydrochloric (HCl) acid. The Bt1 and Bt2 horizons are characterized by the presence of
significant accumulation of translocated clay in the form of clay films and clay coats.
The Btss horizon is characterized by the presence of clay films and occasional
slickensides. The Btg horizon is characterized by the presence of clay argillans and
significant gleying from periodic saturation.
Unit Ic, identified in core MC5, auger MC4, and Test Trench 5, consists of
relatively thick (~6 m) silty clay floodplain facies unconformably overlying Cretaceousage Austin Chalk to the south (Figures 14 and 17). Unit Ic grades upward into a well
developed Mollisol (Test Trench 5) containing a horizon succession of A, Bw, Bss, Bssk,
and Bk grading down into silty clay parent material. The Bss and Bk horizons are
characterized by the presence of slickensides and nodules of secondary calcium
carbonate, respectively.
Micromorphological analysis of the modern Alfisol (Ib) shows fine-grain matrices
expressing various pedogenic features. The Bt horizons show significant amounts of
illuviated clay (i.e. grain and pore argillans), abundant Fe oxide accumulation and
common Fe/Mn redoximorphic features (Figures 18A and 18B; Appendix E) The Btss
horizon shows sepic-plasmic fabric and abundant illuviated clay (Figure 18B; Appendix
E). The Mollisol horizons of Unit Ic contain clay and carbonate-rich matrices showing

43
weak to moderate sepic-plasmic fabric throughout and illuviated clays, especially in the
Bssk horizon (Figure 18C; Appendix E). Abundant carbonate nodules are present in the
lower horizons (especially the Bssk and Bk horizons), some with septarian shrinkage
cracks from drying (Figure 18D; Appendix E). Redoximorphic features (i.e. Fe/Mn
nodules and concretions) are common throughout, some present with distinct banding.

Figure 17. Correlation of soil trench and auger data across the Waco Mammoth Site, but
excluding the site itself showing associated allostratigraphic units and facies.
Buried soils in Test Trench 3 are discontinuous.

Unit II

Unit II is composed of both channel (IIa and IIb) and floodplain (IIc) facies that
unconformably cross cuts Unit I (Figure 14). Unit II is identified in cores MC3 and

44
MC4, augers MA2, MA3, and MA5, and test trenches 2, 3, 4, and 6 (Figures 12, 14, and
17). The Channel facies of Unit IIa (gravels with interbedded sands in the upper portion)
fills a large channel entrenched into Cretaceous Austin Chalk bedrock according to
subsurface trenching and electrical resistivity (Figures 14, 16, and 17). This channel
appears to be confined within steeply dipping bedrock slopes, likely an active meander of
the ancestral Bosque River (Figure 14). The gravels of IIa are fine (3-10 mm, limitations
of the auger flight) grain-supported, well sorted, subrounded to subangular carbonatic
gravels with intermittent lenses of coarser gravels (10-20 mm). A second channel facies
(IIb) was identified in Test Trench 3, with through hand excavation into the subsurface
beneath the Phase II excavation area, and, with electrical resistivity (Figures 14, 15, 16,
and 17). This channel facies (IIb) fills a relatively deeply entrenched channel that lies
beneath the Phase I bone bed surface and thins to the north, where it underlies the Phase
II bone bed surface (Figures 14 and 15).

This channel is also contained within

Cretaceous bedrock. The filled channel appears to have been a low order tributary of,
and a relatively short distance from, the confluence of the larger trunk channel of the
ancestral Bosque River.
The floodplain facies (IIc) to the north consists of thick (5.5 m thick in the south
and 5.8 m thick in the north), horizontally bedded overbank silts and clays (Figures 14).
Here, the vertical accretion deposits of Unit IIc are unconformably inset to Units Ia and
Ib. Exposed in Test Trench 2 (north of the excavation site), a buried soil (Bino soil) is
present (Figures 14 and 17), overlain by the carbonate-rich surface Mollisol. The Bino
paleosol consists of two clay loam, pale reddish brown Bk horizons with common
nodules and filaments of secondary calcium carbonate.

45

Figure 18. Photomicrographs of thin section samples, including: (A) Asepic fabric and
Fe/Mn concentration from TT1 Bt2 horizon (Unit Ib); (B) Sepic plasmic
and abundant illuviated clay in the form of linings and grain argillans from
TT1 Btss horizon (Unit Ib); (C) Clay argillans around grains from TT5 Bssk
horizon (Unit Ic); (D) Large pedogenic carbonate nodule with distinct
septarian shrinkage cracks from TT5 Bk horizon (Unit Ic); (E) Large multigenerational pedogenic nodule with distinct shrinkage cracks from TT2 Bk1
horizon (Unit IIc); (F) Concentrically banded Fe/Mn concretion from TT2 Bk2
horizon (Unit IIc); (G) Pedogenic carbonate disseminated throughout matrix
and infilling biopores (brown streaks) from horizon TT2 Bk1b (Bino soil)
(Unit IIc); (H) biopore infilled with detrital matrix material from TT2 Bk2b
(Bino soil) horizon (Unit IIc);

46

47
In thin section, the upper Bk horizon (Bkb1) of the Bino paleosol consists of a
clay loam, carbonate-rich matrix, with abundant masses of pedogenic calcium carbonate
present throughout. The lower Bk horizon (Bkb2) consists of a carbonate-rich, clay
matrix with abundant embedded silt-size quartz grains.

Pedogenic carbonate

disseminated throughout the soil matrix and biopores infilled with coarser grain detrital
material are also present in the Bk2b horizon (Figures 18 E, 18G, and 18H; Appendix E).
The Bino paleosol appears to be conformably underlying the modern surface
Mollisol in Test Trench 2 (Figures 14 and 15). In the north, the suface of Unit IIc is
weathered to a moderately developed carbonate-rich Mollisol (Test Trench 2). This
surface soil consists of a silty-clay to clay loam, pale yellowish brown to yellowish
brown, A-Bk horizon sequence. The Bk horizons (Test Trench 2) are characterized by
abundant nodules and filaments of secondary calcium carbonate. The Mollisol to the
south (Test Trench 4) of the site consists of a loamy clay, brown to light brown, A-BkBC horizon sequence. The Bk horizons (Test Trench 4) are characterized by the presence
of nodules and filaments of secondary calcium carbonate.
Petrographically, the surface Mollisol of Unit IIc (Test Trench 2) consists of a
clay matrix with abundant very fine to fine silt-size embedded quartz grains (Figure 18E,
Appendix E). The A, Bk1 and Bk2 horizons exhibit distinct mosepic to bimasepic
plasmic fabric. The Bk horizons show abundant pedogenic carbonate nodules, many with
substantial septarian shrinkage cracks and development of secondary sparry calcite
(Figure 18E; Appendix E). The Bk horizons also contain clay argillans, lining root pores
and coating larger mineral particles as grain argillans. Biopores (i.e., root and soil pores)

48
and redoximorphic features (i.e., iron masses, banded Fe/Mn concretions, iron pore
linings) commonly occur in all horizons of the surface soil (Figures 18E and 18F;
Appendix E).

Unit III

Unit III consists of loamy, reddish-yellow floodplain deposits that truncate Unit
IIc, are truncated by Unit IV, and are unconformably bound at their top by Unit V
(Figures 14 and 15). Unit III is completely exposed in Profile 1 and Profile 2 (Figure 15),
just north of the bull mammoth within the current excavation area (Figures 10 and 14). A
well developed paleosol, the Boncap soil, has formed through Unit III. The surface A
horizon and possibly upper B horizon (upper portion of Unit III) of the Boncap soil
appear to have been erosionally truncated (Figures 14 and 15). The Boncap paleosol
consists of a clayey, reddish yellow to gleyed Bkgb1-Bkgb2-Bkssgb horizon sequence.
The Bkg horizons are characterized by common nodules and filaments of secondary
calcium carbonate, abundant carbonate rhizoliths and iron depletions. The Bkssg horizon
is characterized by common nodules and filaments of secondary calcium carbonate,
substantial gleying and occasional pedogenic slickensides.
Thin section analysis of the Boncap paleosol reveals a fine-grained, calcareous clay
matrix with abundant and embedded very fine to fine silt-size quartz grains. The Bkg1b
and Bkg2b horizons contain larger (coarse silt to sand) embedded quartz grains, some
well rounded. Few pedogenic carbonate nodules are present with common septarian
shrinkage cracks in both the Bkg1b and Bkssgb horizons. Illuviated clay features (i.e.,
grain and pore argillans), potential sepic plasmic fabric, and Fe/Mn nodules and pore
linings commonly occur in the Bkg1b and Bkg2b horizons (Figures 19A, 19B, and 19C;

49
Appendix E). The Bkssgb horizon contains a possible mosepic plasmic fabric, but is
generally masked by significant calcium carbonate staining within the matrix (Figure

Figure 19. Photomicrographs from soil horizons showing pedogenic features: (A)
Root pore lined by lluviated clay with possible sepic plasmic fabric from
Bkg1b horizon of the Boncap soil of Profile 1 (Unit III); (B) Fe/Mn pore
lining and concentration from Bkg1b horizon of the Boncap soil of Profile 1
(Unit III); (C) Pedogenic carbonate formation and translocated clays from
Bkg2b horizon of the Boncap soil of Profile 1 (Unit III); (D) Fine-grained
clay soil matrix with embedded quartz grains Bkssgb of the Boncap soil of
Profile 1(Unit III); (E) Concentrically banded Fe/Mn concretion from lower
silty clay sediments of the Bull Profile (Unit IV); (F) Pedogenic carbonate
nodule in lower silty clay sediments of Unit IV; (G) Fine distinct laminations
in upper laminated bed of the Bull Profile (Unit IV); (H) Coarse silt to very
fine sand matrix of TT3 Cb2 horizon correlated to upper laminated bed of the
Bull Profile (Unit IV); (I) Thin illuviated clay argillans lining a root pore in
Bk1 horizon of Profile 1 (Unit V).

50
19D; Appendix E). The Bkg1b, Bkg2b and Bkssgb horizons also contain abundant
biopores, some containing Fe coatings (Figures 19A, 19B, 19C, and 19D; Appendix E).

Unit IV

Unit IV unconformably overlies and truncates Unit III and unconformably
underlies Unit V (Figures 14 and 15). Unit IV is a relatively thick (~3 m) unit exposed in
Profile 3, Profile 4, and the Bull Profile within the excavation area (Figures 10 and 15).
This unit consists of four layers composed of carbonate-rich silty clay and fine sand
slackwater deposits likely derived from the ancestral Bosque River, based on the
carbonatic (Bosque-like) lithology of the sediments and the tributary’s proximity to the
trunk stream (Figure 14).
Unit IV consists of horizontally bedded, carbonate-rich, yellowish-red clay and
fine silt (1st and 3rd layer from bottom to top), and finely laminated coarse silt to very fine
sand (2nd and 4th layer from bottom to top) (Figure 14).

Erosion of sediments is

evidenced by the presence of lensoidal deposits of material from Unit III stratum
dispersed throughout the lowermost layer (1st layer) of Unit IV (Figures 14 and 15). The
lower laminated sand bed (2nd layer) consists of very finely laminated coarse silt- to very
fine-grain quartz sand (Figures 14 and 15), dipping 7 degrees to the south. The lower
sand appears to be the associated ground surface for the unidentified large-tooth feline
(Figures 14, 15). The silty clay sediments of the third layer of Unit IV (between the
lower and upper sand) contain pedogenic features eroded and transported from Unit III as
colluvium during erosional events. Remnants of the detrital pedogenic features include
pedogenic calcium carbonate nodules and filaments and common Fe depletions, which
are confined to the Boncap paleosol of Unit III. The upper sand bed (4th layer) consists of

51
very finely laminated very fine quartz sand, dipping 10 degrees to the south, and contains
the skeletal remains of the elder Bull mammoth and a young adolescent female mammoth
(Figures 14 and 15).
The slackwater facies (IV) was exposed in the south wall of the excavation area in
Test Trench 3 (TT3) (Figure 14). The vertical profile of TT3 consists of a series of
weakly developed Bw-C horizon sequences unconformably overlying Cretaceous
bedrock (Figure 14).

Two stacked, finely laminated sandy horizons (Cb1/Cb2) are

present in TT3, which show macroscopic features (i.e., fine laminations and grain size)
that correlate to the laminations and grain size of the upper sand bed of Unit IV within
the excavation area (Figure 14).
Micromorphologically, the silty clay horizons below the lower sand bed and
between the lower and upper sand beds of Unit IV, exposed in the Bull Profile (Figures
10 and 15), contains a fine, carbonate-rich clay matrices with abundant embedded, fine
silt-size quartz grains.

Abundant pedogenic carbonate nodules and soft masses are

present in the two layers (Figure 19G; Appendix E).

Concentrically banded

iron/manganese concretions (redoximorphic features) are present in the horizon beneath
the lower sand bed (Figure 19F; Appendix E). Abundant biopores (i.e., root pores and
wasp burrows), some partially infilled with detrital material, also occur in the two silty
clay layers below and above the lower sand bed.
Six optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) ages, four obtained in 2004 and two
in 2006, were from sandy sediments within the floodplain deposits of Unit IV just below
and burying the bull mammoth (Figure 20; Table 1). These ages range from 52.1 ± 4.2
ka yr B.P. (WOSL02a) to 73.4 ± 6.8 ka B.P. (WMS03-04) (Figure 20; Table 1). The

52
lower sand bed yielded OSL ages from 2004 and 2006 of 62.1 ± 6.0 ka yr B.P. (WMS0104) and five ages ranging from 52.1 ± 6.8 to 64.1 ± 5.6 ka B.P (WMSL-03a), respectively
(Figure 20; Table 1). The upper sand bed yielded OSL ages of 64.6 ± 6.2 ka yr B.P.
(WMS02-04) and two ages of 52.6 ± 4.2 ka B.P. and 53.3 ± 4.6 ka B.P. (WOSL02a),
respectively (Figure 19; Table 1). Two OSL ages of 58.1 ± 6.0 ka yr B.P. and 73.4 ± 6.8
ka B.P. in 2004 were obtained from sandy sediments (upper and lower sand beds) within
unit IV, below the bull mammoth (Figure 20; Table 1). Additionally, two optically
stimulated luminescence (OSL) ages were obtained in 2006 from a sandy sediment
horizon (C1b3 horizon) located ~210 cm below the surface in Test Trench 3 (Figure 20;
Table 1). The two ages from this horizon yielded ages of 67.9 ± 5.9 ka B.P. and 70.6 ±
5.9 ka B.P. (WOSL01a), respectively.

Unit V

Unit V is exposed in Profiles 1, 2, and 3 and consists of a silty clay
floodplain/slackwater facies (Figures 10, 14, and 15). Unit V unconformably overlies
Unit III and Unit IV, and is inset to Unit II (Figures 14 and 15). The exact lateral extent
of Unit V is not known because a portion of Unit V was removed during earlier
excavations, but it is assumed that it is inset to and confined by Unit II to the north and
south (Figures 14 and 15). Unit V grades upward into the modern surface soil (Figures
14 and 15). Only the subsurface horizons are present in the profile exposures due to soil
removal during prior excavations. The soil consists of a Bk1-Bk2 horizon sequence that
is characterized by the presence of a buff-colored (very pale brown) clayey matrix with
abundant nodules and filaments of secondary calcium carbonate. Micromorphologically,
both Bk horizons contain a fine-grained, carbonate-rich matrix with weakly developed

53

Figure 20. Geologic cross section of the Waco Mammoth Site within the excavation
area, showing locations of optically stimulated luminescence ages within the
excavation area.

54
Table 1. Optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) ages on fine-grained polymineral
extracts from fluvial sediments from the Waco Mammoth Site.
Field#

Laboratory
#

Equivalent
dose

U
(ppm)

K2O

Th
c

(ppm)

c

(%)

d

Dose rate

OSL age

(Gy/ka)

(ka)e

2004
WM01-04

UIC1346a

153.73 ± 0.56a

3.2 ± 0.4b

5.6 ± 1.0c

0.76 ± 0.02

2.48 ± 0.10

62.1 ± 6.0

WM02-04

UIC1345a

151.21 ± 0.37a

3.0 ± 0.4b

5.9 ± 1.0c

0.79 ± 0.02

2.34 ± 0.09

64.6 ± 6.2

WM03-04

UIC1347

a

161.48 ± 0.40a

2.6 ± 0.3b

5.1 ± 0.8c

0.82 ± 0.02

2.20 ± 0.09

73.4 ± 6.8

UIC1348

a

144.78 ± 0.29a

2.5 ± 0.4b

8.9 ± 1.3c

0.73 ± 0.02

2.49 ± 0.10

58.1 ± 6.0

153.73 ± 0.56

1.8 ± 0.1c

4.9 ± 0.1d

0.83 ± 0.02

1.85 ± 0.08

70.6 ± 5.9

WM04-04

2006
WOSL-01a

UIC1805IRb

117.75 ± 0.56

1.8 ± 0.1c

4.9 ± 0.1d

0.83 ± 0.02

1.73 ± 0.07

67.9 ± 5.9

140.43 ± 6.30

2.0 ± 0.1c

12.4 ± 0.1d

0.76 ± 0.02

2.63 ± 0.11

53.3 ± 4.6

UIC1807GR

123.90 ± 2.50

2.0 ± 0.1c

12.4 ± 0.1d

0.76 ± 0.02

2.51 ± 0.10

52.6 ± 4.2

a

144.43 ± 0.52

1.7 ± 0.1c

9.3 ± 0.1d

0.085 ± 0.02

2.25 ± 0.09

57.1 ± 5.6

142.84 ± 0.40

1.7 ± 0.1c

9.3 ± 0.1d

0.085 ± 0.02

2.23 ± 0.09

56.5 ± 5.5

108.93 ± 1.00

1.7 ± 0.1c

9.3 ± 0.1d

0.085 ± 0.02

2.09 ± 0.09

52.1 ± 4.2

154.72 ± 0.40

1.7 ± 0.1c

9.3 ± 0.1d

0.085 ± 0.02

2.52 ± 0.10

64.1 ± 5.6

112.66 ± 0.51

1.7 ± 0.1c

9.3 ± 0.1d

0.085 ± 0.02

2.08 ± 0.09

54.1 ± 4.3

WOSL-01a

UIC1805GR

WOSL-02a

UIC1807IR

WOSL-02a
WOSL-03a

UIC1806IR

WOSL-03a

UIC1806IRb

WOSL-03a

UIC1806GR

WOSL-03a

c

WOSL-03a

b

UIC1806IR

UIC1806GR

b

c

a Multiple aliquot additive dose method from Singhvi et al.(1982) and Forman and Pierson (2002) on 4-11 µm polymineral fraction.
b The GR designation indicates excitation by green light (514 ± 20 nm) and the IR designation indicates excitation by infrared
wavelengths (880 ± 80 nm with the equivalent dose determined by the multiple aliquot regenerative dose technique
(Jain et al. 2003).
c U, and Th content determined by thick-source alpha counting.
d U, Th and K20 assayed by ICP-MS at Activation Laboratories, Ontario, Canada.
e Ages included a cosmic ray dose rate of 16 mGray/ka from calculations of Prescott and Hutton, 1994, an assumed burial
moisture content of 20 ± 5 %, and a measured alpha efficiency factor (a value) as defined by Aitken and Bowman (1975).
All errors are at one sigma. Analyses by the Luminescence Dating Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Chicago.

sepic plasmic fabric. Abundant pedogenic carbonate masses and hard nodules are present
in both horizons, with significant septarian shrinkage cracks and the formation of
secondary sparry calcite. Common clay argillans are present in both horizons, lining root
pores and possible small animal burrows (Figure 19I; Appendix E).

55
Optically Stimulated Luminescence Ages

Variability among the 13 OSL ages (4 from 2004 and 9 from 2006) from the
Waco Mammoth Site sediments was analyzed by constructing a probability density
distribution, completed by the Luminescence Dating Research Laboratory, University of
Illinois at Chicago. The distribution of all the samples was plotted, indicating that the
ages represent one age population, according to central tendency statistics and most
probable age spread (Figure 21). The unweighted mean average for the age population is
60.0 ± 2.5 ka yr B.P. (at 1-sigma, 68% confidence) as shown on the distribution plot
(Figure 21). Thus, at 2-sigma error (95% confidence), the sediments of Unit IV would
have been deposited sometime between ca. 55 and 65 ka yr B.P. The two ages from the
Unit IV sediments in the south wall (TT3) of the excavation site (UIC1805IR and
UIC1805GR) are 70.6 ± 5.9 and 67.9 ± 5.9 ka yr B.P. at 1-sigma error and at 2 sigma
yield an age range of 58.8-82.4 and 56.1-79.7 ka yr B.P, respectively, which does overlap
with the Unit IV strata ages.

Statistically, the Unit IV sediment ages could be

penecontemporaneous to as much as 20 ka yr younger than the south wall (TT3 of Unit
IIc) sediments based on the estimated OSL ages. Moreover, at 1-sigma error the ages
from within Phase II and III excavation areas and from the sandy sediments of Test
Trench 3 (south wall of Phase I excavation area) are statistically distinct, but at 2-sigma
error they overlap, indicating that these sediments are penecontemporaneous to ca. 12 ka
yr difference (twice the error of the 70.6 and 67.9 ka yr B.P. ages).

Stable Isotope Analysis

Carbon and oxygen isotopic compositions were measured (δ13CPDB and δ18OPDB,
respectively) from pedogenic carbonate nodules of 21 soil horizons exposed in vertical

56
profiles and test trenches (Table 2). For this study, the three vertical profiles (Profile 1,
Profile 2, and Profile 3) and one test trench (Test Trench 2) with the most complete data
sets are presented in Figure 22. All 21 isotope samples were used for environmental
reconstruction. Isotopic ratios recorded for carbon and oxygen range from -0.7‰ to
9.2‰ δ13CPDB and -3.2‰ to -4.6‰ δ18OPDB, respectively, and average -4.48‰ and
3.80‰, respectively (Table 2). Given the wide range of δ13C values, neither a temporal
nor stratigraphic relationship was found within the stratigraphic section.

Figure 21. Probability density distribution analysis plot of all (2004 and 2006) ages
obtained from Unit IV sandy sediments performed by the Luminescence
Dating Research Laboratory, University of Illinois at Chicago. The plot
indicates that all the ages represent one population and shows the populations
central Tendency and associated most probably age spread.

δ13C values of soil organic matter (SOM) were estimated from the δ13C values of
pedogenic carbonate nodules, using a temperature constant of 20°C (Nordt et al. 1998).
The SOM δ13C values are presented in Table 2. Following a linear mixing model (Nordt

57
Table 2. Carbon and oxygen isotope values from pedogenic carbonate samples obtained
from vertical profiles and test trenches and converted to δ13C values of soil
organic matter (SOM) using a temperature constant of 20°C (Nordt et al.,
1998), showing estimated mean annual July temperature in °C (Nordt et al.,
2007), and showing C4 and C3 biomass percentages (Nordt et al., 2002).
13

18

Unit

δ C
PDB

δ O
PDB

Depth
cm

P1Bk1
P1Bk2
P1Bkg1b
P1Bkg2b
P1Bkssgb

V
V
III
III
III

-1.7
-1.7
-2.0
-9.2
-7.4

-3.8
-3.8
-4.1
-3.9
-4.0

-10
-45
-83
-122
-182

-15.57
-15.57
-15.87
-23.00
-21.22

P2Bk1
P2Bk2
P2Bkssg

V
V
III

-3.1
-2.8
-3.9

-3.7
-3.7
-3.5

-14
-56
-201

P3Bkg1b
P3Bkg2b
P3Bkg3b

IV
IV
IV

-5.5
-7.5
-5.4

-3.7
-3.4
-3.2

P4Bkgb

III

-8.8

TT2Bk1
TT2Bk2
TT2Bk3
TT2Bk1b
TT2Bk2b

IIc
IIc
IIc
IIc
IIc

TT5Bssk
TT5Bk
TT6Bk1
TT6Bk2

Profile/
Horizon

Average:

13

13

δ C SOM
δ C
Soil Biomass
at 20ºC ºC July Est.
% C4

Soil Biomass
% C3

74
74
72
21
34

26
26
28
79
66

-16.96
-16.66
-17.75

65
67
59

35
33
41

-70
-145
-230

-19.34
-21.32
-19.24

48
33
48

52
67
52

-3.7

-230

-22.61

24

76

-2.9
-2.7
-6.1
-6.0
-5.5

-3.7
-3.8
-4.6
-3.8
-3.8

-36
-77
-148
-262
-295

-16.76
-16.56
-19.93
-19.83
-19.34

66
67
43
44
48

34
33
57
56
52

Ic
Ic

-3.7
-5.2

-3.8
-3.8

-120
-178

-17.55
-19.04

60
50

40
50

IIc
IIc

-0.7
-2.2

-4.1
-4.0

-43
-82

-14.58
-16.07

82
71

18
29

-4.5

-3.8

26.7

Figure 22. δ13C and δ18O values of pedogenic carbonate nodules from soil profiles selected for paleoenvironmental analysis.
58

59
et al., 2002), SOM concentrations were used to calculate the relative contributions to C4
(warm season grasses) and C3 (cool season grasses) biomass from each carbon isotope
sample (Table 2). The upper two horizons of Unit V and first horizon of the Boncap soil
in Unit III of Profile 1 contain SOM that is predominantly from C4 vegetation, whereas
the lower two horizons of the Boncap soil contain SOM dominated by C3 vegetation
(Figure 22; Table 2). Profile 2 (P2),Test Trench 2 (TT2; Unit IIc), Test Trench 5 (TT5;
Unit Ic), and Test Trench 6 (TT6; Unit IIc) all appear to have SOM that was derived from
an ecosystem dominated by C4 vegetation. Profile 3 (P3; Unit IV) contains SOM that is
predominantly C3-contributed (Table 2).
The δ13C value from the upper buried horizon (Bkg1b) of the Boncap soil of
Profile 1 (P1; Unit III) was used to calculate a temperature estimate during soil
formation. The Bkg1b horizon of the Boncap soil was used due to its spatial relationship
to the mammoth strata and its speculated stratigraphic position to the original surface of
Unit III (before truncation). Using the Nordt et al. (2007) linear equation, a mean
monthly July temperature estimate of 26.7 °C was calculated (Table 2). δ18O values
estimated from pedogenic carbonate averaged 3.8‰, which is similar to the δ18O average
of modern meteoric waters for Central Texas and therefore, the estimated δ18O values
from pedogenic carbonate were assumed to have reached equilibrium with the modern
waters. Due to the δ18O values having been “reset” to modern meteoric waters, a
temperature estimate (Dworkin et al., 2005) was not calculated.

CHAPTER FIVE
Discussion

Stratigraphic Interpretation

Subsurface exposures associated with the Waco Mammoth Site represent multiple
facies contained within four allostratigraphic units (Figure 14). These allostratigraphic
units record the geologic history of the Waco Mammoth Site, spanning a large portion of
the Late Quaternary. The elevation of T3, in relation to the T2 and T1 terraces and
modern floodplain, demonstrates that it is the oldest terrace within the existing terrace
hierarchy, and according to OSL ages was formed sometime prior to 60.0 ± 5.0 ka B.P.
(Figures 6, 7, 12, and 19).

Initially, a paired alluvial terrace (T3) was formed,

constructed from siliceous gravels (Ia) overlain by fine-grained overbank deposits (Ib) to
the north and fine-grained, carbonate-rich overbank deposits (Ic) to the south. The
siliceous deposits to the north are consistent with the characteristics of the Brazos River
(Flawn and Burkett,1965; Hilliard, 1997). The carbonate-rich sediments of the southern
portion of T3 terrace suggest they were sourced from the carbonate-alluvium-rich Bosque
River (Flawn and Burket, 1965; Hilliard, 1997).
Sometime after the formation of T3, a period of channel widening and incision
took place (IIa) downcutting through the T3 terrace valley surface.

The channel

continued to downcut into the underlying Cretaceous bedrock, before migrating
northward across the bedrock surface where it formed a narrow, deeply entrenched
channel (Figure 14). Simultaneously, a second, smaller (likely a low-order tributary of
the larger incised channel) channel was formed, downcutting into the Cretaceous bedrock
60

61
bench north of the Unit IIa channel (Figure 14). Infilling of the main channel (IIa) and
floodplain deposition (IIc) by the trunk stream and low order tributary (IIb) through time,
completely filled the entrenched valley and constructed the T2 terrace surface. The main
channel was completely infilled by sand and gravel (IIa), followed by the partial infilling
of the low order tributary (IIb). The low-order tributary remained active, continuing to
deposit fine-grained, overbank sediments of Unit III. Some time after Unit III was
deposited the low order tributary became a location of slackwater deposition (Unit IV).
The clay-rich slackwater sediments and very fine-grained, laminated sands of Unit IV
were deposited within the channel and adjacent floodplain, mixing with the sediments
derived periodically from erosion of Unit III (Figures 14 and 15). Preceding and during
the initial deposition of slackwater deposits, the tributary was inhabited by a variety of
fauna, including Columbian mammoths (Mammuthus columbi), North American Camels
(Camelops hesternus), and large-tooth felines.
The bones of 18 semi- to fully articulated Columbian mammoths and a camel
are/were situated on of erosional surface of Unit III, having been buried by the sediments
of Unit IV (Figures 14 and 15). As the animals died and/or following their deaths,
another period of slackwater deposition (IV) occurred, burying them. These slackwater
deposits consist of silty clay sediments interbedded with thin (avg. 10-20 cm thick) finely
laminated beds of coarse silt to fine sand (Figure 15). These finely laminated beds appear
to be slackwater deposits from high-energy flood events from the trunk stream of the
ancestral Bosque River to the south. The presence of remains from an unidentified largetooth feline in the silty clay sediments of Unit IV (Figure 15) suggests that the surfaces of
Unit IV were intermittingly exposed, allowing occupation by fauna. However, the feline

62
tooth does not appear to be spatially or temporally associated with any other fauna within
the excavation area (Figure 15). The remains of a bull mammoth (6), small juvenile (7)
within Unit IV, and upper female (5) on Unit III surface and buried by Unit IV, which is
traceable southward into the south wall (Test Trench 3) of the excavation area (Figures
14 and 15). These remains appear to represent the last mammoth habitation at the Waco
Mammoth Site (Figure 15). These three mammoths (Figure 15; 5, 6, and 7) appear to
have been buried by silty clay sediments (V) that over time completely filled the tributary
valley.

Unit V was pedogenically altered, forming a surface soil and the modern

geomorphic surface of the T2 valley, before being partially unearthed during the initial
excavation phases (Figure 14).
The depositional history of the sediments associated with the Waco mammoths
uncovered during Phase II and III excavations is documented by a series of slackwater
depositional events captured in Units IV and V (Figures 14 and 15). These deposits over
time formed a well-stratified column of sediments, separating a number of the mammoths
and other fauna (i.e. camel, large-tooth feline) (Figure 15). There is no sedimentological
or stratigraphic evidence for an episodic event associated with the deaths of the Waco
mammoths, rather, the sediments are stratified in a number of unconformable (Unit
III/Unit IV) and conformable layers (Unit IV/Unit V) (Figures 14 and 15). For example,
the sediments exhibit characteristics of a slackwater environment based on the presence
of a succession of very fine-grained (i.e. clay and silt), carbonate-rich sediments
deposited horizontally across the tributary channel. Sedimentological and stratigraphic
evidence suggests several low-energy depositional events that buried the mammoths over
time, not from a single episodic event. Furthermore, given that Unit IV consists of a

63
series of conformable beds with no evidence of surface stability and soil formation, it is
therefore speculated that the three events happened within a relatively brief time frame.

Micromorphologic Interpretation

Thin-section samples were taken from the majority of soil test trenches and
vertical profiles within the excavation area. Micromorphological analysis of the Waco
Mammoth Site was used to identify pedogenic features present throughout each soil
profile and to determine weathering factors associated with soil development. In addition
to micromorphological interpretation and correlation of soils and paleosols, visible
sedimentary structures were identified, when present, and used to correlate sedimentary
beds and units within the alluvium of T3 and T2 terraces.
The presence of abundant translocated clay (i.e., grain and root pore argillans) and
common Fe and Fe/Mn oxide coatings throughout the Test Trench 1 (TT1) Alfisol (Ib),
suggests moderately to well-drained conditions (Figure 18A and 18B). The Fe and
Fe/Mn oxide concentrations throughout the soil profile suggest periods of soil saturation,
likely due to periodic saturation of the soil column from high amounts of precipitation or
rising of the water table. However, the abundance of illuviated clays coating grains and
infilling biopores suggest predominantly freely drained soil conditions. The Btss horizon
at the base of the TT1 soil profile contains a variety of vertic (Vertisol-like) features
including a well defined sepic-plasmic fabric and abundant and thick illuviated clays
(Figure 18B).
The Test Trench 5 (TT5) Mollisol (Ic) contains a thick organic-rich surface
horizon with abundant rooting.

Underlying the surface horizon is a succession of

subsurface (B) horizons that show an increase in pedogenic alteration with depth.

64
Abundant Fe/Mn redoximorphic features throughout the subsurface horizons suggest that
the Mollisol is subjected to intermittent periods of soil saturation. The Bss, Bssk and Bk
horizons all contain fine-grain matrices with sepic-plasmic fabrics.

The distinct

orientation of clays within the matrices, suggest prominent wet/dry or shrink/swell
conditions during soil development. Illuviated clays are present in the form of grain
argillans, thick pore linings and infillings (Figure 18C). Abundant pedogenic carbonate
nodules with septarian shrinkage cracks and secondary sparry calcite development in the
lowermost Bk horizon (Figure 18D) point to seasonal (wet/dry) moisture conditions
during the formation of the horizon.
The Test Trench 2 (TT2) soil (IIc) consists of an organic-rich surface horizon
underlain by a series of Bk (calcic) horizons grading down to a coarser grain BC horizon.
Abundant calcium carbonate nodules with prominent septarian shrinkage cracks are
present with secondary sparry calcite growth (Figure 18E). The abundance of calcium
carbonate nodules with septarian cracks and Fe/Mn redoximorphic features suggest
seasonal moisture conditions controlled primarily by fluctuations in water table levels.
The Bk1b and Bk2b horizons of the buried Bino soil (IIc), exposed below the TT2
surface soil, contain abundant calcium carbonate (crystalic fabric) disseminated
throughout the soil matrix (Figure 18G). The presence of biopores (Figure 18H) and
sparse pedogenically altered carbonate indicate that the Bino soil may have been buried
quickly, thus retarding further pedogenic alteration of the carbonate.
The Boncap paleosol (III) exposed in Profile 1 and Profile 2 contains
micromorphologic features also implying formation under seasonal moisture conditions
(Figures 18A, 18B, 18C, and 18D). An abundance of pedogenic carbonate nodules and

65
filaments (Figure 18D), and the common presence of redoximorphic features (Figure
18C) imply a seasonally controlled water table resulting in alternating wet/dry conditions.
The stratigraphic location of the Boncap soil in relation to the ancient tributary channel
(IIb) and the abundance of redoximorphic features, further suggests that the paleosol was
heavily influenced by the fluctuating position of the water table before burial. Abundant
evidence of rooting (root rhizoliths and rhizocretions) indicates that the paleosol formed
under a long-term stable surface. The upper surface horizon of the Boncap paleosol does
appear to have been erosionally truncated during the deposition of Unit V.
Micromorphologic evidence from Test Trench 3 (TT3) excavated into Unit IV,
suggests frequent deposition of thinly stacked soils. The thin soil horizons appear to be
weakly developed, with minimal soil ped development and sparse pedogenic features
(i.e., fine rooting and Fe staining). The lack of pedogenic alteration and thin horizon
development suggests that the TT3 profile (IIc) represents several periods of brief surface
stability and intermittent deposition.

Micromorphologically, the Cb2/Cb3 horizons

contain sedimentary structures (i.e. Fe-stained laminations) and grain size (Figure 19I)
similar to that of structures and grain size of the upper laminated sand bed (Figures 14
and 15) of surface or upper sand bed of Unit IV within the excavation area (Figure 19H).
Micromorphological features in Unit I (Alfisols of Ib and Mollisols of Ic) soils
suggest fairly well drained soil conditions, with periodic saturation. The close proximity
of these two soils suggests formation under similar climate conditions.

Conversly,

micromorphologic features of these two soils indicate that they have experienced
different forms and degrees of pedogenic alteration.

66
Abundant pedogenic carbonate nodules (with abundant septarian cracks) and
Fe/Mn redoximorphic features suggest that the Unit IIc soils formed under seasonal
wet/dry conditions. The Bino soil (TT2) in Unit IIc contains few Fe/Mn redoximorphic
features and abundant disseminated carbonate that is much less pedogenically altered
than the overlying surface soil, indicates a relatively brief period of surface stability and
soil formation before burial. The Boncap soil of Unit III contains abundant pedogenic
features pointing to seasonally dominated (wet/dry) conditions during soil formation.
The Boncap soil appears to have been subjected to additional pedogenic alteration (i.e.
rhizolith and rhizocretion development) after burial, following features that formed
during pedogenesis. The last surface soil of Unit V contains well-developed calcic
horizons with abundant pedogenic nodules throughout, suggesting wet/dry conditions
during soil formation. Overall, the buried soils associated with the Waco mammoth
events all contain evidence of moderately to well-drained soil conditions and possibly
formed under a seasonal (wet/dry) climate.

Environmental Reconstruction

Climate/Ecosystem Reconstruction

δ13C values of the soils and buried soils of the Waco Mammoth Site suggest
multiple shifts from C3-dominated to C4-dominated plant ecosystems. Carbon isotopic
ratios from subsurface horizons of the Unit Ic Mollisol (TT5) to the south of the Waco
Mammoth Site (Table 2) suggest the presence of a mixed C3/C4 plant component. Plant
ecosystems estimated from isotopic ratios from Unit I (Unit Ib to the north and Unit Ic to
the south) are consistent with the presence of Alfisols and Mollisols, respectively mapped

67
(USDA, 2001) on both sides of the T3 terrace (Figure 8). Commonly associated with
tropical to subtropical climates, C4 vegetation in the North American Great Plains
includes warm-season grasses and some dicot and woody species (Paruelo and
Lauenroth, 1996; Ehleringer et al., 1997). The δ13C values from the Unit Ic Mollisol
indicate an ~50/50 C4/C3 landscape that does not change significantly with depth. This
mixed ecosystem signal implies a grassland-dominated ecosystem throughout much of
the Bosque (south side) T3 surface history, with C3 contributions resulting from a historic
encroachment of mesquite and other C3-photosynthetic vegetation.
δ13C values from the TT2 soil and the buried Bino soil of Unit IIc show that
during periods of landscape stability and pedogenesis, approximately 43 to 67% of the
soil organic matter (SOM) was contributed by C4 vegetation (Table 2). The Bino soil
horizons and the lowermost Bk horizon of the TT2 Mollisol (IIc) show a slightly more C3
plant assemblage during soil formation (Table 2).

The C3 vegetation potentially

consisted of cool-season grasses, trees or shrubs (Paruelo and Lauenroth, 1996;
Ehleringer et al., 1997). The presence of a mixed C3/C4 component suggests more
temperate climate conditions (Nordt et al., 1994) during early deposition of the Unit IIc.
A shift to a more C4-dominated plant association is apparent in the two upper Bk
horizons of the TT2 Mollisol (IIc), which indicates a move towards higher temperature
conditions. Another possibility is that the δ13C values of the TT2 Mollisol and Bino
paleosol represent an early (during soil formation of Bino Soil and lower Bk of TT2
Mollisol) C3 riparian component with the broader landscape being dominantly C4
grasslands with a historic encroachment by mesquite.

Furthermore, the upper Bk

horizons of the surface soil (IIc) of Test Trench 6 (Figures 12 and 14) show δ13C values

68
suggesting a predominantly C4 grass ecosystem, which correlates isotopically with the
upper Bk horizons of the TT2 Mollisol (IIc) to the north. The presence of a more
dominate C4 component in the TT2 and TT6 Mollisol than the TT5 Mollisol is likely due
to the lower density of mesquite (C3 plants) when compared to the TT5 Mollisol
(Table 2).
Isotopic evidence from the buried Boncap soil of Unit III points to an overall
mixed C3/C4 assemblage. δ13C values from the lowermost horizons of the Boncap soil
(III) from Profile 1 (Figure 22, P1) suggest higher C3 contributions, showing a range of
66 to 79% of the biomass being contributed by C4 plants (Table 2). A shift (~8‰) from a
C3-dominated to C4-dominated component occurs between the Bkg2b and Bkg1b
horizons of the Boncap paleosol (Figure 22).

A much more subtle shift from C3-

dominated to C4-dominated plant communities occurs in the upper portion of Unit IIc
(TT2 soil) and appears to be similar to that of the shift present between Unit III to Unit V,
but occurred sometime before the deposition of Unit III. A Mixed C3/C4 plant signal is
shown throughout the deposition of Unit IV, which is potentially a result of the mixing of
detrital SOM prior to and during burial (Table 2; Figure 22).
The presence of a mixed C3/C4 plant ecosystem within the fluvial landscape
during the mammoth habitation indicates the presence of a C3 riparian component
(channel landscape) within the broader floodplain and terrace landscape that consisted
primarily of C4 grasses. As the riparian zone decreased (due to channel infilling) through
time, C4 grasses (evident in Unit IIb and Unit V) continued to encroach and dominate the
landscape. The C4-dominated modern landscape that blankets the majority of the Waco
Mammoth Site supports interpretation of a shift from a mixed grasses and shrubs/trees

69
ecosystem to a grass-dominated assemblage, with a historic encroachment of non-native
C3 shrub and grass component.
According to Hoppe (2004), δ13C values obtained from molars representing
several mammoths at the Waco site suggest that all the mammoths sampled ate similar
diets consisting of 70-80% C4 grasses. This is consistent with the δ13C values from the
broader floodplain/terrace landscape surrounding the Waco Mammoth Site. For example
carbon isotopic ratios from the surface Mollisols north and south of the site indicate a
steady C4-dominated ecosystem with only 20-30% of the mammoths’ diets coming from
C3 vegetation.
Paleohydrology

Stratigraphic evidence of the ancient Bosque River (from coring, augering, and
electrical resistivity in Figures 14 and 16), as well as the modern location of Bosque
River incised into Cretaceous bedrock suggest that the Bosque River has been primarily a
bedrock channel. Bedrock channels are relatively stable and highly resistant to erosion or
incision from flooding (Wohl, 1999). Incision rates for various bedrock channels have
been estimated as ranging from 0.5 to 1000 cm kyr-1 (kyr-1 = per thousand years) (Wohl,
1999) in relation to a variety of bedrock materials. Two limestone bedrock channels
were presented by Wohl (1999), showing average incision rates of 5.7 cm kyr-1
(Quaternary channel in limestone in New Guinea after Chappell, 1974) and 2.7 cm kyr-1
(Quaternary channel in carbonate in Virginia, USA after Granger et al., 1997),
respectively.

Several studies have been performed, that record instances, in which

bedrock erosion has exceeded the average range of 0.5 to 1000 cm kyr-1 (Scott and
Gravlee, 1968; Baker, 1978; Shroba et al., 1979; Vuichard and Zimmermann, 1987). A

70
study by Brackenridge (1984) on the alluvial stratigraphy of Duck River, Tennessee
presented the hydrologic history of the bedrock channel on the time scale of 102 to 104
years. Duck River is a meandering stream that has incised into limestone, with some
reaches confined by steep bedrock valley slopes (Brackenridge, 1984). Brackenridge
(1984) used stratigraphic and topographic evidence to estimate the minimum average rate
of lateral bedrock erosion over the last 30,000 years. Using 10 kyr-1, 20 kyr-1, and 30 kyr1

time spans, Brackenridge (1984) concluded that the Duck River has eroded laterally into

bedrock over time at average rates of no less than 0.25 to 0.75 m 100 yr-1, with a slightly
broader range of 1.25 to 2.0 m 100 yr-1. These averages are dependent on locality; hence
some areas experienced much more lateral erosion than others. Based on stratigraphic
evidence and similarity of bedrock (to the Duck River Limestone), the two deeply incised
channels underlying the T2 terrace (Unit IIa and IIb) at the Waco Mammoth Site
stratigraphically predate the mammoth habitation (Figure 14).

Using the published

limestone bedrock erosion rates (i.e. 5.7 cm kyr-1) presented by Wohl (1999), the incision
of the limestone floor from the base of Unit Ic to the base of Unit IIa occurred over a
period of 104 years.
Situated within a low-order tributary (Unit IIb)near (closer than its distance from
the modern Bosque River) its confluence with the ancestral Bosque River, the Waco
Mammoth Site would have been susceptible to elevated slackwater levels backing into
the low-order triburtary from periodic flooding of the Bosque trunk stream. Stratigraphic
evidence of periodic slackwater deposition (Unit IV sediments) during Columbian
mammoth occupation, coupled with the relationship between the present topographic
association of the Bosque trunk stream (Figure 23), indicate that sediment was derived

71
from the Bosque River during flood episodes. Paleoflood analyses have been performed
using slackwater deposits (Kochel and Baker, 1988; Kochel, 1988) as a means of
estimating flood potential and frequency.

Paleoflood modeling can be an effective

method in the estimation and determination of paleoflood discharge amounts (O’Connor
and Webb, 1988).
A one-dimensional steady-flow model was constructed using a measured reach of
the modern Bosque River associated with the confluence of the distal end of the tributary
containing the Waco Mammoth Site (Figure 23), in order to examine the backwater flood
potential into the low-order tributary. The steady-flow model was computed using the
Hydrologic Engineering Centers River Analysis System (HEC-RAS) 4.0 Beta modeling
program (USACE, 2006). For this study, eight cross-section locations were randomly
chosen from the USGS Waco West 7.5” quadrangle (USGS, 1979), which represented a
stretch of the Bosque River starting upstream of the study area and extending
downstream to the confluence of the modern Bosque and Brazos Rivers (Figure 23).
Because discharge of the Bosque River near the confluence with the Waco Mammoth
Site tributary is controlled by the Waco Lake Dam, discharge was calculated using peak
streamflow discharge data from the North Bosque gauge site at Valley Mills, Texas
(USGS 0809500) (USGS, 2007) (Appendix F).

The North Bosque basin drains

approximately 2968 km2 (USGS, 2007). Discharge data from the North Bosque at Valley
Mills, Texas gauge station was determined to be significantly less dam-controlled than
the Bosque River below Waco Lake Dam, therefore, simulating more realistic discharge
amounts for the ancestral Bosque River. Discharge was computed for two, five, 25, 50,
100, and 200-year storms (Table 3), using the Stormwater Management and Design Aid

72
(SMADA 6) (Appendix G) Distribution Analysis (Distrib 2.13) extention (CEE UCF,
updated 1997) (Appendix G). The HEC-RAS steady flow analysis was run using each
calculated discharge. A model of the selected reach was constructed for each storm
discharge to determine the spatial extent of flood waters produced by each storm
discharge. For this study two models (a 25-year and a 50-year storm discharge model)
were observed in detail and are presented in Figure 24 (Appendix H). For the application
of this model it was assumed that the ancestral Bosque River had already moved
southward from its previous location represented by the deeply incised channel filled
with the gravel and sands of Unit IIa and was perhaps nearer its present location.
Although the ancestral Bosque River basin would not have been dam-controlled and
potentially drained a larger area than the modern Bosque basin, conservative discharge
estimates were calculated using only the North Bosque discharge information (Appendix
F). Furthermore, the backwater potential of the Bosque River from flooding of the
Brazos River was not calculated, which would have likely influenced a higher frequency
of flooding in the mammoth tributary.
The steady-flow analysis of the selected reach of the Bosque River using a 50year flood discharge of approximately 4000 m3/s would cause backwater into the full
extent of the Waco Mammoth Site tributary from the trunk stream, significantly
inundating the site (Figure 24). The analysis suggests that a flash flood in the ancient
Bosque River with a discharge equal to or greater than 4046 m3/s would have forced
water into the steep-sloped tributary associated with mammoths. A significant rise in
water level in the low-order tributary could easily have trapped the Columbian

73

Figure 23. Map of study area, showing measured reach of the modern Bosque River
and associated low order tributary containing the Waco Mammoth Site.
Measured cross-sections are labeled 1-8.

74
Table 3. Peak streamflow discharge for the modern North Bosque River at Valley Mills,
Texas. Predicted peak streamflow discharge (Prediction) for selected year
probability (R Period) flood events calculated from DISTRIB 2.13 (CEE UCF,
updated 1997).
Probability
0.995
0.99
0.98
0.96
0.9
0.8
0.667
0.5

R Period
years

Prediction
3
m /sec

Std. Dev.
3
m /sec

200
100
50
25
10
5
3
2

6244.6
5066.1
4000.7
3048.1
1960.9
1267.4
827.1
516.8

2763.6
1881.3
1224.4
759.2
381.1
222.5
144.3
92.6

mammoths (and other fauna) within the tributary channel. Unable to escape the steep
slopes of the tributary, trapped fauna could have perished as a result of drowning.
Age of the Mammoths

OSL ages from the Waco Mammoth Site (60 ± 2.5 ka unweighted mean average
at 1-sigma) places the mammoth habitation during Marine Oxygen Isotope Stage 4 (OIS
4; Figure 25). This stage begins with the start of the Wisconsinan glaciation and was a
time when temperatures would have been nearly as cold as they were during the last
glacial maximum 21,000 yr B.P. of OIS 2 (Ruddiman, 2001). The sediments associated
with the mammoths (Units III and IV) would have been deposited during the later part of
OIS 4. It is speculated from stratigraphic evidence that channel incision (Units IIa and
IIb) was initiated during the shift from OIS 5 to OIS 4. This shift in stages correlates
with the termination of the Sangamon interglacial (OIS 5) and the subsequent start of the
Wisconsinan glaciation (OIS 4) (Figure 25). The transition from interglacial to glacial
periods would have resulted in a significant shift in climate (i.e. increase in rainfall), and
potentially might have changed fluvial stability and ultimately increased discharge and

75
incision. Speculating that incision (IIa, IIb) and the deposition of T2 (Units IIc, III, IV,
and V) occurred during OIS 4, it is therefore further speculated that T3 (Unit I)
deposition occurred during OIS 5 (Figure 25).

Figure 24. HEC RAS 4.0 Beta steady-flow model of Bosque River channel crosssections, showing water surface levels using (A) 25-yr flood discharge
estimate of 3083 m3/s and (B) 50-yr flood discharge estimate of
4046 m3/s calculated from DISTRIB 2.13 (CEE UCF, updated 1997).
Waco Mammoth Site is located 648 m north of Bosque River Channel.

Death Events

Stratigraphic, micromorphologic, and isotopic evidence from the Waco Mammoth
Site, all suggest that the Columbian mammoths, camel, large-tooth cat, and other
potential fauna were inhabiting a slackwater tributary associated with the ancient Bosque
River during the time of their death (Figure 26). The deposits of each stratigraphic bed
associated with the various fauna uncovered at the site appear to be conformable (Unit

76
IV; Figures 14, 15, and 19) and were deposited over a relatively short period of time,
separated by brief periods of nondeposition or diastems.

Figure 25. Stacked Marine Oxygen Isotope stages (Martinson et al., 1987), showing
associated mammoth habitation and terrace depositional events. Adapted
From Lowe and Walker (1997).

Stratigraphically, three separate death events occurred throughout the slackwater
deposition within the low-order tributary (Figure 26). Some time after the erosion of
Unit III and before the deposition of Unit IV, at least 19 Columbian mammoths (original
16 from Phase I excavation and 3 from Phase II and III excavations) and a camel (Phase
III excavation) were apparently trapped by Bosque River-derived flood waters that
backed up into the low-order tributary (Figure 26). These animals may have been

77
confined by the steep-walled tributary channel and ultimately drowned in situ, coming to
rest on the clay-rich and sand layers (Unit IV slackwater sediments) overlying the ancient
tributary gravels and sands (Figure 27). Above the lower sand bed (2nd layer from bottom
to top) of Unit IV (overlying the bone bed of the 19 mammoths and camel) lies the tooth
of an unidentified large-tooth feline (Figures 15 and 27). Due to the lack of taphonomic
data, the cause of death of the large-tooth cat is uncertain. It is speculated however, that
the cat was walking on the clayey sediments between the two sand beds (IV) in search of
water and food resources and potentially died from drowning within the low ordertributary (Figure 27).
The last death event recorded at the Waco Mammoth Site consists of the adult
bull male mammoth and adjacent juvenile, and an adult female mammoth located slightly
higher topographically, just north of the bull and juvenile (Figures 15 and 27). These
mammoths appear to have been walking on the upper laminated sand bed of Unit IV
before their deaths (Figure 27). The location of the mammoth remains in the Shelby tube
core by Hilliard (1997) located in the sediments of Unit IIc north of the excavation site,
suggests that it was occupied much earlier than the other 22 mammoths unearthed within
the excavation site (Figure 15, Units III and IV). As was the case for the initial death
event, these mammoths appear to have been within the confines of the low-order tributary
as flood waters from the ancestral Bosque River encroached up on them. The mammoths
associated with the initial death event (16 from Phase I and 3 from Phase II/III) appear to
have been confined within the channel of the ancient tributary (IIb), with three of the
mammoths trailing northward (on Unit III surface) away from the channel possibly
attempting to escape rising floodwaters (Figure 27). Like these mammoths, the

78

Figure 26. Conceptual geographic map, showing the location of the Waco Mammoth
Site within the low-order tributary associated with the ancient Bosque River.

79

Figure 27. Environmental reconstruction of the three recorded death events at the Waco
Mammoth Site, occurring between 53 to 73 ka B.P.

80
mammoths (Phase II and III) in the final death event appear to have been trailing away
from the tributary channel on the Unit IV surface (upper sand bed), possibly attempting
to escape the flood waters (Figure 27).

CHAPTER SIX
Conclusion

The Waco Mammoth Site contains the semi- to fully articulated remains of 22
Columbian mammoths (Mammuthus columbi), a North American camel (Camelops
hesternus), and an unidentified large-tooth feline.

The stratigraphic, chronological,

micromorphological, geochemical, and paleohydrological relationships present at the
Waco Mammoth Site are summarized as follow:
1. Four unconformably bound allostratigraphic units were identified in the
succession of the Waco Mammoth Site that represent multiple channel, floodplain
and slackwater depositional events.
2. Within the four allostratigraphic units, two buried soils (paleosols) were
identified. The Boncap paleosol in Unit III formed in the floodplain deposits of
the ancient low-order tributary during a period of surface stability. The Boncap
paleosol appears to have supported the steep bank wall of the ancient tributary
during the mammoth occurrences.
3. A series of optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) ages estimated from sandy
fluvial sediments within the Phase III excavation area indicate that the mammoths
inhabited the Waco site between 53,000 to 73,000 yr B.P. The unweighted mean
average of all ages put the mammoth events around 60.0 ± 2.5 ka B.P. During
this time the mammoths perished within the confines of a low-order tributary of
the ancient Bosque River. This period places site habitation into the Marine
Oxygen Isotope Stage 4 (OIS 4) of the Wisconsinan glaciation, a time when
81

82
temperatures were as low as during the last glacial maximum 21,000 yr B.P.
(Ruddiman, 2001).

The OSL age sharply contrasts the initial standard

radiocarbon age of approximately 29,000 yr B.P., which places the mammoth
habitation during OIS 3 with slightly warmer temperatures relative to OIS 4.
Furthermore, Uranium/Thorium ages (Mckinney, 1990) from two mammoth
molars fit within the range of the OSL ages.
4. Isotopic data obtained on pedogenic carbonate nodules from several sediment and
soil profiles spatially associated with the Waco Mammoths, suggest that during
the mammoth habitation the local environment was covered by a mixed C3/C4
(warm season grasses/trees and shrubs) plant ecosystems. Columbian mammoths,
as open steppe grazers, would have been attracted to grasslands. The presence of
a mixed C3/C4 plant ecosystem within the fluvial landscape during the mammoth
habitation indicates the presence of a C3 riparian component (channel landscape)
within the broader floodplain and terrace landscape that consisted of primarily C4
grasses. The likely presence of warm season grasslands bordering the low-order
tributary is consistent with Hoppe (2004) conclusion that isotopically, the Waco
mammoths age a similar diet of 70-80% C4 plants.

Sometime after the

mammoths’ deaths, a shift from mixed C3/C4 to C4-dominated vegetation
occurred. A mean July temperature estimate of 26°C was calculated using the
δ13C value and a modern analog transfer function from the upper B horizon of the
Boncap paleosol of Unit III (associated with mammoth habitation).

This

temperature estimate suggests that the mean July temperature at the Waco
Mammoth Site between 53,000 to 73,000 yr B.P. was approximately four degrees

83
cooler than the present mean July temperature (~30°C) for Waco, Texas.
5. Micromorphological evidence of the soils and paleosols from the Waco
Mammoth Site suggest strong seasonality in climate.

Abundant calcium

carbonate and Fe/Mn redoximorphic features throughout the Boncap soil (III) and
Unit IV sediments associated with the mammoths, indicate seasonal wetting and
drying of the soil caused by annual water-table. Surface soils associated with the
Waco Mammoth Site include loamy acidic Alfisols (hardwood savannah) to the
north and loamy, organic-rich Mollisols (grassland) to the south. The Bino soil
consists of two Bk horizons in Unit IIc that appear to have been buried, after a
brief period of surface stability, by the surface Mollisol exposed in Test Trench 2.
6. Stratigraphic and paleoclimate history of the site indicates that the Waco
mammoths died in an ancient low-order fluvial environment. Sediment and soil
conditions during the mammoth habitation are consistent with periodic episodes
of slackwater deposition from flooding of the ancestral Bosque River. The spatial
distribution of mammoths within the strata suggest that the mammoths died from
drowning caused by a rapidly rising backwater derived from the ancestral Bosque
River, which trapped the mammoths within the steep-sided tributary channel. As
the waters receded from the tributary, the mammoths likely came to rest on the
slackwater deposits and then were buried by later depositional events. The bull,
juvenile and subadult female appear to have been trailing away from the tributary
channel before succumbing to the lack of footing on the slippery silty clay slopes
of the channel wall and flood waters.
7. Stratigraphic evidence of the spatial distribution of mammoths at the Waco

84
Mammoth Site points to at least two mammoth death events and one possible
large-tooth feline death. The mammoth found during subsurface coring (Hilliard,
1997) is associated with the sediments of Unit IIc and is significantly older than
the other 22 mammoths associated with the sediments of Units III and IV. At
least 19 mammoths perished on the same geomorphic surface before being buried
by the slackwater deposits of Unit IV. Because situated within the upper sand bed
of Unit IV and time-equivalent surface of Unit III, the Bull, juvenile, and adult
female mammoths died sometime after the deposition of Unit IV. Because Unit
IV consists of a succession of conformable beds and the OSL ages all overlap
(within a 2-sigma error), the amount of time between death events cannot be
precisely determined. Given that Unit IV consists of a series of conformable beds
with no evidence of surface stability and soil formation, it is therefore speculated
that the three events happened within a relatively brief time frame.

APPENDICES

85

86

APPENDIX A
Test Trench Field Descriptions

87

Table A.1. Test Trench 1 Alfisol (Unit Ib) field description sheet, showing morphologic
characteristics (Soil Survey Staff, 1993) observed in the field.
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
0-6
A
10YR 3/4& Mod,
N/A
V. friable N/A
SL
5YR 4/6
med
15% clay
Sbk
10YR 5/3&
40% of
5YR5/6
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
6-27
Bt1
5YR 4/6
Mod,
N/A
V. hard
N/A SCL
cs
23% clay
Abk
Depth Horizon
(cm)
27-62
Bt2

Color
M/D
5YR 4/3
5YR 5/6

Boundary

Comments

Abrupt,
smooth

Boundary

Comments

Gradual,
smooth

2d
5YR 4/3
clay skins

Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
size, type
M/D
N/A
V. hard
N/A
CL
Gradual,
>1% Quartz Pebbles
33% clay smooth (1cm dia); Cd Clay Films
5YR 4/3;
f1d FeMn coats
Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
size, type
M/D
N/A
V. hard
N/A
C
Gradual, Cd clay films 7.5YR 4/3;
smooth
f1d FeMn
concentrations
(2-4mm dia)
Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
size, type
M/D
N/A
V. hard
N/A
C
Abrupt,
Cd slicks >20° &
smooth
grooved

Depth Horizon
Color
(cm)
M/D
62-118 Btg
2.5YR 4/6
Ped Interior
10YR 5/4
Ped Exterior
Depth Horizon
Color
(cm)
M/D
118-156 Btss
7.5YR 6/6
Clay Films
5YR 4/3&4/4
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
156-191 Ck
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
str
N/A
N/A

Comments
Matrix supported
poorly sorted
Med. Grained (2mm to
3cm dia) subrounded

Additonal Comments
>1% silicious pebbles >1cm dia throughout
Roots throughout, but concentrated in first 3 horizons
Mod = moderate; med = medium; cs = coarse; Abk = angular blocky; Sbk = subangular blocky; HCl = reaction
to hydrochloric acid; str = strong; SL = Sandy Loam; SCL = Sandy Clay Loam; CL = Clay Loam; C = Clay;
f1d = few fine distinct; 2d = moderate distinct; V. hard = very hard; V. friable = very friable; M/D = moist/dry

88
Table A.2. Test Trench 5 Mollisol (Unit Ic) Field description sheet, showing
morphologic characteristics (Soil Survey Staff, 1993) observed in the field.
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
CaCO3
Consistence HCl
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
0-17
Ap
10YR 3/1
Mod,
N/A
V. hard
N/A
cs
Abk
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
CaCO3
Consistence HCl
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
17-54
Bw
10YR 5/3
W, cs
N/A
V. hard
str
20% of 3/1
Abk
mixed
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
CaCO3
Consistence HCl
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
54-84
Bss
10YR 5/2
Mod,
1% nod
V. hard
str
med
White
3-5% of
Abk
Hard
10YR 4/2
2-4mm dia.
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
CaCO3
Consistence HCl
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
84-155 Bssk 10YR 4/2
Mod,
5-8% nod
V. hard
vstr
cs
White
2% 10YR
Abk
Hard
5/3 pockets
3-8mm dia.
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
CaCO3
Consistence HCl
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
155-200 Bk 7.5YR 5/4 - Weak,
3-5% nod
V. hard
vstr
4/6
cs
White
Abk
Hard
0.5-1cm dia.

Texture Boundary
CL

Gradual,
smooth

Texture Boundary
SiCL

Gradual,
smooth

Texture Boundary
SiCL

Comments

Clear,
smooth

Texture Boundary
CL

Clear,
smooth

SiCL

N/A

Comments
1% FeMn coats
(2-4mm dia.)
Comments
Clear fine slicks

Comments

Clear distinct slicks
20-40° dip
Same FeMn same as
above
Texture Boundary
Comments
1% biocast
10YR 3/2
(2-3mm dia.)

Mod = moderate; W = weak; med = medium; cs = coarse; Abk = angular blocky; nod = nodule;
V. hard = very hard; vstr = very strong; str = strong; CL = Clay Loam; SiCL = Silty Clay Loam; M/D = moist/dry

89
Table A.3. Test Trench 2 Surface soil and Bino Soil (Unit IIc) Field description sheet,
showing morphologic characteristics (Soil Survey Staff, 1993) observed in
the field.
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
0-21
A
7.5YR 4/3 Mod, 2% nodules
V. hard
vstr
CL
Clear,
med
3-8mm dia
smooth
Abk
white/hrd
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
21-52
Bk1 7.5YR 4/3 Mod,
5-7%
V. hard
vstr
CL
Clear,
med
nodules
smooth
Abk .5-1.5cm dia
white/hrd
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
52-102 Bk2 7.5YR 5/6 Mod, 15% nodules V. hard
vstr
CL
Gradual,
med-cs .5-1.5cm dia
38% clay smooth
Abk
white/hrd

Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
102-194 Bk3 10YR 5/4 & W, cs 3% nodules
V. hard
vstr
CL
10YR 6/4
Pr
.5-1.5cm dia
35% clay
white/hrd
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
194-254 BC
10YR 6/4
M
N/A
V. hard
vstr SiCL-CL
30% clay

Depth
(cm)
254-270

Depth
(cm)
270-320

Boundary

Comments

Comments

Comments
Cd coats 7.5YR 3/2,
10cm thick at base of
this horizon;
majority of CaCO3 in
middle of horizon
Comments

Distinct, 5% biocasts (3-6mm dia),
smooth
7.5YR 4/4
Boundary

Comments

Abrupt,
smooth

5% biocasts 3-6mm dia,
7.5YR 4/6 &10YR 5/6
Rysoliths (2mm-5cm dia),
extend 20cm
through horizon
Termite traces
Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
M/D
size, type
M/D
Bk1b 10YR 6/8 & M
1% nodules
Hard
vstr SiCL-CL Clear,
10YR 7/4
.5-1.5cm dia
33% clay Smooth
mixed
white/hrd
5% 2-4cm
Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
M/D
size, type
M/D
Bk2b 7.5YR 5/6 & M
5% nodules
Hard
vstr SiCL-CL
N/A
2% biocasts (2-4cm dia),
5% of
.5-1cm dia
35% clay
7.5YR 4/6
7.5YR 6/6

Additional Comments
Most roots are in 1st 3 horizons
Mod = moderate; med = medium; Abk = angular blocky; Pr = prismatic; M = massive; W = weak; hrd = hard;
V. hard = very hard; vstr = very strong; CL = Clay Loam; SiCL = Silty Clay Loam; M/D = moist/dry

90
Table A.4. Test Trench 3 Surface soil (Unit IIc) and Unit IIb field description sheet of
upper portion of TT3 showing morphologic characteristics (Soil Survey
Staff, 1993) of fill to C2b3 horizons observed in the field.
Depth Horizon
(cm)
0-20
Fill

Color
M/D
N/A

Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
size, type
M/D
N/A
N/A
N/A
vstr N/A
Clear,
smooth
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
20-71 Bwb1 10YR 6/6
W
Filaments
Hard
vstr
Gradual,
10YR 7/3
smooth

Comments

Comments

10YR 6/4
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
71-103 Cb1 10YR 6/6 N/A
N/A
N/A
vstr N/A Gradual, Weak horizontal
10YR 6/4
smooth
Lamination
10YR 6/4
10YR 6/6
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
103-144 Bwb2 10YR 6/4
W
Filaments
Hard
vstr
Gradual,
10YR 6/3
smooth

Comments
Black Mn coats
10YR 2/1 (1%)
2cm thick bed
10YR 4/3
Comments

10YR 6/4
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
144-165 Cb2 2.5Y 6/4
N/A
N/A
N/A
vstr N/A Gradual,
Upper part smooth Cross-lamination
2.5Y 7/4
and grades
downward to
horizontal
Lamination
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
165-196 Bgb3 10YR 7/4
W
N/A
Hard
vstr
Gradual,
10YR 6/4
smooth
2.5Y 7/4
2.5Y 7/2
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
196-222 C1b3 2.5Y 7/4
N/A
N/A
N/A
vstr N/A Gradual,
2.5Y 7/6
smooth
2.5Y 7/3
2.5Y 6/4

Comments
Faint to v.faint
horz lamination
1% Mn coats
2.5Y 2/1
sandy cross
Lamination

91
Table A.4. Continued
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
222-239 C2b3
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A Gradual,
up: clay loam
upper 2.5Y6/4
vstr
smooth
30% clay
2.5Y7/3
few clay laminlower 2.5Y 7/2
ation (red-brown)
upper 2.5Y 7/4
2.5Y 7/3
lower 2.5Y 7/3
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
239-260 Bgb4 2.5Y 6/1
W
N/A
Hard
vstr
Gradual,
2.5Y 5/6
smooth
5Y 6/2
5% of
2.5Y 6/6
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
260-281 Cgb4 2.5Y 7/2
N/A
N/A
N/A
vstr N/A Gradual,
smooth
5Y 7/2
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
281-289 2C1
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A N/A Gradual,
smooth

Depth Horizon
(cm)
289-356 2C1

Color
M/D

Depth Horizon
(cm)
356-406 3C1

Color
M/D

lo: horz lam.
grading down
to cross-lam
Comments
>1% 2.5Y 2/1
Mn coats

Comments
V. faint horz
Lamination
Comments
Gravel: Avg1cm wide
Clast supported;
poorly sorted
Comments

Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
size, type
M/D
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A N/A
Avg- 5cm wide
Gradual, weakly embricated
smooth
to the north;
discotle and
prolate
Clast supported;
v. poorly sorted
Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
size, type
M/D
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A N/A
Abrupt
Crude horz
lamination
Predomenantly
CaCO3
Avg- 2-3cm
pebbles

92
Table A.4. Continued
Depth Horizon Color
(cm)
M/D
406-416Red Clay

Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
size, type
M/D
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A N/A
Abrupt

Depth Horizon
(cm)
416-429 Flaggy

Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
size, type
M/D
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A N/A
Abrupt

Color
M/D

Depth Horizon Color
(cm)
M/D
429-439Red Clay

Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
size, type
M/D
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A N/A
N/A

W = weak; vstr = very strong; v poorly = very poorly; M/D = moist/dry

Comments
Sand matrix
red & brown;
redox boundary
from upper to
lower gravel
Comments
Similar to
upper gravel
graphia-rich
Comments

93
Table A.5. Test Trench 4 Surface soil (Unit IIc) Field description sheet, showing
taxonomic characteristics (Soil Survey Staff, 1993) observed in the field.
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
0-21
Ap
7.5YR 4/6
Mod, 2% nodules
med
White
7.5YR 5/4
Abk
Hard
3-5mm dia.
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
21-96 Bk1
7.5YR 5/4
Str,
5-10% nod
med
White
Abk
Hard
5mm - 0.5cm
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
96-132 Bk2
7.5YR 6/6
W,
1% nod
med-cs 5-7mm dia.
Sbk
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
132-165 Bw
10YR 6/4
W,
cs
Sbk
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
165-181 BC1
10YR 6/4
N/A
Root traces
infilled 2%
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
(cm)
M/D
181-232 BC2
10YR 6/4
N/A
w/ 10YR 5/4
&10YR 7/4
Depth Horizon
Color
Structure
(cm)
M/D
232-410 C
10YR 6/6
(+132)

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
M/D
V. hard
vstr
C
Abrupt,
35% clay smooth

Comments

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
M/D
V. hard
vstr
CL
Gradual,
30% clay smooth

Comments
>1% black Mn coats

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
M/D
V. hard
vstr
CL
Clear,
Root traces
30% clay smooth infilled w/ CaCO3 (2%)
Modern snell shells
Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
M/D
V. hard
vstr SiCL
Gradual,
Rabdotus ?
25% clay smooth
Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
M/D
Hard
vstr
N/A
Gradual,
smooth

Comments
Siliceous pebbles
termites
1% black Mn coats
Comments

CaCO3
size, type

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
M/D
N/A
vstr
N/A
Gradual,
smooth

CaCO3
size, type

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
M/D
N/A
vstr
N/A
Massive weakly horz
lamination
in lower 30cm

Mod = moderate; Str = strong; med = medium; Abk = angular blocky; Sbk = subangular blocky; nod = nodule
V. Hard = very hard; vstr = very strong; M/D = moist/dry

94
Table A.6. Test Trench 6 Surface soil (Unit IIc) Field description sheet, showing
taxonomic characteristics (Soil Survey Staff, 1993) observed in the field.
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
0-16
Ap
7.5YR 4/3 Mod, 1%, 2-5 mm
med White hard
Abk
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
16-69
Bk1 7.5YR 5/4 Mod,
7-8%,
2% 7.5YR- med
3-8 mm
4/3
Abk White hard
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
3-5%
69-95
Bk2 7.5YR 5/4, Mod,
7.5YR 6/6
cs
3-8 mm
Abk White hard
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
95-185
Bw
10YR 6/4
W
>1%, Same
as above
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
185-205 BC1 10YR 7/4
N/A
N/A

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
M/D
V. hard
N/A N/A Gradual,
smooth

Comments

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
M/D
V. hard
vstr N/A Gradual,
smooth

Comments

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
M/D
V. hard
vstr N/A Gradual, 1% biocasts- 7.5YR 4/3
smooth
Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
M/D
Hard
str
N/A
Abrupt, 5% biocasts- 7.5YR 4/3;
smooth
Snail shell fragments
Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
M/D
N/A
N/A N/A
Abrupt, 10% biocasts- 10YR 5/4
smooth

Mod = moderate; W = weak; med = medium; cs = coarse; Abk = angular blocky; V. Hard = very hard;
vstr = very stong; str = strong; M/D = moist/dry

95
Table A.7. Test Trench 7 Surface soil (Unit Ib) Field description sheet, showing
taxonomic characteristics (Soil Survey Staff, 1993) observed in the field.
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
0-15
Ap 7.5YR 4/4 Mod, 1%, 1-3 mm
med
White hard
Abk
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
15-70 Bk1 5YR 4/4, Mod,
2-3%
7.5YR 4/6 med 5 mm-0.5 cm
Abk
White hard
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
10-15%,
70-150 Bk2 7.5YR 4/4, Mod,
7.5YR 5/6
cs
nodules and
Abk
rysoliths,
0.5-1.5 cm
White hard
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
150-189 Bk3 7.5YR 4/6 Str,
5-10%,
med
1-2 cm
Abk
White hard
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3
(cm)
M/D
size, type
189-218 BCk 7.5YR 5/6, Mod,
2-5%,
7.5YR 5/8 med
1-2.5 cm
Abk
White hard

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
M/D
Hard
str SiCL Abrupt,
smooth

Comments

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
M/D
Hard
str SiCL Abrupt,
smooth

Comments

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
M/D
Hard
vstr SiCL Abrupt,
smooth

Comments
>1% Mn coats- Black

Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
M/D
Hard
vstr SiCL Abrupt, >1% Mn coats- Black f1d;
smooth
1%, 1-5 mm in length
Root traces infilled w/
carbonate (white)
Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
Comments
M/D
Hard
str SiCL Abrupt, Mn coats and root traces,
smooth
Same as above

Mod = moderate; Str = strong; med = medium; cs = coarse; Abk = angular blocky; vstr = very strong;
str = strong; SiCL = Silty Clay Loam; M/D = moist/dry

96
Table A.8. Test Trench 8 Surface soil (Unit Ib) Field description sheet, showing
taxonomic characteristics (Soil Survey Staff, 1993) observed in the field.
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence HCl Texture Boundary
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
0-12
A
5YR 4/4 W, cs
N/A
V. hard N/A SiCL Gradual,
Sbk
smooth
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
N/A
Hard
12-38
Bt 7.5YR 4/3 Mod,
cs
Abk
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
38-75 Bk1 7.5YR 4/3, Mod, 3%, 3-8 mm
Hard
7.5YR 4/4 med
White hard
Abk
nod
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
75-123 Bk2
Same as Mod, 10%, 5 mmHard
above
med
1 cm
Abk White hard
nod
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
123-179 BC 10YR 7/4, W, cs 3%, 1-2 cm
Hard
5YR 4/4,
Abk White hard
5YR5/6
nod
Depth Horizon Color Structure CaCO3 Consistence
(cm)
M/D
size, type
M/D
179-193 C2 7.5YR 8/3, N/A 1%, 2-3 cm
N/A
7.5YR 6/6
White hard
nod

HCl Texture Boundary
N/A SiCL

Abrupt,
smooth

HCl Texture Boundary
str

SiCL

SiCL

L

N/A

Comments

Comments

Comments

Abrupt,
smooth

HCl Texture Boundary
str

1% Mn coatsBlack

Gradual,
smooth

HCl Texture Boundary
str

Comments

Abrupt,
smooth

HCl Texture Boundary
str

Comments

Comments

N/A

Mod = moderate; W = weak; med = medium; cs = coarse; Abk = angular blocky; nod = nodule;
str = strong; SiCL = Silty Clay Loam; L = Loam; M/D = moist/dry

97

APPENDIX B
Test Trench and Vertical Profiles

Figure B.1. Field photos of Test Trenches 5, 6, 3, 2, and 1 showing taxonomic soil horizons and depth of horizons. Photo plate is
oriented top-down from north to south.

98

99

Figure B.2. Field photos of Test Trenches 4, 7, and 8, showing taxonomic soil horizons
and depth of horizons. Photo plate is oriented right to left from north to
south.

100

Figure B.3. Photo of Profile 1 (Unit III), showing taxonomic soil horizons and
horizon boundaries.

101

Figure B.4. Photo of Profile 2 (Unit IV), showing morphological soil horizons and
horizon boundaries. Unit IV shown with pedogenic properties inherited
from erosion and redeposition of the Boncap paleosol.

102

Figure B.5. Photo of Profile 2 (Units III, IV, and V), showing morphological soil
horizons, horizon boundaries, and stratigraphic contacts.

103

Figure B.6. Photo of the Bull Profile (Unit IV), showing two finely laminated sand beds
and interbedded silty clay sediments.

104

APPENDIX C
Wall Profiles

105

Figure C.1. Plan map of Phase II and III excavation area, showing associated animals,
vertical profiles, and wall profiles.

Figure C.2. North wall profile in Phase II and III excavation area, showing associated
facies and allostratigraphic units.

Figure C.3. West wall profile in Phase II and III excavation area, showing associated facies and allostratigraphic units.

106

107

APPENDIX D
Particle Size Distribution Analysis

108
Table D.1. Particle size analysis (Gee and Bauder, 1986) of bulk sediment samples
obtained from test trenches and vertical profiles, showing Hydrometer
temperature readings, corrected reading, and percent clay, silt, and sand for
each sample.
Sample
TT1A
TT1Bt1
TT1Bt2
TT1Btss
TT1Btg

Bulk Sample
Dry Wt. (g)
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0

Hydrometer Hydrometer Corrected Sample Wt.
Reading
Temp.
Reading After Drying
9.0
24
10.4
26.3
9.5
24
10.9
28.6
12.0
24
13.4
25.1
20.0
24
21.4
18.1
18.5
24
20.0
19.5

TT2A
TT2Bk1
TT2Bk2
TT2Bk3
TT2Bk1b
TT2Bk2b
TT2BC

50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.1
50.0
50.0

15.0
18.0
19.0
18.0
13.0
15.0
13.0

23
23
23
23
23
23
23

16.1
19.1
20.1
19.1
14.1
16.1
14.1

TT3Bwb1
TT3Cb1
TT3Bwb2
TT3Cb2
TT3Bgb3
TT3C1b3
TT3C2b3
TT3Bgb4
TT3Cgb4

50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0

9.0
6.5
11.0
3.0
10.0
10.0
6.0
16.5
8.5

23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23
23

TT5Ap
TT5Bw
TT5Bss
TT5Bssk
TT5Bk

50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0

13.0
17.0
18.5
20.0
16.0

P1Bk1
P1Bk2
P1Bkg1b
P1Bkg2b
P1Bkssg

50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0

P2Bk1
P2Bk2
P2BC
P2C
P2Bkg2b
P2Bkssgb
P3Cb1
P3Bkg2b
P3Cb2
P3Bkssgb
P3Marsh

% Clay

% Silt

% Sand

20.9
21.9
26.9
42.9
39.9

52.6
57.2
50.1
36.1
39.0

26.6
20.9
23.0
21.0
21.1

15.2
11.0
6.8
5.8
11.6
7.1
11.1

32.1
38.2
40.2
38.2
28.1
32.2
28.2

37.4
39.9
46.2
50.3
48.7
53.7
49.7

30.4
22.0
13.6
11.5
23.2
14.2
22.1

10.1
7.6
12.1
4.1
11.1
11.1
7.1
17.6
9.6

22.3
31.1
16.7
40.3
17.9
21.7
34.9
10.4
27.7

20.2
15.2
24.2
8.2
22.2
22.2
14.2
35.2
19.2

35.3
22.7
42.4
11.3
42.0
34.5
16.1
44.0
25.5

44.5
62.1
33.5
80.5
35.8
43.3
69.7
20.8
55.3

23
23
23
23
23

14.1
18.1
19.6
21.1
17.1

12.5
9.9
9.1
9.2
7.4

28.2
36.2
39.2
42.2
34.2

46.9
44.1
42.6
39.4
51.1

24.9
19.7
18.3
18.4
14.8

16.0
13.5
12.0
13.0
15.0

23
23
23
23
23

17.1
14.6
13.1
14.1
16.1

8.4
10.7
20.4
17.1
11.6

34.2
29.2
26.2
28.2
32.2

49.0
49.4
33.0
37.7
44.6

16.9
21.4
40.8
34.2
23.2

50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0

17.0
13.0
13.0
9.0
13.0
15.0

23
23
23
23
23
23

18.1
14.1
14.1
10.1
14.1
16.1

8.5
11.6
14.0
22.4
12.6
11.0

36.2
28.2
28.2
20.2
28.2
32.2

46.9
48.6
43.9
35.0
46.7
45.9

16.9
23.2
27.9
44.8
25.1
22.0

50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0
50.0

9.0
13.0
14.0
16.0
15.5

23
23
23
23
23

10.1
14.1
15.1
17.1
16.6

18.9
12.9
8.8
9.7
12.9

20.2
28.2
30.2
34.2
33.2

42.0
46.0
52.2
46.4
41.0

37.9
25.8
17.6
19.4
25.8

109

Figure D.1. Textural classes determined from particle size analysis for each profile
sampled.

110

Figure D.2. Textural classes determined from particle size analysis for each test trench
sampled.

111

APPENDIX E
Micromorphologic Descriptions

112
Table E.1. Detailed micromorphologic summary of all thin section samples.
Profile/

Speciman

Horizon Designation
Profile 1/

P1-01

% Composition

Distinguishing

Estimate

Properties/Features

Skeletal grains%

55

Bk1

Fine grain, carbonate-rich matrix with
common silt-size quartz grains

Pedogenic features% 20

Common carbonate nodules and soft masses
Illuviated clay accumulation along biopores and grains

Profile 1/

P1-02

Bk2/Bkg
1b
Contact

Soil matrix%

25

Common Fe/Mn concentrations with embedded silt

Skeletal grains%

65

Fine grain carbonate-rich matrix (similar to above)
Few illuviated clay features (i.e. pore linings)

Pedogenic features% 15

Abundant calcium carbonate nodules and soft masses
Abundant organic material (i.e. roots, root nodes)

Soil matrix%

20

Common Fe/Mn concretions with difuse boundaries,
engulfing surrounding matrix materia
Abundant biopores and soil pores

Profile 1/

P1-03

Skeletal grains%

25

Bkg2b

Slightly coarser grain, reduced matrix with
a slight bimasepic plasmic fabric

Pedogenic features% 10

Abundant calcium carbonate nodules and soft masses
Common septarian shrinkage cracking within

Soil matrix%

65

carbonate nodules, showing sparry calcite development
Sparse Fe staining throughout thin section
Common biopores throughout thin section

Profile 1/

P1-04

Skeletal grains%

35

Bkssgb3

Fine grain matrix showing mosepic plasmic fabric
Abundant carbonate nodules, showing

Pedogenic features% 25

septarian shrinkage cracks and formation of microspar
Abundant root pores, some infilled with

Soil matrix%

40

detrital silt and matrix material
Few Fe/FeMn masses and concentrations
Very few K-feldspar grains, showing little weathering
Possible gastropod fragment

Profile 2/

P2-01a

Skeletal grains%

55

BC

Well rounded, well sorted fine silt
Finely laminated

Pedogenic features% 10

Fe staining and CaCO3 accumulation
along laminations

Soil matrix%

35

113

Profile 2/

P2-01b

Skeletal grains%

70

C

Finely laminated
Pedogenic features% 10

Profile 3/

Well rounded, well sorted fine silt

P3-01

Soil matrix%

20

Skeletal grains%

55

C

Fe staining and CaCO3 accumulation along laminations

Fine-grain CaCO3-rich clay matrix engulfing fine silt to silt
Abundant Fe/Mn concentrations and staining of matrix

Pedogenic features% 10

Lg. root pores with common root fragments
Few areas of illuviated clay accumulations,

Soil matrix%

35

primarily along root pores
Abundant Fe staining of matrix

Profile 3/

P3-02

Skeletal grains%

35

Bkg1b/2b

Fine-grain CaCO3-rich clay matrix w/ embedded
sand-size grainsfine silt to silt-size quartz grains

Pedogenic features% 20

and few larger fine sand-size grains
Sparse Fe accumulations

Soil matrix%

45

Common biopores and soil cracks
Some CaCO3 accumulation within
the matrix and (microspar) along biopores
CaCO3 replaced bone/organic features
Few K-feldspar and clinopyroxene grains

Profile 3/

P3-03

Skeletal grains%

40

Similar matrix as P3-01, w/
slightly finer quartz grain size and abundance

Cb1/Bkg
2b

Pedogenic features% 20

Very few Fe/Mn nodules (~500 µm in dia.)
Biopores infilled with fine-grain detrital clay

Soil matrix%

40

Few biopores with illuviated clay argillans
CaCO3 replaced bone/plant material/fragments

Profile 3/

P3-04

Skeletal grains%

20

Cb1

Drab matrix with common silt-size quartz grains
Common Fe/Mn and organic features

Pedogenic features% 20

embedded in biopore infilled matrix
Very abundant biopores infilled with

Profile 3/

P3-05

Soil matrix%

60

Skeletal grains%

20

Bkgb2

fine clay matrix
Carbonate-rich fine-grain matrix with
abundant embedded silt-size quartz grains

Pedogenic features% 25

Abundant CaCO3 soft masses and nodules
Common Fe/Mn masses and concentrations

Soil matrix%

55

Abundant biopores, few infilled with
detrital matrix material

114

Profile 3/

P3-06

Skeletal grains%

30

Bkssgb2

-Similar matrix as P1 Bkssgb
-Abundant CaCO3 nodules and soft masses

Pedogenic features% 25

-Common Fe/Mn concentrations and argillans
-Carbonate nodule with megaquartz overgrowth

Profile 4/

P4-01

Soil matrix%

45

Skeletal grains%

60

Cb1

-Carbonate-rich Silt to very fine sand matrix
-Abundant silt to fine sand-size carbonate features

Pedogenic features% 10

-Few fairly unweathered K-feldspar grains
-Possible fining upward lamina throughout

Profile 4/

P4-02

Soil matrix%

30

Skeletal grains%

15

Cb2

Slightly finer matrix than P4-02 with
similar carbonate features

Pedogenic features% 10

Common Fe staining in the form of linear features
between lamina

Soil matrix%

75

few small root pores and root nodes with
preserved whewellite

Bull
Profile/
Upper

Bull-upper

Skeletal grains%

10

Abundant carbonate in matrix

Pedogenic features% 20

weak mosepic plasmic fabric,

Fine-grain clay matrix with
ingulfing primarily v. fine to fine sand-size quartz grains
Soil matrix%

70

Very few unweathered K-feldspars
Abundant biopores infilled w/
detrital clay and fine silt

Bull-middle
Bull
Profile/
Middle

Skeletal grains%

5

Similar carbonate rich matrix as Bull-upper with
no apparent plasmic fabric

Pedogenic features% 25

Abundant silt to v. fine sand-size quartz grains
Abundant biopores (e.g. burrows and root pores)

Soil matrix%

70

infilled with detrital clay and silt
Some root pores with organic fragments remaining

Bull
Profile/
Lower/C

Bull-L/C

Skeletal grains%

10

Same matrix and plasmic fabric as Bull-upper
Few unweathered K-feldspar grains and

Pedogenic features% 20

v. few clinopyroxixe (CPX) grains
Carbonate-replaced organic features,

Soil matrix%

70

showing cellular structure
Similar infilled biopores as Bull-upper and Bull-middle
Common Fe staining and Fe/Mn accumulation

115

Bull
Bull-Marsh
Profile/
Marsh

Skeletal grains%

10

Similar matrix, plasmic fabric and quartz grain size and
abundance as Bull-upper

Pedogenic features% 25

Common Fe/Mn concretions and banded nodules
Both Fe/Mn concretions and nodules w/

Soil matrix%

65

embedded matrix material
Abundant carbonate nodules and hard masses
Organic (e.g. plant/root) material, some root nodes
Common biopores (e.g. root traces and possible burrows)
Some Fe staining of matrix and carbonate features
Very few small relatively unweathered K-feldspar grains

TT1/

TT1-01

Skeletal grains%

25

A

silty clay matrix with abundant quartz grains and
few unweathered K-feldspar grains

Pedogenic features% 40

Very abundant illuviated clay in the form of grain argillans
Common roots, few with preserved whewellite present

Soil matrix%
TT1/

TT1-02

Skeletal grains%

35
25 Silty clay matrix slightly finer matrix-supported quartz grains

Bt1

Very abundant illuviated clays in the form of
Pedogenic features% 45

grain argillans and biopore infillings
Abundant Fe staining of matrix and overprinting of argillans

Soil matrix%

30 Few Fe/Mn concretions with both sharp and diffuse boundaries
Fewer roots than TT1-01, some with whewellite preserved

TT1/

TT1-03

Skeletal grains%

30

Bt2

Clay matrix with common sand-size embedded
quartz grains and few K-feldspar grains

Pedogenic features% 40

Very abundant illuviated clay features including
grain argillans and pore linings

Soil matrix%

30

Common Fe staining of matrix and concentrations
Few subangular chert grains, heavily Fe stained
Much fewer roots than TT1-01 and TT1-02

TT1/

TT1-04

Skeletal grains%

25

Btg

Clay matrix showing sepic plasmic fabric and
containing abundant coarse silt-size quartz grains

Pedogenic features% 45
Soil matrix%

30

Abundant illuviated clays forming grain argillans
Common Fe/Mn nodules and concentrations,
nodules with both diffuse and sharp boundaries
Much few roots than TT1-01, TT1-02 and TT1-03

TT1/

TT1-05

Skeletal grains%

25

Btss

Clay matrix with sepic plasmic fabric and
containing similar quartz grains at TT1-04

Pedogenic features% 45

Few illuviated clay features
Common Fe/Mn concentrations and nodules,

Soil matrix%

30

nodules with primarily sharp boundaries
Preserved organic material
Common biopores and soil cracks

116

TT2/

TT2-01

Skeletal grains%

30

A

Clay matrix with abundant silt to fine sand-size
quartz grains

Pedogenic features% 35

Common pedogenic carbonate nodules with
distinct septarian shrinkage cracks

Soil matrix%

35

Shrinkage cracks show sparry calcite development
Few Fe/Mn nodules with sharp boundaries
Common roots and root traces

TT2/

TT2-02

Skeletal grains%

25

Bk1

Same matrix as TT2-01
Very Abundant carbonate nodules, with

Pedogenic features% 35

common stress cutans and septarian shrinkage cracks
Sparry calcite development within cracks

Soil matrix%

40

Common (.25-.5 mm dia) Fe/Mn concretions
engulfing surrounding matrix material

TT2/

TT2-03

Skeletal grains%

15

Bk2

Fine-grain, carbonate-rich matrix engulfing
common silt to fine sand quartz grains

Pedogenic features% 30

Common carbonate nodules with common shrinkage cracks
Common apatite features throughout (possible bone material)

Soil matrix%

55

Few illuviated clay argillans
Large biopore infilled with detrital matrix material

TT2/

TT2-04

Skeletal grains%

15 Carbonate-rich, drab-colored engulfing silt-size quartz grains

Bk3

Common Fe/Mn concentrations engulfing surrounding matrix
Pedogenic features% 35

Common biopores, few with thin clay argillans
Common stress/soil cracking

TT2/

TT2-05

Soil matrix%

50

Skeletal grains%

10

BC

Similar matrix a TT2-04 with
slightly finer embedded quartz grains

Pedogenic features% 30

Common angular carbonate nodules with
common microspar overgrowths

TT2/

TT2-06

Soil matrix%

60

Fe argillans on carbonate nodules

Skeletal grains%

15

Carbonate-rich fine-grain matrix with concentrations

Bk1b

of larger embedded sand-size quartz grains
Pedogenic features% 30

Common Fe/Mn accumulations throughout
engulfing surrounding matrix

Soil matrix%

55

Possible biopores infilled with
detrital matrix and carbonate material

117

TT2/

TT2-07

Skeletal grains%

15

Bk2b

Very fine-grain, carbonate-rich matrix with
fine silt to very fine sand

Pedogenic features% 35

Common carbonate nodules with
common septarian shrinkage cracking

Soil matrix%

50

Common apatite features (possible bone fragments)
Common Microcodium features at bases of root traces
Very few illuviated clays

TT3/

TT3-03

Skeletal grains%

10

Bwb2

Fine-grain, carbonate-rich matrix
Abundant carbonate nodules and masses

Pedogenic features% 30

Abundant silt to fine sand-size carbonate grains
Common microspar development along

Soil matrix%

60

soil cracks and biopores
Common Fe and Fe/Mn concentrations and staining

TT3/

TT3-04

Skeletal grains%

75

Cb2

Very carbonate-rich matrix (almost cemented appeared)
Abundant carbonate masses and grains

Pedogenic features% 10

Common Microcodium associated with root traces
Common apatite features (possible bone fragments)

TT3/

TT3-05

Soil matrix%

15

Skeletal grains%

10

Bgb3

Similar, but finer-grained matrix than TT3-03
Same abundance and type of carbonate features as TT3-03,

Pedogenic features% 30

with few hard masses diffused in matrix
Same abundance and type of biopores as TT3-03

TT3/

TT3-06

Soil matrix%

60

Skeletal grains%

50

C1b3

Very fine-grain matrix (more fine than TT3-04)
Possible fining upward lamina (mm-scale)

Pedogenic features% 20

Abundant carbonate masses, grains,
and concentrations along lamina

TT3/

TT3-07

Soil matrix%

30

Common Fe and Fe/Mn concentration in matrix

Skeletal grains%

35

Same as TT3-06 with more abundant carbonate

C2b3

dispersed throughout thin section
Pedogenic features% 25

Weak nodules with common cracking
Common apatite features

Soil matrix%

40

Common recrystallized carbonate features

118

TT3/

TT3-08

Skeletal grains%

15

Bgb4

Fine-grain, carbonate-rich matrix
Very abundant carbonate masses, some with

Pedogenic features% 25

recrystallized (sparry calcite) carbonate
Common Fe/Mn accumulations within matrix

Soil matrix%

60

Few apatite features
Abundant biopores, few infilled with
detrital quartz silt and matrix material

TT3/

TT3-09

Skeletal grains%

20

Cgb4

Same as TT3-08 with slightly finer matrix
and similar features

Pedogenic features% 15

TT5/

TT5-01

Soil matrix%

65

Skeletal grains%

10

Ap

Fine-grain clay matrix with mosepic plasmic fabric
engulfing silt to very fine sand

Pedogenic features% 30

Common Fe/Mn concretions, most with sharp boundaries
Common organic material (i.e. root nodes, plant fragments)

TT5/

TT5-02

Soil matrix%

60

Skeletal grains%

15

Bw

Fine-grain matrix,drab in color compared to TT5-02
Common Fe/Mn redoximorphic features

Pedogenic features% 10

(i.e. concretions and reduced masses)
Common biopores (i.e. root nodes, roots, and root pores)

TT5/

TT5-03

Soil matrix%

75

Skeletal grains%

20

Bss

Same matrix with slight plasmic fabric
Common carbonate nodules (bifurcated) with

Pedogenic features% 25

shrinkage cracks
Common organic features (i.e. roots and root nodes)

Soil matrix%

55

Few small (.25-.5 mm dia) Fe/Mn concretions with
sharp boundaries

TT5/

TT5-04

Skeletal grains%

10

Bssk

Same matrix as TT5-03
Very abundant carbonate nodules with

Pedogenic features% 45

common septarian shrinkage cracks and stress cutans
Microspar development within shrinkage cracks

Soil matrix%

45

Common Fe/Mn concentrations
Few Fe/Mn concretions with sharp boundaries
Possible biopores

TT5/

TT5-05

Skeletal grains%

10

Bk

Similar matrix as TT5-04 with more abundant carbonate
Few thin clay argillans

Pedogenic features% 30
Soil matrix%

60

Common Fe/Mn masses and concretions

119

APPENDIX F
USGS Peak Stream Flow Data

120

Table E.1. Peak stream flow data from North Bosque River at Valley Mills, Texas, gage
station # 8095200. Data represents peak stream flow in ft3/sec recorded from
October 4, 1959 to March, 20, 2006. For definitions of abbreviations see
USGS-NWIS.
agency_cd
5s
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS

site_no
15s
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200

peak_dt
10d
10/4/1959
1/8/1961
10/10/1961
10/9/1962
9/22/1964
5/16/1965
4/25/1966
4/11/1967
5/11/1968
5/7/1969
10/30/1969
10/27/1970
10/20/1971
4/24/1973
9/17/1974
4/8/1975
6/25/1976
5/1/1977
5/3/1978
5/4/1979
5/15/1980
6/16/1981
5/6/1982

peak_va
8s
107000
22400
73500
8990
20200
54000
23400
5380
27800
24800
10300
1860
36700
18600
8220
16100
11900
36800
2000
31600
2000
47100
11900

peak_cd
27s
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6

gage_ht
8s
40.22
30.47
38.82
20.1
29.35
38
31.91
14.61
34.45
32.84
20.6
9.59
36.67
28.54
18.15
26.69
22.49
36.88
9
35.48
9.7
38.26
22.5

121
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS
USGS

8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200
8095200

5/31/1983
3/21/1984
10/19/1984
6/6/1986
5/29/1987
6/1/1988
3/29/1989
4/26/1990
6/3/1991
12/21/1991
2/4/1993
5/11/1994
5/8/1995
8/30/1996
2/21/1997
3/16/1998
12/10/1998
6/15/2000
3/12/2001
3/20/2002
9/19/2003
5/1/2004
11/17/2004
3/20/2006

1890
5320
5310
19700
16800
24500
31800
56900
5610
220000
9790
36600
42400
24700
46500
92000
3580
21300
17400
15800
8090
42600
36200
5690

6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6

9.21
14.78
14.76
29.67
27.33
32.7
35.53
39.1
14.02
44.6
15.85
30.55
32.48
26.27
35.64
39.4
10.6
27.08
24.04
23.28
15.32
34.78
33.36
13.6

122

APPENDIX G
SMADA DISTRIB 2.13 Output Data

123
Table E.1. SMADA, DISTRIB 2.13 output data from Log Pearson Type III distribution.
Distribution Analysis: Log Pearson Type III
Summary of Data
First Moment (mean) = 29638.9
Second Moment = 1.329e09
Skew = 3.291e+00
Point
Number

Weibull
Probability

Actual
Value

Predicted
Value

Standard
Deviation

Point
Number

Weibull
Probability

Actual
Value

Predicted
Value

Standard
Deviation

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24

0.0208
0.0417
0.0625
0.0833
0.1042
0.125
0.1458
0.1667
0.1875
0.2083
0.2292
0.25
0.2708
0.2917
0.3125
0.3333
0.3542
0.375
0.3958
0.4167
0.4375
0.4583
0.4792
0.5

1860
1890
2000
2000
3580
5310
5320
5380
5610
5690
8090
8220
8990
9790
10300
11900
11900
15800
16100
16800
17400
18600
19700
20200

1461.395
2211.479
2872.72
3497.127
4104.846
4706.429
5308.428
5915.415
6530.884
7157.704
7798.378
8455.2
9130.357
9826.006
10544.32
11287.56
12058.09
12858.41
13691.24
14559.51
15466.46
16415.64
17411
18457.28

661.7704
792.233
889.6567
975.3981
1056.871
1137.581
1219.468
1303.713
1391.088
1482.126
1577.222
1676.683
1780.768
1889.71
2003.737
2123.08
2247.987
2378.729
2515.613
2658.987
2809.249
2966.864
3132.37
3306.445

25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47

0.5208
0.5417
0.5625
0.5833
0.6042
0.625
0.6458
0.6667
0.6875
0.7083
0.7292
0.75
0.7708
0.7917
0.8125
0.8333
0.8542
0.875
0.8958
0.9167
0.9375
0.9583
0.9792

21300
22400
23400
24500
24700
24800
27800
31600
31800
36200
36600
36700
36800
42400
42600
46500
47100
54000
56900
73500
92000
107000
220000

19559.66
20725.05
21960.22
23273.03
24672.59
26169.6
27776.72
29509.09
31384.97
33426.68
35661.9
38125.39
40861.7
43929.07
47405.52
51398.7
56062.77
61628.66
68463.84
77202.6
89077.09
106981.1
140766.9

3489.868
3683.727
3889.129
4107.41
4340.196
4589.486
4857.765
5148.155
5464.633
5812.34
6198.027
6630.719
7122.736
7691.292
8361.089
9168.745
10170.69
11458.16
13188.34
15656.19
19489.25
26324.71
42570.47

Exceedence
Probability
0.995
0.99
0.98
0.96
0.9
0.8
0.667
0.5

Predictions
Return
Calculated Standard
Period
Value
Deviation Deviation
200
100
50
25
10
5
3
2

223022.1
180932.9
142882.1
108859.5
70031.77
45265.34
29537.92
18457.28

98701.43
67189.94
43727.18
27114.71
13609.59
7945.341
5153.001
3306.445

124

APPENDIX H
HEC RAS 4.0 Beta Output Data

Table H.1. Detail steady flow analysis summary table computed from HEC RAS 4.0 Beta Flow Analysis for 25 year flood event.
For definitions of abbreviations see USGS-NWIS.
Reach

River Sta Profile
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

PF 1
PF 1
PF 1
PF 1
PF 1
PF 1
PF 1
PF 1

Q Total
Min Ch El W.S. Elev Crit W.S. E.G. Elev E.G. Slope Vel Chnl
(cfs)
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
(ft/ft)
(ft/s)
108859
360
410.45
410.53 0.000062
4.27
108859
361.3
410.25
410.36 0.000077
4.73
108859
363.8
409.48
409.84 0.000204
7.51
108859
364.8
409.33
409.61 0.000172
6.82
108859
364.5
409.46
409.49 0.000015
2.04
108859
364.2
409.25
409.45 0.000143
6.25
108859
366
408.7
398.14
409 0.000202
7.25
108859
368
390
390
405.75 0.012032
36.24

Flow Area Top Width Froude # Chl
(sq ft)
(ft)
63559.06
3700
0.11
56609.11
3300
0.12
32127.9
1800
0.2
35637.26 1996.67
0.18
97068.11
3600
0.05
43137.32
2812.3
0.17
34629.83
2100
0.2
4179.19
299.97
1.37

125

Table H.2. Detail steady flow analysis summary table computed from HEC RAS 4.0 Beta Flow Analysis for 50 year flood event.
For definitions of abbreviations see USGS-NWIS.
Reach

River Sta

Profile

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1

PF 1
PF 1
PF 1
PF 1
PF 1
PF 1
PF 1
PF 1

Q Total
(cfs)
142882
142882
142882
142882
142882
142882
142882
142882

Min Ch El W.S. Elev Crit W.S. E.G. Elev E.G. Slope
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
(ft)
(ft/ft)
360
421.03
421.07
0.000024
361.3
420.95
421
0.000029
363.8
420.63
420.8
0.000082
364.8
420.57
420.71
0.000067
364.5
420.63
420.65
0.000009
364.2
420.55
420.64
0.000046
366
420.36
390
420.49
0.000068
368
390
390
417.13
0.020718

Vel Chnl Flow Area Top Width Froude # Chl
(ft/s)
(sq ft)
(ft)
3.01
102716.4
3700
0.07
3.34
91929.92
3300
0.08
5.51
52186.63
1800
0.13
4.95
58114.6
2000
0.12
1.8
137265.7
3600
0.04
4.1
75352.42
2850
0.1
4.94
59109.69
2100
0.12
47.56
4180.37
300.13
1.8

126

127
Table H.1. Detailed summary of channel cross section output data computed from
HEC RAS 4.0 Beta Flow Analysis for a 25 year flood event. For definitions
of abbreviations see HEC RAS 4.0 Beta at U. S. Army Corp of Engineers.
Plan: Plan 01 Bosque 1 RS: 8 Profile: PF 1
E.G. Elev (ft)
410.53 Element
Vel Head (ft)
0.08 Wt. n-Val.
W.S. Elev (ft)
410.45 Reach Len. (ft)
Crit W.S. (ft)
Flow Area (sq ft)
E.G. Slope (ft/ft)
0.000062 Area (sq ft)
Q Total (cfs)
108859 Flow (cfs)
Top Width (ft)
3700 Top Width (ft)
Vel Total (ft/s)
1.71 Avg. Vel. (ft/s)
Max Chl Dpth (ft)
50.45 Hydr. Depth (ft)
Conv. Total (cfs)
13830100 Conv. (cfs)
Length Wtd. (ft)
2500 Wetted Per. (ft)
Min Ch El (ft)
360 Shear (lb/sq ft)
Alpha
1.82 Stream Power (lb/ft s)
Frctn Loss (ft)
0.17 Cum Volume (acre-ft)
C & E Loss (ft)
0 Cum SA (acres)

Left OB
Channel
Right OB
0.05
0.035
0.05
2500
2500
2500
10769.04
4944.84 47845.18
10769.04
4944.84 47845.18
17032.36 21111.04 70715.59
600
100
3000
1.58
4.27
1.48
17.95
49.45
15.95
2163892 2682073 8984130
612.53
108.28
3012.45
0.07
0.18
0.06
0.11
0.75
0.09
5200.53
1471.79
8065.82
328.28
33.98
467.29

Table H.4. Detailed summary of channel cross section output data computed from
HEC RAS 4.0 Beta Flow Analysis for a 50 year flood event. For definitions
of abbreviations see HEC RAS 4.0 Beta at U. S. Army Corp of Engineers.
Plan: Plan 01 Bosque 1 RS: 8 Profile: PF 1
E.G. Elev (ft)
421.07 Element
Vel Head (ft)
0.04 Wt. n-Val.
W.S. Elev (ft)
421.03 Reach Len. (ft)
Crit W.S. (ft)
Flow Area (sq ft)
E.G. Slope (ft/ft)
0.000024 Area (sq ft)
Q Total (cfs)
142882 Flow (cfs)
Top Width (ft)
3700 Top Width (ft)
Vel Total (ft/s)
1.39 Avg. Vel. (ft/s)
Max Chl Dpth (ft)
61.03 Hydr. Depth (ft)
Conv. Total (cfs)
29272310 Conv. (cfs)
Length Wtd. (ft)
2500 Wetted Per. (ft)
Min Ch El (ft)
360 Shear (lb/sq ft)
Alpha
1.35 Stream Power (lb/ft s)
Frctn Loss (ft)
0.07 Cum Volume (acre-ft)
C & E Loss (ft)
0 Cum SA (acres)

Left OB
Channel
Right OB
0.05
0.035
0.05
2500
2500
2500
17118.88
6003.15 79594.39
17118.88
6003.15 79594.39
22609.65
18087.1 102185.3
600
100
3000
1.32
3.01
1.28
28.53
60.03
26.53
4632051 3705513 20934750
623.11
108.28
3023.03
0.04
0.08
0.04
0.05
0.25
0.05
8831.37
1814.89 13165.57
328.28
33.98
468.72

128

REFERENCES

Aitken, M. J., and Bowman, S. G. E. 1975, Thermoluminescent dating: Assessment of
alpha particle contribution: Archaeometry, v. 17, p. 132-138.
Aitken, M.J., 1985, Thermoluminescence Dating: Academic Press, New York, 359 pp.
Aitken, M.J., 1998, An Introduction to Optical Dating: The dating of Quaternary
Sediments by the use of Photon-stimulated luminescence: Oxford University
Press, New York, 267 pp.
Agenbroad, L.D., 2004, North American Proboscideans: Mammoths: The State of
Knowledge, 2003: Quaternary International, p. 126-128 (2005) p. 73-92.
Advanced Geosciences Inc., 2006, Instruction manual for SuperSting R8
automatic earth resistivity and IP system: Austin, Texas.
Baker, V.R., 1978, Large-scale erosional and depositional features of the Channeled
Scabland, in Baker, V.R., and Nummedal, D. (Eds.), The Channel Scabland:
NASA, Washington, D.C., p. 81-115.
Bishop, A.L., 1977, Flood Potential of the Bosque Basin: Baylor Geological
Studies Bull., No. 33, p. 37.
Brakenridge, G.R., 1984, Alluvial stratigraphy and radiocarbon dating along the Duck
River, Tennessee: Implications regarding flood-plain origin: Geological Society
of America Bulletin, v. 95, p. 9-25.
Brewer, R., 1976, Fabric and Mineral Analysis of Soils, 2nd edition: Huntington, New
York, Robert E. Krieger Publishing Co., 482 p.
Bullock, P, Fédoroff, N., Jungerius, A., Stoops, G., Tursina, T., and Babel, U., 1985,
Handbook for Soil Thin Section Description: Wolverhampton, UK, Waine
Research Publications, 152 p.
CEE-UCF, 1999, Stormwater Management and Design Aid, Distribution Analysis 2.13:
Civil for Environmental Engineering, University of Central Florida, Orlando,
Florida, http://cee.ucf.edu/software/.
Cheng, H., Edwards, R.L., Hoff, J., Gallup, C.D., Richards, D.A., Asmerom, Y., 2000,
The half-lives of uranium-234 and thorium-230, Chemical Geology, no. 169,
p. 17-33.

129
Claerbout J. F. and Muir, F., 1973, Robust modeling with erratic data: Geophysics, v. 38,
p. 826-844.
Darwin R. L., Ferring, R.C., and Ellwood, B.B., 1990, Geoelectric stratigraphy and
subsurface evaluation of quaternary stream sediments at the Cooper Basin, NE
Texas: Geoarchaeology, v., 5 p. 53-79.
Davis, L.C., Eshelman, R.E., and Prior, J.C., 1972, A Primary Mammoth Site with
Associated Fauna in Pottawattamie County, Iowa: Iowa Academy of Science
Proceedings, v. 79, n. 2, p. 62-65.
Dahlin, T. and Zhou, B., 2004, A numerical comparison of 2D resistivity imaging with
10 electrode arrays: Geophysical Prospecting, v. 52, p. 379-398.
Dutrow, B.L., 1980, Metric Analysis of a Late Pleistocene Mammoth Assemblage,
Hot Springs, South Dakota: unpublished Southern Methodist University
Master of Science thesis, p. 165.
Dworkin, S.I., Nordt, L.C ., and Atchley, S.C., 2005, Determining terrestrial
paleotemperatures using the oxygen isotopic composition of pedogenic
carbonates, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v. 237 p. 56-68.
Ehleringer, J.R., Cerling, T.E., and Helliker, B.R., 1997, C4 photosynthesis, atmospheric
CO2, and climate: Oecologia, v. 112, p. 285-299.
Elder, W.R., 1965, Urban Geology of Greater Waco Part II: Soils: Baylor
Geological Studies Bull., n.9, 66 p.
Epps, L.W., 1973, A Geologic History of the Brazos River: Baylor Geological
Studies Bull., n. 24, p. 45.
Falconer, H., 1863, On the American fossil elephant of the regions bordering the Gulf
of Mexico (E. columbi Falc.); with general observations on the living and extinct
Species: Nat. Hist. Rev., v. 5, n. 3, p. 43-114.
Feathers, J.K., Holliday, V.T., and Meltzer, D.J., 2006, Optically stimulated
luminescence dating of Souther High Plains archaeological sites: Journal of
Archaeological Sciences, v. 33, p. 1651-1665.
Flawn, P.T., Burket, J.M., 1965, Urban Geology of Greater Waco Part 1: Geology:
Baylor Geological Studies Bull., n. 8, p. 45.
Forman, S.L. and Pierson, J., 2002, Late Pleistocene luminescence chronology of loess
deposition in the Missouri and Mississippi river valleys, United States:
Palaeogeography Palaeoclimatology Palaeoecology, v. 186, n. 1-2, p. 25-46.

130
Fox, F.W., Smith, C.B., and Lintz, D.O., 1992, Herd Bunching at the Waco Mammoth
Site: Preliminary Investigations, 1978-1987. Pp. 51, in J.W. Fox, C.B. Smith, and
K.T. Wilkins, (Eds.), Proboscidean and Paleoindian Interactions: Baylor
University Press, Waco, Texas, 233p.
Furman, A., Ferre, P.S., and Warrick, A.W., 2003, A sensitivity analysis of electrical
resistivity tomography array types using analytical element modeling: Vadose
Zone Journal, v. 2, p. 416-423.
Gee, G.W., Bauder, J.W., 1986, Particle-Size Analysis, in Klute, A., (Ed.), Methods of
Soil Analysis, Part 1. Physical and Mineralogical Methods: Agronomy
2nd Edition, Madison, Wisconsin, USA, p. 383-411.
Guthrie, R.D., 2001, Origin and causes of the mammoth steppe: a story of cloud
Cover, woolly mammal tooth pits, buckles, and inside-out Beringia:
Quaternary Science Reviews v.20, p. 549-574.
Graham, R., 1986, Taxonomy of North American mammoths, in Frison, G., Todd, R.,
eds., The Colby mammoth site: University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque,
New Mexico, p. 165-169.
Greiner, J.J., 1978, Erosion and Sedimentation by Water in Texas: Texas Department
of Water Resources, USCS, Report 268.
Grun, R., Abeyratne, M., Head, J., Tuniz, C., and Hedges, R.E.M., 1997, AMS 14C
analysis of teeth from archaeological sites showing anomalous ESR dating
results: Quaternary Science Reviews, v. 16, n. 3, p. 437-444.
Haury, E.W., 1953, Artifacts with mammoths remains, Naco, Arizona, I: discovery of
The Naco mammoth and the associated projectile points: American Antiquity,
v. 19, p. 1-14.
Hay, O., 1924, The Pleistocene of the middle region of North America and its vertebrated
Animals: Carnegie Institute, Washington Publication. v, 322, p. 1-385.
Haynes, G., 1985, On Watering Holes, Mineral Licks, Death, and Predation, in
J. Mead and D. Meltzer (Eds.), Environment and Extinctions: Man in Late Glacial
North America: Center for the Study of Early Man, Orona, Maine, p. 53-71.
Haynes, G., 1988, Mass Deaths and Serial Predation: Comparative Taphonomic Studies
of Modern Large Mammal Death Sites, Journal of Archaeological Science,
no. 15, p. 219-235.
Haynes, G., 1991, Mammoths, mastodonts, and elephants: biology, behavior, and the
Fossil record: Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, England, 413 p.

131
Haynes, G., 1992, The Waco Mammoths: Possible Clues to Herd Size, Demography,
and Reproductive Health. Pp. 111, in J.W. Fox, C.B. Smith, and
K.T. Wilkins, (Eds.), Proboscidean and Paleoindian Interactions: Baylor
University Press, Waco, Texas, 233p.
Heinrich, P.V., 1985, Sedimentology at the Waco Mammoth Site: Manuscript, Strecker
Museum, Baylor University, Waco, Texas, 16 p.
Hilliard, L.K., 1997, Late Quaternary Geology of the Waco Mammoth Site, Waco,
Texas: unpublished Baylor University Bachelor of Science thesis, Waco, Texas,
61p.
Holen, S.R., 2006, Taphonomy of two last glacial maximum mammoth sites in the
Central Great Plains of North America: A preliminary report on La Sena
and Lovewell: Quaternary International, v. 142-143, p. 30-43.
Holliday, V.T., Haynes, V.C., Hofman, J.L., and Meltzer, D.J., 1994, Geoarchaeology
and Geochronology of the Maimi (Clovis) Site, Southern High Plains of Texas:
Quaternary Research, v. 41, p. 234-244.
Hoppe, K.A., 2004, Late Pleistocene mammoth herd structure, migration patterns,
and Clovis hunting strategies inferred from isotopic analysis of multiple
death assemblages: Paleobiology, v.30, n.1, p. 129-145.
Jain, M., Murray, A.S., Bøtter-Jensen, L., 2003, Characterization of blue-light stimulated
luminescence components in different quartz samples: implications for dose
measurements: Radiation Measurements, v. 37, p. 411–449.
Koch, P.L., K.A. Hoppe, and S.D. Webb, 1998, The isotopic ecology of late
Pleistocene mammals in North America Part 1. Florida: Chemical
Geology, v. 152, p. 119-138.
Koch, P.L., N.S. Diffenbaugh, K.A. Hoppe, 2004, The effects of late Quaternary
Climate and pCO2 change on C4 plant abundance in the south-central
United States: Paleogeography, Paleoclimatology, Paleoecology, v. 207,
p. 331-357.
Kochel, R.C., and Baker, V.R., 1988, Paleoflood analysis using slackwater deposits, in
Baker, V.R., Kochel, R.C., and Patton, P.C. (Eds.), Flood Geomorphology: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, p. 357-376.
Kochel, R.C., 1988, Extending stream records with slackwater paleoflood hydrology:
Examples from West Texas, in Baker, V.R., Kochel, R.C., and Patton, P.C. (Eds.),
Flood Geomorphology: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York., p. 377-391.

132
Kurten, B., Anderson, E., 1980, Pleistocene mammals of North America: Columbia
University Press, New York, 442 p.
Loke, M.H., and Barker, R.D., 1996, Rapid least-square inversion of apparent resistivity
pseudosections by quasi-Newton method: Geophysical Prospecting, v. 44, p. 131152.
Loke, M.H, 2000, Electrical imaging surveys for environmental and engineering studies:
available at: http://www.georentals.co.uk/Lokenote.pdf (accessed January 20,
2007, verified February 5, 2007).
Loke M. H., Acworth, I., and Dahlin, T., 2003, A comparison of smooth and blocky
inversion methods in 2D electrical imaging surveys: Exploration Geophysics,
v. 34, p. 182-187.
Lowe J.J., and Walker M.J.C., 1997, Reconstructing Quaternary Environments, 2nd
Edition: Longman, London. 446 pp.
Lundelius, E.L., 1972, Fossil vertebrates from the Late Pleistocene Ingleside fauna, San
Patricio County, Texas: University of Texas Bureau of Economic Geology,
Rept. Inv. 77, p. 1-74.
Lundelius, E.L., 1992, Quaternary Paleofaunas of the Southwest. Pp. 35, in J.W. Fox,
C.B. Smith, and K.T. Wilkins, (Eds.), Proboscidean and Paleoindian Interactions:
Baylor University Press, Waco, Texas, 233p.
Maglio, V.J., 1973, Origin and evolution of the Elephantidae: Transactions of the
American Philosophical Society, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, New series, v. 63, n.
3, p. 1-149.
Marean, C.W., and Ehrhardt, C., 1995, Paleoanthropological and paleoecological
implications of the taphonomy of a sabertooth’s den: Journal of Human
Evolution, v. 29, p. 515-547.
Martinson, D.G., Pisias, N.G., Hays, J.D., Imbrie, J., Moore, T.C., and Shackleton,
N.J., 1987, Age dating and the orbital theory of the ice ages: Development of a
high-resolution 0 to 300 000-year chronostratigraphy: Quaternary Research, v. 27,
p. 1–29.
McDonald, Gregory, 2005, Personal Communication, National Park Service,
Fort Collins, Colorado.
McGrew, P.O., 1961, The Rawlins mammoth: Wyoming Geological Association Annual
Field Conference Guidebook, v. 16, p. 315-317.

133
McKinney, C.R., 1991, The Determination of the Reliability of Uranium Series Dating
Of Enamel, Dentine, and Bone: Unpublished Southern Methodist University
Doctor of Philosophy Dissertation, Dallas, Texas, 186 p.
Murry, A.S., Olley, J.M., 2002, Precision and Accuracy in the Optically Stimulated
Luminescence Dating of Sedimentary Quartz: A Status Review,
Geochronometria, v. 21, p. 1-16.
Naryshkin, G.F., 1981, The Significance of the Waco Mammoth Site To Central Texas
Pleistocene History: unpublished Baylor University Bachelor of Science thesis,
Waco, Texas, 59 p.
Nelson, D.W., Sommers, L.E., 1982, Total Carbon, Organic Carbon, and Organic
Matter, in Page, A.L., Miller, R.H., Keenley, D.R., (Eds.), Methods of Soil
Analysis, Part 2. Chemical and Microbiological Properties: Agronomy, 2nd
Edition, n. 9, p. 539-577.
Nordt, L.C., Boutton, T.W., Hallmark, C.T., and Waters, M.R., 1994, Late Quaternary
vegetation and climate changes in Central Texas based on the isotopic
composition of organic carbon: Quaternary Research, v. 41, p. 109-120.
Nordt, L.C., Hallmark, C.T., Wilding, L.P., and Boutton, T.W., 1998, Quantifying
pedogenic carbonate accumulations using stable carbon isotopes: Geoderma v. 82,
p. 115-136.
Nordt, L.C., 2001, Stable Carbon and Oxygen Isotopes in Soils, in Goldberg, P.,
Holliday, V.T., Ferring, R.C., (Eds.), Earth Sciences and Archaeology: Kluwer
Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York, 514 p.
Nordt, L.C., Boutton, T.W., Mandel, R., and Jacob, J.S. 2002, C4 Plant Productivity
and Climate-CO2 Variations in the Southern Great Plains During the Late
Quaternary: Quaternary Research, v. 58, p. 182-188.
Nordt, L., von Fischer, J., and Tieszen, L. 2007, Late Quaternary temperature record
from buried soils of the North American Great Plains: Geology, v. 35, p. 159-162.
O’Connor, J.E., and Webb, R.H., 1988, Hydraulic modeling for paleoflood analysis, in
Baker, V.R., Kochel, R.C., and Patton, P.C. (Eds.), Flood Geomorphology: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York., p. 403-418..
Olayinka, A.I. and Yaramanci, U., 2000, Use of block inversion in the 2-D interpretation
of apparent resistivity data and its comparison with smooth inversion: Journal of
Applied Geophysics, v. 45, p. 63-81.

134
Olley, J.M., Caitcheon, G.G., and Roberts, R.G., 1999, The origin of dose distributions in
fluvial sediments, and the prospect of dating single grains from fluvial deposits
using optically stimulated luminescence: Radiation Measurements, v. 30, p. 207217.
Osborn, H.F., 1922, Species of American Pleistocene Mammoths, Elephas jeffersonii,
New Species: American Museum of Natural History, Novitates, New York, n. 41,
p. 1-16.
Osborn, H.F., 1942, Proboscidea: A Monograph of the Diversity, Evolution, Migration,
and Extinction of the Mastodons and Elephants of the World: Volume II.
Stegodontoidea and Elephantoidea: The American Museum of Natural History,
New York.
Osella A., de la Vega, M., and Lascano, E., 2005, 3D electrical imaging of an
archaeological site using electrical and electromagnetic method: Geophysics, v. 4,
p. 101-107.
Papadopoulos N. G., Tsourlos, P., Tsokas, G.N., and Sarris, A., 2006, Two-dimensional
and three-dimensional resistivity imaging in archaeological site investigation:
Archaeological Prospection, v. 13, p. 163–181.
Paruleo, J.M., and Lauenroth, W.K., 1996, Relative abundance of plant functional types
in grasslands and shrublands of North America: Ecological Applications, v. 6,
p. 1212-1224.
Prescott, J.R. and Hutton, J.T., 1994, Cosmic ray contributions to dose rates for
luminescence and ESR dating: large depths and long-term time variations:
Radiation Measurements, v. 23, p. 497-500.
Proctor, Jr., C.V., McGowen, J.H., Haenggi, W.T., and Barnes, V.E., 1970, Geologic
Atlas of Texas, Waco Sheet (reprented 1998): Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas, Austin, Texas.
Ruddiman, W.F., 2001, Earth’s Climate Past and Future: W.H. Freeman and Company,
New York, New York, p. 465.
Saunders, J., 1990, Immanence, configuration, and the discovery of America’s past, in
Agenbroad, L.D., Mead, J. I., Nelson, L., (Eds.), Megafauna And Man: The
Mammoth site of Hot Springs, South Dakota, Inc., Hot Springs, p. 136-143.
Scollar, I., Tabbagh, A., Hesse, A., Herzog, I., Arvidson, R. E., and Rycroft, M.J., 1990,
Archaeological Prospecting and Remote Sensing: Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, England, 692 p.

135
Scott, K.M., and Gravlee, Jr., G.C., 1968, Flood surge on the Rubicon River, CaliforniaHydrology, hydraulics, and boulder transport: U.S. Geological Survey
Professional Paper 422-M, Reston, Virginia, M1-M38.
Sellards, E.H., 1952, Early man in America: a study in prehistory: The University of
Texas Press, Austin, Texas, 211 p.
Sellards, E.H., Adkins, W.S., Plummer, F.B., 1981, The Geology of Texas: Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas, p. 1007.
Shroba, R.R., Schmidt, P.W., Crosby, E.J., Hensen, W.R., and Soule, J.M., 1979,
Geologic and geomorphic effects in the Big Thompson Canyon area, Larimer
County, Colorado: U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper, v. 1115B,
p. 87-152.
Singhvi, A.K., Sharma, Y.P. and Agrawal, D.P., 1982, Thermoluminescence dating of
dune sands in Rajasthan, India: Nature, v. 295, p. 313-315.
Soil Survey Division Staff, 1993, Soil Survey Manual, U.S. Department of Agriculture
Handbook No. 18: Washington D.C., U.S. Government Printing Press.
Spencer, J.M., 1966, Urban Geology of Greater Waco Part III: Water: Baylor Geological
Studies Bull., n. 10, p. 49.
Strickland, S.S., 1988, Site Formation Processes at the Waco Mammoth Site: a
thanatocose and its implications: Manuscript, Division of Anthropology,
Baylor University, Waco, Texas, 14 p.
Suhm, R., 1978, Preliminary investigation of the La Paloma mammoth site (Late
Pleistocene), Kenedy County, Texas: TAIUS, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, v. 11, n. 1, p. 13-36.
Tharp, T.L., 1988, Aspects of Leon River Drainage History with Implications to Other
Central Texas Streams: unpublished Baylor University Bachelor of Science thesis,
Waco, Texas, 260 p.
USACE, 2006, HEC RAS 4.0 Beta Flow Analysis: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
http://www.hec.usace.army.mil/.
USDA-NRCS, 2001, Soil Survey of McLennan County, Texas, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, in cooperation with
Texas Agriculture Experimental Station.
USDA-NRCS, 2007, NCSS Web Soil Survey,
http://websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/.

136
USGS-NWIS, 2007, Peak stream flow data from North Bosque River at Valley Mills,
Texas: site number USGS 8095200: National Water Information System, U.S.
Geological Survey, accessed 2007, http://waterdata.usgs.gov/nwis/sw.
Vuichard, D., and Zimmerman, M., 1986, The Langmoche flash flood, Khumb Himal,
Nepal: Mountain Research and Development, v. 6, n. 1, p. 90-93.
Wallinga, J., Murray, A.S., Duller, G.A.T., and Tōrnqvist, T.E., 2001, Testing optically
stimulated luminescence dating of sand-size quartz and feldspar from fluvial
deposits: Earth and Planetary Science Letters, v. 193, p. 617-630.
Wallinga, J., 2002, Optically stimulated luminescence dating of fluvial deposits: a
review: Boreas, v. 31, n. 4, p. 303-322.
Waters, R.M., L.C. Nordt, 1995, Late Quaternary Floodplain History of the Brazos
River in East-Central Texas: Quaternary Research, v. 43, p. 311-319.
Weir, G.H., 1978, Preliminary investigation of the La Paloma mammoth site (Late
Pleistocene), Kenedy County, Texas: TAIUS, Texas A&M University,
College Station, Texas, v. 11, n. 1, p. 15-36.
Wintle, A.G., and Murray, A.S., 2006, A review of quartz optically stimulated
luminescence characteristics and their relevance in single-aliquot regeneration
dating protocols: Radiation Measurements, v. 41, p. 369-391.
Wohl, E.E., 1999, Incised Bedrock Channels in Darby, S.E., and Simon, A., (Eds.),
Incised River Channels: Processes, Forms, Engineering and Management:
Wiley & Sons Ltd., West Sussex, England, 452 p.
Wyckoff, D.G., Carter, B.J., Flynn, P., Martin, L.D., Branson, B.A., and Theler, J.L.,
1992, Interdisciplinary Studies of the Hajny Mammoth Site, Dewey County,
Oklahoma: Studies of Oklahoma’s Past, Oklahoma Archeological Survey,
The University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma, n. 17, 134 p.
Yelderman, J.C., and Cervenka, R.E., 1992, Environmental atlas of McLennan County:
Baylor Geological Studies Bull, Dept. of Geology, Baylor
University, Waco, Texas, . n. 13/14, 19 p.
Zhang, J.F., Zhou, L.P., and Yue, S.Y., 2003, Dating fluvial sediments by optically
stimulated luminescence: selection of equivalent doses for age calculation:
Quaternary Science Reviews, v. 22, p. 1123-1129.

