Bulletin of the

EXAS
RCHEOLOGICAL
QCJETY Volume 79/2008
Timothy K. Perttula, Editor
Chester P. Walker, Assistant Editor

Published by

at Austin
2008

CONTENTS
AFRICAN AMERICAN ARCHEOLOGY IN TEXAS
Introduction: Starting the Dialog on African American Archeology in Texas
Rachel Feit . .................................................................. 1
Africans in American Material Culture:
Does a Pot Hanger Only Function When it Is Used for Cooking?
Kenneth L. Brown . ............................................................. 3
Contextualizing Material Culture:
Some Thoughts on an African American Community in Houston's4th Ward
in the early 20th Century
Rachel Feit and Bradford M. Jones ............................................... 19
Urban Archeology and the Pressures of Gentrification: Claiming, Naming,
and Negotiating "Freedom" in Freedmen's Town, Houston
Carol McDavid, David Brunei; and Robert Marcom . ................................. 37
In the Neighborhood: City Planning, Heritage Politics, and Archeology
at the St. Paul United Methodist Church in Dallas, Texas
Jodi Skipper . ................................................................ 53
Archeological and Historical Investigation and Descendant Community Outreach
on an African American Graveyard: The Case of Bull Hill Cemetery, Falls County, Texas
Nedra Lee and Jim Bruseth ..................................................... 69
Buffalo Soldiers and Apaches in the Guadalupe Mountains:
A Review of Research at Pine Springs Camp
Eleanor King and Justin Dunnavant .............................................. 87
African American Oral History and Archeology: Perceptional Politics, Political Practice
Fred L. J\1cGhee . ............................................................. 95

GEOPHYSICAL INVESTIGATIONS ON TEXAS ARCHEOLOGICAL SITES
Using Near-surface Geophysical Survey, Excavation, and Soil Coring
to Investigate Prehistoric Rockshelter Sites and Historic Cemeteries at Fort Hood, Texas
Duane Simpson ............................................................. l 07
A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido:
Implications for the Pithouse to Pueblo Transition in the Jornada Mogollon
Eileen G. Ernemvein ......................................................... 125
Geophysical Investigations at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site:
Approaching Large-Scale Evaluation of Historic Sites and Public Use Areas
Jennie 0. Sturm . ............................................................ 147
Geophysical Investigations on Caddo Sites in East Texas and Surrounding States
Chester P. Walker and Timothy K. Perttula ................................ ........ 159
Geophysical Survey of the Mound B Area at the George C. Davis Site
Darrell Creel, Dale Hudle1; Samuel Wilson, Chester Walker, and T Clay Schultz .......... 177
Magnetometer Investigations at the George C. Davis site, a Prehistoric Caddo Village
Tiffany Osburn, James Bruseth, and William Pierson ........................ ........ 191
Osteological Evidence of Prehistoric and Historic Scalping in Texas
Kerri R. Wilhelm and Matthew S. Taylor .................................. ........ 201

lll

Introduction: Starting the Dialog on African
American Archeology in Texas
Rachel Feit

This series of articles on African American
archeology comes out of a meeting held the summer
of2007 between some of the state's historical archeologists who study African American history, members of the Texas Historical Commission (THC),
and a representative from the Texas Department of
Transportation. The meeting was held to discuss
why it is that African American archeology seems
to have had so little attention within the broader
field of archeology in Texas. Why in fact, are there
so few African American historical sites in Texas
listed on the National Register of Historic Places
(NRHP), and why, in the context of Cultural Resource Management (CRM), do African American
sites consistently fail to meet the THC's eligibility
criteria for testing and data recovery projects? The
issue is important not just in terms of archeological
research, but also important with respect to social
justice. When African American history and archeology is devalued, not only are the sites themselves
endangered, but so too is the opportunity to enrich
the narrative about African Americans, their contributions, their struggles, and the ways in which race
and class have shaped the trajectory of history.
Although many viewpoints were expressed
in the meeting, what emerged in the end was a
general consensus that African American sites in
Texas, intentionally or unintentionally, have been
paid quite a bit less attention than other types of
sites, especially over the past 10 years. This almost
certainly can be attributed to unstated biases among
historians and archeologists who consciously or
unconsciously privilege certain types of history,
such as Spanish Colonial or Texas Revolution era
history, over the history that African Americans
care about. Among the African American sites that
have been excavated, the resulting reports are often
formulaic, and lack informed critical dialog with the
growing body of literature on race, class, ethnicity,
and the complex way in which these forces ascribe
meaning to material culture (examples of reports

that dealt with African American sites or that have
African American components that were barely
noticed include Feit et al. [2003], Wright [1997],
and Foster and Nance [2002]). Such sites have
been investigated for compliance purposes as part
of CRM projects, and very often the investigators
themselves have only a rudimentary understanding
of, or experience with African American history and
archeology. Consequently, the concept of race, as a
critical starting point, often becomes a secondary or
even tertiary consideration in these studies. Finally,
even among the African American sites that have
been investigated in Texas, it is often difficult to
obtain the site reports; rarely do reports on African
American sites in Texas ever get disseminated to
broader audiences in forums such as the Texas
Archeological Society's annual conference, the
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, or other
journals that the majority of archeologists in Texas
read. Is it any wonder then, that African American
archeology has such a low profile in Texas?
These articles have been collected to provide
some much-needed context. Readers will notice,
and many will wonder why it is, that so few of
these papers actually deal with archeological data
in the more traditional sense. In fact, the authors
of several of these articles have not conducted any
actual archeological excavations at the sites they
discuss. I believe that there are several reasons
for this. The first reason goes back to the original
issue: assembling current archeological research
on African American sites in Texas proves challenging mainly because so few African American
archeological sites have been studied with any rigor
in recent years. The second reason is attributable
to the specific pathways the field has followed.
African American archeology is by definition interdisciplinary, relying on a broad range of interpretive
tools. It incorporates not just the standard arsenal
of artifact and feature analyses used in material
culture studies, but ideas from history, sociology,

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

2

Texas Archeological Society

historiography, heritage studies, and anthropology.
One of the most critical aspects of African American
archeology, and one that in some ways supersedes
even fieldwork, is engagement with descendant
communities. In their articles, Skipper, McDavid
et al., and Lee and Bruseth argue that it is essential
for archeologists working on African American
sites to seek community input. It is largely to these
descendant communities that the African American
past belongs, and research must be understood with
reference to the things that are important to them. As
Brown and McGhee both point out in their articles,
before archeological excavations can even begin, the
archeologist must understand something about the
context in which they are working.
Each of these articles in the first part of this
volume urge the archeologist to think critically about
race, about the role it plays in creating distinctive
forms of identity, and in so doing, the way it forges
a set of attitudes, beliefs, and lifeways that differ
from those of white America. They are intended
not only to begin to develop a baseline for thinking
about African American archeological sites in Texas,
but also to provide guidance to better formulate
relevant research frameworks for dealing with them.

More importantly, they invite the reader to think
imaginatively about his or her assumptions and what
it means for sites to be culturally significant in the
context of typical NRHP or State Archeological
Landmark criteria.

REFERENCES CITED
Feit, R., J. K. Karbula, J. W. Clark, and S. C. Caran
2003 Boarding Houses Barrooms and Brothels- Life in a Vice
District: Archeological Investigations of a Changing
Urban Neighborhood in Austin, Texas. Archeology
Series No. 104. Hicks & Company, Austin.
Foster, E, and L. Nance
2002 Archeological Investigation Report Allen Parkway
Village, 41HR886, Houston, Harris County, Texas.
PBS&J, Austin.
Wright, K.G.
1997 Volume II. Excavations and Artifact Distribution
Analysis. In Archaeology At the Alamodome: Investigations of a San Antonio Neighborhood in Transition,
edited by A. Fox, M. Renner, and R. Hard. Archaeological Survey Report No. 237. Center for Archaeological Research, University of Texas, San Antonio

Africans in American Material Culture:
Does a Pot Hanger Only Function When
Is Used for Cooking?
Kenneth L. Brown

ABSTRACT
Defining the ethnicity and/or race from the archeological record of a site has long been a problem for
archeologists. Perhaps nowhere has this been more of a problem than in the study of African American sites. I
discuss several problems with the way that archeologists have attempted to address this issue: the use of what
amount to stereotypes to test ethnicity/race, the use of functional classification systems, and the need for tight
provenience control. These problems will be illustrated through the use of data derived from the Levi Jordan
Plantation's Slave and Tenant Quarters.

INTRODUCTION
One of the many problems facing archeologists
interested is the question of how to define ethnicity
and/or race within the archeological record. Indeed,
one basic text in historical archeology presents the
problem in these terms: "For all its study by historical archaeologists, the correlation between ethnicity
and material culture remains poorly understood"
(Orser 2004:251). On the question of race, Orser
(2004:255) believes that "ethnicity and race are closely
intertwined, and both present formidable challenges
for historical archaeologists. Both social elements
are difficult, and sometimes well nigh impossible,
to identify in the archaeological record." This is
becoming an increasingly important problem in
the study of the African American past where the
question of how ethnicity and/or race are defined
on the basis of archeological research has proven
to be elusive (Otto 1984; Michie 1990; Ferguson
1992; Farnsworth 1993; Carlson 1995; Stine et al.
1996). The difficulty appears to arise from several
methodological issues involved in the practice of
historical archeology. The issues to be examined
within this article include: the elevation of stereotypical behavior to test questions related to the ethnic/racial make-up of a site's occupants; the use of
functional classification systems; and the derivation
of ethnographic analogies for the behavior of ethnic
and/or racial groups. These issues will be discussed

in relation to their impact on the knowledge that has
been gained concerning the African American past
from the excavation of archeological sites utilized by
Africans and African Americans in Texas. Despite
vast differences in the scale of the investigations, I
will illustrate these issues through a discussion of
archeological investigation of two sites from Texas:
the Peterson Farmstead located in Brazos County
(Carlson 1995) and the Levi Jordan Plantation Quarters located in Brazoria County (Brown 1994, 2001,
2003, 2005a, 2005b; Brown et al. 2006; Brown and
Cooper 1990; Fennell 2007). The results of excavation into the Jordan Quarters will then be employed
to argue for change in the approach taken in the
archeological study of ethnicity/race.

FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATIONS
AND PROBLEMS WITH THE
ARCHEOLOGICAL STUDY OF
THE AFRICAN AMERICAN PAST
For historical archeologists, the definition of
ethnicity and/or the racial composition of a site's
occupants have often involved a methodology that
explicitly links beliefs held concerning a group's
stereotypical behavior and the archeological record
obtained for a site. Such a methodology has been
employed in archeological attempts to define the
presence of Africans and African Americans on sites

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

4

Texas Archeological Society

within the New World. For example, following a
methodology suggested by Farnsworth ( 1993) for the
definition of various ethnic groups, Carlson (1995)
stated that one of the goals of the investigation
of the Ned Peterson Farmstead was an attempt to
confirm the historically based definition that the
members of the Ned Peterson family were African
Americans through the archeological record derived
from the investigation of the site. To Carlson, one of
the mechanisms for such a definition based on the
archeological record might be the interpretation of
the data in the following manner:
Whereas Asian sites have large quantities of distinctive ceramics present, Irish
sites have been found to have higher
percentages of liquor, bitters, and patent medicine bottles, while German
sites have higher percentages of wine
bottles (Farnsworth 1993:9-10). African
American sites could be identified in a
similar way if certain classes of artifacts
are found to be present in unusually high
quantities (Carlson 1995:6).
Indeed, Carlson's problem with defining the
Peterson family as African American employing just
the archeological record stemmed from the observation that distinctive artifact frequencies for African
Americans were not found during the excavation of
this histmic farmstead. It was the historical record that
revealed the race of those who produced the site, not
the archeology. Thus, Carlson (1995:21) concluded
that: "ethnic vs. economic variables are difficult
to distinguish without the complement of historical
documents or oral traditions," as she failed to identify
miifact frequencies that could be tied to stereotypical
beliefs about African Americans. As a result, the race
of the site's occupants, the definition of which was
one of the questions the archeological resem·ch was
intended to address, is believed to be invisible within
the archeological record of the site.
Farnsworth and Carlson suggest that differences
in the frequency of one or more artifact classes
might be utilized to determine African American
sites. While specific artifact classes that might be
employed in this manner are, again, left unstated,
based on the examples cited by Carlson from Farnsworth, it would appem· that these classes might be
derived from stereotypes related to African Americans. In his analysis of the artifacts collected from
10 sites in the Richland Creek area in north Texas,
Saunders (1982) suggests that assemblages from

African American sites had a lower frequency of
a variety of artifact classes, including undecorated
ceramics and stonewares. Indeed, the same can be
said for the Jordan Quarters.
Other attempts to find Africans and African
Americans in the archeological record are studies
that have focused on artifact form (Otto 1984). Otto
( 1984) argued that African American occupation on
Cannon's Point Plantation resulted in a high ratio of
bowls to plates within the m-cheological record. This,
he states, was the result of African Americans maintaining traditional African foodways that included
the consumption of soups and stews, thus requiring
a higher frequency of bowls. This could also explain
the higher frequency of low quality meat within
their diet, as opposed to the planter and overseers
on the plantation. The African Americans did not
obtain cuts of meat that could be roasted, nor would
their work schedule permit such a luxury. Otto suggested that if African Americans were maintaining
traditional West African consumption patterns in
the New World, then the ratio of bowls to plates
might be employed to define African American occupations on sites. Unfortunately, this ratio has not
been found consistently on African American sites
(Adams 1987; Brown and Cooper 1990), and Farnsworth ( l 993) actually argues that sites occupied by
members of other ethnic groups might also exhibit
this ratio. Carlson (1995:7) suggests:
While these differences are related to both
diet and economy, it would be reasonable
to assume that similar patterns may be
distinguished on African American sites.
A higher ratio of bowls to plates is indicative of more economic meals, such as
stew and soup, which might be expected
on rural African American sites such as
41BZ115 [the Peterson Farmstead].
How would this be different from what might
be expected on sites occupied by economically
disadvantaged European Americans? Carlson's
(1995:21) answer, based on the Peterson Farmstead
data, appears to beg the question with her statement
that ethnic and economic variables are difficult to
distinguish without the use of historical documents
and/or oral traditions.
The final hypothesis Carlson raises for the
archeological definition of an African American
presence on a site is that the proportions of
"functional groups" of artifacts will differ in
a fashion that is "ethnically distinctive." This

Brown-Africans in American Material Culture
hypothesis also comes from Farnsworth (1993).
Unlike the other hypotheses, Carlson does not
provide actual examples of ethnic identity based on
frequency differences in functional groups defined
from her excavation. However, Carlson (1995:7)
does hypothesize: "oral histories, using Sprague's
(I 981) functional categories as a framework, may
be the only way to identify distinctively ethnic
functions of particular artifacts."
In this article I argue that part of the problem
of identifying ethnicity that is confronting archeologists actually stems from their employment of functional groups in their analysis of artifacts recovered
from sites occupied by Africans and African Americans. Certainly one of the goals of this article is to
suggest that rising stereotypes to this level does not
do justice to the past nor to the role of archeology
in the interpretation of that past.

THE PROBLEMS ASSOCIATED
WITH THE METHODOLOGY
EMPLOYED TO DEFINE
ETHNICITY/RACE
The argument that is raised here is that the difficulty being experienced in the archeological definitions of the ethnicity and/or race of a site's occupants
exists for at least two major reasons, both of which
are problems in the methodologies that have generally
been employed by historical archeologists. The first
reason concerns the continued and widespread use of
classification systems that employ, in an a priori fashion, the defined function of individual artifacts (South
1977; Sprague 1981; Farnsworth 1992, 1993; Carlson
1995). The central belief behind the employment of
these types of classification systems is the belief in
the principal that artifacts employed in the historic
past can be classified with their function in the past
actually assigned by the archeologist conducting the
research. In these cases, the assignment of an artifact
to a functional class is based on the archeologist's
own knowledge of that function. Thus, for example,
Sprague (1981 :252) argues that:
In the system proposed here, each artifact
is placed in a particular functional category and described in the context of that
category ... any classification, especially
a functional one, imposes the culture of
the researcher upon the body of data.
However, in most 19th and 20th century

5

sites, I have found this to be far less of a
problem than utilizing a material based
classification.
Is the point of archeological research to discover
the knowledge base of the archeologist directing
the analysis of artifacts and to be convenient for the
archeologist, or is it the discovery of beliefs and
behaviors of the individuals who helped to produce
the site from which the artifacts have been recovered? Employing such a classification system, as is
generally the case in historical archeology today, has
contributed to the failure to be able to define the ethnicity and/or race of the peoples who produced the
sites excavated because it precludes the discovery of
new or different functions and/or meanings (Brown
and Cooper 1990; Brown 2005a). This failure is either a direct result of the employment of functionally
based classification systems, or the fact that there
are few practicing African American archeologists
who might possess a "better knowledge base" for
how their ancestors employed and thought about the
material items they utilized. I would suggest that the
former is the more significant problem in the interpretation of archeological data, although the latter
is clearly an issue that must be dealt with.
In establishing the catalogue systems for the
Jordan Plantation materials, it was believed that the
problems of defining ethnicity and behavior stemmed
more from the use of these functional systems rather
than being a product of the archeological record. I
continue to believe that the full archeological context
of the artifacts must be employed in the definition of
function, not simply our knowledge of how material
items were used and what they meant. Indeed,
Sprague clearly implies the importance of context
for the determination of function and meaning;
however, he appears not to call for its systematic
use. For example, Sprague (1981 :256-257) notes
that a horseshoe can be placed into his "domestic
ritual," "household pastimes," and "agricultural
and husbandry" classes. Presumably, the placement
into the appropriate functional class is in some way
dependant on the context of the particular horseshoe
that is being classified. I have personal knowledge of
horseshoes being employed in at least three more of
Sprague's functional classes: "culinary" (as a trivet),
"home education, information, and business" (as a
paper weight), and "domestic safety" (an effective
deterrent to aggression when thrown properly).
If context is employed to determine the function
of any particular horseshoe recovered from a site,

6

Texas Archeological Society

then the use of functional classes is unnecessary
given the limited personal knowledge of any
individual archeologist, and its use only permits
archeologists to find themselves in the past. Further,
as is illustrated by the horseshoe example, material
items can simultaneously have both a function and
a meaning for those who employed them, while
a functional classification system really cannot
address meaning apart from the assigned function.
I have always thought that the goal of archeological
research was to attempt to determine these aspects of
material items for those who utilized the object.
The reuse of objects after their initial service
creates another major problem for functional classification systems, due to the observation that reuse
cannot be recognized and/or interpreted when such
systems are employed. Functional classification
systems may bring out an archeologist's knowledge
of 19th and early 20th century material culture, but
such a system does not necessarily permit identification of African American uses, functions, and/
or meanings, and, therefore, all but precludes the
reconstruction of beliefs and behaviors. If this argument is followed to its logical conclusion, then only
those steeped in the belief and behavioral systems
of the African American past can possibly conduct
research into that past. This belief is both scientifically unacceptable and it still does not permit a reconstruction of the African American past. When the
interpretation of function, use, and meaning is based
upon an archeologist's supposed knowledge, even
if it is based on known cultural traditions, whether
the archeologist is black or white, the result is nothing more than a re-statement of that archeologist's
knowledge. Indeed, one of the earliest publications
related to our excavations within the Jordan Quarters (Brown and Cooper 1990) set the tone for our
position on the nature of the definition of function
within the archeological record of African American
sites. Despite the changes in the nature of the project
that have occurred since that time, in fact, likely
because of those changes, I continue to believe that
the questions of function, use, and meaning of artifacts must be derived from the archeological context
from which the artifacts were recovered, and not be
defined by the classification system.
Thus, the accession catalogue system developed
for the Jordan Plantation investigation is organized
first by the material the artifact is made of (e.g., ceramics, glass, metal), then by some attribute of that
material (e.g., color of glass, type of metal), and finally
by the name generally assigned to the object (e.g.,

button, needle, buckle). This eliminates classifying
the artifacts according to "kitchen artifact group," "architectural group," or "clothing group," as is generally
the case with functional systems. It is believed that the
patterns we are looking for in the artifacts (based on
distribution and types) actually represent something of
the behaviors and beliefs practiced by the individuals,
rather than broad categories that encompass a very
wide variety of beliefs and behaviors.
This issue can be illustrated by employing
Michie's (1990) study of the Richmond Hill Plantation as an example. Michie noted that within the
area of one of the excavated structures (the so-called
Driver's house), nearly 46 percent of the liquor
bottles had originally held wine. Lower status slave
house assemblages, he noted, only had 26 percent of
this type of bottle. In this fashion, he believed he had
demonstrated status variation between individuals
residing within the enslaved community based upon
their consumption of alcoholic beverages.
However, Michie also commented that Magill
(the plantation owner) fostered belief in Christianity
within the enslaved community at Richmond Hill,
including teaching some slaves to read the Bible.
Ethnographic research that has been conducted
among the Gullah of coastal South Carolina, the
location of Richmond Hill, has demonstrated the
central importance of the praise house in Gullah
communities beginning in the 1830s (Woofter 1978;
Creel 1988; Guthrie 1996). One of the important
activities can-ied out within a praise house concerns
political decision-making and the calling of ancestors into the process. This calling involves the "pouring oflibations" to the cardinal directions while calling out the names of the ancestors at the beginning
of the political meeting. Queen Quet, Chieftess of
the Gullah/Geechee Nation, employs a whelk shell
or a reused wine bottle in conducting this activity.
Further, Creel (1988) identified the location of the
praise house as the "first house on the street." This
is a location that is identical to that of the Driver's
house excavated by Michie. Excavations at both the
Frogmore Manor Quarters (located approximately
110 miles down the coast from Richmond Hill)
and the Jordan Plantation Quarters have concluded
that green bottle glass (Michie's wine bottles) were
important components of a number of ritual assemblages, including within the Jordan Quarters community's praise house/church and within both communities' Conjurer's cabins. Had Michie analyzed
the bottles in a fashion that looked for behavior other
than them simply holding an alcoholic beverage, he

Brown-Africans in American Material Culture
might have provided important new information on
the culture of enslaved people. Instead, he developed
the hypothesis that enslaved people drank less high
quality alcohol than did their owner.

EXCAVATION STRATEGIES
AND PROBLEMS WITH THE
ARCHEOLOGICAL DEFINITION
AND STUDY OF THE AFRICAN
AMERICAN PAST
Leland Ferguson (personal communication,
2000) once asked if I had sold my soul to the Devil
for the Jordan Quarters site. Even Maria Franklin
(1998) has stated that the Jordan Quarters have created a pronounced case of "site envy" among historical archeologists interested in the African American
past. What both Ferguson and Franklin are reflecting
is the more generally held view that the richness of
interpretations that are still being developed from
the archeological record of the Jordan Quarters site
are the result of the site's "unique" deposits, not the
methodology employed during the research. I would
contend that while the site is incredibly rich as a
result of the sudden abandonment of the site, it is,
in fact, the excavation methods employed that have
permitted the interpretations. This belief is based on
the fact that three other Quarters sites from South
Carolina, Georgia, and Louisiana, all of which are
much more of the "typical" plantation Quarters site,
have yielded similarly rich interpretations as a result
of the nearly identical excavation methods employed
(Brown 2001, 2004, 2005a, 2005b, 2005c, 2008;
Brown et al. 2006).
Indeed, the discovery of the "abandonment
zone" within the Jordan Quarters required a major
reworking of the methods initially employed in the
recovery of artifacts. The use of 5 x 5 ft. units, and
the removal of artifacts within the 25 ft. 2 of each
provenience unit, was simply too destructive of the
artifact contexts and general associations that had
been preserved within the archeological deposits.
Some mechanism had to be developed in order to
limit this destruction. Several options were devised,
discussed, and, in most cases, discarded prior to the
second field season at Jordan. For example, one option was to plot the exact location of each artifact.
However, given the potential for discovering literally
thousands of artifacts per level, and the equipment
requirements for this type of investigation, this was
clearly not feasible.

7

Another option that was suggested was to
can-y out the excavation employing the techniques
suggested by Harris (1989), and called the Harris
Matrix. That is, the excavation would proceed
through the clearing of large contiguous areas of
the site by soil zone. Such a technique would permit
the viewing of artifacts and features associated
with each specific depositional strata defined as
composing the site. The use of a grid for horizontal
provenience control and the excavation of these
squares by stratigraphic level would permit the
recovery of associated artifacts and/or features. Any
and all artifact and/or feature associations would be
exposed, recorded, and recovered by stratigraphic
and/or depositional unit. According to Harris,
this approach would permit the accurate temporal
association of features and artifacts across the site,
thus permitting the interpretation of behaviors and
beliefs from those associated artifacts and features.
Such techniques would eliminate the use of the
arbitrary levels that had been employed during the
initial excavation of the site, in favor of the removal
of complete strata.
However, as Harris points out, the technique
requires that each of the strata can be defined and
discriminated on the site. This presented a problem
in the excavation of the Quarters Community. As
noted by Cooper ( 1989), the abandonment zone was
defined only by the size, density, and association of
artifacts as well as the presence of complete artifacts
that would be expected to have been taken with the
occupants when they moved out of the cabin, and
not as a discrete and definable soil depositional
unit. The soil that comprised the abandonment zone
was identical to that of the underlying "sub-floor"
zone. Thus, the determination of the abandonment
zone from the sub-floor zone was based upon the
artifacts present, rather than any soil change that
could be determined within the field. As it turned
out, while a number of cabins lacked evidence of
an abandonment zone, the sub-floor zone was always present and was defined by the presence of a
large number of artifacts. Excavation employing a
strict Harris Matrix methodology appeared to have
the problem of permitting the potential mixing of
artifacts, features, and associations from two very
different zones. Clearly, the use of arbitrary levels
had exactly the same shortcoming. However, it was
felt that the continued use of very shallow level
depths, as well as "natural" strata where they could
be defined, might help to keep some of the internal
stratigraphy intact during excavation.

8

Texas Archeological Society

Although there was a need to rapidly record as
much of the contextual information as possible in
order to determine the nature of this abandonment
zone, as a result of beginning this excavation with
5 x 5 ft. units, it was felt that the standard unit size
could not be altered. However, it was determined
that the standard units could be divided into smaller
"subunits" during excavation. That is, immediately
prior to excavating through the brick rubble layer,
each of these standard units could be divided into
25 1 x 1 ft. subunits. This new methodology would
permit the recording of highly specific provenience
information while also permitting excavation to be
conducted. Each of these "subunits" was assigned
a number from one to 25 as well as the actual grid
location for its northwest corner. Thus, the number
was set by a subunit's location within the larger,
standard unit, and these numbers were repeated
within each standard unit. Each subunit could also
be located east and north of the grid system's zero
point, thus providing each subunit across the site
with a unique, spatially-determined, identification.
This system was designed to build redundancy into
the record keeping as the site was excavated and the
materials analyzed over the course of the project.
Unless the stratigraphy encountered with each
unit suggested otherwise, the standard level depth
became 0.1 ft. once a standard 5 x 5 ft. unit had been
placed into subunits. If a soil change became evident
during the excavation of a level within each subunit,
then the interface was cleaned across the subunit and
the level was then terminated at that point. Excavation of the subunit would then continue with a new
level assignment. This modified arbitrary level procedure was maintained throughout the excavation of
both the second and third artifact-bearing zones.
There can be no question that the "abandonment
deposit" discovered within a number of the cabins
within the Jordan Quarters is currently a unique deposit. This deposit has provided literally hundreds of
thousands of artifacts that help to form the basis of
interpretations and reconstructions of the beliefs and
behaviors practiced by members of that community.
However, it is equally the case that the methodology
developed and executed for the excavation of this
"zone" has provided the artifact contexts that led to
the interpretations and reconstructions of the belief
and behavioral systems employed by the members
of this community. Russell (1997:63) notes that the
Jordan project represents the "best-known example"
of an attempt "to identify archaeological contexts
and assemblages that represent religious behavior

on the part of enslaved African Americans." Within
Russell's study of the proposed range of ritual objects employed by enslaved people at the Hermitage
in Nashville, Tennessee, his comparative focus is
primarily on the conjurer's kit, and he is not alone
(Fennell 2003, 2007). However, in nearly every case,
these deposits contained "everyday" artifacts such as
ceramic sherds, glass fragments, burned bone, ash
and charcoal, buttons, and other types of "general
midden" materials. Of the more than 600,000 artifacts recovered from the Jordan Quarters, only one
possible African artifact was recovered: a ring that
may have been made of ebony wood. Essentially all
of the artifacts recovered were European American,
but the use of very fine provenience control techniques permitted the recovery of this material in a
fashion that suggested that "special" meanings had
been attached to their deposition on the site. These
meanings were assigned from the belief systems
of the African Americans who resided within the
cabins and helped to create the deposits beneath
the floors.
The methodology permits the retrieval of artifacts and the recording of associations from very
tight contexts, although in a fashion that is much
slower than more traditional methods. Indeed, during the excavation process I often reflected that
glaciers have moved more rapidly than the excavations. However, given the large number of artifacts
expected on historic period residential sites, the
methodology has proven to be faster than attempting
to plot each artifact individually. The benefit of this
methodology is that when the data derived from its
use are analyzed and combined with ethnographic
data and oral testimony, the result can be highly
specific contextual interpretations. Formulating and
testing hypotheses concerning the belief and behavioral systems developed and employed by African
Americans requires that archeologically derived data
be collected in highly controlled contexts.

AN EXAMPLE FROM THE JORDAN
PRAISE HOUSE/CHURCH
However, it was the methodology employed at
the Jordan Quarters site that provided the basis for the
wealth of interpretation that has been possible, not
the unique nature of the deposit. The demonstration
for this assertion is that where this use of subunits and
shallow levels has been attempted on two "normal"
sites (sites without the so-called abandonment

Brown-Africans in American Material Culture

9

zone), strikingly similar results to the
Jordan Quarters have been obtained
N
(Brown 2001, 2005a, 2008). BaKongo
cosmograms have been defined on artifacts
associated with African Americans at a
few sites located across the slaveholding
South from South Carolina (Ferguson
1992, 1999), Virginia (Franklin 1997),
Kentucky (Young 1997), and Texas (Brown
1994; Fennell 2003, 2007). Prior to the
discovery of a set of deposits that together
comprise a cosmogram at Jordan (Brown
1994, 2001, 2003), these symbols were
known only from a few portable objects.
While these portable artifacts have been
significant in developing interpretations
of the creolization processes that led to
the formation of African American culture
(Ferguson 1992), they were defined as
early and, apparently, temporary African
cultural manifestations that were rapidly
replaced in that development.
Patterns interpreted from the artifacts,
artifact contexts, and features recovered
Figure 1. Plan map showing the location of the sub-floor features that
during the excavation of cabin I-A-1 at
have been interpreted as having been associated with the function of
Jordan demonstrate that major differences
cabin I-A-1 as a church/praise house (from Brown 2005a: 105).
in the function of, and activities carried
out within, this cabin occurred during its
history of use. The "new" function and activities
deposits, the directions mentioned will be from the
made the cabin unlike any of the other cabins tested.
"jeweled" cross, as it appears to be at the center,
These patterns include: (1) that the cabin was not
or the "crossroads," of the features and/or artifact
abandoned after primarily functioning as a dwellassociations interpreted as having formed two
ing; (2) that its function changed from a residence
connected cosmogram symbols. The so-called
(and possible praise meeting location) to a praise
cosmograms are connected at the western featurethe brick altar deposit (Figure 2).
house/school/community center, with the back room
To the east of the cross two deposits were
functioning as a residence; and (3) that a number of
major ritual deposits were placed below the floor
discovered that can be interpreted within the
of the reconstructed cabin which served to sanctify
cosmogram model. Nearest the cross was the
the space (Figure l). These ritual deposits have led
deposit that included a sharp, heavy "hunting" knife
to a reconstruction of the role played by African
placed into a rectangular hole beneath four bricks.
Americans in the processes operating in the formaThree of these bricks formed a cross that had been
tion and evolution of African American culture. It
constructed on top of the fourth brick. The fourth
is clear that for the Quarters community members,
brick covered the knife. The knife had been placed
the activities associated with the main room of the
into the hole pointing toward the cross. This feature
cabin shifted from private to primarily public; and
was discovered approximately 2.5 ft. east of the
from domestic and, possibly, religious, to religious,
cross and 3.5 ft. west of a well preserved plaster
political, social, and educational.
sculpture. The knife deposit has been interpreted to
Analyses conducted on the deposits excavated
symbolize the passage of individuals from childhood
to adulthood and their obtaining membership within
from below the floor space of cabin I-A-1 appear to
support an interpretation that they can be directly
the praise house. Creel (1988) has demonstrated that
linked to the cosmogram model (Brown 2003).
for the Gullah of the South Carolina Low country,
In the following discussion of the cosmogram
membership within a community's praise house was

~

10

Texas Archeological Society

the most important aspect of the sculpture is the
fact that the two items are depicted as a cross,
not an identification of the items themselves. As
Thompson (1983: 108) states: "The Kongo cross
refers therefore to the everlasting continuity of
all righteous men and women" (italics in the
original). The location of the sculpture near
the doorway into the reconfigured main room
may have been important because as Wyatt
MacGaffey has stated, "the person taking the
oath stands upon the cross, situating himself
between life and death, and invokes the
judgment of God and the dead upon himself'
(cited in Thompson 1983: 108). The two layers
of crushed brick that had been placed over the
sculpture protected it from destruction caused
by moisture, roots, burrowing animals, and other
environmental factors.
Two deposits were discovered to the
n011h of the cross. Nearest to the cross was the
"charm" deposit, including a 1858 half-dollar.
The date of 1858 is at least interesting in this
light, since it is the date found on seven of the
eight coins that comprise the northern deposit
Figure 2. A diagram of the two "cosrnograms" placed below the
of the cosmogram placed beneath the Conjurer/
floor of cabin I-A-1.
Midwife's cabin (Brown 1994, 2005a, 2005b).
The half-dollar was located approximately 2.5
ft. north of the cross, while the charm deposit was
not automatic. It was only granted to members of
a plantation community once they had completed
located 4 ft. to the north. The northern point of a cosa "seekin" process within that specific community
mogram relates to power within this world and life
(Guthrie 1996; Bailey 2000). Creel goes on to equate
(Fry 1990; Ferguson 1992; Wahlman 2001; Brown
the seeking process with the ritual involved in the
1994, 2001, 2005a, 2005b). Therefore, it may seem
initiation of children into secret societies among
incongruous that a charm might have been placed as
numerous West African cultures. At the conclusion
a northern deposit of a cosmogram below the floor
of the ritual of initiation, the child is defined as
of a praise house. However, it should be noted that
having been reborn into his/her community as an
during the 1800s, conjuring was an important health
adult. Scarification is often included within these
care activity, especially within the African American
initiation rites for both males (Poro) and females
community. Conjuring was as much a pai1 of the
(Sande). Thus, the knife placed within this deposit
spirituality of African Americans as Christianity
may be a symbolic statement related to this rebirth
was. Conjuring was not originally conceived of as
of individuals into the status of adult community
a competing religious system, but as representing a
members, religiously and politically tied to the
complementary system for the conjuror's "control"
community through the praise house (Brown 2001,
and manipulation of the world around them. For
2005a, 2005b).
example, a major slave revolt planned in CharlesThe second eastern feature was the plaster
ton, South Carolina, in 1822 by Denmark Vesey (a
sculpture, located near the east wall of the cabin. The
class leader in the AME Church) and "Gullah" Jack
sculpture was created on the bottom of a shallow pit
Pritchard (a conjurer) shows the close connection
dug into the soil near the likely location of the doorway
between the systems (Pearson 1999).
into the cabin. The sculpture consists of two crossed
The second northern deposit was located 11 ft.
staffs or swords with hook-like projections from
north of the cross, near the northeastern comer of
the cabin (see Figure 2), and appears to have been
the handles. As yet, no matching symbol has been
identified for this sculpture. However, what may be
another plaster sculpture. Like the eastern plaster

\

Brown-Africans in American 1l1aterial Culture
sculpture, the north one had been created within a
hole dug through the artifact deposit and into the
sterile subsoil, and capped with a lens of broken
bricks and "brick dust." However, unlike the eastern one, this plaster sculpture had been created on
a base of fired clay. Unfortunately, the combination
of the fired clay base and the incomplete capping
of the sculpture led to the destruction of the actual
sculpture. The plaster had become heavily eroded
through the action of ground water and plant roots
that were attracted to the pooling water. That the
plaster originally formed a sculpture is based upon
the uneven surface of the fired clay and the suggestion of a design on the southern portion of the fired
clay. With only the plaster remaining and little or
nothing of the design, no meaning can be discerned
for this feature. However, one aspect of the feature
may be interpreted from the presence of the heavily
fired clay surface on which the plaster was laid. Red
(the fired clay) and white (the plaster) are extremely
powerful colors, often employed in West African and
Cuban religious settings (Thompson 1993); fire is
considered both powerful and of the world of the
living (Brown n.d.).
One deposit was identified to the west of the
cross: the "altar" and its associated artifacts (see
Figure 2). The "altar" consisted of a cube, roughly
1 ft. on a side, made of bricks mortared together.
The feature was placed immediately in front of the
center point of the original hearth for cabin I-A-1.
Thus, the bricks could have functioned in the support of the floorboards once the hearth was removed,
and indeed they likely did just that. However, the
bricks' association with a very high frequency of
artifacts, including many large and complete metal
objects, suggests that it also had another function:
as an altar symbolizing the transition from the
world of the living to the world of the dead. Like
the western cosmogram deposit in the Conjurer/
Midwife's cabin, this one contained numerous
complete metal objects. In fact, this is the only area
within the cabin where many complete artifacts have
been found. These artifacts include: a very heavy
cast iron chisel plow; three kitchen knives, two of
which had been placed on the altar; square nails
and spikes; a pair of scissors; a copper disk; several
large fragments of the wall of a cast iron kettle; the
male part of a large cast iron hinge; and several large
pieces of unidentifiable metal artifacts. Personal
items recovered from the area of the altar include
both blue and amber beads, plain and decorated
china buttons, two Union military buttons, and two

11

coins. The two coins are an 1858 half-dime and a
perforated 1835 half-clime. Again, seven of the eight
coins found within the northern cosmogram deposit
in the Conjurer/Midwife's cabin were minted in
1858 while the other appears to have been minted
in 1853. Thus, the dated coins from this deposit are
either the same (1858) or contain the same numbers
(1835/1853). The presence of the metal in both
western deposits can be related to the transition in a
person's life from living to dead (Brown 2001, n.d.).
Extending southeast from the brick altar, a number
of ocean shells were incorporated within the artifact
deposit, including a very large oyster shell and two
drilled cockleshells. Shell is almost non-existent in
the northern portion of this feature. Given that the
passage to the world of the dead is often conceived
of as passing under water, this is an interesting and
potentially significant distribution.
Within both Christianity and the traditional beliefs of many West African cultures, this transition is
of critical importance to each and every individual.
In the practice of traditional West African religions
and Christianity, there are specific practitioners
who help direct and guide one's life as well as the
transition from the world of the living to that of the
dead. It is perhaps significant that the place at which
the two hypothesized cosmograms placed below the
floor of the praise house meet is this western deposit. Ensuring the best possible outcome from this
personal transition is one of the roles of religious
leaders in Christianity and West African religious
practices, and is in the best interests of both the individual involved and the members of the community.
Spirits were an active part of the world of the living
for members of the Jordan community; thus, the
transition to death and to life within the spirit world
was of critical importance to the living as well as the
dying (Brown 1994, 2001, n.d).
Another interesting aspect of the northern
"charn1" deposit and the western altar deposit is that
they are connected to one another by a semi-circular
band of relatively dense domestic and personal objects. Artifact types defined within this connecting
band included: bone, china, and metal buttons, a
heavily worn, perforated silver coin, glass beads, ceramic sherds, cast iron vessel fragments, glass sherds,
bone, chicken eggshell, and metal can fragments. The
soil containing these artifacts also included a very
high frequency of ash and charcoal. While this deposit
could be simply an anomaly, its shape, location between the two points of the so-called cosmogram, and
the extremely high artifact frequencies, suggest that

12

Texas Archeological Society

it is not. The suggestion is that it was intentionally
into the ground around the walls of the reconstructed
placed in order to illustrate the connection between
hearth, and extending outward a distance of nearly
the type of life led as an adult, praise house, and com1 ft. While ash and charcoal tend to increase in fremunity member, and an adult's transition to the world
quency as one approaches the hearth in each of the
of the dead (Brown n.d).
cabins investigated at Jordan, this represents the only
There were two deposits encountered to the
time that a special hole had been dug around a hearth,
to hold such material. Thus, this feature represents
south of the cross: an ash, charcoal, shell, and metal
feature, and the ash and artifact deposit placed on
only the second known instance where charcoal,
three sides of the reconstructed hearth. The first of
ash, and small household artifacts were intentionally
these deposits is located approximately 2.75 ft. south
deposited, as opposed to having simply accumulated.
The other similar deposit was found within this cabin
of the cross. In this location a nearly rectangular
as well, to the north of the cross connecting the charrn
hole, in all ways identical to holes enclosing the
knife deposit to the east and the charm deposit to the
deposit with the brick altar. Along the eastern edge
north, was discovered. The hole contained the same
of this ash deposit Barnes (1999:73) noted: "the poscoarse ashy sand that was found in the southern
sible deliberate placement of three complete scapula
cosmogram deposit in the Conjurer/Midwife's
bones (horizontal), and three green glass wine bottle
cabin. Also removed from the hole were a few
bases (upside down), in a line extending across the
burned shells and heavily corroded, possibly burned,
front of the hearth, almost symmetrical to the hearth."
The pot hanger was discovered on the northeastern
square nails and spikes.
corner of this feature. The "legs" of this pot hanger
The pits dug to help contain the east, north, and
south deposits nearest to the cross were oriented
had been crossed over one another to form an "X,"
in the same direction: a 45° angle to the cardinal
reminiscent of the eastern plaster sculpture, or posdirections. Thus, they were approximately 10-12°
sibly a fish shape similar to the Christian symbol (Figoff of the orientation of the walls of the cabin and
ure 3). Two large, badly c01Toded and upside down
the post hole features that appear to have held the
cast iron kettle bases had been deposited along with
floor joists in position. While this may appear to be
the scapulae, bottle bases, and crossed pot hanger:
a minor variation from the orientation of the cabin
one disk on an extension of the ash lens northward
walls, it is almost identical to the orientation of the
from the northeast corner of the hearth, and the other
larger cosmogram deposits. This similarity supports
disk over the southeastern corner of this ash deposit.
the hypothesis that all eight of these
features (including the cross) were
related and deposited at the same
time. Again, the stratigraphy of the
cabin suggests that this was shortly
after its original construction in the
early 1850s.
The second southern feature
was a thick deposit of ash, charcoal,
and artifacts that appeared to have
been intentionally placed around the
northern, eastern, and southern walls
of the reconstructed hearth. Incorporated within the ashy matrix of this
feature were bones, small ceramic
sherds, small glass sherds, whole as
well as broken buttons, glass beads,
fragments of hair combs, broken jewelry, burned shell, broken and burned
bone fragments, a pot hanger bent in
Figure 3. The "pot hanger" found within the ritual context related to the
the shape of a fish, and square nails.
Christian Church within the Jordan Quarters. Does it represent cooking
This material had been placed into a
equipment, or does the context permit a very different interpretation of its
intended meaning at the time of its deposition?
hole dug approximately 0.4 to 0.5 ft.

Brown-Africans in American Material Culture
Upside down cast iron kettles are historically known
to have been employed to deaden the noise created
during religious ceremonies conducted in brush arbors and cabins (Raboteau 1978; Johnson 1996). It
is possible that these upside down kettle bases were
intended to symbolically recreate some of the brush
arbor practices, and to demonstrate the "ownership"
of the religious beliefs and practices utilized within
the praise house (Brown n.d).
While cabin I-A-2 is not part of this article, the
nment reconstruction of the location of the wall
that divided the back room of cabin I-A-1 from
I-A-2, places the southern upside down kettle base
within cabin I-A-2. This suggests that there was a
functional link between the two cabins, at least in
a symbolic fashion. A flywhisk, a necklace with
fighting cock spur pendants, at least two coins with
diamond shapes cut through them, the ebony ring,
and other "African" items were all excavated from
cabin I-A-2. The brick with the cosmogram raised
on one of its surfaces was discovered closely associated with cabin I-A-2 as well (Brown 1994, 2001,
n.d). These artifacts further support a functional and
ritual connection between the occupants of cabin
I-A-2 and the praise house.
It is possible to interpret the meaning of the
intentional ash/charcoal/artifact deposit that was
placed on two sides of the reconstructed hearth
within the ethnographic model of the cosmogram.
Employing the model, this ash deposit appears to
represent the southern point of the cycle oflife (e.g.,
the height of a person's power in the world of spirits
and ancestors) and the "female nature" possessed
by all individuals (Thompson 1983; Fry 1990;
Wahlman 2001; Brown 1994, 2001, n.d.). Within
traditional West African societies, one of the many
roles filled by a woman is cooking for herself, her
family (however that is defined), and her household.
Thus, the placement of this deposit adjacent to a
hearth may symbolize death and/or passage into
the world of spirits and ancestors as well as femaleness (Brown 2001, n.d.). The placement of this ash
deposit is similar to that of the southern ash deposit
identified within the Curer/Midwife's cabin (Brown
1994, 2001, n.d.), as they were placed either within
the hearth (Curer/Midwife) or immediately adjacent
to it (praise house back room).
However, within the setting of the Jordan Plantation Quaiiers community, two ash/charcoal/artifact
features appear to have had another meaning, and
one that has not been identified within the cosmogram model as it has been defined and employed by

13

archeologists and folklorists (Ferguson 1992, 1999;
Ruppel et al. 2003). These two features include: the
lens placed around two sides of the reconstructed
hearth, and the nearly identical ash/charcoal/artifact
feature that connects the eastern (knife), northern
(Chaim), and western (Altar) deposits around the
cross (see Figures 1 and 2). This potential additional
meaning is suggested by major differences in the
content of these ritual deposits in comparison to the
ash features associated with the so-called cosmogram
deposits beneath the Curer/Midwife's cabin and the
small hole filled with ash placed to the south of the
cross under the praise house (Brown 2003). That is,
the ash/charcoal/artifact feature that was placed on
two sides of the reconstructed hearth contained small
and sometimes burned pieces of ceramics, glass, and
bone. Certainly, these materials might be expected to
accumulate around a hearth from normal activities
such as cooking; however, the ritual nature of this
deposit has been hypothesized from the presence
of the two upside down kettle bases, the crossed
pot hanger, the pig scapulae, the wine bottle bases,
the knife, and the axe head that had been arranged
along the eastern and northern edges of this lens.
In contrast, the two other ash features contain only
the coarse lime-based ash, with small fragments
of burned shell and a few heavily corroded square
nails and spikes. Little or no charcoal was observed
in these deposits. The ash and charcoal deposit associated with the area of the reconstructed hearth
consisted of a very different "soil" matrix than was
observed in the other two ash features defined as
southern points of the sub-floor cosmograms
The ash, charcoal, and burned household
artifacts intentionally deposited around the reconstructed hearth have been interpreted in two ways:
first, they may have served as a mechanism for
demonstrating membership in, and dedication to
the needs and dictates of, the praise house by households within the community; and second, they may
represent the power of the community's ancestors
or the community of ancestors. Both Creel (1988)
and Guthrie ( 1996) have argued that the praise house
functioned as the center of community religious
and political activities for Gullah and Geechee
communities. Guthrie (1996) points out that for the
historically known Gullah, communities tended to
be defined and named based upon antebellum plantation boundaries. She notes that such plantationbased communities consisted of a variable number
of households, and that the Gullah and Geechee
tended to define a household in physical terms. That

14

Texas Archeological Society

is, a household was a dwelling that included a stove
or fireplace used for cooking by its members. Under this definition, more than a single family could
be contained within any given household, because
where a family cooked determined whether it was
defined as a household or a component of a household. A family was defined as a household only if it
occupied a structure that had its own stove/fireplace
on which they cooked their meals:
A dwelling does not constitute a household unless its occupants possess and
utilize their own separate stove for cooking. Though gas and electric stoves have
long since replaced fireplaces, it is still
the cooking of meals on the premises
that denotes a household within a dwelling .. .It is conceivable that one dwelling
could shelter more than one household
unit if the dwelling contained a separate
stove or fireplace for each unit (Guthrie
1996:42).
Further, Creel (1988) notes the importance of
the community as a central organizing principle
within traditional West African societies, and this
importance was calTied over to the culture developed
within plantation quarters in the New World. It was
the community that formed the main "kin network"
for the enslaved. The community raised people
when parents or spouses were sold off, ran off, or
died. Thus, the praise house became the social,
religious, and political center for the community,
and the plantation equivalent of the secret societies
of West African cultures (Creel 1988; Brown 2004,
n.d.). Households, therefore, formed the basic organizational level for West African cultures as well
as enslaved communities in the New World. That
organizational principle may be what was symbolized by the intentional deposition of household
debris and ash around the hearth. The ritual nature
of this deposit and its location suggest that it was
intended as a dedication. The dedication was to the
community through the physical structure of the
praise house. Thus, if this belief was similar to that
held by members of the Jordan Quarters community,
then the deliberate deposition of ash, charcoal, and
small, often burned domestic artifacts, may have
served as a declaration of support for the functions
of the praise house/church.
Alternatively, this deposit may signify and/or
memorialize the community of ancestors within the
spirit world. This second interpretation appears to

be more in line with the use of this identical ash/
charcoal/artifact matrix associated with the Charm
and the Altar features noted to the north and west of
the "jeweled" cross (see below). Further, this interpretation would also be a better fit based upon the
other so-called cosmogram deposits that have thus
far been defined, for example: the plaster Sankofalike sculpture as the southern deposit in a set of
"cosmogram" deposits identified below the floor
space of the historically known praise house of the
Richmond Hill Plantation in Georgia (Brown 2003).
Meanings for the Sankofa-like symbol include: "go
back to fetch it," and "go back to the past in order to
build for the future" (Willis 1998: 188-89). Further,
the southern deposit noted in the Brice House kitchen
and laundry consisted of a cache of feathers (Ruppel
et al. 2003). Wills (1988:189) noted that theAkan of
West Africa utilize the sankofa bird to represent this
symbol in their artwork. A sankofa bird is" ... either
taking something off its tail, searching through its tail
feathers, or grooming itself." Thus, the use of feathers in the Brice House deposit may also represent an
attempt to symbolize the community of ancestors
and/or the community's ancestors within the world
of spirits.
In many ways the artifacts deposited within
the ash/charcoal/artifact feature associated with the
reconstructed hearth mirror the "soil" matrix that
appears to connect the northern "charm" deposit
with the "altar" deposit, and may be reflective of a
very similar meaning. As has been noted, the feature
associated with the reconstructed hearth had been
placed into a trench dug for the purpose. However,
the identical "soil" matrix that was uncovered to the
nmth of the cross, beginning at a point just east of the
Charm deposit (directly north of the cross), extending to include the brick Altar, and ending at a point
just to the southeast of the Altar feature, was placed
directly on the surface of the ground beneath the
floorboards. Further, the ash/charcoal/artifact soil matrix comp1ised the fill of the hole dug to hold most of
the Charm feature's artifacts. Within the cosmogram
model, such a placement may be interpreted as suggesting that the strength and power of any individual
is based upon, and derived from, the community.
Thus, both times this matrix was encountered
during the excavation of cabin I-A-1, it was not
simply associated with ritually placed features.
Rather, the matrix itself was an integral, possibly
even a defining, element of those features. While
this does not necessarily constitute a "scientificallybased" test of the meaning and function of the ash/

Brown-Africans in American Material Culture
charcoal/artifact soil matrix as ritually identifying
and symbolizing the community and its strength,
it can at least support the hypothesis that "discrete
clusters of meaningful yet everyday objects ... created sacred, protected, and magic space" (Ruppel et
al. 2003:327). For many West African cultures, and
the Gullah and Geechee, the community represents
the central political, economic, social, and religious
authority for its members (Creel 1988). Certainly, as
the cases connected with the hypothesized abandonment of the Jordan Quarters community suggest,
justice came from within the community, not from
the surrounding political authorities.
In the Jordan Quarters excavations, these important West African religious symbols were identified
as sets of deposits oriented to the cardinal directions,
and placed below the floors of the Praise House and
the conjurer/midwife's cabins. However, excavations undertaken utilizing subunits and 0.1 ft. levels
at Frogmore Manor Plantation, St. Helena Island,
Beaufort County, South Carolina, and Richmond
Hill Plantation, Bryan County, Georgia, resulted
in the recovery of sets of ritual deposits originally
interpreted as representing the BaKongo cosmogram
associated with individual structures at each of the
sites (Brown 2001, 2003, n.d.). Further, the methodology defined individual pier and beam structures
at both sites, as well as the street and cabin yards at
Frogmore Manor.

SOME CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
When cabin I-A-1 was constructed at the Jordan Quarters, it was typical of the others within
the same block in terms of size and its residential
function. However, at some point during its use,
the cabin was physically altered and its function
changed. The alterations included: moving the
hearth, lengthening the main room, placing a door
in the interior wall to the back residential room,
and sanctifying the floor space of the altered cabin
through the placement of at least eight ritually significant deposits. The contents of these deposits,
along with the higher than normal presence of slate
board and pencil fragments, buttons (especially
high quality buttons), and jewelry, combined with
the very low frequency of domestic artifacts and
tools, supports the hypothesis that the function of
the main room was that of a praise house/church,
later adding the function of school (Brown and
Brown 1998; Barnes 1999; Brown 2001, n.d.). In

15

attempting to interpret the reconstructed cabin's
function, the character of the archeological deposit
was tested against Creel's (1988) ethnographic
description of Gullah praise houses. While Creel
does not include any discussion of the material
items and/or artifact contexts associated with such
a structure, a number of test implications were developed, tested, and accepted (Brown 2001, 2003,
2004, 2005b, n.d.).
Currently, the identification of the BaKongo religious tradition, often "discovered" in the forn1 of the
cosmogram, has become an important "force" in the
interpretation of the development of African American culture (Ferguson 1992, 1999; Franklin 1997;
Young 1997; Galke 2000; Wilkie 2001). However,
Fennell (2003: 19) has presented a compelling case
demonstrating the need for archeologists to provide:
multiple lines of supporting evidence to
establish that the site was inhabited by
persons likely to have been enculturated
in BaKongo beliefs .... Archaeologists
should proceed with similar care when
interpreting crossed lines inscribed upon
artifacts as representing expressions of
the BaKongo cosmogram.
Crossed lines, Fennell (2003: 19) notes, could
be "the product of other European American or
African American beliefs." Indeed, crossed lines,
whether displayed on portable artifacts or as altar
features placed into the ground beneath structures,
may be indicative of other West African cultures as
well (Stuckey 1987; Gundaker 1998; Fennell 2003;
Brown n.d.). The evidence from the Jordan Quarters
community's praise house deposits, as well as the
similar altar features noted from other sites, support
this "multivocal" adaptation.
The artifact features, the altars, placed below
the floor of the praise house provide support for
the hypothesis concerning the structure's function
and meaning for the community's members. These
deposits also provide an important "view" into the
adaptive processes employed by people of African
descent in the integration of Christianity and diverse
African belief systems. Christianity was certainly
an integral part of the spiritual lives of the enslaved
and, later, emancipated residents of the Jordan
Quarters community, as was their spiritual heritage
from numerous West African cultures and traditions
developed by their enslaved ancestors. Cabin I-A-1
represents one of the physical locations where these
religious beliefs came together, both symbolically

16

Texas Archeological Society

and behaviorally, in the lives of the community's
members. In this context, the placement of the two
cosmograms suggests that within the beliefs held
by the community's members, their African cultural
heritage was a primary conditioning factor in the acceptance of Christianity, not the other way around.
While the two cardinal direction crosses share the
same western point, the African symbolism of the
larger cross clearly dominates and encompasses the
Christian. That the center, the crossroads, the larger
cardinal direction cross, was the eastern altar of the
Christian cross may signify the importance of the
individual within the setting of the overall community. This is a belief widely held by West African
cultures (Creel 1988). The artifacts and artifact
contexts created and left behind by the activities of
the Jordan Plantation Quarters community help to
demonstrate the strength and creativity of enslaved
and free peoples of African descent in their construction of African American culture (Mintz and Price
1992; Fennell 2003; Brown n.d.). This data clearly
demonstrate that peoples of African descent played
a far more important role in this creolization process
than has generally been ascribed to them (Morgan
1998), a role at least as important as the European
Americans who dominated their lives.
The excavation methodology and the cataloguing
systems employed during this work made it possible
for us to recognize features that consisted of small
"everyday" objects that had been deposited for reasons related to spiritual and political beliefs of the
members of the enslaved communities. They were
not defined by the use of "stereotypes" and assumed
artifact con-elates for those views of "other people."
If archeologists are serious in their claims of interest in studying different ethnic and/or racial groups
within past societies, then they will have to develop
methodologies that seek to define, as was attempted
here, those "groups" through their adaptation of the
dominant technology to their own beliefs and uses.

Barnes, M. K.
1999 Church and Community: An Archaeological Investigation at the Levi Jordan Plantation, Brazoria
County, Texas. Masters Thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of Houston.
Brown, K. L.
1994 Material culture and community structure: The slave
and tenant community at Levi Jordan's Plantation.
In Working Towmd Freedom: Slave Society and Domestic Economy in the American South, edited by L.
E. Hudson, pp. 95-118. The University of Rochester
Press, Rochester, New York.
2001

Intertwined Traditions: the Conjurer's Cabins and the
African American cemetery at the Jordan and Frogmore Plantations. In Places of Cultural Memory:
African Reflections on the American Landscape, pp.
99-114. U.S. Department of the Interior, National
Park Service, Washington, D.C.

2003

Spirits and Ancestors: Archaeology and the
Role of Peoples of African Descent in Adapting
Christianity. Invited paper presented at 10th Annual Deerfield-Wellesley Symposium in American
Culture entitled "African Cultures in the North
American Diaspora: An Interdisciplinary Symposium," Deerfield.

2004

Ethnographic Analogy, Archaeology, and the African
Diaspora: Perspectives from a Tenant Community.
Historical Archaeology 34(1):79-89.

2005a The Levi Jordan Plantation Historical Archaeological Research Design. Technical Report Series,
Volume #1, The Levi Jordan Plantation State Historic Site, Brazoria County, Texas. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Austin.
2005b The Archaeology of Cabin I-A-1: The Levi Jordan
Plantation Quarters Community's Praise Housel
Church. Technical Report Series, Volume #2, The
Levi Jordan Plantation State Historic Site, Brazoria
County, Texas. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Austin.
2005c A Proposed Research Design for Archaeological
Investigations at the Magnolia Plantation Quarters,
Cane River Creole National Historic Park, Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana. Proposal submitted to the
National Park Service.
n.d.

REFERENCES CITED
Adams, W. H.
1987 Historical Archaeology of Plantations at Kings Bay,
Camden Count); Georgia. Reports of Investigations
No. 5. Department of Anthropology, University of
Florida, Gainesville.
Bailey, C. W.
2000 God, Dr. Buzzard, and the Bolito Man. Random
House Books, New York.

Spirits and Ancestors: Archaeology of 19th Century
African American Spirituality. MS in preparation.

Brown, K. L. (editor)
2008 A Preliminary Report on the 2007 Excavations into
the Quarters Community of the Magnolia Plantation, Cane River Creole National Historical Park,
Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana. Prepared for the
National Park Service, Southeast Archaeological
Center, Tallahassee, Florida.

Brown-Africans in American Material Culture

17

Brown. K. N. and K. L. Brown
1998 Archaeology and Spirituality: The Conjurer/Midwife
and the Praise House/Church at the Levi Jordan Plantation. Paper presented at the 31st annual meeting of the
Society for Historical Archaeology, Atlanta, Georgia.

1999

Brown. K. L. and D. C. Cooper
1990 Structural Continuity in an African American Slave
and Tenant Community. Historical Archaeology
24(4):95-118.

Franklin, M.
1997 Out of Site, Out of Mind: The Archaeology of an
Enslaved Virginia Household, ca. 1740-1778. Ph.D.
Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The
University of California, Berkeley.

Brown, K. L., D. Heacock, and S. Ridge
2006 A Preliminary Report on the 2006 Excavations into
the Quarters Community of the Magnolia Plantation, Cane River Creole National Historical Park,
Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana. Prepared for the
National Park Service, Southeast Archaeological
Center. Tallahassee, Florida.

1998

Carlson, S. B. (editor)
1995 Afi·ican American Lifeways in East-Central Texas:
The Ned Peterson Farmstead (41BZll5), Brazos
County, Texas. Reports of Investigations No. 3.
Center for Environmental Archaeology, Texas A&M
University, College Station.
Cooper, D. C.
1989 The Archaeology of Abandonment at the Levi Jordan
Plantation. Masters Thesis. Department of Anthropology, University of Houston.
Creel, M. W.
1988 "A Peculiar People": Slave Religion and Community-Culture among the Gullahs. New York University
Press, New York.
Farnsworth, P.
1992 Comparative Analysis in Plantation Archaeology:
The Application of a Functional Classification. Paper
presented at the 25th annual meeting of the Society
for Historical Archaeology, Kingston, Jamaica.
1993

Ethnic Diversity and the "Dominant Cultural Tradition" in the Archaeological Record of the Late
Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries. Paper
presented at the 26th annual meeting of the Society
for American Archaeology.

Fennell, C. C.
2003 Group Identity, Individual Creativity, and Symbolic
Generation in a BaKongo Diaspora. International
Journal of Historical Archaeology 7(1):1-31.
2007

Crossroads and Cosmologies: Diasporas and Ethnogenesis in the New World. University Press of
Florida, Gainesville.

Ferguson, L.
1992 Uncommon Ground: Archaeology and Early African
America: 1650-1800. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

"The Cross as a Magic Sign": Marks on Eighteenthcentury Bowls from South Carolina. In "/, Too,
Am America": Archaeological Studies of Afi-ican
American Life, edited by T. A. Singleton, pp. 116-131.
University of Virginia Press, Charlottesville.

"Discussant." Symposium on the Levi Jordan Plantation, presented at the 31st annual meeting of the Society for Historical Archaeology, Atlanta, Georgia.

Fry, G-M.
1990 Stitchedfrom the Soul: Slave Quilts from the AnteBellum South. Dutton Studio Books, New York.
Galke, L. J.
2000 Did the Gods of Africa Die? A Re-examination of a
Carroll House Crystal Assemblage. North American
Archaeologist 21 ( 1):19-33.
Gundaker, G.
1998 Signs of Diaspora, Diaspora of Signs: Literacies.
Creolization, and Vernacular Practices in Aji·ican
America. Oxford University Press, New York.
Guthrie. P.
1996 Catching Sense: African American Communities on a
South Carolina Sea Island. Bergin and Garvey, New
York.
Harris. E. C.
1989 Principles of Archaeological Stratigraphy. 2nd Edition. Academic Press, San Diego.
Johnson, A.
1996 "Fray's House Spirit": The Institutional Structure
and Spiritual Core of an African American Folk
Tradition. In "Ain't Gonna Lay My 'Ligion Down":
African American Religion in the South, edited by A.
Johnson and P. Jersild, pp. 8-38. University of South
Carolina Press, Columbia.
Michie, J. L.
1990 Richmond Hill Plantation 1810-1868: The Discovery
ofAntebellum Life on a Waccamaw Rice Plantation.
The Reprint Company, Publishers, Spartanburg.
Mintz, S.W. and R. Price
1992 The Birth of African American Culture: An Anthropological Perspective. Beacon Press, Boston.
Morgan, P. D.
1998 Slave Counterpoint: Black Culture in the EighteenthCentury Chesapeake and Lowcountry. Omohundro
Institute of Early American History and Culture, The
University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

18

Texas Archeological Society

Orser, C. E., Jr.
2004 Historical Archaeology. HarperCollins College Publishers, New York.

Stine, L. F., M.A. Cabak, and M. D. Groover
l 996 Blue Beads as African American Cultural Symbols.
Historical Archaeology 30 (3):49-75.

Otto, J. S.
1984 Cannon's Point Plantation 1794-1860: Living Conditions and Status Patterns in the Old South. Academic
Press, New York.

Stuckey, S.
1987 Slave Culture: Nationalist Theory and the Foundations of Black America. Oxford University Press,
New York.

Pearson, E. A.
1999 Designs Against Charleston: The Trial Record of the
Denmark Vesey Slave Conspiracy of 1822. University
of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill.

Thompson, R. F.
1983 Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art
and Philosophy. Random House, New York.

Phaup, N. A.
2001 Cultural Modification of Buttons at the Levi Jordan
Plantation, Brazoria County, Texas. Masters Thesis,
Department of Anthropology, University of Houston.
Raboteau, A. J.
1978 Slave Religion: The "Invisible Institution" in the
Antebellum South. Oxford University Press, New
York.
Ruppel, T., J. Neuwirth, M. P. Leone, and G-M. Fry
2003 Hidden in View: African spiritual spaces in North
American landscapes. Antiquity 77:321-35.
Russell, A. E.
1997 Material Culture and African American Spirituality at the Hermitage. Historical Archaeology
31 (2):63-80.
Saunders, J.
1982 The material manifestations of social stratification
among tenant farming families. In Settlement (~f the
Prairie Margin: Archaeology of the Richland Creek
Reservoi1; Navarro and Freestone Counties, Texas,
1980-1981, edited by L. M. Raab. Archaeological
Monographs No. 1. Archaeology Research Program,
Southern Methodist University, Dallas.
South, S.
1977 Method and Theory in Historical Archaeology. Academic Press, New York.
Sprague, R.
1981 A Functional Classification for Artifacts from 19th
and 20th Century Historical Sites. North American
Archaeologist 2:251-261.

1993

Face of the Gods: Art and Altars of Africa and the
African Americas. The Museum for African Art, New
York, Presta! Publishing, Munich.

Wahlman, M. S.
2001 Signs and Symbols: African Images in Aji'ican
American Quilts. Revised Edition. Tinwood Books,
Atlanta.
Wilkie, L. A.
2001 Methodist Intentions and African Sensibilities: The
Victory of African Consumerism over Planter Paternalism at a Bahamian Plantation. In Island Lives:
Historical Archaeologies of the Caribbean, edited
by P. Farnsworth, pp. 272-300. The University of
Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
Willis. W. B.
1998 The Adinkra Dictionary: A Visual Primer on the
Language ofAdinkra. The Pyramid Complex, Washington, D.C.
Woofter, T. J.
1978 Black Yeomanry: Life on St. Helena Island. Octagon
Books, New York.
Young, A. L.
1997 Risk Management Strategies among African American Slaves at Locust Grove Plantation. International
Journal of Historical Archaeology 1(1):5-37.

Contextualizing Material Culture:
Some Thoughts on an African American Community
in Houston's 4th Ward in the early 20th Century
Rachel Feit and Bradford M. Jones

ABSTRACT
In the early 20th century, Houston's Freedmen's Town was one of the largest and most successful postbellum urban black communities in the country. Its success was due to strong African American investment that
helped build homes, churches, social institutions, and infrastructure in an area largely ignored by Houston's
city planners until the 1980s. This article explores how material culture reflects community commitment to
forging internal relationships that enabled Houston's Freedmen's Town to flourish in spite of institutional racism during the early 20th century. Recent archeological testing and research covering more than 10 city blocks
at the edge of Freedmen's Town considers how residents ai1iculated with others in their community, through
work, shared aesthetics, and even shared households. The investigations also raised intriguing questions about
how the black community intersected with other ethnic groups in Freedmen's Town, particularly Italians, who
opened grocery stores and settled in the area during the same period.

INTRODUCTION
In this article we address history, identity, and
social practice among African Americans in early
20th century Houston through an analysis of artifacts found over a 10 block area in Houston's 4th
Ward. In the summer and fall of 2005, Hicks &
Company archeologists undertook extensive testing in a portion of Houston's 4th Ward situated on
the western edge of the Freedmen's Town National
Historic District (Figure 1) (Feit and Jones 2007).
These excavations were undertaken on the behalf of the Houston Independent School District in
advance of the planned construction of the Gregory
Lincoln School. They were intended to investigate
the possibility of an unmarked African American
cemetery being located on the property as well
as to test the National Register of Historic Places
eligibility of archeological deposits associated with
the 19th and early 20th century occupations of the
neighborhood. While no evidence of a cemetery or
intact archeological deposits predating 1900 was
identified during the course of the excavations, the
investigations did document abundant features and
artifacts pertaining to early 20th century residential
and commercial land use. And while only a few

contexts contained intact material remains that had
not been overprinted by later 20th century land use,
the analysis of the artifacts from these few contexts
provided us with an opportunity to explore the intersection between materiality and identity in the recent
past. In so doing we began to formulate a number
of perspectives through which to approach future
investigations of 20th century African American
occupations in Houston's Freedmen's Town as well
as other parts of Texas.
Investigations covered 10 city blocks in downtown Houston and consisted of gradall trenching
followed by hand excavation of selected areas that
appeared to have intact archeological features. The
material remains were from contexts associated with
both the tenant and owner-occupied households and
businesses that existed in the neighborhood.
Time had not been kind to most of the
archeological deposits investigated in the project
area, where by 2002 all the houses and businesses
had been demolished in advance of the planned
construction of the new school. Over a century of
construction, reconstruction, and demolition had
seriously compromised most site deposits, resulting
in the mixing of different periods and often leaving
artifacts in what were at best secondary contexts.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

20

Texas Archeological Society

Figure I. Project location.

Aside from the remnants of structural elements such
as foundation piers of now demolished buildings,
only a trash pit feature from the 1920s, located
under what had been the home of the African
American Spillman family (Block 2, Lot 6), could
be considered a truly intact archeological context.
However, several trenches and excavation blocks in
the areas of tenant housing (Block 2, Lots 3 and 4),
the Richardson household (Block 4, Lot 5), and the
Starks/Jones households (Block 5, Lots 1-3) all had
sufficiently intact archeological deposits to provide
a window on the material culture associated with
the residents, all of whom were African Americans
(Figure 2). Although heavily mixed with architectural

debris, particularly nails, the majority of the artifacts
recovered during testing were not overly different
from those that one might encounter in any early
20th century urban site in Texas. Not surprisingly,
these urban residents were active participants in the
larger capitalist consumer society in which they
lived, and all the durable material goods present on
the site, such as ceramics and glass, were the mass
produced materials that were sold via catalogs and in
local shops in Houston and across the country. Thus
on the surface, the great social differences that we
know to have existed between peoples based on the
color of their skin or their line of descent, were not
immediately bespoken by the artifacts themselves.

Feit and Jones-Contextualizing Material Culture 21
Only after sustained analysis and reflection on the
assemblages associated with different historically
documented households, did we detect patterns
that reflected forms of social identity. Such analysis
required stepping beyond simple artifact description
and thinking through the historically-specific
context of the artifacts as more than mass-produced
commodities or functional objects.
Such a move is consonant with some broader
theoretical currents that have been emerging in the
discipline of archeology. Over the past few decades
under various theoretical banners, archeologists
investigating both the prehistoric and historic periods have increasingly moved beyond examining
artifacts as static objects that simply inform us
about subsistence, the level of evolution or complexity of a group, their traditions, or their function as emblematic symbols of identity, towards an
investigation of how objects are entangled in the
processes of the construction and negotiation of the
social identities through which people experience
the world (Meskell and Preucel 2004; Orser 2001,
2004, 2007). Such a move reorients archeological investigation away from lists of artifacts that
correlate with particular groups or interest in the
delineation of universal human laws and into multiscalar examinations of the intersection of history,
power, and agency to explain the processes that
contribute to the change and persistence of social
practices over time. As archeology is by its very
subject matter preoccupied with the material world,
this emphasis logically goes hand in hand with a
focus on the study of artifacts that seek to explore
"the situated experiences of material life, the constitution of the object world and concomitantly its
shaping of human experience" (Meskell 2004:2).
In effect, this theoretical shift asks archeologists
to move beyond asking what a particular artifact
is, and ask instead how do people give it meaning
within the social context of its use.
In the study of African American archeological
sites this turn has meant an increasing engagement
with topics such as race, consumerism, and the diverse African heritage of enslaved people brought
to the Americas. Paul Mullins (1999, 2001, 2004,
2006) has approached the topic of material goods
by highlighting how various social groups can ascribe different meanings to the same artifacts, and
the ways in which objects can become critical to
people's self definition. Maria Franklin (2001) has
explored a similar topic as it relates to the foodways
of slaves in Virginia. Franklin notes that many of the

foods eaten by slaves and plantation owners were
not overtly different, but that the combination of
foods were linked to foodways with racial c01Telates.
Franklin also takes the fascinating step of considering how racialization of food also transformed the
practices of both whites and blacks, and came to
define what soul food was. Both of these studies
point towards the need to consider the situated experiences of African American populations as well as
the recursive relationships that exist within the African American populace and between other racial or
ethnic groups. What is significant about these studies
is that, in most cases, the types of material culture
that express social identity are not out of place in
what are otherwise very distinct social contexts. It
is the contextualized meaning people gave to objects
and the meanings which these objects in their turn
imparted to people's lives that makes otherwise
mundane things historically extraordinary.

HOUSTON'S 4TH WARD AND THE
GREGORY LINCOLN PROJECT
AREA
A Neighborhood Overview
Houston's 4th Ward, which encompasses Freedmen's Town National Register Historic District, is
known as the "mother ward' among African Americans because it has been home to a significant African American population since just after the Civil
War (Maxwell 1997). The original portion of the 4th
Ward known as Freedmen's Town was founded in
the 1860s, when land along the south side of Buffalo
Bayou was subdivided into town lots and then sold
mainly to manumitted blacks, who began pouring
into the city following emancipation. During the
Reconstruction period that followed the Civil War,
Houston's Freedmen's community grew as African
Americans organized churches, schools, newspapers,
and strong fraternal organizations in their neighborhood to provide financial aid and cultural support to
the thousands of African Americans mTiving from
rural areas of Texas. After the end of Reconstruction,
Freedmen's Town, as it began to be called, continued
to expand westward and flourish, largely without the
planning support of the white-dominated municipal
government. Freedmen's Town remained a predominantly African American community well into the
20th century. This despite publicly sponsored redevelopment programs intended to destabilize the African
American population, such as a whites-only housing

22

Texas Archeological Society

35
Lf.ncdfri. Scbo-0-f .Tr·a-ck.

1
Ruthven

"'.
~

"'·

HISD Freedmenstown
Archeological Testing Project
Trench
6
53

Datum

6

Test Unit

4

Feature
Tree

6

Bush
Lines and Numbers*
Telephone Pole
Fire Hydrant

~

~

Fence
Scale (m)

10

10

20

30

40

50

*Due to inaccuracy of historic reference maps,
Lot/Block lines are approximations

Figure 2. Field investigations in the project area.

Feit and Jones-Contextualizing Material Culture 23
project in the 1940s (San Felipe Courts, which later
became known as Allen Parkway Village) and a major
highway (IH-45) built in the 1950s, that effectively
isolated the neighborhood from Houston's larger
downtown and claimed the oldest portions of Freedmen's Town. The endurance of neighborhood cohesion in the face of this programmatic marginalization
is attributable to the considerable effort Houston's
African American leaders extended to control the
growth and reproduction of their community (Beeth
and Wintz 1992; Harol 1999).
The project area that was tested in 2005 was
not part of the original Freedmen's Town, but rather
abutted it on the western side. It developed around
1900, at the time the city of Houston was expanding its boundaries westward. Prior to that time, the
Gregory Lincoln project area was technically outside the city's limits. At the outset, the majority of
residents who purchased and occupied subdivided
lots were African American, although a significant
number of Italians also owned and lived on property
in this part of Houston-an aspect of the community
that will be explored in more detail later. In fact,
until 1925 the only white residents in this neighborhood were Italian immigrants, such as Guiseppe
Danna and Louis Trappolino, all of whom owned
corner lots, on which they built groceries that served
the community. 1 There were five Italian grocers in
the 10 block Gregory Lincoln area.
African American land ownership was highest
during the earliest periods of development and
gradually declined at the same time that the number
of African American renters rose. The decline in
African American property ownership can be linked
to many of the discriminatory policies and institutions
instituted in the Jim Crow South. Imbalanced wage
distributions, unequal educational resources, poll
taxes that contributed to political disenfranchisement,
and unequal access to city services and capital
ultimately forged a permanent African American
underclass in Houston and undoubtedly hindered
property ownership for many (Bullard 1992). Deed
records from the Gregory Lincoln project area
suggest that a number of African American residents
made land purchases through bond for title sales
(Feit and Jones 2007; Wagner 2005). These land
transactions were essentially owner-financed sales
in which the purchaser received the title to the land
once they had paid off the total amount. In the inte1im,
the seller would continue to pay taxes on the land
and hold the deed. For many purchasers this mode
of property acquisition proved to be the most viable

means of owning land without having to pay the
entire purchase price up front. Purchasing property
through bank loans and mortgages was simply not an
option for most African American buyers during the
Jim Crow period, since many mortgage companies
and banks would not lend money to them (Bullard
1992). However, the same bond for title loans that
enabled property ownership for African Americans
could also become predatory, especially when made
to buyers with only a skeletal understanding of the
loan's terms, or who lacked resources to combat legal
challenges to their rights over certain property.
This was certainly the case with a number of
African American landowners in one block of the
project area (Block 6), some of whom lost title to
their properties after a 1925 lawsuit. The crux of
the suit ultimately came down to poor surveying
and record keeping-the land boundaries were
mis-drawn by the surveyor and actually overlapped
the adjoining parcel. At the time of the suit, the
property owners to the west-the plaintiffs-were
white, while the defendants were mainly African
American. The white plaintiffs won the suit and
sold their property to an investment realty company
who eventually developed the land as apartments
serving mainly whites. Meanwhile, the African
American homeowners who lost were forced to
leave their homes, which were eventually demolished (Feit and Jones 2007; Wagner 2005). This
type of case illustrates the fragility of African
American land tenure during the early 20th century. Deed records, court cases, and various other
sources suggest that there were many individual
instances of fraud or simple financial hardship,
the result of which was that African American land
ownership in Freedmen's Town declined over time,
while absentee white ownership increased.
Nonetheless, historical sources also document a
neighborhood that remained fairly cohesive in terms
of social and familial relationships, even as the tenant population grew. Jacqueline Beckman recalled
a neighborhood that was like a "small town within
a small town." 4th Ward and Freedmen's Town in
particular, was a place where "you had nosy neighbors ... everybody knew your business" (Beckman
2004). It was a place where residents would sit
out on their front porches and feel protected by the
constant buzz of activity (Beckman 2004). Gladys
House and Darryl Patterson echoed the same sentiments. "West Dallas was just lined with different
types of cafes, lounges. It was just a fun time for
African Americans ... we were self-sustaining"

24

Texas Archeological Society

(House 2004). "We had a nurturing neighborhood,"
according to Patterson (2004).
Even among the tenant population, there was
a strong appearance of cohesion. While tenancy
tended to be less permanent than owner occupancy,
in many cases extended families rented houses or
rooms on adjacent or nearby properties. This was
the case with the Forshay family. John Forshay
rented a house at the corner of Mason and Andrews
Streets in 1920, while an Elvina Forshay rented
a different house at nearby 1820 Andrews Street
with Addie Conway (Houston City Directory 1908,
1912, 1917) during roughly the same period. Meanwhile, the same Addie Conway and a Viola Forshay
are listed in the 1910 census as living with two
sons at 1711 Andrews. During the same year a 16
year old Isabella Forshay lived at neighboring 1715
Andrews (Wagner 2005). All of these addresses are
within one block of a single intersection-Mason
and Andrews Streets-and this strongly implies
that the Forshay family attempted to stay in proximity to each other over the years, even as they
moved from house to house.
African American landowners were familybound in the same manner, and extended families
typically lived on adjoining lots in the neighborhood
for 40 years or more. This was the case with the
Starks family, more than three generations of which
owned and lived on two lots in the project area from
1900 to well past 1940. Their neighbors, the Jones
family, lived on the adjoining lot for most of that period as well. During the 1920s, men of both families
worked in the same profession-as chauffeurs for
private families (and these were the only men in the
project area with this profession).
Another example of the type of long-term land
tenure that characterized the neighborhood is the
Spillman family, who lived at 1720 Ruthven. Lucy
and Walker Spillman probably purchased their
home on two lots through a bond-for-title contract
sometime around the turn of the century. Although
their deed is dated 1911(HCDR281/137 in Wagner
[2005]), city directories, census records, Sanborn
Fire insurance maps, and even legal records suggest that the couple had lived on this property since
before 1907. When Walker Spillman died around
1914, Lucy remodeled the house that she and her
husband had shared, then moved to a smaller rental
house on the same property. Lucy remarried William
Burroughs, a boarder, sometime during the 1920s,
and the two continued to own and live on the same
property until Lucy's death in 1942 (Wagner 2005).

After her death the property appears to have been
purchased by their tenants, the Harts.
Irrespective of whether they were property owners or merely tenants, various sources document a
neighborhood that was overwhelmingly working
class and African American. Sanborn Fire Insurance
maps from 1907 to 1955 indicate that families typically lived in one-story wood frame homes, set on
pier and beam foundations. Rental houses were built
in the shotgun style, while owner-occupied homes
tended to be larger and built on a T-plan, square, or
modified L-plan with front and back porches.
Most adult women worked. Typically they did so
as laundresses, seamstresses, cooks, or as servants for
another household. On one block within the project
area, for instance, of the 13 households with adult
women in them in 1910, 11 of them worked; all but
two of those worked as laundresses from the home.
On another block, Block 2 in the project area, in
1910 there were 10 households with adult women in
them and half of them worked (Feit and Jones 2007).
Laundering and sewing from the home was the most
common occupation for single African American
women who did not own property, and it is likely that
this endeavor offered a certain amount of financial and
social independence for the women who engaged in it
(Mullins 1999). Unlike working for a private family,
the women who took outside laundering and sewing
into their homes set their own schedules, pay, and rate
of production, while still managing a household. Married women, who owned property typically worked
outside the home as nurses, cooks for private families,
or as housekeepers for whites. Historically, African
American women in Texas worked, and this fact is
attributable not just to financial circumstances. Even
among middle and upper class families, the ideals of
African American womanhood incorporated "and
even required work within the public sphere" (Howard
1996:78). Among the women of the Gregory Lincoln
project area, the difference in labor choices between
property owning women and tenant women suggests
a possible hierarchy of professions among working
African American women in Houston. Work outside
the home was perhaps more highly valued than work
from the home, even though it may have allowed for
more flexibility.
Men's professions were more highly varied but
typically encompassed low wage generalist professions such as porters, warehouse laborers, mill
workers, longshoremen, delivery drivers, mechanics,
or construction workers. The majority of African
American men and women worked for others rather

Feit and Jones-Contextualizing Material Culture 25
than in their own businesses between 1900 and 1930.
Consequently, there were few businesses in the project area that appeared to be Afocan American-owned
and operated during the early part of the 20th century.
This is not to say that African American-owned businesses were not present in other parts of 4th Wardthey were. However, African American-owned businesses appear to have been less critical to community
integrity than other institutions such as churches,
schools, and fraternal organizations.
Unlike businesses, schools and churches entered the project area concurrent with development.
Both served as vital community institutions in
Houston's 4th Ward (Beeth and Wintz 1992). The
earliest church in the project area was probably the
2nd Pleasant Green Baptist Church, located on the
corner of Taft and Gray. After the 1925 lawsuit that
resulted in the forced demolition of all the properties
facing Taft Street, the church moved a block away to
Mason Street. It served as an important focal point
for the community according to local residents,
and African American property owners not only
anchored membership, but also helped promote the
development of such churches in their communities
(Feit and Jones 2007). Remembering the 4th Ward
environment of the 1970s, Darryl Patterson stated,
"our parents made sure we had a good education.
You had to obey. You had to do your duties ... you
had to do your church activities" (Patterson 2004).
Consumer Choice, Resistance,
and Community

Health and Hygiene Product Choice
The artifacts from the Gregory Lincoln Project offer an intriguing case study for a deeply
contextualized approach to the study of African
Ame1ican material culture. As with so many urban
sites of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, glass
bottle products were abundant among the material
remains. At face value these artifacts looked like a
typical assemblage. Other investigators working on
early 20th century African American sites have noted
this: ethnicity is often impossible to read in the types
of artifacts recovered (Bastian 1999:291; Wright
1997; Seibel et al. 2000). The seemingly endless
shards of glass bottles and cold cream jars, nails, and
all variety of other materials were not strong indicators
of race or ethnicity and quickly dispelled any illusions
on our part of easily defining a particularly African
American assemblage. Instead what confronted us

was an assemblage that seemed distinctively urban
and consumerist-oriented. Although the assemblage
seemed to downplay the effects of racism and
segregation on the material culture of the community,
artifact analysis suggested the possible complexities
of product use, brand choice, and purchasing options
that may have confronted the 4th Ward's African
American residents.
Across the Gregory Lincoln project area petroleum jelly jars were the single most abundant
bottle product recorded during the project. Most of
the specimens came from two contexts-the Spillman trash pit and the tenant houses on Block 2. The
Spillman trash pit contained seven Vaseline jars or
fragments, while the tenant house assemblage contained at least three Chesebrough and three Moroline
petroleum jelly jars. These six jars from the tenant
houses were clustered in and around Test Units 1 and
2. While petroleum jelly was a regular household
item for families of all ethnicities during the early
20th century, in an African American context they
have particular significance. Moroline, in fact, was
marketed to African Americans as a hair straightener
(Figure 3).
Praetzellis and Praetzellis (1994) wrote about
African American barbers and hair styling practices in early 20th century Sacramento, arguing that
over 40 Vaseline jars found in a trash pit behind the
Cook house represented home barbering offered to
nearby African American residents. Significantly,
a pair of scissors and two metal "hot combs" used
for hair straightening were also found in the tenant
house context of the Gregory Lincoln project (Feit
and Jones 2007). Hot combs were brass combs
that could be heated, and with the help of pomade,
brushed through curly hair to straighten it. We do not
wish to demonstrate here that the tenant occupants
on Block 2, like the residents of the Cook house
in Sacramento, were supplementing their income
with home haircuts (although it is theoretically possible). Nonetheless, we do wish to point out that the
prevalence of common artifacts which could pertain
to hair straightening and grooming is something
that is best understood in the context of race and
specific cultural practice. Hair straightening was an
aspect of everyday life for many African American
women, and this activity required a specific suite of
commonly available manufactured products.
Other health care items offer small glimpses
of the medical needs of the project area's residents,
as well as of their purchasing habits. Among other
types of medical and personal hygiene products,

26

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Jars and hot comb recovered during the investigations: a, Vaseline; b, Moroline; c, metal hot comb.

well known national brands were almost exclusively
represented among the items found. Most of the
medical and health care products found address
primarily aches, hair and skin concerns, and stomach
ailments. Conversely, few marked bottles aimed at
curing cough and flu symptoms were found, although remedies for these ailments may have been
purchased in unmarked bottles or bottles with paper
labels that were worn off. Among the more common
types of bottles are lotion bottles. Pond's Extract,
A.S. Hinds Honey and Almond Creme, and Jergens
lotion (Figure 4) are all represented in the tenant
and Spillman assemblages, and attest to concerns
about dry skin, which would have been particularly
common among those laborers, machinists, or any
individual who worked with their hands. Products
such as Vicks Mentholatum and Va-tro-nol were
used for muscle aches and congestion, while BromoSeltzer bottles would have cured stomach ailments
(Figure 5). Enema apparatuses from four separate
contexts (the Spillman trash pit, the tenant houses,
the Richardson household, and the area under the
track) show that home remedies for constipation and
digestive ailments was probably fairly widespread.

On their own, these nationally available products and associated artifacts do not seem to transmit
much new information for understanding how race
and consumer habits may have intersected in the
Houston's 4th Ward. However, when juxtaposed
with the surprising lack of druggist bottles from local pharmacies that are often found at other contemporary sites, the bottle data suggests the possibility
of a more complex story.
Medicine bottles from local druggists are very
common on urban historical sites throughout Texas.
For instance, during work on the Capitol Extension
project in Austin, investigators recovered several
dozen bottles bearing the names of local druggists
(Thomas and Adovasio 1996). The same was true for
the New City Hall Redevelopment Project that investigated Austin's Guy Town (Feit et al. 2003). Roger
Moore (personal communication, 2007) reports a
similar abundance of this artifact type on urban sites
in Houston. However, in the Gregory Lincoln project
area only one local druggist bottle was found. The
Spillman trash pit contained a single bottle from the
Boeneke Pharmacy (Figure 6), which was located at
520 W. Dallas in the 4th Ward, close to downtown.

Feit and Jones-Contextualizing Material Culture 27

Figure 4. Bottles: a, Ponds lotion bottle; b, cold creme jar; c, Jergens lotion bottle; d, Hinds Honey and Almond
Cream bottle.

Figure 5. Medicinal tubes and bottles: a, Enema tube; b, Bristol Meyers bottle cap; c, prescription bottle with glass
applicator; d, f, unmarked prescription bottles; e, St. Joseph's medicine bottle; g, Campho-Phenique bottle; h-i, Vicks
Mentholatum bottles.

28

Texas Archeological Society

Houston City Directories for 1915 and 1922 list the
pharmacy as a white-owned and managed business
(Houston City Directory 1915, 1922). In 1915 there
were 83 druggists in Houston, several of whom did
business in the 4th Ward.
It is interesting to speculate about why so
few local drugstore bottles would be found in
the Gregory Lincoln project area, when so many
nationally marketed health products are well
represented. According to one source, there were
five African American-run druggists in Houston
in 1915 (Wintz 1984), but clearly the majority of
them were white-owned and operated. It may be
that entrenched racism actively prohibited African
Americans from patronizing these white-operated
businesses during the Jim Crow era. On the other
hand, the absence of these bottles could represent
a conscious tactic of consumption on the part
of African American residents. As many social
theorists have pointed out (Stewart 1994; LeFebvre
1991 ), product consumption is a social act, rife with
symbolism that by the early 20th century was also
linked to self-realization (Cook et al. 1996). For
an African American in the Jim Crow South, the
rejection of discriminatory white-owned businesses
may have represented a political statement to some
degree. During the 1920s, Clifton Richardson, the
editor of the Houston Informer, called on African
Americans to do just that. He urged the community
to make efforts to patronize African American
businesses as a means to economic solidarity, and

Figure 6. Prescription bottle from Hoencke's Pharmacy.

ultimately advancement (Wintz 1984). The act of
purchasing nationally marketed race-blind products
over racialized local products therefore holds the
potential to reflect as much a racially justified
constriction of choice as it is a meaningful act of
resistance and community development on the part
of 4th Ward residents. Continuing archeological
investigation at sites with higher resolution temporal
components could provide opportunities to explore
such complex social issues.
Tableware Choices

Another intriguing example of the possible tensions that existed between the more metropolitan
desires of the local African American residents and
the realities of economic and class constraints within
the marketplace is revealed in the ceramic assemblage
from the Gregory Lincoln Project. The Spillman
ceramic assemblage (Block 2, Lot 6) is particularly
useful for analyzing dining aesthetics and choices,
since all of the artifacts came from a single trash
pit associated with one household. The Spillman
assemblage represented the best matched and most
expensive of all the ceramics in the project area.
Among the household ceramics the Spillman family
used and discarded, were pieces of French Haviland
Porcelain (Figure 7), a set of English Wood & Son
late Victorian blue transfer ware plates (Figure 8,
Trilby pattern ca. 1891; Snyder 1992), and a set of
red transfer English, W. E. Com, whiteware (Figure 9,

Feit and ]ones-Contextualizing Material Culture 29

Figure 7. Haviland porcelain ceramics recovered from the Spillman trash pit.

Figure 8. Examples of Trilby pattern whiteware ceramics recovered from the Spillman trash pit.

30

Texas Archeological Society

although the color and quality of
the red transfer p1int is identical.
In fact, of the roughly 444 pieces
of kitchen ceramics that were
found in the Spillman assemblage,
approximately 17 4 (39 percent) of
them were decorated. Altogether
the Spillman household tablewares
comprised at least 21 different
decorative patterns (Feit and Jones
2007).
This suggests several things
about the dining and table
aesthetics of the Spillman family,
who, although they were stable
owner occupants of the neighborhood, were not wealthy. First, they
appeared to have actively sought
to acquire the material culture of
wealth in their tableware choices.
The range of dates represented
by the ceramics found in the
Spillman trash pit (roughly 1890Figure 9. Examples of red transfer print ceramics recovered from the Spillman
1920) span approximately 30
trash pit.
years, suggesting that these may
have been passed from generation
Daisy pattern ca. 1900, Kowalsky and Kowalsky
to generation, or collected over time. The expensive
1999). At least four different plates were represented
English and French china, representing multiple
by the Haviland china, at least two plates and one cup
patterns, and variations on patterns acquired over a
were represented by the Trilby pattern blue transfer
long period, implies that a Spillman family member
ware, and at least two different plates and a serving
(Lucy Spillman probably) actively collected these
bowl were represented by the red transfer Daisy print.
items for use at the table, for decorating the home,
The presence of multiple discarded pieces of the same
or likely both. Like so many households of that
pattern suggests that the family probably owned a set,
time period, Lucy Spillman may have displayed her
or at least the better part of a set of each.
good china, while she kept the plain stuff hidden
However, certain inconsistencies within each
(Glassie 1999; Mullins 1999). The assemblage
pattern also imply that the Spillman table china was
shows a marked preference for imported ceramics
acquired piecemeal or collected over time, rather
over American-made wares, although Americanthan purchased as sets. Close examination of the
made wares are also represented in Shenango
Haviland china, for instance, shows that while the
(pre-1940, exact date unknown, Lehner 1988),
designs are similar, the pieces came from different
Onondaga (1890, Lehner 1988), and Homer
lots. They show slight variations: some have edge
Laughlin (the Angelus pattern 1909, Tennis 1997)
molding, while others do not, while the flower pattern
makers marks found within the assemblage.
on one is not exactly the same as the flower pattern
Second, and more importantly, the Spillman
on another. Altogether, six similar but not identical
assemblage illustrates an inclination for ornate and
floral porcelain patterns (roughly concurrent styles
colorful floral decorations on virtually every type
and probably also Haviland) were identified among
of ware. The number of different patterns identified
the Spillman assemblage. The same is true for the
among the assemblage suggests that the collector
red transfer ceramics. While there are at least two
was attracted to decorated items, and sought to enplates represented that are from the same set, a large
hance this collection by matching pieces and adding
mixing or decorative bowl, upon closer inspection,
different but complementary decorations whenever
appears to be of a slightly different pattern,
feasible. As a point of comparison, excavations at the

Feit and Jones-Contextualizing Material Culture 31
site of the German born Schneider household, who
lived in Austin's Guy Town from roughly 1860-1920,
yielded approximately 237 total pieces of whiteware and porcelain and only about 20 of them were
decorated. Next door, at the (white) Susan Morgan
household, investigations of a similar trash pit context
(Feature 68) recovered approximately 399 ceramic
fragments, of which 303 were undecorated. Overall,
the variety of decorative patterns from all contexts
within the Susan Morgan household was considerably
less than what was represented by a single feature
from the Spillman household.
This pattern of consumption is similar to the one
Paul Mullins ( 1999) identified for African American
households in early 20th century Annapolis. In his
study, Mullins also noted an unusually high number
of unmatched decorated wares in the assemblages
he analyzed. He argued that "the melange of decorative preparations, age of vessels and heavy wear
suggests that many ceramics came into these African
American households through various forms of nonmarket exchange, such as generational gifts, salvage,
barter and positive reciprocity" (Mullins 1999: 150).
This may be the case with the Spillman assemblage.
While it impossible to know how Mrs. Spillman
acquired her household ceramics (whether by purchase, gift, salvage, etc.), it seems unlikely that she
purchased these items as sets. This contrasts with
the dominant paradigm for white ceramic consumption, which urged housewives that "the service of
each course should be of one kind of dishes. There
is nothing that looks so splotchy and as inelegant
as a table covered with five or six kinds of dishes"
("Notes, Tableware" 1898 in Mullins 1999:150).
While Mullins attributes this perceived difference in material culture choices to race, class,
and uneven access to material goods, it may also
be useful to think about it as an aesthetic choice.
Zora Neale Hurston wrote about African American
aesthetics that "there can never be enough of beauty,
let alone too much" (Hurston 1981 :53). This ideal
manifests itself in what she calls "decorating the
decoration," that is, the African American habit of,
for instance, placing a doily over a calendar, or draping a mantle with a lace scarf and bows.
The tenant houses on Lot 3 of Block 2 reveal a
similar aesthetic sensibility, though to some degree
the tenant house assemblage reflects the lower socioeconomic status of its occupants, and also a different
sample context. Over 34 patterns were represented
among the ceramics recovered from the tenant
households. While admittedly this assemblage

represents at least two households, it nevertheless
demonstrates the same heavy admixture of ceramic
patterns and styles seen in the Spillman assemblage.
For instance, two fragments of a porcelain gold
banded cup were found in the same context as a
single fragment of a very similar whiteware goldbanded cup, suggesting that its owners may have
collected the cups for the pattern, without regard for
the material. Likewise, among the Starks assemblage
on Block 5, two ceramic sherds-a plate and a cup
of almost identical pattern-were recovered from
the same test unit; one was porcelain, however, and
the other whiteware. A third ceramic sherd recorded
in the assemblage had a very similar, but not quite
identical pattern
Continued analysis of ceramic acquisition
patterns and use in similar contexts, in both African
American and white households, bears the potential
to shed light not only on individual aesthetic choices
among African Americans, but also how local
community and identity may have been forged
through active intra-community exchange and
shared aesthetic ideals.

Negotiating Space: Italians and African
Americans in 4th Ward
Up to this point we have focused on the material culture of the African American residents of
the neighborhood and its implications for understanding their engagements with both other African Americans and within the surrounding white
society. Now, we want to return to the residents of
the neighborhood who were of Italian descent. As
previously discussed, several corner groceries were
owned and operated by Italians. Italians began immigrating in large numbers to Houston in the 1880s,
during what one author called the second wave of
Italian Immigration (Belfiglio 1983). This wave of
immigration lasted until roughly World War I. Most
of the Italians who entered Texas during this period
came from southern Italy where economic conditions were dismal. The agricultural system was failing, modern public works amenities were virtually
non-existent, and fewer than 10 percent of the adult
male population was able to read or write (Belfiglio
1983). Almost all of these immigrants were farmers or unskilled laborers. Italians purchased land
disproportionately in minority communities and in
outlying areas of Houston, such as the 3rd and 4th
Wards, in part because land was inexpensive in these
areas. With the help of mutual aid societies, they

32

Texas Archeological Society

opened small businesses, primarily groceries and
fruit markets. These endeavors required a relatively
small outlay of cash and minimal training. In 1906
there were 57 Italian owned groceries in Houston out
of a total Italian population of roughly 350 individuals. In Houston, Italian owned groceries accounted
for 13 percent of the total. In places like Galveston
and Beaumont, this percentage was much higher (50
percent and 28 percent respectively, Belfiglio 1983).
This pattern has been observed in other communities, such as Austin, where Italians owned groceries
and ice houses in the Red Light District (Feit et al.
2003) and in Austin's small Freedmen's community
in Clarksville (Wood 2007).
While we found little archeologically that could
be unambiguously linked to known Italian residences
in the project area, clearly Italians as business owners
and neighbors directly interacted with the African
American community and cont1ibuted to the fom1ation
of the neighborhood. The Trapolino grocery, located
on the corner of Andrews and Mason, offers a case in
point. A sign posted in one of the Trapolino groceries
(Figure 1Oa) visible in a photograph reads "this store
is owned and operated by a friend, neighbor and
tax payer in your community." The sign suggests
that tensions between African Americans and Italians
existed. But it would also seem to mark an effort on
the part of the Italian members of the community
to reach across these tensions to remind the area's
African American residents of their commitment to
the community.
It seems safe to assume that African Americans
in the neighborhood were patronizing the Italian
groceries, and the analysis of the food and food
storage remains clearly indicate that the African
American residents of the neighborhood embraced a
distinctively urban food consumeiism (Feit and Jones
2007). Analysis of the fauna! remains demonstrates
that most meat was purchased already cut from local
butchers, and fish was purchased from local fishmongers. Condiment and extract bottles such as ketchup,
Worcestershire sauce, pepper sauce, and pickle jars
are all well represented. Meanwhile, other types of
bottle products such as vinegar, oil, spice cans, and
Mason or Bell storage jars that one would expect if
the residents were home canning or baking, are rare
throughout the project area. These data suggest that
the predominant foodways pattern in the project area
is highly urban, with little evidence of reliance on
more traditional procurement such as hunting, fishing, gardening, or gathering or rural food processing
strategies such as canning or pickling.

Many of the items that African American
residents purchased likely came from the shops of
their Italian neighbors, almost all of whom were
first generation immigrants from rural southern
Italy. Indeed the highest concentration of storage jars was found in a trench (Trench 8) behind
the Trapolino grocery. And it is worth noting that
outside the Trappolino grocery context, the next
highest numbers of canning jar fragments came
from the tenant households. As photographs of
these Italian markets in Houston during the early
decades of the 20th century show (Figure lOb), it
is clear that the markets stocked not only normal
nationally available goods such as washboards that
would have been used by the local residents, many
of whom worked as laundresses and seamstresses,
but also home-canned foodstuffs (in addition to
traditional Italian meats, notably). This observation raises the further intriguing question, and one
which we were unfortunately unable to address
with our data set alone: to what degree did the interactions between these two socially differentiated
groups open spaces for creative forms of identity,
community, and tradition to emerge?

WHERE WE GO FROM HERE
Long-time 4th Ward resident Jerald Taylor
insightfully observed that "a lotta people have
histories here" (Taylor 2004). Although in this article
we have only briefly touched on the archeology and
history of the early 20th century African American
and Italian residents of the Gregory Lincoln project
area, his statement certainly rings true. In some
ways, the test excavations at the Gregory Lincoln
project area raised more questions and suggestions
for future research into how African American
identity is materialized than answers. Nonetheless
they suggest that by examining how artifacts that are
common in the archeological record gave and were
given meaning in the space of daily life, we can eniich
our understanding of the history of the daily life of
Texas urban African Ame1ican communities.
We believe our research provides a springboard
from which to launch further analysis and
consideration of the materiality of African American
identity in urban spaces in Texas. Ideally, this
approach can apply to other forms of identity as
well, be they rooted in race, economics, gender, or
many of the other myriad forms of personhood that
exist in our modern world. At first glance the overall

Feit and Jones-Contextualizing Material Culture 33

a

b
Figure 10. Interior of the Trapolino Grocery at the corner of Andrews and
Mason in the Gregory Lincoln project area: a. sign above scale reads "this
store owned and operated by a friend, neighbor and tax payer in your community." Note also the washboards lining the tops of shelves (photo courtesy
of Houston Public Library, Texas Room Archives); b, the interior of a different Trapolino grocery; note the types of items being sold including canned,
bottled, and fresh goods (photo courtesy of Houston Public Library, Texas
Room Archives).

34

Texas Archeological Society

character of the archeological record would seem
to run counter to much of the historical discourse
on the life of African Americans in the late 19th
and early 20th century. An uncritical view of the
archeological record could lead down a revisionist
path that attempts to paper over these differences and
the dominant racial paradigm through recourse to an
equal access narrative based on the perceived parity
in the consumption of things. While this is not an
un-American story, it is one which has the potential
to diminish the power of the very real experiences
of a community whose descendents continue to feel
disempowered and neglected by the establishment.
Yet this same archeological record can remind us
that during the late 19th and early 20th centuries
the 4th Ward was at the center of a thriving African
American community in Houston, one which deserves
continued study to better elucidate how race and other
forms of personhood were experienced and how
these experiences were made manifest in the material
world. In the face of accelerating development, it is
this intervention in the way that the 4th Ward's history
and community are recognized and remembered that
archeology stands most poised to contribute to the
ongoing discourse on identity, materiality, and race
in urban Texas.

ENDNOTES
1. After 1925 the westernmost segment of the project area
known as the triangle (because it is triangular in shape) was
platted and developed by investors. This area housed mainly
white tenants in 4-unit apartment buildings, although at least
one Italian family, the Pizzatolas, also lived there in a single
family bungalow. Archeologically these apartments left few
material signatures. Thus, when we discuss the archeology
and cultural history of the project area we will typically be
discussing it as it was before 1930 and development of the
triangle took place.

Beeth, H. and C. Wintz (editors)
1992 Black Dixie: Afro-Texas History and Culture in Houston. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Belfiglio, C. V.
1983 The Italian Experience in Texas. Eakin Press, Austin.
Bullard, R.
1992 Houston Problems and Prospects in Contemporary
Houston. In Black Dixie: Afro-Texas History and
Culture in Houston, edited by H. Beeth and C. Wintz,
pp. 273-288.Texas A&M University Press, College
Station.
Cook L., R. Yamin, and J.P. McCarthy
1996 Shopping As Meaningful Action: Toward a Redefinition of Consumption in Historical Archaeology.
Historical Archaeology 30( 4):50-65.
Feit, R. and B. M. Jones
2007 "A lot of People Have Histories Here . . .": History
and Archeology in Houston's Vanishing Freedmen's
Town, Harris County, Texas. Archeology Report No.
184. Hicks & Company, Austin.
Feit, R., J. Karbula, J. Clark, and S. C. Caran
2003 Boarding Houses Bar Rooms and Brothels-Life in a
Vice District: Archeological Investigations of a Changing Urban Neighborhood in Austin, Texas. Archeology
Series No. 104. Hicks & Company, Austin.
Franklin, M.
2001 The Archaeological Dimensions of Soul Food: Interpreting Race, Culture, and Afro-Virginian Identity. In
Race and the Archaeology of Identity, edited by C.
E. Orser, pp. 88-107. The University of Utah Press,
Salt Lake City.
Glassie, H.
1999 Material Culture. Indiana University Press, Bloomington.
Harol, K.
1999 Enduring History: The Struggle to Control the Future
of Houston's Oldest African American Neighborhood. Master's Thesis, Department of Planning,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge.

REFERENCES CITED
Bastian, B. E.
1999

Elmwood: The Archaeology of Twentieth-Century
African American Pioneers in the Great North Woods.
In "I, Too, Am America": Archaeological Studies of
African American Life, edited by T. A. Singleton, pp.
283-295. University Press of Virginia, Charlottesville.

Beckman, J.
2004 Transcript of Oral Interview Conducted by Fred L.
McGhee. Oral History Project, Houston.

House, G.
2004 Transcript of Oral Interview Conducted by Fred L.
McGhee. Oral History Project, Houston.
Houston City Directory
1908 Morrison and Fourmy's Houston City Directory.
M01Tison and Fourmy Directory Company, Houston.
1912

Morrison and Fourmy's Houston City Directory.
Morrison and Fourmy Directory Company, Houston.

Feit and Jones-Contextualizing Material Culture 35
1915

Morrison and Fourmy's Houston City Directory. Morrison and Fourmy Directory Company, Houston.

1917

Morrison and Fourmy's Houston City Directory. Morrison and Fourmy Directory Company, Houston.

1922

Morrison and Fourmy's Houston City Directory. Morrison and Fourmy Directory Company, Houston.

Howard, V.
1996 The Courtship Letters of an African American Couple: Race, Class, and the Cult of True Womanhood.
Southwestern Historical Quarterly 100(1):64-80.
Hurston, Z. N.
1981 Characteristics of Negro Expression. In The Sanctified Church, written by Z. N. Hurston, pp. 49-68.
Marlowe & Company, New York.
Kowalsky, A. A. and D. E. Kowalsky
1999 Encyclopedia of Marks on American, English, and
European Earthenware, Ironstone and Stoneware
( 1780-1980). Schiffer Publishing Ltd, Atglen, Pennsylvania.
LeFebvre, H.
1984 Everyday Life in the Modern World. Transaction
Books, New Brunswick, New Jersey.
Lehner, L.
1988 Lehne r's Encyclopedia of U.S. Marks on Pottery Porcelain & Clay. Collector Books, Paducah, Kentucky.
Maxwell, L. P.
1997 Freedmanstown: the Origins of a Black Neighborhood
in Houston, 1865-1880. In Bricks Without Straw: A
Comprehensive Histoty ofAfrican Americans in Texas,
edited by D. A. Williams. Eakin Press, Austin.
Meskell, L.
2004 Object Worlds in Ancient Egypt: Material Biographies Past and Present. Berg, Oxford.
Meskell, L. and Pruecel R.W.
2004 Ideology, Power, and Capitalism: The Historical
Archaeology of Consumption. In A Companion to
Social Archaeology, edited by L. Meskell and R. W.
Preucel, pp. 195-211. Blackwell Publishing, Malden,
Massachusetts.
Mullins, P. R.
1999 Race and Affluence: An Archaeology of African
America and Consumer Culture. Kluwer Academic/
Plenum Publishers, New York.
2001

Racializing the Parlor: Race and Victorian Bric-aBrac Consumption. In Race and the Archaeology of
Identity, edited by C. E. Orser, Jr., pp. 158-176. The
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

2006

Racializing the Commonplace Landscape: an Archaeology of Urban Renewal along the Color Line.
World Archaeology 38(1 ):60-71.

Orser Jr., C. E.
200 l Race and the Archaeology ofidentity in the Modern
World. In Race and the Archaeology of Identity,
edited by C. E. Orser, pp. 1-13. The University of
Utah Press, Salt Lake City.
2004

Race and Practice in Archaeological Interpretation.
University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.

2007

The Archaeology ofRace and Racialization in Historic
America. University Press of Florida, Gainesville.

Patterson, D.
2004 Transcript of Oral Interview Conducted by Fred L.
McGhee. Oral History Project, Houston.
Perry, W. and R. Paynter
1999 Artifacts, Ethnicity, and the Archaeology of African
Americans. In "I. Too, Am America": Archaeological Studies ofAfrican American Life, edited by T. A.
Singleton, pp. 299-310. University Press of Virginia,
Charlottesville.
Praetzellis, A. and M. Praetzellis
1994 From Slavery to Freedom: Archaeology of an African
American family in Sacramento, California. Paper
presented at the 1994 Annual Meeting of the Society for
Historical Archaeology, Vancouver, British Columbia.
Seibel, S., R. Feit, and S. Dial (compilers), with contributions
by J. Karbula, M. Parsons, S. Moss, J. Lohse, L. Tovar, V.
Cavness, and J. Logan
2000 Robert E. Johnson State Office Building Project: A
Compilation Volume for Areas A, B. and C. Archeology Series No. 83. Hicks & Company, Austin.
Snyder, J.
1992 Flow Blue: A Collector's Guide to Patterns, HistO!)~ and Values. Schiffer Publishing Ltd. Atglen,
Pennsylvania.
Stewart, S.
1993 On Longing: Narrative of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir and the Collection. Duke University
Press, Durham and London.
Taylor, J.
2004 Transcript of Oral Interview Conducted by Fred L.
McGhee. Oral History Project. Houston.
Tennis, C.
1997 Ceramic Patterns and Variations. In Archaeology
of the Alamodome: Investigations of a San Antonio
Neighborhood in Transition, Vol. I, edited by A. Fox,
M. Renner, and R. Hard, pp.1-35. Archaeological
Survey Report No. 237. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Thomas. J. E. and J. M. Adovasio
1996 The Texas Capitol Extension Archaeological Project.
MerchyhurstArchaeological Institute, Erie, Pennsylvania.

36

Texas Archeological Society

Wagner. J. K.
2005 Archival Research for the South Half of Lot 39, Part
of Lot 40 0 Smith Survey A-696, Houston, Harris
County, Texas. Submitted to Hicks & Company and
Houston Independent School District. On file at
the Texas Historical Commission and the Houston
Independent School District.
Wintz, C. D.
1984 Blacks. In The Ethnic Groups of Houston, edited by
F. R. Von de Mehden, pp. l l-40. Rice University
Studies, Houston.
Wood, V.
2007 Then and Nau, of Kash & Karry, Castraghi's and
Jeffry's: Clarksville's Culinary History. Austin
Chronicle, February 16, Austin.

Wright, K.
1997 Volume IL Excavations and Artifact Distribution
Analysis. In Archaeology of the Alamodome: Investigations of a San Antonio Neighborhood in
Transition, edited by A. Fox, M. Renner, and R. Hard.
Archaeological Survey Report No. 237. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.

Urban Archeology and the Pressures of Gentrification:
Claiming, Naming, and Negotiating ''Freedom''
in Freedmen's Town, Houston
Carol McDavid, David Bruner, and Robert Marcom

ABSTRACT

Freedmen's Town, Houston, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places as an historically
significant historic district in 1984. As the directors and staff of the Yates Community Archaeology Project. we
have been conducting archeological and public archeological research in Freedmen's Town for several years,
both as consultants to the Rutherford B. H. Yates Museum, and as independent scholars. Our research is situated
within fluid and competing definitions of what constitutes "community development" in Houston, as used by
preservationists, descendants, developers, new residents, the larger community, politicians, and archeologists. In
this urban context, property rights compete with the rights of indigenous grassroots residents to determine what
certain neighborhoods are (and will become), and archeology is deployed by various stakeholders in different
ways. We discuss our early findings from both above-ground archeology and public archeology research. as
they have emerged within the context of this constantly shifting political. social, and physical scene.

INTRODUCTION
Freedmen's Town, Houston, was listed on the
National Register of Historic Places as an historically significant historic district in 1984. As the
directors and staff of the Yates Community Archaeology Project (YCAP), we have been conducting
archeological and public archeological research in
Freedmen's Town for several years. Our research is
situated within the competing definitions of what
constitutes "community development" in Houston,
as used by preservationists, descendants, developers,
new residents, the larger community, politicians, and
archeologists. In this urban context, property rights
compete with the rights of indigenous residents to
determine what certain neighborhoods are (and will
become) and archeology is deployed by various
stakeholders in different ways. Our primary sponsor
is the Rutherford B. H. Yates Museum (RBHY), a
50l(c)3 preservation group working to preserve the
few remaining historic properties in the rapidly gentrifying historic landscape of Freedmen's Town. We
conduct field schools for several local universities
and colleges, do mitigation and research archeology on various Freedmen's Town sites, and implement a variety of public archeology activities. Over

time, we hope to create a collaborative, contextual,
reciprocal, and mutually empowered project that is
community based, not just community placed (Ervin
2000). At this point the jury is still out as to whether
that will be possible.
In this article, we will examine how the name
"Freedmen's Town" has been embraced for past and
present political and social purposes, and recognize
how the act of naming is in itself a politically meaningful act by the community's residents (McDavid
2006b; vom Bruck and Bodenhorn 2006). This recognition, and the re-claiming of the community's historic name, was brought about by local descendants,
politicians, and historical professionals, who not only
wanted to honor the recently emancipated people
who built the community (soon after the Civil War),
but also hoped that the designation would provide
one means for preserving (and restoring) the histo1ical character of the neighborhood. This analysis is
based on contemporary ethnographic research in the
community, and is an example of public archeology
as well as ethnographic archeology (Castaneda and
Matthews 2008; Little and Shackel 2007; Shackel
and Chambers 2004). After this, we will examine one
aspect of the archeology of Freedman's Town, the
historic brick streets (Bruner et al. 2007).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

38

Texas Archeological Society
THE POWER OF A NAME:
RECLAIMING HERITAGE IN
FREEDMEN'S TOWN, HOUSTON,
TEXAS 1

This discussion (written primarily by the senior
author) examines how a particular "freedom narrative" was enacted when previously enslaved people
created Freedmantown, in Houston, Texas, and how
this narrative continued as the founders' descendants (lineal and cultural) occupied, renamed, and
reclaimed the physical space in which the contemporary Freedmen's Town still exists. Furthermore,
this section examines how these processes occurred
despite and because of racist public policies and
gentrification pressures that have, over the past 67
years, systematically attempted to erase Freedmen's
Town from the map of Houston. Finally, the hope is
to begin to account for the contested, overlapping,
and multivalent ways that multiple stakeholders,
including our archeology project and its sponsors,
have participated in and intersected with this "freedom narrative."
Historical Overview
After the Civil War, and in some cases before
the war ended, Freedmen's Towns-known by
different variants, including Freedmantown, Freedman's Town, and Free Man's Town-began to appear across the South. Some of these were built as
havens for escaped enslaved people, such as the one
in Mitchelville, South Carolina. More often they
were founded by people immigrating from rural
to urban areas after the Civil War. Although I have
found examples of several, 2 from Texas to Mississippi to Kansas to South Carolina (perhaps most
notably the one in Dallas; see Davidson [2004]),
to my knowledge Houston's Freedman's Town is
the only remaining freedman's community in the
United States that is still occupied by descendants
of the original founders (House 2005). Although
endangered, in every sense of the word, what local
residents define as Freedman's Town is still an extant
community with a strong sense of its own history.
It was founded by previously enslaved people immediately after the Civil War (House 2005; Maxwell
1997; Wintz 1990, 2002). Some of these founders
already lived in Houston, but most flowed in from
surrounding plantations, entering the city by way of
the old San Felipe Road, and settling in the swampy
Buffalo Bayou bottom land just west of central

Houston. One historian, Louise Passey Maxwell,
has made the case that one of the main reasons they
chose this particular area to settle was because they
were able, for a variety of reasons, to buy property
there, and thus to create a black community, free
from white surveillance. In any case, by the 1870s,
black property owners comprised the majority of
residents of Freedmantown (Maxwell 1997: 149).
Freedmantown was located within a larger
political and geographical unit called Fourth Ward,
which had been established in 1839 and included
other black and mixed neighborhoods to the south
and east of San Felipe Road, the road which abutted
Freedmantown. By the late 19th and early 20th centuries Fourth Ward, including Freedmantown, was
the center of black cultural, educational, and professional life in Houston, notable for the number of
important black institutions it housed (Wintz 1990).
It is where Houston's first black lawyers, printers,
judges, doctors, ministers, and teachers owned
homes, lived, and worked, and it became known as
the "mother ward" of black Houston (Wintz 2002).
The desire for self-determination that drove the
creation of the original community-the freedom
to live where one likes, and with whom one wants
to live-still exists today.
In 1938 most of the houses in the original Freedman town settlement disappeared, when, through
eminent domain, the city took the land to build a
thousand-unit housing project for low income white
people called "San Felipe Courts." Despite protests
to city hall and the federal government that this
project would dislocate hundreds of people from one
of the city's most important black neighborhoods,
the government went ahead with the project (Beeth
and Wintz 1992). 3 However, this was not the end of
Freedmantown.
According to oral history, what was originally
mapped as "Freedmantown" (we have found one
historic map with that name) 4 had, by the time of
the eminent domain action, expanded to include the
area just south and east of the original settlement
(House 2005); that is, part of the larger political unit
known as Fourth Ward. Although we have not yet
been able to track individual people through census
and land records (an effort to do this is underway by
local residents; personal communication, G. House,
2008), it does seem likely that many of those who
were displaced from their original homes in 1938
simply moved to the other side of San Felipe, because this area was where many important churches,
schools, and businesses had already been built. In

McDavid et al.-Urban Archeology and the Pressures of Gentrification
any case, over time the original name fell into disuse
(Maxwell 1997), and people began referring to the
neighborhood simply as "Fourth Ward."
Over the middle part of the 20th century, Fourth
Ward became vulnerable to expansion pressures
from the central business district (Beeth and Wintz
1992); large parts of it are now under downtown
skyscrapers. The part of the Ward that comprises
the National Historic District of Freedmen's Town
is the area just south of the original settlement. This
transition can best be told by jumping forward a few
years, to examine contemporary hopes for the area,
and to consider how our archeology project might
intersect with those hopes.

FROM FREEDMANTOWN TO THE
FREEDMEN'S TOWN HISTORIC
DISTRICT5
When Gladys House, a fifth generation descendant of the community's founders, was 14 years old
(in the 1960s) she started to attend meetings having to do with the future of her community. These
meetings represented the City of Houston's early
efforts to begin "urban renewal" in the inner city.
As she put it,
I would attend the community meetings
[and hear] the bad attitude of the elected
officials [about my neighborhood] ... so
I began to talk to some of the elders ...
and ... to do ... oral interviews ... There was
nothing in the library, the whole library,
on Freedmen's Town, so I began to do
more research ... [to] try and start putting
something on paper about the history of
Freedmen's Town (House 2005).
These meetings changed her life, and House
began to unearth the history of her neighborhood.
She learned about what had happened at San Felipe
Courts with the eminent domain action. She learned
about the many early black leaders who had built the
community. As she was learning, she was watching
her historic community slowly being erased. So,
she decided to apply for a National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) designation for what she then
referred to as "Freedmen's Town" (it is uncertain
exactly why the name was changed, because these
applicants did have access to the original map.
However, I have been told by another community
activist that it was because a more "grammatical"

39

name was wanted [Johnson 2005], and House has
said that she and others wanted to distinguish it from
the original settlement). Despite continued pressure
from the city and from developers to prevent the application from being successful (including sending
people around to threaten elderly residents that the
designation would prevent them from ever selling
their property), in January 1984 the Texas Historical
Commission unanimously approved it. At the same
time, House established the Freedman's Town Association (note the different spelling; House has also
said that this was intentional, and meant to distinguish the Association from the neighborhood). After
the designation was approved, one of her earliest and
most difficult fights was to get the local press, and
others, to refer to the name of the area as "Freedmen's Town," instead of "Fourth Ward." She had to
force the city to post any signage at all, even after
the designation was made, and was only able to get
two official state markers installed about two years
ago, having had to raise the money for those herself.
House knew that claiming the name was a vital part
of reclaiming the neighborhood, just as "the act of
de-naming is a form of political annihilation" (vom
Bruck and Bodenhorn 2006:1).
At about the same time that House was starting to work on the NRHP designation, in 1980 a
man named Lenwood Johnson moved to the public
housing project at San Felipe Courts-by then they
were allowing African Americans to live there. He,
too, became interested in the history of the land
upon which his home sat. He decided to organize
his community to obtain a NRHP listing, this time
for San Felipe Courts, which was known by then as
Allen Parkway Village. He enlisted the aid of several
community professionals, and, despite the resistance
of the Housing Authority that owned the project,
that designation too was awarded, in 1987. Johnson
formed a group called "The Unity," which is now
known as the "Free Man's Neighborhood Association." He told me that rather than working under the
auspices of the Freedman's Town Association, his
group wanted to unite the people who lived in what
was now "Freedmen's Town" and the citizens of
Allen Parkway Village, which was located over the
original settlement. Johnson and his group wanted
not only to preserve the physical structures in the
project-which were in themselves an important
example of early modernist architecture-but also
to implement an ambitious, resident-led management plan. They received a great deal of support
for this idea (even for a time from the Director of

40

Texas Archeological Society

HUD) but over time-this is a very long story, and
I cannot do it justice here-the City and Housing
Authority prevailed. In the mid- l 990s, most of the
project was bulldozed and a new mix oflow income
and affordable housing was built. The important
point for my purpose here is that acquiring the
NRHP designation for San Felipe Courts was seen
by Johnson and others as a way to, in effect, reclaim
the original Freedmantown and to reconnect it to the
adjacent area that Gladys House had designated as
"Freedmen's Town." In any event, in the late 1980s
and early 1990s, hopes were high within the community that these designations would generate funds
to drive a full scale preservation effort. However, the
City refused to work with either Johnson or House
(in fact exploiting their many differences whenever
possible) and refused to lend any support to the
grant applications that the designations would have
enhanced (House 2005).
During the same period, pastors of the local
churches were claiming their own stakes in the future of Freedmen's Town. Some wanted to preserve
the historical character of the community, and allied
themselves with House or Johnson. Some wanted to
promote their own property development schemes,
and destroyed many historic houses in the process.
Recently some of the more historically minded
have formed the "Coalition of Pastoral Leaders,"
in an effort to preserve several historic churches,
and this organization actively collaborates with
our museum sponsor on a number of community
projects. Other stakeholders have also emerged,
including the (mostly white) residents of the new
housing in the community. I recently learned that
some of these newcomers were told, by the outsider
groups selling them their homes, that they should
avoid associating with the existing (black) community groups, and instead should form their own
neighborhood associations. 6 Another stakeholder
is the Yates Museum, our sponsor, which is buying
property in order to preserve it. Developers and city
planners who want to "redevelop" Freedmen's Town
into a yuppie village are stakeholders too, and most
deny the racism and classism which underpins their
efforts to "gentrify" the neighborhood. And we, the
archeologists, are stakeholders too. We are building
our careers on the backs of the community, and this
article is one example of that.
In short, it is within this unstable, contested,
strife-filled, and sometimes downright nasty political and social terrain that we are trying to do "community archeology." Over the past year or so, we

are a little closer to the goals I stated earlier, and I
think that this is for two reasons. First, we now
have a better understanding of the community,
or as Leone et al. (1987) put it years ago, its
"interests and conflicts," and the historical and
contemporary dynamics I have just described. The
second reason is going to seem almost heretical,
I suspect. We have started to understand that our
work having meaning to the community has little
to do with how we include them in the work itself;
that is, how we formulate research questions, analyze results, and so on. It is wonderful when that
happens, but the reality is that people have their
own lives to lead. Mutually empowered collaborative research takes a huge amount of time-for
everyone. While we-the archeologists-may
be willing to devote these chunks of time, this is
because we see this as our "job" (Stoecker 1997).
The stakeholders we work with may not have that
luxury, or, even, desire.
So, how does this relate back to the topic of
"freedom"? How can the idea of freedom, as expressed in terms of self-reliance, self-determination, and independence, intersect with how we do
archeology in Freedmen's town? We can turn to
the community's own words for some clues. Here
are merged excerpts from several interviews with
House, Johnson, and other community members
(House 2005; Johnson 2005; McGhee 2004):
[In the past] ... [the community was] ...
prominent, progressive. And we didn't
have to go to the Caucasians for anything;
we were self-sustaining ... "We could get
anything we needed ... we didn't have to
rely on anyone outside, we had our own
doctors, lawyers, schools, and stores ...
People were genuine and did all they
could do to help ... they wanted to get to
the finish line together. You talk about a
village raising? Well, everybody ... helped
you to raise your children ... the whole
community worked together ... It was like
a big village, and we all supported one
another. .. we had a nurturing neighborhood ... We just took what we had and
shared it .. .it brings joy and happiness,
when you can do that. That's what we had
in this neighborhood.
When people speak of what they want for their
community in the future, the same ideas emerge in
a different form. As House put it:

McDavid et al.-Urban Archeology and the Pressures of Gentrification
I [want to] bring back all of the former
grassroots residents of Freedmen's
Town ... and all of them would be welcomed back in the community ... We
would open our businesses up out here
again, so that we could be an independent community ... and our people
would be in power. .. this would be a
community of being in charge of itself ...
(House 2005).
These expressions of freedom and independence in Freedmen's Town are the cultural and
spiritual descendants of the original spirit that
created the original community of Freedmantown.
Not long ago I asked both House and Johnson
how they saw our work-what they saw it doing
for them-in order to better understand how their
freedom narrative could intersect with our archeology project. It surprised me to learn that they did
not expect our work to aid directly in achieving
the goals that they expressed above. Nor did they
want to participate in our research. Both expressed
enthusiastic support for archeology, but their enthusiasm was for three things. First, they want the
new information that archeology can offer about
the past, especially when this information can
counter negative ethnic and class stereotypes in
the larger Houston community. Second and equally
important, they appreciate the legitimization that
our work, done by people with Ph.D's and so on,
confers on their own efforts to convince others that
their community is worth saving. That is, they use
our work strategically, when they see the need. For
example, House told me how she had put a report
we had given her (about one of her properties we
had investigated on a pro-bono basis, as part of the
museum sponsorship) on the desk of a city planner,
to show that a professional archeologist thought
that her neighborhood was important enough to
study, and to save. I know that she appreciated the
specific content of our report, but I suspect that this
personal interest was less important than the simple
fact that we had done the work and written up the
report. That is, that we had treated her neighborhood and its history with the professional respect
it deserves. Third, they are enthusiastic (if a bit
surprised, at times) about our ongoing efforts to talk
to white people about African American archeology,
as well as my own recent activism when speaking
to white audiences about white privilege (McDavid
2007). While they are happy that we want to involve
community people, especially kids, in our project,

41

they are just as happy for us to bring students and
volunteers in from the outside, most of whom are
white. They know that this will create support for
their own agendas, as well as more respect for their
neighborhood. It does, too: I recently encountered a
web blog where one of our previous students said his
experience doing archeology in Freedmen's Town
had been "life changing." House, Johnson, and others see clearly that our work can be used for their
purposes, both directly and indirectly.
Yet, in terms of being full "research partners,"
we have found that most of the time community
members are far too busy with their own struggles
to help us do what they see as our jobs. But they do
want us to do those jobs. They also want us to share
what we learn, as long as we do so with respect for
existing community narratives, oral history accounts,
as well as their own policy and programming goals.
The latter has been challenging at times, because
our sponsor is a preservation-first organization, and
within the community other infrastructure needs
(such as good streets, clear water, etc.) frequently
trump "pure" preservation. Negotiating a pathway
between the two has occasionally been difficult. But
for the most part community people are happy for us
to do, as one put it, "our own thing," in terms of how
we organize and conduct our archeological research.
They are also pleased to provide interpretation assistance when asked, as well as feedback to insure
that we are presenting our findings sensitively. In
short, with their help, we are learning to walk a thin
line: to offer our skills, resources, and information
to community people to use for their own agendas,
while at the same time pursuing the research questions we are interested in. We are learning that, given
transparency and openness, these are not mutually
exclusive activities.
This discussion has dealt mostly with local
contexts, but larger ones are important to mention,
even if briefly. Gentrification and historic preservation efforts in Freedmen's Town are part of the larger
political economy of 21st century Texas. They are
connected to national, even global, issues surrounding urban policy, historic consciousness, racism,
classism, systematic erasure, and displacement. In
Houston, as is true elsewhere, the proximity of the
neighborhood to the downtown area lends urgency
to the problem. I am not at all sure that one small
archeology project can have a substantive role to
play in resisting these larger forces.
However, we can take the time and energy to
truly understand how the communities we work

42

Texas Archeological Society

with construct their own narratives, and how they
find meaning in their own histories. That is, we can
be what most archeologists in this country were
trained to be in the first place: anthropologists. How
many times do post-graduate archeologists conduct
intensive, systematic, ethnographic research? We
can use our archeological work to enhance community agendas (in the case described here, to support
self-determination and independence), but only if
we know what those agendas are, what they sprang
from, and what they hope to accomplish. This type
of contemporary context research, which is sometimes characterized as public archeology or, more
recently, as ethnographic archeology, should not be
something nice that we only do if we happen to have
the time and budget for it. It should be mainstreamed
into archeological projects and seen as a normative
and necessary part of archeological research.

ABOVE-GROUND ARCHEOLOGY:
THE HISTORIC BRICK STREETS
OF FREEDMEN'S TOWN
Now we will move to a discussion of one particular component of our archeological project: the
hypotheses, early findings, and preliminary analysis
of the historic brick streets of Freedmen's Town.
This narrative was written jointly by all three authors
of this article.
A few years ago the museum asked us to perform an assessment of the two remaining historic
brick streets in Freedmen's Town, in order to determine their potential cultural, archeological, and
historical significance. We did our initial assessment
in late 2002 and have done updates intermittently
over the past six years, all on a pro-bono basis. Our
work has included documentary research, oral histories, and interviews as well as pedestrian survey
(a substantial portion of the documentary research
cited below has also been done by our collaborator
Debra Sloan, RBHY's historical researcher). To date
no excavation has taken place.
Part of the larger story about these streets-far
to complex to recount in detail here-is that it is
likely that very soon the remaining historic bricks
will be removed and the street will be "renovated"
by the City of Houston. Plans for that work are underway, and, not surprisingly, different stakeholders
in both the local and larger communities have taken
different positions on the relative merit of various
plans that have been proposed for this work. Some

call for no removal of any historic bricks; some
require reinstallation of the same historic bricks
(some in the same locations, some not); some
would bring in antique bricks from other areas; and
some would use new bricks. Even though YCAP
has managed to avoid participating in the rather
vicious political rhetoric that has raged around
this issue, the hypotheses and data described here
have been used by our client (RBHY), and by their
community collaborators, to argue for a different
sort of restoration plan than that which the city
is currently attempting to execute. In short, they
prefer a preservation-sensitive restoration of the
streetscape rather than the "renovation" proposed
by the City (although everyone is in agreement that
the currently poor condition of the streets needs to
be redressed).
At this writing, we have no idea what will happen, although we hope that streetscape (re)construction will include at least some archeological oversight. We should note that even though the streets
are subject to Section 106 review under the Nati on al
Historic Preservation Act, the review process for
the city's plan is under the purview of the Texas
Historical Commission's (THC's) architecture, not
archeology, division. That is, whether the streets
are seen as archeological at all is not agreed upon
by all players. We have argued that they should be,
in several local public forums and in writing, via
other versions of this article distributed to the City,
local organizations, the THC, local press, etc. So
have a number of key community groups. Unfortunately, none of these community groups are currently recognized by the THC as official consulting
parties for this particular Section 106 undertaking.
Some were consulting parties for other projects in
the past, and the reasons they are not recognized as
consulting parties for this project are, at best, confused. Nonetheless, several stakeholders have read
this article and are in agreement that this paragraph
accurately (although perhaps too briefly) describes
the current situation. A fully contextualized account
of "the brick street situation," with all perspectives,
rationales, and defenses included, will have to wait
for another forum.
At this point we will move to the data itself and
our analysis of it. This data will weave back and forth
from oral, documentary, and material culture evidence,
which we will then summarize and make several recommendations for future research. Figure 1 is a map
showing the extent of the two remaining historic brick
streets, which run almost a mile in length.

McDavid et al.-Urban Archeology and the Pressures of Gentrification

~
O-

"

(?

Blue Place

-~

~

~
,..

"

·o;
a:i

Bluebonnet P!ace

""

_;Q

West Dallas Avenue

Cemetery

I
ro

Saulnier~

Robin

~

!/ ~

JI

~

~.
Andrews

~

~"

ffi

_;Q

E!

h

~

c

.0

~

43

3·

"'

~

6'"

~I

(

.,.,.,,.

<ii

Andrews Street

gs

---,,,

:'!

"

0

I I I j11~t-t--+-J~
Ruthvi::>n

11

I

~I

I

Cleveland I

I

1

1

1

Victor

~

Gray

t

I I I

~t

--

FREEDMAN'S TOWN - HOUSTON, TEXAS
Andrews and Wilson Streets
0

L

0.1

0.2
J_

W+E
N

0.4 KM

s

Figure 1. Map showing remaining brick streets in Freedmen's Town

An important part of the research has been aimed
at learning exactly when the streets were built, and
by whom. According to oral accounts (House 2005),
a "Reverend Jeremiah" led a community-wide effort
to lay brick streets in the neighborhood because the
city government of the time refused to do it. These
narratives describe the reason for this initiative (that
malaria was endemic due to the muddy streets) and
information about how the streets were funded (with
contributions of $1.00 per brick from individual
residents). However, these accounts did not mention when this grassroots effort took place, or any
other details.
The 1907 Sanborn Map for the City of Houston
shows Andrews and Wilson streets as "unpaved,"
whereas on the 1924 map (the next available map),
no notation is made with regard to paving. 7 Therefore our first assumption was that the current brick
streets were likely laid between 1907 and 1924.
Subsequent documentary research by Debra
Sloan (2008) then revealed a number of documents
that indicate the first episode of paving was in 1914,

when the city awarded bids to Eureka Paving Company to pave the portion of Andrews Street east of
Wilson. In addition, in 1921, the city also paved
Andrews west of Wilson, to Mason Street; additional paving contracts were found for that paving.
However, Sloan found another document that is even
more interesting, when considered alongside the
community's oral narrative. In a file in the office of
the City Secretary of Houston, Sloan found a copy
of a petition circulated by the residents of Andrews,
west of Wilson, that had been submitted to the City
in late 1921. The first two signatures on the petition
were both "Elder E. L. Jeremiah"-he apparently
owned two properties, and signed one line for each.
The petition indicates that the signatories were in
support of a city assessment of up to $1.25 per linear
foot of property frontage for brick street paving,
curbs, and gutters. At the bottom of this petition, the
following handwritten addendum appears:
We did not get to see all on this street.
That is, we did not get the petition to all,

44

Texas Archeological Society

but there is nor but one man on the street
who was not in favor of paving. He owns
fifty feet. But we feel that we can get him.
[signed] The committee

This document, in our opinion, provides significant support for the essence of the oral history story.
"Elder" is an honorific frequently used for spiritual
leaders in African American churches, and Elder
E. L. Jeremiah was the first signature on a petition
which the community itself circulated and signed.
This petition indicated that these property owners
made a financial commitment of $1.25 per foot to
pay for paving their street. This amount corresponds
with the "$1.00 per brick" mentioned in the oral
narratives: the bricks used were 8-9 inches long.
The handwritten comment at the bottom makes it
clear that a community "committee" was an active
agent in convincing property owners to support the
assessment for street paving. At this point Sloan is
still looking for a similar petition for the 1914 paving episode.

The Archeology
First we will describe the physical material
culture evidence. We will then begin to interpret that
evidence in light of ethnographic, oral historical,
photographic, and archival data, and will then close
with recommendations for further research.
During our first pedestrian survey in 2002 we
searched for maker's marks and any unusual features
of the bricks themselves, as well as evidence of
buried trolley rails (oral history data had suggested
that at least some of the rails were still there, under
the asphalt that was placed over the old trolley lines;
Figure 2 illustrates this). We surveyed 100 percent of
the project area with a metal detector and found no
evidence of rails in this survey; further tests would
be necessary to determine whether any of them are
still there. Our most significant finding had to do
with the patterning of the bricks as they were laid
in the streets.
First, the pattern of the brick is different
between the intersections and the streets themselves.
We found three intersections where this variance

Figure 2. Andrews Street at Arthur Street, looking east (one of three intersections with similar patterns).

McDavid et al.-Urbcm Archeology and the Pressures of Gentrification
occurs (the other intersections in
the survey area are now covered
with asphalt so it is impossible
to determine whether they were
laid in the same way). As noted
above, asphalt has been laid over
the old rails, but one can still see
the brick patterns in the rest of
each intersection, and between the
spaces where the rails were. The
space between the two rails that
does not lie within an intersection
is laid in a straight runningbond pattern. The herringbone
patterns are located only in the
part of the street that lies both
between the old trolley tracks
and in the intersection. Perhaps
more important, the rest of each
intersection (that is, the portion
outside the trolley line) is laid
in a four-directional diagonal

45

Figure 3. Wilson Street at Andrews Street, center point of intersection pattern
located outside of original trolley line, but within the intersection.

Figure 4. Upside-down street marker at southwest corner of
Crosby and Andrews.

running-bond pattern. In this pattern, the four
quadrants of a larger pattern come together in
the approximate center of each intersection.
This is most notable at the intersection of
Wilson and Andrews, where the brick in the
center is still present (Figure 3).
At the other intersections the same pattern
variance was noted between the rail lines and
the rest of the intersection. At the center point
of these streets, manhole covers are located
over the center spot. In all cases it appears that
a four-directional brick pattern would converge
in a point near the middle of the street if the
center bricks on the street were still present.
The manhole covers are over present-day storm
sewer lines (see Figure 2). The abutting streets
appear to have been laid in a straight running
bond pattern, although with the overlaying asphalt this is difficult to tell.
Another physical finding has to do with
the street marker on one particular intersection.
The blue and white mosaic tile street name at
the intersection of Andrews and Crosby was
installed upside down (Figure 4). This "reverse"
installation is on the southwest corner, next
to Bethel Baptist Church, one of the earliest
and most important historic African American
churches in the area, and the reason for this will
be addressed below.

46

Texas Archeological Society

Another feature of the brick
streets was also noted during our
original surveys. The herringbone
pattern between the rail lines (see
Figure 2) is very similar to the
stonework patterning at Bethel
Baptist Church on Andrews (Figure 5). This church was formed in
1891 at this site, though this particular building was built in 1950,
on the footprint of the original.
According to the cornerstone, the
stonework was done by Magnolia
Lodge #3, an African American
Freemason Lodge.
Since the original walking
survey, additional measurements
and photographs have been taken.
In Fall 2004 a small object was
located very near the geographic
(by measurement) center of Andrews and Wilson. This object was
a small ceramic "die," and was
embedded in the cracks between
two of the bricks. The "three" side
of the die was aligned in a north/
south direction, and the die is
about 3/8-inch square (Figures 6a
and 6b). This object was not noticed until we looked at the bricks
very closely, from a distance of
about 10 inches. Because of the
Figure 5. Bethel Baptist Church, stonework detail.
threatened brick street removal, the
object was removed and replaced
with a marking object, after photographs and more
"crossroads" have appeared in narratives discussing
measurements were taken. We have no idea when
quilt patterns (Tobin and Dobard 1999), African and
the die was originally deposited (it does seem unAfrican American altars (Thompson 1983, 1990,
likely that it was deposited when the streets were
1993), histories of American blues (Mclnnis 2000),
built) and we are still in the process of analyzing
and descriptions of popular culture events such
it. The surface of the die is pitted and cracked from
as dance performance (Janas 1999) and hip hop
natural exposure, and appears to be quite old.
(Octopus 2002). Examples from both sides of the
Black Atlantic appear in data gathered by scholars
We will now consider these physical observations
in light of additional ethnographic, material culture,
in folklore, art history, architecture, anthropology,
oral historical, photographic, and archival data.
and religion.
In addition, archeological research conducted in
1. There is considerable scholarly and popular
the Houston/Brazoria area, and elsewhere across the
culture documentation that speaks to the symSouth, has revealed archeological evidence connectbolic significance of "crossroads" in African and
ing non-Christian "cross" symbolism with a number
African American contexts.
of different African and African American religious
The importance of this symbol, and this idea,
practices (Brown 2001, 2003a, 2003b, 2003c,
is commonplace amongst students of African
2003d, 2004; Brown and Cooper 1990; Bruner 1996;
American culture and history. Discussions about
Fennell 2007; Ferguson 1992; Gundaker 1998a,

McDavid et al.-Urban Archeology and the Pressures of Gentrification

47

four "quadrants" of the "cross" appears to take on
meanings that vary with context, time, and association with other symbols. The most recent research
suggests that the connection, symbolically, is not
directly to the idea of a "cosmogram," but instead
a wider connection to the importance of cardinal
direction crosses (Brown 2003e; Brown and Brown
1998; Gundaker 1998b).

a

b
Figure 6. Ceramic "die" found at the center of Wilson
and Andrews streets: a, the "die" in situ; b, close-up of
the ceramic "die."

l 998b; Henderson 2002; Leone and Fry 1999; Samford 1999; Young 1997). In some of these examples,
artifacts and artifact contexts have been interpreted
as adaptations of the "BaKongo Cosmogram." This
"cosmogram" represents a particular world view of
the cycle of life, and has been of significant interest
to historical archeologists in this country since the
late 1980s. In some New World Diaspora contexts,
the BaKongo tradition is creolized with certain
Yoruba traditions, and the directionality of the

2. Street intersections have been used as ceremonial places, in several African Diaspora and Black
Atlantic contexts, including Freedmen's Town.
Robe1i Farris Thompson has specifically addressed the importance of intersections in his monumental book on African American altars and sacred
places. In this work he recounts an example of how
street intersections were used ceremonially in the
Congo, and in Cuba's African Diaspora community
as well: " ... the celebrants themselves used street
intersections as a chain of found cosmograms ... "
(Thompson 1993:68).
In addition, we have heard two ethnographic
accounts that describe Yoruba ceremonies that have
taken place in Houston intersections in order to protect or prepare for important events (M. Adamu, personal communication, 2003). More recently, some
local churches have held gospel music and prayer
services in the brick street intersections, and a local
black activist group held a "crossroads ceremony"
at the intersection of Andrews and Wilson on Juneteenth of 2007 (Figure 7); note the chalk oval drawn
in the center of the street. An oval is frequently used
to depict the "cosmogram" or "cycle of life" idea
in African Diaspora contexts (Brown and Cooper
1990; Bruner 1996).
3. As described above, oral history narratives and
historical documentation from Freedmen's Town
residents suggest that the construction of the
streets was, in part, an act of self-empowerment
and community choice; a prominent African
American citizen of Freedmen's Town in the late
1800s was Reverend Ned Pullum, who owned a
large brickyard (Sloan 2008).
Pullum lived at the corner of Andrews and Wilson and would have been a contemporary of "Reverend Jeremiah," as well as the other signatories on
the 1921 petition described above (his portion of
Andrews would have been paved in the earlier 1914
paving episode, for which no petition has yet been
found). The obvious question (yet to be answered)
is whether Pullum was part of a community-driven

48

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 7. Celebration hosted by Black United Front, Juneteenth, 2007. Photograph courtesy of Debra Blacklock-Sloan.

paving project for his own portion of the street,
although it seems likely that he was, and he was
undoubtedly in a financial and leadership position
to participate if he chose. He was also, for a time,
the pastor of the Bethel Baptist Church, the church
where the brick patterns are the same as those on
the streets. We should point out that we do not
know what the original Bethel Church looked like,
or whether there was continuity in design from the
older one to the newer one. The current building replaced an earlier one but the stonework was, according to the cornerstone, laid by an African American
Freemason chapter.
4. It is extremely likely, in terms of the manual
labor force in post-emancipation Houston, that
the people who laid the bricks were themselves
African American.
It is not known whether the laborers themselves would have decided what patterns to use
in the intersections: this is a matter for additional
research. Historical construction methods also need
to be examined. Research is also needed to establish connections between the African American
residents of Freedmen's Town and the laborers who

built the streets. Although Sloan has found evidence of black brick masons living in Freedmen's
Town during the construction period (Sloan 2008),
and we have seen photographs of African American
laborers laying brick on other Houston streets in
the "pre Great Depression" era (Powell 2003:76),
direct connections between specific laborers and
the street pavers of Freedmen's Town streets have
yet to be made.
5.At least one intersection (Crosby atAndrews) was
marked with "reverse marking" (see Figure 4), and
examples of similar "inversion" have been found
in other symbolic African Diaspora contexts.
The street marker illustrated in Figure 4 was
next to the Bethel Baptist church, on the south side
of the street. In most "cosmogram" depictions, the
southern portion represents the afterlife. Reversed
letters and texts also exist on grave markers and
features in three other African American cemeteries
in the region: the Olivewood Cemetery (Houston's
oldest recorded African American cemetery), the
College Park Cemetery in Houston, and the Juden
Cemetery (the graveyard for individuals who worked
on the Levi Jordan Plantation, in Brazoria, Texas)

McDavid et al.-Urban Archeology and the Pressures of Gentrification
(Bruner 1996, 2007). Recent research conducted by
Bruner into the symbolism of inversion in the Kongo
belief system indicates that reversed and upside
down script may be intentional (see Bruner 1996;
Thompson 1983:142). Figure 8 illustrates examples
of inverted and reversed text from the Olivewood
Cemetery. The text is composed of blue and white
tiles: the same as that used for street markers in
Freedmen's Town.

6. The "die" described above was found in the
center of Andrews and Wilson, which appears to
have been the most important intersection in 19th
century Freedmen's Town.
According to the "Biography of Jack Yates,"
written by his sons, Rutherford and Paul (Yates and
Yates 1985:23), when one wanted to visit Freedmen's Town, the directions commonly given were
"Ride the San Felipe Car and ask the conductor to
let you get off at Jack Yates." The trolley on this
brick street passed directly in front of the homes of
Jack Yates and Ned Pullum, at this intersection. As
mentioned above, members of both the local and
larger African American communities in Houston
still use this particular street intersection for ceremonial purposes.

CONCLUSIONS: RECOMMENDATIONS
AND IMPLICATIONS
In order to test connections between the above
associations properly, it would be necessary to examine brick streets in other cities (and other parts of
Houston, where they exist) to see if intersection patterning in Freedmen's Town is repeated elsewhere.
If it is, it would be necessary to examine exactly
what sort of patterning variance exists between other
streets and their intersections. That is, is it usually a

49

matter of simply replacing one pattern with another
(say, herringbone instead of the standard runningbond) or, as is the case here, is intersection patterning typically complex, with several patterns existing
within the bounds of each intersection? We would
also need to examine the context in which the patterning takes place. Is it, for example, more prevalent on streets that were built by African American
labor, or in contexts in which African American
people made design decisions?
If a variance between patterns on intersections
and streets is customary-that is, "simply the way one
builds brick streets"-then the streets in Freedmen's
Town would be fairly typical and one of our hypotheses (that the brick patterns themselves are important)
would be unsupported. However, ethnographic and
oral history evidence support a post-construction
ceremonial use. This would be especially interesting
in light of running water beneath the center of the
streets, because the horizontal center line in most
"cosmogram" depictions usually represents water.
That is, it may not matter if the patterns and running
water were on the minds of the street builders and
street designers. Their cultural and archeological
importance would not be diminished if they were
used as "found cosmograms," as Thompson's work
documents for other African Diaspora contexts. This
research has yet to be undertaken.
Following are our recommendations for future
research:
• Photo documentation, including detailed measurements and GIS mapping, of existing streets
and patterns.
• Ethnographic, anthropological, and historical
study of brick street patterning in other American communities, including photographic and
historical documentation.

Figure 8. The tiled grave slab for W. A. Harris (left) and the entrance into a family plot with tiled letters (right).

50

Texas Archeological Society

• Study of the patterns themselves as they occur
(or do not occur) in other African Diaspora
contexts, such as art, architecture, textiles,
religion, etc.
• Oral history about past and present use of
the streetscape, sidewalks, etc., including but
not limited to their connections to vernacular
architecture, neighborhood landmarks, and
structures.
• Study of street construction methods used in
the Freedmen's Town streets, and additional
study of the labor force that designed and laid
the streets.
• Archeological study of easement areas, when
permitted by property owners, in order to
search for physical evidence of the now-missing
heningbone-pattern sidewalks that have been
mentioned by several community members.
• Archeological study of the streets, including
items potentially buried under them, if or when
any construction or restoration work takes
place.
• Most important, collaborative work with the
existing indigenous community (including
those who have been displaced and now live
elsewhere, but are from the community), to
both supplement and inform any research undertaken.
To conclude, in the first section of this article
we discussed the social and political relevance behind the transformation of the names of the neighborhood now known as Freedmen's Town. The act
of naming the historic district itself was interpreted
as a form of social and political self-empowerment.
In the second section, names were also seen as an
important aspect of the physical landscape. Place
names and their transformations were identified
through an array of historic records (maps, directories, oral narratives, etc). The meaning(s) of a
place may be difficult to infer when faced with
only a handful of written and oral accounts, but it
is still possible to view these places as components
of broader and ethnohistorically connected social
landscapes.
Likewise, the brick streets of Freedmen's Town
now have a very active "name" in the political arena
of preservation in Houston. There is clear evidence
that the early 20th century residents of Freedmen's

Town took an active part in the construction of their
streets: they caused them to be constructed and paid
a significant percentage of the cost to do so. There
is also a compelling web of associations to support
the idea that the streets continue to serve as potent
symbols of Freedmen's Town heritage, to cunent
residents and to other African Americans in Houston, whatever the intentions of the original builders
may have been. It is only through a deeply contextualized, interdisciplinary, community-engaged
approach to archeology that these meanings and
associations have become visible.
Questions about continuities and differences
between African, captive African, and African
American life continue to be studied by scholars
all over the world, but to our knowledge no one has
studied streets and streetscapes ~with regard to the
African Diaspora. We think they should be, and that
the brick streets of Freedmen's Town would be a
good place to start.

ENDNOTES
1. A earlier version of this section was also published in
McDavid (2006a).

2. Some examples include Oxford, Mississippi; Mitchelville
and Lincolnville, South Carolina; Bryan, Denton, Austin, and
San Antonio, Texas: and Nicodemus, Kansas.
3. Buffalo Bayou was also straightened during that period.
While this caused many of the original house sites to disappear (Beeth and Wintz 1992), the San Felipe Courts housing
project took by far the largest portion of land.
4. A map of central Houston, showing the location and name of
the original settlement, is located in the Texas Room, Houston
Public Library, Houston, Texas.
5. This account is based on interviews conducted with Gladys
House, Lenwood Johnson, Joan Denkler, Catherine Roberts,
other people, and McDavid's own recollections. Interview
transcripts are in the possession of the senior author.
6. Recently, some stakeholders have formed the "Midtown
West Civic Club," and despite appeals, refuse to have any
communication whatsoever with more historically minded
stakeholders. They have also been successful in changing
some of the signs designating the area to "Midtown," not
"Freedman's Town"-the signs that House had fought so hard
to install. Another new group is called "'The New Fourth Ward
Homeowners Association."
7. Historic Sanborn maps are available on several online sources
as well as the Houston Public Library's Texas Room.

McDavid et al.-Urban Archeology and the Pressures of Gentrification
REFERENCES CITED
Beeth, H. and C. D. Wintz (editors)
1992 Black Dixie: Afro-Texan History and Culture in
Houston. Texas A&M University Press, College
Station, Texas.
Brown, K. L.
2001 Interwoven Traditions: Archaeology of the Conjurer's Cabins and the African American Cemetery at
the Jordan and Frogmore Plantations. Paper presented at the conference "Places of Cultural Memory:
African Reflections on the American Landscape,"
Atlanta, Georgia.
2003a The Archaeology of Cabin l-A-1: The Praise House.
Report to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department.
Technical Report No. 2. University of Houston.
2003b Management Sununar:y Report for the Texas Parks
and Wildlife Department: The Levi Jordan Plantation State Historic Site, Brazoria County. Texas.
University of Houston.
2003c Methodology: Report for the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department. The Levi Jordan Plantation State
Historic Site, Brazoria County, Texas. University of
Houston.
2003d Report to the Texas Parks and Wildl(fe Department.
The Levi Jordan Plantation State Historic Site: The
Levi Jordan Plantation Research Design. Technical
Report Series, No. 1. University of Houston.
2003e Spirits and Ancestors: Archaeology and the Role of
Peoples of African Descent in Adapting Christianity
into their Spirituality. Paper presented at the Tenth
Annual Deerfield-Wellesley Symposium in American Culture, African Cultures in the North American
Diaspora: An Interdisciplinary Symposium, Deerfield, Massachusetts.

2007

51

Symbols for the Living: Synthesis, Invention, and
Resistance in 19th to 20th Century Mortuary Practices from Montgomery County and Harris County,
Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation, State University of New
York, Binghamton.

Bruner, D., C. McDavid, and R. Marcom
2007 Urban Archaeology and the pressures of gentrification: Negotiating "freedom" in Freedmen's Town,
Houston. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting
of the Society for American Archaeology, Austin,
Texas.
Castaneda, Q. E. and C. N. Matthews (editors)
2008 Ethnographic Archaeologies: Reflections on Stakeholders and Archaeological Practices. AltaMira
Press, Lanham, Maryland.
Davidson, J.M.
2004 "Living Symbols of Their Lifelong Struggles": In
Search of the Home and Household in the Heart
of Freedman's Town, Dallas, Texas. In Household
Choices and Household Chores: Theorizing Domestic Relationships and Socia[ Spaces in Historical
Archaeology, edited by K. S. Barile and J. C. Brandon, pp. 75-106. The University of Alabama Press,
Tuscaloosa.
Ervin, A. M.
2000 Applied Anthropology: Tools and Perspectives for
Contemporary Practice. Allyn & Bacon, Needham
Heights, Massachusetts.
Fennell. C. C.
2007 Crossroads and Cosmologies: Diasporas and Eth11.ogenesis in the New World. University Press of
Florida, Gainesville.

Ethnographic Analogy, Archaeology, and the African
Diaspora: Perspectives from a Tenant Community.
Historical Archaeology 38(1):79-89.

Ferguson, L.
1992 Uncommon Ground: Archaeology and Early African
America, 1650-1800. Smithsonian Institution Press,
Washington, D.C.

Brown, K. L. and D. C. Cooper
1990 Structural Continuity in an African American Slave
and Tenant Community. Historical Archaeology
24(4):7-19.

Gundaker, G. (editor)
l 998a Keep your head to the sky: Interpreting African
American Home Ground. University of Virginia
Press, Charlottesville.

2004

Brown, K. N. and K. L. Brown
1998 Archaeology and Spirituality: The Conjurer/Midwife
and the Praise House/Church at the Levi Jordan
Plantation. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting
of the Society for Historical Archaeology, Atlanta,
Georgia.
Bruner, D.
1996 Hidden Power: Burial Practices from an African
American Slave and Tenant Community. Master's
Thesis, Department of Anthropology, University of
Houston.

1998b Signs of Diaspora: Diaspora of Signs. Oxford University Press, New York.
Henderson, C.
2002 Hellhound on my trail: Aswang and Legba at the
Crossroads of Life. Asia Pacific Management Forum
Electronic Newsletter, http://www.apmforum.com/
colnmns/orientseas51.htm. Accessed March 13,
2008.
House, G.
2005 Oral History Interview, transcript in possession of
Carol McDavid.

52

Texas Archeological Society

Janas. M.
1999 Caroline Jackson Smith: Staging the Familiar. Oberlin Online: News and Features.

Powell, W. D.
2003 Houston Then and Now. Thunder Bay Press, an
imprint of Advantage Publishers, London.

Johnson, L.
2005 Oral History Interview, transcript in possession of
Carol McDavid.

Samford, P.
1999 Strong is the Bond of Kinship: West African-Style
Ancestor Shrines on African American Quarters. In
Historical Archaeology, Identity Construction, and
the Inte1pretation of Ethnicity, edited by M. Franklin and G. Fesler, pp. 71-91. Colonial Williamsburg
Research Publications, Williamsburg, Virginia.

Leone, M. P. and G.-M. Fry
1999 Conjuring in the Big House Kitchen: An Interpretation of African American Belief Systems. Journal of
American Folklore 112(445):372-403.
Leone, M. P., P. B. Potter, Jr., and P.A. Shackel
1987 Toward a Critical Archaeology. Current Anthropology 28(3):283-302.
Little, B. and P. Shackel (editors)
2007 Archaeology as a Tool of Civic Engagement.
AltaMira Press, Lanham, Maryland.
Maxwell, L. P.
1997 Freedmantown: The Origins of a Black Neighborhood in Houston, 1865-1880. In Bricks without
Straw: A Comprehensive History of African Americans in Texas, edited by D. A. Williams, pp. 125-152.
Eakin Press, Austin.
McDavid, C.
2006a The Power of a Name: Reclaiming Heritage in
Freedmen's Town, Houston, Texas. African Diaspora
Archaeology Network Newsletter. Online newsletter, March 2006, at http://www.diaspora.uiuc.edu/
news0306/news0306.html#l. Accessed March 13,
2008.
2006b The Power of a Name: Reclaiming Heritage in
Freedmen's Town, Houston, Texas. Paper presented
at the Annual Meeting of the Society for Historical
Archaeology, Sacramento. California.
2007

Beyond strategy and good intentions: Archaeology,
race, and white privilege. In An Archaeology of Civic
Engagement and Social Justice, edited by B. Little
and P. Shackel, pp. 67-88. AltaMira Press, Lanham,
Maryland.

McGhee, F. L.
2004 Oral History Interviews with Freedman's Town
community members. On file at Fred L. McGhee &
Associates, Inc., Austin.
Mcinnis. C. L.
2000 The New African American Writers of Mississippi.
Motion Magazine. November issue. Electronic publication at http://www.inmotionmagazine.com/naawm.
html. Accessed March J 3, 2008.
Octopus, A.
2002 Rap and Hiphop - A semi-essay. Off the Wall, Volume J. Online publication at http://www.altrap.com/
write/?p=4 I 2 . Accessed March 13, 2008.

Shackel, P. and E. Chambers (editors)
2004 Places in Mind: Archaeology as Applied Anthropology. Routledge, New York.
Sloan, D.
2008 Research notes in possession of researcher and the
Rutherford B. H. Yates Museum, Inc., Houston.
Stoecker, R.
1997 Are Academics Irrelevanf? Roles for Scholars in Participatory Research. Paper presented at the American
Sociological Society annual meeting.
Thompson, R. F.
1983 Flash of the Spirit: African and Afro-American Art
& Philosophy. Vintage Books, New York.
1990

Kongo Influences on African American Artistic
Culture. In Afi·icanisms in American Culture, edited
by J.E. Holloway, pp. 148-184. Indiana University
Press, Bloomington and Indianapolis.

1993

Face of the Gods: Art and Altars of Africa and the
African Americas. The Museum for African Art, New
York.

Tobin, J. L. and R. G. Dobard
1999 Hidden in plain view: the secret story of quilts and
the underground railroad. Doubleday, New York.
vom Bruck, G. and B. Bodenhorn
2006 An Anthropology of Names and Naming. Cambridge
University Press. Cambridge.
Wintz, C. D.
1990 The Emergence of a Black Neighborhood: Houston's
Fourth Ward, 1865-1915. In Urban Texas: Politics
and Development, edited by C. Miller and H. Sanders, pp. 96-109. Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Yates, R. B. H., Sr. and P. L. Yates
1985 The Life and Efforts of Jack Yates. Texas Southern
University Press, Houston.
Young, A. L.
1997 Risk Management Strategies Among African American Slaves at Locust Grove Plantation. International
Journal of Historical Archaeology 1(I ):5-37.

In the Neighborhood:
City Planning, Heritage Politics, and Archeology at the
St. Paul United Methodist Church in Dallas, Texas
Jodi Skipper

ABSTRACT
What happens to Black institutions when Black residents have left the neighborhood, but not the building? This is the question that must be asked when a historically Black institution has stayed in place after its
community has moved to outlying suburbs. Here I focus on the St. Paul United Methodist Church in Dallas,
Texas, and investigate the founding of the church, as well as its long, complex history.
Over the years, the city of Dallas has destroyed the sense of unity of this neighborhood by putting in
freeways and a housing project. Eventually, it became difficult for Black residents to stand the traffic in, and
marginalization of. their community, and they left. Arts institutions and other high end developments moved into
the "empty" neighborhood. In just under two decades, the neighborhood became the Dallas Arts District.
The determination of the St. Paul United Methodist Church to stay in the Arts District presents a quandary.
What should Black institutions do when their neighborhoods become primarily White areas? My work on this
topic intersects with questions about gentrification, urban planning, racial discrimination, and surprisingly,
archeology, which has become a tool for the St. Paul United Methodist Church to argue its standing to remain
in the Arts District, and indeed, in Dallas itself.
Telling the story of the St. Paul United Methodist Church required analyses in areas of architecture,
ethnicity, local history, public archeology, and constitutional rights; here, the right of a government entity, the
city of Dallas, to engage in a taking of property. Most important. however, is the culmination of this research:
that through archeology, one Black community has learned how to use its past to cement a place for itself in
the future.

INTRODUCTION
The Deep South was not the only hotbed of racial discrimination in the 1950s. Approximately five
years before the murder of Emmett Till and the arrest of Rosa Parks, vandals bombed 12 Black-owned
homes in Dallas, Texas. The crimes of the Black
homeowners were not to whistle or sit in a front row
bus seat. Rather, it was that they lived in areas that
Dallas' White community coveted for itself.
At the time of the 1950 and 1951 bombings,
Black and White Dallasites were engaged in a political struggle over land in north Dallas. The struggle
began in the late 1870s when Blacks moved to
Dallas from other cities in the South. Blacks then
developed land into viable neighborhoods on the

outskirts of Dallas' existing urban center. At the
same time, Whites were expanding the limits of the
city. Conflict arose in the 1940s when government
entities began using the power of eminent domain
to seize property from Blacks and resell the land to
Whites.
Today, archeology has become a useful tool in
examining the facts behind land disputes in Dallas.
I am concerned with the importance of a prominent
Black church in the Dallas Arts District, the St.
Paul United Methodist Church, also known as the
St. Paul UMC. This article discusses the founding,
community, and role of the influential and still extant
St. Paul UMC. Through these frameworks, I explore
the complexities of race, urban archeology, public
history, and religion.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

54

Texas Archeological Society

THE HISTORIC CHURCH
St. Paul's religious history began in 1784. In
that year, a number of Methodist Episcopalians
formed the Methodist Episcopal Church (M.E.C.) at
an event called the Baltimore Christmas Conference.
Almost a century later, at an event called the General
Conference, the M.E.C. divided itself in two, splitting into the M.E.C. North and the M.E.C. South.
The M.E.C. North was opposed to slavery, as the
previous M.E.C. had been. The M.E.C. South was in
favor of slavery. Many Blacks left the M.E.C. South
after the Civil War ended in 1865. They joined the
African Methodist Episcopal (A.M.E.) or the African Methodist Episcopal-Zion (A.M.E.Z.) churches,
both historically Black.
Since the M.E.C. South would not tolerate the
presence of its Black members, the White members
of the group urged the more than 200,000 remaining
Black members to leave. Many of the remaining Black
M.E.C. South members then formed their own church,
the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church (C.M.E.) in
1870. Still, some of the Black M.E.C. South members
instead chose to affiliate themselves with financially
sound White churches, who now owned some of the
federal property confiscated from Confederate landowners dming the Civil War. These Black M.E.C.
South members joined the M.E.C. North.
The M.E.C. North confronted the influx of
Blacks head-on. It held General and Mission Conferences to answer its "Negro problem." It did this
even in the face of opposition from some southern
Whites. "Following the Confederate surrender in
1865, missionaries from all the Protestant denominations crowded into the South to assist in the organization of African American churches" (McQueen
2000: 11). In December 1865, four White ministers
and 12 Black preachers met as part of the Mississippi Mission Conference. This conference was
organized by the M.E.C. North at the Wesley Church
in New Orleans, Louisiana.
The Mississippi Mission Conference set an
amazing goal for itself. It sought to establish and
administer churches for Black Methodists. The Mississippi Mission Conference led to the organization
of the Texas, Louisiana, and Mississippi Conferences. Many freed persons, including Union army
soldiers who had been evangelized during the Civil
War, became members of these new conferences
(Moore 2003:1).
The Texas Conference of 1873 is the most
important of the conferences in regards to this

examination of Dallas land politics, because this
conference voted to organize and supply Dallas
with a mission. This mission was established as St.
Paul (or St. Paul's) Methodist Episcopal Church
(M.E.C.) in 1876.

St. Paul's Beginnings
After the emancipation that followed the Civil
War, many freed Blacks left outlying plantation
communities and went to large cities. They were
looking for family members and better opportunities. James Davidson (2004:76) noted that during
the Reconstruction era,
many freedmen and women in the Dallas
area were effectively barred entry into
the town of Dallas due to the passage of
harsh vagrancy laws just months after
emancipation, targeting freedmen with
the threat of de facto slavery (imprisonment and hard labor) for up to half a year
for each offense (Davidson 1999:22-23,
2000:23-24). To avoid arrest for lack of
a job or a home, most blacks moving
into North Texas did not settle in Dallas proper, but instead formed their own
communities adjacent to, but clearly
outside of, the town.
One of these earliest communities became
known as Freedman's Town, with spelling variations
including Freedmen's Town and Freedmantown.
Later, it came to be called North Dallas and Short
North Dallas.
The St. Paul M.E.C was Dallas' first Black
Methodist congregation. According to St. Paul historian Jimmie Mae Moore (2003: 1), St. Paul's initial
"home was in a brush arbor on a parcel of land."
The arbor likely consisted of a makeshift pavilion of
small trees framed with shrubbery. St. Paul's initial
benefactor, the Philadelphia Board of Missions of
the Methodist Church, contributed $250 that enabled
the new congregation to purchase a white frame
house. This house was constructed in one location,
but eventually was moved to the southeast corner of
Juliette and Burford streets.
In 1877, the house was destroyed by a fire. St.
Paul church's pionee1ing members then dug the foundation for a brick church. They came "to the church
each evening from their jobs, and often work[ed]
until dark. The women brought food and shared with
small chores" (Moore 2003: 1). Soon after, St. Paul's
unfinished basement became home to the Andrews

Skipper-In the Neighborhood SS
Normal School. This is believed to be the first public
school for Blacks in Dallas. Like many Methodist
church schools, the Andrews Normal School 1 taught
young people and adults "everything from scripture
lessons to higher education" (McQueen 2000:3). According to Prior and Schulte (2000:91), classes at the
school "were taught by Reverend Henry Swann who
also preached on Sundays."
The first brick structure of the St. Paul Church
was later "condemned and declared unfit for public
use" (Moore 2003: 1) by the City of Dallas. In 1894,
a long-standing member of the congregation, Mrs.
Kate Turley, donated a portion of the property on
which the current-day church annex was built (Dallas County Clerk Office, Dallas, Texas, 1894, Deed
Book 167:411: R.H. Claypool to Kate Turley). Construction on the present day Gothic and Victorianstyle church began in 1912. The congregation held
services in the brick basement of the first structure
until the new structure was completed in 1927.
St. Paul not only saw structural changes, but
changes in its relationship to the Methodist church.
In 1939, Northern and Southern Methodist congregations, along with the Methodist Protestant Church,
reunited to form the Methodist Church. Out of this
reunification, six jurisdictional conferences were
formed. Five of the established jurisdictional conferences were regional and one was based on race.
This Central Jurisdiction represented the Methodist
Church's Black constituency. The two branches that
were divided over the issue of slavery had reunited,
yet the issue of race remained pertinent nearly 100
years later. In 1968, the Methodist Church merged
with the Evangelical United Brethren (EUB) and the
Central Jurisdiction, forming The United Methodist
Church. St. Paul now had a new name.

The Current St. Paul Building
The St. Paul United Methodist Church (UMC)
resembles large-scale American church buildings
of the 1840s and 18SOs. The church's exterior has
simple Romanesque architecture, with ornate Gothic
and Victorian features. The verticality of the building's front is accentuated by pointing Gothic arches
and two Victorian, almost Medieval, steeples (Figure
la). These two steeples, and a third steeple at the
northeast corner of the building, do not look alike
(Figure le). Yet they all have Romanesque parapets,
low protecting walls along the edges of their roofs.
The church facades are asymmetrical. A semicircular chapel projects from the southern end of

the building (Figure lb). This projecting chapel
makes that end of the church resemble the eastern
ends of many Romanesque churches. The varieties
of architectural forms seen in the elevation of this
church are typical of Gothic Revival churches. The
church has both single and grouped arrangements of
its numerous pointed arch windows.
There are 3S Gothic-styled stained glass windows dedicated to prominent past bishops, pastors,
and church officials (Figure 2a). These windows are
partly visible from the exterior of the church. The
church has various materials and colors of brick and
carved stonework above its windows and archways.
The variety in the church's decorations gives the
building a unique charm. It also accentuates the
fact that the church has undergone over 100 years
of periodic construction, experiencing both setbacks
and triumphs on its journey.
The interior of the church is just as unique as
the exterior. The basement, the oldest part of the
church, forms a platform for the two higher levels
of the church. These levels house the sanctuary,
balcony, and various church offices. At present, the
basement contains office spaces, a fellowship hall,
and a stage for performances. The sanctuary's altar
and pews are laid out on the diagonal of the room
(Figure 2b ). From looking at the church from the
outside, one would expect the altar and pews to be
laid out in the traditional nave, also known as the
transept or cruciform arrangement, as this is the
typical floor plan for churches from that period. The
pew and aisle design make this church a structural
rarity of its time. Although a single aisle typically
separates two church pew sections, here two aisles
separate the three pew sections. Even rarer, St.
Paul's pews are curved at angles as with the aisles
in a contemporary amphitheater.
The chancel of the church is the sanctuary's
front part where service is conducted. In St. Paul,
the chancel is the vertex of the cone-like room. The
rest of the room holds congregation seats and the
choir area. The latter is adjacent to the chancel and
in direct view of the congregation. The church's
wide auditorium plan with its sloping floor on the
main and balcony levels allows a clear view of the
pulpit and choir area.
The chancel is separated from the nave by a
kneeling rail, featuring a short wall attached to a
bench, where congregants receive communion. If
they wish, they can privately express prayer concerns to the clergy. There is a small semi-circular
aisle adjacent to the bench. This chancel of the

56

Texas Archeological Society

a

c

b

Figure 1. The St. Paul Church on Routh Street: a, facing
north; b, the southern end of the St. Paul Church. Courtesy
of The St. Paul United Methodist Church; c, northeast
corner of the St. Paul Church, courtesy of The St. Paul
United Methodist Church.

Figure 2. Interior of the church: a, stained glass window from the church interior; b. sanctuary facing northeast. Courtesy
of The St. Paul United Methodist Church.

Skipper-In the Neighborhood 57
church is unique in another respect: it is not on an
elevated platform, as chancels are in other contemporary churches. Those churches need the elevation to assist with the congregation's view, but this
church does not. The St. Paul church design allows
the congregation to see without difficulty the two
speaker's stands at the front of the church.
Of these two stands, the stand on the left is the
pulpit. The clergy, in this case, the pastors, associate and assistant pastors, and guest speakers, use
the pulpit to read the gospel and preach the sermon.
The stand on the right is a lectern. The church's
announcement clerks use the lectern to publicize
church events. Congregants of the church can also
look above them to be held in awe. The ceiling of
the main sanctuary has beautiful draped ornate tin
portions as well as exposed beams of timber.

and health and recreational centers. The area also
had beauty salons, barber shops, restaurants and
cafes, drug stores, clothing stores, dress shops, furniture stores, taverns, and various homes (Figure 3).

THE CONTEMPORARY VISION
Observers facing the church from a nearby road,
Routh Street, may not notice that the church has
three levels, because the central staircase leading to
the sanctuary masks the basement. This first level
of the church is the primary entrance to the church
offices, but its staircase is only utilized on Sunday
mornings during worship service.
The very ornate central roof houses the sanctuary balcony. The left tower contains office space.
The lower right tower is a library. The semicircular
extension is the Welcome Parlor area. This extension
houses interior bathrooms. There are other bathrooms in the basement area. These must be accessed
through exterior breezeways: one must proceed from
inside of the basement area into an outside corridor
that leads to an enclosed bathroom. These features
add to the building's charm, but present logistical
issues, such as disability access. Such concerns
would not have caused problems 80 years ago. This
perspective sums up St. Paul's story in a nutshell. The
church community is now facing demands that stem
from its determination to stay in place, but having to
adjust to very different surroundings and attitudes.
Massive Development
From the 1870s to the 1940s, the North Dallas Freedman's Town flourished as a business and
cultural center for many North Texas Blacks. The
Blacks who lived in this area favored its institutions,
including churches, schools, insurance companies,

Figure 3. St. Paul family and home, ca. 1950. Courtesy
of Mrs. Delores Love.

By the early 1950s, the North Dallas Freedman's Town experienced severe deterioration due
to overcrowding. The number of Blacks living in
the area was steadily increasing. Landlocked by
other neighborhoods and dominated by Whites who
strongly objected to Black neighbors, most residents
had nowhere else to go. Some middle class Blacks
who could afford to relocate moved to outlying
neighborhoods; however, many poorer Blacks were
confined to the Town. Community and government
leaders labeled the neighborhood an uninhabitable
slum. White Dallasites steering the area's development built the city's first housing project, Roseland
Homes, to change the way the neighborhood was
structured. It was one of the earliest federal housing
projects in the country.
Roseland Homes was designed to hold many
people in a small amount of space. While the development eased overcrowding, the fix came at the
expense of middle class Blacks. In order to build
Roseland, the city condemned private land for public
use, paying below-market rates to many of the 100
Black property owners. This left them at a disadvantage in trying to find new homes. The result was
that Roseland was both a sanctuary and an object of
hatred for Dallas Blacks in the 1950s.
The subsequent construction of two highways
in the area, the North Central and Woodall Rodgers
expressways, caused similar results. In 1872, the

58

Texas Archeological Society

Houston & Texas Central (H&TC) Railroad came
to Dallas. The H&TC brought many job opportunities for residents, some of whom were unemployed
Blacks. Due to its proximity to the railroads, Freedman's Town experienced population and economic
boosts. "African American men frequently were
hired for railroad construction work. Small, shotgunstyle houses, built for railroad workers and their
families, lined the H&TC tracks from Dallas northward to Freedman's Town ... " (Prior and Kemper
2005:180).
In the 1940s, the railroad corridor became the
six-lane North Central Expressway. City leaders and
transportation planners attempted to make downtown more accessible to Whites in affluent neighborhoods north of downtown. In constructing the
expressway, the city destroyed the homes of some
1500 people and paved over the Freedman's Cemetery. This cemetery is home to many former slaves
and their descendants. The Black community that
had once relied so heavily on the railroad economy
was victimized by the new expressway. Woodall
Rodgers Expressway, built by the city between the
1960s and the 1980s, further divided the community
and destroyed more homes.
The destruction of homes was harmful to the stability of the N01th Dallas neighborhood. Yet the highways were not a problem solely because they caused
houses to be razed. The presence of the highways, the
traffic, and the constant noise and maintenance that
they brought, impeded the ability of residents to move
from one side of the highway to another. Residents
who once patronized local businesses and places of
worship at further distances were compelled to stay
on their sides of the highway.
The neighborhoods also suffered from the displacement of many residents. The North Dallas landscape changed severely "with serious consequences
for the social and economic dynamics essential to the
community's solidaiity for nearly 80 years" (Plior and
Kemper 2005: 191 ). Although the highway construction was indicative of a thriving Dallas economy, it
ended Freedman Town's development. The existence
of the highway effectively led to the Town's transition
into the Dallas Arts District. The Dallas Arts District
is located just north of the downtown central business district, south of Uptown, southeast of the State
Thomas neighborhood, and adjacent to the Woodall
Rodgers Expressway.
St. Paul is the only historically Black institution
in the Arts District that serves in the same capacity
as its original development. It has been and

remains a Methodist church with a majority Black
congregation, but there are other Black historic
institutions in the neighborhood. One is the Booker
T. Washington Arts Magnet High School.
This school faces St. Paul across Routh Street.
The school was initially founded as the first high
school for Black Dallas students in 1892. It was named
the Dallas Colored High School in 1911. In 1922, it
was renamed Booker T. Washington High School.
After several enlargements, the school was enlai·ged
again in 1952. It was also given the new name "Booker
T. Washington Technical High School."
The school underwent another change in 1976.
It was made into a magnet high school focused on
the arts. This Booker T. Washington Arts Magnet
High School is presently undergoing renovation. A
new building is scheduled to open in the spring of
2008. The historic building will serve as a future
exhibit space for artifacts tied to the school. The
once Black institution now has students of many
different racial and ethnic backgrounds, rather than
mainly Black students.
Another historically Black building in the Freedmanstown neighborhood is the Moorland Family
YMCA. This building was established in 1926. It was
intended as a recreational facility for Black Dallas
families. It remains in this area as part of the Dallas
Arts Distlict. Now the YMCA building is home to
the Dallas Black Dance Theatre (DBDT), "the oldest,
continuously operating professional dance company
in Dallas" (Dallas Black Dance Theatre 2008).

A LOSS OF MEMORY
Planners for the city of Dallas have made recent
attempts to restore historic buildings in the Arts
District. Yet they have not paid much attention to the
significance of Black heritage sites downtown or in
any other parts of the city. Historic sites generally
focus on the progress and heroism of White males.
One example is the Confederate War Memorial in
downtown Dallas. This monument highlights White
Confederate heroes and silences the histories of
enslaved Africans and victims of Reconstruction
Era violence.
Silence is an important theme in this analysis.
Haitian scholar Michel-Rolph Trouillot ( 1995)
describes silence as an engaging, active, and
transitive process. Trouillot writes that silence enters
the process of historical production at the moment
of site production. The Confederate monument

Skipper-In the Neighborhood 59
commemorates the deeds of Confederate soldiers,
but it silences the segregationist circumstances that
led to the development of the Freedman's community
and institutions like St. Paul. This may not have been
the intention of the memorial constructors, but the
result is the same.
Richard Flores's analysis of site production at
The Alamo in San Antonio is another example of
how silence creates "master" narratives. According
to Flores, silences are perpetuated through cultural
memory and place memory. Flores refers to Marita
Sturken's definition of cultural [social] memory as
"those aspects of memory that exist outside of official historical discourse, yet are entangled with
them, rather than oppositional" (Sturken 1997:5, as
cited in Flores 2002:xv).
Flores says that people choose to remember
certain events in a certain way, sometimes in spite of
historical documents. The memories, however, are
often based on some version of a documented historical event. This is why Sturken describes memories
as always being "entangled." Flores goes on to say
that White male heroes, like Davy Crockett, are familiar to most Texans. Members of underrepresented
groups such as women and Blacks, in contrast, are
often left out of historical narratives.
James Davidson (2000:14) has reflected on the
silencing of Black history in this specific area. He
chronicles how the name of the neighborhood has
changed:
Originally known as Freedman's Town,
by the early twentieth century this area
was more commonly known to its inhabitants as North Dallas (or 'Short North
Dallas'), and later still the 'Hall and State'
or 'State-Thomas" Neighborhood' (Prior
and Schulte 2000:69-79). Stripped of its
historical precedence, the current name
given to this same area is 'Uptown' or
the 'Citiplace [also Cityplace] Neighborhood.' When even the name of this
historically African American enclave is
erased, what then will remain?
In the 1970s, the history of the North Dallas
community was essentially made to disappear. The
city of Dallas began to actively silence the fact
that a Black community had or did exist in North
Dallas. In the early part of the decade, city plannners
documented the area as the majority-White Oak
Lawn community, disregarding the neighborhood's
cultural heritage before the 1970s (Prior and Kemper

2005: 197). City planners then developed a new
neighborhood, Cityplace Neighborhood, on the
northeast border of North Dallas:
Subsequently, the designation of the
State-Thomas neighborhood as an Historic District redefined the western edge
of North Dallas. Soon after, The City of
Dallas created Tax Increment Finance
(TIF) Districts for Cityplace and for the
State-Thomas area, and later approved
an Uptown Public Improvement District
(PID), in order to make available millions
of dollars in incentives for a new wave
of land developers in the North Dallas
area. As the final part of the process, on
the east side of Central Expressway, the
Roseland Homes housing project was
torn down by the Dallas Housing Authority and replaced by a smaller number of
units deemed to be more compatible with
the upscale residential and commercial
environment being developed in the area
(Prior and Kemper 2005: 197).
Next, the developers created and put into effect
a plan to gentrify the district. This gentrification
contributed to significant rises in the development
of upscale commercial and residential properties in
Freedman's Town. The re-creation of the area into
an arts district has led to its being home to a large
amount of cultural centers, among them the Dallas
Museum of Art, the Nasher Sculpture Center, the
Annette Strauss Artist Square, and the Trammell
& Margaret Crow Collection of Asian Art and the
Trammell Crow Center. The district also houses
the Dallas Theater Center/Arts District Theater,
the Ad-Libs Improvisational Comedy Theater, the
Morton H. Meyerson Symphony Center, the Dallas
Symphony Orchestra, the One Arts Plaza/7-Eleven
Corporate Headquarters, and will include additional
arts plazas (Figure 4).

Heritage Politics
The St. Paul church community has remained
active throughout its long history, even between
1973 and 1974, after a fire destroyed the church's
third floor business office. The fire also caused substantial water and soot damage to most furnishings
in the sanctuary (The Post Tribune, pp. 1-2, November 1973 ). Around this time "sadly, the once proud,
close-knit neighborhood had all but disappeared.

60

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Projection of St. Paul in a completed Arts Plaza. Courtesy of The St. Paul United Methodist Church.

Eminent domain, highway construction, and urban
decay destroyed the church neighborhood, and many
families moved to other areas of the [Dallas] metroplex" (Moore 2003:4).
The St. Paul Church stood as the lone reminder
of the North Dallas Freedman's community within
the midst of The Arts District's massive commercial development. "The section of Dallas in which
the church is located was in an enormous revolution. The Arts District plans were on the drawing
board, and the face-lifting of the community was
well under way with office towers, condominiums,
banks, and new freeways. Being in close proximity
to Downtown Dallas made St. Paul's vulnerability
to change inescapable" (Moore 2003:4).
As with many other historically Black institutions, the St. Paul community considered moving
their church to another part of the Dallas metroplex.
Instead, the community chose to keep the building
in place and restore it. After making this decision,
the community built support for its efforts by getting the city to recognize the church as a landmark.
The community worked on this goal by employing
"heritage politics," a practice of politicizing their
goals by associating them with racial, ethnic, and
national identifications. The community's actions
were not unusual. Institutions such as museums and

churches frequently employ "politics of the past" to
make sure their financial and political needs are met
(Gathercole 1994; Hayden 1995).
Archeology at St. Paul's
In the summer of 2002, Jam es Davidson, then
a doctoral student at The University of Texas at
Austin (UT), began a historical and archeological
study oflife in the late 19th century in Freedman's
Town. Davidson was very familiar with the history
of Dallas's Black community, after working on the
Freedman's Cemetery project. Davidson and UT
professor Maria Franklin began the project by asking landowners in the Arts District if they could do
archeological excavations on the landowners' properties. St. Paul was the only property owner to grant
permission (James Davidson and Maria Franklin,
personal communication, 2002).
The archeologists took a major step by establishing a rapport with the St. Paul community. The
interaction began when Davidson and Franklin presented the field school ideas to governing members
of the congregation. Then Davidson and Franklin
solicited input from them. After that, Davidson and
Franklin made the field school a cooperative effort
between the people who worked on the site and the

Skipper-Jn the Neighborhood 61
people who used the site. After the archeologists
made first contact, the St. Paul community continued working with them because they demonstrated
patience and responsiveness.
The archeologists' interactions made congregants who were initially wary more trusting and
willing to work with outsiders. Before archeologists
came to the community, the congregation of St. Paul
had been exposed to previous archeological work
that many of them perceived as discourteous.
Davidson successfully secured the opportunity to excavate on the St. Paul property, even after
certain prominent members of the Dallas Black
community made statements indicating that they
opposed the archeological excavations in the neighborhood. The testimony of these members should be
understood in context. It is likely that these members
were opposed to more excavations because they felt
archeologists mishandled excavations of the Dallas
Freedman's Cemetery site in the late 1980s.
This aspect of the story begins in the 1940s when
Black leaders warned that widening the North Central Expressway in Dallas infringed on the cemetery
where many former slaves and their descendants
were bmied. In the 1980s, Black leaders rallied to
prevent more damage after highway excavation crews
unearthed human remains, revealing the freeway construction over hundreds of graves. A majority of the
archeologists were White, and some members of the
Black community felt that their thoughts and feelings
were disregarded by the White-led teams.
The St. Paul church pastor and community
should be commended for demonstrating patience
because they were able to overcome the residual
anger left from these episodes. The church community realized the potential for city-wide exposure
and recognition from an archeological project that
focused on a Black community. The archeological
excavation became the second phase of the community's effort to become one of the most visible
institutions in the Arts District.
After acquiring landmark status (the first step),
the St. Paul community then put the church "on
display" through archeological excavation. In the
same summer of 2002 that the UT archeologists had
approached the community, the community allowed
the field excavations to begin.
The Field School
Students in the five-week field school excavated
a spot on the church's property that had formerly

been the location of the Thomas and Nora Cole
house. The house stood a few feet behind the
church, on the former Juliette Street (Figure 5).
By the 1890s, Juliette Street held 16 homes, two
businesses, and two churches. Mr. Cole, one of St.
Paul's early trustees, and his family lived on this
Juliette Street property from 1887-1910. Thomas
and Nora had been born into slavery in Texas during the Civil War.
The Cole children were born while the parents
lived in this house and the entire Cole family attended St. Paul. After the Coles resided here, other
working class Black families occupied the house
until the church purchased the property in 1962.
By that time, most of the neighborhood had been
destroyed by the construction of the Woodall Rodgers freeway.
The goal of the field school was to investigate
the residual occupations of the Juliette Street house.
Field school investigators wanted to better understand the historical, cultural, and social development of Black communities within Dallas from
1870 into the early 20th century (Maria Franklin,
personal communication, 2002). As the field school
progressed, archeologists found that the small site,
measuring 23 x 87 ft., appeared to be the location of
a single shotgun house. The house likely had three
rooms but no hall to connect them. This financially
and spatially economical house was inexpensive to
construct and did not take up much space.
The field school students worked with church
members to learn invaluable information about
previous members of the congregation who lived
at the house. The Cole descendants were very
excited about the 2002 excavations. Students in
the field school gathered genealogical information
from members of the St. Paul community. They
also researched local archives and were able to tell
church members that the Coles had lived adjacent
to the church property. The Cole descendants had
not known this, because the Coles also had a second
residence a few blocks up Juliette Street. The Cole
descendants were only familiar with the Cole's second residence, not the first.
Archeologists also made the field school successful for some of the St. Paul youth. They worked
with members of the St. Paul community to combine
work in the field school with St. Paul's summer
youth camp, Camp Succeed. The students in the field
school taught campers some excavation techniques.
This joint effort was one of the church community's
suggestions:

62

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 5. Booker T. Washington High School with St. Paul and Juliette Street in the background, circa 1950-1960.
Courtesy of The Texas African American Photography Archive.

A field school, at its best, is an attempt
to do several things simultaneously. Its
primary goal is to teach, even as it creates
a valuable archaeological data set. With
our Dallas field school, our hopes were
greater. We hoped to instigate an activist
archaeology, to use this 6 week inquiry
into the past to inform the present, but to
also influence the present for the future.
The concept that the act of archaeology
is a political act was not forgotten here
(Davidson et al. 2004).
The field school was political because it taught
the St. Paul community another method of representing itself. In the process of assisting and observing
the field school students, the community learned
more about their history and were able to publicly
represent their congregation. Their accomplishment
is especially notable because it gave the church a
prominent place among its new neighbors, the museums and cultural institutions. Many residents of

the Dallas/Ft. Worth rnetroplex were not aware that
St. Paul is in the Arts District!

Artifacts, Oral History, and Memory
The field school students opened 19 excavation
units. In the first half of the session, the students
excavated the house portion of the lot. The students
then excavated the backyard area by digging four 2
x 2 rn units. The students' excavation exposed many
intact features: post holes, brick piers for former
outbuildings, and two trash pits.
The site yielded numerous artifacts. These included soft drink bottle fragments from the early
20th century; remains of writing utensils, such as
pencil erasers and slate pencils; jewelry; toys such
as marbles; and ceramic wares, among them a large
variety of tableware fragments. One of these was
part of a cup with a tea leaf pattern thought to date
between the 1880s and 1900. In addition, a Dutch
girl figurine was found in the work, along with an

Skipper-In the Neighborhood 63
intact Hutchinson stoppered Dallas
Bottling Works bottle.
These listed artifacts complement the historical documentation
of the property. The artifacts are
contemporary with the Cole family's occupation, and lend insight
into consumer and life choices
made by the Cole family.
One little piece of pot metal
tells a story in particular. This
fragment was part of the handle
to an early 20th century letter
opener. The letter opener was a
promotional item made by the
Berry Brothers Varnish Company
of Detroit, Michigan. Field school
Figure 6. Overton "High Brown" compact (right) and unidentified compact
students related this discovery to
(left). Courtesy of James Davidson.
Thomas Coles' profession as a
carpenter and builder. They think
that Thomas Cole may have been a consumer of the
of the site provided by members of the St. Paul
company's varnish or lacquer products.
community. The correlation between a particular site
The recovery of particular artifacts prompted
and the people that lived there has led archeologists
to believe that "historical archaeology has a good
oral history sessions with church members. One
deal to contribute to ctment practice in oral history."
church elder commented on the recovery of a strap(Purser 1992:27). The oral history narratives of the
on roller skate remnant. She told the students that
she remembered a fact about St. Paul's that was
St. Paul members helped the archeologists to idennew to them. The St. Paul basement had served as a
tify how specific objects were used in local contexts
Saturday night skating rink for local children.
that no longer exist.
Another artifact, the "High Brown" compact,
Mnemonic triggers can also be useful where
reminded several elder women of early beauty
no material culture is present. Dolores Hayden
practices. The brass cosmetic compact is embossed
(l 995) uses a method called "cognitive mapping."
Cognitive mapping examines the former locations
on the lid with a cameo portrait of a woman. The
portrait is framed by the words "High Brown/
of non-extant structures through the recollections
Overton/Chicago" (Figure 6, right). Field school
and memories of informants. Hayden used cognistudents recovered the compact from a pit feature
tive mapping to comprehend several Los Angeles
in the backyard.
residents' ties to an African American homestead.
To create her cognitive maps, Hayden collected
The compact probably contained face powder
from the Overton Hygienic Manufacturing Comoral histories from her informants: "It is possible
pany, founded by a former slave named Anthony
to identify historic urban places that have special
Overton. This compact is evidence for the presence
significance to certain populations fighting spatial
segregation of different kinds" (Hayden 1995:39).
of a woman within the household. The compact
also indicates that people in the neighborhood used
Cognitive mapping is an important tool, even
cosmetic products that were marketed specifically to
where primary sources (e.g., a plan maps) are available. The location of an item on a contemporary map
Black women in Dallas around the turn of the 20th
century. These details show that although the comdoes not mean that the place ever existed. These are
pact is small, it is significant. The compact reminds
instances in which places appear on maps, but are
us of two concepts about beauty in the early 20th
not uncovered in archeological excavations. Some
century: African American female aesthetics and
of these places apparently were never built.
cosmetology practices.
Supplementary information derived from locals
The presence of certain kinds of artifacts coinand other sources (i.e., newspapers and tax records)
can be invaluable. Oral history "accounts like these
cides with oral and written details about the history

64

Texas Archeological Society

begin to make it possible to map spatial segregation for the larger African American community:
not only streets and neighborhoods, but schools,
hotels, stores, fire stations, swimming pools, and
cemeteries would be some of the places to examine"
(Hayden 1995:24). The residents of the Freedman's
community can then be explored, not only in their
attempts to defy White boundaries, but to evade
White boundaries.
Blacks in North Dallas apparently created their
own urban communities within a segregated Dallas
landscape. During the field school, the students collected data that allowed them to create a territorial
history of the area of the St. Paul community. They
used methods such as cognitive mapping to gather
invaluable information about institutions that were
integral to the community. Some St. Paul members
were local residents prior to urban renewal. They
remembered the locations of structures that are no
longer standing. During the field school, Davidson
and other archeologists reconstructed the outlines
of Juliette Street and made notes about the people
who lived and worked there. They did this by using
Dallas city directories, Sanborn Insurance maps,
United States Census data, archival sources, community memory, and artifacts.
In 2003, Davidson returned the artifacts to the
St. Paul community. He also provided them with a
portable exhibit about the church that could "travel"
to other locations for educational purposes.
After the Archeology
There are potential opportunities to do more
excavations in the former Freedman's Town. Yet it
is doubtful that such excavation will occur. "The
sale and development of the nearby property in the
area is occurring at an alarming rate" (Crawford
2002). The 2002 field school has been, and may be,
the only extensive excavation of the Dallas Freedman's Town.
The comprehensive efforts of Davidson, Franklin, the UT field school, and the St. Paul community
are a remarkable step in understanding and publicizing the archeology of North Dallas. Through the
project, UT students and community members were
able to explore how artifacts served the needs of the
community. In addition, the students and community
members provided a much needed addition to available research on historical studies of Black Texans.
The artifacts provide insight into Black economies and consumerism in Freedman's communities.

They are invaluable to the field of urban archeology
and to the St. Paul's church, where they are housed.
"We did not give them their history, but instead these
good people allowed us the opportunity to explore
that history together, all of us armed with the knowledge that neither could have accomplished it without
the other" (Davidson et al. 2004).
Post-excavation Research
This review of the history of the community,
the church, and the excavations indicate that further
research on the site is needed. It would be ideal to
have more public outreach efforts involving the
church and the greater Dallas communities. Such
efforts could focus on the life paths of residents of
the earlier St. Paul community, their relations to the
larger Freedman's Town community, and how the
St. Paul Church can continue to exist in the Arts
District. In their research, Davidson and Franklin
observed that the St. Paul community was interested
in recovering more information about its history.
Davidson and Franklin noted that members of the St.
Paul community also showed interest in exhibiting
the recovered archeological information. In the fall
of 2002, I met with St. Paul's church leaders to discuss the potential for engaging in a post-excavation
project. More archival and archeological research
would aid their goal of receiving National Register
of Historic Places status for the St. Paul Church. It
would also help the church to become a better repository for its artifacts and documents. The Freedman's Town excavation not only tells the story of St.
Paul's, but a story of survival that can be told from
many different levels.
When I became involved in the study of the St.
Paul Church and the Freedman's Town community,
I began by meeting church leaders. I asked them
what they were interested in doing regarding history, archeology, and landmark preservation. I also
toured the city of Dallas' public archives to retrieve
documentary research for this proposed project. The
trustee members of St. Paul's church agreed to my
further investigations of the church's history in a
public interpretive project.
The church leaders and I came up with the goal
of creating a heritage room for the church. This
room was to house photographs, historical documents, and a newly created timeline highlighting
important events integral to St. Paul's development.
The exhibit was to also emphasize the architectural
and social history of St. Paul's building. The church

Skipper-In the Neighborhood 65
building is St. Paul's most visible artifact, indeed,
the "face" of all cultural heritage projects associated
with the church.
The project entailed research into building
plans, ownership records, and St. Paul's link to
buildings in the area. The task I set myself was to see
how information from these three topics connected
to development practices in the city of Dallas. As I
developed plans for the heritage room, I began to
understand that the story of St. Paul's building and
community is a story of how the St. Paul community
formed, and strengthened, itself in North Dallas over
more than a century.
One thing that I noticed in working with the St.
Paul community is that the community is the oldest
living reminder of The Arts District's early history.
Yet this community has not been a significant focus
in the Arts District. Although the church is still
in the area, members of the St. Paul community
commute there. This has left the community in the
midst of identity crises. The circumstances have
forced it to cooperate with its new neighborhood.
As noted by McRoberts (2003: 124), the congregation changed from one a/the neighborhood to one
in the neighborhood.
One of the community's goals is to make St.
Paul's history more visible to tourists who take the
Arts District Stroll. The Stroll is a private guided
tour of the history and architecture of the Arts District. It is important to remember in dealing with the
St. Paul community that the church is historically
significant, and the community wants to remain an
active church community in the same place. The
community recognizes that its historical significance
may not shield it from the demise suffered by other
Black landmarks.
There has been a recent development that has
significantly changed St. Paul's circumstances.
Dallas's affluent Highland Park United Methodist Church donated the bulk of financial resources
needed to assist St. Paul with a renovation and
restoration project. After these improvements, St.
Paul will become the final historic building in the
Arts District to restore its fac;ade and interior. The
proposed heritage room is planned to be a significant
part of this renovation.

Implications for the Future
Today, more than 55 years after the U.S. government allowed cities and counties to legislate
Black removal, a number of politicians, political

activists, and public policy lawyers have expressed
concerns about the potential misuse of eminent
domain. They see it as unethical and racist to
"re-develop" neighborhoods that have historically
housed moderate and/or low-income Black residents. One example of such a neighborhood is the
Ninth Ward of New Orleans, which was home to
many low to moderate income Black people before
Hurricane Katrina. Concerned citizens are aware
that some local, state, and federal government officials verbalize "urban renewal plans" as ways to
eliminate crime and make areas less economically
stagnant. Yet the term that government officials use
to describe the result of the above-listed problems,
"urban blight," is innately problematic, because it
is normally defined by those whose economic and
political interests benefit from redevelopment, not
by those within the "blighted" community itself.
Community leaders and politicians have spoken out against the government abuses of eminent
domain (Lochhead 2005; Greenhut 2004), arguing
that minority communities are generally more at
risk if they are not as politically and financially
equipped to battle government and business factions. Many fear that the 2005 United States
Supreme Court decision of Kelo v. City of New
London-a legal judgment involving the use of
eminent domain for purposes of the public goodfor instance, could make it easier for companies
such as Costco and Wal-mart to prove that their
corporations serve the public good by bringing in
jobs. For institutions like St. Paul and other property owners in historic minority communities this
means that property owners could be forced from
their "homes" and given no way to relocate in a
similar neighborhood.
They do, however, have the ability to respond
to these pressures not only through legal challenges
to eminent domain proceedings, but also by brining attention to the cultural significance of their
properties, as the members of St. Paul have. Many
archeologists begin to work on sites in urban areas
after most extant features are gone, and after a good
deal of development has taken placed. In many
cases, property owners think that archeologists are
aligned with government entities trying to destroy
their neighborhoods or historic sites. They are not
aware of most historic preservation and compliance
laws under which archeologists work.
Archeologists can greatly assist both institutions
and private property owners in this last respect. They
can emphasize to members of minority communities

66

Texas Archeological Society

the historic significance of their sites and properties, possibly lessening their changes of becoming
candidates for salvage-style archeology. They can
engage in cooperative efforts to stop the loss of
cultural memory and of important buildings. Most
importantly, archeologists can help communities
create a plan to remain in place. Communities must
stand up to government to challenge the status quo.
They must say, "We are not going anywhere. Look
forward to working with us."
I expect that my research will continue to investigate how archeologists can work with St. Paul
and other communities. Together, multiple forces
are better equipped to stop cities from engaging in
discriminatory and likely illicit takings of minority properties. I am confident that archeologists
can work with communities to use scholarship as
a practical tool to protect historic institutions and
their past. I believe that my research, made possible
by the combined efforts of archeologists and the
community, will result in the finding that St. Paul
United Methodist Church is making and has made
a necessary contribution to the history and future of
the Dallas Arts District.

REFERENCES CITED
Byrne, D.R.
2003 Nervous Landscapes: Race and space in Australia.
Journal of Social Archaeology 3(2): 169-193.
Crawford, S.
2002 Excavation team shines light on Freedman's Town
family: Coles Jived behind St. Paul United Methodist. In Dallas News.com-The Dallas Morning News.
Electronic Document, http://www.dallasnews.com/
localnews/stories/070702dnmetbigdig.88870.html,
Accessed December 16, 2003.
Dallas Black Dance Theatre
2008 Electronic document, http://dbdt.com/, accessed
February 5, 2008.
Davidson, J.
1999 An Archival History of Freedman's cemetery, Dallas, Texas. In Freedman's Cemetery: A Legacy of a
Pioneer Black Community in Dallas, Texas, edited by
D. E. Peter, M. Prior, M. M. Green, and V. G. Clow,
pp. 21-50. Special Publication No. 6, Geo-Marine,
Inc., Plano, Texas, and Archeology Studies Program,
Report No. 21, Texas Department of Transportation,
Environmental Affairs Division. Austin.
2000

Freedman's Cemetery (1869-1907): A Chronological
Reconstruction of an Excavated African American
Burial Ground, Dallas, Texas. Master·s thesis. Department of Anthropology, University of Arkansas,
Fayetteville.

2004

"Living Symbols of Their Lifelong Struggles": In
Search of the Home and Household in the Heart
of Freedman's Town, Dallas, Texas. In Household
Choices and Household Chores: Theorizing the
Domestic Sphere in Historical Archaeology, edited
by K. S. Barile and J.C. Brandon, pp. 75-106. The
University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

ENDNOTES
1. The school was later offered to the West Texas Conference,
which at that point was in search of an undergraduate college
to train Black youth for service in the Black community. The
school was renamed the West Texas Conference School, then
Samuel Huston College in 1878 and 1890, respectively. In
1952, Samuel Huston College and Tillotson College merged
to form Huston-Tillotson College. This college relocated to
another location and another building. It now makes its home
in Austin, Texas.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am greatly indebted to James Davidson, Maria
Franklin, and Jamie Brandon, primary excavators
and researchers on the St. Paul historic site. Thanks
to Jessica Zimmer and Twanna Hines for reviewing
and re-reviewing. I would mostly like to thank Ms.
Leah Parker, Pastor Elzie Odom, Jr., and the entire
St. Paul church community for their continued support and willingness to see this project through.

Davidson, J., M. Franklin, and J. Brandon
2004 Remembering North Dallas/Freedman's Town: First
Steps Towards Public Archaeology within an African
American Community in Dallas, Texas. Paper Presented at the 2004 meeting of the Society for Historical Archaeology as a part of the "Can Archaeology
Save the World" symposium, St. Louis, Missouri.
Flores, R.
2002 Remembering the Alamo. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Gathercole, P. W.
1990 The Politics of the Past. Routledge, New York.

Skipper-In the Neighborhood 67
Greenhut. S.
2004 Abuse of Pmver: How the Government Misuses
Eminent Domain. Seven Locks Press, Santa Ana,
California.
Hayden, D.
1995 The Power of Place: Urban Landscapes as Public
History. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Lochhead, C.
2006 Lawmaker cautions against eminent domain in rebuilding Maxine Water sees threat to poor blacks in New
Orleans. Electronic document, http://www.sfgate.
com/cgibin/article.cgi?fiJe=/c/a/2005/09/21/MNGHOER9U81.DTL, accessed November 10. 2006.
McQueen, C.
2003 Black Churches in Texas. Texas A&M University
Press, College Station.
McRoberts, 0.
2003 Streets of Glory: Church and Community in a Black
Urban Neighborhood. The University of Chicago
Press, Chicago.
Moore, J.M.
2003 Historical Reflections: St. Paul UMC, 1873-2003.
St. Paul Times 3:1-5.

The Post Tribune (Dallas, Texas)
1973 History Outshines Fire. November: 1-2. Dallas.
Texas.
Prior, M. and R. V. Kemper
2005 From Freedman's Town to Uptown: Community
Transformation and Gentrification in Dallas, Texas.
Urban Anthropology & Studies of Cultural Systems
& World Economic Development 34 (2-3):177-216.

Prior, M. and T. A. Schulte
2000 Freedman' Town/North Dallas: The Convergence and
Development of an African American Community. In
Freedman's Cemetery: A Legacy of a Pioneer Black
Community in Dallas, Texas, edited by D. E. Peter,
M. Prior, M. M. Green, and V. G. Clow, 69-116.
Special Publication No. 6, Geo-Marine, Inc., Plano.
Texas, and Archeology Studies Program, Report No.
21, Texas Department of Transportation, Environmental Affairs Division, Austin.
Purser, M.
1992 Oral History and Historical Archaeology. In TextAidedArchaeology, edited by B. J. Little, pp. 25-35.
CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
Rapp, K. T.
2005 Law Review Summaries: Racial Lines and Property
Rights, Electronic Document. In Equal Justice Society e-Newsletter (5). Electronic Document, Accessed
February 5, 2008.
Sturken, M.
1997 Tangled Memories: The Vietnam Wm; the AIDS Epidemic, and the Politics of Remembering. University
of California Press, Berkeley.
Trouillot. M.-R.
1995 Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of
History. Beacon Press, Boston.

Archeological and Historical Investigation and Descendant
Community Outreach on an African American Graveyard:
The Case of Bull Hill Cemetery, Falls County, Texas
Nedra Lee and Jim Bruseth

ABSTRACT
Archeological, historical, and oral history research was conducted in 2007 at the Bull Hill Cemetery in Falls
County, Texas, by the Texas Historical Commission. Bull Hill is an African American cemetery on property
acquired by the Summerlee Foundation. The archeological work was successful in identifying a number of
cemetery features that provided information about enslaved and emancipated African American burial customs.
Historical and oral history research identified members of the descendant community with knowledge of the
deceased buried in the cemetery.

INTRODUCTION
In March 2007, archeologists from the Texas
Hist01ical Commission (THC) began documentation
and preservation efforts at the Bull Hill Cemetery in
Falls County, Texas (Figure 1). Bull Hill is an Afocan American cemetery that may date as early as the
1830s. It was used for the interment ofAfricanAme1icans until the first half of the 20th century. Sometime
in the 1960s, the cemetery was closed and nearly disappeared from the collective memories of both African
American and White Falls County residents.
The Bull Hill Cemetery is situated on a larger
tract of land acquired by the Summerlee Foundation, a non-profit philanthropic corporation in Dallas
dedicated to understanding and preserving Texas history. In 2006, the Foundation purchased property to
preserve the archeological remains of Sarahville de
Viesca, the capital colony of empresaiio Sterling C.
Robertson and home to early Falls County residents
(Potter et al. 2008: 1). The Foundation later discovered
that this land also contained the Bull Hill Cemetery.
Information provided by the former property owner,
Churchill Jones, indicated that the land was once part
of a plantation owned by his great-great grandfather,
a wealthy Central Texas slaveowner and landowner.
The Bull Hill Cemetery was used as the burial place
for the enslaved people on the plantation. Today, the
cemetery represents one of the few vestiges of a previously thriving plantation economy along the middle

Brazos River valley, an area largely forgotten in the
history of early Texas agricultural settlement.
From March to August 2007, the cemetery was
documented according to the TH C's Standards for
Preserving Historic Cemeteries (n.d.) and Preserving Historic Cemeteries: Texas Preservation
Guidelines (2001 ). Non-invasive remote sensing
geophysical archeological methods were also
employed to learn more about the cemetery. Specifically, a cart-mounted magnetometer and mobile
ground penetrating radar (GPR) unit were used to
detect subsurface grave features.
A particularly important part of the project was
community outreach to the local African American
descendant community, with careful attention being paid to issues of race and power in interpreting
the past. Since African American cemetery history
is far too often overlooked in county histories, a
plan was made to conduct site-specific oral history
interviews to augment what might be found in historical records. This aspect of the work at Bull Hill
ultimately served to highlight the lives and experiences of African Americans in a small rural Central
Texas community.

HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
The history of Bull Hill Cemetery began with
the mid-19th century settlement of land along the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

70

Texas Archeological Society

Falls

County·

Figure 1. Map showing the location of the Bull Hill Cemetery relative to the town site of Sarahville de Viesca.

Brazos River by Churchill Jones (referred to hereafter as "elder Jones"), great-great grandfather of
the current Churchill Jones (referred to hereafter as
"present-day Jones"), the former owner of the property purchased by the Summerlee Foundation. The
elder Jones decided to settle in Falls County after
a "prospecting" tour of the region in 1849 (St. Romain 1951:45). In 1850, he acquired 28,000 acres of
land and established a plantation that encompassed
the former 1830s-era Sarahville de Viesca settlement and a natural falls of the Brazos River (Oltorf
1968:47). Jones hoped to manage "the largest cotton
plantation on the frontier, and utilize the power of
the falling waters to operate a cotton mill" (Oltforf
1968:47). The Jones complex was the largest occupation of the region since the days of the initial
Viesca settlement (Oltorf 1968:47).
The elder Jones brought approximately 60 enslaved African Americans with him to Falls County
in 1849. Table 1 is a contract between Aylett Dean
and Churchill Jones for Dean to transport to Texas
all of the enslaved individuals then owned by Jones
on his Alabama plantation. Since enslaved African
Americans were considered property and were
rarely granted surnames during their enslavement

(Genovese 1976:445), only the first names of these
individuals are listed. Jones eventually became one
of the largest slaveowners in Falls County with a total of 100 enslaved persons on his plantation in 1860
(1860 Slave Schedule, U.S. Census Records, Center
for American History, The University of Texas at
Austin). At the start of the Civil War, Churchill Jones
was the fourth wealthiest slaveowner in Texas (01tmf 1968:105). "At the time of this death in 1869, he
was said to have owned 50,000 acres of land" (Jones,
Churchill, Handbook of Texas Online).
The Jones plantation comprised extensive crops
of cotton, vegetables, and fruit orchards (Silvia
King, WPA Slave Narratives, Center for American
History, The University of Texas at Austin), a twostory log house, and a series of cabins for about 80
enslaved African Americans (St. Romain 1951 :46).
During the construction of his plantation, Churchill
Jones laid out his family graveyard on a post oakcovered hill, a few hundred yards behind his house
(Oltorf 1968:256). According to Oltorf (1968:256),
"Members of the family were buried inside the
enclosure and favorite slaves were buried outside
the wall." Today the only remaining vestiges of
Churchill Jones' plantation are the Bull Hill and the

Lee and Bruseth-Archeological and Histmical Investigation on an African American Graveyard

71

Table 1. Transcription of a contract between Churchill Jones and Aylett Dean to transport
the elder Jones' enslaved workers to Texas.
Evergreen, [Alabama] October 22, 1849
State of Alabama:
Connecuh County:
Know all men by these present that, I, Aylett Dean of the state and county afforesaid have this day
agreed to take all the negroes belonging to Churchill Jones now on his plantation on the Connecuh River
known formerly as the Rand A Dean plantation named as follows:
Edmond, Big Peter, Hampton, Charles and Celia, George, little Peter, big Mary, Joane and four children, Elisa, John, Augustus, Aylett, Tommy and children, Rueben, Miloc, Moses, PelTy, Little Ben, Kitty
and child Judy, Big Peter, Big Ben, Sarah and children, Margaret and infant, Cloea and children, Caleb,
Nelson, and Martha, negro boys Jack, John, William, Elles and Millis, negro woman Harriet and six children, negro woman Lydia and two children together with mules and horses of every description, wagons
and all other traveling implements to whatever part of Texas he many purchase land and work them on the
same terms we worked them on Connecuh.
A. Dean
Attest
Austin Robinson
Source: Jones, Churchill Letters, 1849, 1853, 1865-1866, Center for American History, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Jones Family cemeteries. The Jones Family Cemetery remains quite impressive, encompassing about
an acre in size and still surrounded by relatively
intact 6 ft. high hand-made brick walls.
We are uncertain of the date when Bull Hill
began to serve as a burying place for the plantation's enslaved workers. There are also no historical
records that explain how the name Bull Hill came
about. The present-day Churchill Jones suggests
that the name of the cemetery alludes to county residents' onetime practice of grazing cattle on the hills
that overlook the falls of the Brazos River (personal
communication, August 2007).
Another possible reference to Bull Hill comes
from a discussion of a cemetery by Oltorf ( 1968). He
does not state the exact location of the graveyard but
recounts the story ofZenas Bartlett (a son-in-law of
the elder Churchill Jones) officiating over the hasty
burial of an African American colloquially referred
to as Sinner Primus in the "colored graveyard" on
the Tonkaway Plantation, near the falls of the Brazos
River (Oltorf 1968:245). He notes that the Tonkaway

Plantation was situated on land known as the John
Marlin League, which was located on the eastern
side of the Brazos River and adjacent to the falls
of the Brazos River (Oltorf 1968: 108). Churchill
Jones gave this land, which was part of his original
plantation, to his daughter, Sarah Green, and her
husband, Zenas Bartlett. They tilled the land and an
additional 731 acres on the Brazos River above the
falls with enslaved labor leased from slaveowners in
Texas or owners moving to Mexico during the Civil
War (Olt01f 1968: 108). We suggest that the "colored
graveyard" referred to by Oltorf may likely be Bull
Hill, and if so, it was shared by both the Jones and
Tonkaway plantations.
Despite its roots in the slave past, the earliest
known grave in Bull Hill may actually belong to a
White man, James Coryell, who was a frontiersman
present at Sarahville de Viesca in the late 1830s
(Simmons 1936:23-25). On May 27, 1837, Coryell
was killed during an attack by Native Americans
and said to be buried in the area that later became
part of Bull Hill. According to Frank E. Simmons

72

Texas Archeological Society

(1936:23). who recounted the tale of James Coryell's
interment:
Torn Broadus ... a slave of Churchill
Jones ... relates that when the first Negroes were buried on the lot there was
a grave just a few feet off the south line
of the lot that he had always been taught
was the grave of "Mr. Jim Coryell"
where he was buried so long ago. After
several years, the grave caved in and the
superstitious Negroes who had been told
the story of Coryell, carried stones from
Jones Spring, some distance away, and
filled and covered the grave so the spirit
of Coryell would be at ease and would
not bother the dead Negroes. Old Tom
Broadus related that the Negroes had a
reverence for the grave.
Talking with local informants in the early 1930s,
Simmons placed the burial location of Coryell about
1 mile northwest of Sarahville de Viesca, or almost
exactly at the location of the Bull Hill Cemetery.
Simmons' reference to the oral testimony of
Tom Broadus is important because it presents information that Bull Hill was used as a burial ground
before the Jones plantation's enslaved workers were
interred there. Tom Broadus' discussion of the location and reverence for Coryell's grave also provides
insight into the views of the enslaved about burial
practices at Bull Hill.
It is possible that before Bull Hill was used by
the elder Jones' enslaved workers, the cemetery
was previously part of the Sarahville community.
A plat map of the community exists today (Eddins 1947:18) and shows that an entire town of
multi-acre plots was proposed for the town. While
there is no scale for the town site plat, comparison
of key features with modern topographic locales
suggests that the town site was planned to extend
about 1 mile to the west from the Brazos River.
This would place one of the multi-acre plots over
Bull Hill Cemetery, and suggests that one of the
town lots was reserved for burial, where Coryell
was interred.
Bull Hill was located in an area of the plantation some distance from the main house. In a
November 27, 1853, letter to his son James, the
elder Jones inquired about the progress George H.
Daffan, one of the five overseers on the plantation,
was making "building the negro houses in the bottoms" (Oltorf 1968:67). In a previous letter, Jones

insisted that the dwellings for his enslaved workers
be placed in a separate location from the family's
residence and in close proximity to the "kitchen
and business houses" (Oltorf 1968:52). From this
we conclude that the enslaved quarters were in the
bottomlands near the present Jones Family cemetery and along what is today referred to as Jones
Creek. This area is about 1.5 miles southeast of the
Bull Hill Cemetery.
Further information about the enslaved community at the Jones plantation and the "bottoms" is
in the Works Progress Administration (WPA) narrative of Mrs. Silvia King. The Slave Narratives were
part of a federally sponsored program from 1936 to
1938 to conduct oral history interviews with former
enslaved African Americans from across the American South; the interviews were done mostly by
White writers and journalists. Mrs. King's interview
provides a fascinating account of her movement
from Morocco to France, where she was captured
and put into the American slave trade. She noted
that the bottoms at the Jones Plantation provided a
safe haven for the enslaved to practice their native
African traditions, specifically performing a dance
called the ring-shout. This dance can be interpreted
as a simultaneous act of native worship and enslaved
resistance, which culminated in praying, singing,
dancing, moaning, and shouting (Silvia King, WPA
Slave Narratives, Center for American History, The
University of Texas at Austin).

INFORMATION OBTAINED FROM
DESCENDANT COMMUNITY
OUTREACH
At the beginning of the project, a major question was whether anyone would be found with
know ledge of Bull Hill after more than 40 years of
non-use of the cemetery. Finding descendant community members with knowledge of the cemetery
was initially difficult. Madison Wideman, a local
White ranch foreman with strong friendship ties to
the neighboring African American community, was
enlisted to help. Despite Mr. Wideman's considerable connections, we were unable to immediately
identify anyone who had more than a very cursory
knowledge of Bull Hill. We also relied on efforts
such as combing through the local Marlin telephone book to locate descendants based on names
from cemetery tombstones; disseminating information about the project in local newspapers as well as

Lee and Bruseth-Archeological and Historical Investigation on an African American Graveyard
on websites such as Rootsweb and Ancestry.com;
and working with members of the Falls County
Historical Commission to identify long-time African American residents. Persistence eventually
paid off and people were located that could offer
first-hand information to help us understand the
cemetery's history.
Ms. Sharon Johnson Styles, a current resident
of Sacramento, California, with deep familial ties to
Falls County and Bull Hill, was extremely helpful
during the research process. She brought to our attention her grandmother, Mary Lillian Paul Johnson,
granddaughter of Eliza Sneed, an enslaved woman
from the Jones plantation. She provided written excerpts and a video tape of a January 1994 interview
she made with her grandmother that confirmed the
oral testimony of Silvia King about the practice of
religion by the enslaved:
In the slavery, she [Eliza Sneed] told me
the slaves were not allowed to worship.
They didn't go to church. If they had
wanted to sing or pray they had to get in
a secret place and pray, "cause the boss
didn't allow them to do that." Didn't
allow them to pray (Mary Lillian Paul
Johnson, interview by Sharon Johnson
Styles, January 1994)
Mary Lillian Paul Johnson's words illustrated
how the oppressive nature of slavery impacted the
religious lives and beliefs of enslaved African Americans. While Silvia King's and Tom Broadus' WPA
narratives attested to the elder Jones' benign treatment
of his enslaved workers, Johnson's statement provided
a contrasting picture of life on the Jones plantation.
Johnson's testimony suggested that Jones and his
overseers strictly regulated the personal lives of the
enslaved African Americans. In Churchill Jones' July
25, 1853, letter to his overseer, George Daffan, Jones
believed that the enslaved African Americans needed
to be feaiful and obedient to ensure ultimate productivity (Churchill Jones Letters, 1849, 1853, 1865-1866,
Center for American History, The University of Texas
at Austin). In this 1853 letter, Jones wrote, "I am afraid
you have got the negroes to like you and not fear you.
If it is the case, you cannot get on nor take care of
anything. They must know when you speak they have
to obey, and to do this you have to stand square up to
them and show yourself master."
After the conclusion of the Civil War, many
of the former slaves remained in Falls County and
labored under a tenant farming system on the same

73

plantations that they had once worked under slavery.
During this time Churchill Jones was ordered to give
his former enslaved workers land for their own use.
Jones either gave the freedmen the land outright or
sold it to them on easy terms (Eddins 1947:247).
According to Madison Wideson, this area of land is
commonly referred to as the "slave land" by local
inhabitants (personal communication, March 2007).
Oral history information indicates that African
Americans formerly enslaved on Churchill Jones'
plantation continued to bury their deceased kin in
Bull Hill.
Additional details about specific burials in Bull
Hill have been provided to us by Ms. Styles. She
provided the death certificates of her great-great
grandparents, Eliza and Sam Sneed, and her great
grandmother, Pearl Paul. The certificates showed
that all three were buried in Bull Hill Cemetery. The
death certificate for Eliza Sneed (Figure 2) further
shows that she was born in 1846 in Alabama, and
that her parents were Harriet and George Jones.
Jones is the same surname as Churchill Jones, and
Alabama is the same state that the elder Churchill
came from in l 852. The names of Harriet and
George were also on the contract for moving Jones'
enslaved individuals to Texas in 1849 (see italicized
names on Table 1). The evidence clearly indicates
that Harriet and George Jones were enslaved by
Churchill Jones, and Mrs. Styles can trace her ancestry from these enslaved people brought to Texas
to work the Jones plantation.
About 1880, individuals from several families,
including the Jones, Sneed, Broadus, Paul, Stokes,
and Taylor families-most either freed or descendants of freed slaves from the Jones and other nearby
plantations-formed the China Grove community,
about 4 miles west of the Bull Hill Cemetery. They
erected a church that shared the community's namesake as well as a school for their children (St. Romain 1951: 112). A title record from the Falls County
Com1house dated January 3, 1890, shows that Zenas
Bartlett deeded the deacons of the China Grove
African Church an acre of land for the purpose
of worship and interring their dead (Falls County
Courthouse, Deed and Probate records). While the
archival evidence seems to indicate that burials were
interred at China Grove in addition to Bull Hill, the
interviewed members of the descendant community
state that the cemetery at China Grove was not used
until the closure of Bull Hill.
The present-day Churchill Jones describes Bull
Hill as once a source of great pride in the China

74

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Death certificate of Eliza Sneed, died February 8, 1939. Note her parents are George Jones and Harriet Jones.
Eliza and her parents are all from Alabama. and Eliza is buried in the Bull Hill Cemetery.

Grove community (personal communication, August
2007). The cemetery was an attractive setting for
local residents, ensconced in the woods. Oral information provided by current Falls County residents
Mrs. Annie Bailey and Mrs. Lovie Taylor (personal
communication, July 2007) stressed that there were
nearly 100 burials in Bull Hill.
Lacking sufficient economic resources, most
families marked graves with temporary metal
markers provided by funeral homes or wooden
markers carved from local trees. Today there are
only two possible wooden markers in the cemetery,
the others having decayed. Fieldstones from the
surrounding areas and waterways were also used
to identify interments. Oral testimony from Mr.

George Jackson, Mrs. Milly Burrell, Mrs. Tennie
Travis, and Mrs. Jeri] Dean Smith Graves note
that before funerals, much effort was expended
in locating a space for interment. Since the caring
and maintenance of the burying ground often relied
on the work of a few, it was not uncommon for
the cemetery to be plagued by the overgrowth of
vegetation, making it hard to locate previous burials.
The practice of using temporary markers to identify
burials or to rely on the memories of kin to find their
locations also possibly contributed to this difficulty.
The present-day Jones stated that Bull Hill was
cleaned sporadically. However, Mrs. Taylor, who
is also a descendant of the Sneed family, noted that
families came together to clean the cemetery during

Lee and Bruseth-Archeological and Historical Investigation on an African American Graveyard
the holidays, particularly on Memorial Day or before
funerals (personal communication, August 2007).
Taylor recalled that the cleaning of the cemetery
during the holidays was a special event.
According to members of the Falls County African American community, the Bull Hill Cemetery
was closed during the 1960s, although information
is contradictory about why. At the time of closing,
the cemetery was situated on land owned by Wiley
and Agnes Jones, the parents of the present-day
Churchill Jones. According to the current Jones
(personal communication, August 2007), Bull Hill
ceased to be used because integration caused local
African American residents to disassociate themselves from any traditions associated with the slave
past. Jones stated that integration had a "reverse
effect" on local residents' pride in Bull Hill; maintenance began to cease. He also stated that he and
his wife periodically cleaned the cemetery, but this
effort became difficult without the help of others and
was stopped in the 1970s.
The members of the local African American
descendant community who were interviewed for
this project had another reason for the lack of use
of the cemetery. They stated that, "They just closed
the gate" (personal communications, Mrs. Annie
Bailey, July 2007, and Mrs. Lovie Taylor, August
2007). Bailey stated that the Jones family provided
no explanation for their decision to close Bull Hull.
Local residents did not return to Bull Hill and
instead began to bury their deceased exclusively
in front of the China Grove African (now Baptist)
Church. Although the China Grove church building
collapsed nearly two years ago during a storm and
community members have dispersed to more urban
areas and towns, the connection between China
Grove and Bull Hill remains strong to this day.
Individuals continue to bury the deceased in the
cemetery at China Grove and remember their loved
ones interred at Bull Hill.
Lovie Taylor (personal communication, August 2007) noted that the last person to be buried
in Bull Hill was her relative, Mrs. Pearl Paul: also
the great-grandmother to Sharon Johnson Styles.
This burial occurred in 1961. After its closure in the
1960s, the Bull Hill Cemetery was subject to poor
maintenance as well as farm-related encroachment.
The present-day Jones noted that the area was also
prone to flooding that dislocated burial markers.
Overgrowth of dense brush and grazing by cattle
from the surrounding livestock operations caused
significant damage to the cemetery.

75

The unexpected closing of Bull Hill resulted
in the near physical disappearance of the cemetery.
While some local knowledge about the Bull Hill
Cemetery persisted during the time of our fieldwork,
the memory of the China Grove Church and community seemed to figure more prominently among
interviewed individuals.

ARCHEOLOGICAL INVESTIGATIONS
The purpose of the 2007 archeological fieldwork at the Bull Hill Cemetery was to: (1) determine
the cemetery's current physical boundaries; (2) ascertain the number of burials present; and (3) record
and map the cemetery's fencing, landscaping, and
grave markers. At the beginning of fieldwork, the
cemetery brush was cleared and the grass mowed.
All grave markers and other visible features located
during the clean-up process were temporarily identified with pin flags and mapped with a Total Data
Station. The mapping activity included not only
in situ headstones but also marker fragments and
surface depressions that likely identified unmarked
graves. At each in situ marker, metal T-posts were
placed into the ground to protect the marker during
future clearing activity and to serve as a permanent
identification of the location.
During the first week of April, several members
of the THC's Archeology Division staff joined the
project. This included the authors, Bill Pierson,
Patricia Mercado-Allinger, Maureen Brown, Brett
Cruse, Elizabeth Martindale, Donna McCarver, and
Dan Potter. Gerron Hite and Anne Shelton of the
THC's History Programs Division provided assistance later in the week. David Bruner ( 1996, 2007),
Carol McDavid, and Fred McGhee also visited the
Bull Hill Cemetery in July. They provided valuable
insight on how to best research the lives of the enslaved African Americans on the Jones plantation as
well as how to understand the symbols and meanings
comprised within various cemetery features.
Project members and volunteers were divided
into two teams, with one team identifying additional
visible features with pin flags, while the other completed a cemetery feature form for every located
marker or other cemetery feature. Each feature was
drawn and photographed, and its location, type, and
material described. Ground depressions, potentially
indicating collapsed graves, were also documented.
Team members recorded features in north-south
transects, beginning at the northeast corner of the

76

Texas Archeological Society

cemetery and then moving east to west. All features
were given a sequential identification number. No
materials were moved during this early phase of the
survey to avoid the destruction of any evidence of
traditional African American burial practices and
material culture. After full documentation, fragmentary markers were removed and stored in a secure
location on a nearby ranch owned by the Summerlee
Foundation.

Documentation of Surface Features
The cemetery survey led to the identification of
101 features. Seven features are depressions in the
ground surface that are likely to be burial locations,
but without an associated marker this cannot be confirmed. Four features are iron wreath holders, used
to display flowers during a funeral. Ninety burial
features represent primary grave markers (Table 2).
In some instances a head and a foot marker are both

present. and head markers are used to categorize the
grave marker type.
The most common burial markers are native
stones, which account for almost 36 percent of all
markers. We have subdivided this group into three
categories. The first is rounded and unmodified
native fieldstones (Figure 3). They are mostly
made of native Central Texas limestone and
sandstone. Stones of this type, however, are not
native to the Bull Hill area and were brought in to
mark burials. The second category of unmodified
stones are flat native stones. These markers, of
the same materials as the fieldstones, have a flat
surface and a general shape that approximates
a man-made burial marker. Again, because the
cemetery has no natural stones of this type, these
have been brought in as well. The final category
is native flat stones that have numbers or letters
carved into them. One, for instance, has the letters
"TP" carved near the top.

Table 2. Grave (Head) Marker Classification.

Marker Classification
Native Stone
Unmodified Fieldstone
Unmodified Flat Stone
Carved Flat Stone
Temporary Metal Grave Marker
Brick
Machine-made
Handmade Brick
Professional Manufactured Stone
Marble
Granite
Concrete
Cast
Stamped
Wood Post
Bent Iron Bar
Iron Ring with Shaft
Iron Pipe in Concrete with Brick
Metal Bucket
Metal Pipe
Stoneware Jar
Total

Number

Percent

17
9
6
27

18.9
10.0
6.7
30.0

8

8.9

1

1.1

5
4

5.6
4.4

3
2
2
1
l
l
1
1

1

3.3
2.2
2.2
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1
1.1

90

100.0

Lee and Bruseth-Archeological and Historical Investigation on an African American Graveyard

77

Figure 3. Undecorated limestone marker (#CMC-03).

Thirty percent of the markers are temporary
metal grave markers consisting of a galvanized metal
plate with a glass cover mounted to a shaft (Figure
4). Nearly all have stamped patent dates that range
from 1911to1925. Today, these kinds of temporary
markers are issued by funeral homes as field locators
until permanent monuments are set. For the Bull Hill
interments, these markers often served as the final
identification of grave locations, a practice common
in many older African American cemeteries.
Nine brick or brick associations were observed on
the surface of the cemetery and relate to at least two
graves and perhaps to as many as nine graves. Most
likely the machine-made bricks are all part of a single
grave marker but have subsequently been scattered
about an area of 10 m 2• The single hand-made brick
almost certainly marks another burial location.
There are nine marble or granite monuments
(Figure 5). These burial stones have been produced
by a professional monument company and have
birth and death information engraved on them. Many
refer to deceased who served in the military and the

stones are likely part of a Veterans Administration
death benefit. These markers are identical to mortuary company monuments commonly present on
cemeteries throughout Texas.
Five cast concrete monuments were observed.
Several were in poor condition, often broken into
pieces and scattered about. Two of these markers
had birth and death information stamped into the
surface (Figure 6).
Several other marker types were observed at the
cemetery. These included two wooden posts, which
alternatively may have been part of a fence to mark
off a grave; an iron rod with a ring on one end and
placed lengthwise into the ground; an iron pipe set
in concrete in the soil; a metal bucket; a simple
metal pipe driven lengthwise into the ground; and
a stoneware jar.
There were also large areas of the cemetery
where no markers or associated material culture
were visible above ground. These areas are discussed below as part of the interpretation of the
cemetery remote sensing results.

78

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 4. Galvanized iron funeral home temporary marker (#CMC-65).

Figure 5. Granite marker (#CMC-55).

Lee and Bruseth-Archeological and Historical Investigation on an African American Graveyard

79

Remote Sensing of Subsurface
Features
Remote sensing was conducted
with a cart-mounted Geometrics G-858
cesium magnetometer and a SIR-3000
Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) unit to
help determine the location and extent of
burials in the cemetery (Figure 7). The
decision to use remote sensing technologies was made to be sensitive to the
sacredness of the cemetery and the politics of conducting archeological investigations in historically disenfranchised
communities. As seen with large-scale
archeological projects like the Freedman's Cemetery in Dallas (Davidson
2004) and the African Burial Ground in
Manhattan (LaRoche and Blakey 1997),
more invasive investigations of historic
African American cemeteries require
sustained communication and outreach
to African American descendant communities as well as sensitivity to the
historically contentious relationship
between anthropological practitioners
and individuals of color. A non-invasive
archeological examination of the Bull
Hill Cemetery was felt to be the best approach since at the start of the fieldwork
we were uncertain if we would be able
to identify members of the descendant
Figure 6. Concrete marker with stamped letters (#CMC-08).
community.
Over the past few years, the THC
has used the magnetometer to survey more than 50
every 10 cm on two 50 cm transects. A base-station
archeological sites of divergent age, occupation, and
magnetometer collected the total magnetic field for
geographic setting throughout Texas (Bruseth et al.
correction of global-scale diurnal magnetic fluctua2007). Since magnetometers are ideal for detecting
tions and sun-induced magnetic storm activity.
features containing ferrous metal, this instrument
The magnetometer located all ferrous metal on
was thought to be useful in detecting burials at the
the site, mainly temporary grave markers placed by
Bull Hill Cemetery through the identification of
funeral homes during interment. Figure 8a displays
coffin hardware.
the results of the magnetic surveys. Most apparent on
A magnetic survey of almost 85 percent of Bull
the map are linear rows of magnetic anomalies oriHill was conducted using an aluminum cart holding
ented approximately to magnetic east, highlighted by
two cesium sensors, spaced 50 cm apart and 25 cm
white lines on Figure 8b. Some of these could be idenabove the ground. The cart-mounted magnetometer
tified in the field as temporary funeral home markers,
was operated by one person pulling it with a data
but many showed no surface evidence. Shovel tests
collection console attached to the waist. Magnetic
were excavated over a few of the anomalies that
readings from the two sensors were collected at a
lacked surface features, and temporary metal markers
sampling rate of 10 measurements per second. This
were often found buried in the soil. On this basis, we
allowed for the simultaneous collection of 20 meacan conclude that the linear rows of anomalies are
surements per m2 or readings taken approximately
rows of graves with temporary markers at the head.

80

Texas Archeological Society

Farm Road

I

. - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Magnetometer

Survey

Area

<J>

•41
•91
•90

GPR Survey I
•89

I
!

•54

"--~----·---~

64•

•88 •87
•86

56. •53
•55
head foot

SS

•63•58
•52 •so

•85 i •34•83
80 .1
•82• 81 .71
head i
•72
lfoot•79

•61

80

•68

I

•69

•77

.92
.25
l5f93
.24
.j3 -:.~100
•2~11 W10 ."11294
08• •09 .

•5044•39
•49 •36 •38
•47
•48

•57

0

•65
•67 ·66-head
"66-foot

•78

c

•51 •42
.43•40

•52

59

•46

•Tree

•35
•45 .r101

<J>
()

c

I

<J>

lL

16• •
•07 I •02 •01
16-foot os. 9 ~~b6 •98
99
•17
" "•ID4

•26

28 •27
•34
•33
•32

-.1

>,
~

<J>

•971

I

.211
•21
•20. 8

!

<J>

E
(!)

0

•31
30-foot 'I>
30-head • 29

•19

l

GPR Survey II

•73
•70
•74

•03

Figure 7. Remote sensing survey areas within the cemetery and location of surface features (numbers represent "CMC"
designations discussed in text).

In his seminal study of Texas graveyards,
Terry Jordan (1982:30) noted that many African
American cemeteries contained graves that were
"often strewn about in a rather disorderly manner,
in staggered rows, separate clusters, and freestanding sites." Jordan (1982:30) further stated that "[s]
uperimposed upon the randomness is an unfailing
orientation, as certain a compass as the pole star.
Nearly all southern folk cemeteries [including African American graveyards] have the graves aligned
on an east-west axis, and burials are made with the
feet to the east."
Ross Jamieson's (1995:52) discussion of African American mortuary practices provides further
insight into the variation of burial orientations in
African American cemetery contexts. He noted that
burial orientations varied widely within and between
African groups: "For instance, in the Mandara Highlands of Cameroon, otientation of the body is said to
be commonly directed towards the east-west axis."

However, in other African societies, burials were
placed in distinct physical locations that referenced
"symbolism of a group's cosmologies" (Jamieson
1995 :47) or distinguished those who died of natural
or unnatural causes (Jamieson 1995:47-48). The influence of Christianity and the oppressive constraints
of plantation life contributed to the standardization
of the orientation of burials within Aftican American
cemetery contexts. While many African Americans
continued to honor native African traditions by burying along the east-west axis, burials with the head
facing the west also became quite common with the
practice of Christianity (Jamieson 1995:52). The
practice of adhering to no single direction in African
American cemeteries was also prevalent.
The graves in Bull Hill, especially the burials
marked with temporary markers, show these patterns
quite clearly. The individual graves designated with
temporary markers are laid out in an east-west
orientation. The magnetometer survey depicted

Lee and Bruseth-Archeological and Historical Investigation on an African American Graveyard

110 '"'""''"·7'~'.''-;C'

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

a

40

60

70

80

90

110

120

b
Figure 8. Magnetometer survey results: (a) shaded relief map of magnetic anomalies; and
(b) shaded relief map with noted orientation (white line) of ferrous anomalies, likely rows of
temporary funeral home head markers. Grid in meters.

81

82

Texas Archeological Society

distinctive rows of the metal markers, representing
head markers in rows oriented to magnetic north.
A SIR-3000 GPR system was used with a 400
MHz antenna to collect data in 50 cm transects.
The 400 MHz antenna had a maximum effective
range of about 10 ft. under ideal conditions. Two
areas were selected for the GPR survey (see Figure
7). Survey I extended from the northwestern corner
of the cemetery, where the magnetometer indicated
that ferrous temporary markers were not present and
where surface cemetery features were lacking. Survey II was on the eastern part of Bull Hill where the
magnetometer had located several anomalies, most
likely representing temporary metal markers. Since
graves were clearly present based on surface makers, this seemed like a good opportunity to examine
their GPR signature.
Ten slices were derived for Survey I, each representing estimated 25 cm depth increments. The first
three slices show a number of anomalies, most of
which are related to likely buried markers or natural
soil disturbances (such as tree roots). Slices four
through six show what almost certainly have to be
the remains of human burials. Slice five shows this
best with a series of east-west oriented anomalies
and a series of north-south oriented anomalies situated perpendicular to the ranch road (Figure 9b). In
fact, the east-west GPR anomalies seem to follow a
row of metal temporary markers evident to the south
in the magnetic data and may be the continuation of
the row towards the north but without the temporary
metal markers.
Figure 10 depicts the GPR Survey II results.
A great number of anomalies are present, but most
seem not to relate to graves, or at least are not easily interpreted as relating to graves. Slices three
through five reflect tree roots that extend from a
series of large trees immediately to the west of the
survey area.
Based on the remote sensing results, we suggest
that the plantation's earliest graves were placed in
the northwestern part of the cemetery (Area A on
Figure 11 ). Today they are both inside and outside
of the cmrent northern fence boundary, based on
GPR transects conducted in the current ranch road.
These graves were possibly added to an earlier extant
graveyard for residents from Sarah ville de Viescabased on the historical account of the death of James
Coryell. There are no markers present for these graves
today. Many of these burials are oriented north-south,
based on the GPR data, which may be paxt of a burial
tradition rooted in African culture. As discussed by

Ross Jamieson (1995:52), and as previously noted,
archeological analyses of mortuary practices in Africa have shown that burials often lacked a consistent
orientation and that the north-south axis was also
traditionally used in some areas.
Oral history information from the present-day
Churchill Jones (personal communication, March
2007) further indicates that burials continued
through the 19th century. Area B may be where these
interments are located, all without any surviving
surface markers today. Some time after the turn of
the 20th century, interments at Bull Hill expanded
further to the south (Area C of Figure 11). Graves
from this time are mostly identified by unmarked
and marked natural stones, temporary metal grave
markers, and a few stone monuments. Some other
marker mate1ials, such as a bucket, a stoneware
jar, and metal pipes, were placed endwise into the
ground. Area D is a part of the cemetery without
remote sensing grave anomalies and without smface
markers. Present evidence indicates that this part of
the cemetery was not used for human burials.
The remote sensing survey substantiates claims
made by members of the descendant community
about the numbers of interments at Bull Hill. Several individuals told us that that there were more
than 100 burials present, and our work supports
this figure-even suggests more than that number
are likely present.

CONCLUSIONS
The archeological and historical investigations
of the Bull Hill Cemetery have offered us a rare
opportunity to explore burial practices and African
American community fo1mation during the antebellum
period as well as the years following Emancipation.
With remote sensing technology, oral histories,
and a critical analysis of historical documents, we
have outlined the cemetery's physical, social, and
historical landscape, connecting its multiple registers
of meaning to the operation of a large plantation and
a nearby African American community.
While there are no plans to excavate at Bull
Hull, the preservation and documentation of the
cemetery have subsequently led to discussions about
archeological investigations to locate the main house
and other buildings on the nearby related Jones
plantation. The possibility of conducting work at the
plantation surrounding Bull Hill Cemetery would
expand the rather limited body of archeological

Lee and Bruseth-Archeological and Historical Investigation on an African American Graveyard

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

4

6

12

8

14

16

18

a

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

I

i'6
2

="T
4

....
6

!!!'
I
8

. ...
I

10

·•
~

12

'
14

16

18

Figure 9. Ground Penetrating Radar results for Survey I: (a) anomalies on
slice five (estimated 1.25 m depth); and (b) likely grave locations on slice five
identified by rectangles with diagonal lines. Grid in meters.

83

84

Texas Archeological Society

Slice I (estimated 25 cm)

0

0

~

Ii)

t !j

;\')

Sli ce 6 (estimated J.5 m)

Slice 2 (estimated 50 cm)

~ 0o

5

10

15

::D

Slice 7 (estimated 1.75 m)

Slice 4 (estimated I m)

Sli ce 3 (estimated 75 cm)

u0

5

to

~

;;.'()

0

·0

Sli ce 8 (estimated 2 m)

5

!O

15

::,;,

Slice 9 (estimated 2.25 m)

Slice 5 (estimated 1.25 m)

-

u.t

,

1b

11s

I

r

I

Slice 10 (estimated 2.25 cm)

Figure 10. Ground Penetrating Radar results for Survey II. Grid in meters.

know ledge about the nature of slavery in Texas as well
as provide a richer and more nuanced understanding
about topics such as hierarchy, spirituality, and
resistance in enslaved communities. It would also
encourage the posing of new questions about
freedom and community organization during the
Reconstruction era. The potential to use archeology
to learn more about the trials and triumphs of African
Americans dming this period are not only endless
but necessary. While groundbreaking archeological
work has been done by Paul Shackel (Pinkowski
2005:42-47), Paul Mullins (1999), Kenneth Brown
(2004; Brown and Cooper 1990), and Carol McDavid
(2007) on freedmen ' s communities, our work at
Bull Hill has shown us that post-Emancipation life
for African Americans in rural environs was just
as rich and complicated by the re-implementation
of slavery through the tenant farming system.
Questions about the meaning of freedom, refuge,
resistance, family. and community organization
abound in light of manifestations of racial terror
because of rapid African Ame1ican progress. The

African American communities that arose in rural
Texas after Emancipation could provide a wealth of
knowledge on these topics.
In his dissertation, The Black Crop: Slave1y and
Slave Trading in Nineteenth Century Texas, Fred L.
McGhee (2000) emphasizes the importance of a revisionist history in the inclusive study of the Texas past.
McGhee (2000:30) states that, "The time has now
come to take the next step in the rewriting of Texas
and the west. Not only was slavery a fundamental
and intrinsic aspect of nineteenth century Texas, but
slave trading-or 'negro speculation' as it was technically known-was an integral aspect of the peculiar
institution as it was practiced in the Lone Star State."
Further work at Bull Hill, once a large graveyard for
enslaved Af1ican Americans from the central Brazos
River plantation economy, can elucidate how the
untold parts of African American history in Texas
can be documented, preserved, and presented. This
history would challenge the power dynamics that have
downplayed the importance of slavery in the settlement of Texas and highlight the past experiences and

Lee and Bruseth-Archeological and Historical Investigation on an African American Graveyard

85

Farm Road

a

Figure 11. Proposed burial areas at the Bull Hill Cemetery: (a) possible oldest
burials; (b) pre-20th Century burials; (c) burials with metal, stone, and wood
markers; and (d) area unused for burial.

contributions of African Americans. Archeology has
an important role to play in this process, and coupled
with the goals of historic preservation, it can have
much to offer in the interpretation and documentation
of histories and memories silenced because of issues
of race and power. The practice of an inclusive archeology must come with a methodology that creatively
employs oral and archival research, archeological
investigations that may not always result in excavations, and sensitivity to contemporary racial injustices
rooted in the past.

their guidance and help in this project. They readily
shared their stories and insights with us during this
effort. Ms. Sharon Johnson Styles shared a wealth of
information from her personal files on her family in
Marlin, Texas, and in so doing showed the way for
research undertaken in this project. Finally, a special
thank you goes to Drs. Maria Franklin, Sam Wilson,
and James Denbow, all of The University of Texas
at Austin, for their constant reminders to the senior
author to continue looking towards the future during
work on this project.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

REFERENCES CITED

We would like to thank everyone who assisted
in the Bull Hill Cemetery research and the preparation of this article. We are extremely grateful for
the financial support of Mr. John Crain of the Summerlee Foundation, and Judge David Jackson of the
Summerfield G. Roberts Foundation. Without the
strong commitment of these individuals and foundations, this work would never have occurred. We also
appreciate the help of Mrs. Jeril Dean Smith Graves,
Mrs. Bernice Kirk, Mrs. Trudie Asbury, Mrs. Annie
Bailey, Mrs. Milly Burrell, Mr. George Burrell, Mrs.
Lear Alford, Mr. Churchill Jones, and the members
of the Falls County Historical Commission, for

1860 Slave Schedule, U.S. Census Records, Center for American History, The University of Texas at Austin.
Broadus, Tom, WPA Slave Narratives, Center for American
History, The University of Texas at Austin.
Brown, K. L.
2004 Ethnographic Analogy, Archaeology, and the African
Diaspora: Perspectives from a Tenant Community.
Historical Archaeology 38(1):79-89.
Brown, K. L. and D. C. Cooper
1990 Structural Continuity in an African American Slave
and Tenant Community. Historical Archaeology
24(4):7-19.

86

Texas Archeological Society

Bruner, D.
1996 Hidden Power: Burial Practices from an African
American Slave and Tenant Community. Master's
Thesis, University of Houston.
2007

Symbols for the Living: Synthesis, Invention, and
Resistance in 19th to 20th Century Mortuary Practices from Montgomery County and Harris County,
Texas. Ph.D. Dissertation, State University of New
York, Binghamton

Bruseth. J. E., W. T. Pierson, and R. M. Johnson
2007 Large-Area Remote Sensing Coverage of Archaeological Sites with a Dual-Track, Cart-Mounted Cesium Magnetometer. Journal of Field Archaeology
32:1-15.
Davidson, J. M.
2004 Mediating Race and Class through the Death Experience: Power Relations and Resistance Strategies
of an African American Community, Dallas, Texas
1869-1907. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Deed and Probate Records, Falls County Courthouse. Marlin, Texas.
Eddins, R. (editor)
1947 Histo1y of Falls County, Texas. Old Settlers and
Veterans Association of Falls County, Texas.
Genovese. E. D.
1976 Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made.
Vintage Books, New York.
Jamieson, R. W.
1995 Material Culture and Social Death: African
American Burial Practices. Historical Archaeology
29( 4 ):39-58.
Styles, Sharon Johnson,
1994 January interview with Mary Lillian Paul Johnson,
Bull Hill Cemetery, Historic Cemetery Program,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Jones, Churchill
n.d.
Letters, 1849, 1853, J 865-1866, Center for American
History, The University of Texas at Austin.
Jones, Churchill, Handbook of Texas Online
n.d.
http://www.tshaonline.org/handbook/online/articles/
JJ/fjo9 l .html.
Jordan, T. G.
1982 Texas Graveyards: A Cultural Legacy. The University of Texas Press, Austin.

King, Silvia
WPA Slave Narratives, Center for American History,
n.d.
The University of Texas at Austin.
LaRoche, C. J. and M. L. Blakey.
1997 Seizing Intellectual Power: The Dialogue at the New
York African Burial Ground. Historical Archaeology
31(3):84-106.
McDavid, C.
2007 Beyond Strategy and Good Intentions: Archaeology,
Race, and White Privilege. In Archaeology as a Tool
of Civic Engagement, edited by B. J. Little and P.
A. Shackel, pp. 67-88. AltaMira Press, Lanham.
Maryland.
McGhee, F. L.
2000 The Black Crop: Slavery and Slave Trading in
Nineteenth Century Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Mullins. P.
1999 Race and Affluence: An Archaeology of Afi·ican
American and Consumer Culture. Kluwer Academic/
Plenum Publishers, New York.
Oltorf, F. C.
1968 The Marlin Compound: Letters of a Singular Family.
The University of Texas Press, Austin.
Pinkowski, J.
2005 Integrating the Frontier: A Town Founded by a Former Slave Resurfaces in Illinois. Archaeology 58
(No. 5):42-47.
Potter, D., P. Mercado-Allinger, J. Bruseth, and M. Brown
2008 Archeological Investigations at Sarahville de Viesca,
Falls County, Texas. MS on file, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
St. Romain. L. S.
1951 Western Falls County, Texas. The Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Simmons. F. E.
1936 History of Coryell County. Coryell County News,
Belton, Texas.
Texas Historical Commission
2001 Preserving Historic Cemeteries: Texas Preservation
Guidelines. Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
n.d.

Standardsfor Preserving Historic Cemeteries. Texas
Historical Commission, Austin.

Buffalo Soldiers and Apaches in the Guadalupe Mountains:
A Review of Research at Pine Springs Camp
Eleanor King and Justin Dunnavant

ABSTRACT
In 2006 Howard University finished investigating Pine Springs Camp in the Guadalupe Mountains, in
cooperation with the Mescalero Apache Tribe and the National Park Service. Discovery of contemporaneous
Buffalo Soldier and Apache occupations suggested that the two groups alternated their use of this area during
the 1870s Apache Wars. The military presence is particularly well-marked, with activity areas, structures, and
artifacts providing information on site layout and use. The Apache presence, although more ephemeral, shows
great longevity. Archival and historical research has now provided additional details about the various users of
the camp. This article summarizes the results of these investigations and explores the intertwined activities of
the Buffalo Soldiers and the Apache on this part of the western frontier.

This article tells a dual story. Spanning over a
century, it concerns both African American Buffalo
Soldiers serving on the western frontier and their
Apache opponents. It does not offer any special
theoretical insight, but rather a practical example of
a collaborative approach to the past and its results. It
centers on the transient history of one particular site
in western Texas, Pine Springs Camp. The following
account focuses primarily on our understanding of
the people and events that left their record on the
ground, rather than on the archeology per se.
The story begins in the 1860s, after the Civil
War, when the U.S. government stepped up its efforts to contain the Apache on reservations. For the
next 20 years, the fighting continued, sometimes
intensely, sometimes sporadically, as different
Apache groups resisted confinement and attacked
settlers, travelers, cattle drovers, and other intruders.
Particularly prominent in the later fighting were the
Warm Springs Apache, who were denied the land
promised to them, an all too familiar tale. They refused to settle down in San Carlos, as mandated by
the U.S. government, because endemic malaria and
food shortages there made the order tantamount to
a death sentence (Ball 1970). They were led by the
able tactician Victorio, along with Nana, Geronimo,
and Cochise's son Naiche, in a protracted guerilla
war. By the late 1870s this conflict had heated up to
the point that all the U.S. military units in western
Texas, from Fort Concho in San Angelo to Fort

Bliss in El Paso, were involved. The majority of
these troops were comprised of Buffalo Soldiers,
the African American regular military regiments
created after the Civil War. Two regiments in particular, the 9th and the 10th Cavalry, saw a lot of
action, although the 25th Infantry was also involved.
Initially, the newly formed African American regiments were dispatched to defend the Kansas Pacific
Railroad and nearby settlements from enemy attack.
However, in accordance with the expansionist policy
of the time, it became a top priority to expel the
Apache from the land and keep them confined to
assigned reservations. Regiments of the 9th and 10th
Calvary were tasked with the inimical mission of
pursuing the Apache, which required near constant
movement. Patrols and skirmishes intensified, as
the cavalry hounded Victorio and his followers. An
important phase of these Apache wars ended when
the Mexican Army killed Victoria along with many
of his people at Tres Castillos in 1880, an event
that still resonates with the Apache. The fighting,
of course, continued until Geronimo surrendered
in 1886, but fewer units seem to have been active
then, many of them remaining in their home forts
for extended periods.
One of the areas where the military activity was
at its most intense was the Guadalupe Mountains of
west Texas. Although only a few battles were fought
there, the military regularly criss-crossed the te1nin
on patrol, and in the late 1870s, upon the orders of

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

88

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 1. Aerial photograph of Pine Springs Camp, showing extent and location in relation to Guadalupe Mountains
National Park headquarters.

Colonel Benjamin Grierson, commander of the 10th
Cavalry, settled down to occupy all the major springs
and water sources in order to prevent the Apache
from re-supplying (Charles Haecker, personal
communication, 2004). At that time the Guadalupe
Mountains would have been especially dangerous
for troops because they were largely uncharted and
lay within the boundaries of the Mescalero Apache
territory. One of the places the military chose to
occupy was Pine Springs, a particularly desirable
campsite because it featured clean, non-sulphurous
water from two sources, as well as abundant grass
for livestock and pine for building material (Figure
1). The springs had long been known as one of the
stops (the "Pinery") on the then-defunct Butterfield
Stage Trail, which traversed the mountains via a

nearby pass, and the location was important enough
to the military to be designated an official sub-post
(Levy 1971: 119). The camp was used sporadically
in the late 1860s and early 1870s by elements of the
9th Cavalry and possibly by the European-American
3rd and 8th Cavalry as well. In the spring of 1870,
for example, it served as a focal place for 9th Cavalry troops from Fort Stockton and Fort Davis to
meet and re-supply during their campaign against
the Mescalero (Leckie and Leckie 2003:93).
Its major period of military use, however, came
during the Victoria campaign between 1878 and
1881, when it was repeatedly used by elements
of the 10th Cavalry. Most prominent among these
occupants were the troopers of Company K out of
Fort Davis, under the command of Captain Thomas

King and Dunnavant-Buffalo Soldiers and Apaches in the Guadalupe Mountains
Lebo. In 1878, they camped at Pine Springs for two
months in the late fall, using it as a base camp for
regular mountain patrols. Other units of the 10th
Cavalry used Pine Springs more briefly. Company
H under Captain Carpenter went through there in
September 1875 on their way to Fort Sill from New
Mexico. Company M under Captain Stevens Norvell, out of Fort Stockton, stayed twice in June 1878.
Similarly, Captain William Kennedy's Company
F camped there in September 1880. These are the
military occupations known about so far. Hopefully
ongoing archival research will yield others.
The military were not the only ones to use Pine
Springs, however. Their sporadic occupation allowed
the Apache to come in during the long stretches of
time the Army was not in the immediate area and
avail themselves of the local resources, such as
mescal, as well as of the materials the soldiers left
behind. Tin cans, cartridge cases, and bottles all
provided raw materials for shaping into a variety of
items. The activities of the Apache, interlaced with
those of the soldiers, have left behind a complex
archeological record at Pine Springs that we have
recently begun to decipher.
Before discussing our project and what was
found, however, it is important to understand a little
about the people whose lives have been uncovered.
The bare historical facts do not do them justice. On
the military side, the Buffalo Soldiers, although
relatively new units, proved to be some of the toughest fighters in the Army (Leckie and Leckie 2003).
Most of their officers, like Grierson and Lebo, were
Civil War veterans. The men they led were largely
former slaves, although some were freedmen. Military officers enlisted many of the troops of the 9th
Calvary from the streets of New Orleans, while a
number of the troops from the 10th Calvary came
from further North, including Boston, Philadelphia,
and New York City (Alt and Alt 2002:54-55). They
had joined the Army for the promise of regular
pay and, for the Southerners, the ability to move
out of a devastated region, where job opportunities
were scarce, especially for the recently enslaved.
Additionally, joining the military meant three hot
meals a day, clothing, and sleeping quarters. It also
provided some form of education as the Black regiments were assigned a permanent chaplain. Many of
the new recruits had to survive hideous conditions
and rampant disease in tent cities around recruiting
posts, as they awaited enlistment and mobilization (Leckie and Leckie 2003:3-18). The military
records, succinct to a fault, only hint at the difficult

89

conditions they subsequently endured. During nine
months from 1878 to 1879 just four companies of
the 10th rode over 8000 rugged miles chasing the
Apache (Leckie and Leckie 2003:221). One can
only guess at what the men went through when the
terse company returns report horses that died of
exhaustion. The account for one company, F, under
Captain Kennedy, nicely illustrates field conditions.
In the fall of 1880 the Company had to leave another
camp in the Guadalupe Mountains "for sanitary
reasons" and take refuge in Pine Springs Camp.
There, the return continues, "Company not in good
fix for appointed work by reasons of insufficiency
of materials for men ... " Nonetheless, they marched
491 miles that month and remained in the field for
two more months before returning to Fort Stockton,
having "suffered severely from the inclemency of
the weather, some being frost bitten." One horse, in
fact, died of the cold (Returns of the 10th Cavalry,
September 1880).
On the other side of the conflict, the Apache,
while used to the extremes of weather in the Southwest, fared not much better. Pursued by the Army,
Victoria's group, broken into several bands, could
rarely stay in one place long enough to collect the
food their hunting and gathering way of life had
fonnerly provided. The agave mescal, a portable
resource prized for its durability, as once roasted it
would keep for a long time, was not easily available.
Roasting took several days and often the Apache
had to move before the cooking could be completed.
Roasting, too, was done by the women and made
them vulnerable to attack. One harrowing tale by an
Apache survivor tells of two 15 year old girls traveling with Nana's band who were surp1ised and shot in
the back by soldiers as they checked their mescal pit
(Ball 1970). Soldiers regularly destroyed any caches
of mescal or other food they found. Bullets, too,
were in short supply for the Apache wan-iors, as were
horses, and re-provisioning required risky raids.
It is against this broad canvas that our investigation of Pine Springs Camp took place, roughly 120
years after the end of the Apache Wars. The site had
already been documented by the 1970 Texas Archeological Society (TAS) field school (Shafer 1970),
and subsequent research by TAS member Anne Fox,
who graciously gave us her notes, has made much
of our reconstruction of events possible. Further
reconnaissance by Charles Haecker of the National
Park Service (NPS) in the 1990s not on] y confirmed
the military nature of the encampment but identified
Apache remains in the same area. Accordingly, in

90

Texas Archeological Society

2004 a new archeological project was initiated to
examine the site in greater detail. This project was
itself part of the larger Warriors Project sponsored
by the NPS. The aim of this ambitious program
is to encourage African Americans and American
Indians to discuss their mutual past on the frontier.
In accordance with these goals, since 2004 Howard
University has been partnering with the Mescalero
Apache Tribe, with help from both the NPS and the
Bureau of Land Management, to introduce students
to archeology. We worked with a field school at the
Pine Springs Camp for three years and are cmTently
planning our next joint field operation. Participants
in the project have included Howard University
undergraduates and graduates, Mescalero Apache,
and European American high school students, and
international visitors. Together, we have looked at
who occupied the site, how the land was used, and
what happened in the larger picture on this part of
the frontier.
The site itself is unique. A multi-component
campsite spread out over more than 60 acres, it
comprises a range of occupations, mostly from the

Guadalupe Mountains
National Park

41CU44
p~i:: a~~ii~C~:~~~P

.

Encampment

·

0

20

'

40

60

area of singlecomponent
occupation
wicldup
rings
(buried ':t·
hearths)

\;.\N

late 19th century (Figure 2). Prominent features
include a central line of military hearths, used on at
least two distinct occasions and probably more; a
subsidiary line of hearths that represents a separate,
single component military occupation; a wagon
road; picket stations that protected both lines of
hearths; the remains of semi-permanent structures,
most likely tent pads; and wickiup rings that the
Apache appear to have used several times. Military
features of particular interest include hypocausts,
or underground heating channels that apparently
served to warm several of the tents. These were
connected to campfires outside the tents, at least
one of which was used for cooking as several can
lids were found stashed nearby (Figures 3 and 4).
Other buried stone boxes, one underneath a hearth in
the main row, may also have been used for cooking.
The presence of these protected fire features makes
perfect sense in an area where the winds can blow
up to 110 miles an hour in the cold-weather months
(Gorden Bell, personal communication, 2005), and
fires would have needed containment to avoid being
extinguished or spreading.

_blacksmith
activity area

80

meters

Pine Springs

Canyon
drainage

Figure 2. Map of Pine Springs Camp showing the location of various features.

wagon trail
to Upper Pine
Springs

King and Dunnavant-Buffalo Soldiers and Apaches in the Guadalupe Mountains
Military activity areas can also be discerned
at the site, based on artifact distributions. Most
notable is one associated with the single component
occupation, where an abundance of horseshoe nails
and horseshoes, as well as chisel-cut iron bar stock,
suggest a blacksmith, apparently using a portable
forge, shoed horses there (see Figure 2). Long
spike fragments found nearby may indicate a corral
or at least a place where horses were temporarily
tethered. The picket stations associated with this
occupation also have an interesting artifact array.
Several instances of can lid fragments and some
cast iron fragments were found around two of
them. As the only cast iron food vessels were
cooking pots, the mess pans and camp kettles being
made of bloom iron (Quartermaster General of the
Army l 889), these finds suggest food preparation
in the vicinity. There are no indications of hearths
nearby, however, and it is unlikely the men on
picket duty prepared their own food. Perhaps it
was brought to them, then, in a cast iron pot on
at least one occasion; perhaps at other times they
ate directly from the can. A third picket station
belonging to this occupation yielded several aqua
and brown glass bottle fragments, suggesting
drinking activity. Bottle fragments near the hearths

91

Figure 3. Tent pad with hypocaust during excavation.
Firebox, located outside of tent, is delineated by upright
stones forming a square in the lower half of the picture.

Figure 4. Can lids found stashed within the firebox from Figure 3.

92

Texas Archeological Society

and military structures in other
parts of Pine Springs Camp
indicate this was a widespread
way of taking comfort, although
some of the glass is admittedly
from medicine bottles.
Overall, the debris of military
life are scattered throughout the
site, but are especially concentrated near the hearths. Bottles,
buttons, coins, cartridges, and particularly nails are visible (Figure
5). The latter include horseshoe
nails, box nails, and the longer
bridge spikes. Some of the horseshoe nails were fashioned into
fishing hooks, a common practice
at the time (Farrow 1881:212),
which confirms reports that the
soldiers hunted and fished to
supplement their regulation fare.
One hearth in the main line had
a considerable amount of spikes
averaging approximately 3 inches
in length. These were associated
Figure 5. Military artifacts, Pine Springs Camp; clockwise from top: button,
with the construction activities of
cartridge, quarter, tobacco pouch tab, pen nib (later date), square cut nail.
the infantry and may indicate infantry use of that campfire, as well
as a storage area for materials and/or a construction
find was unusual, however. Significantly, Apache
workshop. Near the semi-permanent structures
artifacts tend to concentrate in the vicinity of the
fewer materials were found, with the notable excepmilitary features, a distribution that supports the
tion of several tent posts still solidly implanted in
idea that they periodically "mined" the soldiers'
bedrock. One of these was a wrought iron tent peg
camp for useful materials. A small amount of stone
11.3 inches long and 0.6 inches in diameter. Sixteen
tools attest to prehistoric as well as historic use of
inch wooden pegs were used for securing common
this location.
tents approximately 7 x 8 ft. in size (Quartermaster
The total number of occupations at the site
General of the Army 1889). The size of the peg may
is hard to determine, as many left few traces.
indicate a slightly smaller tent, or the sturdier iron
At a minimum we can identify three military
may not have needed to be as long. It should also be
occupations, two associated with the main line of
noted that tent pegs were used sometimes to secure
hearths, one associated with the subsidiary line.
horses (Farrow 1881:62).
The only one we can pinpoint with any accuracy,
Apache occupations of the Pine Springs Camp
however, is the two month stay by Company K of
left a lighter signature, although a number of
the 10th Cavalry in 1878. Their commander, Lebo,
distinctive items have been found. Several wickiup
left a detailed description of where they camped,
rings and a possible burned rock midden suggest
including measurements that place them firmly
repeated and sustained use of the site. A glass
within the main line of hearths. Significantly,
bottom scraper, a cut cartridge, and several cut can
Company K was accompanied on that occasion by a
rims testify to their re-cycling of military materials.
detachment of infantrymen from the 25th regiment.
Of particular interest was the discovery within one
They may well have been the ones responsible for
wickiup ring of a buried hearth, cut through three
the concentration of spikes that were found. As for
previous hearths, which had a large cut tin can lid
other occupations, there are at least five Apache and
in situ beside it (Figure 6). The location of this
possibly pre-Apache uses of the site as indicated

King and Dunnavant-Buffalo Soldiers and Apaches in the Guadalupe Mountains

93

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Park Service, the Bureau
of Land Management, Guadalupe Mountains National Park (GMNP), the Mescalero
Apache Tribe, and Howard University all
provided support to the project, for which
we are most grateful. We would especially
like to thank John Lujan, Fred Armstrong,
and Jan Wobbenhorst of the GMNP and
Holly Houghten and Cody Bill Browning
of the Mescalero Apache Tribe for their
constant, friendly help. We would also like
to thank the project co-director, Charles
Haecker, and the terrific field crews of the
2004, 2005, and 2006 field seasons, which
included GMNP volunteers as well as students. Away from the field, we are grateful
for the help of several Howard University
undergraduates and graduates, who did not
come to the Guadalupe Mountains but dug
up critical information in the Archives.
Finally, we want to thank Paris McCoy,
Figure 6. Tin can lid cut by the Apache, probably for jingles; found
Justin Knight, and Bruce Moses, who
next to buried hearth.
provided illustrations or otherwise helped
with that part of the project. We regret that
we cannot name everyone involved in the different
by the surface ivickiups, the four buried hearths,
phases of research, due to space constraints, but we
and the stone tools. The distribution of the historic
can say for certain that without the contributions of
artifacts suggests that the latest Apache occupations
each and every one of them this article would not
were contemporaneous with the main military use
exist. To them, the larger team, goes any credit that
of the site in the 1870s. Beyond that, we cannot
is due; ours alone, however, are any errors in facts
be certain, but we suspect there were many more
or interpretation.
ephemeral occupations of the site, by Apache and
military alike.
The field phase of this particular archeological
project is now over, but we are continuing with the
REFERENCES CITED
joint venture that has involved this rediscovery of
the past. Besides further analyzing the Pine Springs
Alt, W. and B. Alt
2002 Black Soldiers, White Wars. Black Warriors.from AnCamp materials, we are looking for more informatiquity to the Present. Praeger Publishers, Westport,
tion about the people who used it. We have been
Connecticut.
privileged to talk with Apache elders and others
over the years, and learn their point of view. We
Ball, E.
have also been working with chapters of the Ninth
1970 In the Days of Victoria. The University of Arizona
and Tenth (Horse) Cavalry Association to find out
Press, Tucson.
about the African Americans who occupied the site.
Fa1Tow, E. S.
We now have their names from the archives and are
1881(2000] Mountain Scouting. University of Oklahoma
looking for their service records. Eventually, we
Press, Norman.
hope to be able to connect with their descendants, if
we can find them. In the meantime, as we plan our
Leckie, W. H. and S. A. Leckie
next joint venture we hope to attract more people
2003 The Br(ffalo Soldiers. A Narrative of the Black
to engage with us in multicultural research from a
Cavalry in the West. University of Oklahoma Press,
Norman.
multicultural perspective.

94

Texas Archeological Society

Levy,B.
1971 Guadalupe Mountains National Park. Historic Resource Study. U.S. Department of the Interior. National
Park Service, Division of History, Washington, D.C.
Quartermaster General of the Army
l 889[ 1986] U.S. Anny Un(forms and Equipment, 1889.
University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.
Returns of the I 0th Cavalry
1880 National Archives and Records Administration,
M744. roll 96.

Shafer, H.J.
1970 A Preliminary Report of An Archeological Survey in
the Guadalupe Mountain National Park by the Texas
Archeological Society in June 1970. Texas Archeology 14(3):10-17.

African American Oral History and Archeology:
Perceptional Politics, Political Practice
Fred L. McGhee

ABSTRACT
Awareness of the role of collective historical memory in the generation of historic contexts is crucial to understanding African American history and in making professional heritage management decisions. In practice this
means treating Black history and Black experiences with seriousness and respect, and confronting racism. Utilizing
selected oral histories from Houston as a springboard, I argue that forthright political examination of National
Register of Historic Places eligibility determinations based on a valid historical context is a prerequisite toward
moving forward on a plan to reconcile the Afro-Texas experience with the Texas history master nmTative.

INTRODUCTION
The importance of oral history, oral naiTative,
and oral tradition in establishing the historical significance and context of archeological sites-indeed
most historic sites-is by now reasonably well recognized (Barber 1994), even by middle range theorybased archeologists, although still not widely applied.
Historical archeologists have the advantage of being
able to consult and work with a diversity of sources,
many of them not in the ground or in the water. African American cases, for instance, often present more
weighty and nuanced judgment calls that do not lend
themselves to programmatic summary.
One noteworthy example of a problematic "one
size fits all approach" was the Texas Historical Commission (THC) policy on "Late 19th and Early 20th
Century Sites" (Denton 1999). The policy flatly
stated, "In general, late-19th and early-20th century
sites are not considered eligible for inclusion in the
National Register of Historic Places" because:
the distribution of mass-produced goods
across the United States produced amazing artifact assemblage uniformity,
and, therefore, the archeological results
rarely provide important new interpretive
insights for the historical record. What
these massive numbers of artifacts almost
always produce is increased costs, dramatically increased analysis times, and
curation problems (Denton 1999: 13-14).

The policy went on to declare:
... we are not saying that archeological
excavations of late-19th or early-20th
century sites should never be conducted-only that the rationale for doing
so must be extremely well developed.
As with problematic prehistoric archeological sites, the contractor must present
a clear case justifying why public funds
should be spent to investigate such sites
(Denton 1999:14).
The apparent overflow of superfluous artifact
collections was not seen as evidence of flawed technique or a lack of interpretive sophistication on the
part of archeologists or the people reviewing their
work. Instead the policy reflected an interpretation
of state law that considered not only the cultural resource significance analysis customarily conducted
by agency archeologists, architects, and historians
but also inserted the analysis of "economic" or "fiscal" impacts that archeological investigations would
have on cities or municipalities that were mandated
to comply with the Antiquities Code of Texas. "Driving these efforts [was] the widely held belief that
three decades of creeping environmental controls
ha[d] strangled the economy and undermined economic competitiveness" (Meyer 1999).
Also at work was a misinterpretation of middle
range theory. The theory's origins in sociology
long since forgotten, it continues to be applied

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

96

Texas Archeological Society

haphazardly and unsystematically, and ultimately
applied in ways that appear to be more political
than empirical:
Unfortunately, many archaeologists
have seen Binford's methods of studying
site-formation process as an end in themselves. In many cases, the development of
middle range theory has become the research goal rather than the means to connect archaeological data with high-level,
abstract explanations ... although such
studies increase our interpretive abilities,
they contribute little to the advancement
of our understanding of human behavior
(Maschner 1996:469).
In short, as Singleton and Bograd noted in 1995
about African American archeology generally, archeology in Texas remains "theory poor, not data poor"
(Singleton and Bograd 1995:29). The Texas example
is particularly unfortunate, because African American
archeology is both theory and data poor, a situation
which the enactment of the THC policy exacerbated,
since many African American archeological sites,
particularly urban ones, postdate the 1870s.
While this agency interpretation of the Antiquities Code of Texas has reflected the cost-benefit
analysis model of historic resource protection for
some time now, the National Historic Preservation Act and its implementing regulations are still
supposed to follow the traditional model, wherein
the intrinsic nature of a historic property is more
frequently of greater consequence than the "fiscal
impact" of historically preserving it, or mitigating
adverse effects to its historic integrity. Regrettably,
however, "regulation creep" appears to have resulted
in a confusion of state standards with federal undertakings, particularly at African American sites,
which fall into the late 19th and early 20th century
time framework the policy sought to criticize.
African American sites from this and other time
periods already faced a higher eligibility burden
under state law than conventional sites, and as Barile
(2004:90-100) eloquently noted, positive National
Register of Historic Places (NRHP) eligibility
determinations of African American sites were
already rare before the policy change. She attributed
the disparity to the fact that THC archeologists
were not conversant in historical archeology, and
especially not in African American archeology,
which grew into maturity largely after THC
archeologists had finished their graduate educations

and had embarked on private sector and government
careers. She observed:
Inherent prejudices influence one's valuation of certain site types, especially when
historical context is a secondary consideration or denied consideration at all.
In particular, the often-used methods of
evaluation for many CRM projects give
primacy to artifact quantity, rather than
quality, which is then placed within its
historic context. This approach appears to
favor large sites with elaborate architecture and a high quantity of artifacts, rather
than lower class sites with vernacular
structures. When specifically looking at
late-19th and early-20th century sites, it
is not only the issue of class that enters
the analysis but, importantly, the issue of
race (Barile 2004:93).
As part of a number of recommendations for improvement, Barile suggested that Cultural Resource
Management (CRM) firms move beyond an overreliance on archeological surveys. Writing against
methodological approaches employing "single-level
analysis" where "the strengths of historical archaeology are ignored," Barile (2004:99) instead suggested
that historic context-one that does not shirk controversies of race, class, or gender-is crucial to any
understanding of "significance" in a CRM sense, or
in a larger more epistemological one.
Barile's critique was more than simply insightful. Crucial to Barile's argument is adherence to
the historic context procedure laid out in National
Register Bulletins 15 and 16A (National Park Service 1997a, 1997b), which define and describe the
process for applying the National Register criteria in
considerable detail. How to Apply the National Register Criteria for Evaluation (National Park Service
l 997a:53) defines historic context as:
An organizing structure for interpreting
history that groups information about
historic properties that share a common
theme, common geographical area, and a
common time period. The development
of historic contexts is a foundation for decisions about the planning, identification,
evaluation, registration, and treatment of
historic properties, based upon comparative historic significance.
The necessity of having and consulting a proper

McGhee-African American Oral History and Archeology
historic context framework is also made clear by
the bulletin:
Decisions concerning the significance,
historic integrity, documentation, and
treatment of properties can be made reliably only when the resource is evaluated
within its historic context. The historic
context serves as the framework within
which the National Register Criteria are
applied to specific properties or property
types ((National Park Service 1997a:l).
The concept of historic context is not
a new one; it has been fundamental to the
study of history since the 18th century
and, arguably, earlier than that. Its core
premise is that resources, properties, or
happenings in history do not occur in
a vacuum but rather are part of larger
trends or patterns (National Park Service
1997a:7).
Historic contexts are historical patterns that can be identified through consideration of the history of the property
and the history of the sunounding area
(National Park Service 1997a:7).
After stressing the importance of historic context in the making of National Register eligibility
determinations, the bulletin goes on to elaborate the
process of how to evaluate a historic property within
its historic context. The first step in this process is as
follows: "Determine how the theme of the context is
significant in the history of the local area, the State,
or the nation" ((National Park Service 1997 a: 8).
This step is important because a context may be
organized by theme, geographic area, or chronology,
and helps to inform the interpretive framework used
by evaluators in assessing the significance of a historic property. The unfortunate problem in Texas has
been that African American history and archeology
have not been seen as themes. This deficiency has
led to the destruction of historic African American
sites in Texas.
The obligation to utilize historic context in making NRHP decisions stands by itself. But how is such
a requirement in the public interest? First, if our nation's history-and its present-is multicultural and
multi vocal, we must seek to produce interpretations
of that history to a general public that deserves to be
able to see itself in representations of the past. As a
practical matter, this means that resource managers

97

must cease defining the hypothetical "taxpayer" they
routinely invoke in defending their management
decisions in stereotyped and parochial ways. It is
incumbent upon federal as well as state resource
managers to ensure that African American history
and archeology's relevance to the American story
is respected and understood as being integral to any
effort to tell the overall story.
The gathering, documentation, and interpretation of African American oral histories, traditions,
and narratives is bound to be a key aspect of any
future project to develop an Afro-Texas historic context document. Using a set of oral history interviews
l collected in Houston's Freedmenstown neighborhood, I contend that regulatory compliance-oriented
African American historical research must also
understand the role of historical memmy in Black
culture, politics, and expression. I further argue
that any worthwhile investigation of black life must
have a working and informed theory of not just race
and racism at the core of its analysis, but must also
consider the perspectives of other minorities and
women. Further, any significance determination of
Texas cultural resources-particularly at the federal
level-must employ a historical context analysis
based on issues relevant to African American history
and archeology.

HISTORICAL MEMORY AND THE
PRODUCTION OF HISTORY AND
ARCHEOLOGY
A discussion of historical memory within
African American culture and its relationship to
historic preservation requires a brief discussion of
how "heritage" is actually produced and consumed.
Paul A. Shackel (2008: l 0) and Michel-Rolph
Trouillot (1995) have long noted that official public
histories hide as much as they reveal, and that the
past can only be understood in a present context. It is
incumbent upon historic context authors, therefore,
to not only embrace reflexivity but also positionality
in crafting historical nan-atives. This means frank
discussion about the interests or motives of the parties involved and fuller disclosure of political and/
or financial prerogatives.
Both authors critically analyze the different
strategies that are often used to "create" or
"produce" the public past. "First, people can create
an exclusionary past. By implying continuity with
the past, or reinventing a collective memory, these

98

Texas Archeological Society

traditions reinforce values and behavior. Many
cases that deal with race and ethnic genocide are
often about forgetting a past" (Shackel 2008: 10).
One notable example from Texas is the apparent nonhistory of racial violence committed against African
Americans and American Indians, particularly in
the 19th century. For instance, in 2008 there still is
no official commemoration of a lynching in Texas,
despite the fact that such spectacles, often advertised
in newspapers as "Negro Barbecues," often involved
thousands of whites, who would eat chicken salad and
drink sweet tea, while the black victims were being
hung, then shot, then burned. The victims' body parts
were then cut off, to be handed out to onlookers, with
postcards of the events traded as souvenirs.
A second strategy is to develop a memory that
commemorates a patriotic and/or celebrated past.
The two quintessential Texas examples of this phenomenon would have to be the Alamo and the San
Jacinto Battlefield. What is important to remember
is that what is said about what happened at those
places is not the same as what actually took place.
Historian Eric Hobsbawm (1983: 13) writes: "The
history which became part of the fund of knowledge
or the ideology of nation, state or movement is not
what has actually been preserved in popular memory, but what has been selected, written, pictured,
popularized and institutionalized by those whose
function it is to do so." It is important to go beyond
simply stating that "history is written by the winners" and to critically engage the process by which
historical narratives are actually manufactured. Visitors to Texas historic sites would do well to reflect
upon the political circumstances surrounding their
commemoration, and to ask themselves some critical questions (Loewen 1999:459). Who sponsored
the historic monument? What were their motives?
Who was their intended audience? Who is left out?
Is the presentation accurate?

Archeology, Politics, and African American
Perception
Archeology conducted subject to federal or state
law is by definition political because the creation and
enforcement of those laws involves political processes. The different environmental and cultural impacts
experienced by vulnerable populations targeted for
urban renewal (McGhee 2007) or other forms of redevelopment entail policy decisions that are also political by their nature. The proponents of community
redevelopment initiatives, who often undertake such

initiatives with crucial government support, usually
display only token concern for how their projects will
actually impact the people on the ground. Within the
context of this discussion, it bears repeating that "history is what is past, while 'heritage' is a filtered past
infused with purpose in the present" (Dodd 2007:7;
see also Lowenthal 1998; Olivier 2004). "Heritage
is history processed through mythology, ideology,
nationalism, local pride, romantic ideas, or just
plain marketing into commodity (Schouten 1995 :21;
see also Meskell 2005: 136). Therefore, differential
conceptions of what is "historical" play a key role in
what actually happens.
It stands to reason, therefore, that archeologists
working in such circumstances are political actors
and make political decisions. These decisions have
impacts on people and the environment, not just "the
resource" or "the archeological record," particularly
if descendant communities are involved. The largely
unacknow !edged history of discrepant access among
minority peoples to the resources and tools necessary for heritage making in Texas, has left its mark
in a variety of places, laws, ideas, and customs.
Therefore, a truthful historic context for African
American archeology and history in Texas must also
describe that aspect of the story.
African American familiarity with archeological
politics and with archeological practice is extensive,
as is African American experience with the politics
of historic districts (Schmickle 2007: 159-170). It
encompasses a perception that archeological consultants are often paid to facilitate the ethnic cleansing
of historically significant black neighborhoods. The
perception is that they do this by producing documents that justify the desired outcomes of the people
who pay them money, regardless of what the facts
are. The perception is that they often do this by looking at African American sites through a Eurocentric
lens, as in the African Burial Ground case (La Roche
and Blakey l 997:84-106), cheffy-picking "facts" that
reinforce what clients want, and excluding "facts"
that would complicate the undertaking, usually
by making it more expensive. What is particularly
disturbing to black citizens is that the money these
consultants are paid is usually public money, which
means that black taxpayers are in effect paying for
the destruction of their own communities.
The showpiece example of this phenomenon in
Texas is surely the destruction and redevelopment
of the Freedrnenstown Historic District and the San
Felipe Courts Historic District, a.k.a. Allen Parkway
Village, in Houston. In this case two acknowledged

McGhee-African American Oral History and Archeology
historic districts of national significance were judged
to not be worth saving because the "highest and best
use" of the downtown land upon which they now sat
was deemed to be different from what the residents
of the historic districts, mostly renters, thought. It
may be useful to remember that in the time period
in question (the 1990s), Enron was considered the
crown business jewel of Houston and was widely admired for its charitable giving and lavish campaign
contributions, particularly to politicians such as Rep.
Sheila Jackson-Lee, D-Houston, members of the
Houston City Council, and others. The destruction
of this neighborhood and its subsequent gentrification, is a complicated story and encompasses many
dimensions, a diversity of documentary evidence
and multiple points of view, and a detailed discussion here would take us too far afield (for some
beginning discussion of this complex subject, see
McGhee [2000:327-251], Fox [1996], Wallstin
[1997a, 1997b, 1998a, 1998b], and Mason [1999],
among many others). 1
To summarize briefly, downtown business interests, real estate developers, and four mayoral administrations pursued the redevelopment of this area
for 20 years (Harol 1999:6). The neighborhood is
historically significant at the national level because
it illuminates important themes about post-Civil
War African American neighborhood development,
particularly efforts on the part of newly emancipated
slaves to purchase, keep, and defend land across the
postwar urban South. To many Houston Blacks, the
term "Freedmen's Town" also conveys symbolic and
spiritual significance. Long known as the "Mother
Ward" of Houston's black community, the neighborhood has fostered a sense of pride in the success that
the city's early black settlers had in establishing their
own autonomous neighborhoods and communities
(Maxwell 1997:126).
In 1998 Allen Parkway Village, a housing project listed on the National Register of Historic Places
(as the San Felipe Courts Historic District), was demolished to make way for a mixed-use development.
The housing project was built during the early 1940s
over what was the oldest part of Freedmen's Town,
and also over an African American cemetery. Archeological background studies and monitoring were
undertaken prior to demolition of the structures.
Although extensive household remains and structure
foundations from some of the earliest Freedmen's
Town residences were observed during monitoring,
these were not considered significant enough to
warrant testing with any rigor. Also ignored were

99

repeated community declarations of the existence
of a historic cemetery inside the project area. After
repeated denials on the part of the housing authority
and its contractors, a cemetery was eventually inadvertently located on the site. Eventually more than
400 African American burials were excavated from
the site, none of them by properly trained African
American archeologists who were familiar with
the "biocultural" approach pioneered by Michael
Blakey and others at the New York African Burial
Ground several years before.
Many lessons can be learned from the archeology that was and was not conducted in the Houston of
the 1990s. One that is important to note is the degree
to which the state government exercised double standards in its regulation of the quality of the archeology that was conduced at African American historic
sites. When one examines the internal administrative
record of this undertaking, what becomes apparent is
that none of the THC staff involved in regulating the
project had experience in African Ametican archeology, and that none of them perceived themselves as
even needing experience in the subject, because they
perceived the undertaking as an "urban" archeology
project, not an African American one. They also
did not have an African American historic context
document upon which to base their decisions, but
did not see that as a shortcoming. It was only after
protracted activism by neighborhood leaders that
an out-of-state consultant with no previous Texas
experience was eventually brought in, after the HUD
and housing authority objectives of neighborhood
and community destruction had been achieved, and
only after the eventual discovery of a historic cemetery, which residents had repeatedly told officials
was there all along. The administrative record placed
on file at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of Texas at Austin after the
completion of the project, and the publication of the
final report, also shows that the consultant's role was
quite limited and not substantive.
The depth of disillusionment and frustration
many blacks have about Texas archeology is reflected in the oral history interviews I conducted
in 2004 and 2005 in Houston. The interviews were
conducted as part of a comprehensive research
strategy, based on the African Burial Ground model
(Mack and Blakey 2004), I authored for the Houston
Independent School District in conjunction with its
effort to clear, remove, and redevelop a multi-acre
property it owns in the western portion of the city's
Freedmenstown neighborhood (McGhee 2004a).

l 00

Texas Archeological Society

What becomes clear upon listening to the interviews
and analyzing them is that African Americans seem
to have a different definition of "historic context"
than the majority of archeologists, most of whom
have almost no functional historical understanding
of the Texas black experience. The end result is that
African Americans perceive that archeologists use
their superior position as scholars and consultants as
weapons of intellectual and cultural destruction instead of as tools for community uplift and empowerment. In short, they see that archeologists operating
in this role commit and reinforce acts of racism.
For instance, Black Houstonians from the
Fourth Ward have long resented the paternalism
and secrecy that has permeated the gentrification of
their neighborhood, and see archeological activities
as complicit in this practice. This is admittedly not
necessarily an "archeological" problem per se, but it
is an ethics problem because it violates the informed
consent and collaborative research provisions of
most professional social sciences organizations, a
shortcoming the CRM industry and its advocacy
groups (such as the American Cultural Resources
Association) have yet to adequately address.
Ms. Jacqueline Beckham, a longtime resident,
observed in 2004:
... When things are done in this community, they're done in secret. We don't
know anything; it's done ... they kept
tacking things up on the telephone pole.
I said "No, that's not the way you do
that." You're going to tell me that you're
going to put around and put up notices
up on the telephone pole for a whole
community to read?" In the first place,
they don't last. People tear them down
(McGhee 2004b).
Ms. Gladys M. House, born and raised in Freedmenstown and a lifelong resident, sees the destruction
of her neighborhood as the continuation of racist
practices that have long characterized American
society:
Freedmenstown is the only one that it was
planned and developed by and for African
American people. The only one. So therefore, we pose the biggest threat, really
the only threat, because the Caucasian
power structure wants to just eradicate,
just erase, African American history, so
that they can say-It's no different than

Rosewood, what happened to Rosewood,
and other freedmen towns all across the
nation (McGhee 2004c).
Mr. Terry L. Howard keenly felt the 1980 closing of
the "Old Gregory" school, one of the lynchpins of
the neighborhood, as a key event in the gentrification
of Fourth Ward:
Well, when we saw the close, or the conversion, shall I say, of our high school, we
knew that that would be a change coming.
What extent we did not know, certainly to
this extent today. We expected change.
The redevelopment in the area, we're saying that this redevelopment is supposed to
be for low income (McGhee 2005).
Finally, Mr. John Fenley, born at Jeff Davis hospital
in 1949, lamented the lack of proper historic preservation oversight when that historic hospital and its
surrounding property was torn down to make room
for the Houston branch of the Federal Reserve Bank
of Dallas:
I think they demolished old Jeff Davis
Hospital about three years ago, and they
started building the Federal Reserve
Building this year. And there were some
issues about bodies being buried there,
too. But of course, when progress is-I
mean, you know, most of the time, they're
not going to let, you know, some dead
bodies stop progress. Especially when
they're African American descendants
(McGhee 2004d).
Over time, perspectives on "progress" such as
these produce historical memories that differ from
conventional narratives because they reflect different experiences. How are African American understandings of historic "significance" and "context"
different from standard accounts? Several factors are
involved, but two are predominant: (a) as with many
Native American communities, African Americans
view "historical" significance from the standpoint of
cultural and/or religious significance. Discussions of
"effects" or "impacts" from this point of view take
on a different meaning, because religious or cultural
impacts do not lend themselves to easy quantification; and (b) the historical memory of enslavement,
racial violence, segregation, and discrimination, and
their justification, racism, permeate black understandings of history.

McGhee-African American Oral History and Archeology
The lingering problem that remains is that racial
prejudice and its effects are not considered proper
historic contexts. White denial of the history, effects, and ongoing challenges of racial prejudice and
racism are surely a major cause. This explains, for
instance, why there is not one historical marker or
commemorative plaque in Texas that memorializes
a lynching. It also explains how people can have differing recollections of the same reality, both equally
valid. Take, for example, oral histories of 20th
century Central Texas teachers; the recollections
of white teachers fell largely within the dominant
"immigrant" model of American history, whereas
the remembrances of black teachers helped to fill
out the picture:
An oral historian studying Texas teachers
who made the transition from the oneroom schoolhouse to modern consolidated schools found that white teachers
said almost nothing about racial segregation or the details of the integration
process. Blacks, Hispanic Americans,
and disabled students, remained largely
"invisible" in their memories. African
American teachers by contrast recalled
the days of integration vividly because
it affected their own lives so personally
(Ritchie 2003:32).

THE SORDID HISTORY OF
LYNCHINGS IN TEXAS: WHITE
DENIAL, BLACK REALITY
Few things illuminate the politics of heritage
making and unmaking in Texas more strongly than
the history of racial violence. The lynchings of Jesse
Washington and Jesse Thomas in Waco in the early
20th century are two of the more egregious cases
of how differing historical memories can produce
political disputes. White Waco has tried to forget
the staggering and terrifying history of extralegal
mob violence against blacks that characterized
Central Texas for most of the late 19th and early
20th centuries:
Roger Norman Conger, the city's premier
historian, did not mention racial violence
in his many histories of McLennan County and Waco. In a telephone interview
he maintained that there was no need to
bring up aspects of Waco's history that

101

reflected poorly on the city (Carrigan
2004:194).
In 1998 Waco city councilman Lawrence Johnson called for the city of Waco to issue a statement
denouncing Washington's lynching and proclaiming
a commitment to racial harmony. He asked for the
city to pay for and install some type of commemorative monument or memorial. In 2002 the struggle
over the historical memory of Jesse Washington's
lynching reached the McLennan County Commissioner's Court. The struggle erupted when the court
voted to spend $22,000 to refurbish a 16 panel mural
in the county courthouse. A hanging tree is pictured
on one of the mural's panels. County commissioner
Lester Gibson offered a resolution that would have
acknowledged Jesse Washington's lynching and
would have placed a commemorative plaque near the
mural with the hanging tree (Carrigan 2004:207):
No one seconded Gibson's resolution,
however, and it died. He complained
that the white population of central
Texas preferred to ignore and forget the
racial violence that marked the area for
so many years. County Commissioner
Wendall Crunk disagreed with Gibson's
interpretation and maintained that the
mural did not symbolize racial violence
but rather a long-gone era of vigilantism
that claimed victims of all backgrounds
(Carrigan 2004:208).
The politics surrounding this heated discussion
revolve around differing conceptions and interpretations of history. The facts of the case are not in
dispute. The event was the subject of contemporary
newspaper coverage and its imagery was captured
for posterity in a series of macabre photographs
graphically depicting Washington's charred corpse.
Prior to being strung up, Washington was stoned
with bricks and shovels and one of his ears was cut
off. He was also castrated and had his fingers cut off
when he tried to remove the chain that was used to
hang him, leaving him to slap at his noose. He was
then lowered into the fire several times and burned
alive. His corpse was paraded through the streets of
Waco, including City Hall Plaza, and eventually was
hung for public display in front of a blacksmith's
shop (Carrigan 2004:2).
An estimated 15,000 people gathered to witness
the lynching of Jesse Washington. The event took
place in broad daylight and had the atmosphere of

l 02

Texas Archeological Society

a family gathering. The gathered mob watched and
cheered what was happening and then posed for pictures with the corpse. The perpetrators of the murder
were not arrested and they were not punished. Their
identities were and are well known.
Commissioner Crunk is playing false with history. The fact that some whites, often northerners
suspected of being abolitionists or supportive of civil
rights for blacks, were lynched in Central Texas is
not suggestive of a non--racialized history of violence. The lynching of Jesse Washington "deserves
scholarly attention not because it was a singularly
infamous event in the history of mob violence but
because members of the mob, and residents of the
community who tolerated the lynching, represent
a deeply disturbing part of American culture in the
early twentieth century" (Carrigan 2004:2). White
Central Texans such as Mr. Crunk have made a
conscious effort to forget what happened and to
strike lynching from the region's historical memory.
African Americans, however, did not and could
not forget the lynchings, burnings, fire hoses, and
police dogs.

THE IMPORTANCE OF RACIAL
CANDOR IN THE DEVELOPMENT
OF A TEXAS AFRICAN AMERICAN
HISTORIC CONTEXT
Award-winning historian and biographer Robert
A. Caro (2008) once observed: "To show power
you not only have to show how it is used but also
its effect on those on whom it is used. You have to
show the effect of power on the powerless." The
anthropologist might add: "from the perspective of
the powerless and in their voice."
Historical contexts in southern states-where
they exist-that deal forthrightly with slavery,
slave trading, and racism are rare. 2 This is partly
because honestly discussing such matters can shatter popular myths and misconceptions. For a variety
of historical reasons, Texas is probably the state
with the largest material, intellectual, and cultural
investment in "great man" conceptions of popular
history. 3 The African American historical experience will not fit neatly into dominant Eurocentric
historic contexts such as immigrant or "gone to
Texas" paradigms.
Any incorporation of Afro-Texas history into
the Texas master narrative is going to require grappling with some uncomfortable truths. Perhaps most

importantly, it is going to have to admit and come to
terms with the nature and effects of racial violence.
It would have to forthrightly, for instance, examine
why the Lone Star State still operates under its
1876 "Redeemer" constitution, albeit with several
hundred amendments (Texas Legislative Council
2004). An African American historic context at the
state level would of course begin with slavery, but
would go well beyond. In particular it should anticipate recent developments in African American
archeology and seek to broaden archeological investigations beyond the plantation (Wilkie 2004: 111 ).
It must also come to terms with the recognition that
all archeological work is politically situated, and
that issues of race, inequality, and identity that have
characterized much of historical archeology work
over the past 30 years are not going to disappear and
are likely to intensify.
Descendant communities of all kinds should
play an important role in any historical archeology research. In the African American case, Mack
and Blakey (2004: 16) make important observations about the interaction of historic context and
community participation. They note that "[u]ntil
the discipline views descendant communities as
integral participants in the comprehensive research
effort, there will always be the real risk of lost research opportunities and scientifically and humanistically problematic and ineffective investigations
of the African Diaspora." This requires admitting
that African American historical perspectives and
interpretations are valid. On that score, the noted
historian Eric Foner (2002:xvi-xvii) observed the
following:
... the history wars did underscore the
basic differences between historians' understanding of their task and what much
of the broader public thinks the writing
of history entails. Historians view the
constant search for new perspectives as
the lifeblood of historical understanding.
Outside the academy, however, the act
of reinterpretation is often viewed with
suspicion, and "revisionist" is invoked
as a term of abuse .... historical truth does
exist, not in the scientific sense but as a
reasonable approximation of the past. But
the most difficult truth for those outside
the ranks of professional historians to
accept is that there often exists more
than one legitimate way of recounting
past events.

McGhee-African American Oral History and Archeology
Stated another way, there is no one "Story of
Texas." There are many stories. Gathering those
stories and giving them meaning is the true business
of the historical archeologist:
Archaeologists should strive to create personal connections between the
consumer and the people of the past. ..
regardless of whose history they are
constructing. An aspect of historical
archaeology often envied by prehistorians is the possibility that we can re-find
the names of the people who lived on
our sites. We should take full advantage
of this strength in our interpretations
(Wilkie 2004: 114).
In terms of African American archeological research
conducted by the CRM industry that is subject to
federal, state, or local law, this means basing research frameworks on a sound historic context that
skillfully blends the political with the archeological
and comes to terms with the unique struggles that
have characterized the black experience in America
and Texas.

ENDNOTES
l. Critiques of the research strategy employed by the Houston
Housing Authority's archeological contractor (Espey Huston
& Associates) are discussed in McGhee (1997) and Fox
(1996), and were included in oral and written testimony at
numerous public forums and town hall meetings (at Antioch
Missionary Baptist Church and the Museum of Fine Arts'
Glassell School Auditorium) (Chmiola 1998). Critiques of
the Programmatic Agreement reached between HUD, the
Houston Housing Authority, and the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation, especially the flawed "historical" studies conducted by J. K. Wagner & Company (Wagner 1994)
that served as its basis, can be found in Fox (1996), McGhee
(1997. 2000) and the testimony of dozens of Houston citizens
who testified against the agreement and in favor of the Allen
Parkway Village Community Campus concept (Barth 1995).
For a discussion of the use of public money to finance "public/
private" urban revitalization schemes in the 1990s (e.g., Tax
Increment Financing and HUD's HOPE VI program), see
McGhee (1999), Johnston (2007), and Bennett et al. (2006).
See Dillon ( 1998) for a discussion of some similar socioeconomic forces entailed in the decline and "renewal" of Dallas'
Freedman Town neighborhood.
2. For discussion of similar difficulties facing the Mid-Atlantic
region, see O'Bannon (1994:22). For some discussion of a
broad-based African American example, see Wellman (2002),
particularly her mention of Marie Tyler-McGraw and Kira R.

103

Badamo's (1998) innovative historical context document on
the Underground Railroad.
3. Critiques of "great man" interpretations of Texas history
such as John Henry Brown's (1892) The History of Texas,
Eugene Barker's ( 1925) The Life o.f Stephen F Austin, or more
recent versions such as T.R. Fehrenbach's (1968) Lone Star
abound. Examples would include McGhee (2000), Anderson
(2005), or Canigan (2004), but would also include work by
Cantrell ( 1999). It is perhaps worthwhile to note that in 1999,
the Dallas school board responded to longstanding criticism
of Brown's well-documented racism by changing of the name
of John Henry Brown Elementary School to Billy E. Dade
Elementary School (Dade was an African American public
school educator in Dallas). As of 2006, the Dade School
became the Billy E. Dade Middle Learning Center.

REFERENCES CITED
Anderson, G. C.
2005 The Conquest of Texas: Ethnic Cleansing in the Promised Land. University of Oklahoma Press, Norman.
Barber, R. J.
1994 Doing Historical Archaeology: exercises using documentary, oral, and material evidence. Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey.
Barile, K. S.
2004 Race, the National Register, and Cultural Resource Management: Creating an Historic Context
for Postbellurn Sites. Historical Archaeology
38( 1):90-100.
Barker. E. C.
1925 The Life of Stephen F Austin, Founder of Texas:
1793-1836. Cokesbury Press, Dallas.
Barth, L.
1995 Ideas that Work: A Plan for Allen Parkway Village.
Houston Life Magazine. May.
Bennett, L., J. L. Smith, and P.A. Wright (editors)
2006 Where are Poor People to Live? Transforming Public
Housing Communities. M. E. Sharpe, Armonk, New
York.
Brown, J. H.
1892 History ofTexasfrom 1685 to 1892. 2 vols. Becktold
& Company, St. Louis.
Cantrell, G.
1999 Stephen F Austin: Empresario of Texas. Yale University Press, New Haven.
Caro, R.A.
2008 Personal website of Robert A. Caro. http://www.
robertacaro.com/. Accessed 4 March 2008.

104

Texas Archeological Society

Carrigan, W. D,
2004 The Making of a Lynching Culture.· Violence and
Vigilantism in Central Texas 1836-1916. University
of Illinois Press, Urbana and Chicago.

Maschner, H. D.G.
1996 Middle Range Theory. In The Oxford Companion to
Archaeology, edited by B. M. Fagan, pp. 469. Oxford
University Press, New York.

Chmiola, L. M.
1998 Congresswoman urges more affordable public housing
for the area. Houston Chronicle, February 22, 42A.

Mason, J.
1999 Fourth Ward project on verge of collapse: revitalization failure apparently conceded. Houston Chronicle,
February 8, IA, 4A.

Denton, M. H.
1999 Dealing with Late 19th and Early 20th Century Sites.
CRM News and Views, April, pp. 13-14.
Dillon, D.
1988 The state of State-Thomas: a once vital downtown
area is poised to come back to life. So why isn't it')
Dallas Morning News, December 25, Dl.
Dodd, L. S.
2007 Heritage Formulation in Overtly Politicized Environments: A Commentary. Archaeologies 3(1 ):4-15.
Fehrenbach, T. R.
1968 Lone Star: A History of Texas and Texans. Macmillan
Publishing Company, New York.

Maxwell, LP.
1997 Freedmantown: The Origins of a Black Neighborhood in Houston, 1865-1880. In Bricks Without
Straw: A Comprehensive History of African Americans in Texas, edited by D. A. Williams, pp. 125-152.
Eakin Press, Austin.
McGhee, F. L.
1997 Allen Parkway Village-An Excavation Strategy
Based on Sampling. Unpublished manuscript on file
with the author.
1999

How HUD's HOPE VI Program is Destroying a
Historic Houston Neighborhood. Copy available at
http://www.flma.org/downloads/UIPPaper.pdf.

2000

The Black Crop: Slavery and Slave Trading in Nineteenth Century Texas. Ph.D. dissertation, University
of Texas at Austin.

Foner E.
2002 Who Owns History? Hill and Wang, New York.

Fox, S.
1996 Allen Parkway Village and Fourth Ward: Community Campus or "Black Chinatown?" Unpublished
MS on file with the author.
Hobsbawm. E.
1983 Introduction: Inventing Tradition. In The Invention
of Tradition, edited by E. Hobsbawm and T. Ranger,
pp. 19-33. Routledge, New York.
Johnston, D. C.
2007 Free Lunch: How the Wealthiest Americans Enrich
Themselves at Government Expense (and Stick You
with the Bill). Portfolio Hardcover, New York.
La Roche, C. J. and M. L. Blakey
1997 Seizing Intellectual Power: The Dialogue at the New
York African Burial Ground. Historical Archaeology
31(3):84-106.
Loewen, J. W.
1999 Lies Across America: What our Historic Sites Get
Wrong. W.W. Norton, New York.

2004a The Houston High School for the Performing and Visual Arts (HSPVA) and Gregory-Lincoln Education
Center Collaborative Historic Preservation Project
Research Program. Copy available at http://www.
flma.org/ResearchDesign. pdf.
2004b Oral History Interview with Ms. Jacqueline Beckham, October 16, 2004. On file at Fred L. McGhee
& Associates, Inc., Austin.
2004c Oral History Interview with Ms. Gladys M. House,
October 18, 2004. On file at Fred L. McGhee & Associates, Inc., Austin.
2004d Oral History Interview with Mr. John Fenley, November 9, 2004. On file at Fred L. McGhee & Associates, Inc., Austin.
2005

Oral History Interview with Mr. Terry L. Howard,
January 18, 2005. On file at Fred L. McGhee & Associates, Inc., Austin.

2007

Archaeological Opportunity And Challenge Within
A Context Of Urban Renewal. Paper presented at the
2007 Society for American Archaeology meeting,
Austin Texas.

Lowenthal, D.
1998 The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of History.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Meskell, L.
2005 Sites of Violence: Terrorism, Tourism, and Heritage in
the Archaeological Present. In Embedded Pasts, edited
by L. Meskell and P. Pels, pp. 123-146. Berg, Oxford.

Mack, M. E. and M. L. Blakey
2004 The New York African Burial Ground Project: Past
Biases, Current Dilemmas, and Future Research Opportunities. Historical Archaeology 38(1): 10-17.

Meyer, S. M.
1999 The Economic Impact of Environmental Regulation.
Online at http://web.mit.edu/polisci/mpepp/Reports/
eier.pdf.

McGhee-AfricanAmerican Oral History and Archeology
National Park Service
1997a National Register Bulletin 15: How to Apply the
National Register Criteria for Evaluation. National
Park Service, Washington, D.C.
1997b National Register Bulletin 16A: How to Complete
the National Register Registration Form. National
Park Service, Washington, D.C.
O'Bannon, P. W.
1994 History, Historic Archaeology, and Cultural Resources Management: A View from the Mid-Atlantic
Region. The Public Historian 16 (No. 1):14-23.
Olivier, L.
2004 The Past of the Present: Archaeological Memory and
Time. Archaeological Dialogues 10(2):204-213.
Ritchie. D. A.
2003 Doing Oral Hist01y: Oxford University Press, New
York.
Schmickle, W. E.
2007 The Politics of Historic Districts. AltaMira Press,
Lanham, Maryland.

105

Trouillot, M.-R.
1995 Silencing the Past: Power in the Production rf History. Beacon Press, Boston.
Tyler-McGraw, M. and K. R. Badamo
1998 Underground Railroad Resources in the United
States: Theme Study. U.S. Department of the Interior,
Washington, D.C.
Wagner. J. K.
1994 Previous Land Use Allen Parkway Village. Analysis
produced for Mr. Joe Garza, Director of Legal Services, c/o the Housing Authority of the City of Houston.
Wallstin, B.
l 997a Fourth Ward or Bust. Houston Press, July 31-August
6,pp.11-12.
1997b Hello Columbus: Is the mayor's housing adviser
about to hand the Fourth Ward over to a for-profit
developer? Houston Press, November 13-19, pp.
10-11.
l 998a No Account: Secrecy and Lack of Oversight Plague
Housing Programs. Houston Press, July 16-22. Available online at www.houstonpress.com/archives.

Schouten, F. J.
1995 Heritage as Historical Reality. In Heritage, Tourism,
and Society, edited by D. T. Herbert, pp. 21-31.
Mansell. London.

1998b No Shame: Real people are being evicted from the
Fourth Ward. And real people are responsible for
their plight. Houston Press. February 12-18, pp.
6-8.

Shackel, P. A.
2008 Memory Studies in Historical Archaeology. The SAA
Archaeological Record 8(1): 10-12.

Wellman, J.
2002 The Underground Railroad and the National Register of Historic Places: Historical Importance
vs. Architectural Integrity. The Public Historian
24(1): 11-30.

Singleton, T. A. and M. D. Bograd
1995 The Archaeology of the African Diaspora in the
Americas. Guides to the Archaeological Literature of
the Immigrant Experience in America, No. 2. Society
for Historical Archaeology, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Texas Legislative Council
2004 Amendments to the Texas Constitution Since 1876.
Texas Legislative Council, Austin.

Wilkie. L.
2004 Considering the Future of African American Archaeology. Historical Archaeology 38(1):109-123.

Using Near-surface Geophysical Survey, Excavation, and
Soil Coring to Investigate Prehistoric Rockshelter Sites
and Historic Cemeteries at Fort Hood, Texas
Duane Simpson

ABSTRACT
A Legacy funded research project was completed in 2004 at Fort Hood, Texas, and Camp Lejeune, North
Carolina, focusing on the development of a non-invasive methodology to locate prehistoric and historic human
burials using geophysical and soil chemistry techniques. Field investigations at Fort Hood were conducted at
eight archeological sites including prehistoric rockshelters, open-air prehistoric sites, and an historic cemetery.
An intensive geophysical survey methodology was crafted that included multiple electrical resistance surveys,
rnagnetometry, laser field scanning and detailed mapping to ensure adequate to excellent results across different
environmental and cultural site types. Anomalies identified within the geophysical data were then confirmed
using highly focused excavation units and core samples. The confirmed cultural features were then sampled for
an array of different trace elements and total phosphorous in an effort to develop a chemical signature capable
of verifying that a geophysical anomaly was a human burial. Examples from the prehistoric rockshelters and
the historic cemeteries surveyed during the project are discussed, focusing on the geophysical methodologies
employed at each, as well as the archeological confirmation phase of the project.

INTRODUCTION
In managing the vast properties of the Federal
Government many agencies and departments are
faced with identifying, managing, and protecting
archeological sites. Of the archeological sites to be
protected, none are more sensitive or potentially important than those that contain unmarked prehistoric
or historic graves. These sites possess not only vast
amounts of archeological information about past
occupations of an area, but also hold great social
importance to many groups both in and outside of
the Federal government. The very nature of these
types of resources is difficult to identify and protect,
given the fact that they are unknown by managers
until they are discovered either through controlled
excavations or inadvertent exposure. Realizing that
these types of sites were becoming more threatened
and impacted on their facilities, the Department of
Defense (DoD) authorized research to be completed
on methods of identifying unmarked graves. Under
the Legacy Resource Management Program (Legacy), the DoD provided funding for a research project
to evaluate methods for identifying the presence of

human remains through non-invasive near-surface
geophysical and chemical soil analyses.
In 2003, archeologists working at Fort Hood, a
large Army base in Central Texas, obtained a Legacy
research grant to test various non-invasive methods
of identifying unmarked human interments. The
central goal of the grant was to create a methodology
that combined geophysics and chemical sampling
techniques to identify and confirm geophysical
anomalies as grave locations. This research would
also need to be transferable to other installations
throughout the DoD, a tenet of the Legacy Research
grant program. Given the necessity of developing a
transferable technique, the research was expanded to
include sites at Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune,
North Carolina, in addition to sites at Fort Hood.
In 2004, archeologists from AMEC Earth &
Environmental in Louisville, Kentucky, initiated the
research in cooperation with archeologists from both
Fort Hood and Camp Lejeune. The research project
focused on creating a methodology that would utilize non-invasive techniques to identify potential
burial anomalies, sample soil from these anomalies,
and return a chemical signature that would identify

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

108

Texas Archeological Society

the anomaly as a human burial. These goals had
to be met in succession based on the format of the
research grant. Intensive geophysical data collection
techniques were utilized to ensure that adequate data
was collected for the chemical signature development phase of the project. The original focus of the
research centered on the investigation of rockshelter
sites at Fort Hood, given the fact that the majority of
previously identified prehistoric burials were located
within these environments. As the research design
progressed, additional sites and environmental types
were added, broadening the research focus. These
additional site types included prehistoric open-air
sites and historic cemeteries.

SITE SELECTION
The selection of sites at Fort Hood was focused
on those that had the potential or were known to
contain interments, facilitating the interpretation
process. Selection of known burial sites was essential to ensure that an adequate burial sample
was achieved for the second focus of the project:
soil chemical testing. While these sites produced
multiple burial locations for chemical sampling,
additional anomalies were necessary for sampling
as well. Human interments are not the only cultural
features that contain bone. Faunal material (nonhuman bone) can be recovered from a number of

different cultural feature types, such as hearths or
trash pits. Geophysical anomalies appearing more
consistent with these types of occupational features
were added to the testing regimen, providing a
sample to compare against those collected from the
burial locations. This addition was believed necessary to provide the chemical data to compare and
contrast the effectiveness of the chemical sampling
protocol's ability to differentiate a human interment
against other cultural features. Additional sites were
selected-both rockshelters as well as open-air
locations-that had the potential to contain a greater
variety of archeological features. The expansion of
the project to open-air sites was also necessary to
provide a comparative sample from Fort Hood to
the site's selected at Camp Lejeune, given that the
latter lacks rockshelter environments entirely. In a
final effort to make the sampling protocol as broad
and inclusive as possible, unmarked historic graves
within cemeteries at Fort Hood and Camp Lejeune
were selected. The selection of historic graves added
greater time depth and variability to the study, providing a sample to compare prehistoric and historic
period interments. They also provided the potential
to assess the effect that time has on the slow change
of the chemical signature of a burial.
A total of eight sites were investigated at Fort
Hood, including five rockshelters (Table 1). Three
shelters, 41BL69, 41BL744, and 41CV901, contained known burials. Rockshelter 4 lBL 780A was

Table 1. Summary of Sites Investigated.
Installation

Site#

Site Type

Fort Hood

41BL69
41BL744
41BL780A
41BL884B
41CV901
41CV1038
41CV1150
41CV1235

Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Rockshelter
Open-air
Historic Cemetery
Open-air

Camp Lejeune

310N71
310Nl019
310Nl236
Wards-Will

Open-air
Open-air
Open-air
Historic Cemetery

Simpson-Investigations of Rockshelter Sites and Historic Cemeteries at Fort Hood, Texas
chosen based on its high surface artifact density
that provided an indication that non-burial archeological features might be present. Rockshelter site
41BL844B was chosen due to previously reported
human bone on the surface and the presence of dense
artifact concentrations documented during previous
investigations.
In addition to the rockshelters, three openair sites were investigated at Fort Hood. Sites
41CV1038 and 41CV1235 were selected because
of their high probability of containing archeological features. Walker Cemetery (41CV1150) was
selected to provide a source of comparison between
prehistoric and historic human burials. Four sites
were investigated at Camp Lejeune, including three
open-air prehistoric sites and one historic cemetery
(see Table 1).
A full discussion of the research completed for
this project is too broad for this article, and only
a sample of the research is presented below. For
additional information on the project, the Simpson
and Peterson (2004a) report is available from the
Cultural Resource Management Division of Fort
Hood Directorate of Public Works, on the web at
the Directorate of Public Works web site (www.dpw.
hood.army.mil), or at the Defense Environmental
Network & Information Exchange web site in the
Office of the Deputy Under Secretary of Defense
Installations and Environment (www.denix.osd.
mil/portal/page/portal/denix). Rockshelter site
41BL780A was selected for discussion here out of
the larger rockshelter site assemblage, due to the fact
that it represented the truest test of the geophysical
methodology employed for the project. Only limited information had been obtained from the shelter
prior to the research, and thus interpretations of
the geophysical survey data were completed solely
upon the knowledge obtained during the project. The
results from Walker Cemetery are also discussed, to
provide an example of geophysical investigations of
a historic period site at Fort Hood.

FORT HOOD PHYSIOGRAPHY
Fort Hood is located in Bell and Coryell counties, in Central Texas, cove1ing an area of more than
217,000 acres. The base is located on the northeast
edge of the Edwards Plateau, within the Great Plains
Physiographic Province (Hayward et al. 1990). Hill
(1901) labeled the southern portion of this region
the Lampasas Cut Plain, based on the prominent

109

fiat-topped, butte-like, ridges bounded by broad,
low-lying erosional stream valleys. Topographically the base is typified by deeply incised erosional
ravines along the western section of the base that
flow into long narrow drainages within the eastern
section of the base. Exposed bedrock, sparse vegetation, and long narrow drainages exacerbate erosion
within the steeper sections of the base, transporting
substantial amounts of sediments into thick alluvial
depositional packages. Given that erosion and flood
events are localized phenomena, soil stratigraphy
within the floodplains of the major drainages can
vary widely.
Fort Hood is located west of the Balcones
Fault Zone on lower Cretaceous carbonate rock.
During the Cretaceous period, this region consisted
of a broad shelf covered by a shallow sea. Material
from the Cretaceous period is mainly interbedded
limestone and calcareous marl (Huckabee et al.
1977). These bedded limestones have undergone
substantial erosion, creating a moderately dissected
plain that slopes southeastward. Relief increases
from east to west across the base. Soils range from
extremely deep along Pleistocene and Holoceneaged sediments within drainages, to shallow along
upland escarpments. Limestone bedrock is common
at the surface throughout the base. Rockshelters
and caves are common within the Edwards limestone that caps the underlying Comanche Peak
limestone. The Edwards Limestone and Kiamichi
Clay form the "High" surfaces noted by Hayward
et al. (1990) and labeled as the Manning Surface by
Nordt (1992). The Manning surface forms the cap
rock on all of the upland ridges and buttes that run
approximately east to west across the base. It is this
high surface that the majority of the rockshelters are
located within, including all five investigated within
the current project.

ROCKSHELTER ENVIRONMENTS
The majority of rockshelters at Fmt Hood have
formed as irregular cavities within the softer fissile
beds of the Comanche Peak limestone to the harder
beds of the overlying Edwards limestone that caps
the upland ridge portions of the base (Abbott 1994).
In Abbott's (1994) summary of rockshelters on Fmt
Hood, he noted that more than 150 rockshelters, caves,
and karstic sinks have been identified, ranging in size
from 2 to 60 min length, 0.75 to 15 min width, and
0.4 to 4 m in height. The rockshelters appear to have

110

Texas Archeological Society

fom1ed initially as solution cavities that were subsequently augmented by erosion and thermoclastism
(freezing of water that completely fills up cavities
contained in the rock, causing its fragmentation).
The soil deposits within rockshelters form by
a number of methods including thermoclastism,
run-off, or human occupation (Laville 1976).
Thermoelastic deposits consist of small to large
pieces of fractured limestone within the fill. Abbott
( 1994:341) noted that the majority of rockshelters on
Fort Hood were estimated to have less than 0.50 m
of deposits, with only three having deposits greater
than 1.0 m. Limestone inclusions can range from
clay-sized particles up to large pieces of roof-fall.
Run-off from the surrounding upland can add sediments into the shelter environments, from both the
mouth of the shelter or small conduits at the rear.
The small conduits common at the rockshelters at
Fort Hood do not appear to possess a large sediment load for transport into the shelter, thus run-off
deposits primarily augment the mouth area of the
shelter. Abbott (1994:346) did identify at least
one shelter in which reddish-brown upland argillic
sediments (Abbott's Type 4 deposits) were being
deposited into a rockshelter from a conduit, but this
does not appear to be the norm for most rockshelters identified on the installation, at least within the
current climatic regime. Human occupation can add
substantial amounts of debitage, river cobbles, bone,
and organic content to the deposits of a shelter.
In Abbott's (1994) examination of karstic features at Fort Hood, he identified six types of deposits
characte1istic of the 150 rockshelters, caves, and sinks
identified at the time of the study. The types identified
sediment transport actions from internal spalling and
granular disintegration within the rockshelters, and
incorporation of outside organics and external sources
that transported sediments through slope wash and
conduits into the rockshelters. Current investigations
identified sediments akin to those identified by Abbott, with the exception of Types 5 and 6. Type 5 included tufa and travertine deposits that were probably
more consistent with cave formation at Fort Hood.
Type 6 included rockshelters that had been flushed of
sediments or were characterized as having coarse lag
deposits. Rockshelters investigated during the current
research did not exist in areas where large scale erosion, probably attributed to active stream migration,
would have been a possibility.
Sediments once deposited in the rockshelters
experience secondary frost shattering, erosion,
cryoturbation, chemical alteration, and bioturbation

from both plants and animals. These physical and
chemical weathering forces alter the shelter deposits,
causing them to resort themselves and continue to
breakdown into smaller and smaller particles. Silts
and clays dominate the particle size constituent
less than 2 mm in size. A large proportion of fine
sediment may be associated with sedimentation from
run-off or chemical alteration of the products of
thermoelastic fragmentation (Laville 1976). Larger
roof slabs noted in many of the shelters have been
dislodged by thermoclasitic fragmentation. These
larger pieces of roof slabs usually have an angular
appearance. Smaller limestone fragments observed
on and within the shelter deposits have become
rounded, an indication that secondary chemical
alteration also plays an important role in sediment
creation. Human utilization of the shelters adds
substantial amounts of organic material, creating a
thick surface A-horizon. Anthropogenic-enhanced
surface deposits were observed within all of the
shelters investigated at Fort Hood. The accumulation
of organic material of animal or vegetable origin
contributes, in certain cases, to the precipitation
of carbonates into solution in particular horizons
(Laville 1976: 143). While not specifically studied
as part of the current research, it is possible that the
enhanced surface deposits are increasing chemical
alteration to large elastic deposits in the shelter.
It would appear that thermoelastic fragmentation,
chemical alteration, and possibly to a lesser degree,
the accumulation of organics, plays the dominant
role in the formation of fill within the rockshelters
at Fort Hood.

SURVEY STRATEGY AND
METHODOLOGY
A geophysical investigation strategy was devised that attempted to ensure the best possible
results within any environmental or physical site
type. In the case of the Fort Hood sites, the central
research focus was the rockshelter locales. Rockshelters are challenging environments in which to
work and have proven to be difficult to explore
and interpret with geophysical instruments. Given
this central focus, a more intense and improved
combination of geophysical data sets was needed,
offering the best chance to locate and sample a range
of burial and cultural features. While the open-air
prehistoric sites were not as complex and thus easier
to survey, the addition of the historic cemeteries

Simpson-Investigations of Rocks helter Sites and Historic Cemeteries at Fort Hood, Texas
to the project did pose some difficulties. Historic
cemeteries are notorious for producing marginal if
not questionable geophysical data, due to a multitude of problems such as subtle change between
grave shaft and background soils; limited change
to subsurface depths in some cases; differing burial
practices; and substantial metallic signatures on the
surface that overwhelm subtle grave signatures. The
intense open-air methodology produced adequate to
excellent results at both cemeteries, providing the
information necessary to complete the succeeding
archeological investigations and chemical sampling
aspects of the project.
The methodology devised to investigate and
sample the various geophysical anomalies was focused on producing the least amount of disturbance
to the in situ features. Given that the primary goal of
the project was to identify human interments, it was
believed that minimal methods of ground-truthing
the geophysical anomalies were preferred. In order
to treat the burials with sensitivity and respect, the
primary collection methodology used was core
sampling with a small barrel, less than an inch in diameter, soil core. A series of small excavation units
were also included in the process in those situations
were soil coring could not adequately verify the geophysical data. No test units were excavated in areas
containing previously documented burials. Both
methodologies were used effectively to identify and
sample a range of burial and non-burial features.
The geophysical survey methodology was
divided between two general site types: open-air
and rockshelters. Both general site types produced
a range of different challenges for data collection,
but the rockshelter environment was by far the most
difficult to collect. interpret, and test. The open-air
methodology was used to survey both the prehistoric
sites and the historic cemeteries.
Geophysical techniques have proven highly effective in defining subsurface anomalies in open-air
sites, but cave or rockshelter environments have not
been as thoroughly investigated, and when they have
(De Vore 1999; Somers et al. 2004 ), they have provided a number of difficulties for researchers. Due
to the difficulty of interpreting and collecting data
within rockshelter environments, it was necessary to
modify existing techniques to maximize the potential of the geophysics. The proposed methodological
techniques focused on collecting the maximum data
resolution possible with all instruments, as well as
specific alterations to the collection methodology,
in order to contend with obstructions and potential

111

differences in soil moisture. High spatial sampling
densities increased detection probabilities of archeological features, as well as increased the accuracy of
mapping the locations and shapes of subsurface features. Human burials, particularly infant burials, can
be very small in size, measuring as little as 0.5 x 0.5
m. Dense spatial sampling ensured that such features
were characterized by multiple measurements, to
help validate their presence, as well as guarantee accurate representation of the feature's size, shape, and
orientation. The rockshelter environment was difficult to interpret due to rock fall, moisture pockets,
undulating base depth, and animal bioturbation. The
method for improving the interpretative potential of
the geophysical survey was through the utilization
of multiple techniques.
The utilization of multiple geophysical and remote sensing techniques has been shown to be the
best way to define and interpret archeological sites,
due to the fact that different feature types may be
identified reliably only with certain methods (Clay
2001; Hasek 1999; Kvamme 2001; Weymouth 1986).
Multiple methods may also be complimentary in the
definition of certain feature types, improving final
interpretation. In the case of the rockshelter environment, multiple techniques provided the additional
information necessary to eliminate or confom certain
anomalies as cultural or natural in origin. Given the
small size of the rockshelters and the interpretation
difficulties related to them, quality of data collection, not quantity, was the rule with all the various
geophysical techniques. A total of three different
instruments were used in the research: a magnetometer, resistance meter, and a laser field scanner. The
magnetometer and resistance meter represent the
two core subsurface remote sensing techniques, with
the laser field scanner being used for mapping subtle
surface depressions, and in some aspects acting as a
type of remote sensing instrument. Additional geophysical techniques, such as ground penetrating radar
(GPR) and electromagnetics (EM), were considered
within the initial methodological design. Research
completed previously at Fort Hood (Somers et al.
2004) within a single rockshelter had produced usable
results with a magnetometer and resistance meter, but
GPR results obtained from the shelter provided little
information about potential cultural features. Given
the lack of usable results obtained within the previous
study, the GPR was removed from consideration. EM
techniques were considered for the project, but were
held in reserve if the initial magnetic and resistance
instruments were ineffective.

112

Texas Archeological Society

A FM256 magnetometer and RM15 electrical
resistance meter, produced by Geoscan Research
in England, were selected for the project. These
instruments have a proven track record throughout
the world, are specifically designed for archeology,
and are becoming recognized throughout the United
States as effective non-invasive tools to determine
the presence of subsurface features. The universality
of these two instruments within the broader archeogeophysical community was also believed to be an
asset in making the project methodology easier for
other facilities to integrate into their own management programs. The addition of a laser field scanner
provided an exact representation of the surface features of the shelter at the time of survey, as well as
documenting surface rocks, the shape of the shelter
overhang, and depressions on the shelter's floor. This
surface was correlated with the geophysical results,
helping to explain some features and improving
interpretations of potential anomalies identified
within the data sets. Given that interpretation within
the rockshelters was difficult due to roof fall, bioturbation, and historic disturbance, any means of
improving interpretations was of great value. It was
believed that intensely mapping the shelter floors
may be useful in defining shallow surface depressions that directly related to buried cultural features.
The scanner was used only at the rockshelter sites
due to the fact that surface vegetation at the openair sites would severely hinder the applicability of
the technique.
A 1 m survey grid was established in each shelter,
and a detailed sketch map created of the shelter floors,
focusing on depressions, obstructions, and any obvious exposed cultural material that may assist in the
interpretation of anomalies. Following the survey and
mapping stage of the methodology, a laser field scan
was completed of each shelter. A CYRAX 2500 laser
field scanner was used to perform this task (Figure 1).
This instrument collects approximately l 000 points
per second, with an error rate of less than 6 mm
within 50 m of the scanner. In order to maximize the
remote sensing potential of the laser field scanner, a
1.0 cm resolution DEM (Digital Elevation Model)
was created for each shelter from a minimum of 1.5
million survey points. The final stage in the methodology was the collection of the FM256 and RM15
geophysical data sets.
The FM256 magnetometer can collect up to 16
measurements per m, a point approximately every
6 cm along a transect. In addition, it allows a digital
average to be taken for each recorded point. The

instrument allows as many as 32 measurements to be
averaged at any single point. This averaging process
substantially improves the signal to noise ratio by
reducing the instrument's measurement variations at
each locus. Although this averaging technique can
substantially reduce collection error, a balance must
be struck between error reduction and speed of data
collection. By increasing the average cycles, the rate
of data collection is slowed, as well as the potential
samples that can be collected per m. In order to
make collection plausible, a reduced averaging rate
of 8 measurements per recorded point was used.
Given this level of data collection, the interval
speed was also substantially reduced in comparison
to normal collection speeds to approximately
2.8 seconds per 50 cm traversed. This collection
methodology reduced collection noise by almost
2.8 times (Geoscan Research 2003), and allowed
for a slow and detailed survey. Sample interval per
transect was kept at 16 perm, with transects spaced
every 12.5 cm. Each 5 x 5 m grid contained 3200
readings, with a final interpolated grid resolution of
6 cm in both the x and y directions, totaling 6400
readings per grid.
The RM15 resistance meter collected at a
sample interval of 8 per m along each transect. The
interval between transects was maintained at 12.5
cm, the same as that used in the magnetometer
survey. This produced an initial resolution of 12.5
cm in both the x and y directions, with final interpolated images produced at a grid resolution of 6 cm,
for a total of 6400 readings within a 5 x 5 m grid.
A series of different probe spacings, or theoretical
depths, were collect in each of the rockshelters.
Probe spacing ranged from 25 to 75 cm, depending
on the previously defined or potential depth of soil
deposits in each shelter.
The data collection at the open-air sites was
less intensive, and utilized more standard testing
intervals and methods. A 10 x l 0 m survey grid
was established at each site, and a base map created
of surface conditions within the grids, focusing
on above ground obstructions and depressions.
Following grid establishment and mapping, the
magnetometer and resistance meter data sets were
collected at a slightly reduced interval as compared
to the rockshelter methodology. The FM256
magnetometer survey utilized a transect interval of
25 cm and sampling interval of 8 measurements per
m. Digital averaging of 8 cycles per measurement
was used to improve signal to noise ratio. This
sampling protocol recorded 3200 readings per grid,

Simpson-Investigations of Rockshelter Sites and Historic Cemeteries at Fort Hood, Texas

113

Figure 1. Cyrax 2500 laser field scanner collecting data at 4 lBL780A. The 1.0 cm resolution DEM of 41BL780A created
from the laser field scanner data; this is typical of the results obtained for all shelters.

with a final interpolated resolution of 12.5 cm, or
6400 total readings per grid.
The resistance surveys completed on the openair sites were collected in an identical fashion as
the magnetometer data, with only one exception.
The resistance data was collected at 25 cm transect
intervals, the same as the magnetometer methodology, but samples per m were spaced every 25 cm
instead of 12.5 cm as in the magnetometer survey.
This collection interval produced a total of 1600
reading per grid, with a final interpolation in both
the x and y directions producing 6400 total readings.
This collection methodology produced identical
resolution between the two geophysical data sets,
facilitating interpretation and unit placement. The
depth of investigation was determined on a site by
site basis.

41BL780
Site 41BL780 consists of a series of three rockshelters (A, B, and C) that lie along a west facing
escarpment edge, overlooking the Cowhouse Creek
valley and a portion of Belton Lake. The shelters

are linked together by a 2 to 3 m tall rock face that
extends along the majority of the escarpment. A
gradual talus slope extends away from the shelters.
Steeper drainage ravines that run into Belton Lake
dissect the talus slope. One of these drainage ravines
dissects the broad talus slopes, effectively bisecting
Shelter A into two sections. The eastern section
of Shelter A was selected for investigation during
this initial research. A seep spring flows from two
conduits along the back wall of the shelter forming
the drainage ravine, and keeping the majority of
the western end saturated throughout the year. The
shelter measures approximately 16 m in length, 7 m
in width, and has a maximum roof height of 1.5 m.
The site was first recorded by Carlson et al.
(1987). Smface inspection of the three shelters identified a range of lithic artifact types including: Type
I and III bifaces, biface scrapers, blanks, retouched
flakes and blades, cores, hammerstones, choppers,
flakes, and manos. In addition to these artifacts,
charcoal, bone, mussel shell, and moderate amounts
of fired rock were also noted within the shelter and
talus deposits. The only diagnostic artifacts collected
included three untyped dart points, classifying the
site as "General Archaic" (Carlson et al. 1987).

114

Texas Archeological Society

A high artifact density was observed on the
smface of the western section of Shelter A, consisting
of lithics, charcoal, shell, and bone. These areas of
high artifact density corresponded to portions of
the shelter that have undergone substantial amounts
of vandalism demarcated by deep looter holes .
Assessment of the eastern section of Shelter A
indicated a much reduced amount of similar cultural
material on the surface. The reduction of smface
material was interpreted to indicate that the shelter
had experienced minimal or no vandalism, making
it of primary importance to the investigations.
41BL780 Geophysical Survey

All of the shelters chosen for investigation
within the project had at least one confirmed cultural
feature or burial identified dming previous excavations . One additional rockshelter was added that had
undergone no previous archeological investigations,
to act as a test case for the effectiveness of the geophysical survey and interpretations. Rockshelter A at
41BL780 was chosen for investigation for two main
reasons. First, it appeared to have excellent potential
to contain intact prehistoric features. Visual inspection of the shelter floor observed limited amounts
of cultural material on the surface, indicative of a
shelter that had experienced minimal, if any, modem
disturbance. Secondly, the shelter appeared to have a

minimum of at least 50 cm of soil deposits , certainly
sufficient to contain cultural features.
A S m wide by 9 m long grid was established
across the majority of the rockshelter. The grid extended from effectively the backwall of the shelter
to the talus edge. The extent of this grid was constrained by the naffow roof height in parts of the
shelter. The roof height ranged from approximately
1.5 m at the dripline to an average of 75 cm in
height within the shelter, making collection of the
geophysical surveys difficult but not impossible. A
magnetometer, three resistance meter surveys of 25
cm, SO cm, and 75 cm spacing (intervals correlate
to the theoretical depth of investigation), and a laser
field scan were completed at the site (Figures 2 and
3). The southern end of the shelter contained an active seep spring that made this portion of the shelter
extremely wet. The difference in soil moisture was
obvious within all three of the resistance surveys ,
and effectively demarcated the western extent of
what were interpreted as potential feature locations
within the shelter.
It was determined that two anomalies would
be identified and tested within the 4 lBL780A
shelter. Anomaly 1 was identified primarily
within the 75 cm resistance survey data (see Figure
3). This anomaly was one of a string of high
resistance anomalies that run along the center of
the shelter. Data collection in this area noted a large

ohm
High : 146.000000

Legend

Value
High : 25-4

=::J

Depression

c:z:J ,,..,.,
[t~

Organic

g:X)

Smurated

- - Gnd

-

Tree Roots & Branches

Figure 2. Electrical Resistance data at a 50 cm spacing collected at 4 lBL 780A; b, photograph of shelter looking grid east.

Simpson-Investigations of Rockshelter Sites and Historic Cemeteries at Fort Hood, Texas

I

115

ohm
High '. 36.099998

Low : ·33.107!»2

Legend
Value
High : 254

__

Lcw : O

r..:_---i Springs
!_•...-....~ Potential Cultural Feature
Rod<s

c::::J Depression
EZZl Mc>st
~ "'-"'
CK2l
Saturaled
-

-

-Grid

Tree ROOls & Branches

.

'-=--=::1..-----======-----..,======I----"""'======----""""'"""'
Figure 3. Electrical Resistance data at a 75 cm spacing collected at 4 lBL 780A. Potential cultural features are highlighted
on data.

concentration of limestone roof slabs. Assessment
of the magnetometer data indicated low magnetic
readings corresponding to the high resistant
anomaly, interpreted to indicate that low-magnetic
limestone was predominant in this location (Figure
4 ). The magnetometer also contained a high
magnetic anomaly that formed a crescent around
the low magnetic limestone slab signature. It was
believed that this crescent shape was indicating a
more magnetic A-horizon-filled pit capped by less
magnetic limestone rock (Figure 4). Assessment of
the field scan data indicated a subtle depression to
the east of the surface rock concentration.
Anomaly 2 was identified as a high magnetic
anomaly, averaging between 6.0 and 7.0 nT, within
the magnetometer data (see Figure 4). Assessment
of the resistance survey data did not indicate any
anomalous signature at this location (see Figure 3).
The signature was interpreted as a possible prehistoric hearth with few limestone rock inclusions. The
laser field scanner data did not indicate any sort of
subtle depression in the area of the possible hearth
anomaly.
41BL780 Archeological Investigations
The archeological investigations at 41BL780
were focused on the two excavation units placed
based on the geophysical survey. In addition to these

excavation units, a series of eight core samples were
completed across the site to provide background
soil characterization for soil samples collected from
each excavation unit. These cores demonstrated a
substantial degree of variability in strata color and
depth, but in general two broad stratigraphic units
were identified: an upper smface A-horizon underlain by an unmodified rocky C-horizon.
Test Unit 1, measuring 50 x 50 cm, was placed
so as to lie along the southern edge of Anomaly
1 (see Figure 4). The test unit was excavated in
5 cm arbitrary levels within greater natural strata.
A total of six levels were excavated, identifying a
total of three stratigraphic zones (Figure 5). Zone
1 was interpreted as a relatively consistent surface
A-horizon that extended across the majority of the
shelter. It averaged approximately 5 cm in thickness
across the entire shelter, based upon unit excavations
and core sampling. Zone 2 was identified as a
second A-horizon, representing organics and
debris constituting the fill mattix of Feature 1. It
possessed a defined plunging edge extending from
south to north, consistent with the edge defined by
Anomaly 1. Zone 3, identified at the base of the
unit excavation, represents the upper portions of the
deeper unmodified C-horizon sediments. This zone
was seen within the deeper core samples to lighten
with depth and increase in inclusions. Tabular
limestone spall constituted 20 to 80 percent of the

116

Texas Archeological Society

nT
High ; 10.500000

Legen<I

Value
High · 2$4
Low ~ O

c:::::J """''

c=

.

Tesl Uruts

Springs
Rod<$

C':J Oep«SSiQn
CZ2J "°"''

Gf"?:~~ Organic

CXJ Saturated

.......

--Grid
-

Tree Roots & Branches

--<=>--==-~~~"======II~~~-=====:;~~~-======='~~~-

Figure 4. Magnetometer data collected at 41BL780A. Potential cultural features are highlighted on the data. The three
test units used to investigate Anomalies 1 and 2 are also displayed.

North Wall

East Wall

South Wall

West Wall

lOYR 2/2 silty clay
0

10

II 1OYR2/l silty clay, inclusions of
degrading tabular limestone and snail shells

20
cm

@Root
{) Tabular Rock

III 1OYR4/4 silty clay, degrading limestone

Figure 5. Wall Profile of Test Unit l (Feature I) at 41BL 780A. Zone II represents the fill matrix of the feature.

zone in the various areas tested within the shelter.
Lithic debitage, shell, and bone fragments were
recovered throughout the upper two zones . Feature
1 produced a total of 91 pieces of debitage, 21 pieces
of shell, and nine pieces of bone. Specific analysis
was not completed of the shell or bone fragments .
The feature did not produce any diagnostic material,
and as such no temporal or cultural petiod could
be determined for it. The feature appears to be
a basin hearth, based on the amount of charcoal
noted throughout the feature matrix and the high
magnetic signature. Based on the geophysics and

archeological data obtained from the test unit, the
feature measures approximately 90 cm in diameter
and extends to a depth of 30 cm below the shelter
surface.
Test Units 2 and 3, measuting 50 x 100 cm,
were placed across the center of this Anomaly 2
(see Figure 4 ). The test units were excavated in 5
cm arbitrary levels within greater natural strata. A
total of four levels were excavated, identifying three
stratigraphic zones (Figure 6). Zone 1 was interpreted as the relative! y consistent surface A-horizon
that extended across the majority of the shelter. In

Simpson-Investigations of Rockshelter Sites and Historic Cemeteries at Fort Hood, Texas
the location of Test Unit 2 this surface layer was
extremely thin, measuring less than 4 cm in thickness. Zone 2 was identified as a second A-horizon,
representing organics and debris constituting the
fill matrix of Feature 2. It possessed a defined edge
along the southeast corner of the unit. This edge
definition was consistent with that identified from
Anomaly 2. Zone 3 was again found to be the basal
C-horizon sediments that extend across the shelter.
The placement of the test unit was accurate in its
ability to define the edge of the cultural feature, but
the western edge of the unit was dominated by a
series of stacked tabular pieces of limestone spall.
The tabular pieces of limestone spall appeared to cap
the feature along the western wall of the unit. The
rock cap appeared similar to that noted in the previous burial investigations at 41BL69 (Mehalchick et
al. 1999). Based on the possibility that the feature
may contain a burial, an additional 50 x 50 cm unit
was placed west of Test Unit 2, producing a 50 x 100
cm contiguous unit. Test Unit 3 contained the same
stratigraphic zones as identified in Test Unit 2. The
depth of excavation was slightly deeper than that of
Test Unit 2 due to the large concentrations of rock
spall contained within the feature. Rock content was
substantial from the base of Level 1 to the bottom of
the unit excavation, constituting approximately 30
percent of the overall feature's volume. The extent
of the unit did not fully transect the breadth of the
feature, but the excavation clearly demonstrated that
the feature did not contain a capped burial. Excavation of Feature 2 was terminated at the completion
of Test Unit 3, due to the fact that a cultural feature
had been demonstrated to exist in context with
Anomaly 2.
Feature 2 produced a total of 149 pieces of
debitage, 28 shell fragments, four pieces of bone,
and one projectile point. As with Feature 1, no specific analysis was completed of the shell or bone
fragments. The projectile point was identified as a
Korth Wall

117

Fresno point, potentially dating the feature to the
Late Prehistoric period (ca. 1100-500 B.P.). The
point was located at the base of Level 1, slightly
above the main feature matrix. Minor disturbances
were noted within Level 1 of both test units, indicating some degree of animal bioturbation to the upper
extent of the feature. It appeared probable that the
point was a part of the feature prior to bioturbation,
providing a tenuous Late Prehistoric date for Feature
2. Based on the geophysics and archeological data
obtained from the test units, the feature is a ftatbottomed basin measuring approximately 100 cm
long by 75 cm wide, and extends to a depth of 10 to
15 cm below the shelter surface.

COMPARING EXCAVATION
RESULTS TO GEOPHYSICAL DATA
FROM THE ROCKSHELTERS
Of the five shelters investigated at Fort Hood,
41BL780A and 41BL844B were the only two that
had excavation units placed over potential cultural anomalies. These larger units taken in context
with broader core sampling provided the greatest
amount of information pertaining to the geophysical exploration of the rockshelter environments.
The excavations at both sites produced cultural
features at a much shallower depth than would be
expected based on the investigated resistance
depths. Traditionally the probe spacing within a
resistance survey approximates depth, but in the
case of the rockshelters these theoretical depths
were nearly halved. This substantial reduction in
depth is believed to relate to a combination of dry
and rocky subsurface conditions of the shelters that
effectively increased the soil's resistance to the
passage of electricity well beyond normal. While
it was known that differential moisture conditions
and rock concentrations would be issues within the
South Viall

East \Vall

II

I

A; JOYR 2/2; clayey silt

II A2, feahrre; JOYR 2/2; clayey silt with JOYR 4/4

•

Rock

HI AC; lOYR 414; clayey silt

Figure 6. Wall Profile of Test Unit 2 and 3 (Feature 2) at 41BL780A. Zone II represents the fill matrix of the feature.

118

Texas Archeological Society

shelter locales, it was unexpected that such a substantial reduction in the resistance depths would be
produced. This depth reduction should be expected
by other researchers beginning to use the resistance
techniques to investigate shelter locales. In the case
of shelters with extremely deep deposits, it may be
necessary to add GPR as an additional technique
to improve depth penetration. But if GPR is added
to an investigative methodology, improvements to
general collection methodologies would be necessary to effectively use the technique to identify
certain feature types. The substantial reduction in
resistance depth was also observed consistently in
the 25 cm probe-spaced data collected at all the
shelters. It consistently appeared to identify surface
conditions instead of any deeper cultural features: a
product of reducing the potential depth of the data.
In a majority of cases, the 25 cm spaced data identified anomalies consistent with natural origins, such
as tree roots or rodent burrows. While the 25 cm
spaced data proved marginal in directly identifying
cultural features, it was found effective in isolating
surface disturbances and natural anomalies and
screening them out of the total pool of potential
cultural anomalies identified at any one shelter.
Dry conditions at a few of the shelters (41 BL69 and
41 CV901) reduced subtle differences between cultural features and the background, indicating that
the use of the resistance technique in dry shelter
conditions may be problematic. It is probable that
in such dry conditions features would need to be
substantially different than the background to be
reliably identified within the resistance data.
The magnetometer data served as the primary
interpretative layer throughout all of the shelter
investigations. The majority of the shelter deposits
consist of spall and sediments derived from the
native limestone in which the shelters have formed.
Limestone is extremely non-magnetic in character,
providing a very low background level and
facilitating interpretations. An example of the nonmagnetic nature of the limestone was displayed
in the interpretation and excavation of Feature
2 at 41BL780A, wherein the concentration of
limestone slabs provided a low magnetic signature.
Similar concentrations of rock identified in the
resistance data from other shelters was compared
with the magnetometer data for corresponding
low signatures ranges, serving as a check on the
insights gained from the resistance data sets. It is
probable that shelters formed of other rock types,
such as sandstone, may not provide as low a level

of background noise, or may in fact hinder the
use of magnetic-based instrumentation if the rock
possesses magnetic properties.
41CV1150 (Walker Cemetery)
Walker Cemetery is located on a broad upland
slope that extends down to Shoal Creek in the far
northwestern corner of Fort Hood. The majority of
the cemetery was covered in tall grass with isolated
live oaks and junipers dotting its extent. It contains
143 marked graves, of which 25 are marked but have
no identifiable name labeled on the headstone. A
metal hurricane fence encloses the area. The fence
boundary measures 59 x 68 m, but the actual extent
of marked graves covers an area of approximately 50
x 48 m. An area located in the center of the cemetery
is void of graves, but surface indications, such as
stones and slight depressions, were observed within
this section of the cemetery. It was believed that the
cemetery possibly contained older unmarked graves
in the central void area.
The previous work at the cemetery has focused
on surface mapping of features, with no subsmface
investigations. Death dates documented from headstones within the cemetery range from the 1860s to
2003. The oldest dated graves lie in the central and
southeastern sections of the cemetery. The majority
of the marked but undated stones lie approximately
in the center of the cemetery. Depth of deposits was
assumed to extend to approximately 6 ft. bs (1.8 m
bs). Given the interpretation that the central void
area may contain a number of early and unmarked
graves, this area became the central focus of the
geophysical survey.
41 CV1150 Geophysical Survey
A 20 x 30 m grid was placed over the center of
the cemetery, covering the central void area and all
of the marked but undated graves. The placement of
the collection area in the center of the cemetery nullified any affect that the encircling hurricane fence
would impart to the magnetic data. A magnetometer
survey (Figure 7) and a resistance survey at a 50
cm probe spacing (Figure 8) were completed over
the entire grid area. The shallow resistance survey
identified a majority of the marked graves, as well as
a number of anomalies within the central void area.
The magnetometer data was deleteriously affected
by the extensive use of metal in the headstones,
crypts, and reinforced concrete enclosures that had

Simpson-Investigations of Rockshelter Sites and Historic Cemeteries at Fort Hood, Texas

119

N 500
E 530

N 500
E 500

Value
-

Legend
DMarkers
,-j Depression

C'.

High: 141.615997

Low: -105.734596
0

5

10

15 Meters

Figure 7. Magnetometer data collected at Walker Cemetery.

been constructed across the cemetery. Although
large portions of the magnetometer data were marginalized or obscured by the large metal dipoles,
a number of anomalies were also identified in the
central void area of the site.
An additional limited resistance survey with a
1.0 m probe spacing was completed over the central
section of the grid, focusing on the central void
area and the majority of the marked but undated
headstones (Figure 9). This deeper 1.0 m survey
was completed due to the results identified in the
shalJower 50 cm resistance and magnetometer
surveys, which indicated a number of highly defined
burial shafts within the central void area. The clarity
of the 1.0 m deep resistance survey provided the

best data set on which to determine the sample of
graves to be tested in the subsequent archeological
investigations (Figure 9). It identified a row of six
graves (five are highlighted with the sixth being
defined by a subtle depression in Figure 9) that ran
approximately along the E512 line with greater
clarity than the 50 cm and magnetometer data sets.
It also provided better clarity for the majority of
graves located to the east of the ES J 2 line of graves,
with the exception of the high resistant grave located
along the ES 16-517 lines (labeled as Grave 3 in
Figure 9). The deeper survey calls into question the
nature of the anomaly, given the change in size and
orientation. This potential grave locale is anomalous
compared to the other grave signatures and required

120

Texas Archeological Society

N 500

N 500

E 500

E 530

ohm

Legend

High : 45.750000

c:::::JMarkers
(',~Depression
0

5

10

15 Meters

Low: -5.321438

Figure 8. Electrical Resistance data at a 50 cm spacing collected at Walker Cemetery.

some subsequent testing in order to understand the
differences.
A series of four investigative cores was placed
down the long axis of the high resistance anomaly,
labeled Grave 3 (see Figure 9). The smface of the area
around the anomaly contained no visible depressions.
The only observable difference in the area versus the
surrounding void area was a single vertically oriented
brick extending only slightly from the ground surface.
At a depth of 40 cm bs, a consistent obstruction was
discovered across the anomaly. Inspections of the
cores indicated that the obstruction was the placement
of a brick cap within a burial shaft. Similar brickcapped burials have been identified in geophysical
investigations in a cemetery dating from the early to

mid-19th century in Portsmouth, Virginia (Simpson
and Peterson 2004b). Given that the grave signature is
anomalous to all the others within the survey, it is believed that this grave may represent a very early bmial
at the cemetery, if not the oldest. If the dates from the
Virginia cemetery are used as a guide, the grave could
conservatively date to the mid-19th century, predating
the oldest marked grave by approximately 20 years.
Given the sensitivity of testing within a marked
cemetery, it was determined that only unmarked
potential grave locations would be chosen for testing.
Of the line of six graves noted in the 1.0 m deep
resistance survey data, two were chosen for sampling
(see Figure 9). These two graves, Grave 1 and 2, both
possessed excellent signatures, shallow depressions,

Simpson-Investigations of Rockshelter Sites and Historic Cemeteries at Fort Hood, Texas

121

Grave 2

Grave 3

Lo1,v -1.209702

Legend

012345

\,, "' b...I

b.r...I

I1v1eters

1\1 500
E 500

N 500

E 530

Figure 9. Electrical resistance data at a 1.0 m spacing collected at Walker Cemetery. Potential graves identified in the
resistance data are highlighted. All cores used to investigate the background and Graves 1, 2, and 3 are labeled.

and no markers of any kind on the surface. These
characteristics not only satisfied the sensitivity issues
of testing but also possessed at least some limited
surface indications that a probable grave shaft was
located in the area of the anomaly.

41CVl150 Archaeological Investigations
The archeological investigations at Walker
Cemetery were focused on the two potential grave
anomalies lying along the E512 line that corresponded to slight surface depressions (see Figure 9).
Two cores were used to sample both potential grave
locations. In addition to the four feature cores, an
additional eight background cores were placed to
characterize the unaltered portions of the cemetery.
These cores were placed in areas that appeared unaltered based on the 1.0 m deep resistance data.
The eight background cores are discussed first,
in order to provide a context of soils across the site

against which to compare the potential grave anomalies. The eight background cores, labeled as Cores
5 through 12 on Figure 9, expressed a great degree
of homogeneity, possessing basically two strata.
The surface stratum was a brown to yellowishbrown A-horizon, consisting of dense granular silty
clay with from 2-5 percent degrading limestone
intermixed throughout the matrix. It extended to
a depth of approximately 28 cm bs. This surface
horizon was underlain by a thick yellowish-brown
Btk-horizon that contained well-developed clayskins and calcium carbonate nodules, ranging from
15-20 percent of the matrix. Observations made of
soil exposures close to the cemetery locale indicated
that calcium carbonate nodules were concentrated
along drainage avenues, such as roots and structural
voids, within the upper soil column. At a depth of
approximately 75 cm bs nodules increased across
the overall breadth of the soil column. This expansion of carbonate nodules appears to correspond to

122

Texas Archeological Society

the upper extent of the seasonal water table. Cores
were taken to depths ranging from l.25 to 1.75 m
bs into the Btk-horizon prior to being terminated,
providing sufficient depth to properly characterize
the soil strata present at the cemetery.
Cores 1 and 2 were placed within the Grave 1
anomaly (see Figure 9), and contained very similar
core profiles. Unlike the background cores there
was no 28 cm thick A-horizon on the surface, but
instead both cores began with a yellowish-brown
mottled massive clayey silt. This disturbed soil matrix extended from the surface to a depth of 1.20 m.
This portion of the core was extremely soft. Based
on these characteristics, this section was interpreted
as grave shaft fill. The shaft fill terminated at a thin
brown massive clay loam stratum, with small wood
fragment inclusions. The stratum was interpreted
as the remnants of an historic grave, and that the
wood fragments were deteriorated pieces of a coffin.
The stratum had an abrupt smooth boundary with
the underlying pale brown Btk-horizon, which was
sampled to a depth of 1.60 m bs. This stratum was
identical to the Btk-horizon identified within the
background cores.
Cores 3 and 4 were placed within the Grave 2
anomaly (see Figure 9). Both cores possessed a disturbed upper section that extended from the surface
to 1.48 m bs. At that depth in both cores, a thin l 0
cm thick brown stratum was identified at the base of
the grave shaft fill. As with Grave 1, the base of this
stratum possessed an abrupt and smooth boundary
with the underlying Btk-horizon. The brownishyellow Btk-horizon was sampled to a depth of 1.90
m bs. The brown stratum did not include any wood
fragments as did the cores in Grave 1, but Core 3
did contain fragments of bone. The bone fragments
were too small for identification, but given their
context they were treated as if they were human
and immediately placed back into the core location.
Based on the recovery of the bone and the general
characteristics of the two cores, the sampled area
was interpreted as another historic grave.

Comparing Investigation Results to
Geophysical Data from Walker Cemetery
The most interesting aspect of the investigation
of the geophysical data at Walker Cemetery is the
reason for such high grave shaft definition in the
resistance data. The survey was completed in the late
winter to early spring, which is a period of maximum
moisture content in the soils at Fort Hood. This high

water table constrained resistance measurements at
the cemetery to a total range of 3 ohms. Traditionally
a range of 30 ohms is considered acceptable for the
degree of clarity necessary to define cultural features
from background measurements. This narrow range
of resistance measurements usually leads to data
that lacks the clarity to discern subtle differences.
Coring of the soils at the site indicated that the shafts
were much softer than the surrounding unaltered
soils, indicating that the grave shafts were holding
more moisture and for a longer period than the
Slmounding unaltered soil horizons. The obvious
moisture differences between the grave shafts and
the surrounding subsoil was initially believed to be
the entire reason for the clarity shown within the
resistance data, but further assessment of the data
sets appeared to indicate one additional reason for
the increased clarity.
The shallow 50 cm deep resistance data defined
the same grave shafts as seen within the 1.0 m deep
data, but the low resistance measurements were isolated around the extremity of the grave shafts, whereas the deeper data showed an extensive low resistance
signature across the entire width of the shaft. While
moisture content can explain the lower resistance
ranges expressed for both data sets, the differences in
signatures appear tied to one additional soil variable
noted off-site. The assessment of soil exposures just
east of the cemetery indicated that calcium carbonate
nodules were concentrated along moisture channels in
the upper sections of the soil profile. Nodule size and
number increased at a depth of approximately 75 cm
bs in the soil exposure, expanding to cover the entire
profile from that depth to the base of the exposure.
It is believed a similar process was occurring in the
grave shafts, with calcium carbonate nodules lining
the grave shaft walls and expanding to cover the entire
breadth of the shaft at similar depths as seen in the
soil exposures. Soil coring within the shafts noted
increased nodules from approximately 75 cm to the
bottom of the shaft. The higher moisture content in
the graves taken in conjunction with the higher solute
content contributed by the calcium carbonate nodules
to specific section of the grave shafts is believed to be
the reason for the excellent clarity of the resistance
data sets.

CONCLUSIONS
The dense sampling methodology used in the
Fort Hood geophysical survey project provided the

Simpson-Investigations of Rocks helter Sites and Historic Cemeteries at Fort Hood, Texas
level of detail necessary to both define very small
anomalies as well as clarify the edges of larger
anomalies in the studied sites, vastly improving
the overall final interpretations of both prehistoric
and historic features. Multiple geophysical techniques proved complimentary and highly effective
in defining subtle cultural features at most of the
investigated sites. The layering of different data
types and investigative depths provided a greater
understanding of the subsurface deposits contained
at many of the sites, improving final interpretations
of the geophysical survey data. The investigations
at the majority of the rockshelters, open-air prehistoric sites, and historic cemeteries produced usable
to excellent geophysical results, providing data
accurate to within less than 10 cm of actual feature
placement. This level of detail allowed small excavation units to be placed on the edges of geophysical
anomalies, effectively providing a bisection profile
of the features with minimal disturbance. While the
units were small, they provided the information necessary to understand and verify that intact cultural
features were located at the various sites.
The investigations at rockshelter sites
41BL780A and 41BL844B identified a total of
four previously unknown cultural features, one
of which contained a human burial. This testing
verified that the methodology and interpretations
developed from the research could be used to direct
archeological investigations within the difficult
rockshelter environments. It also showed that the
geophysical results could direct investigations on
a limited and non-invasive methodology more effectively than traditional excavation techniques.
Just over 1 m2 was excavated at the two rockshelter sites to confirm the four anomalies as cultural
features, representing a substantial reduction in
excavation impact to the sites. While the excavation within the shelters was minimal, it proved
to be highly effective in locating intact cultural
features and providing a basis of understanding to
the Fort Hood archeology staff to better manage
and protect those shelters with truly invaluable resources. Investigations in the past of Central Texas
rockshelters (Lynott 1980) have shown them to be
highly variable and difficult to adequately assess
with limited investigations. Cultural usage, feature
size, and feature placement may all be substantially
effected by the deposits, roof fall, or other internal
physical structures present with any given rockshelter locale. It is this high degree of variability as
well as the overall effectiveness of the geophysical

123

methodology in the rockshelters that has lead to an
expansion of the research at Fort Hood. In 2006,
an additional 36 rockshelter sites were evaluated
for geophysical investigations, with 16 eventually
being surveyed. These shelters represent the final
36 rockshelter sites not yet evaluated for National
Register of Historic Places eligibility at the installation. The results of this research are not yet
complete, with excavations planned later in 2008
or 2009 by the Fort Hood archeology staff.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Dennis Glinn and Dr. Cheryl Huckerby (Fort
Hood) provided the opportunity to work on this
project, as well as assistance and support throughout the process. Karl Kleinbach, Kristen Wenzel,
and Sunny Wood (also Fort Hood) provided support and guidance that contributed to the success
of the project. At Camp Lejeune, Rick Richardson
and Tara Speth were very supportive of the project
and assisted with the logistics that made that portion of the project successful. Ryan Peterson, my
co-author on the original research report, provided
expertise on all aspects of the project and was
instrumental in its success. David Schatz, Todd
Johanboeke, Robin Coleman, Brian Stutzman, and
Matt Faulkner (AMEC) all provided support with
various aspects of the project. Technical advice
received from many professionals provided valuable contributions to this project. Dr. Ken Kvamme
(University of Arkansas) provided comments on the
research design and reviewed the geophysical component of the project for technical merit. Marilyn
Hoyt and Elizabeth Wessling (AMEC) consulted on
the soil sampling and analysis relating to the project. Other professionals that contributed technical
advice include: Arpaad Vass, John Schultz, Kate
Spradley, Melissa Zabecki, Stephen Nawrocki,
Matt Williamson, Sarah Sherwood, Doug Lane,
Elayne Pope, and Geoffrey Tassie.

REFERENCES CITED
Abbott, J. T.
1994 Rockshelters. In Archeological Investigations on
571 Prehistoric Sites at Fort Hood. Bell and Coryell Counties, Texas. edited by N. Trierweiler, pp.
333-347. Archeological Resource Management
Series, Research Report No. 31. United States Army,
Fort Hood, Texas.

124

Texas Archeological Society

Carlson, S. B., H.B. Ensor, D. L. Carlson, E. A. Miller, and
D. E. Young
1987 Archaeological Survey at Fort Hood, Texas; Fiscal
Year 1984. Archeological Resource Management
Series, Research Report No. 14. United States Army,
Fort Hood, Texas.

Laville, H.
1976 Deposits in Calcareous rock shelters: analytical
methods and climatic interpretation. In Geoarchaeology: Earth Science and the Past, edited by D. A.
Davidson and M. L. Shackley, pp. 137-155. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.

Clay, R. B.
2001 Complementary Geophysical Survey Techniques:
Why Two Ways are Always Better than One. Southeastern Archaeology 20:31-43.

Lynott, M. J.
1980 The Dynamics of Significance: An Example from
Central Texas. American Antiquity 45: 117-120.

De Vore, S. L.
1999 Field Report for magnetic Field-Gradient Survey of
Prehistoric Sites on the Utah Test and Training Ranges, Hill Air Force Base, Utah. Cultural Resources &
National Register Program Services, Intermountain
Support Office, National Park Service, Santa Fe,
New Mexico. On file at the National Park Service,
Midwest Archeological Center, Lincoln, Nebraska.
Geoscan Research
2003 Geoplot Version 3.00 Instruction Manual. Geoscan
Research, Bradford, United Kingdom.
Hasek, V.
1999 Methodology of Geophysical Research in Archaeology. BAR International Series 769. British Archaeological Reports, Oxford, United Kingdom.
Hayward, 0. T., P. M. Allen, and D. L. Amsbury
1990 Lampasas Cut Plain-Evidence for the Cyclic
Evolution of a Regional Landscape, Central Texas.
Geological Society ofAmerica Guidebook 2, p. 122.
Dallas, Texas.
Hill, R. T.
1901 Geography and Geology of the Grand and Black
Prairies, Texas. Twenty-first Annual Report, part VIL
p. 666. U.S. Geological Survey, Washington, D.C.
Huckabee, J. W., D.R. Thompson, J.C. Wyrick, and E.G.
Pavlat
1977 Soil Survey of Bell County. U.S. Department of Agriculture and Texas Agricultural Experiment Station.
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington D.C.
Kvamme. K. L.
2001 Current Practices inArchaeogeophysics: Magnetics,
Resistivity, Conductivity, and Ground-Penetrating
Radar. In Earth Sciences and Archaeology, edited
by P. Goldberg, V. Holliday, and C. R. Ferring, pp.
353-384. Kluwer/Plenum Publishers, New York.

Mehalchick, G., K. Kleinbach, D. K. Boyd, S. A. Tomka,
and K. W. Kibler
1999 National Register Testing of I9 Prehistoric Archeological Sites at Fort Hood, Texas: The 1995 Season.
Archaeological Resource Management Series,
Research Report No. 37. United States Army, Fort
Hood, Texas.
Nordt, L. C.
1992 Archaeological Geology of the Fort Hood Military
Reservation Ft. Hood, Texas. Archeological Resource Management Series, Research Report No. 25.
United States Army, Fort Hood, Texas.
Simpson, D. B and R. J. Peterson
2004a Non-invasive Burial Determination using Nearsu1face Geophysical Survey and Soil Chemical Testing at Fort Hood, Texas and Camp Lejeune, North
Carolina. Archeological Resource Management
Series, Research Report No. 55. United States Army,
Fort Hood, Texas.
2004b Archaeo-Geophysical investigation of The Emmanuel
A.M.E. Church and Fonner Glasgow Street Location
of the Church Portsmouth, Virginia. Unpublished
report by AMEC Earth & Environmental, Louisville,
Kentucky, submitted to the Department of History,
Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia.
Somers, L., D. L. Maki, and J. A. Zeidler
2004 Geophysical Prospecting and Site Mitigation. In
Militm)· Impacts and Archaeological Site Mitigation
Methods at the Firebreak Site (41 CV595), Fort Hood,
Texas, edited by J. A. Zeidler, pp. 25-48. Archeological Resource Management Series, Research Report
No. 53. United States Army, Fort Hood, Texas.
Weymouth, J. W.
1986 Geophysical Methods of Archaeological Site Surveying. In Advances in Archaeological Method and
Theory, Vol. 9, edited by M. B. Schiffer, pp. 311-395.
Academic Press, New York.

A Geophysical View
Pueblo Escondido: Implications for
the Pithouse to Pueblo Transition
Jornada Mogollon
Eileen G. Emenwein

ABSTRACT
An early El Paso phase village in New Mexico's Tularosa Basin was examined with large-area geophysical surveys (covering 1.2 ha) and limited test excavations. Geophysical surveys included ground-penetrating
radar, magnetometry, magnetic susceptibility, and electrical conductivity. A key aspect of this project was the
use of large-area multi-sensor geophysical surveys, enabling a landscape scale perspective that is beyond the
reach of traditional archeological methods. Test excavations were conducted on a random sample of geophysical features in an attempt to verify interpretations and reveal greater archeological detail. Radiocarbon dates
suggest Pueblo Escondido has multiple components with the main occupation dating to the pithouse to pueblo
transition. All of this information culminated in a surprising reinterpretation of the site, with implications for
understanding the pithouse to pueblo transition in the Jomada Mogollon region. Many architectural details are
consistent with the pueblo period, including the size of domestic structures, their spatial arrangement, the large
size of the village, and the presence of kivas and middens. Yet, most and possibly all of the structures visible
in the geophysical maps are pit-rooms that do not share walls with their neighbors, rather than the anticipated
surface pueblo units. This suggests that most aspects of pueblo culture evolved during or before the transitional
period, prior to adoption of surface pueblo units as the dominant form of architecture. The eventual change to
surface pueblo units with shared walls was therefore only a minor one.

INTRODUCTION
The pithouse to pueblo transition has long been
a focal point of archeological inquiry in the Southwest, and the Jornada Mogollon region in southern
New Mexico and western Texas is no exception.
The Formative period (A.D. 200-1250) witnessed
a transformation to more formalized residential
settlements, from ephemeral huts to more formally
constructed rooms, terminating with surface rooms
or pueblos (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004). Although
some have lamented that excavations have been unduly focused on structures and their interiors, rather
than extramural areas (O'Laughlin 200la; Whalen
1994), architecture as artifact (Gilman 1987) has
been a useful point of reference for interpreting
changes in mobility, intensity of agriculture, and
social organization (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004).
Following Gilman (1987), Whalen (1994) and
O'Laughlin (200lb) interpret pithouses as indicative
of short-lived, seasonal, or intermittent occupations.
Pueblos, on the other hand, which emerge at the beginning of the El Paso phase (A.D. 1200), appear to

signify more permanent settlements associated with
intensified agriculture, although complete sedentism
probably never occurred (Carmichael 1990; Whalen
1994). Pueblo-style architecture, with surface rooms
arranged in rows and joined by shared adobe walls,
characterizes the majority of El Paso phase residential
sites. Various styles of pit structures have been documented for El Paso phase components (Kegley 1979;
Miller and Kenmotsu 2004; O'Laughlin 1999, 2001 a,
b; Scarborough 1989), however, suggesting that pitstructures still served a purpose, and that pueblos may
not have been the sole focus of habitation.
Although architecture can tell much about mobility and adaptation, excavations in the region have
been rare; thus, regional mobility models have relied
heavily on findings from surface survey (Carmichael
1990; Whalen 1994). Surface materials, where
visible, usually can aid in estimating site size and
chronological phase associations, but buried structures and features, which hold information about
mobility strategies, often have no surface expression
(Whalen 1990). In some cases systematic auguring
can reveal and even classify the kinds of subsurface

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

126

Texas Archeological Society

features that are present (Whalen 1990), but followup excavation is required to determine feature size,
shape, and other spatial details.
Geophysical methods offer a faster, more detailed solution to determining the architectural character of most archaeological sites because extensive
spatial detail is obtained prior to any excavation, and
portions of features can be pinpointed for excavation
to answer targeted questions. At Pueblo Escondido
(LA 458; FB9569) extensive geophysical survey,
paired with minimal test excavations, revealed subsurface architecture in considerable detail, allowing
a landscape scale view of the spatial organization
of the prehistoric occupation there. The geophysical maps and excavations depict a large village
organized much like an El Paso phase pueblo, but
composed mostly of shallow pit structures dating to
the late Dona Ana to early El Paso phases. Pueblo
Escondido, therefore, represents a link between pithouse and pueblo architectural traditions, suggesting
that the pithouse to pueblo transition in the region
was more gradual and occurred over a longer period
of time than previously thought.
Ground-penetrating radar, magnetometry,
magnetic susceptibility, and electrical conductivity
data were collected over a 1.2 hectare portion of the
Pueblo Escondido site in New Mexico's Tularosa Basin, near the northern border of the McGregor Range
of Fort Bliss (Figure 1a-b ). The geophysical maps
reveal at least six "rows" of quadrilateral structures
aligned primarily east-west, and several more isolated
structures and extramural features. Unlike previous

reports of pueblo-style rooms visible on the surface
at this site (Beckes et al. 1977; Hedrick 1967), most
of the structures identified in the geophysical maps,
and subsequently tested by excavations, are individual
pit structures, or "pit-rooms" arranged in east-west
rows. Pit-rooms are shallow quadrilateral dwellings
with similarities to both pithouses and pueblo surface
rooms. They have been documented at only a handful
of sites (Kegley 1979; Miller and Kenmotsu 2004;
O'Laughlin 1999; Scarborough 1989), and most are
single, isolated structures, not found in formal aggregations. Roughly linear arrangements of pithouses or
pit-rooms have only been documented in the Jornada
Mogollon region at Firecracker Pueblo, the Well site,
and Casa Blanca (O'Laughlin 1999, 200la, 200lb),
but these are not as neatly mranged as those discovered at Pueblo Escondido. The geophysical survey
has also identified what are interpreted as informal
patios surrounding structure rows. Pueblo Escondido
is unique in the Jornada Mogollon in terms of architecture and spatial layout and this has implications for
the pithouse to pueblo transition in the region.

SITE HISTORY
Pueblo Escondido (LA 458, FB9569, M410,
EPAS-15, the Escondida site) was first documented
in 1953 by the El Paso Archaeological Society
(Hedrick 1967). Since then it has been surveyed on
numerous occasions and limited excavations were
conducted in 1965 (Hedrick 1967) and 1975 (Beckes

~
.ii.

&!.
&!.

ti!

iii

~·

::i::
0
c::

'\.~

:~
&!. ~·

&,&Al.a.

A

ta.
.Ii.

A

.5

~

it:I

t "'A 't~
U\

/t

:. A<\,r;.

~

AA~~

~·~

~'¢

-=::::=:i@
a
Figure 1. Project location: (a) location of Pueblo Escondido in the Jornada Mogollon region; (b) outline of the geophysical survey area shown on a QuickBird satellite panchromatic image with 0.6 m spatial resolution, taken in 2003.

Ernenwein-A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido 127
et al. 1977). It has been described as a multi-room
pueblo having 60-80 rooms, with four visible parallel rows of rooms running east to west extending
over 4-5 ha. Surface surveys revealed discrete trash
middens with ash, lithics, and ceramics, hearths with
fire-cracked rock, and a few large adobe structural
remnants. Severe vandalism of visible rooms and
several pits and trenches were also noted (Beckes
et al. 1977; Hedrick 1967).
Excavations in 1965 uncovered a square adobe
room measuring about 5.7 m on a side (32.5 m 2),
with an average wall thickness of 34 cm (Hedrick
1967). The location of this excavation within the
site is unknown. Later excavations uncovered a
much larger rectangular adobe room measuring 9 .4
m east-west by 8.4 m north-south (79.0 m 2 ), with
exterior walls that were 35 cm thick, and an adjoining pueblo room to the east (Beckes et al. 1977).
These excavations took place about 20 m south of
the geophysical surveys described in this article.
One uncorrected radiocarbon date of A.D. 1260 ±
70 was obtained from a burned roof beam found in
this structure (Beckes et al. 1977).
During the 2003 geophysical survey, the site's
surface was paved with a dense spread of ceramics
and lithics, suggesting that wind erosion had greatly
deflated the site. In addition, despite earlier reports
of adobe structural remnants on the ground surface,
none were visible in 2003, further suggesting that
erosion has severely impacted the site.

THE FORMATIVE PERIOD
The recent regional synthesis by Miller and
Kenmotsu (2004) provides a useful framework
for local chronology and architectural change.
The Formative period in the Jornada Mogollon
is divided into the Mesilla (A.D. 200/400-1000),
Dofia Ana (A.D. 1000/1150-1250/1300), and El
Paso (A.D. 1250/1300-1450) phases (Miller and
Kenmotsu 2004). The Mesilla phase is marked by
population increase, the appearance of ceramics,
a high degree of residential mobility, and the first
large villages (greater than 3 ha in total extent)
(Whalen 1981 a, 1981 b). The following Dofia Ana
phase has both pithouses and pit-rooms (Miller and
Kenmotsu 2004). The appearance of pueblo habitations marks the beginning of the El Paso phase.
The transition from the Dofia Ana to the El Paso
phase (AD 1250-1300) represents the transition
from pithouse to pueblo architecture.

Architecture
There are four main categories of architecture
during the Formative period: huts, pithouses, pitrooms, and pueblos. Huts are small, shallow, informal, roughly circular shelters (Carmichael 1985;
Whalen 1994) used by highly mobile populations. In
general, early pithouses are circular and later forms
are sub-rectangular or square, but they are highly
variable in form and co-occur on sites (Miller and
Kenmotsu 2004). Over time pithouses became deeper,
larger, and generally more substantial, although a
clear lack of formality (i.e., time and energy invested
in construction) continued into the Late Formative
(Miller and Kenmotsu 2004). The first pit-rooms
appeared ca. A.D. 1000 as circular pithouses were
generally being replaced by rectangular structures,
and there was a marked increase in pit-rooms (and
a complementary decrease in traditional pithouses)
around A.D. 1150 (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004;
O'Laughlin 1985). Pit-rooms were much more formal and uniform in construction than pithouses and
were usually square, shallow, with prepared caliche
or adobe plastered floors, and occasionally plastered
walls (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004). In many ways
they were similar to surface adobe pueblo rooms and
may have been the precursor to pueblo architecture
(Miller and Kenmotsu 2004). Pit-rooms can be distinguished from surface adobe pueblos by the lack
of shared walls between dwellings and often their
smaller size (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004). Otherwise,
interior floor and sub-floor features are very similar
between these two architectural styles (Miller and
Kenmotsu 2004; O'Laughlin 1985). Around A.D.
1250-1300, the construction and occupation of pithouse structures had nearly come to an end and the
use of pit-rooms declined sharply, while the majority
of contiguous pueblo rooms and room blocks date to
A.D. 1300-1400. Limited use of pit-rooms continued
through the El Paso phase, however (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004; O'Laughlin 1985).

Settlement Layout
Early village layouts in the Mesilla and early
Dona Ana phases were characterized by central
clusters of pithouses surrounded by discrete activity
areas, dense trash middens, and a general absence of
extramural pits and hearths (Miller and Kenmotsu
2004; Whalen 1994). Later in the Dofia Ana phase
square or rectangular pithouses and pit-rooms were
arranged in central clusters surrounded by numer-

128

Texas Archeological Society

ous hearths and pits (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004).
Pueblo period villages also had complex and variable settlement layouts. The majority of pueblos
consisted of linear, east-west room blocks with occasional pit-rooms or pithouses distributed among
the blocks, forming linear plazas between rows, a
pattern exemplified by Hot Well Pueblo (Bentley
1993). Exceptions occurred along rivers where room
blocks are oriented parallel to waterways (Miller and
Kenmotsu 2004; O'Laughlin 1985). Plaza-oriented
pueblos are also known in this area (Browning 1991;
Lehmer 1948; Lekson and Rorex 1995). Typical El
Paso phase pueblos included a single large room
(over 25 m 2) for every six to 10 rooms. The large
room has been interpreted as a kiva or communal
room (O'Laughlin 1985), suggesting that the room
blocks were inhabited by lineage or corporate
groups (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004).

METHODS OF INVESTIGATION
Ground-penetrating radar (GPR), magnetometry, magnetic susceptibility (MS), and conductivity
data were collected at Pueblo Escondido over a 1.2
ha survey area (see Figure 1b ), with an additional
900 m 2 of magnetometry data collected to the northwest. Instrumentation and data density are described
in Table I. The majority of these data were collected
in 2003 (1 ha), with the remainder acquired during
the excavation phase of the project in 2005. Four
GPR depth slices (explained below) were created
and integrated with the other layers in a GIS.
Test excavations were designed to quantitatively evaluate the ability of geophysical data to
characterize the subsurface archeological deposits
while also minimizing site impacts in fulfillment of
Department of Defense requirements (see Kvamme

et al. 2006). Interpretations of each geophysical
map were digitized as polygons in GIS, and a random sample of these was subjected to excavation
using three shovel scrape trenches, 43 backhoe
trenches, and 28 augur holes. While this approach
was necessary for objective evaluation, it did not
allow targeted excavations of anomalies based on
specific research interests or hypotheses. Additionally, since the goal was to verify the presence or
absence of archeological features interpreted from
the geophysical maps, excavation was halted once
a feature was discovered. Features could not be
further explored with detailed hand excavation due
to time restrictions, thereby limiting archeological
interpretation. Nonetheless, the excavations helped
to verify the presence and nature of many dwellings and some of their construction details. Paul
Lukowski and Elia Perez of TRC Environmental
Corporation (El Paso, Texas) led the excavations
in cooperation with the author and other project
participants. Details of these excavations are described in Lukowski et al. (2006).

RESULTS
Ground-penetrating radar
GPR involves transmitting pulses of electromagnetic energy into the ground and measuring the
amount of energy reflected and the time taken for that
energy to reach the receiver (Conyers 2004; Gaffney
and Gater 2003; Kvamme 2001). Archeological
features and other subsurface objects and layers
produce reflections of varying strengths depending
on their properties and their contrast with surrounding
sediments. Depth can be estimated using reflection
two-way travel times and estimated velocity of

Table 1. Summary of geophysical survey parameters.
Method

Instrument

GPR

GSSI SIR2000 w/ 400 MHz
antenna and Survey Wheel
Geonics EM38
Geonics EM38
Geoscan FM36 (2003)
Geoscan FM256 (2005)

Conductivity
Magnetic Susceptibility
Magnetometry

Readings/m

Line spacing

40

0.5

4
4

0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

8
16

Ernenwein-A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido 129
wave travel (Conyers 2004). GPR data are recorded
in reflection profiles that are two dimensional
representations of the subsurface directly below
the antenna as it passes along the ground. A series
of closely spaced reflection profiles are typically
acquired for archeological applications, making it
possible to interpolate the data into three dimensional
cubes or horizontal slice maps (Goodman et al. 1995).
High amplitude reflections in the Pueblo Escondido
GPR data primarily indicate architectural components
such as floors and walls, but smaller and more
subtle reflections probably indicate pits and other
unclassified features.
Four horizontal depth slices were created that
represent subsurface reflections at approximately
9-15, 15-31, 31-47, and47-63 cm below the ground
surface. They offer a clear view of the settlement
layout within the confines of the 1.2 ha survey area
of this very large multi-component site. Although
reflections in the shallowest slice do not point to
many structures, thin lineations (in white) likely
represent adobe walls located in the uppermost 9
cm of the archeological deposits (Figure 2a). This
interpretation is based on the finding of an in situ
adobe wall when one of these reflection features
was tested. Slice 1 also shows the uppermost portions of a few of the shallowest dwellings, indicated with short horizontal arrows. The next slice
(Figure 2b) shows several quadrilateral dwellings
in a pattern of mostly east-west rows. A series of
tire marks, some indicated with diagonal arrows
in Figure 2b, are also apparent in these slices. Tire
marks are visible because vehicles have compacted
the ground, making it more reflective where tires
have passed.
Rows of structures (the ends of rows are
marked with diagonal arrows), interpreted by their
size and shape in comparison to excavated structures in nearby sites, are clearest in the third slice
(Figure 3a), which is the basis for interpretation of
six distinct household groups (A-F) discussed in
detail below. Household Groups A and C suggest
L-shaped plazas. Household Groups A, E, and F
appear to continue outside the geophysical survey
area. The fourth slice (Figure 3b) shows similar
patterns, as well as two other likely structures
(indicated by diagonal white arrows). Beginning
in the lower two slices, a pattern of lineations
surrounding some of the structure alignments is
apparent, suggesting extramural features related to
the dwellings. Some of these are pointed out with
horizontal arrows (Figure 3a-b).

Magnetic Susceptibility
Magnetic susceptibility (MS) refers to the
ability of a material to become magnetized in the
presence of an induced magnetizing field, such
as the Earth's (Clark 1996; Dalan 2006). MS was
measured using the in-phase component of induced
electromagnetic fields recorded with the EM-38B
(manufactured by Geonics, Ltd), which yields a very
shallow depth response of less than 0.5 m (Dalan
2006; McNeill 1986). Unlike magnetometry (see
below), which records the sum of all magnetism
(remnant and induced) to depths up to 1.5 m bs
(Kvamme 2006b), the MS data represent only the
induced component at very shallow depths. MS is
increased by pedogenesis, which is enhanced when
humans alter soil porosity through digging and add
organic waste (Dalan 2006). Humans also cause MS
to increase by raising soil temperature through firing or incorporation of burned or high MS materials
(Kvamme 2006b). A high MS at Pueblo Escondido
likely results from increased susceptibility due to
firing, concentrated settlement deposits, enhanced
soils, and adobe formed from topsoil (which tends
to possess a higher MS).
While the majority of architectural features
were identified with GPR, MS adds greatly to the
geophysical interpretations by showing that some of
the dwellings in Household Groups A, C, and D are
magnetically enhanced (Figure 4a), probably due
to burning or incorporation of burned material into
their floors or the overlying fill. The large stmcture
in Household Group A has magnetic enhancement
only around its perimeter, as does another dwelling
in that row to the east. The MS map also shows a pattern of lineations surrounding some of the structure
alignments, particularly around Household Groups
C and D, a pattern previously pointed out in the
two deepest GPR slices (see Figure 3a-b). A high
MS surrounding structure rows may represent areas
of activity where the ground has been repeatedly
disturbed through activities such as digging, mixing
adobe, processing food, and cooking, which would
enhance the MS. There are also many large high MS
anomalies that probably represent pithouses or other
large structures. Some of these are indicated on the
map with horizontal arrows (see Figure 4a).
Magnetometry
Magnetometry is a method of passively measuring magnetic fields, including the induced and

130

Texas Archeological Society

walls

a

+

@
-=~

20 m

b

Figure 2. GPR depth slices: (a) slice l (9-16 cm), horizontal arrows indicate shallow dwellings;
(b) slice 2 (15-31 cm), diagonal mrnws indicate tire marks on the ground surface.

remnant components. Remnant magnetic fields
are produced when a material is heated, creating
a field independent of external magnetizing fields
such as the Earth's (Clark 1996). Heating is a major
influence on both MS and magnetometry because it
not only enhances MS (see above) but also creates
thermoremanence (remnant magnetic fields created
by heat). Even small amounts of heating produce

some thermoremanence (Tite 1972), but if materials are heated beyond the Curie Point (around 600°
C, depending on the material) (Clark 1996), their
magnetic particles align with the Earth's magnetic
field and are "frozen" in that position upon cooling.
This makes them strongly magnetic, because of the
net effect of all the magnetic domains added together
(Kvamme 2006b). Magnetometry surveys can detect

Emenwein-A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido 131

a

0

0

Figure 3. GPR depth slices: (a) slice 3 (31-47 cm), with household groups A-F and
diagonal anows marking the ends of east-west and north-south structure rows; (b)
slice 4 (47-63 cm), with diagonal anows marking deeply buried features mentioned
in the text. Horizontal arrows in both images mark anomalies mranged linearly around
house rows.

many of the modifications that humans make to the
Earth's surface, including fire pits, burned houses,
large pieces of fired clay (bricks, whole pots),
earthen house walls, earthen mounds, ditches, pits,
many types of stone, and iron artifacts (Kvamme
2006b). Strong magnetic gradients at Pueblo Escon-

dido probably indicate burned features (i.e., burned
houses and fire pits).
Not surprisingly, the magnetometry data (see
Figure 3b) for the most part agree with the MS results. Structures in Household Groups A and C are
visible in both datasets, indicating burning as the

132

Texas Archeological Society

main cause (Figure 4b). Three additional structures
are indicated in the extra 900 m 2 in the northwest
(upper right), making Household Group A the longest continuous row of dwellings detected in the
survey area.
There are two important differences between
the MS and magnetometry data. Surprisingly, the

lineations surrounding structure rows are not well
indicated by magnetometry, suggesting that the
EM38B may be more sensitive to near-surface
induced magnetism. Although both instruments
are sensitive to MS, the EM38 is more sensitive
to shallow deposits due to its peak sensitivity at
about 0.2 m bs, with maximum depth penetration

+

@
l!lliC--~

20 m

b
Figure 4. Pueblo Escondido magnetic datasets: (a) magnetic susceptibility, with possible pithouses
indicated by horizontal arrows; (b) magnetometry, with probable burned houses indicated by horizontal anows. Household Groups are labeled A-F.

Emenwein-A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido 133
around 0.S m (Dalan 2006). These high MS features
are probably not related to in situ burning, but rather
to the accumulation of magnetically enhanced material such as household waste. In addition, the large
structure in Household Group A shows intramural
magnetic lineations while the MS detected only
the structure perimeter. The interior lineations are
therefore probably due to remnant magnetism alone
(which is not detected by the EM38 MS), most likely
from in situ burning. Indeed, excavations revealed
the burned remains of wooden roof or wall beams
in these locations.

Electrical Conductivity
Electrical conductivity is a measure of how
easily an electrical current will flow through a
material (Witten 2006), and can be measured using
an electromagnetic induction instrument such as
the Geonics EM38B used at Pueblo Escondido.
When an electrical current is passed through a
coil or loop, an electromagnetic field is created
(Witten 2006). If this EM field is close enough to
objects that are somewhat conductive, the applied
field will cause currents to flow in them, thereby
inducing a secondary electromagnetic field that is
measured by a receiver. This measures approximate
subsurface conductivity within the vicinity of the
instrument, down to about l .S m bs when the EM38
is operated in the vertical dipole mode (McNeill
1986). Electrical conductivity responds primarily
to differences in soil moisture, but also particle
size, and the amount of organic matter (McNeill
1980); thus, a variety of archeological features can
be detected. In desert environments such as the
Tularosa Basin, this method is limited by a general
lack of subsurface moisture. High conductivity
at Pueblo Escondido appears to indicate areas of
moisture retention, such as around bushes, but also
middens, which may retain moisture due to high
percentages of organic matter, clay, and adobe.
At first glance the conductivity maps (Figure
Sa) appear to show only geological or vegetation
patterns; indeed, some of the positive anomalies are
related to surface vegetation. Comparing these maps
to the known locations of dwellings from the other
geophysical data layers suggests that some of the
large, circular, high conductivity anomalies may be
middens. One of these is situated neatly between two
structures in Household Group A (Figure Sa) and is
also indicated on a 197S survey map that indicated
the possible presence of several middens and other

smface features (Beckes et al. 1977). Other similarly
shaped conductivity anomalies indicated in Figure
Sa, although not on the l 97S map, are also good
candidates for middens.

Geophysical Data Fusion
A host of data fusion algo1ithms are available for
combining multiple geophysical data layers in a single image, and one of the most powerful is multiple
logistic regression (Kvamme 2006a, 2007; Kvamme
et al. 2006). In the interest of isolating a single class
of anomalies that represent all possible archeological features, a binary logistic regression was used
to combine the Pueblo Escondido geophysical data
into one image. Training sites (portions of anomalies
known to represent archeological features) were selected in each geophysical map (except conductivity
data, which were not included). The following function was derived: L = - 7 .686 + .398*GPR slice 1 +
.002*GPR slice 2 + .960*GPR slice 3 + .099*GPR
slice 4 + .1S9*magnetometry + .S75"'MS
Since the geophysical maps were standardized,
the coefficients indicate how much each one contributed to fusion. GPR slice 3 (see Figure 3a) was the
most heavily weighted, followed by MS (see Figure
4a), GPR slice 1 (see Figure 2a), magnetometry (see
Figure 4b), GPR slice 4 (see Figure 3b), and finally
GPR slice 2 (see Figure 2b). A logistic transformation, p = (1 +exp(-L)t 1, transfonns the results to a 0-1
scale, where each pixel in the final image indicates the
probability that it is an anomaly like those chosen as
training sites (Figure Sb). This fusion serves as a fair
representation of the most important components of
the geophysical layers. (For a more detailed explanation of this and other data fusion method applied to
archeogeophysical data see Kvamme [2006a, 2007]
and Kvamme et al. [2006].)

Radiocarbon Dates
Five radiocarbon dates are available for Pueblo
Escondido. The first was a sample of charcoal from
a burned roof beam in an excavation north of the
geophysical survey area (Beckes et al. 1977). Four
new samples taken during the 200S excavations were
sent to Beta Analytic, and the original radiocarbon
date was recalibrated at that time. These dates are
discussed by Lukowski et al. (2006).
The five dates indicate a two-sigma calibrated
age range of A.D. 1010-1490 (Figure 6). Three
of these dates have calibrated intercepts of A.D.

134

Texas Archeological Society

@

-

20m

Figure 5. Electrical conductivity and data fusion results: (a) electrical conductivity with
197 5 surface map overlay after Beckes et al. (1977), and with possible middens indicated
by horizontal arrows; (b) fusion of GPR slices, magnetic susceptibility, and magnetometry
maps by binary logistic regression, with diagonal arrows marking the ends of house rows.
Household Groups are labeled A-F.

1280-1290, suggesting that the main occupation of
the site was during the transition between the Dofia
Ana and El Paso phases. The earliest date suggests
use of the site during the Dofia Ana phase, and the
latest suggests occupation into the late El Paso

phase. The ceramic assemblage collected during the
2005 excavations suggests that the major occupation
of the site was during the early El Paso phase, with
less intense occupations in the late Dofia Ana and
late El Paso phases (Lukowski et al. 2006).

Ernenwein-A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido 135

8202712

structure 7

8202713

--IDl--

structure 1 3 - { ) - - UTA feature 1

TX-2341

structure 4

8202711
820 2714 I

INTERPRETATIONS

El Paso ghase

Dona Ana ghase

--llJlllllllil!
llll!l---

-lllllllllllllllllllllJlllillll---

1000

1100

0 intercept

matrix near structure 22

1200
1300
Calibrated Years A.D.
11111-sigma range

-

1400

1500

2-sigma range

Figure 6. Calibrated radiocarbon dates with one and twosigma ranges and calibration intercepts. Phase dates after
Miller and Kenmotsu (2004). See Figure 7 for sample
locations.

Interpretations of the spatial character of the
Pueblo Escondido site are presented in Figure 7.
This figure uses the logistic regression fusion (see
Figure Sb) as a base layer, with vector overlays of
the 1975 surface map (see Figure Sa) (Beckes et al.
1977), principal geophysical anomalies delineated
and numbered (features are prefixed with "f' and
structures are boldly numbered), selected excavation units (white rectangles), and radiocarbon dates
and locations. Structure size and related details are
given in Table 2.
GPR slice maps were the primary source of information for delineation of structures and features,

©

0
@

@

©"AD1280-1300/@r
@

(8-202713)

0
©

Figure 7. Interpretive map with the regression fusion (see Figure Sb) as a background. Excavation units, radiocarbon
dates, surface features from 1975 (Beckes et al. 1977), and the major structures and features are labeled.

Texas Archeological Society

136

Table 2. Summary of Structures.
Structure
No.

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

Length (m)
north-south

Width (m)
east-west

Area
(m2)

Household
Group

5.6
5.8
5.8
8.6
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.5
6.4
4.4
4.4
4.8
4.1
4.7
6.6
6.1
8
4.5
4.7
8.1
7.5
6
6
6.5
5.5
7.5
7.6
4.4
3
5.6
5.2

5.4
5.4
5.5
9.9
5.7
5.4
5.5
5.3
5.9
5
5
4.7
4.9
4.5
4.4
6.5
8
4.4
5
9
7
5.8
6.2
5.5
5
8.4
8.2
4.6
3.1
5.8
4.8

30.24
31.32
31.9
85.14
32.49
30.78
31.35
29.15
37.76
22.0
22.0
22.56
20.09
21.15
29.04
39.65
64.0
19.8
23.5
72.9
52.5
34.8
37.2
35.8
27.5
63.0
62.32
20.24
9.3
32.48
24.96

A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A

5.8

5.8

35.4

A
B
B

c
c
c
c
c
c
c
c
D
D
D
D
D
E
E
E
E
F
F
F

Excavation
units

Cl4 date,
1-0 calibrated

Ml, M2, SSl

AD 1250-1300

MS
M8

AD 1410-1450

M35
M28
M29

AD 1280-1300

M39

M40
M23
M24, M41

Ml6
Ml7
Ml9
M43
M38
Ml3

-

Mean
Size

with the exception of Structures 1-3 where only
magnetometry data were available. The geophysical
maps show at least 32 quadrilateral structures, four
with possible adobe walls, 18 large features (including many ovoid pithouses), at least two large middens, and countless small features dotting structure
perimeters. Quadrilateral structures are arranged in

the cardinal directions with spaces between them
exceeding the width of typical adobe walls for the
region, indicating that many of the structures are
physically isolated from their neighbors and, unlike
typical El Paso phase pueblos, did not share walls.
Excavations revealed that most of these quadrilateral
structures are pit-rooms rather than surface pueblo

Emenwein-A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido 137
rooms, but some variation in construction style exists across the site. Six different household groups,
labeled A-F and identified solely by structure proximity, are described below.
Household Group A
Household Group A consists of nine structures
interpreted as pit-rooms arranged in an L-shape
with at least two possible middens and seven other
features in the vicinity (see Figure 7). Excavations
of Structures 4, 7, and 8 clearly show that they
are in shallow pits. Additionally, geophysical
anomalies (mostly GPR) show that the minimum
spacing between structures ranges from 0.6 to 1.4
m. This implies that the structures did not share
walls, which are typically 30-35 cm thick in this
region (Hedrick 1967; Lehmer 1948; O'Laughlin
1999, 200la). The arrangement of Structures 1-7
is symmetrical, with three roughly equally-sized
structures on both sides of a large probable kiva
or communal room. Magnetometry data suggest
that Structures 1-4 and 7 were heavily burned, and
Structure 8 was partially burned, while all others
in this group were not. Excavations confirm this
for Structures 4, 7, and 8. Features fl-f7 were not
excavated and are difficult to interpret because they
do not have shapes indicative of specific feature
types. Their shapes suggest that they are pithouses,
portions of pit-rooms, or other features.
Structure 4 was excavated with three separate
trenches, revealing that the pit-room had several 6 cm
diameter burned timbers resting on the floor. It is the
largest structure in the entire survey area. The timbers
coincide with linear magnetometry anomalies (see
Figure 4b) and they are probably the remains of roof
support beams that fell to the floor when the structure
burned. One of the beams was radiocarbon-dated
to AD 1250-1300 (1-sigma calibrated range; Beta202711) (see Figure 6). The pit-room floor was 40
cm bs, with patches of charcoal and adobe. The floor
slopes up on the edges to form a shallow basin 20-30
cm deep (Figure 8a-b), but no evidence of formal
floor or wall preparation was found.
Structures 7-8 are very similar to Structure
4 in contents and construction. In Structure 7,
the 35-40 cm deep floor was covered by a 10-15
cm zone of charcoal and ash-enriched sediment
with pieces of adobe. The floor is situated in a
shallow basin, whose edges are very clear due to
intense burning. Structure 8 had very similar fill
and an abrupt boundary between the basin and

b

Figure 8. Excavation unit M2, exposing the north edge of
Structure 4 (see Figure 7): (a), drawing; (b) photograph.
The two large charcoal pieces are burned timbers, probably
the remains of roof or wall supports.

the surrounding matrix; excavations were not
continued down to floor level in the interest of
preserving it for future work. Charcoal collected
from the fill of Structure 7 yielded a radiocarbon
date of AD 1410-1450 (I -sigma calibrated range,
Beta-202712) (see Figure 6). This date is much
later than that obtained from Structure 4, but the
two dates overlap in the 2-sigma range (see Figure
6). It is unclear if these two dates represent two
different phases of construction within this row of
structures, or if they simply bracket its age range
(Lukowski et al. 2006). The later date, if reliable,
suggests that pit-room architecture was used well
into the late El Paso phase. The similarity of
anomalies representing Structures 4, 7, and 8 to the
unexcavated structures in this group suggests they
are all shallow, closely-spaced pit-rooms built in a
pueblo-style arrangement.
Household Group B
Household Group B is the only exclusively
north-south arrangement of structures at Pueblo
Escondido, and contains only two structures and
two adjacent features (see Figure 7). Structure l 0
was found to be another pit-room, with a compacted
sandy floor 15-25 cm bs and a basin edge that rises
to within a few cm of the surface. Structure 11 is
similar in size, shape, and geophysical properties,
suggesting that it is also a pit-room.

138

Texas Archeological Society

Household Group C
Household Group C is a second L-shaped arrangement of structures with a communal room
located near the center of the east-west row (see
Figure 7). The structures themselves, however, are
considerably different than those in Household
Group A. Structures 15-16 are closely spaced and
could represent two rooms separated by an interior
partition. Excavation along the western edge of
Structure 15 revealed the only clear in situ adobe
wall discovered during the excavations. The wall
was less than 15 cm bs, 10 cm high, and 20-30 cm
thick. Excavation was halted, however, before the
structure floor was reached so it is impossible to
tell whether Structure 15 is a surface pueblo room
or some form of pit-room. The presence of intact
adobe walls and the close proximity to Structure 16
suggests that these two structures may have been
adjoined, perhaps as surface adobe rooms with an
interior partition wall. Alternatively, Structure 16
may have been built after Structure 15 was abandoned, partially destroying the older one. The two
structures could also be separate pit-rooms. The
shallowest GPR depth slice (see Figure 2a) shows
the adobe wall and other similar anomalies interpreted to be adobe walls.
All other structures in this east-west row are
spaced farther apart and resemble the structures of
Household Group A in terms of their geophysical
anomalies. Excavation of Structure 19 identified a
burned, hard-packed, possibly plastered floor 35 cm
bs overlaid by complex structure fill similar to that
found in the burned structures in Household Group
A. No basin edge or wall was found, but the floor
and structure fill are absent from the southern 20
cm of the excavation trench. Structures 17-19 are
interpreted as pit-rooms based on distances between
them, which range from 0.5-1.5 m.
Structures 12-13 are closely spaced with each
other and in relation to Structure 15, and may be
more like surface adobe rooms than pit-rooms. The
evidence, however, is inconclusive. Excavation of
Structure 13 encountered rich cultural fill including
numerous charcoal pieces, burned wood, ash,
chipped stone, ground stone, and ceramic artifacts
(Lukowski et al. 2006). Excavation stopped before
the floor was reached, and as the trench did not
extend outside of the structure wall construction
details could not be determined. Some of the
charcoal was used to obtain a radiocarbon date of AD
1280-1300 (I-sigma calibrated range; Beta-202713)

(see Figure 6). This structure, therefore, most likely
dates to the transitional period between the Dona
Ana and El Paso phases, or later in the El Paso phase
if the 2-sigma calibrated age range is considered.
Excavation of Structure 12, located 40-50 cm to the
south, surprisingly revealed no evidence of a house
or of any cultural features. It was excavated to 42
cm bs-well below the estimated depth of the GPR
reflections that illustrated the structure's presence
and distinctive quadrilateral shape (see Figure 2b ).
The lack of tangible evidence for the structure in the
ground does not imply that it does not exist-the
geophysical evidence is firm (see Figures 3a and
Sb )-but simply suggests that it does not possess
properties visible to the human eye.

Household Group D
Household Group D consists of five quadrilateral structures aligned east-west (see Figure 7).
Structures 20-21 are close together, suggesting a
two-room pueblo unit. Fine lineations visible in
GPR slice 1 (see Figure 2a; shown in black in Figure 5) may represent adobe walls on the west and
north sides of Structure 20. Yet, unit M23 extended
15 cm east of Structure 20 and did not uncover a
wall or any part of Structure 21. Excavation within
Structure 20 found only a subtle basin-shaped
depression filled with lenses of fine sand. Excavation of Structure 21 encountered a rich cultural fill,
including bone, charcoal, and corn cob fragments.
Excavation was stopped in both units at 30-35 cm
bs. Unit M41 showed that the cultural fill is absent
outside the geophysical anomaly, but no evidence of
a wall or basin edge was found.
Structures 20-21 are separated from Structures
22-24 by at least l. l m, and the shape of the anomaly
defining Structure 23 suggests a wall may connect it with Structure 22 (see Figure 7). Structures
20-22 coincide with a surface feature mapped in
1975 (Beckes et al. 1977), but which was no longer
visible in 2003. Beckes et al. (1977) describe this
feature as a distinct rectangular mound suggestive of
structural remnants. These structures could represent
the latest preserved component of the site, which
was partially visible on the surface in 1975 but has
since been weathered and eroded. To the north of
Structure 22, unit M26 was placed to test the linear
string of anomalies visible in GPR and MS (see
Figure 7). A lens of ash-filled sediment was found,
with charcoal flecks above it, suggesting use of fire
in this area. Charcoal from 3 cm bs was radiocarbon

Ernenwein-A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido 139
dated to AD 1030-1210 (I-sigma calibrated range,
Beta-202714). This is the earliest date for the site,
and may indicate that nearby structures date to the
Dofia Ana phase. Structures 20-24, however, are
closely spaced and are more characteristic of later
pueblo-style architecture.
Feature 14 is situated 4.5 m southwest of Structure 24 (see Figure 7) and was strongly indicated by
MS, but also partially by GPR and magnetometry. Its
shape is more round than quadrilateral, suggesting a
pithouse or extramural feature. Unit M42 intersected
its northern edge and encountered a probable sandy
clay floor and two possible post molds. This feature
is probably a pithouse based on its shape and rich
cultural fill.

Household Group E
Household Group E consists of five widelyspaced quadrilateral structures and two additional
features (see Figure 7). Structures 25-27 are slightly
more formally shaped than surrounding dwellings,
and could represent isolated surface rooms or formally constructed pit-rooms. The 15 cm deep, 5 cm
thick, clay floor of Structure 25 was more characteristic of pueblo than pithouse construction. Seven
m to the east, unit Ml 7 revealed a possible adobe
wall 5 cm above the 35 cm deep floor of Structure
26. The area where the floor would presumably meet
the wall was indistinct. GPR slices 3-4 (see Figure
3) show thin lineations on the north, west, and east
sides of Structure 26, which are interpreted as adobe
walls (see Figure 7). Excavation of Structure 27
identified a section of an adobe floor buried 20 cm
bs, interpreted as a remnant of a poorly preserved
surface room or pit-room.
Structure 28 lies 19.2 m east of Structure 27,
and clearly continues outside the geophysical survey
area (see Figure 7). Excavation exposed rich cultural
fill, including two hearths, but the floor was not
exposed and no evidence of wall construction was
found. This structure is very similar to Structures
10-11 and 18-19. To the north, Structure 29 is a relatively small isolated structure revealed by GPR slice
3 (see Figure 3a), with a magnetometry anomaly
near the center suggesting a central hearth (see Figure 4b). Excavations uncovered a compact silt-clay
floor with a small, centrally-located collared hearth
20 cm bs (Figure 9). A mano fragment and other
artifacts were recovered from the fill.
Features 15-16 are probably pithouses or some
form of structural features that were later used as trash

Figure 9. Collared hearth after contents excavated, Unit
M38.

pits. Feature 15 contained charcoal, lithics, pottery,
ground stone, fire-cracked rock, and faunal remains
to a depth of 65 cm in the western half of trench M34.
Excavation ceased before a floor was found, and
there was no evidence of wall construction. Situated
between Structures 27 and 28, the group of small
anomalies labeled Feature 16 (see Figure 7) probably
represents structural remains and midden fill. Unit
M27 uncovered a large ash and charcoal concentration and soil stain in the western half of the trench,
although excavation did not continue below 30 cm bs.
The 1975 map (Beckes et al. 1977) depicts surface
evidence for a large midden in this area.

Household Group F
Household Group F consists of three quadrilateral structures aligned east-west that clearly
continue outside the survey area, and two small
semi-circular features interpreted as pithouses (see
Figure 7). Features 17-18 are similar in size and
shape based on strong MS anomalies (see Figure
4a), and all four GPR slices show Feature 18. In
addition, the 1975 surface map (Beckes et al. 1977)
suggests large middens over these two features.
Excavation of Feature 18 found dense cultural fill
including faunal remains, charcoal, pottery, and
lithics. Excavation was stopped at 40 cm bs, above
the anticipated feature floor. No evidence of wall
construction was found. These features are probably
pithouses, and may have been converted to trash pits
after they were abandoned.
Structures 30-32 are similar in size and spacing
to Structures 5-7, with a 60-90 cm separation between structure anomalies (see Figure 7). GPR slices

140

Texas Archeological Society

2-3 showed the outlines of these structures, and the
1975 map (Beckes et al. 1977) indicated surface expression of Structures 30-31. Two small anomalies
in GPR slice 3 (see Figure 3a) are situated along the
east-west midline of this structure, suggesting they
are post holes. In addition, a strong magnetometry
anomaly in the central area suggests a hearth (see
Figure 4b). One of these post holes and a central
hearth were found in excavation unit M13.

Community Pattern
The overall layout of Pueblo Escondido within
the confines of the geophysical survey area is reminiscent of an El Paso phase pueblo, yet most of the
dwellings are spaced too far apart to have shared
walls and are more accurately described as pitrooms. Structures 12-13, 15-16, 18-19, and 20-24
are possible pueblo rooms, but excavations did not
confirm or reject this notion. Structures 25-27 are
more formally constructed than others, but are even
more widely spaced than the confirmed pit-rooms of
Household Group A. The majority of quadrilateral
dwellings were constructed in shallow pits, with
gaps ranging from 0.5-2 m between them. Aboveground wall construction is elusive, but adobe walls
may have been used based on the two known walls
from Structures 15 and 26. A series of "features"
are scattered about the site that probably represent
pithouses, some of which were turned into dumping areas as indicated by their fill and the 197 5 map
(Beckes et al. 1977). Finally, a pattern of communal
rooms or kivas is suggested in Household Groups
A and C. In both cases a structure at least twice
as large as others is situated near the center of an
east-west row. Perhaps not coincidentally, these two
groups of households are also L-shaped, whereas all
other groupings appear to be linear. The communal
rooms jut south toward the interior of presumed
plazas, suggesting a more community-oriented way
of life, and therefore suggesting a more sedentary
lifestyle than other household groups that lack kivas
and plazas. Linear plazas may exist between closely
spaced east-west rows, such as the areas between
Household Groups C, D, and E.
Another compelling pattern evident in the
geophysical maps (predominantly MS and GPR, but
also magnetometry) is a series of small geophysical
features surrounding structure rows at a distance
of 2-4 m. In some cases they run together to
form lineations (for example, north of Structures
20-24, see Figure 3b), while in other areas they are

distinctly discrete (surrounding Structure 25, for
example, see Figures 3a and 7). Prior to excavations,
these anomalies were interpreted to be remnants
of patios or working areas associated with nearby
dwellings, containing various pits, hearths, other
work-related features, and perhaps post holes to
support shade ramadas. Only two out of nine of
these anomalies showed clear evidence of cultural
features in excavations. Three of the others contained
soil stains, but no recognizable cultural materials.
Despite this, the interpretation is retained that
these anomalies represent intensively used space,
probably for cooking and other domestic activities.
In the 19th century, the Hopi reportedly used small
pits near houses for cooking (Mindeleff 1891), and
adobe patios dense with adobe-lined cooking and
mixing pits were documented at the NAN Ruin
in the neighboring Mimbres region (Shafer and
Drollinger 1998). Furthermore, human activities
such as soil disturbance and incorporation of fired
materials tend to enhance MS (Dalan 2006), and it
is these data that show the pattern most prominently.
It is quite feasible that traces of concentrated
human activity such as plant processing, cooking,
and adobe mixing are present within a buffer zone
surrounding dwellings, and that these traces are not
visible to the human eye when excavated. It is also
unclear why the anomalies seem to be concentrated
2-4 m from dwellings, while the area immediately
surrounding the structures is relatively "clean"
and characterized by average to low values in MS,
magnetometry, and GPR. This pattern has been
noted elsewhere, most notably at nearby Firecracker
Pueblo, where extramural features and trash are
distributed roughly in bands adjacent to structures,
with an area immediately surrounding structures that
is fairly clear of features (O'Laughlin 2001 b).

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS
The predominance of pit-rooms at Pueblo Escondido is unique and warrants further discussion.
Only a handful of pit-rooms have been documented
in the published archeological literature and most
sites contain isolated rooms that are not oriented in
rows as at Pueblo Escondido. Hueco Tanks (Kegley 1979), Meyer Pithouse Village (Scarborough
1989), The Well site (O'Laughlin 1999), Loop
375 41EP2724, and Dofia Ana Airport (Miller and
Kenmotsu 2004), each contain one to four isolated
pit-rooms ranging in size from 4.6 m 2 to just over

Emenwein-A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido 141
20 m 2 . At the fully-excavated Well site, three small,
widely separated pit-rooms (8.5-13 m 2) were later
incorporated into a linear arrangement of contiguous pueblo rooms characteristic of El Paso phase
architecture (O'Laughlin 1999).
Two recently described sites have architecture
and spatial patterns more similar to Pueblo Escondido. At Casa Blanca, an El Paso phase pueblo located
in Mexico, 62 km south of El Paso, Texas, the earliest component consists of three small, quadrilateral
pithouses arranged informally in an east-west row
with 1-2 m between them (O'Laughlin 2001a). A
second component is comprised of two small, isolated, partially subterranean pithouses, one directly
beneath and aligned with a later surface room. All
of these "pithouses" fit within the description of
pit-rooms. The latest and most extensive component
includes 16-17 contiguous El Paso phase surface
rooms (O'Laughlin 200la).
The second example of pit-room architecture
and settlement layout is found at Firecracker Pueblo
in northeast El Paso, Texas (O'Laughlin 2001 b ).
Firecracker Pueblo is a moderately-sized but shortlived El Paso phase pueblo that overlies 17-18 pitrooms and pithouses (O'Laughlin 200lb). Many of
the pithouses are shallow and rectangular, fitting the
description of pit-rooms. Most significantly, Firecracker Pueblo has an informal linear arrangement
of 11 mostly shallow, narrow, rectangular, widelyspaced pithouses (O'Laughlin 200lb). One of them
was dated to A.D. 1250-1300 (one sigma calibrated
range, O'Laughlin 2001b:l23), which is comparable
with three of the dates from Pueblo Escondido, and
overlaps with all of them in the two-sigma range.
Most of the other radiocarbon dates, from isolated
pithouses and contiguous pueblo units, are clustered
around AD 1400-1600, suggesting that the linear
pithouse arrangement was a precursor to contiguous
surface rooms.
Pueblo Escondido's architecture and spatial
patterns bare some similarity to the pit-rooms at
both Casa Blanca and Firecracker Pueblo. Each site
contains shallow pithouses or pit-rooms arranged in
east-west rows, with generous gaps between them
indicating that walls were not shared. They also
contain a few isolated pit-rooms that are widely
separated from other dwellings. Yet, Pueblo Escondido differs in many other respects, and this is abundantly clear by the scaled comparison of the three
sites (Figure lOa-c ). First, structure arrangement
at Pueblo Escondido is much more formal (Figure
lOa). At Casa Blanca, each of the three pit-rooms is

oriented at a slightly different angle (Figure 1Ob),
while the Firecracker Pueblo pithouses are basically
parallel, but are offset several m from each other
along the long axis of the row (Figure lOc, upperleft). In contrast, the majority of Pueblo Escondido's
pit-rooms align neatly with their neighbors and their
northern edges follow a common line, implying that
these were built for a more sedentary lifestyle. The
Firecracker Pueblo pit-rooms are also elongated
rectangles, whereas those at Casa Blanca and Pueblo
Escondido are nearly square.
Another dramatic difference is the size of
structures at these three sites. The three east-west
oriented pit-rooms at Casa Blanca range from 2.4
to 2.7 m per side, for an average area of 6.3 m2
(O'Laughlin 200la) (see Figure lOb). The east-west
aligned pithouses at Firecracker Pueblo have floor
areas between 6 and 10.9 m2 (O'Laughlin 200lb) (see
Figure lOc). In contrast, the approximate floor area
of pit-rooms at Pueblo Escondido range from 9-85
m2 , with the majority between 20 and 40 m2 . In fact,
these are more similar to the size of smface rooms at
Firecracker Pueblo (O'Laughlin 2001 b ), the Well site
(O'Laughlin 1999), previously excavated structures at
Pueblo Escondido (Beckes et al. 1977; Hedrick 1967),
and other pueblos in the region (Lehmer 1948).
Finally, Pueblo Escondido's community pattern
is somewhat unique. For the most part the site is
arranged much like a typical El Paso phase pueblo
with east-west oriented rows of dwellings. Two of
the Household groupings (A and C) are L-shaped
and include one considerably larger structure near
the center of the northern row. These patterns are
known from El Paso phase surface pueblos, but not
for pit-rooms (Miller and Kenmotsu 2004). There
is also evidence of patios or heavily used areas immediately surrounding the majority of dwellings at
Pueblo Escondido. This extramural pattern has not
been described for other sites in the Jornada Mogollon region, but the absence may be due to a lack
of excavation and the fact that, at least at Pueblo
Escondido, they are often not visible to the human
eye or could be confused with non-archeological
deposits. Limited excavations of extramural space
at Casa Blanca did reveal three small pits, 35-70
cm wide, located within 5 m of pit-rooms as well as
three small post holes about 2 m east of a pit-room
that were interpreted to be support posts for a shade
ramada (O'Laughlin 200la). A pattern of concentrated extramural features and trash was also found
at Firecracker pueblo (O'Laughlin 200 lb), but the
overall spatial arrangement of these features is un-

Texas Archeological Society

142

a

OOC:,

o~

0
0

D
CJ

OD

CJ

~

b

~
c

DO

D

·-'CJ.
~o

~.·
i~·,
c .

v

~ 9
•

0 •

00

qi .

0
0

•

o

~

v

·~
o.

rD

0

a;OV
Cl'·

,,_,.,.~

0 ()---'-'"'

r<OO·v c(5b

'111

/\X'\'Q -

o

~~

•olo

0

(jq

(\l. ,
o. \-)

0. O -O
""o

o•

11111111111111111

®

1\111
~'-'
0

Figure 10. Same-scaled comparison of: (a) Pueblo Escondido (from Figure 7); (b) Casa Blanca, with pithouses shaded
dark gray and pueblos white (adapted from O'Laughlin 200la); (c) Firecracker Pueblo, with pithouses shaded black,
pueblos shaded gray, and other features shaded white (adapted from O'Laughlin 200lb).

clear due to the complex superposition of pithouses
and pueblo units over time. In the neighboring
Mimbres region adobe-paved work surfaces have
been found bordering Classic Mimbres structures
(Shafer and Drollinger 1998). They contain small
(18-20 cm), shallow (2-33 cm) pits used mostly for
mixing adobe, but also for containing fire (Shafer
and Drollinger 1998). The proposed work areas at
Pueblo Escondido could be very similar to those
documented in the Mimbres region.
Architecture has long been used to gauge residential mobility in the Southwest. One school of
thought suggests that architecture changed abruptly
from pithouses to pueblos, which implies a drastic
change in social or environmental conditions that
required a new residential strategy (Gilman 1987).
The Pueblo period in the Jornada Mogollon region

is characterized by increases in area population,
reliance on cultivated plants, settlement system
specialization, and larger residential unit sizes
and villages (Whalen l 981a). Pueblo Escondido
embodies the majority of these characteristics,
but lacks classic surface adobe architecture. The
pit-rooms are very similar to contiguous surface
pueblo rooms in size, shape, dimension, arrangement, and formality, indicating more sedentary
strategies compared to earlier pithouse villages.
Two of the household groups form L-shaped plazas
that include large communal rooms or kivas, which
would have fostered the kind of social integration
required for increased agricultural specialization.
The site also contains a handful of moderate-sized
middens, suggesting at least some degree of sedentism (burials, if they exist, were intentionally

Ernenwein-A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido 143
avoided by halting excavation at or above house
floors). The fact that Pueblo Escondido lacks surface rooms with shared adobe walls implies that
architectural style alone is not a reliable indicator
of residential mobility in the Jornada Mogollon.
Pit-rooms are no less an indicator of short-term
occupation than surface pueblo units.
The current results from Pueblo Escondido
provide a rare opportunity to comment on the use
of architecture as a means of interpreting changes
in mobility, intensity of agriculture, and social organization. Whalen (1981b) showed that pithouse
villages gradually became more organized over
time, as evidenced by the increased clustering of
similarly-constructed dwellings. The change from
individual households to groups of pithouses is a
logical precursor to pueblos (Whalen 1981 b ), where
larger residential groups were more advantageous
for the practice of intensified agricultural subsistence
strategies in the Pueblo period (Whalen 1981 a). This
suggests that the appearance of pueblos was not such
a dramatic change, since the use of larger residential
groups emerged during the Pithouse period (Whalen
1981 b ). Indeed, Pueblo Escondido suggests that
the appearance of pueblos was culturally trivial, as
most or all of the characteristics of the Pueblo period appeared before pueblo architecture had been
constructed at Pueblo Escondido.
Such a conclusion is, of course, limited by a lack
of precise dates for the myriad architectural styles in
the region and a dearth of spatial data at other sites
showing community pattern and use of extramural
space. This study of Pueblo Escondido underscores
the power of large-scale geophysical survey paired
with test excavations, enabling a landscape perspective (Kvamme 2003). The geophysical data provided
primary information about site content and organization at a scale beyond the reach of traditional archeological methods. Pueblo Escondido was previously
known as a typical El Paso phase pueblo suffering
from a history of severe erosion and looting (Beckes
et al. 1977; Hedrick 1967), but we now know that it
is a well preserved, multi-component site with much
yet to say about the pithouse to pueblo transition in
the Jornada Mogollon region.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

form of this article. Timothy K. Perttula and Chet
Walker also provided helpful editorial comments.
Geophysical surveys were conducted by the author
along with Ken Kvamme and Mike Hm·grave, with
assistance from University of Arkansas students Terri
Bruce, Sara H. Gale, Aaron Gunn, Jason T. Herrmann,
Christine J. Markussen, Elsa Heckman McMakin, and
Alicia Valentino. Excavations were conducted by
Paul Lukowski and Elia Perez ofTRC Environmental
Corporation. Margaret Berrier, archivist for the El
Paso Archaeological Society, generously provided
photographs documenting previous surveys and
excavations at Pueblo Escondido. Thanks to Sue
Sitton for facilitating repeated visits to Fort Bliss. This
research was made possible by a grant awarded to the
Center for Advanced Spatial Technologies (CAST)
and Department of Anthropology, University of
Arkansas, from the Strategic Environmental Research
and Development Program, U.S. Department of
Defense, with Principal Investigators Kenneth L.
Kvamme and W. Fredrick Limp.

REFERENCES CITED
Beckes, M. R., D. S. Dibble, and M. D. Freeman
1977 A Cultural Resource Inventory and Assessment of
McGregor Guided Missile Range, Otero County,
Nevv Mexico. Research Report No. 65. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.
Bentley, M. T.
1993 Hot Well Village and Reservoir: A Preliminary Overview. The Artifact 31(2):1-32.
Browning, C. B.
1991 El Paso Phase Structural Sites in the Southern San
Andres Mountains, New Mexico. In Jornada Mogollon Archaeology: Collected Papers from the Fifth
and Sixth Jornada Mogollon COl~ferences, edited
by M. S. Duran and P.H. Beckett, pp. 17-33. COAS
Publishing and Research and Human Systems Research, Las Cruces, New Mexico.
Carmichael, D. L.
1985 Transitional Pueblo Occupation on Dofia Ana Range,
Fort Bliss, New Mexico. In Views of the Jomada
Mogollon: Proceedings of the Second Jornada Mog·
ollon Archaeology Conference, edited by C. M.
Beck. pp. 45-53. Contributions in Anthropology No.
12. Eastern New Mexico University, Portales.
1990

I am grateful to Ken Kvamme and LmTy Conyers
for sharing their wisdom with me over the years and
proving comments that greatly benefited the final

Patterns of Residential Mobility and Sedentism in the
Jornada Mogollon Area. In Perspectives on South·
western Prehistory, edited by P. E. Minnis and C. L.
Redman, pp. 122-134. Westview Press, Boulder.

144

Texas Archeological Society

Clark, A.
1996 Seeing Beneath the Soil. Batsford, London.

Kvamme, K. L., E.G. Ernenwein, M. L. Hargrave, T. Sever,
D. Harmon, F. Limp, B. Howell, M. Koons, and J. Tullis
2006 New Approaches to the Use and Integration of

Conyers, L. B.
2004 Ground-Penetrating Radar.for Archaeology. AltaMira
Press, Walnut Creek, California.
Dalan, R. A.
2006 Magnetic Susceptibility. In Remote Sensing in

Archaeology: An Explicitly North American Perspective, edited by J. K. Johnson, pp. 161-203.
University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
Gaffney, C. and J. Gater
2003 Revealing the Buried Past, Geophysics for Archaeologists. Tempus Publishing, Ltd., Gloucestershire.
Gilman, P. A.
1987 Architecture as Artifact: Pit Structures and Pueblos
in the American Southwest. American Antiquity
52(3):538-564.
Goodman, D., Y. Nishimura, and J. D. Rogers
1995 GPR Time-Slices in Archaeological Prospection.
Archaeological Prospection 2:85-89.
Hedrick, M. J. A
1967 Escondida Survey. The Artifact 5(2): 19-24.

Multi-Sensor Remote Sensing for Historic Resource
Identification and Evaluation. Strategic Environmental Resource Development Program (SERDP),
Washington, D.C.
Lehmer, D. J.
1948 The Jornada Branch of the Mogollon. University of
Arizona Social Science Bulletin No. 17. University
of Arizona, Tucson.
Lekson, S. H. and A. S. Rorex
1995 The Cottonwood Spring and Indian Tank Sites. The
Artifact 33(2):9-36.
Lukowski, P. D., E. Perez, M. L. Hargrave, K. L. Kvamme,
and E. G. Ernenwein
2006 Ground-Truthing Remote Sensing Data at the

Escondida Site (La 458), Otero County, Neiv
Mexico. Engineer Research and Development Center
Construction Engineering Research Laboratory,
Champaign, Illinois.
McNeill, J. D.
1980 Electrical Conductivity of Soils and Rocks. Technical
Note TN-5. Geonics, Ltd., Mississauga, Ontario.
1986

Kegley, G. B.
J979 Excavations at Hueco Tanks State Park: A Summary and Some Implications. In Jomada Mogollon

Archaeology: Proceedings of the First Jornada Mogollon Conference, edited by P.H. Beckett and R. N.
Wiseman, pp. 19-23. Historic Preservation Bureau,
State of New Mexico, Santa Fe.
Kvamme, K. L.
2001 Cun-ent Practices in Archaeogeophysics: Magnetics, Resistivity, Conductivity, and Ground Peneu·ating Radar. In
Earth Sciences and Archaeology, edited by P. Goldberg,
V. T. Holliday, and C. R. Fening, pp. 353-384. Kluwer
Academic/ Plenum Publishers, New York.
2003

Geophysical Surveys as Landscape Archaeology.

American Antiquity 68(3):435-457.
2006a Integrating Multidimensional Geophysical Data.
Archaeological Prospection 13( 1):57-72.
2006b Magnetometry: Nature's Gift to Archaeology. In

Remote Sensing in Archaeology: An Explicitly North
American Perspective, edited by J. K. Johnson, pp.
2007

Geonics EM38 Ground Conductivity Meter: Operating Instructions and Survey Interpretation
Techniques. Technical Note TN-21. Geonics. Ltd.,
Mississauga, Ontario.

Miller, M. R. and N. A. Kenmotsu
2004 Prehistory of the Jornada Mogollon and Eastern
Trans-Pecos Regions of West Texas. In The Prehistory of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 205-265.
Texas A&M University Press, College Station.
Mindeleff. V.
1891 A Study of Pueblo Architecture in Tusayan and
Cibola. In Eighth Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnology, pp. 13-228. U.S. Government
Printing Office, Washington, D.C.
O'Laughlin, T. C.
1985 Intrasite and Intersite Variability in Architecture: The
Pueblo Model. The Artifact 23(3): 19-39.
1999

Beyond Borders: The Well Site. In La Frontera, Papers
in Honor o,f Patrick H. Beckett, edited by M. S. Duran
and D. T. Kirkpatrick, pp. 143-160. Vol. 22, Archaeological Society of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

205-233. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

2001a Casa Blanca. The Artifact 39: 1-39.

Integrating Multiple Geophysical Datasets. In Remote Sensing in Archaeology, edited by J. Wiseman
and F. El-Baz, pp. 345-374. Springer, New York.

200lb Long Lessons and Big Surprises: Firecracker Pueblo.
In Following Through: Papers in Honor of Phyllis S.
Davis, edited by R. N. Wiseman, T. C. O'Laughlin,
and C. T. Snow, pp. 115-131. Vol. 27, Archaeological
Society of New Mexico, Albuquerque.

Ernenwein-A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido 145
Scarborough, V. L.
1989 Site Structure of a Village of the Late Pithouse-Early
Pueblo Period in New Mexico. Journal of Field Archaeology 16(4):405-425.
Shafer, H.J. and H. Drollinger
1998 Classic Mimbres Adobe-Lined Pits, Plazas, and
Courtyards at the NAN Ruin, Grant County, New
Mexico. Kiva 63(4):379-399.
Tite, M. S.
1972 The Influence of Geology on the Magnetic Susceptibility of Soils on Archaeological Sites. Archaeometry
14:229-236.
Whalen, M. E.
1981 a Cultural-Ecological Aspects of the Pithouse-toPueblo Transition in a Portion of the Southwest.
American Antiquity 46( 1):75-92.

1981 b An Investigation of Pithouse Village Structure
in Western Texas. Journal of Field Archaeology
8(3):303-311.
1990

Defining Bnried Features before Excavation: A Case
from the American Southwest. Journal of Field Archaeology 17(3):323-331.

1994

Moving out of the Archaic on the Edge of the Southwest. American Antiquity 59(4):622-638.

Witten. A. J.
2006 Handbook of Geophysics and Archaeology. Equinox
Publishing. London.

Geophysical Investigations at the San Jacinto Battleground
State Historic Site: Approaching Large-Scale Evaluation
of Historic Sites and Public Use Areas
Jennie 0. Sturm

ABSTRACT
The San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site near Houston, Texas, was once the site of the San Jacinto
Battle. which secured Texas independence from Mexico in 1836. Today the area is both a historic area and a
recreational park, with parking lots, buildings, and picnic areas. As part of the ongoing historic preservation goals
for this site, it was important to assess the material extent of the battle, most of which was unknown, with minimal
impact. This included locating where the Texas Army had their campsite, as well as unmarked burials of Texas
soldiers. The area under investigation was quite large, over three acres, and so a combination of geophysical surveys, magnetometry and ground-penetrating radar (GPR), were used to test for the presence of cultural materials
in this area. Magnetometry is an efficient geophysical method that was used to cover large expanses of ground to
test for the general presence of buried cultural materials. Based on those results, GPR surveys were then placed in
specific areas to delineate the precise position and shape of those materials. When the GPR data were processed
and overlain with the magnetometry maps, a number of features were readily visible, including modem utility
pipes, fire hearths, buried metal objects including possible cannon shot and several unmarked burials.

INTRODUCTION
On April 21, 1836, armies of the Republic of
Texas and Mexico engaged in a battle that would
prove to be "the deciding moment in the Texas
Revolution" (Moore 2004:xiii), leading to a victory that would ultimately provide the Republic of
Texas independence from Mexico. In what would
become known as the Battle of San Jacinto, General
Sam Houston and his Texan army of 930 soldiers
engaged General Antonio Lopez de Santa Anna's
1,250 Mexican soldiers in a surprise attack at their
campsite late in the day on April 21. The 18 minute
battle was a quick but bloody affair as Texas soldiers
ruthlessly attacked and pursued retreating Mexican
soldiers (Moore 2004). In the end, the battle provided a clear victory for the Republic of Texas and
a demoralizing blow for Mexico. With the capture of
General Santa Anna by General Houston's soldiers
the following day, Texas secured its independence
from Mexico (Lanning 2003; Moore 2004).
The Battle of San Jacinto is still considered one
of the most influential battles in Unites States history
(Lanning 2003). The land where the battle had taken

place was formally purchased by the state of Texas in
the 1890s and made a historic site with a monument
to commemorate it. Today, the site of the San Jacinto
Battleground is an expansive area, consisting not
only of the battlefield, but also the towering 604
foot San Jacinto monument, and the U.S.S. Texas,
the last battleship modeled after the Dreadnought
to fight in World Wars I and II. According to the
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD),
however, the primary purpose of this 1,200 acre
site is to "commemorate the Battle of San Jacinto
and to preserve the battleground" (TPWD 2007). As
part of this goal to commemorate and preserve this
battlefield, a number of archeological investigations
have been undertaken at the San Jacinto historic
site, including attempts to reconstruct the placement
of the Mexican army's camp, breastworks, and
the site formation processes that have impacted
these features (Dimmick 2004; Pertermann 2008).
The opportunity to do large-scale archeological
excavations, especially in the area where the Texan
army may have been, has been limited, however,
due primarily to funding restrictions, and because
the site is also used as a public recreation area.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

148

Texas Archeological Society

Numerous day-use activities are now held at this
in contrast, is a very precise method that can map a
variety of buried features but on a smaller scale due
site, including school group visits, picnicking,
walking and jogging, and festivals (TPWD 2007).
to a much slower collection rate and a greater complexity of data. In this study, therefore, magnetomDue to its popularity as a recreational site, and
because the site covers a large area, a number of aretry data were first collected as a way to generally
cheological questions concerning the San Jacinto site
test for the presence of archeologically significant
materials such as buried cannon shot or fire hearths,
remained unaddressed. Primarily, specific evidence
which may have indicated the location of the Texan
relating to the location of the Texan Army camp during the San Jacinto campaign, as well as the location
army camp (McDonald 2006). GPR data were then
collected in areas that were defined by the magof several burials of the Texan Army soldiers, is still
unknown. It should be noted here that the number and
netometry results as areas with potential cultural
names of the soldiers who fought and died at San Jaremains (Sturm 2006). While buried features and
cinto, both Texan and Mexican, are well documented
objects were located throughout the project area,
(see Moore 2004:429-452). Yet the present-day headincluding many modern utilities and pipelines, only
stones at the San Jacinto site do not account for all the
the most archeologically and potentially historically
Texan soldiers known to have died in the battle, and
significant features are discussed here.
therefore it is believed that several unmarked burials
possibly exist in the area (Jan De Vault, Friends of the
San Jacinto Battleground, personal communication,
GEOPHYSICAL METHODS
November 18, 2006).
IN ARCHEOLOGICAL
The combination of the limitations on the number
INVESTIGATIONS
and extent of excavations that can be pe1fonned at the
The use of geophysics in archeology is a method
San Jacinto Battleground, and the cultural sensitivity
of data collection that, by measuring the physical
of features such as burials, prompted the desire to use
geophysical techniques to study the
site. Geophysical methods can help
better locate areas of higher archeological interest than simple shovel
testing allows, and geophysical
methods also allow features such
as burials to be located and studied
without needing to excavate them.
Between November 28 and December 9, 2006, magnetometry and
ground-penetrating radar surveys
were conducted over a three acre
area where historic records indicate
the Texan Army was camped and
its soldiers buried (TPWD 2007)
(Figure l).
Since the area to be studied
was so large, using a two-method
geophysical approach was the
most practical and efficient way
to map the cultural remains here.
Magnetometry is a technique that
can collect data quickly and efficiently, making it a good method
Figure I. Aerial photo of the three-acre area at the San Jacinto Battleground
to map expansive areas, although
that was under investigation using geophysical surveys. The central area of this
with less precision than some other
image was where the Texas Army Camp was believed to have been located,
geophysical techniques. Groundand where the headstones of Texas soldiers' burials exist. Image courtesy of
Moore Archaeological Consulting, Inc.
penetrating radar (GPR) mapping,

Sturm-Geophysical Investigations at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site 149
and chemical changes in the ground, allows archeologists to relate those changes to the presence or
absence of archeologically significant materials
(Conyers 2004: 1). Archeological geophysics continues to grow in popularity and acceptance among
archeologists in the United States because it often
offers viable solutions to problems that traditional
field methods cannot address. Geophysical methods can gather a great deal of information about
the near-surface in a totally non-destructive way,
allowing relatively large areas with buried remains
to be studied efficiently and accurately, while at the
same time preserving and protecting them when
necessary (Conyers 2004; Kvamme 2005). While
no geophysical method can offer a "catch all" solution to every subsurface problem, with thoughtful
application and modifications in acquisition and
data processing methodology, many can be adapted
and still gather meaningful data from a variety of
site conditions.
The Magnetometry Method
Magnetometry is the most common geophysical method applied to archeological sites, both for
its wide applicability and quick data acquisition
(Kvamme 2006; Witten 2006). In its most basic
sense, magnetometry is a geophysical method that
measures the modification and minor deflections of
the Earth's magnetic field as a result of the presence and 01ientation of ferrous or slightly magnetic
buried objects in the near-surface. Many humanmade objects have a detectable magnetic signature,
and even weak signatures can be detected by the
extremely sensitive instruments used to collect
magnetic data, known as magnetometers (Conyers
2004:3; Kvamme 2006; Witten 2006).
While there are various magnetometers available for collecting magnetic data, all operate under
the same principle of measuring variations in the
magnetic field produced by near-surface magnetic
sources. In this project, a gradiometer was used,
which consists of two magnetometers separated by
a small distance (Witten 2006:88). With this tool,
the magnetic field measured by both magnetometers is subtracted, and therefore the contribution of
external fields (such as the Earth's magnetic field)
is virtually eliminated in the gradient measurement.
This allows much weaker magnetic anomalies in the
near-surface, such as those related to archeological
features or artifacts, to be potentially more apparent
in the acquired data (Witten 2006).

Some objects or features, such as iron pipes, are
obvious magnetic sources that are easily identified
in the magnetic data. Numerous human-made objects, however, can also be detected using magnetic
measurements. Disruptions in subsurface soils, particularly soils containing a ferromagnetic element
such as biologically altered soils, will also cause a
measurable change from the Earth's magnetic field
(Kvamme 2005, 2006). In archeological applications, this information is especially useful for locating buried fire hearths, stone or adobe walls, burials,
and of course iron objects such as tools or weapons
(Witten 2006:98).
Magnetic data are typically collected in transects running parallel to each other, although these
transects need not be in a rectilinear grid. The magnetometer or gradiometer is carried or towed along
each transect, and a high number of samples are
collected at a preprogrammed rate. A high collection rate allows data to be collected while moving
along transects at the rate of a normal human walking pace, allowing large areas to be covered quickly
and efficiently. Magnetic data are processed and
displayed as any variety of two-dimensional maps
that show variations in the magnetic field, referred
to as anomalies.
Because large areas can be covered quickly,
magnetometry is especially useful when dealing
with larger sites or expansive areas that need to be
evaluated for the presence of culturally significant
material (Kvamme 2005). It does, however, have
limitations in archeological applications. Magnetometry is not known for its high resolution capabilities, and even well processed magnetic data can
be difficult to analyze for the presence of smaller
features or objects, especially in a larger area where
there may be numerous objects with magnetic signatures. This is especially true if there are features such
as iron utility pipes in the area, which produces such
a high magnetic measurement that other features
near them may be obscured and difficult to identify
in the data. In addition, the rapid rate of acquisition
of magnetic data means that almost all magnetic
measurements are two-dimensional (Witten 2006:
92). This makes any depth estimation of buried
features a difficult task.
To help compensate for these shortcomings,
GPR was used in combination with magnetometry.
The GPR method is more time-consuming than
magnetometry, both in terms of data collection and
data processing, so it is typically not practical for
surveying expansive areas. It does, however, offer

150

Texas Archeological Society

high resolution mapping with three-dimensional
capabilities where magnetometry does not, making
it highly useful for archeological sites and an excellent companion to magnetometry.
The Ground-Penetrating Radar
(GPR) Method
GPR is a geophysical method that can accurately map the spatial extent of near-smface objects
and archeological features, or changes in soil media,
to ultimately produce images of those materials.
Radar waves are propagated in distinct pulses from
a surface antenna, reflected off buried objects, features, bedding contacts, or soil units, and detected
back at the source by a receiving antenna. As radar
pulses are transmitted through various materials on
their way to the buried target feature, their velocity
changes depending on the physical and chemical
properties of the material through which they travel
(Conyers 2004). The greater the contrast in electrical, and to some extent magnetic, properties between
two materials at a subsurface interface, the greater
amplitude of the reflected waves and therefore the
stronger the reflected signal. When the travel times
of energy pulses are measured, and their velocity through the ground is known, then distance (or
depth in the ground) can be accurately measured
to produce a three-dimensional data set (Conyers
and Lucius 1996). Each time a radar pulse traverses
a material with a different composition or water
saturation, the velocity changes and a portion of
the radar energy is reflected back to the surface, to
be recorded at the receiving antenna. The remaining energy continues to pass into the ground to be
further reflected, until it finally dissipates with depth
(Conyers 2004).
The success of GPR surveys in archeology is to a
great extent dependent on soil and sediment mineralogy, clay content, ground moisture, depth of burial,
surface topography, and vegetation. Although radarwave penetration and the ability to reflect energy back
to the surface is often enhanced in a dry environment,
moist soils can still transmit and reflect radar energy,
and GPR surveys can sometimes yield meaningful
data even in totally saturated clay-rich soils. Often
completely water-saturated ground will drastically
slow radar wave velocity, but not attenuate the signal,
if the material is not electrically conductive.
Most often the primary display of GPR data is
in the form of two-dimensional profiles. To produce
reflection profiles, the two-way travel time, the am-

plitude, and the wavelength of the reflected radar
waves derived from pulses generated at the antenna
are amplified, processed, and recorded for immediate viewing or later post-acquisition processing and
display. During acquisition of field data, the radartransmission, reflection, and recording of waves
from within the ground is repeated many times per
second as the antennas are pulled along the ground
surface or moved in steps. Distance along each line
is recorded using a survey wheel attached to the
antennas for accurate placement of all reflections in
space within a surveyed grid.
Standard two-dimensional reflection profiles
can be used for most basic data interpretation, but
analysis can be tedious if many are included in the
database. A more sophisticated method of GPR processing is amplitude slice-mapping, which creates
maps of reflected wave amplitude differences in discrete horizontal slices within a grid (Conyers 2004;
Conyers et al. 2002; Goodman et al. 1998; Goodman et al. 2004; Leckebusch 2003). Reflected radar
amplitudes are of interest because they measure the
degree of physical and chemical differences in the
buried materials. Strong, or high-amplitude, reflections often indicate denser buried materials, such
as historic features or other important stratigraphic
changes, while areas oflow-amplitude waves usually
indicate uniform matrix material or soils. Amplitude
slice-maps are generated through comparison of reflected amplitudes between raw vertical profiles. In
this method, amplitude variations recorded as digital
values are analyzed at each location in a grid where
there is a reflection recorded. The amplitudes of all
traces are compared to the amplitudes of all nearby
traces along that profile. This database can then be
"sliced" horizontally and displayed to show the variation in reflection amplitudes at a sequence of depths
in the ground. The produced result is a map that
shows amplitudes in map view, but also with depth.
Often when this is done, changes in the soil related to
disturbances such as burials, foundations, or middens
can become visible, making many features visible to
the human eye (Conyers 2004).

GEOPHYSICAL RESULTS
AT SAN JACINTO
Of the three acres surveyed at San Jacinto, a
number of areas were identified as potentially culturally interesting using both methods. In some cases,
what appear to be individual objects or features were

Sturm-Geophysical Investigations at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site 151

Figure 2. Full study area at San Jacinto Battleground, showing the central area where the most
archeologically significant materials were located (the magneto me try area is outlined in red, and the GPR
areas outlined in blue). Also shown are all the locations where geophysical data were collected (GPR
grids are shown here in black, overlaying magnetometry grids in white). A total of 14 GPR grids were
collected, both in areas where the magnetometry detected anomalies and where the magnetometer could
not be used. The geophysical survey study area was established by Moore Archaeological Consulting,
Inc., and all grids (both magnetic and GPR) were surveyed in by them using a total station.

located with either GPR or magnetometry, but more
interesting, especially in terms of focusing archeological attention, were the areas where both methods
successfully located and mapped features of interest.
This included the central section of the study area,
or the areas covered by GPR grids 1, 2, and 14, and
magnetometry grids 35 and 43-73 (Figure 2). Historic
maps of the site suggested that this area could have
been the original location of the Texas Army Camp
(TPWD 2007; Michael Strutt, TPWD, personal communication, December 6, 2007). In these areas, the

geophysical surveys mapped a number of interesting
features relating to the Texan campsite as well as
possibly artifacts related to the original battle, including fire hearths , cannon shot, and several unmarked
bmials. It was this central section where specific areas
were recommended for excavation and preservation
at the time of this project.
The area covered by magnetometry grids 43-63
(GPR grids 1 and 2) showed the greatest number of
features of potential a.rcheological interest. These
g1ids were collected in a large open area of the park,

152

Texas Archeological Society

just northwest of where the majority of marked
graves are located. The magnetometry maps from
this area showed large metal utility pipes, as well
as some other larger magnetic anomalies that were
identified as potentially culturally interesting (McDonald 2006) (Figure 3). When GPR grids 1 and 2
were collected in this area, a number of potentially
interesting features were also noted, including a possible fire hearth, what appeared to be an extensive
metal scatter, burned sediment layers, at least one
larger buried object, and several unmarked burials
(Figure 4).
The possible metal scatter and area with burned
layers is represented in the amplitude slice-map
by an area of high-amplitude reflections, noted
by the color red (see Figure 4). They show up this
way because burned layers and metal objects are
chemically and physically different enough from
their s1mounding soils to reflect a large part of the
energy from the GPR antennae, resulting in a highamplitude reflection. These reflections and their spatial distribution was interesting, as such an expanse
of high-amplitude reflections was not found in any
other area studied at this site. In addition, these reflections are somewhat scattered, suggesting they are

not part of some natural continuous layer. According
to evidence provided by the TPWD, at least two
large fires occurred in this area during the time of
the Texas Army occupation, one of which was supposedly a camp fire that got out of control (TPWD
2007). Given this information, one hypothesis is
that the GPR has mapped part of one of these fires,
and the extent of high-amplitude reflections seen in
Figure 4 is part of the burned layers resulting from
a widespread fire. Figure 5 depicts what some of
these possible burned layers look like in profile. As
also seen in Figure 5, a number of small, hyperbolic
reflections are close to the possible burned layers.
Such reflections are typical of individual objects in
the subsurface, and may be related to buried cannon
or grape shot from the San Jacinto battle. Reflections
such as these are seen throughout GPR grid 2, in and
near the possible burned areas (Figure 6). If these
reflections are cannon or grape shot, this would suggest that a fire in this area may have destroyed some
of the ammunition in the Texan camp, or perhaps
the ammunition contributed to the fire itself. Only
future excavations can confirm if this area does have
widespread burned layers and scattered cannon or
grape shot.

Utility Pipes

Grid 1

Unmarked
Burials

Figure 3. Magnetometry maps of the central area at the San Jacinto Battleground. Buried utility pipes are clearly seen,
as well as some other magnetic anomalies, which were believed to be potentially archeologically significant. Based on
these anomalies, this area was chosen for further testing with GPR.

Sturm-Geophysical Investigations at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site 153

+
==-

0 meters 10
+Unmarked
Burials
emo High
..,oAmplitued
roJo Reflections

.,,.
'""

·3:UO

"'10

'.O'UO

"""
'"'" Low
1000

"'' Amplitued
o Reflections

Figure 4. GPR amplitude slice-maps of the area shown in Figure 3. GPR mapped an area of considerable disturbance here,
which included bmied metal objects and burned areas. Five unmarked burials were also found here, one of which was
located underneath the asphalt of a nearby road. These slice-maps represent a depth of approximately 45-65 cm bs.

~'~~
~~~
~~ ;; cue .,.._,,,..,,,P1J.#IP02 .i..Y-~'.2! . <?.

:[12
Q)

E18

~24~~~r-J~(il~~~.il~

30~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ll/Ja::l:~~
0

10

20

Distance (m)

30

40

Figure 5. This reflection profile from GPR grid 2 shows the high amplitude reflections from the burned area and metal
scatter seen in the slice-maps of Figure 4. The hyperbolic reflections are typical of buried objects, and in this case, are
likely cannon shot.

Both the GPR and magnetometer mapped at
least one, and possibly two, larger buried objects in
the possible burned area. The reflection from one
of these objects is seen in the GPR profile in Figure
5 as a larger hyperbolic reflection. While this does
seem to be a larger bmied object, it is probably not a
bmial, as the reflection does not extend over enough
consecutive profiles to be consistent with the length
of a typical burial. Since it is at a similar depth to the

other hyperbolic reflections from possible cannon
or grape shot in the area, it is hypothesized that this
object is a larger cannon ball or shell, or possibly
part of a cannon itself. The strong signature in the
magnetic maps also suggests this is a metal object,
and that it is large enough to be a larger shell or
weapon (McDonald 2006) .
In both GPR grids 1 and 2, several unmarked
burials were located using the reflection profiles.

154

Texas Archeological Society

20

10

Distance (m)

40

30

Figure 6. Another reflection profile from GPR grid 2 shows the highly reflective hyperbolas from buried metal objects.

the GPR profiles (Sturm 2006). In addition, what
appeared to be a rectangular structure or pit was
identified in the GPR amplitude slice-maps (Figure
9). This rectangular feature is quite interesting, and
may have been used to bury several people at once, as
it measures approximately 3 x 1.5 min size, although
it is difficult to determine from the GPR data if there
are actually human remains within the feature.
In total, five probable burials were noted in the
GPR reflection profiles, based on the geometry and
depth of the reflections, and in the magnetic maps,
based on the strength of the magnetic signature
(McDonald 2006). Interestingly enough, only one
of the burials located with the geophysical surveys
has a current headstone marking it (Figures 9 and
10). Two of the headstones in the area could not
be found to have burials associated with them by
either the magnetometry or GPR surveys. While it
is possible that there are actual burials associated
with these seemingly "empty" headstones, and the

Burials are typically best identified using the
reflection profiles, because they often have a very
distinct geometry relating both to the actual burial,
and the truncation of the ground caused from digging
a burial shaft (Conyers 2006). Most of the reflections
from these potential burials appear as deeply buried,
distinct hyperbolas (Figure 7). In total, five probable
unmarked burials were located within GPR grids
1 and 2, including one that was located beneath
the asphalt of a nearby parking lot (Figure 8).
This suggests that at least part of the Texas Army
cemetery was paved during construction of the
modern roads, parking lots, and other recreational
areas of this historic site.
The area covered by magnetometry grid 35 and
GPR grid 14 was placed to include the remaining
outlying marked graves in this general area (Figure
9). One unmarked burial was located with both the
magnetometer and GPR (McDonald 2006), and three
other unmarked burials were identified solely with

6
W12
~

(!)

Ei8

r=

24
30'

0

10

20

30

40

Distance (m)
Figure 7. This reflection profile from GPR grid 2 was collected partly on asphalt and partly on grass. One unmarked
burial was identified beneath the grass.

Sturm-Geophysical Investigations at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site 155

0
6

~10
©

E15

f=

20

Distance (m)
Figure 8. The reflection profile from GPR grid 1 was also collected partly on asphalt and partly on grass. In this case,
an unmarked burial was located beneath the asphalt, suggesting that part of the original cemetery was at one time paved
over, probably during modern construction.

·~

_.,/

{,..··'

l \

l ··--,
1

(~>; 1 (0·\-.. 1@;1// r/
:11

.... \) _..

..!

·~---··

.i.. 1.,\·.,.·.,
\

\~/

II

I (

I

\·--.._;,I

I

·. ·-···-//

/
/\ {

i'

".J

II

\ __

.,._

1.,

\..._,
,//\!

\

/

11 /

/'

\4

(/

\,

/\

\/

5

Figure 9. Close-up of magnetometry grid 35, overlain on an amplitude slice-map of GPR grid 14. This area was shown to
contain numerous potential features with both methods, including four possible unmarked bmials, a possible buried structure
or pit, and some magnetic anomalies. It is also interesting to note that neither the magnetometry nor GPR found obvious burials
associated with two of the headstones in this area. This slice-map represents a depth of approximately 45-65 cm bs.

Texas Archeological Society

156

Unmarked
burial

Marked
burial

0
6

:-[12
Q)

E18

i=

24
30

5

0

10
Distance (m)

15

20

Figure 10. Reflection profile from GPR grid 14 showing the reflections from two burials. One has a headstone associated with it, while the other is unmarked.

burials simply lack the caskets or associated grave
goods to be discernable in the survey data, what
seems more likely is that these headstones were
misplaced. The reflection from one other unmarked
burial was noted in line with the headstones, so it
seems probable that its headstone was placed incorrectly (Figure 11 ).

CONCLUSIONS
When dealing with large or expansive archeological sites, especially those that have been
impacted by modern construction or building
activities in some way, it is impractical to assume
that traditional methods such as pedestrian surveys or
shovel testing can provide a reasonable assessment
of the cultural area. As with the case of this project
at the San Jacinto Battleground, determining the

Unmarked

exact locations of battle remains and burials within
this very expansive area would not have been
possible without geophysical surveys. Using both
magnetometry and GPR surveys, a three acre area
at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site
could be tested for the presence of archeologically
significant materials in an effective and efficient
manner. Areas containing buried metal objects,
including cannon shot, areas that had experienced
possible previous burning episodes, and areas with
previously unknown burials were all identified in
the geophysical maps. This was possible because
geophysical methods such as magnetometry and
GPR are able to map even subtle changes and
disturbances in the subsurface.
In addition, results from these geophysical
surveys have already aided directly in the historic
preservation of this site by being used as part of the
historic interpretations here, especially in marking

Headstones at surface,
no burials present

0
6

:-[12
Q)

E18"
i=

24
24
0

5

10
15
20
Distance (m)
Figure 11. This reflection profile from GPR grid 14 shows the locations of where two burials ought to exist, based on the
presence of headstones at the surface. No burials, however, were found associated with these headstones. The reflection
from an unmarked burial is seen nearby, suggesting the headstones were possibly misplaced.

Sturm-Geophysical Investigations at the San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site 157
the unknown burials. Some limited archeological
excavation has already taken place at this site based
on the geophysical results, which preliminarily confirmed the presence of buried metal (some historic,
some modern) and burned materials. Additional
future excavations are also being planned (Roger
Moore, Moore Archaeological Consulting Inc.,
personal communication, January 2007), making
the San Jacinto Battleground an example of how
beneficial, and often necessary, it is to use a combination of traditional archeological and archeological
geophysical methods.

REFERENCES CITED
Conyers, L. B.
2004

Ground-Penetrating Radar. AltaMira Press, Walnut
Creek, California.

2006

Ground-penetrating radar to discover and map historic graves. Historic Archaeology 40(3):64-73.

Conyers, L. B., E. G. Ernenwein, and L. Bedal
2002 Ground-penetrating radar (GPR) mapping as a
method for planning excavation strategies, Petra,
Jordan, E-tiquity, No. 1, Electronic document,
http://e-tiquity.saa.org/% 7Eetiquity/title I .html
Conyers, L. and J. Lucius
1996 Velocity analysis in archaeological ground-penetrating
radar studies. Archaeological Prospection 3:25-38.
Dimmick. G. J.
2004 Sea of' Mud: The Retreat of the Mexican Army aper
San Jacinto, an Archaeological Investigation. Texas
State Historical Association, Austin.
Goodman, D., S. Piro, Y. Nishimura, H. Patterson, and V.
Gaffney
2004 Discovery of a 1st century AD Roman amphitheatre
and other structures at the Forum Novum by GPR.
Journal of' Environmental and Engineering Geophysics 9:35-42.
Goodman, D .. Y. Nishimura, H. Hongo, and M. Okita
1998 GPR Amplitude rendering in archaeology. In Proceedings of the Se\'enth International Conference
011 Ground-penetrating Radar, May 27-30, !998, pp.
91-92. Radar Systems and Remote Sensing Laboratory. University of Kansas, Lawrence.

Kvamme, K. L.
2005 Terrestrial Remote Sensing in Archaeology. In
Handbook of Archaeological Methods, edited by
H. Maschner and C. Chippendale, pp. 423-4 77.
AltaMira Press, Lanham, Maryland.
2006

Magnetometry: Nature's Gift to Archaeology. In
Remote Sensing in Archaeology: An Explicitly North
American Perspectil'e, edited by J. K. Johnson, pp.
205-234. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.

Lanning, M. L.
2003 The Battle 100: The Stories Behind History's Most
Influential Battles. Sourcebooks, Naperville. Illinois.
Leckebusch, J.
2003 Ground-penetrating radar: A modern three-dimensional prospection method. Archaeological Prospection 10:213-240.
McDonald, K.
2006 San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site Magnetic Survey. Z-Too Archaeogeophysical Prospection, Portland, Oregon.
Moore, S. L.
2004 Eighteen Minutes: The Battle (if San Jacinto and the
Texas Independence Campaign. Republic of Texas
Press, Lanham. Maryland.
Pertermann, D. L.
2008 Modeling the Relationship Between the Systemic
Context and the Archaeological Record at the San
Jacinto Battleground, Texas. Poster presented at the
41 st Annual Conference on Historical and U nderwater Archaeology, January 8-13, Albuquerque, New
Mexico.
Sturm, J. 0.
2006 Report on Ground-Penetrating Radar Surveys: San
Jacinto Battleground. TAG Research by Sturm Inc.,
Denver. Colorado.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
2007 San Jacinto Battleground State Historic Site. Electronic document, http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/, accessed January 7, 2008.
Witten, A. J.
2006 Handbook of' Geophysics and Archaeology. Equinox
Publishing, Oakville. Connecticut.

Geophysical Investigations on Caddo Sites in East Texas
and Surrounding States
Chester P. Walker and Timothy K. Perttula

ABSTRACT
In this article, we discuss the range of geophysical survey investigations that have been conducted over
the last 30 years on Caddo archeological sites, both mound centers and domestic settlements, in East Texas and
surrounding parts of the Caddo archeological area. The use of geophysical technologies on Caddo archeological
sites has contributed new understandings of the internal spatial structure and organization of Caddo habitation
sites and mound centers.

INTRODUCTION
The use of geophysical technologies on Caddo
archeological sites in East Texas and surrounding
states is producing, and will undoubtedly continue
to produce, unprecedented characterizations of the
internal spatial structure and organization of Caddo
habitation sites and mound centers. This understanding is only constrained by the spatial scale in which
geophysical survey investigations are undertaken,
and the ability of archeologists to appreciate and
evaluate the geophysical data in ways that bring
new archeological findings to light. In this article
we review the history of geophysical investigations
on prehistoric and early historic Caddo sites in the
region, and focus on the findings from a range of
Caddo settlements in the region. 1
It is not easy to pinpoint exactly who was the
first archeologist to use geophysics on a Caddo
site. Perhaps the first attempts were made in ca.
1970 at the George C. Davis site (41CE19) using
electromagnetic induction (Dee Ann Story, 2003
personal communication). Other early geophysical
investigations include a proton magnetometer survey
at the Late Caddo Burks site (41 WD52, see Perttula
2005a) in 1978, and a proton magnetometer survey
at the Spiro mound site in eastern Oklahoma in
1981 (Bennett and Weymouth 1982). In 1991, Tom
Middlebrook commissioned ground penetrating radar and conductivity surveys at the Historic Caddo
Henry M site (41NA60) in Nacogdoches County,
Texas (Environmetrics 1991). It has only been since
the early years of the 21st century, however, that

geophysical survey investigations have begun to be
employed with any regularity on Caddo sites in East
Texas or surrounding states.

GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH IN
CADDO ARCHEOLOGY
Archeo-geophysical prospecting using magnetometry, electromagnetic conductivity, electrical
resistivity, ground-penetrating radar, and magnetic susceptibility (see recent reviews by Kvamme
[2003a, 2006a, 2008]; Gaffney and Gater [2003];
and Gaffney [2008]) have all been shown to be useful geophysical techniques for locating buried architectural remains and other kinds of features on a
variety of prehistoric Caddo sites. These techniques
measure certain physical properties of the soil, such
as magnetic conditions, electromagnetic conductivity, or electrical resistivity. Given the proper soil conditions, archeological features such as fire hearths,
post holes, and storage pits differ from the surrounding soil matrix, and can be recognized by distinctive spatial signatures in geophysical data sets from
archeological sites. Archeo-geophysics employs a
range of techniques for the non-destructive prospecting of archeological deposits. These techniques have
been developed for a range of applications, mostly
geological in nature, but they have been adapted for
specific use in archeological investigations through
rigorous field collection techniques and unique data
processing programs specifically developed for
archeo-geophysics.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

160

Texas Archeological Society

MOUND SITES
Geophysical survey work since the early part of
the 21st century has been accomplished at a number
of Caddo mound sites, obvious cultural features created by the Caddo peoples over an occupation in the
region that lasted more than a thousand years. This
work includes the George C. Davis site (41CE19,
Bruseth and Pierson 2004, see also Creel et al. and
Osburn et al. this volume; Creel et al. 2005; Walker
et al. 2003), the Jamestown site (41SM54, Perttula
and Walker 2008), A. C. Saunders (4 lANl 9, Hudler
et al. 2006), and Horace Cabe Mounds (41BW14,
Walker and Perttula 2007) in East Texas, various sites
on the Grandview project in southwestern Arkansas
(Schambach 2001, 2002; Schambach and Lockhart
2003; Lockhart 2006, 2007 a; Lockhart and Green
2006; Dalan 2006; Kvamme 2006b ), and recent geophysics work at the Battle (3LA 1), Crenshaw (3MI6),
and Mounds Plantation (16CD12) mound sites along
the Red River in Arkansas and Louisiana (Lockhart
2007b; Lockhart and Girard 2007; McKinnon 2008;
Samuelson 2008).

George C. Davis
At the George C. Davis site, geophysical surveys
by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas (TARL) and the Texas
Historical Commission (THC), using a portable
cesium magnetometer, on large blocks of land have
proved successful in locating both large and small
architectural features, particularly numerous Caddo
stmctures, some as much as 20 min diameter (Bmseth
and Pierson 2004:Figures 1-3; Creel et al. 2005; Creel
et al., this volume; Osburn et al., this volume). This
work is contributing new information on the overall
layout of stmctures around the mounds and across this
lc:u-ge prehistoric site. In some settings, the geophysical
survey has successfully located archeological features
in areas that previous subsmface excavations failed
to locate (Walker et al. 2003). Shaded relief maps of
the magnetic data have also identified a number of
unique architectural forms at the site, such as the socalled "Button Houses" (Creel et al. 2005), that can
be compared to the architectural plans of the more
than 50 previously excavated stmctures at the George
C. Davis site (see Newell and Krieger 1949; Story
1997, 2000). These geophysical examples of Caddo
structures are 10-15 m diameter circular structures
with four internal magnetic returns that are spatially
patterned on the interior of the structure to encircle

a central hearth; these no doubt represent large post
hole features (support posts) or interior pits. The
magnetometer data from the Mound B area at George
C. Davis are providing new information about the
constmction phases of the mound (for more detailed
discussions, see Creel et al., this volume). These
data have detected a trench of some kind or a small
mound of earth that apparently served to anchor the
mound to a specific place on the ground. The remote
sensing work has also identified a second ramp on the
southern flanks of the mound (Schultz et al. 2004).

Jamestown
With the permission of The Archaeological
Conservancy, a 16,400 m2 geophysical survey (4.05
acres) using a fluxgate gradiometer was conducted
in February 2007 at the Jamestown Mound site
(41SM54), a Caddo archeological preserve (Perttula
and Walker 2008). Jamestown is a large, probably
Middle Caddo period (ca. A.D. 1200-1400), prehistoric mound center with seven mounds roughly
arranged in a circular pattern, with an open area (or
plaza?) between the mounds. Five of the mounds
(Mds. A-E) are on the archeological preserve (Perttula and Walker 2008:Figure 2). The largest is Md.
A along the western side of the preserve, measuring 43 m in diameter and 4 m in height; there are at
least two levels of burned structural remains in the
upper mound fill. The smaller mounds (Mds. B-E)
are probably mounds built over houses with a clay
floor and a clay cap. Habitation and midden deposits
are known to exist on the preserve, but their extent
and character are virtually unknown.
Magnetometer data was collected in 4120x20
m collection grids located across the western half
of the site and archeological preserve. Collection
grids were positioned so they would cross likely
village areas directly to the east of both Mounds A
and B. These data suggest the possible locations of
two plazas at Jamestown as well as the presence of
possible burned Caddo structures (Figure 1).
There are several notable patterns in the geophysical data from the Jamestown site that may likely be the
product of prehistoric cultural activities; none of the
detected geophysical anomalies have been groundtmthed. A trend in the data is noted moving from n01th
to south along the geophysical survey collection grid,
with the magnetic data becoming much more quiet
at the southern end, north and east of Mound A. This
magnetic spatial pattern corresponds to two large rectangular areas in immediate proximity to Mounds A,

Walker and Perttula-Geophysical Investigations on Caddo Sites 161

J.\

+ 2ml

~<2-%'ffil1 -2m

~m

A + 2m!

,'c»>-:%%ff4'3-2m

Figure 1. Magnetometer data from the Jamestown site (41SM54): left, magnetometer data; right,
interpretation of the magnetometer data.

B, and C. This area is the probable location of a plaza
to the east of Mound A that is approximately 60 m
east-west and 40 m north-south in size (2400 m 2) (see
Figure 1, right). This interpretation is based on the significant drop off of magnetic activity in this area (presumably because of non-habitation or more specialized
activities by the Caddo in these distinct areas of the
mound center) as well as its proximity to the mound
itself. A second and smaller possible plaza is proposed
to the east of Mound B: it measures approximately 45
m north-south and 40 m east-west (1800 m 2). In this
case, there is not a drop off in magnetic activity, but
a slight but significant square-shaped trend in slightly
enhanced readings (see Figure 1, iight).
Several complex di polar anomalies (Features A,
C, and D) were identified that may represent burned
Caddo features that are approximately 8 to 10 m in
diameter (see Figure 1), most likely burned Caddo
houses or burned habitation surfaces. Complex dipolar signatures similar to the ones discussed here
were recorded at the Tom Jones site (3HE40) in
southwestern Arkansas (Schambach and Lockhart
2003; Lockhart 2007a:Figure 4.9). Features A, C,
and D are situated in proximity to the two proposed
plazas (see Figure 1, right).
Feature B, ca. 20 m east of the plaza by Mound
B, is more difficult to interpret with the available

geophysical data. It is a complex dipolar signal that
could be interpreted as an area of intense burning
(either prehistoric or modern), an area of intense
metal accumulation, a geological feature, or even an
area that has been disturbed in some way.
The results of the initial geophysical survey of
the Jamestown Mound site were promising, even
though less than half of the Archaeological Conservancy preserve has been examined to date. The
geophysical survey work appears to have brought to
light two possible plaza areas near the main mounds
(Mounds A and B) as well as three probable offmound burned Caddo structures that are likely to
have been used for public and community rituals
and ceremonies.

Horace Cabe
Magnetometer data were collected in 2005
from five 20 x 20 m grids (0.5 acres) in the area
of, and on, several mounds (Mounds B and C) and
a platform or deliberately constructed plaza at the
Horace Cabe site (Walker and Perttula 2007 :Figure
1). The Cabe site is also an Archaeological Conservancy preserve.
This Caddo site (occupied between ca. A.D.
1200-1700, with the principal occupation occurring

162

Texas Archeological Society

3.1), the Arkansas Archeological
Survey used a variety of geophysical surveying equipment to
measure magnetic susceptibility,
gradiometry, electrical resistance,
and
electromagnetic conductivity of
Feature 3
key areas at Caddo mound and nonmound settlements, and achieved
impressive results. The geophysical
surveying has detected the locations
of burned Caddo houses, fireplaces
or hearths within the houses, burial
pits, non-burial pits of various sizes
and shapes, stockade lines around
the Tom Jones mound (3HE40)
(Lockhart 2007 a), and possible
paths across the sites (Schambach
2001, 2002; Lockhart and Green
~
Feature 1
2006). Ground-truthing excavations of several of the subsurface
10m
0
10m
anomalies identified in the Grand'------'
view geophysical survey have been
successful in identifying archeoFigure 2. Magnetometer data from the Horace Cabe site (41BW14): left,
logical features, including burned
plots of magnetometer grids with Block 4 removed; right: interpretations
houses
with "heaps of fired daub
of magnetometer data from the Cabe site.
up to a meter deep in places, pieces
of carbonized logs, and a floor
after ca. A.D. l 500), is a large mound center that
laden with ash and domestic debris" (Schambach
covers about 55 acres, with eight constructed
200l:10). Other excavations exposed clay-lined
mounds, seven of which are part of a cluster of
hearths, and lines of post holes, while excavations
mounds in a single group. The magnetometer
placed over "reasonably clear images [from the
survey grids were placed in the central part of
remote sensing] of house remains netted ... the
this semi-circular mound cluster (see Walker and
archaeological remains of four houses" (SchamPerttula 2007:Figure 1). During this work and the
bach 2001: 10).
subsequent processing of the magnetic data, three
clear magnetic anomalies (Features 2-4) were
detected that are interpreted as large (12-17 m in
HABITATION SITES
diameter) circular Caddo structures; all three have
Geophysical survey investigations have also
central hearth anomalies (Figure 2, left and right).
been
productive on non-mound Caddo habitation
These structures were probably daub-covered, and
sites in terms of detecting house structures and
when burned by the Caddo, covered with earth
ancillary extra-mural features. Various examples of
during the construction and reshaping of the mounds
this work in East Texas and northwestern Louisiana
at Horace Cabe. Feature 2 is situated directly in front
are becoming commonplace in cultural resource
of Mound C, Feature 3 is on the northwestern side
management work as well as Caddo archeological
of this mound, and Feature 4 is on the northwestern
research projects in general (see for example Bruseth
side of Mound B.
et al. 2005; Jurney 1999; Kelley 2006; Walker 2007;
Walker and Perttula 2008b; Walker and Schultz
Grandview, southwestern Arkansas
2007). Several geophysical survey investigations
On the Grandview project in the Blackland
at Caddo habitation sites are discussed in this part
Prairie highlands of the West Gulf Coastal Plain
of the article, beginning with the illuminating work
in southwestern Arkansas (Lockhart 2007a:Figure
at the Hill Farm site, a 16th-17th century Nasoni

Walker and Perttula-Geophysical Investigations on Caddo Sites 163

reaturel

Fe<"Jture2

Feature3

Fr:a:ure 6

Feature8

o~Om

A

Fe-attff€ 9

Feature 10

~m/A.

Figure 3. Magnetometer data from the Hill Farm site (41BW169): top left, Area A magnetometer data;
top right, interpretation of the Area A magnetometer data from the Hill Farm site; c, bottom left, Area B
magnetometer data; top right, interpretation of the Area B magnetometer data.

Caddo site near the Red River and the Hatchel
Mound site (41BW3).
Hill Farm (41BW169)
Walker and Schultz (2006) completed a magnetometer survey of the Hill Farm (41BW169) and
Horace Cabe sites as part of the Bowie County Le-

vee Realignment project (Sundermeyer et al. 2006).
The geophysical survey was done using a Geometrics portable G858 cesium sensor magnetometer and
a G-856 proton magnetometer base station.
The Hill Farm site is a large (ca. 675 x 135
m) late Texarkana phase site with two spatially
discrete Caddo habitation areas (Areas A and B)
detected by extensive shovel testing (Sundermeyer

164

Texas Archeological Society

et al. 2006:206 and Figures 12.7 and 12.8). The site
is less than l km southeast of the temple mound at the
contemporaneous Hatchel site (Perttula 2005b). The
archeological deposits here are shallowly buried (20-40
cm) by Red River alluvium, and are marked by high
densities of ceramic sherds, animal bones, mussel shell,
charred plant remains, and other signs of domestic use
and trash disposal by Nasoni Caddo peoples.
For the geophysical effort, the Hill Farm site was
divided into two areas (Area A and Area B) to match
the shovel test findings, and then collected in adjacent
20 x 20 m blocks (Figure 3). A total of 24 20 x 20 m
remote sensing blocks were collected: 15 blocks in
Area A and nine blocks in Area B (Walker and Schultz
2006:Figures 8.2 and 8.3). Several distinctive spatial
patterns have been identified in the magnetometer data
that we interpret as archeological features, nine inArea
A and four in Area B. None of them have been ground
truthed through traditional archeological means, but
these features occur within the broad and patterned
distributions of archeological materials (including
likely midden deposits) detected by shovel testing
in both areas (Perttula et al. 2008). The Hill Farm
site provides an excellent example of a geophysical
dataset that can be used as primary data to further our
understanding of both inter- and intra-site settlement
dynamics at this Caddo village. This data also adds
to our overall understanding of the prehistoric Caddo
landscape now just glimpsed haphazardly from
previous archeological investigations.
Ten circular Caddo structures have been identified in the magnetometer data from the Hill Farm site.
They are similar in form to those found in previous
excavations at the Hatchel site (Perttula 2005b ). The
newly identified structure's range from 8-17.5 m in
diameter with the smallest potential structure measuring 8 min diameter. All have interior hearths. At least
two structure may show evidence of burning (one
with an extended entranceway), a widespread practice throughout the Caddo area when a structure was
abandoned, and a second structure has a magnetic signature suggesting it has an extended entranceway.
In specific terms, nine features were noted inArea
A: eight are interpreted as domestic Caddo structures
(Features 1-2, 4-8, and 13). Features 1, 2 and 4 are
large structures (between 14.5-17 .5 m in diameter
for Feature 4) with central heaiths (see Figure 3, top
left and top right). In these three cases the magnetic
patterning have a series of positive magnetic returns
comprising the outer ring or wall arc of the structures.
Feature 1 is also interpreted as a burned feature due to
the large amount of high magnetic returns associated

with this feature (see Figure 3, top right). Feature
3 is a lai·ge di-polar return interpreted as either a
small b01Tow pit, where the underlying strata are of
significantly higher magnetic susceptibility that the
overlying strata, or a burned structure. The small
size of the feature and its proximity to other houses
suggests that it may represent a special use structure,
perhaps a granary. Feature 5 is a 12 m diameter
structure with what appears to be a projection roughly
radiating to the northwest that may be an extended
entranceway (see Figure 3, top right). This feature
also has a considerable amount of remote sensing
information from within the structure, namely several
small mono-polar positive magnetic returns just
inside the walls of the structure that may represent
small storage pits.
Features 6-8 and 13 are more geophysicallysubtle features that are also interpreted as Caddo
house structures. These four features consist of a
central mono-polar positive return with a circular
to semi-circular series of returns encircling the
central feature (see Figure 3, top right). These Area
A features are all less than 10 m in diameters, but
well within the size range for typical Caddo houses
found at sites along the Red River and elsewhere in
East Texas.
Four features were noted in Area B, including
two probable Caddo structures (see Figure 3, bottom
left and right). Feature 9 is a circular series of
complex mono-polar to di-polar returns, including a
di-polar return in its center, suggesting the placement
of the central fire hearth (Feature 9.1). This structure
feature appears to have an extended entryway (see
Figure 3, bottom right). Feature 11 is also a Caddo
structure with a mono-polar positive magnetic return
in its center that represents its central hearth. The
mono-polar positive magnetic returns that comprise
the outside ring of the structure vai·y from solid high
returns to lower and more diffuse returns (see Figure
3, bottom left). Both Features 9 and 11 appear to
have been burned due to the high magnetic returns
that comprise much of their remote sensing spatial
patterning. Both Features 10 and 12 are low diffuse
mono-polar linear magnetic returns. These two
features flank both the northeast and southwest sides
of Feature 11 (see Figure 3, see bottom right), and
may be compound dividers like those depicted on
the 1691 Teran map of the N asoni Caddo village in
this location (Perttula et al. 2008).
Approximately 40 percent of the Hill Farm site
has been examined to date by geophysical survey,
with additional geophysical survey investigations

Walker and Perttula-Geophysical Investigations on Caddo Sites 165
planned for the near future. If the density of
structures across the unsurveyed portions of the site
is comparable to those areas already documented
by remote sensing, then there may be as many
as 25 Caddo structures within the boundaries of
Area A and Area B. These could be from as many
as 9-10 separate household compounds that were
contemporaneously and/or sequentially occupied by
Caddo families over several generations.
Leaning Rock (41SM325)
Survey of 2500 m 2 using a cesium magnetometer was conducted in order to identify potential
Caddo archeological features at the Leaning Rock
site (Figure 4), a Middle Caddo settlement in the
middle reaches of the Sabine River basin. The
magnetometer data from Leaning Rock is a good
example of the magnetic signature of a small Caddo
site in the sandy soil found throughout East Texas
(Walker 2008). While no clear cut architectural
patterns were obvious in the geophysical data from
the site, a closer look revealed a fair amount of archeological information. Ground penetrating radar

survey was also conducted of a portion of the magnetometer grid (Bergstrom et al. 2008).
Whether it was caused by the actual magnetic
properties of sherds, general magnetic enhancement
of anthropogenic deposits, or was a simple geological
phenomena, there appeared to be an area of magnetic
enhancement (see Figure 4, right) that corresponded
to the overall distributions of artifacts and known
features at this Caddo residential settlement (Walker
2008; Walters 2008:Figures 1 and 8). Plots of excavation units and features also showed that despite
the overall noisy nature of the data there indeed
are legible and interpretable archeological features
present in the Leaning Rock magnetometer data.
Detailed interpretations were not easy at Leaning
Rock, primarily because of the apparently small size
of identified features. Even with detailed plots of
excavated features it was still difficult to resolve some
of the magnetic anomalies.
The most obvious trend in the magnetometer
data from the Leaning Rock site is the area of general magnetic enhancement located in the southeastern portion of the collection area. This area
corresponded approximately to the area of highest

N

A

/

Possible Burned
Rock Features

Figure 4. Magnetometer data from the Leaning Rock site (41 SM325): left, magnetometer results; right, area of magnetic
enhancement and locations of possible burned rock features.

166

Texas Archeological Society

artifact densities, a 12 m diameter midden, and
pit and post hole features. This pattern has been
observed in magnetometer data sets at other Caddo
sites (see Walker and Perttula 2008a), where it appears that densities of pottery sherds and burned
organic materials raised the magnetic background.
It is unclear what exactly is causing this magnetic
enhancement: the intensity of burning and the
discarding of burned materials, the clay bodies of
the sherds themselves, the high densities of such
sherds in subsurface contexts, or the simple fact
that they have been fired. Lipo et al. (2004:80) have
also suggested "positive magnetization also occurs
in organic-rich materials such as midden deposits,
as these conditions may cause authigenic mineral
growth." Further experiments, and additional geophysical investigations on sites with and without
midden deposits, will hopefully resolve the details
of these phenomena.
Several dipole returns were scattered across the
Leaning Rock collection area. These dipoles were
mostly clustered in the area of magnetic enhancement
discussed above; however, they are not limited to this
area (see Figure 4, 1ight). Dipole returns are usually
interpreted as metal debris although ground truthing is
needed to dete1mine this for ce1tain. Thermally-altered
rock cooking features can produce similar magnetic
returns (see Rogers 2000), and we suspect that at least
some of these magnetic dipoles mark the locations of
buried burned rock features. The magnetic properties
of fermginous materials, especially plinthite, increase
significantly when heated, sometimes producing
stronger signatures than metal.
Lake Naconiche Caddo Sites
Geophysical surveys at the Middle Caddo period
(ca. AD. 1200-1400) Tallow Grove (41NA231) and
Beech Ridge (41NA242) sites at Lake Naconiche
in Nacogdoches County, Texas, identified subtle
anomalies visible on shaded relief maps (Walker and
Perttula 2008a). These small habitation sites are on an
alluvial knoll (in the case of Tallow Grove) by Naconiche Creek, or on a nearby elevated upland ridge (in
the case of Beech Ridge) overlooking the floodplain.
Approximately 6900 m2 was covered by the magnetometer survey of the two sites and intervening nonhabitation areas between them (Figure 5, left)
Four areas were identified at the two sites that
represent possible prehistoric Caddo house areas,
midden areas, and/or deposits with organicallyor mineral-rich (i.e., areas with high densities of

discarded ceramic vessel sherds, burned clay, and
burned sediments) inclusions that are the product
of intensive but localized occupations/trash accumulation (Figure 5, right). Excavations in these
areas documented the occurrence of discrete occupational areas and concentrated organic deposits
(including two large midden deposits at the Tallow
Grove site) in each of these four areas, along with
evidence for Caddo house construction, hearths,
and the use of large pits (first for storage, and then
for trash disposal) (Perttula 2008). In the case
of the Beech Ridge site, the two areas of Caddo
structural archeological deposits and domestic
debris are apparently separated by a courtyard
or open area characterized by limited amounts of
trash and correspondingly low or quiet magnetic
returns. We should note that the geophysical survey
investigations did not specifically identify the locations of any Caddo burials on the two sites, even
though 10 distinct burial features (including a small
cemetery in the northern part of the Tallow Grove
site) were eventually identified at them, and the
distribution of all the midden deposits at the Tallow
Grove was not fully detected by the geophysical
work; nevertheless, the geophysical findings are
in concordance with the more arduously obtained
archeological data and findings.
The subtle nature of the anomalies at the two
Lake Naconiche sites, along with the intensive archeological investigations (i.e., extensive shovel testing data, hand excavations in blocks and scattered 1
x 1 m units, and machine-assisted excavations, see
Perttula 2008) in the same areas of the anomalies,
suggests the following: (1) that a dynamic research
design allowing for the feedback of results from
archeological excavations and geophysical survey
work is a prerequisite to the successful integration
of the results and interpretations from both kinds of
investigations, (2) that geophysical research can be
useful in the relatively deep sandy sites (ca. 40-90
cm+ in thickness above a clay Bt horizon) of East
Texas, and (3) there is a great range in the types of
anomalies of archeological significance on Caddo
sites. The results, as well as the appearance of relevant anomalies at the Tallow Grove and Beech
Ridge sites, are much different when compared to
the spectacular and easily interpretable geophysical
results from the George C. Davis (Creel et al. 2005;
see Osburn et al., this volume) and Grandview sites
(Lockhart 2007 a; Schambach 2001 b, 2002b) in East
Texas and southwestern Arkansas, respectively,
which have geophysically unique characteristics that

Walker and Perttula-Geophysical Investigations on Caddo Sites 167

n1170e1080

Area of Caddo
Structural Deposits

Possible Caddo Structural Area
{concentration of features
and artifacts)

n1000e1000

n1000e1080

Figure 5. Magnetometer data from the Tallow Grove (41NA231) and Beech Ridge sites (41NA242):
left, magnetometer plots, with the Tallow Grove site centered at NlOOO El040 and the Beech Ridge site
centered at Nl 150E1060; right, interpretation of the magnetometer data from the two sites.

enhanced the geophysical anomalies and features
that were identified there.

the magnetometer map suggest that other structures
are present across the natural rises (Bruseth et al.
2005:14).

Stallings Ranch (41LR297)
Magnetometer survey work was conducted by
Bruseth et al. (2005) at the Stallings Ranch site in
December 2003. The site appears to be a multi-component Woodland and early Caddo habitation site on
several natural rises in the Pine Creek valley. An area
80 x 80 min size (1.6 acres) was surveyed with the
magnetometer (Bruseth et al. 2005:Figure 3a).
In the work, areas of magnetic enhancement
were identified in five areas, each corresponding
to the natural rises, suggesting "cultural activity at
the site that clustered on the topographic knolls"
(Bruseth et al. 2005:14); midden deposits were
subsequently identified in several parts of the site.
A 10 m diameter anomaly on the central rise or
knoll (Bruseth et al. 2005:Figure 3b) appears to be
the magnetic signature for the outline of a circular
prehistoric structure; other partial arcs visible on

Bumitt (16SA204)
The Burnitt site was investigated by Kelley
(2006) in 2004, prior to new road construction. It is
a well-preserved 16th century Late Caddo habitation
site in the uplands, about 15 km east of the Sabine
River. Prior to excavations in the proposed highway
right-of-way, a 20 x 80 m area (0.4 acres) was examined with magnetic susceptibility, gradiometer,
electromagnetic conductivity, resistivity, and ground
penetrating radar (Kelley 2006:Figures 5-4 to 5-8).
The magnetic susceptibility survey results proved
to be the most useful in designing a plan of excavations in the right-of-way, as it showed a 12 x 8 m
circular area within the larger geophysical survey area
that proved to be a prehistoric midden deposit; three
smaller anomalies detected by magnetic susceptibility were cultural pit features (Kelley 2006:30). The

168

Texas Archeological Society

other geophysical techniques were less successful in
detecting anomalies of a prehistoric Caddo origin,
due at least in part to the extensive concentration of
historic 20th century metal and house debris at one
end of the survey area. An area of moderate magnetic
enhancement in the gradiometer data subsequently
was shown to con-espond to a cluster of pits and post
holes associated with a 5.4 m circular Caddo structure
underlying the previously mentioned midden deposits. One area of high resistance in the resistivity data
con-esponded to the southern part of the midden, but
no anomalies indicative of pit features were detected
with this technique.
Tyson (41SY92)
At the request of Dr. Tom Middlebrook, in 2007
the THC and Archaeo-Geophysical Associates,
LLC collected magnetometer data from the Tyson
site. Tyson is a Middle Caddo habitation site on a
prominent hill about 25 m above the floodplain of
the Attoyac River in Shelby County, Texas (Middlebrook 1994:4).
Approximately 8000 m2 (Figure 6, top) were
examined during the geophysical investigations,
centered over the area of previous archeological
investigations (see Middlebrook 1994:Figure 1).
These earlier excavations at the site (Figure 6,
bottom) had uncovered a house area in a large block
excavation; this house area was marked by a large
clay hearth, several large pits, and two child burials
(Middlebrook 1993:2-7, 1994:17-19 and Figure 2;
Middlebrook and Middlebrook 1996).
The magnetometer survey did not locate any
definitive evidence of Caddo architecture (see Figure 6, bottom), although the available archeological data suggests there may be several structures
present at the Tyson site beyond the one area that
has been partially excavated. However, extending
out of the northwest corner of the excavation block
is the possible geophysical remnant of a structure.
Middlebrook (1994) found no easily definable ring
or arc of posts, but did locate other evidence that
a Caddo structure was indeed present in the main
excavated area (Middlebrook and Middlebrook
1996). Given the apparent low contrast archeological anomalies and the high contrast soil matrix,
defining individual features is difficult at Tyson.
The magnetometer data is quite noisy-due in part
to previous widely-scattered excavations, as well
as left-over nails that marked these excavation
units-with several large complex dipoles ran-

domly arranged across the landform; these dipoles
closely resemble similar geophysical anomalies at
the Leaning Rock site that were suspected to be
buried burned rock features (see Figure 4, right).
Ground truthing of several of these at the Tyson
site showed them to be deeply buried (60-80 cm)
burned rock features.
Tyson is an excellent example of a Caddo
site that is known to contain an abundance of
archeological features that were not legible in
the geophysical data. This is partially due to the
nature of the site's matrix as a result of recent
cultural activities as well as its geological and soil
characteristics; another factor may be a product of
the Tyson's site distinctive archeological record
(Middlebrook and Middlebrook 1996: 11). The
findings from the Tyson site should serve as a
cautionary note that while geophysical investigations
have a tremendous potential in archeological
research, it should not be used as the sole means to
address the presence or absence of buried features or
other kinds of significant subsurface archeological
deposits. This is not an issue of whether the
geophysical technique "worked" or "did not work,"
but is simply a situation where the signal to noise
ratio, not easily predictable, in the geophysical
data is not satisfactory for immediate archeological
interpretation (see below).

GEOPHYSICAL EVIDENCE OF
CADDO STRUCTURES
To date, several Caddo sites have produced
geophysical data that can be readily interpretable
as Caddo architecture (Bruseth et al. 2007; Creel
et al. 2005; Lockhart 2007a; McKinnon 2008; see
Creel et al. and Osburn et al., this volume; Samuelson 2008; Schambach and Lockhart 2003; Walker
and Schultz 2006). This geophysical evidence
bolsters Kvamme's (2003a) argument that archeogeophysics has developed to the point where it can
often be used as a primary means of archeological
information in its own right. Thus, these geophysical findings contribute considerably to our cmTent
understanding of Caddo archeological landscapes
and community patterning, as well as lead to a more
nuanced understanding of the architectural details of
Caddo structures, as exemplified in the case of the
George C. Davis and Hill Farm sites.
The geophysical data from these two sites does,
however, illustrate an additional point concerning

Walker and Perttula-Geophysical Investigations on Caddo Sites 169

Possible Burned Rock Features

Excavation Blocks

+~~===:J
20

40m

Figure 6. Magnetometer data from the Tyson site (41SY92): top, magnetometer results; bottom;
excavation areas and locations of probable plinthite burned rock features.

the nature of the use of geophysics in archeology
(Figure 7). The George C. Davis site is situated on a
high Pleistocene telTace (Story 1997:3). The legible
features in the magnetic data at the site are comprised
of low magnetic signatures contrasting against an enhanced magnetic or shallow iron-rich subsoil (Bruseth
et al. 2007: 137; see also Creel et al. and Osburn et al.,
this volume). The opposite contrast can be seen in the
geophysical data from the Hill Farm site, where the
architectural features are high magnetic signatures
contrasting with a lower magnetic soil matrix (Walker
and Schultz 2006: 160).
Figure 7 displays some geophysical signature
examples from both sites that are clearly recognizable as Caddo houses. In the George C. Davis struc-

tures (Figure 7a-c), magnetic lows are depicted as
black, while in the Hill Farm examples (Figure 7d-f),
magnetic highs are depicted as black, so where the
images appear similar graphically they are in fact the
results of opposite magnetic contrasts. The negative
magnetic features at the Davis site are produced
by a ring of negative relief features filled with soil
with a low magnetic susceptibility that extended
into a clay sub-soil with an enhanced magnetic
susceptibility. Also at Davis, there are occasions
where a central hearth is represented by a magnetic
high in the center of the structure (Figure 7a), this
being the result of the thermo-remnant signature
of the burned clay hearth. At the Hill Farm site,
the structures may range from those that had been

170

Texas Archeological Society

B

c

A

D

E

F
Figure 7. Geophysical features of Caddo structures from the George C. Davis and Hill Farm sites: a-c, George C. Davis
structures; d-f, Hill Farm structures.

burned that are identified as strong magnetic highs
(Figure 7e-f) to those with more subtle geophysical
trends caused by magnetic susceptibility contrasts
(Figure 7d). These contrasts serve as a reminder
that there are a suite of both geological and cultural
variables that can come into play to produce legible
and archeologically interpretable geophysical data
from Caddo sites. Even in ideal situations with high
contrast data, such as the Davis and Hill Farm sites,
the total number of structures present in the data
from both locales is probably a more accurate count
of the numbers of houses that are within a visible
contrast range as opposed to the total numbers of
structures that occupied any surveyed portion of any
prehistoric community.

PRESENT AND FUTURE
PROSPECTS IN CADDO
GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH
As Berle Clay has noted, "one should end any
geophysical survey with the caveat, 'pending further archaeological examination, I think ... "' (Clay
2003:6-7). This brings to the forefront the importance of acquiring archeological data, particularly
information on the structure and character of the archeological record from excavations, that is closely
integrated with the geophysical survey data from the
same sites. As such, the geophysical survey data can
be viewed "as an extension of the archaeological
record that includes measures of electromagnetic

Walker and Perttula-Geophysical Investigations on Caddo Sites 171
spectra beyond the human visual range" (Lipo et al.
2004:79). Each form of data, whether archeological
or geophysical, constitute independent but different kinds of information about the archeological
record under investigation; the synthesis of both is
a necessity.
It is far too early to predict the frequency or
relative proportion of Caddo sites that will produce
clear and interpretable architectural features or
other features of interest in present and future
geophysical survey investigations or data. We do
have an understanding of why some sites have a
positive feature signal to noise ratio coupled with
well preserved archeological features detectable
in geophysical surveys. However, the opposite
question is more nebulous: namely, is the absence of
geophysical anomalies or features in a geophysical
investigation truly the absence of preserved
archeological features? Determining the feature
signal to noise ratio of any one site-or more simply
put, determining if there is too much noise, be it
from modern cultural clutter, background geological
and soil conditions, or both-is, and should continue
to be, an empirical observation, backed by continued
archeological investigations. Convincing ourselves
that we have enough data to start to understand all
the factors that play into interpreting the legibility
of geophysical data from sites or strata that have
not been thoroughly surveyed and investigated
archeologically would be an unfortunate mistake.
Multiple Techniques
The first strategy to employ to increase the potential success of an archeo-geophysical survey is to
use multiple instruments (Kvamme 2003a, 2003b,
2006a, 2007). Multiple instruments "sense" different
physical properties of the soil and are differentially
and adversely effected by extraneous modern cultural debris and metal. The current state of the art
for using multiple geophysical instruments is being
championed by Kvamme (2007), and consists of
using a series of statistical models and algorithms
to combine these multiple data sets into what he has
termed a GIS fusion.
For Caddo archeology specifically, Lockhart's
work at the Tom Jones site (Lockhart 2006, 2007a;
Schambach and Lockhart 2003) is the most
compelling illustration of this point. Lockhart
demonstrated that using a suite of geophysical
instruments, including fluxgate gradiometry,
electromagnetic induction (magnetic susceptibility

and conductivity), resistance, as well as ground
penetrating radar, helped tease out archeological
nuances in the deposits and features preserved there
that were not legible in any one single data set.
The cliche "if all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail" is all too true in geophysics.
The emphasis of archeo-geophysical investigations
should be on the successful collection of archeological information and not the use of any particular
instrument. A good analogy can be made with archeological excavations: sometimes one needs a shovel
or trowel and other times a backhoe; what matters in
the end is the collection of interpretable and useful
data. Using multiple instruments has been proven to
help in this respect in geophysical and archeological
investigations of Caddo sites.
Caddo Landscapes and Geophysical Data
An exciting possibility that archeo-geophysics
on Caddo sites offers is the potential for joint research investigations that can focus their attention
and study on the entire prehistoric landscape used
by Caddo peoples and communities at a greater degree of resolution that has previously been possible.
The geophysical data from the George C. Davis site
that TARL and the THC have collected is currently
around 20 ha in size (see Creel et al., this volume;
Creel et al. 2005). Eventually this entire site will
be investigated by geophysics; however, it already
provides us with the most complete spatial picture
of an Early Caddo ceremonial center, and possibly
the most complete view of any Caddo site. Current
work by Kvamme's students from the University
of Arkansas (McKinnon 2008; Samuelson 2008)
are performing comparable large scale geophysical
surveys of the Battle and Crenshaw mound sites
along the Great Bend of the Red River.
The well known map from the 1691 Teran de
los Rios expedition of the Upper Nasoni village,
believed to be at least in part the current day Hatchel
site (Wedel 1978; Perttula et al. 2008), provides
archeologists with our best and most complete
depiction of how the Caddo constructed and used
the landscape, at least at that time in their history.
Archeo-geophysics has been used to help strengthen
our understanding of how Teran's map is not just
an image to be used as a generic model of Caddo
community organization (cf. Lockhart 2007a) but
an actual map of a Caddo community at a specific
point in time (Perttula et al. 2008). Geophysical
techniques were used at multiple spatial scales

172

Texas Archeological Society

to target resolving both the nature of the Caddo
settlement in part of the Nasoni village explored
at the Hill Farm site, but also to help aid in the
environmental reconstruction and relocation of buried
stream channels and relict meander scars of the Red
River (Conyers et al. 2008; Grealy and Conyers 2006)
that are accurately shown on the Teran map.
At several smaller Caddo settlements, geophysical data was not as clear as that from the Hill Farm
or George C. Davis sites. However, it still obtained
important information about smaller-scale Caddo
landscapes and the spatial organization of particular
settlements, either farmsteads or small hamlets. In
several cases, areas of magnetic enhancement correlated well with the distributions of artifacts and
features, as well as open courtyard areas (Walker
2008; Walker and Perttula 2008a; Perttula and
Walker 2008). These areas of enhanced magnetism
consist of anthropogenic soils that have increased
magnetic susceptibility (David 1995:20; Dalan and
Bane1jee 1998:14; Dalan 2006:162).
Recommendations for Future Geophysical
Investigations at Caddo Sites in East Texas
We think it is important that future joint
geophysical and archeological investigations on
Caddo sites give relatively close attention to areas
of potential archeological significance marked by
subtly defined geophysical anomalies, not just those
areas that may have clear and legible geophysical
signatures of Caddo features and structures. Caution should always be exercised when excavating
in such areas defined by geophysical survey, being
mindful of the possibility that any magnetic anomalies may be represented by subtle soil color and/
or texture variations that may be otherwise easily
overlooked. Similarly, the anomalies detected may
be sufficiently subtle that the temptation may arise
(in the absence of other data) to conclude that no
anomalies of archeological significance actually
exist in an area of archeological study. Such hasty
conclusions should be resisted without first taking a
comprehensive view of the structure and character of
a site's archeological record from subsurface explorations (i.e., at a minimum, intensive shovel testing
and exploratory backhoe trenching/scraping) in the
same study areas.
To build on the potentially exciting geophysical findings that are being obtained from Caddo

sites in East Texas, some form of ground truthing is absolutely essential to better ascertain the
archaeological context and cultural association
of the various anomalies identified in the work.
Ground truthing could consist of a program of
systematic shovel testing across the larger geophysical anomalies as well as controlled handexcavated units in key locales within geophysical
collection grids to obtain information on the character of the archaeological deposits in these areas.
Such archeological investigations, if carefully
done and specifically targeted to these locations
to minimize damage to a site's archeological deposits, are certainly necessary to further advance
and develop interpretations of the cultural significance of the geophysical features and anomalies
detected at any Caddo site.
Finally, another consideration in future work at
Caddo habitation sizes is the size of the geophysical collection units that are being employed during
geophysical surveys. In the George C. Davis site
geophysical survey project (Creel et al. 2005) as
well as work conducted by the THC at the site
(Bruseth and Pierson 2004), emphasis was placed
on collecting and processing large amounts of geophysical data for broad community level analyses
covering many hectares. This technique has proven
useful in many regions, not just East Texas, for
identifying, discussing, and interpreting the patterning of many house clusters as well as spatial
patterning in prehistoric community layout (cf.
Kvamme 2003a, 2003b). However, as previously
mentioned, the Davis site geophysical data set is
uncommonly clean due to a relatively shallow plow
zone directly overlying a dense and iron-rich clay
subsoil (Walker et al. 2003; Bruseth et al. 2007;
Creel et al. and Osburn et al., this volume). For
prehistoric Caddo sites located in deeper sands
with a more complex package of sediments and archeological deposits, such as the Tallow Grove and
Beech Ridge sites at Lake Naconiche (and indeed
many other-if not most-Caddo sites in much of
East Texas), collecting geophysical data in smaller
units, or breaking down collection units to smaller
sizes during data processing, may prove to be very
useful in reducing the "noise" caused from various
non-archeological impediments and increasing the
likelihood that cultural features of interest can be
identified in future geophysical surveys on Caddo
sites in East Texas and surrounding states.

Walker and Perttula-Geophysical Investigations on Caddo Sites 173
ENDNOTE
1. The archeology of the Caddo Indian peoples in East
Texas has been recently summarized by Perttula
(2004:378-407).

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank several people who
have helped us both directly or indirectly with this
article. Mark Walters and Tom Middlebrook have
privately funded archeo-geophysical projects in the
East Texas Caddo region, and researchers from the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at The
University of Texas at Austin and the Texas Historical Commission have also conducted surveys at
several Caddo sites. Thanks also to Ken Kvamme at
the University of Arkansas and Dale Hudler at The
University of Texas at Austin, both of whom teach
courses on archeo-geophysics and will hopefully
continue to introduce students to the field.

REFERENCES CITED
Bennett, C. and J. Weymouth
1982 Magnetic Survey in the Plaza Area of the Spiro Mounds
Site. In Spiro Archaeology: 1980 Research, by J. D.
Rogers, pp. 215-226. Studies in Oklahoma's Past No.
9. OklahomaArcheological Survey, Nom1an.
Bergstrom, V. R., J. Ippolito, and K. Schneider
2008 Ground Penetrating Radar Investigations at the
Leaning Rock Site (41SM325). Caddo Archeology
Journal 17:115-117.
Bruseth, J.E. and B. Pierson
2004 Magnetometer Survey at the George C. Davis Site
(41CE19). Current Archeology in Texas 6(1):7-9.
Bruseth, J., J. Durst, R. Proctor, L. Banks, G. Sykes, and B.
Pierson
2005 Archeological Investigations at the Gene and Ruth Ann
Stallings Ranch Site (41LR297). MS on file, Archeology Division, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Bruseth, J. E., W. T. Pierson, and R. M. Johnson
2007 Large-Area Remote Sensing Coverage of Archaeological Sites with a Dual-Track, Cart-Mounted Cesium Magnetometer. Journal of Field Archaeology
32:1-15.
Clay, R. B.
2003 Conductivity (EM) Survey: A Survival Manual. Cultural Resource Analysts, Inc., Lexington, Kentucky.

Conyers, L. B., E. G. Ernenwein, M. Grealy, and K. M.
Lowe
2008 Electromagnetic Conductivity Mapping for Site
Prediction in Meandering River Floodplains. Archaeological Prospection 15:81-91.
Creel, D. G., D. Hudler, S. M. Wilson, T. C. Schultz, and C.
P. Walker
2005 A Magnetometer Survey of Caddoan Mounds State
Historic Site. Technical Report 51. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Dalan, R. A.
2006 Magnetic Susceptibility. In Remote Sensing in
Archaeology: An Explicitly North American Perspective, edited by J. K. Johnson, pp. 161-203.
University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
Dalan, R. A. and S. K. Banerjee
1998 Solving Archaeological Problems Using Techniques of Soil Magnetism. Geoarchaeology
13(1):3-36.
David, A.
1995 Geophysical Survey in Archaeological Field Evaluation. Ancient Monuments Laboratory, English
Heritage Society, London.
Environmetrics Inc.
1991 Mast Archeological Project, Nacogdoches, Texas:
Environmental Geophysical Survey, Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) and Electromagnetics (Conductivity). Environmetrics Inc., Houston.
Gaffney, C.
2008 Detecting Trends in the Prediction of the Buried Past:
A Review of Geophysical Techniques in Archaeology. Archaeometry 50 (2):313-336.
Gaffney, C. and J. Gater
2003 Revealing the Buried Past: Geophysics for Archaeologists. Tempus Publishing Ltd., Stroud, Gloucestershire, England.
Grealy, M. and L.B. Conyers
2006 EM3 l Geophysical Survey Methods, Results,
and Recommendations. In An Intensive Cultural
Resources Survey and Remote Sensing and Geomorphological Investigations for the Bowie County
Levee Realignment Project, Bowie County, Texas
and Little River County, Arkansas, by S. A. Sundermeyer, J. T. Penman, and T. K. Perttula, pp. 89-103.
Miscellaneous Reports, Report of Investigations
No. 29. LopezGarcia Group, Dallas, Texas.
Hudler, D., J. Jarvis, and T. Griffith
2006 A Partial Magnetometer Survey of the Archaeological Conservancy's Portion of the A. C. Saunders
Site (41AN19). Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

174

Texas Archeological Society

Jurney, D. H.
1999 Passport in Time Archaeological Investigations at
the Hargrove Lake Site (41HO150), Houston Count);
Texas. U.S. Forest Service, Lufkin.
Kelley, D. B.
2006 The Burnitt Site: A Late Caddo Occupation in the
Uplands of the Sabine River Basin in Louisiana.
Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge.
Kvamme, K. L.
2003a Geophysical Surveys as Landscape Archaeology.
American Antiquity 68:435-457.
2003b Multidimensional Prospecting in North American
Great Plains Villages Sites. Archaeological Prospection 10:131-142.
2006a Integrating Multidimensional Geophysical Data.
Archaeological Prospection 13:57-72.
2006b Magnetometry: Nature's Gift to Archaeology. In
Remote Sensing in Archaeology: An Explicitly North
American Perspective, edited by J. K. Johnson, pp.
205-233. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
2007

Integrating Multiple Geophysical Datasets. In Remote Sensing in Archaeology, edited by J. Wiseman
and F. El-Baz, pp. 345-374. Springer, New York.

2008

Remote Sensing Approaches to Archaeological Reasoning: Pattern Recognition and Physical Principles.
In Archaeological Concepts for the Study of the
Cultural Past, edited by A. P. Sullivan III, pp. 65-84.
University of Utah Press, Salt Lake City.

Kvamme, K. L., J. K. Johnson, and B. S. Haley
2006 Multiple Methods Surveys: Case Studies. In Remote Sensing in Archaeology: An Explicitly North
American Perspective, edited by J. K. Johnson, pp.
251-267. University of Alabama Press, Tuscaloosa.
Lipo, C. P., R. C. Dunnell, and D. 0. Larsen
2004 Studying the Evolution of Complex Societies: Recent
Geophysical Studies in the Central Mississippi River
Valley. Missouri Archaeologist 65:68-106.
Lockhart, J. J.
2006 Multi-sensor archaeogeophysics in disparate physiographic regions of Arkansas. Lecture in University of
Oklahoma Anthropology Graduate Student Association Lecture Series, Norman.
2007a Prehistoric Caddo of Arkansas: A Multiscalar Examination of Past Cultural Landscapes. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Anthropology, University
of Arkansas, Fayetteville.
2007b Archaeogeophysical Survey at Mounds Plantation
(l 6CD 12), Louisiana. Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Lockhart, J. J. and J. S. Girard
2007 Archaeogeophysical Survey at Mounds Plantation
(16CD 12). In Regional Archaeology Program, Management Unit 1, Eighteenth Annual Report, by J. S.
Girard, pp. 17-30. Northwestern State University of
Louisiana, Natchitoches.
Lockhart, J. J. and T. J. Green
2006 The Current and Potential Role of Archaeogeophysics in Cultural Resource Management in the United
States. In Remote Sensing in Archaeology: An Explicitly North American Perspective, edited by J. K.
Johnson, pp. 18-32. University of Alabama Press,
Tuscaloosa.
McKinnon, D. P.
2008 A View Beneath the Surface: Archaeogeophysical
Research at Battle Mound (3LA1 ). Paper presented
at the 50th Caddo Conference, Natchitoches, Louisiana.
Middlebrook, T. A.
1993 Radiocarbon Dates from the Tyson Site (41SY92).
Caddoan Archeology Newsletter III(4):2-8.
l 994

An Update of Archaeological Investigations at the
Tyson Site (41 SY92). Journal of Northeast Texas
Archaeology 3: 1-36.

Middlebrook, T. and R. Middlebrook
1996 Of Hearths and Houses. Caddoan Archeology Neivsletter 6(4):11-22.
Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee Count)'. Texas.
Memoir No. 5. Society for American Archaeology,
Menasha, Wisconsin.
Perttula, T. K.
2004 The Prehistoric and Caddoan Archeology of the
Northeastern Texas Pineywoods. In The Prehistory
of Texas, edited by T. K. Perttula, pp. 370-407. Texas
A&M University Press, College Station.
2005a The M. W. Burks Site (41WD52), A Late Caddo
Hamlet in Wood County, Texas. Journal of Northeast
Texas Archaeology 23: 1-27.
2005b 1938-1939 WPA Excavations at the Hatchel Site
(41BW3) on the Red River in Bowie County, Texas.
Southeastern Archaeology 24(2): 180-198.
Perttula, T. K. (editor)
2008 Lake Naconiche Archeology, Nacogdoches County,
Texas: Results of the Data Recovery Excavations at
Five Prehistoric Archeological Sites. Report of Investigations No. 60. Archeological & Environmental
Consultants, LLC, in press.

Walker and Perttula-Geophysical Investigations
Pe11tula. T. K. and C. P. Walker
2008 The History of Archaeological !nl'estigations and
Geophysical Survey at the Jamestmrn Mound Site
(41 SM54), an Archaeological Conservancy Preserve
in Smith County, Texas. Archeological & Environmental Consultants, LLC and Archaeo-Geophysical
Associates, LLC, Austin.
Perttula, T. K., C. P. Walker, and T. C. Schultz
2008 A Revolution in Caddo Archaeology: The Remote
Sensing and Archaeological View from the Hill Farm
Site (41BW169) in Bowie County, Texas. Southeastern Archaeology, in press.
Rogers. R.
2000 Excavations at Site 41HP200. Document No.
000211. PBS&J. Austin.
Samuelson, J.
2008 Geophysics at the Crenshaw Site. Paper presented at
the 50th Caddo Conference, Natchitoches, Louisiana.
Scharnbach, F. F.
2001 A Preliminary Report on the 2001 Investigations by
the Arkansas Archeological Survey and the Arkansas Archeological Society at the Grandview Prairie
Wildlife Management Area, Hempstead County,
Southwest Arkansas. Field Notes 301 :5-11. Newsletter of the Arkansas Archeological Society.
2002

The Grandview Archeological Project: The Arkansas
Archeological Survey/Arkansas Archeological Society's 2002 Field Season at the Grandview Prairie
Wildlife Management Area. Columbus, Arkansas.
Field Notes 308:3-8. Newsletter of the Arkansas
Archeological Society.

Schambach, F. F. and J. J. Lockhart
2003 The 2001-2002 Investigations by the Arkansas Archeological Survey and the Arkansas Archeological
Society at the Tom Jones Site (3HE40). a Late 14th,
Early 15th Century Caddo Mound Group in Southwest Arkansas. Paper presented at the 45th Annual
Caddo Conference. Arkadelphia, Arkansas.
Schultz, T. C.. C. P. Walker, D. Creel, D. Hudler, and S. M.
Wilson.
2004 Magnetometer Survey and Intrasite Structure of an
Early Caddo Site. Poster presented at the 69th Annual Meeting of the Society for American Archaeology, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

2000

Introduction. In The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas. by H.P. Newell and A. D. Krieger, pp.
1-31. 2nd Edition. Society for American Archaeology, Washington, D.C.

Caddo Sites 175

Sundermeyer, S. A. . J. T. Penman, and T. K. Perttula
2006 An Intensive Cultural Resources Survey and Remote Sensing and Geommphological Investigations for the Bowie County Levee Realignment
Project, Bowie County, Texas and Little River
County, Arkansas. Miscellaneous Reports, Report
of Investigations No. 29. LopezGarcia Group, Dallas, Texas.
Walker. C. P.
2007 Geophysical Survey Investigations. In Interim Report
on Data Recove1y Excavations at the Kitchen Branch
Site (41CP220) on FM 557 in Camp County, Texas,
by T. K. Perttula, pp. J2-19. Hicks & Company. Inc.
and Archeological & Environmental Consultants,
LLC, Austin.
2008

Cesium Magnetometer Survey at the Leaning
Rock Site (41SM325). Caddo Archeology Journal
17:7-12.

Walker. C. P. and T. K. Perttula
2007 Remote Sensing at the Horace Cabe Site (41BW14).
Caddo Archeology Journal 16:37-44.
2008a Geophysical Surveying at the Tallow Grove
(41NA231), Foggy Fork (41NA235), and Beech
Ridge (41NA242) sites. In Lake Naconiche Archeolog)~ Nacogdoches County, Texas: Results of
the Data Recovery Excavations at Five Prehistoric
Archeological Sites, edited by T. K. Perttula. Report
of Investigations No. 60. Archeological & Environmental Consultants, LLC, in press.
2008b Reanalysis of the Magnetometer Investigations at
the Ear Spool Site (41TT653). In Data Recovery
Investigations at the Ear Spool Site (4JTT653), Titus
County, Texas, by T. K. Perttula and D. L Sherman,
pp. 55-61. Document No. 070205. PBS&J, Austin,
in press.
Walker. C. P. and T. C. Schultz
2006 Magnetometer Survey and Results. In An Intensive
Cultural Resources Survey and Remote Sensing and
Geomorphological Investigations for the Bowie
County Levee Realignment Project, Bowie County,
Texas and Little River County, Arkansas, by S. A.
Sundermeyer, J. T. Penman, and T. K. Perttula.
pp. 158-168. Miscellaneous Reports, Report of
Investigations No. 29. LopezGarcia Group, Dallas,
Texas.
2007

Story. D. A.
J997 1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the
George C. Davis Site. Cherokee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68: l-113.

mi

Geophysical Survey at the Kah-hah-ko-wha Site
(41CE354), Cherokee County, Texas. In Archeological Survey Investigations and Test Excavations
at 4JCE354 at the North and South Lake Areas
of the H.R.C. Cherokee Tree Farm, L.P. Project,
Cherokee County, Texas, by T. K. Perttula and B.
Nelson, pp. 111-116. Report of Investigations No.
80. Archeological & Environmental Consultants.
LLC, Austin.

176

Texas Archeological Society

Walker, C. P., T. C. Schultz, D. G. Creel, D. Hudler, and S.
M. Wilson
2003 Magnetometer Survey and Intrasite Structure of
the George C. Davis Site in Northeast Texas. Paper
presented at the 11th East Texas Archeological Conference, Texarkana, Texas.
Walters, M.
2008 Life on Jackson Creek, Smith County, Texas: Archeological Investigations of a 14th Century Caddo
Domicile at the Leaning Rock Site (41SM325).
Caddo Archeology Journal 17: 1-119.

Wedel,M. M.
1978 La Harpe's 1719 Post on Red River and Nearby
Caddo Settlements. Bulletin 30. Texas Memorial
Museum, Austin.

Geophysical Survey of the Mound B Area
at the George Ce Davis Site
Darrell Creel, Dale Hudler, Samuel Wilson, Chester Walker, and T. Clay Schultz

ABSTRACT
The University of Texas has partially completed an extensive geophysical survey at the George C. Davis
site (41CE19, now Caddoan Mounds State Historic Site), one of the most intensively investigated archeological sites in Texas. Magnetometer and ground penetrating radar survey in the area of Mound B from 2002-2008
discovered evidence of several prehistoric structures and other features. This geophysical survey effort also
revealed important new information about mound construction stages.

INTRODUCTION
Since 2002, the University of Texas has conducted extensive geophysical survey at the George
C. Davis site, one of the most intensively investigated archeological sites in Texas. Our geophysical
survey, especially magnetometer, was planned for
the entire archeological site, a rather substantial undertaking that has not yet been completed. To date,
our investigations have been conducted with the permission and support of the Texas Parks and Wildlife
Department, first in 2001 via its Memorandum of
Understanding (Texas Antiquities Permit 2538) with
the Texas Historical Commission (THC) and subsequently under Texas Antiquities Permits 2850 and
4687 issued to Darrell Creel. Access to the privately
held parcel adjacent to the park property was generously provided by Harold Lovell. Here, we focus
on our geophysical investigations in the Mound B
area and describe our findings as they build on the
results of excavations in 1968-1969 (Story 1972,
1997, 2000). Not only did our geophysical surveys
reveal important new information about the mound
itself, they also detected a number of previously
unknown features adjacent to the mound in and
near what Dee Ann Story referred to as the Mound
B "inner precinct."
The University's geophysical survey efforts at
the site began with our curiosity about three unusually large post holes that had been discovered in
Unit 38 during a testing project at the state historic
site in 1977 (Fields 1978). We reasoned that the
most cost-effective way to determine whether the

post holes were part of a large feature/structure was
to conduct a geophysical survey of the area. At our
request Mark Willis (then at the University of Texas
at El Paso) conducted a 30 x 40 m ground penetrating radar (GPR) survey in August 2001 that was
centered on the Unit 38 area. Unfortunately, results
were ambiguous.
We then requested that the THC conduct a magnetometer survey of the post hole area, and they did
so in May 2002. Their survey covered a 40 x 100 m
area that included the known post holes, and results
were excellent. Based on this result, a decision was
made to purchase our own magnetometer and to
conduct surveys at the site with our own equipment
in October 2002. To date, we have surveyed more
than 17 hectares at the site with the magnetometer.
In 2004, we added a GPR to our instrument inventory and began radar surveys of selected areas of
the site in November of that year. A more limited
amount of resistivity survey has also been done, but
it is not discussed here.

BACKGROUND
The George C. Davis site is a large, long
occupied site on the east side of the Neches River
in Cherokee County, Texas. It is best known as an
early Caddo mound site, but there is artifactual
evidence of occupation as early as Paleoindian
times and as late as the protohistoric period. Three
earthen mounds are the most conspicuous remains
of the Caddo village. The site has been the scene

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

178

Texas Arclzeological Society

of numerous archeological excavations since the
initial Works Progress Administration (WPA)
excavations (Newell and Krieger 1949). These have
been summarized most recently by Story (2000) in
her "Introduction" to the 2000 reprinting of Newell
and Krieger's (1949) report as one of the Society for
American Archaeology's Classics.
The Davis site comprises more than 100 acres
on a high terrace of the Neches River. The three
Caddo mounds and the village remains smTounding
them occur over most of the site area. Much of the
excavation has been near the mounds (Newell and
Krieger 1949; Story 1972, 1997), but a large number of smaller units have been dug throughout the
site primarily to define the extent and nature of archeological remains (Creel 1979; Davis et al. 1992;
Fields 1978; Fields and Thurmond 1980; Story
1981; Thurmond and Kleinschmidt 1979). While
these excavations have provided a general definition
of the site, archeologists have had difficulty in identifying architectural remains and thereby deriving a
more detailed understanding of residential areas. It
is this difficulty and the size of the site that led us
to undertake a geophysical survey of the entire site.
To date, we have conducted this survey only on the
Caddoan Mounds State Historic Site and a privately
owned area immediately adjacent to the south end
of our collection area.

THE MOUND B AREA
Within the Mound B area, previous investigations include a large excavation in the west central
portion of the mound, trenches in its north and east
sides, and two small excavation units just southwest
of the mound, all during the 1968-1970 University
of Texas at Austin project at the site. These are described in detail in Story (1972, 1997).
The large excavation in the western side of the
mound began as a 2 m wide trench dug in 1968 from
the center of the mound to beyond the western edge
of mound wash. In 1969, a second trench was dug
parallel to, and 11 m south of, the 1968 trench, and
the fill between the two trenches was stripped, thus
resulting in a large excavation that was 15 m northsouth. Remains of several structures were found,
including two large round buildings underneath the
mound and parts of others beyond the western edge
of the mound (Spock 1977; Story 1972, 1997).
In addition, trenches were dug in the northern
and eastern sides of the mound, and together with

the large excavation on the west side, revealed much
about pre-mound remains and mound construction.
In short, they revealed that the mound was composed
of several construction phases and was underlain
by occupational debris (Story 1972:62, 1997:65).
According to Story, "About A.D. 1200 at least two
structures [on the premound surface] were apparently deliberately destroyed and then capped with
earth to form a rectangular or subrectangular, truncated mound. Designated as Mound B 1, this feature
measured a maximum of 40 meters N-S, 26 meters
E-W, and 2 meters high" (Story 1972:63). "Mound
B 1 was constructed by "piling loads of dirt into
distinct, haystack-like, hummocks which were then
joined to form one mound ... " (Story 1972:66). "No
features were found within Mound B and whether
or not it additionally served as a platform for one
or more buildings cannot be ascertained" (Story
1972:63).
According to Story (1972:63-64 ):
A layer of fine, laminated wash,
which generally reached a maximum
thickness of about 15 cm, rested at the
base of Mound B 1 and separated it from
the second building phase, Mound B2.
Mound B2 was preserved only on the
slopes of the mound and, very curiously,
did not extend completely around the
mound ... at least it was absent in walls
of the backhoe trench (No. 8) dug into
the east side of the mound. Apparently it
was during this construction stage that a
ramp was first added to the north end of
the mound. The ramp was approximately
4 meters wide and extended in excess of
5 meters beyond the mound.
The third and evidently final addition
to Mound B, Mound B3, was separated
from the second addition by a fairly thick
(generally 30 cm) layer of wash. Little
remained of this construction phase: it
was badly eroded and very difficult to
trace ... As best could be determined, it
followed the same distribution as Mound
B2, being observable only on the northern
and western margins of the mound and
not present in the walls of the backhoe
trench dug into the east of the mound.
With the third addition Mound B reached
its maximum horizontal extent: roughly
42 to 44 meters N-S and 28 meters E-W.
The final maximum height is estimated at

Creel et al.-Geophysical Survey of the Mound B Area at the George C. Davis Site 179
3 meters based on the amount of washed
material and disturbed plow zone.
Thus, at the time of our geophysical survey, there
had been substantial excavations into Mound B, with
more limited work adjacent to it. Much was known
about its general internal structure, and the primary
objective of our work was locating structures in the
area surrounding the mound. As described here, our
geophysical survey work yielded much more than
this, in particular, revealing unexpected details about
mound construction history.

component in the soil can be disturbed by any
activity that disrupts the physical integrity of the
matrix and this disturbance can result in a negative magnetic anomaly (Breiner 1973:47). Maillol
et al. (2004:216) estimated that they were able to
measure differences as small as 0.25 nT (nanotesla) in the total magnetic field with a proton
magnetometer, but our experience has been that
field resolution is seldom that good and is highly
dependent on the local magnetic environment.

Radar

THE GEOPHYSICAL
SENSORS USED
In this article, we report results of our survey using a magnetometer and GPR. At the site in general,
our coverage with the magnetometer was extensive,
continuous to the extent possible, and far exceeded
what was done with the radar. Radar survey was
done in three areas in addition to the Mound B area,
but none of these was as extensive.

Magnetometer
A Geometrics G-858 cesium magnetometer
was used for magnetometer data collection. Magnetometers are passive receivers that measure the
total magnetic field intensity at a point location.
The largest component of this intensity is the
earth's magnetic field, but two smaller local components of the magnetic intensity can be of interest
to archeologists. These are induced magnetization
(present when a material in the earth's magnetic
field enhances that field, causing the material itself
to act as a magnet), and remanent magnetization
(present when a material has its own magnetic field
independent of the earth's magnetic field) (Breiner
1973:8). In archeological contexts, remanent
magnetization commonly occurs in clay objects
that have been heated (hearths, bricks, pottery,
etc.) and induced magnetization occurs in objects
made from ferrous or other materials that are
highly susceptible to being magnetized. A more
subtle expression of both types of magnetization
occurs in soils, which can have an induced magnetic field generated by soil components such as
magnetite and a remanent magnetic field generated
by in situ formation (through organic processes) of
maghemite (Breiner 1973:46-47). This magnetic

A Geophysical Survey Systems GPR with an
SIR-3000 controller was used for the radar collection. GPRs are complex systems that transmit signals into the ground at differing time intervals and
signal frequencies (determined by the operator and
antenna hardware) and then receive back those same
signals as reflected by the soil matrix and materials
within it. Each of these signal reflections:
contain information regarding strength
of reflection (measured in amplitude),
depth in the ground (in two-way travel
time), as well as energy from a wide
range of frequencies above and below the
antennae' centre-frequency. Each of these
factors potentially can be used to measure
variables of geological or archaeological
materials in the ground, but only if one
can relate them directly to the material
in the ground and the geometry of the
features (Conyers 2006:139).
Resolution (ability to discriminate between two
radar reflective objects) is affected by transmission
frequency and depth of the reflecting object. Higher
frequencies provide better resolution but less ability
to penetrate the ground, and when using the same
transmission frequency, signal returns from shallow
objects have better resolution than signal returns
from deeper objects (Leckebusch 2003:215).

THE GEOPHYSICAL FIELDWORK
A non-magnetic cart with dual G-858 magnetometers installed was pulled in a zig-zag pattern
on north-south transects located 1 m apart on the
east-west axis. The two sensors were located 50
cm apart on the cart, providing readings at a 50 cm
spacing on the east-west axis (25 cm either side

180

Texas Archeological Society

of the transect line). The magnetometer was set to
take readings every 0.1 second along the transect,
providing readings at approximately 15 cm spacing
on the north-south axis. A Geometrics G-856 proton
magnetometer was operated as a base station to take
magnetic background readings during G-858 collection. Magnetic background intensity varies through
time (based on solar conditions, etc.) and data on
the background intensity allows one to standardize
readings taken days or weeks apart. These field collection methods were based on those used by the
THC in their magnetometer program in 2002, and
journal articles have since confirmed that these collection methods provide excellent magnetic resolution (Tabbagh 2003; Bescoby et al. 2004).
We collected GPR data with both 200 Mhz
and 400 Mhz antenna frequencies. Leckebusch
(2003:216) notes that a resolution of 20 cm theoretically requires transect spacing of less than 50 cm and
suggests transect spacing of 25 cm when using a 400
or 500 Mhz antenna. A recent field study by Pomfret
(2006) indicates that transects 25 cm apart (400 Mhz
antenna) do the best job of resolving small, linear
objects but that this spacing only provides a small
resolution gain over 50 cm transect surveys.
We operated our cart-mounted 400 Mhz antenna
system in a zig-zag pattern on east-west transects
that were spaced 50 cm apart on the north-south
axis. The controller was set to transmit 40 signals
(scans) per m and the receiver was set to listen to
the return signal for 50 nano-seconds (time= depth).
This time was chosen based on a test dataset we
collected at the site that suggested 50 nano-seconds
would provide returns from the bottom of Mound B
(approximately 2.4 m depth). The characteristics of
the return signal were sampled (recorded) 512 times
during the 50 nano-seconds listening time.
The 200 Mhz antenna was pulled in a zig-zag
pattern on east-west transects located 1 m apart on
the north-south axis. This transect spacing was selected based on the lower resolution capability of the
200 Mhz antenna and the fact that we were primarily
using this antenna to determine the depth of several
magnetometer features east of Mound B that are
fairly large (several meters) in extent. The controller
was set to transmit 40 signals (scans) perm and the
receiver was set to listen to the return signal for 100
nano-seconds (time= depth). This time was selected
because the features of interest east of Mound B
might be as deep as 4 to 5 m. The characteristics of
the return signal were sampled (recorded) 512 times
during the 100 nano-seconds listening time.

COLLECTION AREA GRID
LOCATIONS
A total station set to the site's grid coordinates
was used to lay out the magnetometer collection
areas. North-south transects were used since the
magnetometer is more sensitive when lined up with
the Earth's magnetic field. Figure 1 is a map of our
magnetometer collection to date on the site.
Several radar collection areas were also laid out
using the site grid coordinate system; however, the
Mound B radar collection area was laid out using a
sub-meter Global Positioning System (GPS) set to
the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinate system. Figure 2 is a map of our GPR collection
to date on the site.

DATA PROCESSING AND
INTERPRETATION
The first step in processing the magnetometer
dataset was to subtract the base station readings
from the cart mounted sensor readings to correct
for variation in the general magnetic background
during collection. The corrected sensor readings
were then scanned and short-term very high/very
low readings (spikes) and zero readings resulting
from sensor 'dropout' were detected using a Visual
Basic for Applications (VBA) program written by
Hudler. This program uses detection and evaluation
methods described by Ciminale and Loddo (2001).
Next, the 'striping' effects caused by using dual
sensors (exaggerated by pulling the sensor cart in
a zig-zag pattern) were corrected for by processing
the dataset through another VBA program written by
Hudler, again using methods described by Ciminale
and Loddo (2001). The resulting datasets were then
manipulated mathematically to set them to a "standard" average reading so they would better match
each other when put together in a mosaic.
The datasets were then imported into a geographical information system (GIS) program (ArcGIS) and the individual readings were used to calculate a "checkerboard" of values at regular 10 cm
intervals. The result of this process is a GIS surface
(expressed as a raster/grid) that can be displayed
as a gray-scale color map. Locations within this
surface that have no gray-scale displayed are areas
where very high/low readings were deleted during
the de-spiking operation. Finally, the magnetometer
collection grid coordinates for the Mound B area

Creel et al.-Geophysical Survey of the Mound B Area at the George C. Davis Site 181

Figure 1. Aerial photograph (part of the digital ortho quarter quad) of the George C. Davis site area showing the areas
covered by magnetometer survey (hatched). State Highway 21 runs southwest-northeast through the site.

182

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Aerial photograph (part of the digital ortho quarter quad) of the George C. Davis site area showing the areas
covered by GPR survey (hatched). Mound B is in the large GPR survey area at left center; State Highway 21 runs
southwest-northeast through the site (lower right corner).

Creel et al.-Geophysical Survey of the Mound B Area at the George C. Davis Site 183
were converted to UTM grid coordinates so the
magnetometer data could be merged with the GPR
data for interpretation.
The radar datasets were processed using GPRSlice software. A visual scan of the raw dataset for
each transect showed that many of the shallow returns were obscured by overlapping hyperbolas (particularly in the 400 Mhz datasets) caused by small,
highly radar-reflective objects and that "ringing"
occurred at the lower depths, probably caused by
dense clay layers. Although these can be processed
out (using migration and deconvolution techniques
respectively), the publisher of the GPR-Slice software feels that this processing is not necessary for
most archeological datasets since the individual
radar returns get "averaged" during the slicing process in his software (Dean Goodman, 2008 personal
communication). This "averaging" eliminates most
of the unwanted signal patterns in the radar returns.
Using GPR-Slice, we assembled the data from the
individual transects into a 3-dimensional block that
could then be sliced into vertical and horizontal
planes for analysis. We also applied a topographic
dataset (collected with a total station) to this 3-dimensional block so that it was not flat, but curved
to reflect the mound's actual shape. We sliced the
400 Mhz datasets at 1 nano-second intervals vertically (approximately 10 cm) and 50 cm intervals
horizontally. The 200 Mhz datasets were sliced at 2
nano-second intervals vertically (approximately 20
cm) and I m horizontally.
Our basic interpretive approach to the geophysical dataset was the same as our approach to datasets
resulting from excavation, i.e., pattern recognition.
However, the geophysical dataset lacks many of the
visual aids to interpretation that are in an excavation
dataset while providing aids to interpretation in an
entirely different part of the electromagnetic spectrum. As an example, remanent magnetization can
be seen in the geophysical dataset as small, strong
dipole magnetic signatures, while soil disruption is
evident as areas of low magnetic readings. We have
interpreted many of the strong magnetic dipole returns as clay hearths and many of the low intensity
magnetic anomalies as post holes and roads.
It should be noted that geophysical anomalies
have not necessatily been caused by ai·cheological objects/disturbances but could be the result of geologic
and/or other events that have generated magnetic and
radar signatures. To distinguish between geophysical
anomalies generated by prehistoric and historic human activity and those caused by other processes we

have relied on pattern recognition and our understanding of the geophysical causes of the returns. To this
end, anomaly patterns observed in the geophysical
data were compared to archeological features that
have previously been found at the George C. Davis
site and other Caddo ai·cheological sites.

RESULTS
As noted previously, we were pleasantly surprised at the information obtained on Mound B,
some of which slightly changes previous interpretation of its internal structure and construction stages.
It is appropriate, therefore, that the data and our assessment of it be presented in some detail. We then
describe our findings in the area around Mound B.

Mound B
In general, the results of our geophysical survey
work are consistent with the earlier excavations into
Mound B proper, but they add considerable detail
about mound size, growth, presence of ramps, and
possibly the presence of architectural remnants. As
can be seen in Figure 3, the edges of the original
mound and subsequent additions are clearly revealed
in the magnetometer data, we think even to the point
of distinguishing between strongly magnetic mound
facings that were also seen in the excavations. The
magnetometer data also present a more complete
picture of the size and shape of the mound, revealing
the original mound to have been approximately 31
m east-west x 37 m north-south. The GPR data also
detected the same outline.
It is important to note that the 01iginal mound as
identified from the excavations apparently represents
the mound after the first addition. That is, the
original mound as revealed by the magnetometer was
approximately 31 x 37 rn in size, a few m wider but a
few m shorter than what was believed to be the case
based on the 1968-1970 excavations. This seeming
inconsistency was in part resolved by examination of
both profiles of Backhoe Trench 9, dug into the north
end of the mound, which shows that the excavators
clearly saw and documented a stratigraphic break
exactly where we see a pronounced line in the magnetometer data. This stratigraphic break is shown
on the profiles as having the same inclination as the
breaks clearly identified as the edges of the mound,
although it was not perceived as the mound's edge at
that time. Given this excavation data, the con-elation

184

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 3. Magnetometer survey data of the immediate Mound B area showing the rectangular mound and nearby features.
GPR survey covered approximately the same area as shown in this image.

with the magnetometer break, and a comparable
magnetometer image on the south end of the mound,
we have some confidence that what Story identified
as the original mound (B 1) was instead the mound

with its first and most substantial lateral addition. It
is not clear why there is a difference in the east-west
dimension, which apparently changed only slightly
as a result of all mound additions.

Creel et al.-Geophysical Survey of the Mound B Area at the George C. Davis Site 185
We considered the possibility that the major
additions to the north and south ends of the mound
were in fact simply lower terraces or levels of the
mound and that the interpretation based on the
excavations was correct. The geophysical data
are ambiguous in this regard, but the profiles of
Backhoe Trench 9 are definitive in showing that the
stratigraphic break along the edge of our Mound
B 1 extends well below the level of the mound additions. It is true that this might still be consistent
with the mound, as first built, consisting of a higher
central platform with low terraces on the north and
south ends, both built after the main part. However,
the contours of the mound remnant and excavation
profiles seem to us to preclude this possibility.
The magnetometer and GPR data both reveal
what appear to be ramps on the east and south sides of
the original mound, comparable to the north side ramp
identified during the 1968-1970 excavations. Neither
of these was known to be present until our magnetometer survey. Backhoe Trench 13, dug into the east side
of the mound, was apparently just to the north of the
ramp there, and the ramp on the south side was undetected due to the lack of excavation in that part of the
mound. The magnetometer data indicate that the south
ramp extended from the original mound (as defined
here), and we presume that the same is true of the
east ramp, although only excavations can verify this
inference. The profiles in the backhoe trenches in the
north end of the mound can be interpreted in various
ways, but there are no data, excavation or geophysical,
that preclude the ramp there from extending from the
original mound edge (as defined here). If that were
the case, Mound B began as a rectangular platform
with ramps on three sides, one south toward Mound
A, another north toward Mound C, and the third to
the east. Dming the 1968-1970 excavations into the
west side of the mound, no ramp was recognized; and
it seems unlikely that a ramp was ever present on that
side of the mound.
Seen most clearly in the magnetometer data are
what we interpret as major additions to the north
and south sides of the mound, together rendering a
longer and probably higher rectangular mound from
the original. We suspect that the expansion of the
mound on its south side involved the deposition of
fill on and around the ramp, obscuring but also preserving it. It is likely that the same was done on the
north side of the mound, in effect making the mound
substantially larger in the north-south direction. We
cannot be sure if there may have been short ramp
remnants still in use on the north and south ends, but

we feel reasonably confident that the ramp on the
east side may well have continued in use. Presumably, this ramp is preserved due to the accumulation
of eroded mound fill around it.
The 1968-1970 excavations documented relatively modest additions to the east and west sides
compared to the additions on the north side. At
least one of these additions appears to be visible in
the magnetometer data, thus lending support to our
interpretation of the addition on the north and, by
inference, the south ends of the mound.
We have not been able to identify with any
confidence architecture on mound platforms. In both
the magnetometer and GPR datasets, one can see
areas on the mound that are more strongly magnetic
and less radar reflective, primarily along the central
north-south axis of the mound where the platform is
more likely to be better preserved. Both instruments
detected a more clayey deposit that we presume to
have been the remnant of the capping material. For
the most part, this is confined to the original mound,
but it also extends over nearly all of the western portion of the southern mound addition.
Beyond this possible capping, we could not
confidently identify any structure that we believe to
have been on top of the mound. There are, however,
hints of small structures on the mound along the east
side, both north and south of the probable ramp, but
none that were unanimously agreed to be architectural. The GPR detected a sinuous line of possible
post holes that goes completely over and beyond
the mound in an east-west direction; on this basis,
we believe that this line represents a historical, not
archeological, feature.

ARCHITECTURE AND OTHER
FEATURES BEYOND THE MOUND
While we have magnetometer data completely
around and well beyond Mound B, our GPR data
coverage is considerably more limited, as noted
previously. In general, the two datasets are comparable
where they overlap, although we believe that our
magnetometer data are a bit more useful for identifying
architectural remnants due in part to our GPR data
having been collected on east-west transects only,
rather than both east-west and north-south transects.
Based on our magnetometer survey, we believe
we can identify several different types of archeological features. Most notably, these include
round and sub-square structures of the sort found

186

Texas Archeological Society

previously at the site, arcs that may be remnants
of such structures, and possibly some large, deep
pits. Off the mound as well as on it, we can clearly
see in both data sets the distinct furrows from
historic plowing and the regular pattern of holes
where peach trees were planted in the orchard (no
longer extant). These tend to make the signal of
archeological features more difficult to interpret,
and of course, the many decades of plowing has
destroyed the upper portions of all features except
those buried by eroded mound fill. Due to the
number and density of anomalies, including both
historic and prehistoric features, we set a relatively
high standard for definition of prehistoric features.
In the magnetometer data set in particular, there are
numerous additional anomalies that we suspect are
prehistoric; when we could not agree on these, they
have not been assigned feature numbers and are not
discussed further.
Within the dataset overlap area, we have identified six structures that we believe with some confidence to be prehistoric (Figure 4). All are east of the
mound. Two of these (Features 250 and 251 ), plus
another now thought possibly to be historic (Feature
249), were first believed to be large prehistoric shaft
graves on the basis of the magnetometer data. Indeed,
our GPR work was largely devoted to testing this
possibility. Interestingly, however, the GPR data lent
some support to this interpretation only for Feature
249, and it could be a historic pit perhaps similar to
the horse burial found during the 1980 Unit 65 excavations just north of the area discussed in this article
(Guy 1981 :77). There is no definitive evidence that
the other two are pits, and they now seem more likely
to be the remnants of houses whose floors are buried
by deposits eroded from the mound.
Feature 253 is a distinct sub-square structure
approximately 14.9 m across east of Mound B. No
definite interior features are recognizable, but the
perimeter postholes appear to be large, comparable
to those in the larger circular structures to the east.
There are, in addition, two circular anomalies
that apparently represent substantial round buildings,
one to the southeast of the mound (Feature 285), the
other to the northeast (Feature 284), both of them
beyond the smaller Features 250 and 251. The GPR
also detected both, although not quite so clearly.
In addition, there is a less clearly defined and less
regularly shaped anomaly immediately southeast of
Feature 250 that we assess as a possible structure
(Feature 254). Its southwest side is in part coincident
with the sinuous line of probable post holes that goes

over Mound B and that, as noted previously, may well
be historic in age.
In the northwest corner of the Mound B geophysical survey area, there are two concentric arcs
that are designated as Feature 279. These cannot be
traced as complete circles and thus identified as prehistoric structures, but neither do we interpret them
as plow scars where a tractor turned. At the present
time, we do not know if they are architectural remnants or even prehistoric.
Another arc, Feature 286, curves around the
north and west sides of Feature 250 just east of
Mound B. This arc is clearly visible in both the
magnetometer and GPR datasets, but in neither can
it be traced very far to the south. If the arc represents
the recognizable portion of a full circle, it would
be approximately 25 m in diameter. We cannot be
certain that it is a prehistoric feature; even if it is,
we have no data at present that links it to any of the
nearby features, including Feature 250.
Just to the east of Feature 279, in the area of
excavation Unit 65, we have tentatively identified at
least one circular anomaly that may be a prehistoric
structure. If so, it seems probable that some of its
northern post holes were found during the Unit 5
excavations (Story 1972). Moreover, if this anomaly
is a structure, it is fairly large at 16 min diameter. In
addition, we see hints in the magnetometer data of
possible round structures in both the Unit 4 and Unit
13 areas southwest of Mound B. Excavation in Unit
4 found few features and the Unit 13 excavations
found 15 small charcoal-filled pits and one post hole
(Story 1972:90). Incidentally, both of these excavation units were detected by the magnetometer.
Of all these definite, probable, and possible
structures, only Feature 284 appears to have a hearth
remnant or interior support posts. This feature is
approximately 9 .1 m in diameter and has a distinct
magnetic dipole at its center. It also has a series of
what may well be interior roof support post holes.
With these and the dipole in the center, it closely
resembles a number of other structures identified
in various parts of the site by our magnetometer
survey; with these features, it also resembles Feature
125 in Unit 10 (Spock 1977; Story 1972, 1997), just
to the north of our Mound B survey area.
In addition to the definite, probable, and possible structures we have identified in our data, there
are a number of anomalies that may represent large
extramural pits. Several are east and north of Mound
B, but others are scattered elsewhere around the
mound and throughout the village area in general.

Creel et al.-Geophysical Survey of the Mound B Area at the George C. Davis Site 187

Figure 4. Magnetometer survey data of the greater Mound B area, with excavation units and features . The strongly
magnetic linear anomaly (Feature 248) that arcs around Mound Bis probably a historic road, and the distinct linear
anomaly in the lower left corner is the gravel-covered walking path in the state historic site.

188

Texas Archeological Society

Given the finding of such pits in various excavations
at the site over the years, it is not surprising that
they would occur in the Mound B area. Similarly,
there are a number of dipole anomalies that could
represent prehistoric burned features, although they
could also represent metal objects, presumably most
of which would be modern.
Arcing around the east side of the mound is a
distinct, strongly magnetic anomaly (Feature 248)
that we now believe to have been the course of an
historic vehicle path. It terminates in the area where
a house stood until 1970, and it is very similar to
other linear anomalies also identifiable as roads
between this house and Texas State Highway 21.
Thus, while at first we entertained the possibility
that this anomaly might be prehistoric, it seems
more likely to be a recent historic road. In support
of this inference, we note the pronounced magnetic
difference between it and the Camino Real in the
northern portion of the site; that is, later historic road
features are magnetically strong whereas the older
road is significantly weaker magnetically.

CONCLUSIONS
In general, our magnetometer survey detected
a substantial number of round buildings, and a few
sub-square buildings, consistent with those found
during previous excavations at the site. No matter
what confidence level one uses in defining architecture in the magnetometer data, buildings seem to be
more numerous in the vicinity of Mound B than in
village areas to the south, east, and north. If true, this
would be consistent with the findings in the WPA
excavations around Mound A. It would also appear
to be consistent with Story's definition of "inner
precincts" centered on Mounds A and B (Story
1972). Interestingly, we have not detected overlapping structures in the Mound B area as was found
adjacent to Mound A, although we acknowledge
the possibility that older structures may not have as
distinct a magnetic signature as more recent ones.
Whether there are any additional structures that we
have not recognized in the geophysical data remains
to be seen. It is worth noting, however, that we have
not clearly seen in our data some of the structures
partially exposed during the 1968-1970 excavations
on the west side of Mound B, nor one found in 1978
in Unit 45 (Creel 1979:31).
In the site generally, structures recognizable in
our magnetometer data tend to be rather large, with

big, deep post holes whose fill is decidedly different
magnetically from the surrounding dense red clay.
Almost certainly, small structures, particularly those
only a few m in diameter, are underrepresented in
our list of features. In part, this is probably due to
the profusion of magnetic anomalies, some prehistoric, others historic, but it surely relates as well
to our setting a relatively high standard for formal
designation of features.
Many of the structures we found, particularly
east of Mound B, are quite large, up to 20 m in
diameter and do not have recognized interior post
holes. Based on the partial excavation of one of
these in 1977, combined with our magnetometer
data, we suggest with some diffidence that they
may be enclosures instead of roofed buildings. In
no case have we been able to identify buildings
within any of these large structures, so our hypothesis is quite tentative and sorely in need of testing.
However, it is possible that Feature 250 (probable
structure) within Feature 286 (large arc) was such
an enclosure, although, of course, there is no way
at present to know if they were associated with
one another.
More generally, we have found geophysical
evidence for prehistoric Caddo architecture over a
large area east of Mound B, between it and Mound
A, and to about midway between Mounds B and C.
There is a large zone around, and east of, Mound C
that appears to be basically devoid of architectural
remnants. However, along the drainage north of
Mound C, there are abundant prehistoric remains,
some of which date to the Caddo occupation.
Excavations there have found numerous features,
including post holes, but our magnetometer data
set from that area was much degraded due to the
substantial recent damage caused by feral hogs. As
a result, we did not acquire data comparable to that
elsewhere at the site.
Basically, it appears that the Caddo residential use of the site was concentrated in the area
around Mounds A and B, between them, and to
the east. Other smaller residential areas are along
the drainage in the northern part of the site. Architecture seems conspicuously scarce in the vicinity
of Mound C, the special mortuary area at the site.
Immediately south of Mound C is a fairly large area
with particularly notable magnetic anomalies, and
some of the anomalies are in rows. In terms of size,
these are consistent with graves, and we suggest
that this may be a cemetery area for many of the
community residents.

Creel et al.-Geophysical Survey of the Mound B Area at the George C. Davis Site 189
In sum, our more detailed geophysical survey
of the Mound B area has helped to flesh out our
knowledge of the archeological remains at the
George C. Davis site, particularly of the Caddo
occupation. We now have a much more complete
understanding of the occurrence of architectural
remains in the village, although we have not yet
completed our magnetometer survey of the state
historic site property or of the portion of the site
south of State Highway 21 (part of our planned
effort to survey the site as completely as possible).
We can see that there was at least one part of the
site set aside for interment of the dead (the burial
mound and possibly an adjacent cemetery), two
special areas that had the platform mounds (Story's
"inner precincts"), and a more extensive village area
than was previously known. Our geophysical survey
has provided much new information, but it just as
surely poses many new research questions about this
important Caddo site.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A large number of people have been instrumental in our research at the George C. Davis site. We
hope to have acknowledged them all here but apologize if anyone has been inadvertently omitted.
This project was undertaken in cooperation
with the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department
(TPWD), which provided partial funding as well
as other kinds of support, including mowing on
several occasions. Particular thanks are due Jim
Herrold and Lisa Bennett at Caddoan Mounds State
Historic Site, the staff at Mission Tejas State Park,
Todd McMakin, TPWD regional archeologist, Karen Harry (former Director of Cultural Resources),
and Michael Strutt (current Director of Cultural
Resources) for all their help.
Mark Denton at the THC was extremely helpful
on several occasions in our application for Texas
Antiquities Permits. He worked closely with us and
the TPWD on all three permits under which the data
presented in this article were acquired.
Mark Willis, University of Texas at El Paso,
brought a GPR for our initial use in the area of
Excavation Unit 38; the data from that modest
survey Jed to use of magnetometry at the site.
At our request, Jim Bruseth and Bill Pierson of
the THC brought the THC's magnetometer to
survey essentially the same area as the radar; this
generous effort led directly to our acquisition of a

magnetometer and the large-scale project reported
herein. Funds to purchase the magnetometer were
provided by the Cynthia and George Mitchell
Foundation and by the College of Liberal Arts at
The University of Texas at Austin. The College of
Liberal Arts also provided funds for the radar and
additional geophysical sensing and high precision
GPS equipment used in our research at the Davis
site.
Local TPWD volunteers graciously cut down
several chinaberry trees that were in the project
area. Additional financial support for this project was provided by Tom Middlebrook, George
Mitchell, Dee Ann Story, the East Texas Geological
Society, and the Friends of the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory.
We are also much indebted to the Texas Department of Transportation, Tyler District, for mowing
much of the area in the northern portion of the site,
an area that had not been mowed in several years.
Nancy Kenmotsu and Jay Tullos very generously
arranged for this critical mowing.
The work was conducted under the direction
of Darrell Creel (Principal Investigator) and Dale
Hudler (Project Director) of the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory (TARL) and Samuel Wilson of
the Department of Anthropology, with the assistance
of student volunteers Clay Schultz, Chet Walker,
Colleen Morgan, Matthew Taliaferro, Milton T01Tes,
and Tim Schneider, as well as TARL staff members
Jonathon Jarvis and Jeff Link. At TARL, Carolyn
Spock was always helpful in locating maps, plans,
and other records from earlier work at the site.
Diane Ruetz helped immeasurably in assembling
this article and other documents on our research.
We are profoundly grateful for the support and help
provided by everyone.

REFERENCES CITED
Bescoby, D., G. Cawley, and P. Chroston
2004 Enhanced Interpretation of Magnetic Survey Data
using Artificial Neural Networks: a Case Study from
Butrint, Southern Albania. Archaeological Prospection 11:189-199.
Breiner, S.
1973 Applications Manual for Portable Magnetometers.
Geometrics, Inc., Sunnyvale, California.
Ciminale, M. and M. Loddo
200 I Aspects of Magnetic Data Processing. Archaeological Prospection 8:239-246.

190

Texas Archeological Society

Conyers, L.B.
2006 Innovative Ground-penetrating Radar Methods for
Archaeological Mapping. Archaeological Prospection 13:139-141.

Pomfret. J.
2006 Ground-penetrating Radar Profile Spacing and
Orientation for Subsurface Resolution of Linear
Features. Archaeological Prospection 13: 151-153.

Creel, D.
1979 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas, Summer 1978.
Anthropology Research Laboratory, Texas A&M
University, College Station, and Texas Antiquities
Committee, Austin.

Spock, C.
1977 An Analysis of the Architectural and Related Features at the George C. Davis Site. Masters Thesis,
Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Davis, M. W., A. Earls, and M. B. Tomka
1992 1987 Archeological Excavations at the George C.
Davis Site (41CEJ9), Caddoan Mounds State Historic Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Technical Report
1. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Fields, R.
1978 Report on the 1977 Investigations at the George C.
Davis Site, Caddoan Mounds State Historic Site,
Cherokee County, Texas. Report submitted to Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department by the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Fields, R. and J. P. Thurmond
1980 George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas:
Spring 1980 Archeological Investigations. Reports
of Investigations No. 8. Prewitt and Associates, Inc.,
Austin.
Guy, J.
1981 Cultural Features. InArcheological Investigations at
the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas:
Summers of 1979 and 1980, edited by D. A. Story,
pp. 37-123. Occasional Paper No. 1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Leckebusch, J.
2003 Ground Penetrating Radar: A Modern Threedimensional Prospection Method. Archaeological
Prospection 10:213-240.
Maillol, J., D. Ciobotaru, and I. Moravetz
2004 Electrical and Magnetic Response of Archaeological
Features at the Early Neolithic Site of Movil lui Deciov, Western Romania. Archaeological Prospection
11:213-226.
Newell, H.P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs No. 5. Society for American Archaeology,
Menasha, Wisconsin.

Story, D.A.
1972 A Preliminary Report of the 1968, 1969, and 1970
Excavations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas. Report of Field Research Conducted
under National Science Foundation (GS-2573 and
3200) and Interagency Contracts between The University of Texas at Austin and the Texas Building
Commission and Texas Historical Survey Committee.
1997

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the
George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:1-113.

2000

Introduction. In The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas, by H. Perry Newell and Alex D.
Krieger, pp. 1-31. Society for American Archaeology
Classics, Washington, D.C.

Story, D. A. (editor)
1981 Archeological Investigations at the George C. Davis
Site, Cherokee County, Texas: Summers of 1979 and
1980. Occasional Paper No. 1. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Tabbagh, J.
2003 Total Field Magnetic Prospection: Are Vertical Gradiometer Measurements Preferable to Single Sensor
Survey? Archaeological Pro.1pectio11 10:75-81.
Thurmond, J. P. and U. Kleinschmidt
1979 Report of the Fall 1979 Investigations at the George
C. Davis Site, Caddoan Mounds State Historic
Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Magnetometer Investigations at the George C .. Davis
site, a Prehistoric Caddo Village
Tiffany Osburn, James Bruseth, and William Pierson

ABSTRACT
A recent magnetometer survey was conducted by the Archeology Division of the Texas Historical Commission (THC) over a portion of the George C. Davis site at Indian Mound Nursery, operated by the Texas Forest
Service. The survey was conducted partly in response to plans by the Texas Forest Service to change the use
of this site from the cultivation of seedlings to the growth of mature heritage pine stock. The survey sought to
determine whether, after 60 years of intense pine seedling cultivation, archeological features remain preserved
below the plow zone. The results clearly indicate that very significant archeological features still exist on the
Indian Mound Nursery property, despite decades of intensive agricultural practices. The use of magnetometer
technology as a tool for management of cultural resources has provided the THC with the archeological data
necessary to begin focusing efforts on the preservation of this important part of one of the state's most significant archeological sites.

INTRODUCTION
The George C. Davis site (41CE19) was a major
Caddo village and ceremonial center on an ancient
terrace of the Neches River in Cherokee County. The
site extends over 112 hectares (ha), and encompasses three earthen mounds, a large borrow pit where
soil was obtained for mound construction, and an
associated village deposit (Story 1998:9; Story and
Valastro 1977:63-65). The mounds are designated
A, B, and C. Mound A is the largest, measuring 46
x 76 m and standing about 5 m high. Mound B has
been heavily impacted (spread-out and lowered in
height) by cultivation and today is 35 x 50 m in
size and about 2 m high. Both Mounds A and B are
structural and either cover or contain the remains
of burned or dismantled structures. Mound C is
roughly circular, measures about 40 m in diameter,
and is about 6 m high. It is a special mortuary with a
number of shaft burials occurring either underneath
or within it (Story 1972, 1997). The archeological
site was placed on the National Register of Historic
Places in 1979 and then designated as a State Archeological Landmark (SAL) in 1983.
Soils at the site consist of sandy loam topsoil
about 20 to 30 cm deep overlying a iron-rich clay
B-horizon. The subsoil is relatively high in magnetic
susceptibility, while the topsoil has weak magnetic

susceptibility. This contrast in soil-layer magnetism
made the site ideal for the detection of prehistoric
features that have been previously excavated and
where the two horizons have been mixed.
In February 2008, the Archeology Division of
the Texas Historical Commission (THC) conducted
a magnetometer survey over a large, previously unsurveyed portion of the George C. Davis site at the
Indian Mound Nursery. The Indian Mound Nursery
is owned and operated by the Texas Forest Service
(TFS) on 322 acres adjoining the THC's Caddoan
Mounds State Historic Site. Approximately 28 ha (25
percent) of this important archeological site is located
on TFS land. The Indian Mound Nursery has been
producing pine and hardwood seedlings for reforestation, windbreak, wildlife, and resource conservation
since the mid-1940s (Evans and Anderson 2008).
The TFS now plans to change the use of the Indian
Mound Nursery from a nursery for pine tree seedlings to planting of heritage pine trees that will grow
to full size. These plans are a major concern for the
THC as the extensive tap roots of mature trees would
potentially cause immense damage to preserved archeological features, including human burials.
This recent magnetometer survey was conducted to determine whether, after 60 years of intense
seedling cultivation, any archeological features
remain preserved below the plow zone at the Indian

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

192

Texas Archeological Society

Mound Nursery. Given the success of previous
magnetometer surveys at the Caddoan Mounds State
Historic Site by the THC and the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory at The University of Texas
at Austin (TARL) in 2002-2005 (Bruseth et al. 2007;
Creel et al. 2005), a survey using this technology
was the most efficient method of achieving the
stated goals.

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS AT
THE GEORGE C. DAVIS SITE
The historic Camino Real skirts the northwestern
side of the George C. Davis site. In 1779 Athanase
de Mezieres traveled from Louisiana to San Antonio
along the historic road and mentioned observing the
mounds in his journal (Bolton 1908:261). The first
systematic excavations at the site were conducted by
the Works Progress Administration (WPA) and the
University of Texas archeologist H. Perry Newell
from 1939 to 1941 (the work centered on Mound A
and the immediately adjacent village area). Approximately 7000 m 2 were excavated, including nearly
60 percent of Mound A and a large portion of the
adjacent village deposits. The area dug near Mound
A was approximately 300 x 300 ft. in size, nearly
100,000 artifacts were collected, and 34 structures
were recorded, both domiciles and ceremonial buildings. The report of this work was prepared by Alex
D. Krieger (Newell and Krieger 1949). Additionally,
a smaller block excavation of about 100 m2 was
conducted near the terrace edge south of Mound A
(Spock 1977 :5). This smaller excavation block was
never mentioned in the report of investigations by
Newell and Krieger (1949).
After Newell's death, Krieger examined Newell's findings and concluded that the site represented
a major Caddo community inhabited for several
centuries, possibly beginning as early as A.D. 500.
Further excavations conducted by a team led by Dee
Ann Story from 1968-1970 focused on Mounds B
and C, a large depression just off the terrace edge,
and in the village area. As a result of these investigations, it was determined that Mound B had also functioned as a temple mound and covered the remains
of pre-mound structures. Mound C was affirmed as
a burial mound, and the depression was identified
as a borrow pit. Subsequent dating of radiocarbon
samples generated by these investigations established a site time frame of approximately A.D. 780
to 1260 (Story 1998: 12; Story and Valastro 1977:63,

86); additional corrected and calibrated dates suggest the Early Caddo occupation actually began in
the late 9th century A.D and lasted until the early
A.D. 1300s (Story 2000: 14). Additional examination
of the excavated material revealed that the site had
also been occupied by Paleoindian (10,000-6,000
B.C.), Archaic, and Woodland period cultures (6,000
B.C.-A.D. 500).
After decades of farming, 70 acres of the northwestern and western portion of the site was acquired
by the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department (TPWD)
in 197 5 and established as a State Historic Site in
1978 (Davis et al. 1992:7). During the late 1970s
and early 1980s, the department sponsored a series
of excavations by archeologists from the University
of Texas at Austin, Texas A&M University, and Prewitt & Associates, Inc. These investigations revealed
large concentrations of artifacts and surface features
that indicated the village had been significantly
larger than previously thought, extending beyond
Weeping Mary Road to the north. As a result, the
TWPD acquired an additional 23 acres of adjacent
land in 1981. The TPWD subsequently constructed
a visitors' center with interpretive exhibits as well
as a 0.75 mile long self-guided trail tour that leads
visitors through the mounds and village.
All the archeological work has been instrumental in developing a good understanding of the
temporal occupation and intra-site layout of the
site. The community layout consisted of two inner
precincts that correspond to Mounds A and B, two
inner villages around the mounds identified by the
presence of larger quantities of artifacts thought to
be prestige items, the special mortuary of Mound
C, and the outer village deposit. Excavations at
the site have identified dozens of house patterns;
most are circular but some are rectilinear and at
least one is maze-like with an irregular wall pattern (Spock 1977).
In May 2002 a magnetometer survey was conducted by the Archeology Division of the THC at
the request of University of Texas researchers, who
were planning a field school to investigate a portion
of the site west of SH 21. The results of the survey
east of Mound B identified three circular structures:
Structures A, B, and C (Bruseth et al. 2007:137).
Structure A was the smallest, measuring 15 m in
diameter with four anomalies in the center that are
likely to be interior postholes. Structure B was 20 m
in diameter and appeared to be more circular, with
a flattening on the northern and western sides with
a possible hearth or post hole visible in the center.

Osburn et al.-Magnetometer Investigations at the George C. Davis site 193
Structure C was l 8 m in diameter and appeared to be
somewhat rectilinear in outline with rounded corners
(Bruseth et al. 2007: 137).
The success of the THC magnetometer survey
led to the purchase of a magnetometer system by
TARL. Surveys conducted by TARL archeologists
between October 2002 and May 2003, and more
recently, resulted in magnetometer data from nearly
180,000 m2 (18 hectares) of the Caddoan Mounds
State Historic Site. In addition, one small survey was
conducted on top of Mound A, but due to the limited
grid size no features were clearly discernable. As
a result of these investigations, nearly 90 percent
of the Caddoan Mounds State Historic Site has
been surveyed using the magnetometer (Creel et al.
2005). However, aside from the small investigation
on Mound A, no other archeological work has been
conducted on the TFS half of this important Caddo
site since the early 1940s.
As a result of legislative action in 2007, ownership of the Caddoan Mounds State Historic Site
transferred from the TPWD to the THC on January
1, 2008. THC plans for the site include a program of
continuing research, additional interpretive development, and a number of facility upgrades.

SURVEY METHODS

vertical movement, depending on the smoothness
of the surface, generally it is much less than that
introduced by a normal walking gait. A base-station
magnetometer was used to correct for diurnal magnetic fluctuations and sun-induced magnetic storm
activity, which affect the earth's magnetic field. The
base-station magnetometer consisted of a single
cesium sensor on a 1.0 m-long pole, held upright
above the ground by a tripod, and connected to a
data-logging console. The collection rate was set to
a 0.2 second interval.
The methodology for conducting a survey was
quite simple. The survey area northeast of Mound A
(Figure 1) was laid out into a north-south east-west
grid of 10 m quadrants, and the overall grid size ( l 00
x 100 m) was entered into the console attached to
the cart (Figure 2). Magnetic data were collected by
pulling the cart along the north axis of the grid, collecting two 50 cm transects of data simultaneously.
The readings from each transect were stored in a
data-logging console set to the "survey" mode. During operation, readings were collected at 0.1-second
intervals with a .05-.06 nT level of sensitivity.
The giid was set up so that survey transects were
roughly oriented parallel to the pine seedling beds,
consisting of individual beds of mounded, loose,
loamy soil 50 cm wide alternated with 50 cm wide
furrows. The ridge and furrow character of the beds
resulted in approximately 30 cm of relief between
the crest of the beds and the trough of the furrows.
The loose loamy beds and the uneven terrain introduced traversing difficulty for the operator and

The THC conducts magnetic-survey work
with a Geometrics cesium-magnetometer system.
The equipment for this work consists of a small
hand-pulled aluminum cart with
two cesium sensors cabled to a
G-858 data-logger console. The
sensors operate on the principle
of self-oscillating, split-beam
cesium-vapor technology with
automatic hemisphere switching.
The cart was custom made by the
THC's Archeology Division out
of aluminum tubing, as only nonferrous materials could be used.
Two sensors are mounted on the
cart 50 cm apart and about 25 cm
above the ground and cabled to a
console strapped to the waist of the
operator. The cart provided a more
constant height for the sensors
than hand-held instruments used
while walking along a transect.
Figure 1. Location of magnetometer survey grid northwest of Mound A at
the Indian Mound Nursery at the George C. Davis site.
While there still can be some

194

Texas Archeological Society

to remove signal dropouts, value
spikes, and corrections for diurnal
fluctuations in the earth's magnetic
field. The program also contains
a destriping algorithm to remove
heading errors potentially introduced with bidirectional surveys
and, in the case of this particular
survey, destriping was necessary to
c01Tect for the uneven terrain.
After processing in Magmap
2000, the magnetic data were exported into Surfer, Version 8, for
contouring into two-dimensional
spatial maps (Golden Software,
Inc. 2003). A Kriging gridding
Figure 2. Magnetometer cart with sensors cabled to console worn by the operaalgorithm was employed and the
tor. Note that one wheel is on top of a bed and the other is down in a fLmow.
final maps produced using the
Shaded Relief Map option set to
grayscale. This map option was
used instead of line-contour or color maps, since the
caused the axle of the cart to be tilted perpendicular
human eye can more easily observe subtle changes
to the direction of travel when one wheel was up on
in shades of gray.
a bed and the other was down in a fuJTow (Figure 3).
This inconsistency introduced some striping similar
to heading errors in the data.
Plastic traffic cones were placed at 10 m interRESULTS
vals along the survey transects to serve as fiducial
marks, or known points on the grid entered into the
Intensive agricultural modification of the George
data logger to track the position of the magnetomC. Davis site through plowing and planting episodes
eter. To record when the sensors crossed a known
at the Indian Mound Nursery has been so pronounced
grid point, a small plastic flapper was placed on the
that for decades this portion of the site has been concart axle to flap as it crossed over a cone, providing
sidered too heavily damaged to contain intact archeoa visual and auditory marker for the operator, who
logical features. In fact, a September 15, 1978, memo
would register the point on a pickle switch conof the Texas Antiquities Committee stated, "Mound A
nected to the console.
The base station was placed
away from the site area, where it
would not be affected by intrusive
sources of magnetism such as
passing cars or the movements
of people. The console was set to
the "base station" mode and continuously collected data for later
downloading and diurnal correction of the roving sensors' data.
The data collected by the mobile magnetometer and the base
station were downloaded using
Magrnap 2000, Version 4 (software
written by Geometrics, Inc.). This
program retrieves the data from
the consoles and allows processing
Figure 3. Relief of the surface caused by the beds and furrows.

Osburn et al.-Magnetometer Investigations at the George C. Davis site

195

580

540

310

320

330

340

350

360

370

380

390

400

Figure 4. Shaded relief map of the magnetometer results.

is the only remnant in fair condition of the Davis site
located east of Highway 21; the remainder of the area
has been leveled and put into beds for pine seedlings."
For this reason the magnetometer survey was necessary to detennine if useful archeological information
is preserved below the plow zone at Indian Mound
Nursery. The survey was also necessary to provide
data, if preservation of archeological deposits was
confirmed, that would support an argument against
growing mature pine trees on the site.
Once the magnetometer results were gridded
and plotted it became clear that, despite more than
six decades of seedling cultivation, a great deal of
useful archeological information is indeed preserved
beneath the beds. Figure 4 shows the results of the
survey. Many of the geophysical features detected
by the magnetometer are distinct and recognizable
as archeological features such as structures, while
others are more subtle. At least 10 circular structures

are apparent, some more obvious than others. In
addition, no less than four partial circular segments
are visible, each of these likely representing a structure. These features are outlined in Figure 5. Only
features that are plainly visible and recognizable are
labeled and traced with a solid line (Table I).
Within two of the structures (2 and 7) small
magnetic features are visible near the center, likely
indicating the presence of an internal hearth or large
center post (see Figure 5). Note that these internal
features are only visible in the two structures that
are classified as being round with noticeably flattened sides (see Table 1). Faint indications of possible internal features, however, are also visible in
Structures 3 and 9.
Many of the circular structures identified in the
magnetometer map are superimposed upon earlier
structures, creating numerous overlapping circles
that are indicative of lengthy occupation episodes

196

Texas Archeological Society

570

550

300

310

320

330

340

350

360

370

380

390

400

Figure 5. Magnetometer map with geophysical features labeled.

Table 1. Geophysical features identified as possible strnctures in magnetometer results.
Structure

2
3
4

5
6
7
8
9
10

Dimensions

Shape

8.7 min diameter
20.2 x 20.5 m
18 x 17.5 m
16.4 m diameter
16.8 x 17.5 m
16.5 m diameter
17.0x 17.3m
16.3 m diameter
18 m diameter
15.9 rn diameter

Round
Round-flattened sides
Round-oval
Round
Round-oval
Round
Round-flattened sides
Round
Round
Round

Comments

Internal hearth or large center post

Internal hearth or large center post

Osburn et al.-Magnetometer Investigations at the George C. Davis site
and dynamic community patterning. The results of
the magnetometer survey, of course, only indicate
features that maintain a significant enough contrast
in magnetic susceptibility to be detected in the present investigation. It is certain that many other buried
post hole alignments and archeological features
within the grid have escaped detection due to more
subtle magnetic characteristics.
The very large rectangular anomaly with
internal horizontal banding at the bottom of the
survey area (see Figures 4 and 5) represents the
northern half of the WPA excavation block northeast of Mound A. It is apparent that the backfilling
techniques resulted in the somewhat linear deposition of excavated sediment into the open block
excavations, yielding a banded appearance in the
magnetometer results. It is likely that the backfilling method involved shoveling dirt off of a cart
as it was drawn by a mule or other draft animal.
Within the WPA block excavation there is a circular
structure that is most likely Feature 9, identified
and excavated by Newell (Newell and Krieger
1949:26-27; Spock 1977). Feature 9 was a 9.9
m diameter sub-square structure with all exterior
wall posts set into a trench (0.3 m wide and 1.12 m
deep) encircling the strncture (Spock 1977:44). The
excavation technique for this structure appears to
have included excavation to floor level followed by
excavation of the perimeter posthole pattern by digging a circular trench following the external wall
of the structure. When the WPA workers backfilled
the excavated post hole trench, it resulted in a very
strong magnetic differential from the surrounding
unexcavated sediment. In this case, the excavation
and subsequent backfilling during the WPA excavations essentially served to magnify the same effect
that causes the magnetic contrast associated with
all of the prehistoric structures identified by this
magnetometer survey.
During the WPA excavations, the largest structure documented, Feature 31, was 15 m in diameter
(Spock 1977:59). Structures identified during the
current investigation reach diameters of 20.5 m,
nine are larger than 15 m, and only one is smaller
(Structure 1, 8.7 m in diameter) (see Table 1).
This is a pattern in the magnetometer data similar
to that observed by Creel et al. (2005:3) in which
we are primarily seeing the larger structures in the
magnetic data. Creel et al. (2005:3) discuss some
potential factors relating to this potential bias in the
magnetometer data. It is likely that for the larger
structures the posts were set deeper in the ground

197

and therefore more of the post hole is preserved
below the plow zone. Additionally, it may simply
be more difficult to recognize smaller structures
because of their size and smaller number of posts
(Creel et al. 2005:3).
The area excavated by Newell on and near
Mound A covered approximately 100 x 100 m,
and of this, the portion that was north and east of
Mound A (approximately 100 x 40 m) revealed
an exceptionally dense concentration of post hole
alignments (Figure 6). A minimum of 29 structures
were traced within the massive concentration.
These, in combination with at least 10 structures
(and likely many more that go unrecognized)
identified in the current magnetometer investigation adjacent to the WPA excavations, indicate that
this was potentially one of the most densely and
intensively occupied portions of the site (Spock
l 977:Figure 3, Features 9-29, 32, 46-53, and 55;
Story 2000:Figure 4 ). The many overlapping post
hole configurations indicate that this area of the
site saw occupation that extended over a significant
period of time and included numerous episodes of
rebuilding and reorganization.
The dense concentration of structures clustered in this location was likely an effort to establish proximity to Mound A. However, the areas
excavated by Newell and surveyed by the THC
represent just a small portion of the terrace and associated village deposits on the eastern half of the
George C. Davis site. Large springs emerge from
the terrace edge in the eastern portion of the site.
These springs have flowed continuously throughout recorded history in the area and have filled
two large reservoirs to capacity, providing water
for the Indian Mound Nursery since the 1940s.
The springs may have offered a water source that
was equally, or perhaps more, accessible than was
Bowles Creek. While most of the deposits east of
SH 21 have not been tested, it is possible that a
major, and perhaps main, part of the residential
Caddo village at the Davis site is located along the
eastern edge of the terrace and concentrated near
the springs.
Three geophysical features identified in the
2008 magnetometer results are strongly suspected to
represent shaft burials. Geophysical anomalies with
a very similar magnetic signature were also identified in the TARL magnetometer results immediately
east of Mound B, and were suspected to be large and
deep shaft tombs (Creel et al. 2005: 10, 13). If these
features on the Indian Mound Nursery lands are

198

Texas Archeological Society

STATE

1--/

HIGHWAY

21

~~~~-~~~~~~~~-~~~---------

~/
Q

APPROXl~~ATE

EXTENT

OF MOUND A

80F7~1F2

F54QIv

'I
\

/

I

I

F4

41CE!9

GEO. C. DAVIS SITE
MOUND A

0

50

100

METERS

Figure 6. Map depicting the dense concentration of structures identified by WPA excavation near Mound A. Reproduced
from Spock (1977:32).

confirmed to be burials during future investigations,
they will be the first identified on the eastern half
of the site and will likely prompt evaluations of our
current understanding of community patterning.

POTENTIAL FOR FUTURE WORK
THC plans to continue investigations at the
George C. Davis site by expanding the geophysical

Osburn et al.-Magnetometer Investigations at the George C. Davis site
grid over much of the Indian Mound Nursery. These
investigations will focus on mapping structures and
other features associated with the Caddo village
north and east of Mound A. The structures thus far
identified in magnetometer maps are likely only a
percentage of those that are truly present.
Occasionally, structures identified in geophysical results may be difficult to differentiate from surrounding sediments texturally and visibly during traditional excavations. This phenomenon is periodically
documented during geophysical investigations where
geophysical imagery clearly illustrates the presence
and shape of an archeological feature that is not visible
during excavation. In these cases it can be argued that
some features possess geophysical prope1ties that are
detectable using remote sensing technology but simply
do not possess characteristics that are visible to the human eye (Emenwein 2008, this volume). At the George
C. Davis site, it is therefore necessary to continue a program of geophysical investigation to augment archeological investigations, and thus fo1m a more complete
understanding of the intra-site spatial patterning of this
prehist01ic Caddo community and their organization of
spiritual, political, and secular activities.
Newell and Krieger (1949:3-4) stated "repeated
plowing since ... 1821 has reached far enough below
the surface to have destroyed many of the houses we
did excavate, except for the lower parts of the post
holes." The survey by THC indicates that, after 60
years of intensive plowing and cultivation by the
TFS, the post holes are still preserved below the
plow zone at the site and may be mapped to provide
useful info1mation about community patterning and
organizational anangements within the George C.
Davis site. While the upper parts of structural remains
may be destroyed, additional types of infonnation
may be extant within the plow zone. Artifacts will be
dispersed and reduced in size as a result of cultivation;
however, research potential likely remains within this
upper cultural deposit and it is worthy of additional
study. While higher resolution contexts may be compromised, plow zone studies in other regions indicate
that artifacts likely remain in the general area in
which they were deposited (Petraglia et al. 1998). In
fact, lateral displacement of artifacts may be no more
than 1-2 m (Lewarch and O'Brien 1981).
An additional goal of upcoming magnetometer
surveys at the Indian Mound Nursery will be to more
completely document the WPA excavations. It was
a pleasant surprise that the 1939-1941 archeological
excavation blocks were plainly visible in the magnetometer results. Currently, the location of one WPA

199

excavation block near the terrace edge is unknown.
Magnetometer survey in this area will surely succeed in mapping the location of these excavations.
Before additional magnetometer survey is conducted at the site, the seedling beds will be slightly
smoothed using machinery to reduce the relief
between the beds and the furrows. It became clear
during data processing that the lateral tilt of the cart
axle, and therefore the sensors, introduced significant striping into the data resulting from the survey.
Destriping algorithms were applied in Magmap
2000 to remove much of the striping but did not succeed in removing it all. It is always a concern when
performing post-processing operations that the quality of the useful geophysical data will be degraded
in an attempt to remove logistical errors.
In summary, the magnetometer survey at
the George C. Davis site was extraordinarily
productive. The results clearly indicate that very
significant archeological features still exist on the
Indian Mound Nursery property, despite decades of
intensive agricultural practices. The magnetometer
results from a small area of the site have provided
the THC with the minimum archeological data
necessary to focus on the preservation of this important part of one of the state's most significant
archeological sites. The equipment showed its capability to identify subtle archaeological features,
most notably circular structures.
All of the magnetometer surveys conducted at
the George C. Davis site since 2002 have succeeded
in identifying significant archeological features
(Bruseth et al. 2007; Creel et al. 2005; see Creel
et al., this volume). The success of these surveys
hinged on the magnetic characteristics of the natural
soils on the site and the alterations that prehistoric
peoples imposed upon the surface and near surface
of those soils. Specifically, the sandy loam A-horizon has very low magnetic susceptibility while the
iron-rich clay B-horizon has relatively high magnetic susceptibility. The B-horizon, buried at about
30 to 50 cm bs, is relatively shallow, and any digging
by prehistoric people would have mixed the natural
contrasting soil layers, resulting in a backfilled hole
with a different magnetic susceptibility than the surrounding, intact soils. In this sense, the site is ideal
for magnetic detection of any features that penetrated into the B-horizon. Further magnetometer survey
of the George C. Davis site will undoubtedly lead
to the discovery of additional structures and other
features that will help immensely in the delineation
of the site's overall layout.

200

Texas Archeological Society

REFERENCES CITED
Bolton. H. E.
1908 The Native Tribes About the East Texas Missions.
Quarterly of the Texas State Historical Association
XI:249-276.
Bruseth, J.E., W. T. Pierson, and R. M. Johnson
2007 Large-Area Remote Sensing Coverage of Archaeological Sites with a Dual-track, Cart-mounted Cesium Magnetometer. Journal of Field Archaeology
32:133-147.
Creel, D .. D. Hudler. S. Wilson, C. Schultz, and C. Walker
2005 A Magnetometer Survey of Caddoan Mounds State
Historic Site. Technical Report 51. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas
at Austin.
Davis, M., A. Earls, and M. Tomka
1992 1987 Archeological Excavations at the George C.
Davis Site, 41 CE19: Caddoan Mounds State Historical Park. Technical Repot No. I. Texas Parks and
Wildlife Department, Austin.
Evans, E. F. and D. A. Anderson
n.d.
History of the Texas Forest Service. http://txforestservice.tamu.edu/main/article.aspx?id=l628, accessed
April 2, 2008.
Ernenwein, E.G.
2008 A Geophysical View of Pueblo Escondido: Implications for the Pithouse to Pueblo Transition in the
Jornada Mogollon. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79, in press.
Golden Software, Inc.
2003 Swfer 8 User's Guide: Contouring and JD Surface
Mapping for Scientists and Engineers. Golden Software, Inc .. Golden, Colorado.
Lewarch, D. E., and M. J. O'Brien
1981 Effect of Short Term Tillage on Aggregate Provenience Surface Pattern. In Plowzone Archeology:
Contributions to TheOI)' and Technique, edited by
M. J. O'Brien and D. E. Lewarch, 7-49. Publications in Anthropology No. 27. Vanderbilt University,
Nashville.

Newell, H. P. and A. D. Krieger
1949 The George C. Dcti"is Site, Cherokee County, Texas.
Memoirs No. 5. Society for American Archaeology,
Menasha, Wisconsin.
Petraglia, M., K. Knepper, J. Rutherford, P. LaPorta, K. Puseman, J. Schuldenrein. and N. Tuross.
1998 The Prehistory of Lwns Pond: The Formation of an
Archaeological Site in Delaware, Vol. II. Archaeology Series No. 155. Delaware Department of Transportation, Dover.
Spock, C.
1977 An Analysis of the Architectural and Related Features at the George C. Davis Site. Master's thesis,
Department of Anthropology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Story, D. A.
1972 A Preliminary Report of the 1968, 1969, and 1970
Excavations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas. Conducted under National Science
Foundation Grants (GS-2573 and 3200) and interagency contracts between the University of Texas at
Austin and Texas Building Commission and Texas
Historical Comrrrittee. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
1997

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the
George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:1-103.

1998

The George C. Davis Site: Glimpses into Early
Caddoan Symbolism and Ideology. In The Native
History of the Caddo: Their Place in Southeastern
Archeology and Ethnohistory, edited by T. K. Perttula and J.E. Bruseth, pp. 9-43. Studies in Archeology 30. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

2000

Introduction. In The George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas. by H. P. Newell and A. D. Krieger,
pp. 1-31. 211 d Edition. Memoirs No. 5. Society for
American Archaeology, Washington, D.C.

Story, D. A. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1977 Radiocarbon Dating and the George C. Davis Site,
Texas. Journal of Field Archaeology 4(1):63-89.

Osteological Evidence of Prehistoric and
Historic Scalping
Texas
Kerri R. Wilhelm and Matthew S. Taylor

ABSTRACT
Osteological evidence for prehistoric and historic scalping in Texas is evaluated in this study. Previously,
scalping has been asserted to be present at three pre-contact sites: Harrell Ranch (41YN1), Grimes-Houy
(41CV17), and Andrews Lake (41AD2). Historic era scalpings have been noted at Mission San Juan Capistrano (41BX5) and Mission Refugio (41RF1). We examined over 800 human skulls from all regions of Texas
to systematically find and document incidences of scalping trauma. Osteological signatures of scalping were
found on three individuals from three sites: Andrews Lake (41AD2), Grimes Houy (41CV17), and possibly
Lawrence Island (41CH1 ). All of these sites date to the Late Prehistoric period (ca. AD. 700-1500) but are
widely separated geographically. Despite earlier suppositions, cranial trauma observed on the Harrell Ranch
remains consisted of pseudo-pathologies. Marks observed on the skulls were the result of normal taphonomic
processes, excavation trauma, or natural discrete features. In the available statewide sample, no evidence for
scalping was found that predated the appearance of the bow and arrow. Based on the available evidence, the
practice of scalping a fallen enemy was not a long-standing practice in Texas, and was likely introduced from
outside regions.

INTRODUCTION
Scalping has long been of interest in bioarcheological studies in North America. It is one of
the types of inter-personal and/or inter-population
violence that is readily recognizable on human
skeletal remains. Scalping has been suspected in
several Texas skeletal samples, among them the
remains from the Harrell Ranch site (41 YNl) in
Young County (Darrell Creel, 2006 personal communication) and the Andrews Lake (41AD2) locality
(Michael Collins, 2006 personal communication).
Since the evidence for scalping from these sites has
not been systematically examined, we studied these
remains, and others from across the state, to confirm
and record the existence of scalping in indigenous
prehistoric and historic Texas.
Numerous publications have addressed the evidence for pre-Columbian scalping in North America
(Burton 1864; Miller 1994; Neumann 1940; Snow
1942). In the latter half of the 20th century, some
scholars and American Indian civil rights activists
maintained that scalping was unknown in the Americas before the arrival of Europeans. Their position
was that the practice was a response to the bounties
offered by European colonial administrators for

scalps of hostile native peoples. However, both ethnohistoric and linguistic evidence demonstrates that
scalping was a common practice of war, at least in
eastern North America, well before the arrival of Old
World colonizers (Axtell and Sturtevant 1980).
In addition to the ethnohistoric and linguistic
record, there is ample osteological evidence in the
archeological record for pre-Columbian scalping
in North America. It has been observed in skeletal
samples from the Great Plains (Willey and Emerson
1993), the Southwest (Turner and Turner 1999),
and the Southeast (Hamper! 1967). Scalping among
Texas samples was mentioned by Baker (2001), who
noted potentially scalped individuals from the prehistoric Grimes-Houy site (41CVl7) and the historic
San Juan Capistrano Mission (41BX5) cemetery.

BACKGROUND
Different techniques employed by assailants in
removing scalps have been witnessed and recounted
in first, second, and third person accounts (see Haas
and Creamer 1997; Foster 1998:27; Nadeau 1941;
Neumann 1940; Smith 1938; Owsley et al. 1977).
One method involved making an incision at the base

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 79 (2008)

202

Texas Archeological Society

of the skull (nape of the neck) and cutting forward to
loosen or break tendons and subcutaneous fat. Another technique involved cutting in a circle around
the skull (sometimes including the ears) and forcibly yanking the scalp from the skull. Leverage was
secured by placing one foot on the victim's shoulder.
A third technique involved simply removing the part
of the scalp that secured the single patch or braid of
hair (scalp lock) that was worn by some indigenous
groups. Different methods for removal depended on
the amount of time that the perpetrator had to remove the scalp. Some historic accounts tell of scalps
being taken only after the victim had been killed or
was wounded or immobile (Nadeau 1941).
Cut marks associated with scalping are most
commonly found on the superior portions of the
frontal bone, the middle portion of the parietals, the
squamous portion of the zygomatic, the mastoid
processes of the temporals, and in the nuchal region
of the occipital (Smith 1995; Snow 1942; Willey and
Emerson 1993). Cuts on the frontal bone usually
follow the hairline (Owsley et al. 1977). However,
it is possible for a scalping to occur without leaving cut marks on the underlying bone provided the
assailant is using a sufficiently sharp knife (Willey
1990). As a result, the actual incidence of scalping
may be underreported in the osteological record
(Miller 1994).
Usually, death does not result from scalping
but from some other severe bodily trauma. In cases
where this additional mortal trauma was absent,
victims often recovered from their wounds (Aufderheide and Rodriguez-Martin 1998:37). In the
skeletal assemblage from the Crow Creek Massacre
site in South Dakota, two skulls were found that bore
osteological signatures of healing or healed scalping
trauma (Willey and Emerson 1993).
When evaluating osteological evidence of potential scalping trauma, it is important to determine
the timing of the injury. Traditionally, the timing of
traumatic injuries has been divided into three categories: antemortem (before death), perimortem (at
or near the time of death), and postmortem, or after
death (Galloway et al. 1999; Nafte 2000:118; Sauer
1998). Forensic anthropologists have devoted a significant amount of research to be able to distinguish
between various types of trauma and in identifying
the tools used to inflict them. For our purposes, we
are concerned with sharp-force cut marks left on the
cranial surface.
Different sharp-edged instruments will leave
specific "signatures" on bone. In forensic

terminology, the groove walls and floor created by
the forcible passage of a sharp tool's edge against
the outer table of bone is called a kerf (Symes et al.
2002). In prehistoric contexts, cut marks are most
likely the result of chert knives. The signatures
resulting from stone tools are somewhat different
from those left from metal, so much so that they can
be discerned from one another (Turner and Turner
1999: 18). The differing signatures are of particular
importance, because a razor-sharp trowel might
leave a misleading cut mark.
Potential stone tool cut marks can be discerned
by examining the multiple striae, or multiple grooving, in the kerf. The striae of incised cuts, whether
made by stone or metal blades, run parallel to the
kerf floor, as opposed to the striae of "chop" marks
that run perpendicular. Striae can be discerned well
by using a light microscope or, for exposing the
greatest amount of kerf detail, a scanning electron
microscope. If the affected portion of bone were
sectioned, and viewed as a thin slice, a cut mark will
appear as av-shaped notch in the outer table of the
bone (Maples 1986; Nafte 2000:125).
Marks on bone associated with scalping may
also result from chopping with a heavy, cleaver-like
weapon. In the heat of battle, removing a scalp may
have been carried out in a haphazard, frantic fashion, resulting in more damage to the skull than was
absolutely necessary. As a result, chop marks on a
skull may also be evidence of scalping. A blow with
a sharp, wedge-shaped weapon can cause fracturing
of the bone immediately surrounding the point of
impact. When using a weapon such as a cleaver on
bone, the force and angle of the impact can leave a
distinct signature in direct association with the point
of impact (Humphrey and Hutchinson 2001 ).
If one relies purely on macroscopic analysis,
some natural, but variable, cranial features can be
confused with cut marks. Vagal impressions (also
referred to as accessory frontal sulci) can appear on
the outer table of bone and confuse the untrained
observer (Mann and Murphy 1990:28). When examined under a microscope, the cross section of
a vagal groove appears as a U-shaped depression
(Bueschgen and Case 1996).

METHODS
Much of the data collected for this article
was done in conjunction with the Texas Dental
Anthropology Project. This study, under the aegis

Wilhelm and Taylor-Osteological Evidence of Prehistoric and Historic Scalping in Texas
of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory
(TARL), is a pan-Texas survey of heritable dental
traits. While examining dentitions for this study, the
crania were also examined for evidence of scalping
trauma. Over 800 individuals in the TARL collections (representing all geographic regions of Texas)
were analyzed.
In our study, suspected cut marks on cranial
bones were first analyzed in terms of taphonomy
and pseudo-pathology. Coloring found at the interior
and edges of the "cuts" were utilized to determine
a general temporal context to the cut mark. If the
coloring matched that of the surrounding bone, the
wound was considered perimortem. If the cut was
noticeably paler than the sunounding bone, the mark
is considered postmortem damage, and the result
of excavation trauma (Ubelaker and Adams 1995).
Additionally, postmortem trauma can be recognized
by the appearance of the cut mark. Trauma that occurred when the bone is dry fails to react with the
elasticity attributed to healthy living bone (Ubelaker
and Adams 1995). Cuts made on living or "green"
bone will be narrower than the blade that made it.
Marks made by sharp objects on dry bone are usually associated with flaking and micro-fracturing and
will be the same size or larger than
the tool edge (Nafte 2000: 129).
Skulls were examined macroscopically for evidence of cut- or
hack mark trauma on the frontal,
parietal, and occipital bones. Examination was also made of the temporals, zygomatics, and mandible
for secondary evidence. Individuals
who were found to have evidence
of sharp force trauma on the crania were assessed for age and sex.
Published archeological reports and
records in the TARL site files were
examined to ascertain or estimate
the date and cultural context of the
remains. Assessments of sex and
age were made during a general
inventory conducted in 1986 and we
confirmed them.

203

that is consistent with scalping. These individuals
were from Native American archeological sites
widely removed geographically across the state
(Figure 1), but somewhat similar in date. All date
to the Late Prehistoric period (AD. 700-1500),
following the chronology published in Turner and
Hester (1985).
Andrews Lake/Salt Cedar (41AD2)
This individual (TARL accession #2235) is a
male who is at least over 40 years of age. There are
cut marks evident on the right portion of the frontal
on the temporal line and on the left portion of the
occipital below the nuchal line (Figure 2). The cuts
along the temporal line are especially deep (Figure
3). In addition to the cranial cuts, this individual
may have suffered as many as six arrow wounds.
Four projectile points were found in the chest cavity,
one was lodged between the third and fourth lumbar
vertebrae, and another was found while screening
the burial fill (Collins 1968:65).
The people represented by the Andrews Lake
burial were foragers who may also have been parttime agriculturalists. Evidence of simple structures,

RESULTS
A total of three skulls in the
TARL collections were found to
have evidence of sharp force trauma

Figure 1. Location of burial sites mentioned in the text. Round markers
represent locations where scalping trauma was observed or has been previously reported. Square marker (Harrell Ranch site) indicates a locality where
scalping was suspected. but could not be confirmed osteologically.

204

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 2. Distribution of scalping cut marks on the cranium from the Andrews Lake (Salt Cedar) site (41AD2).

Figure 3. Deep cut marks observed on the cranium of Burial 2 from the Andrews Lake (Salt Cedar) site (41AD2). The
image shows a right lateral close up of the cranium: arrows point to the cut marks.

Wilhelm and Taylor-Osteological Evidence of Prehistoric and Historic Scalping in Texas

205

clay and stone-lined hearths, milling
stones, and numerous pottery sherds all
point to at least a semi-permanent occupation that would have been facilitated
by agriculture (Collins 1968: 119).
Grimes-Houy (41CV17)
This individual (TARL Accession
#2027) is a male about 17-23 years of
age. He has multiple cut marks located
on the frontal, both parietals, and the occipital (Figures 4 and 5). There is a healing projectile point wound on the right
ulna, but no evidence of perimortem
trauma that could be attributed to a cause
of death (see also Baker 2001:327).
Grimes-Houy is a burial site dating
to the Late Prehistoric period near
Mother Neff State Park in Coryell
County. The population represented by
the Grimes-Houy cemetery were broad-

Figure 4. The distribution of scalping cut marks on one of the cranium
excavated from the Grimes-Houy site (41CV17).

Figure 5. Cut marks (arrows) on the frontal bone from a young adult male from the Grimes-Houy site (41CV17).

206

Texas Archeological Society

spectrum, highly mobile, hunter-gatherers.
The Late Prehistoric period in this region is
characterized by the introduction of arrow
points, burned rock middens, and an increasing
reliance on bison (Collins 1995; Kibler and
Boyd 1999). Bioarcheologically, the skeletal
samples from this region show evidence of
increasing levels of interpersonal violence over
the earlier Archaic periods, which may have
resulted from resource competition between
mobile groups (Baker 2001:464).

Lawrence Island (41CH1)
This individual (TARL Accession #l 35A)
is a female over 20 years of age at death. She
is represented by a cranium that is missing
the frontal and facial bones. No post-cranial
bones are present. There is no sign of a mortal
wound on the surviving cranial elements. She
has evidence of hack marks and cut marks on
Figure 6. Illustration showing the posterior view of the cranium
her parietal bones (Figure 6). The wounds on
from the Lawrence Island site (41CH1). Hack- and cut marks
the parietals were made with enough force to
are shown on and near the sagittal suture (obelion) and on the
break away small pieces of bone around the
right lambdoidal suture near the asterion.
impact site (Figure 7). The frontal bone is
largely missing and there are no cut marks on
those portions of it that have survived. The appearLawrence Island is a burial locality in Chambers
ance of the wounds are suggestive of scalping, but
County on the upper Texas coast. It was excavated
the lack of the frontal prevents absolute certainty.
by archeologists from the University of Texas in the
1930s. Artifacts associated with the burial
suggest a Late Prehistoric date (TARL files,
ca. 1930s). The Lawrence Island cemetery,
and others in the region, are associated with
the Akokisas, a hunting, gathering, and fishing people that ranged from southeastern
Texas into neighboring parts of Louisiana
(Aten 1983; Newcomb 1961:315).

~-~

Harrell Ranch (41YN1)

Figure 7. Superior view of the skull of an adult female from the
Lawrence Island site (41CH1) in Chambers County. The arrow
points to hack marks. Breakage around the impact point indicates
that considerable force was applied when removing the scalp.

This Late Prehistoric site is located
in Young County in North Texas, near the
junction of the Brazos River and Clear Fork
of the Brazos. The site included a cemetery
with approximately 32 individuals (Hughes
1942:4 ). Krieger (1946) considered the
Harrell site the southernmost representation of Great Plains village horticultural
settlements (dating between A.D. 1200
and 1500).
Although it has been previously suspected, there is no definitive evidence of

Wilhelm and Taylor-Osteological Evidence of Prehistoric and Historic Scalping in Texas

207

scalping in the Harrell Ranch bioarcheological sample. Cut marks
and other evidence for sharp-force
trauma were discovered on multiple individuals, but we judged
the trauma to be postmortem.
Cut marks on the remains did not
match the coloration of the surrounding outer table of bone and
were associated with flaking and
micro-fractures (Figure 8). These
features are consistent with postmortem damage to dry bones.
Vagal impressions on some of the
cranial bones might have also been
mistaken for scalping, but most
of the damage done to the Harrell
Ranch crania was from excavation
trauma (Figure 9).

POTENTIAL PREHISTORIC
AND HISTORIC SCALPINGS
OUTSIDE THE TARL
COLLECTIONS
Yeliowhouse Draw
The junior author observed
a cranium (40-31; 0027) in the
Figure 8. An example of postmortem cut marks on a portion of a frontal
bone from the Harrell Ranch site (41 YN I). This represents trauma caused
collections of the Texas Tech
by excavation or cleaning.
University Museum that displayed
cut marks consistent with scalping. The remains represent an old
(50+) adult male discovered in Yellowhouse Draw in
reported an adult male from Mission San Juan
Hockley County (no trinomial). The provenience is
Capistrano with three light parallel cut marks on
the boss of the parietal. She stated that "since these
unknown, but the state of preservation suggests a Late
cuts
are isolated, it is not clear whether they are
Prehistoric or Historic date. A cluster of deep, incised
associated with scalping or with some other form
cut marks were observed on the right portion of the
of perimortem trauma." Due to the lack of evidence
frontal bone, bisecting the temporal line. Another
that either Catholic or native mortuary customs
cluster was observed on the coronal suture, near the
included cutting the scalp, she concluded that
junction of that suture with the temporal line.
scalping was the most likely cause of the trauma
(Baker 2001 :327).
Mission San Juan Capistrano (41BX5)
The Mission San Juan Capistrano was founded
by Franciscan missionaries in its present location
in A.D. 1731. One of five missions in the area, it
was placed near the banks of the San Antonio River
in present day south San Antonio (Scheutz 1968,
1980). Periodically, the mission was harassed, and
even openly attacked, by Apache and Comanche
raiding parties (Scheutz 1980). Baker (200 l :327)

Mission Nuestra Senora del Refugio (41RF1)
While examining the human skeletal remains
excavated from the Mission cemetery at Mission
Refugio, Jantz et al. (2002) repmied on three different
skulls that bore some evidence of scalping. All three
crania represented adult males with similar patterns of
cut marks on the frontal, paiietal, and occipital bones

208

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 9. Pseudo-pathologies on a skull from the Harrell Ranch site (41 YNl). Arrow A points to a postmortem cut mark
caused by excavation trauma. Arrow B points to a vagal groove.

(Jantz et al. 2002:63). These remains have since been
reburied, however, preventing independent analysis
and confirmation of these observations.
Mission Refugio was the last Spanish mission
founded in Texas. Located along the Mission River
in present Refugio, Texas, the final site of the church
was the last of three different locations. Intended to
serve local Karankawa Indians, the Mission was periodically attacked by Apache and Comanche groups
(Chipman 1992:201; Oberste 1942).

DISCUSSION
Evidence for scalping in Texas is rare, but covers a
wide geographic area. Based on osteological evidence,
the practice of scalping was known on the Upper Gulf
Coast, Central Texas, the Gulf Coastal Plain, and the
South Plains. Methods for removing the scalp appear
to be similar to one another, despite the geographic
distance. Cut marks associated with scalping are found

on the frontal, parietal, and occipital bones. They were
absent from the zygomatic, temporal, sphenoid, and
mandible. Only the superior and posterior po1tions of
the scalp were taken, and the ears were not included.
Most wounds were simple single cuts or "sawing"
marks at specific locations on the skull. However, hack
marks on the Lawrence Island individual suggest that
her scalping was inexpert and caused more damage
than was necessary to remove the scalp.
The fact that all of these instances occurred
during the Late Prehistoric period (dating after A.D.
700) is significant. Scalping trauma has not been
observed in Texas samples before this time period.
Perhaps the introduction of new technologies during
this time period coincided with the diffusion of new
ideas about warfare. There is ample osteological
evidence that violent, interpersonal conflict was on
the rise. Violent trauma from Late Prehistoric sites
in Central Texas (see Baker 2001) indicate that
this period was one of conflict over resources and
perhaps population dislocation.

Wilhelm and Taylor-Osteological Evidence of Prehistoric and Historic Scalping in Texas
Scalping may have been introduced as an individual expression of prowess in battle, a tool for
intimidation of enemies, or both. The scalping of a
woman in the Lawrence Island sample would suggest
that intimidation was the goal on the upper Texas
coast. Unless the woman was a wa1Tior, the scalping
of a noncombatant may have been intended as intimidation. She most likely represents an Akokisa individual, who lived in the western and coastal regions
of the Southeastern U.S. (Newcomb 1961:321). If this
is the case, then her scalping might be reflective of the
traditions of war associated with Southeastern Native
Americans. However, the scant evidence provided
by this individual is not sufficient to make specific
interpretations of local warfare practices.
The scalpings at Andrews Lake and GrimesHou y may be part of cultural practices that were
common on the Great Plains (see Willey 1990).
Since both of the victims were men of fighting age,
it would be reasonable to assume that they fell in
combat. Their scalps were likely taken primarily as
symbols of their killer's prowess in battle, which
is in keeping with recorded Plains warfare cultural
practices. Intimidation may have been a desired, but
unintentional, side-effect.
Cut marks observed in all three victims were
perimortem injuries. There is no osteological evidence that any of them survived their scalping for
any length of time. Most likely their scalps were
removed after they were dead or had been mortally
wounded and rendered too weak to fight back.

CONCLUSIONS
The instances of scalping in prehistoric Texas
are sparse, but provide enough evidence to draw
some important conclusions. Scalping had a brief
history in Texas. We found no osteological evidence
of scalping before A.D. 700. During the Archaic
period, there is ample evidence of interpersonal
violence (see Baker 2001) but no evidence of taking
scalps as trophies of war. Based on this finding it is
probable that scalping was introduced from adjacent
regions, such as the Great Plains. The technological
innovations that delineate the Late Prehistoric time
period were likely accompanied by a diffusion of
different cultural ideas. Among these new ideas may
have been novel approaches to warfare, including
the practice of scalping enemies.
The scalpings described here may be interpreted
as further evidence of a continent-wide war practice

209

(Axtell and Sturtevant 1980). The act of scalping has
a long and well-documented record in pre-contact
North America. In Texas, scalping appears late in
the archeological record but was geographically
wide-spread.

ACKNOWLEGEMENTS
We wish to thank Dr. Darrell Creel and Laura
Nightengale for access to the collections of the Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory. We would also
like to thank Dr. Eileen Johnson for access to the
collections of the Texas Tech Museum. The Texas
Dental Anthropology project was funded by a grant
from the George and Cynthia Mitchell Foundation.

REFERENCES CITED
Aten, L. E.
1983 Indians r~f the Upper Texas Coast. Academic Press.
New York.
Aufderheide, A. C. and C. Rodriguez-Martin
l 998 The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Paleopathology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Axtell, J. and W. C. Sturtevant
1980 The Unkindest Cut of All, or Who Invented Scalping.
The William and Mm}· Quarterly 37(3):451-472.
Baker. J.E.
2001 No Golden Age of Peace: A Bioarchaeological Investigation of Interpersonal Violence on the West Gulf
Coastal Plain. Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology, Texas A&M University, College Station.
Bueschgen, W. D. and D. T. Case
1996 Evidence of Prehistoric scalping at Vosberg, Central
Arizona. International Journal of Osteoarchaeology
6:230-248.
Burton, R.R.
1864 Notes on Scalping. Anthropological Review
2:49-52.
Chipman, D. E.
1992 Spanish Texas, 1519-1821. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Collins, M. B.
1968 The Andrews Lake Locality: New Archeological
Data from the Southern Llano Estacado, Texas.
Master's thesis, Department of Anthropology, The
University of Texas at Austin.

210

Texas Archeological Society

1995

Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 66:361-400.

Foster, W. C. (editor)
1998 The La Salle Expedition to Texas: The Journal of
Henri Joutel, 1684-1687. Texas State Historical Association, Austin.
Galloway, A., S. A. Symes, W .D. Haglund, and D. L.
France.
1999 The Role of Forensic Anthropology in Trauma
Analysis. In Broken Bones: Anthropological Analysis
of Blunt Force Trauma, edited by A. Galloway, pp.
5-31. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.
Haas, J. and W. Creamer
1997 Warfare among the Pueblos: Myth, History, and
Ethnohistory. Ethnohistory 44:235-261.
Hamper!, H.
1967 The Osteological Consequences of Scalping. In Diseases in Antiquity: A Survey of the Disease, Injuries,
and Surgery of Early Populations, edited by D. R.
Brothwell and A. T. Sandison, pp. 630-634. Charles
C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.
Hamper!, H. and W. S. Laughlin
1959 Osteological Consequences of Scalping. Human
Biology 31 :80-89.
Hughes, J. T.
1942 An Archaeological Report on the Harrell Site on
North-Central Texas. Master's thesis, Department of
Anthropology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Humphrey, J. H. and D .L. Hutchinson
2001 Macroscopic Characteristics of Hacking Trauma.
Journal of Forensic Sciences 46:228-233.
Jantz, L. M, R. L. Jantz, N. P. Herrmann, C. S. Sparks, K. E.
Weisensee, and D. V. Kopp
2002 Archaeological Investigations at the Last Spanish
Colonial Mission Established on the Texas Frontier: Nuestra Seiiora del Refugio (41RF1), Reji1gio
County, Texas, Volume 11: Osteological Analyses.
Archaeological Survey Report, No. 315. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.
Kibler, K.W. and D. K. Boyd
1999 Archeological Background and Research Contexts.
In National Register Testing of 42 Prehistoric Archeological Sites on Fort Hood, Texas: The 1996
Season, by K. Kleinbach, G. Mehalchick, D. K.
Boyd, and K.W. Kibler, pp. 13-22. Research Report
No. 38. United States Army Fort Hood Archeological Resource Management Series, Fort Hood,
Texas.

Krieger, A. D.
1946 Culture Complexes and Chronology in Northern
Texas: With Extension of Puebloan Datings to the
Mississippi Valley. Publication 4640. The University
of Texas at Austin.
Mann, R. W. and S. P. Murphy
1990 Regional Atlas of Bone Disease: A Guide to Pathologic and Normal Variation in the Human Skeleton.
Charles C. Thomas, Springfield Illinois.
Maples, W. R.
1986 Trauma Analysis by the Forensic Anthropologist.
In Forensic Osteology: Advances in the Identification of Human Remains, edited by K. J. Reichs, pp.
218-228. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, Illinois.
Miller, E.
1994 Evidence for Prehistoric Scalping in Northeastern
Nebraska. Plains Anthropologist 39:211-219.
Nadeau, G.
1941 Indian Scalping Techniques in Different Tribes. Bulletin of the History of Medicine 10:178-194.
Nafte, M.
2000 Flesh and Bone: An Introduction to Forensic Anthropology. Carolina Academic Press, Durham, North
Carolina.
Neumann, G. K.
1940 Evidence for the Antiquity of Scalping from Central
Illinois. American Antiquity 5:287-289.
Newcomb, Jr., W. W.
1961 The Indians o,f Texas: From Prehistoric to Modern
Times. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Oberste, W. H.
1942 History of the Refugio Mission. Refugio County
Timely Remarks, Refugio, Texas.
Owsley, D. W., H. E. Berryman, and W. M. Bass
1977 Demographic and Osteological Evidence for Warfare
at the Larson Site, South Dakota. Plains Anthropologist 22(78): 119-131.
Sauer, N. J.
1998 The Timing of Injuries and Manner of Death: Distinguishing among Antemortem, Perimortem, and Postmortem Trauma. In Forensic Osteology: Advances in
the Identification of Human Remains, edited by K. J.
Reichs, pp. 321-332. 211 d Edition. Charles C. Thomas,
Springfield, Illinois.
Schuetz, M. K.
1968 The History and Archeology of Mission San Juan
Capistrano, San Antonio, Texas. Historical Documentation and Description of Structures, Vol. 1.
Archaeology Program, State Building Commission,
Austin.

Wilhelm and Taylor-Osteological Evidence of Prehistoric and Historic Scalping in Texas
1980

A Historical Outline of Mission San Juan de Capistrano. La Tierra 7(4):3-15.

Smith.M. 0.
1995 Scalping in the Archaic Period: Evidence from the
Western Tennessee Valley. Southeastern Archaeology
14:60-68.
Smith, M. W.
1938 The War Complex of the Plains Indians. Pmceedings
of the American Philosophical Society 78:425-464.
Snow, C. E.
1942 Additional Evidence of Scalping. American Antiquity
7:398-400.
Symes, S. A., J. A. Williams, E. A. Murray, J.M. Hoffman, T.
D. Holland, J.M. Saul, F. P. Saul, and E. J. Pope
2002 Taphonomic Context of Sharp-Force Trauma in Suspected Cases of Human Mutilation and Dismemberment. In Advances in Forensic Taphonomy: Method,
The01y, and Archaeological Perspectives, edited by
W. D. Haglund and M. H. Sorg, pp. 403-434. CRC
Press, Boca Raton, Florida.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory (TARL)
1930s Unpublished records for Chambers County. Documents on file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. The University of Texas at Austin.

211

Turner II, C. G. and J. A. Turner
1999 Man Corn: Cannibalism and Violence in the Prehistoric American Southwest. University of Utah Press,
Salt Lake City.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1985 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians.
Texas Monthly Press, Austin.
Ubelaker, D. H. and B. J. Adams
1995 Differentiation of perimortem and postmortem
trauma using taphonomic indicators. Journal of
Forensic Sciences 40:509-512.
Willey, P.
1990 Prehistoric Wa1fare on the Great Plains. Garland
Publishing, New York.
Willey, P. and T. E. Emerson
1993 The Osteology and Archaeology of the Crow
Creek Massacre. Plains Anthropologist 38, Memoir
27:227-269.

ogyscho1ar1y and Popular Books on Archaeology from Around the World

The Mesa Verde World

The Archaeology of Chaco Canyon

Explorations in Ancestral
Pueblo Archaeology

An Eleventh-Century Pueblo Regional Center
Edited by Stephen H. Lekson

Edited by David Grant Noble

2006. l 82 pp., 22 color & l 45 black-and-white
illustrations, maps, reading list, index, 8 x I I

2006. 556 pp., 8 color & 65 black-and-white
illustrations, timeline, 2 appendices, notes,
references, index, 6 x 9

978-1-930618-74-9,Cloth, $59.95
978-1-930618-75-&;~per, $24.95

978-1-930618-47-3, Cloth, $60.00
978-1-930618-48-0, Paper, $34.95

~~r

-

The Model-Based Archaeology
of Socionatural Systems
Edited by Timothy A. Kohler and
Sander E. van der Leeuw

2007. 304 pp., color & black-and-white
ilfustrations, notes, references, index, 7 x I 0
978-1-930618-87-9, Paper, $34.95

School for Advanced Research Press • P.O. Box 2188, Santa Fe, NM 87504 • 888-390-6070 • sarpress.sarweb.org

your advertisement
Texas Archeological Society

year.,

place an ad, please contact Pam Wheat, at
pwheat@vmplus.com

