CHEOLOGICAL
QCIETY Volume 69/1998

Timothy K. Perttula, Editor
Linda W. Ellis, Assistant Editor

Published by the Society at Austin

1998

CONTENTS

Prehistoric Human Food Resource Patches on the Texas Coastal Plain
Grant D. Hall .............................................................. I
Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site (41ZV155), Zavala County,
Southern Texas
Betty J. Inman, T.C. Hill, Jr., and Thomas R. Hester ............................... 11
Treachery and Tragedy in the Texas Wilderness: The Adventures of Jean L' Archeveque in Texas
(A Member of La Salle's Colony)
Kathleen Gilmore .......................................................... 35
The Washington Square Mound Site: A Middle Caddo Mound Complex
in South Central East Texas
James E. Corbin and John P. Hart ............................................. 47
Terrace Deposits and Late Quaternary Climate, South-Central Edwards Plateau, Texas
Charles E. Mear ........................................................... 79
Infierno Phase Pottery of the Lower Pecos River Region
Solveig A. Turpin and David G. Robinson ....................................... 89
The Impact of Eolian Processes on Archeological Site Size and Characteristics in West Texas
and Southern New Mexico
Jeff D. Leach, Raymond P. Mauldin, and H. Curtis Monger ......................... 99
Hand Prints at Pace Bend Park That Are Probably Not Prehistoric
E. J. Mawk and M. W. Rowe ................................................. 109

BOOK REVIEWS
Life and Death in the Templo Mayor, by Eduardo Matos Moctezuma, translated
by Bernard R. Ortiz de Montellano and Thelma Ortiz de Montellano
John A. Giacobbe ......................................................... 113
The Lion Creek Site (41BT105): Aboriginal Houses and Other Remains at a Prehistoric
Rancherfa in the Texas Hill Country (Burnet County), by LeRoy Johnson
Dawn Youngblood ......................................................... 115
Trade and Discovery: The Scientific Study of Artefacts from Post-Medieval Europe
and Beyond, edited by Duncan R. Hook and David R. M. Gaimster
Timothy K. Perttula ........................................................ 117

iii

Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices During the Central Texas Archaic,
by Leland C. Bement
Helen Danzeiser Dockal! ................................................... 119
The Story of Big Bend National Park, by John R. Jameson
Jean L. Epperson ......................................................... 121
Stone Tools: Theoretical Insights into Human Prehistory, edited by George H. Odell
John E. Dockal! ........................................................... 122

iv

Prehistoric Human Food Resource Patches
on the Texas Coastal Plain
Grant D. Hall

ABSTRACT
The Texas coastal plain is remarkable for its ecotonal diversity and natural food productivity. This study
takes a look at broad patterns in the occurrence of such food resources, with emphasis on the aquatic products
of rivers and bays, nuts and acorns, animals, and prickly pear fruit. These resources converged in parts of the
coastal plain to form areas that were especially productive to prehistoric hunter-gatherers. These food resource
patches clearly had a profound affect on the behavior and character of people present on the Texas coastal plain
over the past 4,000 years.

INTRODUCTION
In an earlier study focusing on the interpretation of prehistoric aboriginal cemetery distribution
and character, I noted that the Texas central coastal
plain "was blessed with a variety of plants and
animals which, in their aggregate, would have provided a superabundance of native foods to prehistoric hunter-gatherers" (Hall l 995a:637). I
attempted to show that native pecans were the most
critical of these food resources in terms of the definition of Archaic territories across the region, but
this idea was not supported by the pattern of known
cemeteries relative to native pecan distribution. I
concluded my study by observing that: "It was the
variety and density of the aggregate of native food
resources of southeast Texas that contributed to the
area's attractiveness of prehistoric human groups"
(Hall 1995a:644). Here, pecans will again be briefly
considered, but more attention will be paid, in terms
of broad patterns of resource availability, to the
coastal plain's rich mosaic of food resources considered only marginally in the earlier study. These
include the natural products of Holocene flood
plains, bays and estuaries, the Post Oak Belt, the
Cross Timbers, and prickly pear fields.
The Texas coastal plain is defined for present
purposes as extending from the Sabine River
catchment in the northeast to the Rfo Grande
catchment in the southwest (Figure 1). The region
is bounded on the southeast by the Gulf of Mexico
and on the northwest by the Balcones Escarpment

and Edwards Plateau. The climate, landforms, and
floral and faunal communities to be discussed have
been in place for the past 2000 to 4000 years, and
this will be the period of Texas prehistory relevant
to this study.

LATE PLEISTOCENE AND
HOLOCENE DEVELOPMENT
OF THE COASTAL PLAIN
During the Pleistocene, when sea level was
100 m below that of today, Texas rivers were
coursing down steeper regional gradients to a
coastline that was 65 to 160 km seaward from
where it is at present (Frazier 1974:22). Because
of the steeper gradients, water was flowing down
the river channels faster, cutting deep, V-shaped,
relatively straight channels. Due to a wetter Pleistocene climate throughout the catchment basins,
the rivers were also carrying more water than in
later times. As glaciers began to retreat, sea level
gradually rose, river gradients decreased, water
flow rates slowed, and the deep valleys began to
fill with alluvium.
Following stabilization of modern sea level,
the channels of Texas rivers became more sinuous,
creating active aggradational environments where
spring floods, periodic channel abandonment, and
formation of oxbow lakes were more common
events in the broad, flat alluvial plains that were
developing. Coastward, the flooding of the river

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69 (1998)

2

Texas Archeological Society

which is in the month of April, and
sometimes it overflows twice. The
Red River
~ Post Oak Belt
second time is through May, and then
they kill great quantities of fish, and
~ Cross Timbers
very good ones" (Oviedo y Valdes
1853:601). The rivers along the Texas
coastal plain were important sources
of aquatic foods for prehistoric
\ ....
people, and the abundance and avail. River
.
~abme
ability of riverine food resources varied in proportion to the size of the
Holocene floodplain of each river.
(
The larger the floodplain, the more
Edwards Plateau
area of active channel, abandoned
Neches River
channels or sloughs, swamps, and oxbows can potentially occur: all features where aquatic food species
would flourish and/or be trapped.
It is evident from examination of
maps showing the extent of Holocene
valley fills (e.g., Frazier 1974:2;
20
Barnes 1975, 1982) that the floodplains of Texas rivers vary consider~ Holocene Flood Plains
ably in extent. These size differences
can be seen in Figure 1, with the coaNative Pecan Trees
~ Bays & Estuaries
(thousands/county)
lescent valleys of the lower Brazos
~ Prickly Pear Cactus
and Colorado rivers and the valley of
the Rfo Grande standing out promiFigure 1. Extent of Food Resource Patches in Eastern Texas. Sources: Post nently on the Texas coastal plain.
Oak Belt and Cross Timbers (McMahan et al. 1984); native pecans (U.S. Nevertheless, these "biggest" Texas
Department of Commerce 1981:282-283 and Table 32); prickly pear floodplains are dwarfed by the coastal
cactus (Davenport and Wells 1919); and Holocene floodplains, bays, and Holocene floodplain of the Missisestuaries (Barnes 1975, 1982).
sippi River to the east (Frazier
1974:2). The size of the floodplain of
Texas rivers is dictated by geologic
valleys by the sea level rise created estuaries and,
and physiographic factors, the drainage area of the
river, and annual rainfall rates in the river catchlater, bays and barrier islands (Ricklis 1995 :289).
During the same period, the floral and faunal comment (Table 1).
munities witnessed by native peoples living on the
Floodplain features such as oxbow lakes,
coastal plain during the final 4000 years of Texas
sloughs, and backwater swamps were places where
prehistory emerged (Story 1985:25, 40). Over these
aquatic species were introduced during spring
final four millennia, however, average rainfall rates
floods and then naturally trapped or contained as
and temperature have fluctuated (Nordt et al.
flood waters receded. They were the prehistoric
1994: 117).
equivalents of "catfish farms" where aquatic species were, in essence, preserved and stored through
spring and into the summer to be harvested by
people as needed. Such features were fixed in space
HOLOCENE FLOODPLAINS
and would have been a predictable source of food
from year to year to the extent that broader climatic
Of the Mariame, an aboriginal group inhabitpatterns cooperated in bringing integral spring
ing the lower Guadalupe River valley, the Spaniard
floods.
The same processes that were creating such
Oviedo said: "Sometimes they eat fish which they
features
also brought about their eventual demise.
kill in that river, but few, except when it overflows

'

'

1J:
5

Hall- Prehistoric Human Food Resource Patches on the Texas Coastal Plain

3

Table 1. Drainage Areas, Rainfall Rates, and Annual Runoff Statistics for Texas Rivers*
Total Basin Drainage
Area (Sq. Miles)

Mean Annual
Rainfall (inches)

48,030

17-47

7,492,680

Sabine

9,756

44-53

6,243,840

Neches

10,011

45-47

5,225,742

Trinity

17,969

32-50

5,570,390

3,834

48

1,686,960

River
Red

San Jacinto

Average Annual Runoff
(Acre Feet)

Brazos

45,573

17-46

5,423, 187

Colorado

41,763

14-44

3,341,040

Lavaca-Navidad

2,309

34-41

544,924-773,515

Guadalupe

6,070

25-49

1,080,460

San Antonio

4,180

26-36

627,000-773,300

16,950

23

1,254,300-2,000, 100

182,215

8-18

5,284,235

Nueces
Rio Grande

Data Source: Texas Water Development Board (1977).

Sloughs and oxbows gradually fill with sediments
or are cut off from influx of floodwaters, thus becoming less effective as fish traps and storage
ponds. The geomorphic evolution of such features
through time is reflected in local settlement patterns of contemporary prehistoric people. Good
examples of this situation are provided by the Flat
Bank Creek site (Kelley et al. 1994:7-1to7-3) and
sites near Shy Pond (Hamilton 1987) in the lower
Brazos River valley, and in the lower Guadalupe
River valley (Weinstein 1992:367-377). Examining
faunal lists from such sites (e.g., Weinstein
1992:306-308; Kelley et al. 1994:6-2 to 6-4), gar,
drum, catfish, bass, perch, sunfish, minnows, mussels, turtles, snakes, and alligators are all seen to
have been important food resources procured from
floodplain features.

BAYS AND ESTUARIES
For the Nueces River estuary and the bays in
the vicinity of Corpus Christi, Ricklis (1995:280281) has shown that the formation of estuaries and

shallow bays protected by barrier islands occurred
during at least three sea level stillstand intervals
over the past 7500 years. As with the two earlier
intervals, the latest versions of these features, in
place along the Texas coast by Late Archaic times
(2500 to 2000 B.P.), "led to a considerable increase
in estuarine fish carrying capacity, and human populations shifted to greater economic focus on fish
procurement." The bays and estuaries also supported
a variety of shellfish, which were also harvested by
the fishermen. In Late Prehistoric times (700 to 250
B.P.), fishing appears to have become even more
important (Ricklis 1995:286). For both the Late
Archaic and Late Prehistoric periods, Ricklis
(1995 :281, 287) believes that fishing was most intense from fall and winter through early spring,
corresponding to the spawning season of redfish
and black drum. He further notes (1995:287) that
the movement of fish into the bay shallows to spawn
provided "the kind of predictable and concentrated
food resources required to support relatively large
human groups."
Scott (1992:423-424) provides a consideration
of aquatic food resource exploitation in the lower

4

Texas Archeological Society

Guadalupe River valley, where both marine and
freshwater species were available. There, Scott
equated increased use of aquatic foods with stress
brought on by an "insidious increase in population"
beginning in the Late Archaic. Though often considered by hunter-gatherers to be a second-line,
less desirable resource, aquatic foods became more
attractive in times of stress because of their abundance, ease of procurement, and nutritional value.
Gradually increasing reliance on aquatic foods, as
observed by Ricklis (1995) and Scott (1992), may
be interpreted, along with the appearance of cemeteries, as a sign of increased population and greater
demands on the food base.

PECANS, ACORNS, AND
OTHER NUTS
The floodplains of creeks and rivers over
portions of the eastern half of Texas support the
world's densest stands of native pecans. Data on
the distribution and other characteristics of native
pecans have been presented in Hall (l 995a:638644 ). Figure 1 shows the distribution of native
pecans on a county-by-county basis over the study
area (though only counties having 5,000 or more
native pecan trees are included). In the fall season
of years of maximum productivity, these groves
yield millions of kilograms of pecans. Then, for a
couple of years, sometimes longer, nut yields are
lower, reflecting naturally-dictated cycles of
productivity. In addition to being "rooted" in the
landscape, and thus predictable as to location, other
attractive qualities of native pecans as a human
food resource include their abundance; relative ease
of collection, processing, and preparation prior to
eating; good preservation and storage properties;
and nutritional value. Most important with respect
to nutrition is that over 70 percent of the nut meat
consists of fat, a critical component of the diet that
was often in short supply for hunter-gatherers.
Campbell and Campbell (1981:17-18) provide an
informative summary of pecan utilization by the
Mariame on the lower Guadalupe River, and
Campbell (1975:18-19) tells of pecan usage by the
Payaya people along the Medina River south of
San Antonio.
Acorn-producing oaks grow extensively over
the Texas coastal plain and on the Edwards Plateau,
but are most heavily concentrated in two major
features of the Texas floral landscape known as the

Post Oak Belt and the Cross Timbers (see Figure
1). Also embedded in these forests are hickory and
walnut trees. The acorns and nuts produced by these
trees would have been utilized as food resources by
prehistoric people during the fall and winter. Less
is known about the density and productivity of oaks,
hickories, and walnuts because, unlike pecans, they
do not have enough direct economic value to have
justified extensive study. But localized studies (e.g.,
Marietta and Nixon 1983; Ward and Nixon 1992)
do show that oaks and hickories are major
components of these forests. Though the labor
investment to collect and process acorns, hickory
nuts, and walnuts is higher than for pecans, the
acorns and other nuts do provide important sources
of carbohydrates, fats, and proteins. Like pecans,
the productivity of acorns and nuts from these other
trees is variable from year to year. Of additional
importance, the pecans, acorns, and other nuts
attracted and fed a variety of wildlife species.

PRICKLY PEAR CACTUS
From the Nueces River southward to the Rfo
Grande, vast stands of prickly pear cactus yielded
abundant fruits (known as tunas) that were an important food resource to early historic aboriginal
populations, mainly in the summer when the greatest numbers of the tunas ripen. In their study of the
route of Cabeza de Vaca across Texas, Davenport
and Wells (1919:208-210) gathered good distributional data on prickly pear in southern Texas. The
prickly pear areas shown in Figure l come from
this study. Other good 19th century descriptions of
the size, extent, and density of the prickly pear
concentrations are mentioned by Campbell and
Campbell (1981:7, 18), who also provide a good
summary of Cabeza de Vaca's 1533 observations
concerning the utilization of prickly pear by the
Mariame, who annually moved south to the prickly
pear fields from their home in the pecan groves of
the lower Guadalupe River valley. From May until
August, tunas were a staple of the diet. The harvest
apparently attracted different ethnic groups from a
wide region around the main concentrations, and
was an occasion for larger-than-usual aggregations
of people. Though similar behavior related to prickly
pear exploitation undoubtedly occurred in prehistoric times, it has not yet been verified
archeologically, and the time-depth of the activity
is unknown.

Hall - Prehistoric Human Food Resource Patches on the Texas Coastal Plain

ECOTONAL DIVERSITY EQUALS
RICH FLORA AND FAUNA
The interfingering of the roughly north-south
trending nut- and acorn-rich forested areas of the
Cross Timbers and Post Oak Belt with prairie and
savannah zones, and the bounding of the entire
region by the Pineywoods, Edwards Plateau, South
Texas Plains, and Gulf of Mexico (see Figure 1),
creates a landscape mosaic of rich floral and faunal
communities. The entire region is slashed northwest
to southeast by the floodplains of the major rivers.
For Texas, this landscape is one of relatively great
ecotonal diversity, supporting dense and diverse
plant and animal communities. Foster (1995:233260) summarizes reports of plants and animals seen
by 17th and 18th century Spanish explorers as they
traveled along the Camino Real from the Rio Grande
to the Sabine River. Alston V. Thoms does an
excellent job of characterizing the ecological
diversity and productivity of small areas of the Post
Oak Belt (Thoms 1993:12-17) and the Cross
Timbers (Thoms 1994: 17-20). These studies vividly
demonstrate how productive the Texas coastal plain
was (and, for many species, still is), especially in
terms of white-tailed deer, but also including bison,
antelope, bears, turkeys, raccoons, beavers, rabbits,
snakes, migratory waterfowl and other aquatic
fauna, prairie chickens, and quail. Thoms (1993,
1994) and Foster (1995) also mention, in addition
to the nuts and acorns already discussed, a variety
of other plant food resources such as mesquite
beans, hackberries, dewberries, hawthorns, plums,
mustang grapes, greenbriars, persimmons, and
generic "roots," "seeds," "berries," and "herbs" that
are available throughout the region.

DISCUSSION
Having briefly mentioned the various food resource patches present on the Texas coastal plain,
attention is now turned to specific areas within the
region to consider how the availability of aggregate
food resources may have affected the behavior of
prehistoric human groups inhabiting each area. The
areas to be discussed are numbered 1 to 5 on Figure 1.
Area 1 encompasses the lower valleys of the
Brazos and Colorado rivers. It was in this area that
I attempted to show that, during the Late Archaic,
relatively dense human populations, formation of

5

territories, and subsequent development of large
cemeteries were keyed to native pecan availability
(Hall 1995a, 1995b). However, pecans alone failed
to account for this Late Archaic cultural phenomenon. Looking beyond the pecans, it is seen that
Area 1 is also blessed with the expansive, coalescent floodplains of two big rivers, the Brazos and
Colorado, their floodplains rivaled in extent here in
Texas only by the Rio Grande delta. The channels,
oxbows, sloughs, and swamps of these big plains
were a bountiful source of aquatic foods.
I now believe that it was a combination of the
pecans and the aquatic resources that provided the
main impetus for Late Archaic settlement in this
area of the coastal plain. These two foods complemented each other in terms of seasonal availability,
pecans being harvested in the fall and winter, and
aquatic resources primarily in the spring and summer. Both the nut groves and the floodplain "catfish farms" were fixed on the landscape, and thus
were predictable as to where the food resources
would be. This geographic resource fixity would be
consistent with the prehistoric settlement patterns
hypothesized by Vernon (1989:53-55) wherein Late
Archaic populations were not sedentary, but were
operating over reduced territories. As time went by,
enough deaths and burials occurred in the vicinity
to result in development of the large cemeteries
characteristic of the area. There was good storage
potential in the sense that pecans can be cached for
a year or more without spoiling, and fish would
continue to live, but be trapped, in sloughs to be
used on into the summer. The pecans and aquatic
foods in Area 1 were augmented by bay foods on
the coast, products of the Pineywoods region to the
northeast, acorns and hickory nuts from adjacent
segments of the Post Oak Belt, and the various
other plant and animal resources supported by prairie, savannah, floodplain, and forest ecotones. These
subsidiary resources were abundant enough to support the people at times when primary resources
were in short supply.
Late Archaic cemeteries in Area l are
distinguished by remarkable grave inclusions,
including specimens made of raw materials
originating in the Ouachita Mountains of Arkansas
and the Llano Uplift of Central Texas (Hall 1981,
l 995a, l 995b ). If these artifacts are tangible signs
of reciprocal resource-sharing alliances (Hall
1995a), then the higher incidence of such objects in
the cemeteries of Area 1 suggests that the area had,
year-in and year-out, the most abundant food

6

Texas Archeological Society

resource base available on the Texas coastal plain.
In this scenario, the "exotic" objects and materials

found in the cemeteries would have been brought
in by visiting bands when they came to partake of
surplus food resources, the exotics being given to
members of the hosting band. Binford outlines this
process and refers to such resource-rich areas as
"centers of secure production" (Binford 1983:219220). The bands of Area 1 likely experienced
occasional food shortages themselves and had to
pay visits to neighboring territories to get by. These
movements might explain the occurrence of
distinctive bone artifacts typical of Area 1 (Hall
1989) at more remote sites such as Morhiss and
Texas West Indies to the southwest in the Guadalupe
River valley (Birmingham and Huebner 1991; J.
Dockall and H. D. Dockall 1996). Parallels may
also be seen in marine shell ornaments (Birmingham
and Huebner 1991; H. D. Dockal! and J. Dockall
1996).
Area 2 in the middle reaches of the Guadalupe
and San Antonio rivers has concentrated native pecan resources second only to Area 3 along the San
Saba, Colorado, and Leon rivers. Late Archaic burials and related grave inclusions, such as found at
Rudy Haiduk (Mitchell et al. 1984), at the Olmos
Dam cemetery (Lukowski 1988), and at the Silo
cemetery (Lovata 1996), suggest settlement systems and a food resource base similar to those in
the Late Archaic of Area 1. In Area 2, the pecan
groves are solidly embedded in the forests of the
Post Oak Belt, which is bifurcated by prairies at its
southwestern end (see Figure 1). Pecans, acorns,
and perhaps hickory nuts are abundant. The floodplains of the area's two major rivers are not large,
so aquatic resources would not have been a significant factor affecting local settlement. There are big
bays and estuaries at the mouths of the rivers that
trend through this area, so aquatic food resource
potential was high coastward.
In addition to the immediate plant and animal
food resources available in Area 2, its location with
respect to the Edwards Plateau, Area 1, and Area 4
may have been an advantage to its Late Archaic
people in two respects. First, ecotonal diversity was
high, with attendant rich floral and faunal communities. Secondly, if the Area 2 people had reciprocal resource-sharing alliances with their neighbors
(Hall l 995a), they were strategically positioned to
draw on the resources of several well-endowed adjacent regions. In years when their substantial pecan groves were producing bumper crops, the Area

2 people would have been in a position to invite
neighbors in to partake of surplus pecans. The
Mariame, early historic inhabitants of the Guadalupe
River valley, provide a model for this type of interregional movement. Cabeza de Vaca reported that
the Mariame exploited pecans in their valley during
the fall and winter, then moved southward to the
prickly pear fields of Area 4 in the summer
(Campbell and Campbell 1981).
Area 3, comprising the upper reaches of the
San Saba and Leon rivers, and the middle stretches
of the Colorado River (see Figure 1), supports the
densest concentration of native pecans in the world.
The apparent absence of large Late Archaic cemeteries in the area (Hall 1995b; Taylor 1995:668)
indicates that abundant native pecans alone did not
constitute a resource around which Late Archaic
settlement patterns of the type that emerged in Areas 1 and 2 could develop. However, if more Archaic burials and related artifacts such as were found
at the Bering Sinkhole site (Bement 1994) show up,
this picture may change. There are thousands of
such sinkholes in Central Texas, including the vicinity of Area 3 (Wermand et al. 1978:13). The one
big drawback to pecans is that the groves do not
naturally produce bumper crops every year, and,
though described as being "biennial" in their productivity, it can actually be anywhere from two to
four years between bumper crops. Hunter-gatherers
thus could not have relied totally on pecans, but
would have needed complementary resources to
take up the slack at times when the pecans were in
short supply.
Area 3 lacks the critical ecotonal diversity and
food product variability of coastal plain regions to
the southeast needed for the sustenance of large
populations of people. On the Edwards Plateau, the
floodplains of rivers and streams are very narrow,
and not nearly as productive in terms of aquatic
resources as are their coastal plain counterparts.
Durable Late Archaic products from Central Texas,
such as corner-tang chert knives, graphite, and
biotite schist, show up in Area 1 cemeteries (Hall
1981, 1995b), suggesting that Area 3 people may
have arranged resource-sharing agreements that took
them down to the lower reaches of the Brazos and
Colorado valleys. When they were producing
bumper crops, the vast groves of native pecan in
Area 3 must have been irresistibly attractive to
people living in a wide radius around the area, a
pattern that was certainly in place in early historic
times. J. Charles Kelley (1955) describes the cross-

Hall - Prehistoric Human Food Resource Patches on the Texas Coastal Plain
state trading expeditions of Juan Sabeata, a Jumano
Indian, as having been timed partly to coordinate
with Area 3 fall pecan harvests.
Area 4 incorporates the lower reaches of the
Nueces River valley on the South Texas Plains (see
Figure 1). It is defined in this article by the huge
northernmost prickly pear cactus "patch" delimited
by Davenport and Wells (1919:209-211). For its
drainage area, the Nueces River has a comparatively large Holocene floodplain, with good slough
and oxbow development even far inland. Area 4 is
blessed with extensive bays and estuaries on the
coast. Large prehistoric and early historic aboriginal cemeteries are known for the area, including the
late Middle Archaic Loma Sandia cemetery (Taylor and Highley 1995) and the Oso site, a huge, but
poorly-known cemetery on Oso Bay (Hall
1995b:47-49). The presence of these cemeteries suggests that the prehistoric food resource base was
adequate to support concentrated populations at certain times in prehistory, with its bay and estuarine
resources, deer, and the prickly pear patches being
especially important (Campbell and Campbell 1981;
Ricklis 1995). Grave inclusions in the Loma Sandia
cemetery are varied and remarkable, but are substantially different in terms of forms and raw materials when compared to those found in the Late
Archaic cemeteries of Areas 1 and 2. Though the
Loma Sandia grave inclusions are apparently not
"exotic" in terms of being from distant sources,
they are suggestive of participation in exchange
systems, perhaps driven by reciprocal resource-sharing arrangements (Hall 1995a). From Area 4 southward to Area 5, there is actually more ecotonal
diversity than is indicated in Figure 1. For example,
the area supports dense concentrations of acornproducing live oaks, and mesquites in the region
yield prolific quantities of nutritious "beans"
(McMahan et al. 1984).
Along the Rfo Grande is Area 5. This area is
defined by Davenport and Wells' southern prickly
pear patch, the extensive Holocene floodplain of
the Rfo Grande delta, and some big bays. The
sloughs and oxbows of the Rfo Grande delta, known
locally as resacas, are numerous. Salinas (1990: 116119) suggests that fishing was probably the most
important subsistence pursuit of native people in
Area 5 in early historic times, augmented by hunting of deer, javelinas, turkeys, and rabbits, and harvesting of wild plant foods such as prickly pear
leaves and fruits, mesquite beans, and various other
roots, beans, seeds, and fruits. The Ayala site is the

7

one large cemetery known in the area, and it is
dated to the Late Prehistoric period (Hester and
Ruecking 1969). Though the available cemetery
data does not strongly support the idea that a large
prehistoric population was present in Area 5, there
is substantial documentary evidence for a surprisingly large aboriginal population there in the early
historic period (Salinas 1990: 138-139; Ricklis
1995:293).

CONCLUSIONS
Native pecans and the floodplain aquatic resources of the Texas coastal plain were key natural
foods with respect to Late Archaic settlement patterns, especially in Area 1. More broadly across
this plain, it was the diversity and richness of the
natural food matrix created by unusual ecotonal
diversity that made the region very attractive to
prehistoric hunter-gatherers. The emerging "patchy"
distribution of Archaic and Late Prehistoric cemeteries on the coastal plain and its margins indicates that key natural food resources were
themselves patchy, and definitely not equitably distributed across the area. This circumstance led to
the formation of exclusive territories. "Exotic" or
otherwise unusual grave inclusions found with Archaic burials on the coastal plain seem best to be
interpreted as signs of reciprocal alliances that facilitated access of populations to food surpluses in
a territorial context. Their concentration in Areas 1
and 2 is a tangible indication that these areas were
"centers of secure production" in prehistoric times.
There remains great potential for further study
of Texas coastal plain food resources to determine
more specifically how they influenced the behavior
of prehistoric people. For example, it would be
useful to know the aquatic species yield of typical
sloughs, oxbows, and swamps in the lower reaches
of rivers such as the Brazos, Colorado, and
Guadalupe. What is the density and distribution of
hickory and walnut trees in the Cross Timbers and
Post Oak Belt? How reliable are production rates
for the various species from year to year? If pecans
are not plentiful in groves along the Brazos and
Colorado valleys one year, is the same true of the
Guadalupe or San Saba valleys? If spring floods do
not come down the Guadalupe one year to replenish
the oxbows with fish, what is the likelihood that the
same thing happened along the Brazos? In terms of
seasons of production, how do all of the resources

8

Texas Archeological Society

relate to one another? What is the potential for
preservation and storage of a particular resource?
From the perspective of human dietary
requirements, what are the nutritional benefits or
drawbacks of particular natural foods?
Alston Thoms ( 1997 personal communication)
is well on his way to recognizing additional important natural plant foods of the region. He identifies
arrowhead (Sagittaria sp.), crow poison
(Nothoscordum bivalve), lotus (Nelumbo sp.), blue
camass (Camassia scilloides), and spring beauty
(Claytonia virginiana) as producers of nutritious
tubers, bulbs, or roots. Like native pecans and
acorns, Thoms feels that these species would have
been particularly important to hunter-gatherers because they are non-mobile, widely distributed, as
well as abundant, and could be collected and processed with relative ease. There are undoubtedly
other floral species having similar beneficial characteristics that are waiting to be factored into the
region's prehistoric human food resource equation.
Thoms (1993, 1994) has also provided good
models of how deer populations can be evaluated
on an area-by-area basis on the coastal plain. More
fine-grained delineation of wildlife densities, especially with respect to deer, bison, and bear, would
be very useful. Intensive study of the heartland of
prickly pear country down in Area 4, generally
from Palo Blanco Creek and Baffin Bay northward
to the Nueces River, holds great potential. This
area has received much less attention than the central coastal plain. The same is true of the Rfo Grande
delta. From the Nueces River south, species such as
prickly pear, ebony, and mesquite become important, and need to be studied in terms of their distribution, nutritional value, and productivity.
The area of paleoenvironmental research has
seen substantial progress. The emerging picture for
Central Texas as painted, for example, by Nordt et
al. ( 1994: 117) depicts warm, dry weather from 6000
to 4000 B.P.; cooler, wetter weather beginning about
4000 B.P.; and a "brief shift" to a dry, warm spell
"around 2000 years B.P." I have previously speculated that the timing of this dry-wet-dry sequence
had an impact on the character and behavior of
Middle and Late Archaic populations in Area l
(Hall 1981:267-268, 308), and Story (1985:50-51)
has developed this scenario even more completely.
This complex interplay of climate, geomorphology,
human behavior, and food resources in the period
from 4000 to 2000 B.P. holds exciting potential for
further research.

As we get control of some of the above
variables, as new sites come to light, and as we
continue to apply more sophisticated theories
concerning hunter-gatherer behavior to the available
data (cf. Kelly 1995), we can expect more refined
interpretations of the prehistoric archeological
record on the Texas coastal plain to be put forth.

REFERENCES CITED
Barnes, V. E.
1975 Beeville-Bay City Sheet. Geologic Atlas of Texas.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.
1982

Houston Sheet. Geologic Atlas of Texas. Bureau of
Economic Geology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Bement, L. C.
1994 Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices during the
Central Texas Archaic. University of Texas Press,
Austin.
Binford, L. R.
1983 In Pursuit of the Past. Thames and Hudson, London.
Birmingham, W.W. and J. A. Huebner
1991 Incised Bone and Conch Shell Artifacts from the
Texas West Indies Site (41 VT9). La Tierra 18(3):820.
Campbell, T. N.
1975 The Payaya Indians of Southern Texas. Special Publication I. Southern Texas Archaeological Association, San Antonio.
Campbell, T. N. and T. J. Campbell
1981 Historic Indian Groups of the Choke Canyon Reservoir and Surrounding Area, Southern Texas.
Choke Canyon Series 1. Center for Archaeological
Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Davenport, H. and J. K. Wells
1919 The First Europeans in Texas, 1528-1536. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 22(3):205-259.
Dockall, H. D. and J. Dockall
1996 The Shell Assemblage from Morhiss (41VTI), An
Archaic Site on the West Gulf Coastal Plain. Southeastern Archaeology 15(2):211-229.
Dockall, J. and H. D. Dockall
1996 The Bone Artifact Assemblage from Morhiss
(41 VTl ), An Archaic Cemetery Site. Paper presented at the 67th Annual Meeting of the Texas
Archeological Society, San Antonio.

Hall -

Prehistoric Human Food Resource Patches on the Texas Coastal Plain

Foster, W. C.
1995 Spanish Expeditions Into Texas 1689-1768. University of Texas Press, Austin.
Frazier, D. E.
1974 Depositional Episodes: Their Relationship to the
Quaternary Stratigraphic Framework in the Northwestern Portion of the Gulf Basin. Geologic Circular 74-1. Bureau of Economic Geology, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Hall, G.D.
1981 Allens Creek: A Study in the Cultural Prehistory of
the Lower Brazos River Valley, Texas. Research
Report 61. Texas Archeological Survey, The University of Texas at Austin.

9

Kelly, R. L.
1995 The Foraging Spectrum: Diversity in Hunter-Gatherer Lifeways. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D. C.
Lovata, T. R.
1996 Ongoing Research at the Silo Site. The Newsletter
of the Friends of the Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory 4(2): 17-19.
Lukowski, P, D.
1988 Archaeological Investigations at 4JBXJ, Bexar
County, Texas. Archaeological Survey Report No.
135. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Long-Bone Implements from Some Prehistoric Sites
in Texas: Functional Interpretations Based on Ethnographic Analogy. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59: 157-176.

Marietta, K. L. and E. S. Nixon
1983 Vegetational Analysis of a Post Oak-Black Hickory
Community in Eastern Texas. Texas Journal of Science 35(3):197-203.

l 995a Prehistoric Cemeteries on the Texas Central Coastal
Plain: Interpretations and Hypotheses. In Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site
(41LK28), A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in
Live Oak County, Texas, by A. J. Taylor and C. L.
Highley, pp. 633-647. 2 Vols. Studies in Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.

McMahan, C. A., R. G. Frye, and K. L. Brown
1984 The Vegetation Types of Texas. Wildlife Division,
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.

1989

I 995b Descriptions and Chronology of Some Prehistoric
Cemeteries in Texas. In Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28), A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County,
Texas, by A. J. Taylor and C. L. Highley, pp. 47-57.
2 Vols. Studies in Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of
Texas at Austin.
Hamilton, D. L.
1987 Archeological Investigations at Shy Pond, Brazoria
County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 58:77-145.
Hester, T. R. and R. Ruecking, Jr.
1969 Two Prehistoric Cemetery Sites in the Lower Rio
Grande Valley of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 40: 147-157.
Kelley, D. B.. G. J. Castille, C. E. Pearson, R. A. Weinstein,
and D. D. Bryant
1994 Archaeological Testing and Evaluation of the Flat
Bank Creek Site (41 FB99), Fort Bend County, Texas.
Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge,
Louisiana.
Kelley, J.C.
1955 Juan Sabeata and Diffusion in Aboriginal Texas.
American Anthropologist 57(5):981-995.

Mitchell, J. L., C. K. Chandler, and T. C. Kelly
1984 The Rudy Haiduk Site (41KA23): A Late Archaic
Burial in Karnes County, Texas. La Tierra 11(2): 1239.
Nordt,L. C., T. W. Boutton, C. T. Hallmark, andM. R. Waters
1994 Late Quaternary Vegetation and Climate Changes
in Central Texas Based on the Isotopic Composition of Organic Carbon. Quaternary Research
41:109-120.
Oviedo y Valdes, G. F. de
1853 Historia General y Natural de las Indias. Torno III,
Madrid.
Ricklis, R. A.
1995 Prehistoric Occupation of the Central and Lower
Texas Coast: A Regional Overview. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 66:265-300.
Salinas, M.
1990 Indians of the Rio Grande Delta. University of Texas
Press, Austin.
Scott, S. L.
1992 Temporal Analysis of Lower Guadalupe River Fauna! Remains. In Archaeology and Paleogeography
of the Lower Guadalupe River/San Antonio Bay Region, by R. A. Weinstein, pp. 417-425. Coastal Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge, Louisiana.

10

Texas Archeological Society

Story, D. A.
1985 Adaptive Strategies of Archaic Cultures of the West
Gulf Coastal Plain. In Prehistoric Food Production
in North America, edited by R. I. Ford, pp. 19-56.
Anthropological Paper 75. Museum of Anthropology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Taylor, A. J.
1995 An Overview of Mortuary Traits at Loma Sandia
and Certain Other Texas Sites. In Archeological
Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28), A
Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak
County, Texas, by A. J. Taylor and C. L. Highley,
pp. 663-699. 2 Vols. Studies in Archeology 20.
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Taylor, A. J. and C. L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia
Site (41LK28), A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 Vols. Studies in
Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Texas Water Development Board
1977 Continuing Water Resources Planning and Development for Texas, Volume 2. Draft report, May
1977. Texas Water Development Board, Austin.
Thoms, A. V.
1993 The Structure of Natural Resources in the Post Oak
Savannah: Regional Productivity Potential. In The
Brazos River Valley Slopes Archaeological Project,
edited by A. V. Thoms, pp. 7-20. Reports of Investigations 14. Archaeological Research Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, College Station.

1994 The Central Cross Timbers: Resource Productivity
Potential from a Hunter-Gatherer Land-Use Perspective. In The Valley Branch Archaeological
Project: Excavations at an Archaic Site (41 MU55)
in the Cross Timbers Uplands, North-Central Texas,
edited by A. V. Thoms, pp. 9-24. Reports of Investigations 15. Archaeological Research Laboratory,
Texas A&M University, College Station.
U. S. Department of Commerce
1981 1978 Census ofAgriculture, Book 1, Volume I State
and County Data, Part 43 Texas AC78-A-43. Bureau of the Census, Washington, D.C.
Vernon, C.R.
1989 The Prehistoric Skeletal Remains from the
Crestmont Site, Wharton County, Texas. Studies in
Archeology 1. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.
Ward, J. R. and E. S. Nixon
1992 Woody Vegetation of the Dry, Sandy Uplands of
Eastern Texas. Texas Journal of Science 44(3):283294.
Weinstein, R. A.
1992 Archaeology and Paleogeography of the Lower
Guadalupe River/San Antonio Bay Region. Coastal
Environments, Inc., Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
Wermand, E.G., J.C. Cepeda, and P. E. Luttrell
1978 Regional Distribution of Fractures in the Southern
Edwards Plateau and Their Relationship to
Tectonics and Caves. Geologic Circular 78-2.
Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of
Texas at Austin.

Archeological Investigations at the
Tortuga Flat Site (41ZV155),
Zavala County, Southern Texas
Betty J. Inman,

C. Hill, Jr., and Thomas R. Hester

ABSTRACT
During 1972-1973, T. C. Hill Jr., an avocational archeologist from Crystal City, conducted test excavations
in Zavala County at the Late Prehistoric/Protohistoric period Tortuga Flat site (41ZV155). Seven test units and
a refuse area (containing dense fauna! materials) were excavated and artifacts were surface collected from three
features. Cultural deposits at Tortuga Flat were concentrated in a compact, discrete zone between 5-15 cm below
surface. Cultural materials recovered from the site include arrow points, unifaces (scrapers), bifaces, ground
stone artifacts, debitage, bone-tempered ceramics, burned rocks, and a wide variety of faunal remains. Perdiz
and Scallorn arrow points, and a single Cuney arrow point, appear to be contemporaneous. Microwear analysis
of a sample of lithic tools from the site revealed polish indicative of meat and hide processing. Fauna! remains
attest to a diverse subsistence economy, including various large and small animals, and aquatic resources. Bonetempered ceramics from Tortuga Flat are similar to others recovered from the area. One reliable radiocarbon date
from the site indicates probable occupations during the 15th and 16th centuries. Ethnohistoric data indicates
Tortuga Flat was in the territorial range of a cultural group named the Pacuache, and it is likely that they and other
small bands occupied the site on a seasonal basis.

INTRODUCTION

ENVIRONMENTAL BACKGROUND

Preliminary notes on the Tortuga Flat Site
(41ZV155) were published by Hill and Hester
(1973). In 1981, Margaret Greco and Ralph
Snavely, then students at The University of Texas
at San Antonio, analyzed the site materials and
prepared a report (Greco and Snavely 1981) as a
class project with Professor Hester. This third inquiry into the archeology of the Tortuga Flat site
incorporates information from previous research
and provides additional analysis of the lithic and
ceramic artifacts. Cultural materials from the site
are then examined to determine how the diagnostic artifacts, toolkit composition, ceramics, and fauna! remains from Tortuga Flat contribute to our
knowledge of Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric
sites in southern Texas. Ethnohistoric information
will be used in an attempt to link the site's archeological record to cultural groups living in the South
Texas region during the Late Prehistoric and
Protohistoric eras.

Zavala County (Figure 1) lies in the Rio
Grande Plain in the southern part of Texas, bordered on the west by the Rio Grande, on the east
and south by the Gulf of Mexico, and on the north
by the Edwards Plateau. Zavala county is near the
northern edge of the Tamaulipan biotic province
and has a semi-arid, warm climate with brushy
vegetation (Hill and Hester 1971). Although brush
and mesquite presently dominate the landscape, it
is possible that, under native range, the area was a
more open grassland (see Stevens and Arriaga
1985).
Tortugas Creek, which drains into the Nueces
River, is in the eastern part of the county. The area
contains well-developed stream valleys with networks of old channels caused by fluctuations in the
stream courses (Hill and Hester 1971). During historic times, Tortugas Creek has been an intermittent stream, but there are some Spanish accounts of
the Tortugas Creek area that indicate there were

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69 (1998)

12

Texas Archeological Society

Zavala County

Zavala
Dimmit
0

2

4

6

~

Scale In Miles

Figure 1. General location of site 41ZV155 in Zavala
County, Texas. Insert shows location of county within
the state.

springs along it that maintained permanent water
sources (Inglis 1964). Large oak trees in the creek's
riparian zone support this recorded observation
(Hester and Hill 1973).
The soil in the site area along Tortugas Creek
is Brundage fine sandy clay loam. This is a brown
to dark brown to yellowish-brown loamy Aridisol
formed on alluvium. This soil occurs on level or
nearly level areas, mainly in close proximity to
drainages that transect the county. The upper soil
horizons are generally grayish brown fine sandy
loam with few calcium carbonate masses. At a depth
of about 98 cm is a pale yellow sandy clay loam
that is mottled and contains about 10 percent calcium carbonate nodules. Brundage soils are well
drained and permeability is very slow. Surface crusting and tight subsoil limit water movement into
these soils (Stevens and Arriaga 1985).
Historical documents provide some environmental information about the Zavala county area.
In 1691, the Teran expedition traveled near
Chaparrosa Creek. Entries in the diaries of these
early explorers indicated the country was level with
mesquite in some of the sections. "Great quantities
of buffaloes" were reported near the Nueces River
(Inglis 1964). Archeological data also attests to the
presence of bison and pronghorn in prehistoric times
(Hester 1975a). Deer, rabbits, rats, and mice were
available to the native populations and other sources

of food were fish, freshwater mussels, land snails,
snakes, and lizards (Hester 1980).
John Holdsworth (in Hester and Hill 1973)
describes the modern environment of the Tortugas
Creek area, indicating it contains various species of
waterfowl, frogs, turtles, raptors, gray fox, and native wild cats. Holdsworth mentions roots and tubers (for example, cattail roots) that may have been
food sources. It is likely that most of these resources (with the exception of the intrusive armadillo) were also available to the Late Prehistoric
inhabitants of the region (Hester l 975a). Peccary
may have been present, given the faunal data from
41MC222 (Hall 1986) and 41JW8 (Black 1986).
However, it is absent in extensive faunal analyses
at Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric sites in the
Zavala County area (Hester and Hill 1975). Indeed,
it is found only in the 18th century mission Indian
fauna at San Juan Bautista and San Bernardo
(Davidson and Valdez 1976).
Other food resources include prickly pear cactus (the new leaves in spring; tunas in summer),
and mesquite beans, the latter also ripening in early
summer. It has been noted that, in the event of a
drought, an additional fall crop of mesquite beans
may be produced (Windberg 1997). The leaves and
bulbs of yucca were likely harvested and eaten (Hill
et al. 1976). Fall resources included acorns and
presumably pecans. Although pecan trees are not
present along Tortugas Creek, they are found nearby
along the Nueces River (at a distance of about 10
km) and well within the range of migrating peoples.

CULTURAL BACKGROUND
The native groups of South Texas were hunters and gatherers, part of an 11,000-year tradition
(Hester 1981 ). These inhabitants have long been
labeled as "Coahuiltecan" in reference to a language supposedly spoken by numerous hunting and
gathering groups in southern Texas and northeastern Mexico at the time of Spanish contact. Research by Campbell (1991) and Goddard (1979)
has determined that other languages besides
"Coahuilteco" were spoken in the region, including
seven major linguistic groups: Coahuilteco,
Karankawa, Comecrudo, Cotoname, Solano,
Tonkawa, and Aranama. A study by Johnson and
Campbell (1992) named "Sanan" as one of the aboriginal languages in Eastern Coahuila and Southern Texas.

Inman, Hill, and Hester - Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site
Early historical records indicate that the native
peoples of South Texas were mobile and that group
size was relatively small, usually 300 persons or
less. It is probable that these groups had exclusive
territories during the winter but in summer and fall
shared a distant area with other groups because of
abundant seasonal food resources (i.e., prickly pear
fruit in summer, and pecans and acorns in fall). An
example of overlapping territories can be found in
the Mariames, a coastal Texas group that ranged
over two areas separated by a distance of at least
130 km (Campbell 1988).
Some general characteristics of native lifeways
can be extracted from records of the Spanish colonial missions at Guerrero, Coahuila, Mexico. Mission San Juan Bautista and Mission San Bernardo,
established in 1700, were located approximately 64
km southwest of Tortuga Flat. For example, there
are accounts of the gathering of wild plant foods
(roots, acorns), the use of bison meat, and descriptions of houses-round structures made of poles
and covered with bison skins (Campbell 1988).
Cabeza de Vaca' s arrival on the Texas coast in
1528 and the accounts of his travels across southern Texas (including the Rio Grande vicinity), confirm that bison were present there during this time.
Small animals such as rats, mice, frogs, snakes, and
certain insects were mentioned as food sources for
the Mariames (Campbell 1988), and research by
Black (1986) indicates they were also used by the
more inland South Texas inhabitants.
Ethnohistoric research on a specific cultural
group from southern Texas, the Pacuache, has been
conducted by T. N. Campbell (n.d.) from civil,
military, and ecclesiastical records. Early maps,
traveler's accounts, presidio records (garrison inspection reports), and mission records (progress reports, administrative inspection records, census
reports, baptismal, marriage and burial registers)
also provided relevant ethnohistoric data, as well as
the few books compiled by early church historians.
The Pacuache can be associated with the Zavala
County area, and with some aspects of the archaeological record from sites in the vicinity.
Campbell's (n.d.) research indicates that the
Pacuache name first appears in documents in 1684
and disappears from the records after 1775. Most
ethnohistoric data was taken from Spanish colonial
mission documents (mainly at Guerrero, Coahuila)
written between 1690 and 1730. Several of these
documents are pertinent to the placement of the
Pacuache in the Tortuga Flat area: a 1709 diary

13

kept by Espinosa stated his party encountered three
"Pacuasian" Indians as they approached the Nueces
River (in either present-day northern Dimmit or
southern Zavala county) who were out hunting mice
(ratones); a document dated 1726 mentions
Pacuaches on the Nueces River; and an account
dated 1729 mentions Spaniards encountering an unspecified number of Pacuaches hunting buffalo near
present day Del Rio (less than 160 km from Zavala
county). Further, the Pacuache have been closely
linked with Mission San Bernardo, Guerrero,
Coahuila. Census records from the mission list 85
Pacuache individuals present in 1772 (Almaraz
1980). An earlier report, dated 1727, indicates that
many Pacuache had been living at Mission San
Bernardo but, because of food shortages there, had
returned to their lands some 15 leagues (about 65
km) from the mission. This seems to indicate their
homeland was the Zavala/Dimmit county area. A
document dated 1728 also places the land of the
Pacuache in the area now covered by eastern Maverick county and the western parts of Zavala and
Dimmit counties. In addition, a report from 1709
mentions an encounter that appears to have taken
place near the present Leona River (near the boundary between Frio and Zavala county) with a group
numbering about 20 and identifying themselves as
Xarame and Pacuache (Campbell n.d.).
Research by Campbell ( 1979) on the
ethnohistory of the Spanish missions at Guerrero
indicates that the Pacuache, when first known to
Europeans, had a population of about 400. Campbell
(1979) compiled the following details on Pacuache
culture: hunting of bison, deer, rats, and mice; use
of the bow and arrow; temporary settlements, usually shared with other groups, in wooded areas near
streams; one house form (poorly described), apparently a lean-to, made of branches, covered with
grasses, open on one side; hides processed by
women and decorated with designs in red and yellow paint; smoke signaling; horses stolen at night
from a Spanish travel party; and decorated hides
and other unspecified items traded to Spaniards and
Indians at the Guerrero missions.

ARCHEOLOGICALBACKGROUND
The first published report of Late Prehistoric
and Protohistoric sites in the Zavala (and Dimmit)
county area described artifacts recovered from
surveys (Nunley and Hester 1966). Of the 26

14

Texas Archeological Society

mentioned sites, two were Late Prehistoric and 14
contained both Archaic and Late Prehistoric
diagnostics. The Late Prehistoric sites were
represented by arrow points (Perdiz, Scallorn,
Fresno) and a smattering of pottery sherds.
Hester and Hill (1975) reviewed Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric sites in Zavala county (and
adjacent Dimmit county), and outlined general characteristics of this era through descriptions of the
lithic artifacts and ceramics, analysis of sites and
settlement patterns, and radiocarbon dates. Hester
and Hill (1975) described the Late Prehistoric toolkit
as including small arrow points (Scallorn, Perdiz,
Edwards, and Zavala), being used with the bow as
the principal hunting device and weapon. Other
artifacts were bifaces, unifaces (scrapers), perforators, bone pressure-flaking tools and awls, quartzite
hammerstones, manos, and bone-tempered ceramics; ornaments (primarily small bone beads) and
stone pipes were rare. Regarding settlement patterns, Hester and Hill (1975) noted that while sites
were generally located in riparian zones along major stream courses, there were other resource-rich
micro-environments that were easily accessible.
Uncorrected radiocarbon dates from five sites indicated the occupations ranged from A.D. 1440 to
1760 (Hester and Hill 1975).
Other Late Prehistoric sites in the Zavala
county area include 41ZVIO, 41ZV83, Holdsworth,
and the Errol Jonsson #1 site (Hester 1978; Montgomery 1978; Hester and Hill 1973; Inman et al.
1995). In Dimmit county, Late Prehistoric sites include 41DM70 (the Spillway site), 41DM31, and
41DM33 (Hester and Hill 1975). From a review of
the artifacts from these sites, it appears that there is
no distinct separation of diagnostic artifacts associated with the early part of the Late Prehistoric (as
has been documented for Central Texas), and that
during the latter part of the period, Perdiz, Scallorn,
and Edwards arrow points were all used. It is noted
that at some Late Prehistoric sites, small dart points
(Ensor, Zavala, Matamoros, and Catan) may have
been used with the bow and arrow. In general, the
sites share similar toolkits (arrow points, end scrapers, beveled knives); late radiocarbon dates; an overlap of arrow points and small dart points; the
presence of pottery sherds; large amounts of diverse faunal material; and site locations in riparian
environments (see Hester and Hill 1975; Black
1986; Hester et al. 1989; Hester 1995 for more
comprehensive discussions of the Late Prehistoric/
Protohistoric era in Southern Texas).

Important Late Prehistoric sites located east of
the Tortuga Flat area include 41LK201, 41LK67,
and 41MC222, all at Choke Canyon (Hall et al.
1986; Brown et al. 1982); 41LK28, Loma Sandia
(Taylor and Highley 1995); the Hinojosa site (41JW8
[Black 1986]); and 41 GD4, the Berclair site (Hester
and Parker 1970). Expanding-stem arrow points were
found to date earlier than contracting stem arrow
points (Perdiz) in the Choke Canyon area. Bonetempered pottery was dated earlier than A.D. 1000
at several Choke Canyon sites and was found in
association with expanding-stem arrow point forms
(Hall et al. 1986). The Late Prehistoric component
at 41LK67 (Brown et al. 1982), yielded Perdiz arrow points and preforms, Scallorn arrow points,
beveled knives (quadrilateral bifaces), bone-tempered pottery, mussel and snail shells, chipping debris, and fire-cracked rocks. Brown et al. ( 1982)
suggest the site dates to about AD. 1300. Research
at the Berclair site revealed an assemblage characteristic of Central Texas sites dating to the latter part
of the Late Prehistoric. These included arrow points
(predominantly Perdiz), bone-tempered pottery, beveled biface fragments and small unifaces or end
scrapers (Hester and Parker 1970). The occupation
of the Hinojosa site, a major Late Prehistoric campsite, dates to AD. 1350-1400. The assemblage includes Perdiz atTow points, bone-tempered pottery,
beveled bifaces (with two sides beveled), unifaces,
flake drills, and bison bone (Black (1986).
To the northeast of Tortuga Flat, archeological
investigations at the Pampopa-Talon Crossings site
in Bexar county (Thoms and Ahr 1995), yielded
Guerrero, Perdiz, Cuney, and Scallorn arrow points,
large bifaces, bone-tempered pottery, medium and
large endscrapers, and slickstones (suggestive of
hide processing) and one small fragment of leadglazed (non-native) pottery. The site, located on a
terrace rising 12 m above the Medina River floodplain, had abundant surface materials and artifacts
in the upper 30 cm of the terrace.

EXCAVATION PROCEDURES
Data upon which this paper is based consists of
cultural materials recovered from surface collections and test excavations conducted by T. C. Hill,
Jr., in 1972-1973. Information was also extracted
from Hill's field notes (including maps and photographs), correspondence between Hester and Hill
and the senior author and Hill, the preliminary re-

Inman, Hill, and Hester-Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site

15

Figure 2. Occupation area of the Tortuga Flat site with
Tortugas Creek in the background (looking west).

Figure 3. View of the site to the southeast.

port published by Hill and Hester (1973), and the
unpublished paper by Greco and Snavely (1981).
The Tortuga Flat site (Figures 2-4), located on
the east bank of Tortugas Creek, is oval in plan and
measures 60 by 66 m (Hester and Hill 1975). Cultural remains were concentrated in a discrete, compact zone ranging from a depth of 5 cm near the
eastern edge of the site to 15 cm near the creek. A
thin layer of alluvium covered the site, except on the eastern edge where debris was
exposed on the surface. Three surface features in this area contained pottery sherds as
well as Scallorn and Perdiz arrow points. It
is possible these features were exposed due
to erosion near a road cut located to the east
of the site. Hill indicated that the soil away
from the creek bank is composed of fine
sandy loam. The creek bank consists of dark,
organic deposits from flood sediments deposited since the occupation of the site.
Hill's investigations included surface
collection of three features and the excavation of seven test units of varying dimensions (a total of 21.4 square meters) and a
refuse area (0.25 square meters). Cultural
deposits were screened through 1/4-inch
wire mesh and approximately 5 percent of
these deposits were screened through 1/8inch wire mesh. Hill's field notes indicate
that Test Unit I and II were expanded to
determine the extent of cultural deposits.
Hill probed below the cultural materials on several occasions to ascertain there
were no deeper levels. He found no stratigraphic evidence of mixing of cultural materials and the records emphasize his view

that the site contained a discrete, single component.
The contents of the test units, surface
collections, and refuse area are outlined in Table 1.
Larger concentrations of cultural materials occur in
and IV, as well as Feature I and 2
Test Units I,
and the refuse area. Charcoal and wood species
samples were taken from Test Unit I. The large
amount of lithic debitage, including three exhausted

........... Limits of
Occupation
c:) Surface Features
I-VII

Test Units
Eroded Area
Refuse Area

/

".

-- ---.... .. . .. ..

__

:

_

...

-..

_

C'~)
--//

Figure 4. Tortuga Flat site map.

16

Texas Archeological Society

cores, indicate lithic manufacturing was taking place
in this area. Test Unit II and the refuse area have
the largest concentration of biface thinning flakes,
indicating that biface reduction or tool resharpening
activities were taking place in these areas.
Test Unit IV was the largest in size and, accordingly, produced the most lithics: six arrow
points and/or point fragments and other tools (see
Table 1). Heat-treated flakes, charcoal, wood, bone,
and pieces of burned clay indicate this may have
been an activity area associated with a hearth.
Surface Feature I, located approximately 10 m
east of the creek in a sandy depression, contained a
Scallorn arrow point fragment, a preform, a utilized
biface fragment, and two unifacial tools. Numerous
pottery sherds, as well as two hammerstone fragments and a metate fragment, suggest food processing at this locale. Another surface feature, Feature 2,
was located approximately 20 m east of Feature 1 in
a similar low, sandy area. It contained two Scallorn; one Perdiz; a
beveled bi face; three hammerstones;
one unifacial tool; one modified
a
flake; a small amount of lithic debris; and 30 sherds. Surface Feature
3, located near the center of the site,
yielded only small amounts of cultural materials, mainly pottery
e
sherds.
The refuse area, located near
the creek's eastern edge, was an
eroded area or gully containing
dense faunal materials, two Scallorn
arrow points, five unifacial tools,
six bifaces, four cores, and other
cultural debris. The unit was excavated to a depth of approximately
15 cm, however, the eastern section
m
of the midden area was slightly
deeper and was explored to a depth
of approximately 20-25 cm. A moderate amount of debitage was also
recovered from the refuse area.

All measurements given are in mm and weights in
grams. The following abbreviations are employed:
L, maximum length; W, maximum width; T,
maximum thickness; SL, stem length; SW, stem
width; and WT, weight. A dash (-) indicates a
fragmentary specimen.
Some general comments can be made about the
majority of artifacts from the assemblage. It appears that local chert was obtained from the uplands in the form of Uvalde gravels (an exception is
discussed later in this report) and that the raw materials were heat-treated. This is evident from the
vitreous sheen and pink or purple coloring of some
of the lithics. Previous research in South Texas has
shown that heat-treated materials may have facilitated chipping and even appears to have been preferred for the manufacture of Shumla dart points
(Hester and Collins 1974). Evidence of heat-treating can be seen in an examination of the debitage

b

c

g

k

n

0

p

s

ARTIFACT ANALYSIS
The lithic artifacts from
Tortuga Flat are described here;
provenience data are given in Table
1. Projectile point typology follows
that of Turner and Hester (1993).

0

5

10

centimeters

Figure 5. Arrow points: a-d, f-h, Perdiz; e, Cuney; i-u, Scallorn.

q

Inman, Hill, and Hester -Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site

a

c

b

17

in size from small thumbnail scrapers (Figure
6c) to a large heavy uniface (Figure 7h). One is
a recycled tool, having been patinated and
subsequently pressure-flaked along one edge
on the ventral surface resulting in differential
patination (Figure 7a). Another (Figure 7d) is a
possible perforator made on a flake. The
unifaces range in color from light to medium
tan/gray chert. Several have a pink hue due to
heat-treating.

Bifaces
d

e

g
0

5

10

h

Eleven bifaces were found at the Tortuga Flat
site (Figures S and 9a-b ). Table 4 provides data
on each specimen. One biface is made from
medium gray chert and is oval in shape, and is
possibly a preform (Figure Sa). Another is a
pointed biface of medium gray chert, convex in
cross-section, that has been broken (by endshock or as a result of an overshot flake) (Figure Sb). A third biface, perhaps a preform, is

centimeters

Figure 6. Unifaces.
from Tortuga Flat and on some finished tools;
therefore, it is likely that materials were heated
at an early stage of reduction.

c

b

Arrow Points
Twenty-one arrow points and fragments
thereof were recovered from the site (Table 2).
Seven are examples of the Perdiz type (Figure
Sa-d, f-h), and they are made from light gray,
tan, and cream cherts; one is made on a flake
(Figure Sh). The Cuney point has finely serrated lateral edges (Figure Se). Several of the
arrow points have a pink cast resulting from
thermal alteration (Figure Sb, h, j, 1-m). There
are 13 corner-notched Scallorn points (Figure
Si-u). Several have heat induced-pot lid fractures (Figure Sm-q).

d

e

h

Unifaces
Twenty-three unifacial tools were
recovered from the site (Table 3 and Figures 6
and 7; see also Figure 9c). The unifaces range

centimeters

Figure 7. Unifaces.

18

Texas Archeological Society

Table 1. Lithic artifact distributions
Test Pit

II

Artifact Type

IV

Ill

Feature

v

VI

VII

2

Perdiz

2

2

I

Scallorn

l

3

3

2

Uni faces

3

2

7

Bi faces

5

Cuney

3

Refuse
Area

2

I

Preforms

2

2

5

5
3

3

3

2

7

Blades

7

2

Bifaces (lg. choppers)
Groundstone

I

Hammerstones
Cores (& core fragments)

3

2

I

I

3

l

2

2

6

3

J

Pottery sherds

45

Primary cortex flakes

23

17

17

28

7

5

5

Secondary cortex flakes

63

110

73

110

3

31

II

300

480

180

603

7

13

16

23

55

101

53

29

4

6

2

2

3

2

6

I

3

458

724

332

819

55

45

Interior flakes
Biface thinning flakes
Cores ( & core fragments)
Total

21

3
4
30

7

7

24

9

59

25

233

4

47
4

85

82

8

384

Table 2. Measurements of arrow points
Type

L

Perdiz
Perdiz

w

T

20.0

2.9

23.9

1.9

SL

0.9

SW

Wt.

Figure

O.S

l.S

Sa

0.3

0.4

Sb

0.7

1.1

Sc

1.0

l.S

Sd

Perdiz

21.6

3.0

Perdiz

21.9

3.0

Perdiz

13.3

3.0

0.7

Sf

Perdiz

13.2

3.6

0.6

Sg

Perdiz

16.0

2.0

0.3

Sh

1.2

Se
Si

Cuney

0.9

3.S

o.s

0.7

Scallorn

20.0

IS.O

3.0

0.6

1.0

Scallorn

29.6

19.4

3.0

O.S

1.6

5j

IS.O

3.4

1.0

Sk

24.1

19.0

4.7

0.6

1.6

SI

3.6

0.7

1.0

Sm

30.0

17.0

Scallorn
Scallorn
Scallorn
Scallorn

IS.4

3.1

1.2

Sn

Scallorn

2.S

0.7

So

Scallorn

2.7

O.S

Sp

0.4

Sq

Scallorn

2.8

Scallorn

32.2

Scallorn

14.S

3.6

0.6

32.8

4.3

O.S

Scallorn

29.2

4.4

Scallorn

26.8

3.6

0.6

13.0

1.4

Sr

1.8

Ss

1.9

St

l.S

Su

Inman, Hill, and Hester -Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site

g
0

(Michael B. Collins, 1997 personal
communication). It is therefore likely that this
tool was a trade item from Central Texas.
Functionally, beveled knives have been
linked to bison processing, and spatially they
are a diagnostic of the Late Prehistoric of South
and Central Texas, part of the Toyah horizon
toolkit (Black 1989). These beveled bifaces
were efficient tools for processing large game
because their design permits any and all edges
to be used in skinning regardless of how the
tool is held (Sollberger 1971 ). Experiments by
Sollberger ( 1971) with beveling of the edges of
bifaces compared to bifacial resharpening revealed a dramatic increase in the use life of
these tools. Other works have provided interesting details about these beveled bifaces. For
example, research at 41 LK67 (Brown et al.
1982) found that bifaces with two beveled
edges, rather than four, are more commonly
found at South Texas sites. Brown's analysis

c

b

a

h
5

10

centimeters

Figure 8. Bifaces.

oval in shape, and is heavily patinated on the dorsal
surface (Figure Sh).
There is a bipointed biface (beveled biface
form) in the collection with a broken area on one
edge of the proximal end (Figure 9b). It is made
from dark gray chert and is beveled on two opposite
lateral edges. This tool and one other, a uniface
fragment (see Figure 7f), are the only lithics from
the site that are not tan or light gray in color. The
dark gray fine-grained chert is similar to the
distinctive Georgetown chert from Central Texas.
Examination of the material through the use of ultraviolet fluorescence (both long wave and short-wave)
was conducted by Dr. Michael B. Collins of the
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory. The
methodology uses comparative Edwards chert
samples (see Hofman et al. 1991). Collins' findings
indicate that although the material appears atypical
of Edwards chert, it does fluoresce, and the color it
exhibits is within the range (orange-yellow-gold)
of other samples tested from the Edwards formation

19

a

0

5

10

centimeters

Figure 9. Bifaces and uniface; a, biface; b,
beveled biface; c, heavy uniface.

20

Texas Archeological Society
Table 3. Measurements of unifaces
Bit

also suggests that beveling may increase edge
angles to allow for heavy-duty cutting, and minimizes width reduction due to resharpening. Another study of beveled knives (quadrilateral) from
Sanford Reservoir in the Texas Panhandle
(Shoberg n.d.) indicates that these tools were
reworked and not readily discarded even in the
area of the Alibates quarry where raw materials
were abundant and close at hand.

L

w

T

Edge

Wt.

39.9

38.4

16.9

50

2S.4

6a

64.5

36.9

13.6

50

27.9

6b

40.2

27.4

S.2

45

9.4

6c

29.0

39.7

11.0

40

12.7

6d

52.1

46.2

11. I

4S

0

33.7

6e

44.7

2S.3

s.s

4S

0

13.0

6f

43.3

46.0

12.1

4S 0

27.0

6g

44.1

32.9

12.6

45

2S.2

6h

43.3

27.4

7.6

10.7

7a

34.9

35.0

9.1

13.0

7b

41.5

33.4

7.4

9.7

7c

41.0

33.S

S.7

9.0

7d

46.9

31.6

6.S

S.I

7e

39.S

4S.4

12.2

30.1

7f

64.0

49.1

15.2

60.6

7g

69.7

41.0

19.9

55

76.7

7h

Large Bifaces (Choppers)

107.5

71.6

30.0

70

266.3

9c

The term "chopper" is often applied to
cobbles or large pieces of stone with a few flakes
removed from one end (Turner and Hester 1993).
Two specimens from Tortuga Flat are included
in this category (Figure 11 and Table 6). One is a
chert cobble that has been bifaced (Figure l la).
Two large flakes have been removed at one end
on the ventral surface. The other is made from
chalcedony. The dorsal surface has the majority
of cortex remaining (Figure 11 b ).
It should be noted that these specimens could
also be classified as cores. Cobbles were sometimes "tested" by removing one or two flakes
(Hester 1975b:Figure 2e). This can result in a
bifaced cobble that may subsequently have been
used for cutting tasks. An examination for usewear revealed none on one specimen, while the
other (see Figure llb) has slight dulling on the
flaked end. Whether this is the result of abrading
to establish a better striking platform or actual
use-wear is unclear.

Figure

Table 4. Measurements of Bifaces

Preforms
Two preforms specimens (Figure lOa-b) are
pointed triangular forms (Table 5); four are triangular forms (Figure 1Of-g, i-j), and eight are ovate
(Figure lOc-e, h, k-n). The 14 bifaces range in
color from light cream to medium brown chert.
Three specimens (see Figure 1Ob, i-j) have a pink
hue resulting from heat treating and three others
exhibit a vitreous sheen. One of the preforms is
made on a blade but is bifacially chipped and
may be an arrow point preform (see Figure lOn).

L

w

T

Wt.

Figure

51.9

3S.5

1.59

29.S

Sa

49.6

45.5

11.3

2S.S

Sb

36.5

32.1

9.1

I0.7

Sc

41.5

31.4

13.9

22.5

Sd

5S.O

4S.6

14.S

43.3

Se

28.7

31.5

6.S

7.3

Sf

49.S

39.4

12.7

29.0

Sg

49.1

35.4

11.5

21.5

Sh

54.S

53.6

17.2

49.3

Si

61.4

46.5

15.7

45.S

9a

Cores

96.7

3S.3

7.6

3S.l

9b

Three prepared cores and 19 core fragments
were present at the site (Figure 12). Several of

Inman, Hill, and Hester -Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site

a

c

b

21

1993) may have been an efficient
use of small cobbles in the manufacture of Perdiz points and end
scrapers that are characteristic of the
Toyah Horizon in Central and South
Texas (as well as the contemporary
Rockport Horizon).

d

Debitage

e

All flakes from each test pit and
the refuse area (see Table I) were
collected, analyzed, and sorted into
categories which reflect the technological processes carried out in tool
manufacture. Primary cortex flakes
have the dorsal surface covered with
cortex; they represent the initial
decortification of a core. Further
shaping of both cores and preforms
is represented by flakes with dorsal
surfaces retaining some cortex, but
showing one or more previous flake
removals (secondary cortex flakes).
In general, secondary cortex flakes
retain some cortex on the dorsal surface, representing further reduction
of a core. Interior flakes have no
cortex on the dorsal surface, indicating further reduction from the interior of a core or a larger biface.
Biface thinning flakes are distinctive small flakes resulting from the
soft hammer technique of biface reduction (Hester l 975b ).

f

k

h

m

n
10

Figure 10. Preforms.

the fragments are expended cores. All cortex and
numerous flakes have been removed from one of
the cores (Figure l 2a). It is light tan in color and
has several, small, quartz inclusions on the ventral
surface and one on the dorsal surface. Reduction of
this core may have ceased as the inclusions made
the material undesirable for tool manufacture. Flakes
have been removed from five areas of another core
(Figure 12b). The core illustrated in Figure 12c has
a glassy sheen, areas of pink coloration from heat
treating, and is made from a light gray, fine-grained
chert. This specimen resembles an expended Toyah
Horizon blade core (Turner and Hester 1993 :Figure
2-20; Johnson l 994:Figure 94). Blade-core technology (Hester and Shafer 1975; Turner and Hester

a
0

b

5
centimeters

Figure 11. Large Bifaces (Choppers).

10

22

Texas Archeological Society
Feature l. The stone is flat with a
smoothed area in the center ex hibiting very fine scratches on the
dorsal surface. Both lateral edges
show use-wear in the form of
smoothing. A third groundstone
specimen is a quartzite mano with
brownish/red coloring near the
center of the dorsal side (probably burned) and moderate battering or grinding damage on both
ends.
a

Hammerstones
Two hammerstones were
present in the collections from the
site. One specimen is purple
quartzite with heavy battering on
one end and moderate on the
other. The second specimen is of
tan quartzite with moderate use
wear in the form of battering or
grinding on one end. In addition,
three hammerstone fragments
were recovered from test unit IV
and two were surface finds from
Feature l.

c

Microwear Analysis of
Lithie Artifacts

Microwear analysis was conducted on a selected number of
chipped stone artifacts. Equipment
Figure 12. Cores. Drawings by Pam Headrick.
used for photomicroscopy was the
Lei ca Wild MI 00 microscope,
Raw materials were obtained in cobble form
Optronics DEI-470 video camera, and HP Laser Jet
from terrace exposures near the site. A variety of
4 printer. In some instances, Nomarski DIC (Differmulticolored fine and coarse-grained cherts (Uvalde
ential Interference Contrast prisms) were used to
gravels) are present in the debitage. There is evienhance the view of tool topography. In these cases,
dence of heat treating on some flakes and a number
notations have been made.
of flakes are fire-cracked.
All chipped stone tools (n=69) from the site
(excluding arrow points and debitage) were subjected to macroscopic examination for obvious useGround Stone
wear indicators: polish, striations, or edge damage
(micro-flaking, rounding, or crushing). Of this toGround stone artifacts from the site include a
tal, 28 specimens, exhibiting some of the above
dense sandstone mano (Figure 13a) with extensive
characteristics, were selected for microscopic study
battering on both ends and large damaged areas on
(range of 10X-40X power). This examination reone side and both ends. A metate fragment (Figure
sulted in the selection of 18 tools (eight uni faces
13b) of dense sandstone was a surface find from

Inman, Hill, and Hester -Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site
Table 5. Measurements of Preforms
L

w

T

Wt.

Figure

32.5

17.9

5.0

2.5

!Oa

32.5

12.9

3.2

1.1

lOb

19.5

4.2

3.0

lOc

16.0

4.8

2.0

!Od

20.9

6.9

4.5

!Oe

28.2

6.8

7.l

lOf

18.6

6.4

3.l

!Og

34.5

21.3

5.6

4.4

!Oh

31.1

20.7

7.5

4.4

!Oi

25.6

4.4

3.9

!Oj

39.4

24.2

7.9

7.4

!Ok

36.8

18.1

4.8

3.3

IOI

45.5

23.8

7.2

9.0

!Om

41.4

20.9

5.0

4.1

!On

34.4

23

by Vaughan (1985:28), the polish appears to be
what he terms a "weakly developed polish." This
type of polish is characterized by an uneven patchy
distribution usually very close to the work edge and
can be associated with the processing of meat or
fresh hide.
The second worn tool specimen 9b is the beveled biface (see Figure 9b). Striations in a triangular pattern were detected on the ventral side of the
tool near the bit end (see Figure 14b). The striations are likely indicators of use of the tool as a
knife. A replicative study by Kay ( 1996) on tools
used for butchering yielded a similar triangular pattern that he describes as "striated micropolishes."
Another image from this same tool (see Figure
14c), taken on the ventral lateral edge near the
proximal end of the tool, revealed polish. The
polish appears similar to one defined by Vaughan
(1985: 123) as bone residue resulting from butchering. Both images were taken at 200X using
Nomarski Optics.
A uniface (end scraper) (see Figure 6f),
examined at 200X power, exhibited generic polish

Table 6. Measurements of Large Bifaces
(Choppers)
L

w

T

Wt.

63.6

47.8

33.3

159.6

Ila

65.6

57.6

36.8

103.8

I lb

Figure

and l 0 bi faces) for high magnification microscopy.
Of this total, three tools exhibited some form of
identifiable use-wear. In general, use-wear polish
was identified. Use-wear polish is produced by the
gradual loss of superficial materials and the wearing down and smoothing of those surfaces (Vaughan
1985).
One specimen (see Figure 6a) is a small uniface
which may have functioned as an end scraper. The
proximal end is broken (snap fracture) and the ventral surface has a large flake scar that may have
resulted from use. The polish on this tool is located
on the dorsal surface near the center of the bit end
(Figure l 4a). The distal end of the tool was examined under high magnification and was photographed at 200X. Based on replicative experiments

a

0

5

10

centimeters

Figure 13. Ground Stone: a, metate fragment; b, mano.

24

Texas Archeological Society

Figure 14a. Uniface (Specimen 6a).

Figure 14b. Beveled Biface (Specimen 9b).

Figure 14c. Beveled Biface (Specimen 9b).

Figure 14d. Uniface (Specimen 6f).

near the bit end of the tool (ventral surface) and
striations at the edge of the tool (see Figure l 4d).
These characteristics are similar to Vaughan's
(1985: 127) description of a smooth type grit polish
with some grooves. It is possible that the polish can
be attributed to the processing of hides and the
striations caused by grit on the surface being worked
(removing hair from a hide with embedded soil or
sand). Nomarski optics were used for increased
resolution of the digital image.

interior and a grog-tempered jar was recovered
from the Berclair site in Goliad County (Hester and
Parker 1970).
Work by Hester and Hill (1975) indicated that
bone-tempered plainware pottery occurred at many
Late Prehistoric sites in South Texas, especially
along the middle Nueces River drainage area
(Calhoun 1966; Hester l 975a). Ceramic vessels
were formed by coiling and the method of firing
was oxidization. Decoration of exterior surfaces
with incised lines or painted red bands has been
noted but is very rare. Exterior surfaces are generally well-smoothed and burnished. Interiors are
poorly finished and sometimes striated; coil junctures are often visible (Hester and Hill 1975). This
has been interpreted to be from the use of a bundle
of grass or a stick used in smoothing. Experiments

Prehistoric Ceramics
In general, ceramics from South Texas closely
resemble the bone-tempered Leon Plain type of
Central Texas. However, sandy-paste sherds are
known from 41DM70 in the southern Texas

Inman, Hill, and Hester -Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site
by Hill (1975) indicate that smoothing with the
fingers can also cause striations as sand grains or
other particles are picked up and dragged across the
surface during smoothing. Some sherds appear to
have a red slip on the exterior. The paste is generally compact and contains finely crushed bone fragments. Vessel shapes are poorly known; however,
two ollas have been recorded from the Scarborough
Farm site (41KA1) in Karnes County (Calhoun
1966; Hester 1980). In other parts of Texas, vessels
were sometimes small, round-bottomed bowls or
jars. One flat-bottomed vessel, however, has been
observed in a private Dimmit County collection.
Attachments on the vessels consist of lugs and loop
handles (Hester and Hill 1975).
More recently, Black (1986) analyzed sherds
from the Hinojosa site. The site contained a total of
711 sherds, although the majority of the sherds
were small and in poor condition. From Black's
study of a sample of 100 of the better-preserved
sherds, he determined that the ceramics could be
strongly identified with the bone-tempered ceramics from other southern Texas sites. Sherds had a
silty paste or a sandy paste. The silty paste sherds
were slightly less numerous than the sandy paste
sherds and had moderate to profuse quantities of
bone inclusions. Sandy paste sherds had only sparse
to moderate bone quantities. Some sherds had asphaltum and fugitive red decorations indicating contact with coastal groups. Black concluded that the
inland ceramic tradition and the coastal tradition
shared many attributes, suggesting a common origin. He theorized that the differences were technological, not cultural, and related to the variation in
available raw materials. Black indicates this would
also account for differences in vessel forms due to
the unique characteristics of different pastes.
In other areas of South Texas, nearer to the
coast, bone-tempered pottery has been dated earlier
than A.D. 1000 at several Choke Canyon sites in
Live Oak county (Hall et al. 1982). Ceramics from
41LK201 at Choke Canyon (Highley 1986) were
analyzed by Black. No whole vessels were found,
but rim sherds that probably represent bowl or jar
fragments (possible ollas) and pipe bowl fragments
were recovered. In general, the sherds were highly
burnished, with fugitive red film and bone-temper.
Most sherds have a similar sandy paste, suggesting
a common clay source, and some have traces of
asphaltum.
The Loma Sandia site (41 LK28) yielded a total
of 22 pottery sherds. Analysis indicates that the

25

ceramics had a uniform sandy matrix with moderate
quantities of crushed bone. All the sherds appear to
be fragments from a single vessel of undetermined
form (Black 1995).

Methodology
Pottery sherds from Tortuga Flat were
examined macroscopically and microscopically to
determine constituents, aplastics, method of firing,
and to look for evidence of degradation through the
natural processes of erosion, deposition, and
chemical weathering. The firing of experimental
tiles was conducted for comparative purposes.
Sherds were sorted according to size. Those smaller
than 2 mm were excluded from the sample under
the premise that little information could be extracted
from small specimens. From the total of 82 sherds
from the site, 27 sherds were selected for
microscopic examination.
The sherds were examined using a binocular
microscope at lOX power. The exterior, interior,
and cross-section of each sherd was examined
microscopically. Sherds were broken to expose the
cross section of the core for detection of carbon
streaks, to determine the firing method, or to detect
evidence of a slip. Cross-section examination also
included the clay matrix to determine the
constituents and percentage of aplastic temper
present.
Photo-micrographs were taken on a select
sample of sherds to show bone temper and carbon
streak (Figures 15 and 16). The scale for photomicrographs is in cm and cross-section views are
at 12.8X power.

Ceramic Data
The conditions of the sherds range from relatively well-preserved to highly eroded. Attempts to
determine vessel form have not been made due to
the small size of the sherds. The sherds range in
thickness from 5.3-6.4 mm.
Exterior su1face: 41 percent (n= 11) are light
tan/beige in color (Munsell 7.5YR8/2); 59
percent (N=16) are medium tan (Munsell
5YR6/3).
Interior Surface: Of the sherds, 36 percent

are light tan in color (Munsell 7.5YR8/2); 10
have bone tempering visible at the

26

Texas Archeological Society

a

b

b

Figure 15. a, Digital image of sherd with slight burnishing;
b, Sherd cross-section at 12.8X power.

Figure 16. a, Digital image of sherd with use-wear; b.
Sherd cross-section at 12.8X power.

macroscopic level. One sherd has a dark gray
interior, possibly due to smudging, but more
probably due to burning.

Traces of a red slip appear on the interiors of
two sherds and on the exteriors of three others.
Remnants of a substance resembling asphaltum or
pine pitch appear on the interiors of two sherds.
Approximately 25 percent of the sherds are moderately to highly eroded. One sherd has a moderately
burnished exterior, and one has a wet brushed interior. Five sherds from this site have use-wear in the
form of smoothed, beveled edges. One of these
exhibits striations on each edge of the exterior.

The paste consists of a fine-grained silty matrix with moderate amounts of crushed bone (range
from 3-5 percent). Bone fragments range from 0.1
to 1.0 mm in size. Other than the bone temper, no
paste inclusions were observed.
Examination of sherd cores reveals a definite
carbon streak present in 33 percent (n=9); a faint
carbon streak visible in 15 percent (n=4); no carbon
streak detected in 44 percent (n=12); and two sherds
exhibited possible post-firing heat damage as evidenced by the uniformly dark gray color throughout
the specimens.
All sherds from the site are body sherds with
two exceptions: a possible node for a lug attachment and a vessel base or foot fragment.

Experimental Data
Test tiles were fired and analyzed to obtain
technological and firing data on the Tortuga Flat
sherds. Temper in the form of sand, crushed bone
fragments, mussel shell fragments, and marine
shell fragments was added to test tiles for
comparison with sherds from the site. The tiles

Inman, Hill, and Hester - Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site
were fired at 1280 F, then broken, and examined
microscopically.
The experimental work with test tiles allowed
for the comparison of paste with sand inclusions to
the silty paste of sherds from the Tortuga Flat site.
Upon microscopic examination, the distinction between the sand grains in the test tiles and the
smoother, silty paste of the sherds from the site was
evident. Examination of the bone temper from the
test tiles showed that the bone fragments were more
chalky and less translucent than those seen in the
sherds from the site. A possible explanation is that
the bone used in the sherds from Tortuga Flat had
been burned prior to being ground for use as temper.
Burned bone sometimes appears shiny and has a
blue cast. Experiments by Hill (1975) indicate that
burned bone is easier to pulverize for use as temper.
The bone selected for the test tiles had been leached
from exposure to the elements and had a chalky
appearance. Other possibilities to be considered include repeated firings, whether intentional or accidental. Hill's experiments (1975) found that cooking
oils caused the core of pottery to darken from absorption of oil. It is possible that oils from cooking
were also absorbed by the bone fragments, resulting
in their shiny appearance under microscopic examination. This experiment also made clear the difference between bone temper and shell (fresh water
mussel and marine) temper under microscopic examination. The cancellous (spongy) structure of the
bone was readily distinguished from the shiny appearance of the mussel shell inclusions and the chalky
appearance of the marine shell fragments.

Conclusions of the
Ceramic Analysis
The method of ceramic vessel manufacture appears to have been by coil and scrape as evidenced
by the grooves or striations on the interior of several
sherds. These markings are probably the result of
poorly bonded coils and are remnants of joints after
smoothing of the coils had been attempted (possibly
through the use of a wooden tool, a smooth stone, or
sherd edge). Hill (1975) believes these interior striations may have resulted from the use of a bundle of
grass or a stick used in smoothing the coils.
The visible carbon streaks (the result of incomplete oxidation of the carbon in the clay) on the
cores of some sherds indicate a non-kiln, open firing. Additionally, the presence of fire clouds on two
sherds and the light color of the sherds in general

27

supports the premise of an open firing with characteristic uneven temperatures. Possible smudging of
vessel interiors could be inferred from only two
sherds. These sherds, however, were uniformly dark
gray in color throughout so it is more likely that they
incurred post-manufacture fire damage.
The bone-tempered ceramics from the Tortuga
Flat site are very similar to those from other South
Texas sites as described by Hester and Hill (1975).
The traces of red slip, possibly red ocher, need
further analysis to determine if this is the agent
responsible for the red coloring of some sherds.
Perhaps further study (use-wear experiments)
of the five sherds that have obvious modifications
could give new insight into their function. It is
possible they were used for smoothing vessels during manufacture; however, other uses unrelated to
pottery making should be considered.

RADIOCARBON DATES
Charcoal for radiocarbon dating was collected
by Hill, packed in aluminum foil pouches, and
sealed in polyethylene bags. The samples were submitted to the Radiocarbon Laboratory at the University of Texas at Austin where they were
processed under the direction of Salvatore Valastro.
The results of two radiocarbon assays are provided below. The calibrations are based on Methods A and B in Stuiver and Reimer (1993) and
Stuiver and Pearson (1993):
Sample Tx-1514

170  60 B.P.

(uncorrected)

Method A calibrated age ranges at 1 sigma for
Tx-1514 are AD 1663-1822, 1833-1882, and 19121954; at two sigma the calibrated age range is AD
1644-1955* (* indicates post-atomic bomb contamination). Method B calibrated ages at 1 sigma
are AD 1666-1703 (0.20 under the probability distribution), 1717-1819 (0.57), 1856-1861 (0.02), and
1917-1955* (0.21 ). At two sigma, the calibrated
age ranges are AD 1658-1893 (0.82) and 19051955 (0.18).
Sample Tx-i 515

410  40 B.P.

(uncorrected)

Method A calibrated age ranges at one sigma
for Tx-1515 are AD 1443-1488 and 1609-1611; at
two sigma the calibrated age ranges are AD 1432-

28

Texas Archeological Society

1525 and 1558-1631. Method B calibrated ages at
one sigma are AD 1441-1510 (0.86 under the
probability distribution) and 1601-1615 (0.14). At
two sigma, the calibrated age ranges are AD 14321526 (0.70) and 1556-1632 (0.30).
Radiocarbon sample Tx-1514 was a composite
sample from test unit I (depth of 0-15 cm). It is
likely that the sample was contaminated with charcoal of more recent age that was not related to the
aboriginal occupation of the site. The late date of
this sample, and the absence of artifacts of Spanish
origin at the site, support this premise. Sample Tx1515 was collected from the refuse area and was
probably less subject to contamination than the previous sample.

FAUNAL REMAINS
The faunal remains (Table 7) were analyzed by
Billy Davidson of Austin, Texas. The majority of
bone fragments were recovered from the refuse area;
however, small amounts of bone were present in all
test units.
A variety of animals served as food sources
for the native peoples. The major large game animals were pronghorn and deer; bison played a minor role in the diet. This pattern is found at several
other sites in the study area. The large number of
smaller mammals (rabbits and rodents) present at
Tortuga Flat attests to their importance in the natives' diet. Most of the fauna could have been obtained by hunters and foragers in the immediate site
area (Hester and Hill 1975).
Other materials recovered from the site include land and aquatic gastropods (Rabdotus,
Polygyra, and Helisoma) and highly fragmented
mussel shell fragments (Unio proptera purpurata).
Fire-cracked stones, baked lumps of clay, and charcoal were also present (Hill and Hester 1973).

DISCUSSION
During the 15th and 16th centuries (based on
the radiocarbon dates and the arrow points), the
peoples who at times inhabited Tortuga Flat made
their living by hunting a variety of animals and by
gathering and processing plant foods. Seeds, nuts,
aquatic resources (freshwater mussel, fish), reptiles,
rodents, and land snails were part of their diverse
diet. It is likely that small, mobile groups were

living at Tortuga Flat for certain times during the
year, returning periodically to harvest seasonal plant
foods and to hunt. Summer attraction to the area
may have been the abundant tunas of the prickly
pear cactus and mesquite beans. In the fall of the
year, many small groups may have convened for
the harvesting of pecans and acorns.
Bison bone was present at the site; a minimum
of three individuals were represented in the faunal
materials. Other large animals (deer and pronghorn) were also food sources. The faunal assemblage included large numbers of rabbits and rodents attesting to their importance in the native
diet. Information from Espinosa's diary (Campbell
n.d.) about mice hunting by native residents
(Pacuaches) can be used as an additional line of
evidence in this regard. Perhaps specialized wooden
tools (clubs, throwing sticks, or rabbit sticks) were
used for this aspect of food procurement. If these
tools were used at Tortuga Flat, they were not preserved in the archeological record, although examples have been recovered from the Lower Pecos.
The native peoples living at Tortuga Flat manufactured and maintained stone tools of various types
and used pottery (probably made from local clays,
based on experiments by the senior author). Local
chert from the uplands was heat-treated and used
for lithic manufacturing. The hunters at Tortuga
Flat used the bow and arrow with predominately
Scallorn and Perdiz points (one Cuney arrow point
was also recovered from the site). Other lithic forms
present include bifacial and unifacial tools, preforms, hammerstones, and ground stone implements. These reflect the various food procurement,
processing, and domestic activities taking place at
the site. Use-wear study indicates that unifacial and
bifacial tools were used for meat and hide processing. Manos and metate fragments from the site substantiate the importance of plant foods in the native
diet that are mentioned in historic accounts.
From the Late Prehistoric/Protohistoric
perspective, the apparent contemporaneity of
Scallorn and Perdiz points from Tortuga Flat is in
contrast to Central Texas where Scallorn points
appear earlier in the Late Prehistoric than do Perdiz
points. In addition, the lithic artifacts from Tortuga
Flat cannot be considered wholly compatible with
those of the Toyah horizon as it appears there is
more variability in the assemblage at Tortuga Flat.
Perhaps this reflects a later southward diffusion of
selected artifacts of Plains technology (the Toyah
horizon), and specifically adapted for bison hunting

Inman, Hill, and Hester -Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site
Table 7. Number of Identified Fam1al Specimens.
Test Pit
Common Name

IA

II

III

IV

v

2

2

3

2

bison
antelope
cf. antelope
whitetail deer

3

2

coyote
1

jackrabbit
cottontail rabbit
pocket gopher
gopher
packrat
cotton rat
white-footed mouse
raccoon
gray fox
box turtle
bull snake
rat snake
fish (species?)
mockingbird
duck
rabbits (species?)
deer, antelope (sp.?)
horned toad
hog-nosed skunk
ground squirrel
turtle (species?)

and processing. This may coincide with a change to
a more mesic climate and the return of bison to the
southernmost parts of Texas. If the Toyah horizon
does not represent a change of technology but
instead indicates a cultural migration, then perhaps
these migrating peoples joined other groups (local
residents or others migrating through the region)
and this merger has been expressed in the
archeological record as a combination toolkit.
Data on site stratigraphy, taken from field
notes, argues against bioturbation (rodent burrowing) or pedogenic disturbance (root intrusions) as
the cause of artifact mixing. The tendency of
Tortugas Creek to over-bank flooding (witnessed
in modern times), which would naturally separate
components if they represent different ages, suggests that slow deposition was not the cause of
arrow points of different ages being incorporated in

29

the same natural deposit. Also,
the mix of arrow point types is
Refuse
found in several test units within
Area
VI VII
the site (see Table 1).
Although a mix of arrow
3
point types is not typically found
at single component sites in Cen2
tral Texas, several South Texas
2
9
sites have yielded such a variety.
2
Pampopa-Talon Crossings
The
3
site
(Thoms and Ahr 1995)
5
yielded Guerrero, Cuney, Perdiz,
2
and Scallorn points in the upper
1
30 cm. The Skillet Mountain No.
6
4 site (41MC222) at Choke Can13
yon (Hall et al. 1986), contained
only Late Prehistoric remains
(with well preserved fauna! materials) that appeared to be un2
contaminated by debris from
earlier periods of activity. UnI
corrected radiocarbon dates
5
ranged from A.D. 1247-1500 and
diagnostic arrow points included
Perdiz, Scallorn, and Edwards.
From Victoria County,
2
test excavations in 1995 (Walter
several
1997)at41VT11 (the third location of Mission Espiritu Santo)
at a depth of 30 cm below the
surface (bs) yielded Cuney,
Guerrero, and Perdiz points
from the aboriginal habitation
area. Recent block excavations
at the same site (Texas Archeological Society Field
School, June 1997) recovered Guerrero points, a
small dart point (Ensor-like), and a Perdiz point
from 0-15 cm bs. Another block excavation, approximately I 0 m to the south, excavated to a depth
of 25 cm bs, had a Guerrero point, a beveled knife
(possible Toyah horizon), and two drills.
In addition, work carried out in late summer
1997 at a Wilson County site (41 WN88) yielded
Perdiz, Scallorn, Cuney, and Guerrero arrow points.
These appear to be contemporaneous in a discrete
occupation zone just below the present ground surface (Brett Houk, 1997 personal communication).
The one Cuney arrow point from Tortuga Flat
is a diagnostic of the Protohistoric and Historic
eras. These points appear to have originated in East
Texas and were reported by Hudgins ( 1986) at the
Shanklin site (41WH8). Recently, a single Cuney

30

Texas Archeological Society

point was reported by Walter (1997) at 41VT11,
and a single arrow point resembling a Cuney was
recovered from the excavation of La Salle's ship,
Belle, in Matagorda Bay (Martin 1997). In addition, Cuney points occur with Perdiz points at a
nearby Dimmit County site (41DM33) documented
by Nunley and Hester ( 1966).
Contact or trade with Central Texas can be
inferred by the presence of one large biface (a
beveled form, probably used as a knife), made from
Edwards chert, and one uniface fragment. The
Cuney arrow point, an East Texas form, also
provides evidence of contact through migrations,
trade networks, or bison-hunting parties coming
onto the coastal plain. Creel ( 1991) suggests that
the occurrence of beveled knives and end scrapers
in assemblages dating after about A.D. 1300 reflects
the importance of bison hides in a widespread
exchange network in the early historic period in the
Southern Plains and adjacent areas. This trade
network, reported by early Spanish explorers,
continued into the historic period. The knives were
believed to have been used to cut the hides during
skinning, and the end scrapers were probably used
to remove hair and to reduce hide thickness.
Campbell's research (n.d.) on the Pacuache provides
information on hide trading in the region of Tortuga
Flat at the time of the Guerrero missions (beginning
in 1700). An account from 1709 by Espinosa links
the Pacuache to this trade at Mission San Juan
Bautista, Coahuila. The following passage by
Espinosa is excerpted from Campbell (n.d.): "They
are much inclined to the chase, the men engaging in
no other occupation. The women are trained to cure
and tan the hides of buffalo and deer. These they
curiously paint to trade to the Spaniards ... "
The abundance of large end scrapers from the
Pampopa-Talons Crossing site in Bexar county
could be related to this important bison hide trade.
While the fauna! evidence from this site emphasizes deer processing, perhaps this indicates that
bison hide processing was taking place at the site,
but not bison butchering.
Approaching the site from the cultural-historical aspect, it appears that the diagnostic artifacts
from Mission San Bernardo and San Juan Bautista
at Guerrero, Coahuila (Hester 1977), have little in
common with those from Tortuga Flat. In general,
the dart points (which are Archaic in age, collected
from local eroded sites and clearly "recycled" by
the Mission Indians) and arrow points are crude
and fragmentary. The exceptions are the Guerrero

arrow points, a number of which are more finelymade. No beveled bifaces were found at the
Guerrero missions. It is likely that Spanish metal
knives were possibly being used, although in what
numbers is not known. The large array of modified
flakes from the mission lithic assemblages indicate
that these informal, utilitarian tools were an important part of the toolkit. Two arrow points (one a
fragmentary specimen) from excavations at the aboriginal habitation area north of San Bernardo somewhat resemble Perdiz arrow points.
It is also important to keep in mind Campbell's
( 1988) caution that, when considering the native
groups of South Texas during the latter part of the
17th century, it should not be assumed that they
fully represent the groups who lived there during
the Late Prehistoric. It is likely that upheaval of
aboriginal lifeways had probably already begun in
South Texas at that time, and that movement of
groups out of Mexico, and even the spread of
Spanish diseases, may have already altered native
populations.
Regarding the identification of specific cultural groups at Tortuga Flat, the Pacuache can be
placed in the vicinity of the site in the late 17th and
early 18th centuries and they are considered to be
one of several native groups occupying the site or
migrating through the area periodically. The cultural materials from Tortuga Flat can likely be attributed, in part, to this group. How this can be read
in the archeological record is unclear because, at
present, it is not possible to attribute an entire assemblage, nor to isolate specific artifact forms or
styles, from the cultural remains at Tortuga Flat
and link them to a particular native population. The
1ithic assemblages from the missions at Guerrero
offer little insight into the problem. Study of these
assemblages does, however, reveal that certain Late
Prehistoric/Protohistoric tools were not part of the
18th century mission Indian lithic toolkit.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Margaret Greco and Ralph
Snavely for their earlier work on the Tortuga Flat
materials. We are very grateful to Bobby Inman for
his preparation of the artifact photos, site map, and
for his editorial help. We also thank Dale Hudler
for his assistance with microwear analysis; Linda
Ellis for sharing her knowledge of ceramics; Frank
Huffman who provided geological insight; and Karl

Inman, Hill, and Hester -Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site
Kibler, John Dockall, and Tim Perttula for their
editorial comments. Grant 6316 (to Hester) from
the Penrose Fund of the American Philosophical
Society made possible the analysis of faunal remains from the site. Pam Headrick prepared the
core drawings with funding provided by the Friends
of the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory.

REFERENCES CITED

31

l 991

Coahuiltecans and Their Neighbors. In Spanish Borderlands Sourcebooks, edited by T.R. Hester, pp.
I 09-126. Garland Publishing, Inc., New York.

n.d.

The Pacuache Indians of Southern Texas. Ms. on
file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

Creel, D. G.
1991 Bison Hides in Late Prehistoric Exchange in the
Southern Plains. American Antiquity 56(1):40-49.

Almarez, F.
1980 Inventory of the Rio Grande Missions: 1772 San
Juan Bautista and San Bernardo. Special Report 2.
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Davidson, B. and F. Valdez, Jr.
1976 Subsistence Data From San Juan Bautista and San
Bernardo. In Archaeology and Ethnohistory of the
Gateway Area, Middle Rio Grande of Texas, assembled by R. E.W. Adams. Submitted to the National Endowment for the Humanities by The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Black, S. L.
1986 The Clemente and Herminia Hinojosa Site. 4!JW8:
A Toyah Horizon Campsite in Southern Texas, Special Report 18. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Goddard, I.
1979 The Languages of South Texas and the Lower Rio
Grande. In The Languages of Native America, edited by L. Campbell and M. Mithiun, pp. 355-389.
University of Texas Press, Austin.

South Texas Plains. In From the Gulf to the Rio
Grande: Human Adaptation in Central, South, and
Lower Pecos Texas, by T. R. Hester, S. L. Black, D.
G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox, K. Reinhard, and
L. C. Bement, pp. 39-62. Research Series No. 33.
Arkansas Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.

Greco, M. and R. Snavely
1981 Another Inquiry Into The Tortuga Flat Site. Ms. on
file, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1989

1995

Prehistoric Ceramics. In Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia Site (41LK28), A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County,
Texas, by A.J. Taylor and C. L. Highley, pp. 547549. 2 Vols. Studies in Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, the University of
Texas at Austin.

Brown, K. M., D.R. Potter, G.D. Hall, and S. L. Black
1982 Excavations at 41 LK67: A Prehistoric Site in the
Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas. Choke Canyon Series 7. Center for Archaeological Research,
The University of Texas at San Antonio
Calhoun, C. A.
1966 A Small Campsite near Kenedy, Texas. Newsletter
of the Houston Archeological Society 18:3-6.
Campbell, T. N.
1979 Ethnohistoric Notes on Indian Groups Associated
with Three Spanish Missions at Guerrero, Coahuila.
Special Report 3. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
1988

The Indians of Southern Texas and Northeastern
Mexico: Selected Writings of Thomas Nolan
Campbell. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Hall, G. D., S. L. Black, and C. Graves
1982 Archaeological Investigations at Choke Canyon Reservoir, South Texas: The Phase I Findings. Choke
Canyon Series 5. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.
Hall, G. D., T. R. Hester, and S. L. Black
1986 The Prehistoric Sites at Choke Canyon Reservoir,
Southern Texas: Results of Phase II Archaeological
Investigations. Choke Canyon Series I 0. Center for
Archaeological Research, The University of Texas
at San Antonio.
Hester, T. R.
l 975a Late Prehistoric Cultural Patterns Along the Lower
Rio Grande of Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 46: 1-25.
l 975b Chipped Stone Industries on the Rio Grande Plain,
Texas: Some Preliminary Observations. The Texas
Journal of Science 26( l-2):213-222.
1977

The Lithic Technology of Mission Indians in Texas
and Northeastern Mexico. Lithic Technologv 6( 12):9-13.

1978

Background to the Archaeology of Chaparrosa
Ranch, Southern Texas, Volume I: Studies in the
Archaeology of Chaparrosa Ranch. Special Report
6. Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

32

Texas Archeological Society

1980

Digging into South Texas Prehistory. Corona Publishing Company, San Antonio.

1981

Tradition and Diversity Among the Prehistoric Hunters and Gatherers of Southern Texas. Plains Anthropologist 26(92): 119-128.

Hill, T. C., Jr., J.B. Holdsworth, and T. R. Hester
1976 Yucca Exploitation: A Contemporary Account from
the Rio Grande Plain. La Tierra 1: 19-2 l.

The Prehistory of South Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Society 66:427-459.

Hofman, J. L., L. C. Todd, and M. B. Collins
199 l Identification of Central Texas Edwards Chert at
the Folsom and Lindenmeier Sites. Plains Anthropologist 36( 137):297-308.

Hester, T. R. and M. B. Collins
1974 Evidence for Heat Treating of Southern Texas Projectile Points. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 45:219-224.

Hudgins, J. D.
1986 A Historic Indian Site in Wharton County, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 55:305 l.

Hester, T. R. and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1973 Prehistoric Occupation at the Holdsworth and
Stewart Sites on the Rio Grande Plain of Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 43:3375.

Inglis, J.M.
1964 A History of Vegetation on the Rio Grande Plain.
Bulletin 45. Texas Parks and Wildlife Department,
Austin.

Some Aspects of Late Prehistoric and Protohistoric
Archaeology in Southern Texas. Special Report I.
Center for Archaeologicai Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Inman, B., T. R. Hester, and T. C. Hill, Jr.
1995 Test Excavations at the Errol Jonsson #I Site,
41ZV37, South Texas La Tierra 22(1):17-33.

1995

1975

Hester, T. R. and R. C. Parker
1970 The Berclair Site: A Late Prehistoric Component in
Goliad County, Southern Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 44: 1-23.
Hester, T. R. and H.J. Shafer
1975 An Initial Study of Blade Technology on the Central and Southern Texas Coast. Plains Anthropologist 20(69): 175-185.

Johnson,L.,Jr.
1994 The Life and Times of Toyah-Culture Folk as Seen
from the Buckhollow Encampment, Site 41KM16,
Kimble County, Texas. Office of the State Archeologist Report 38. Texas Department of Transportation and Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Johnson, L. and T. N. Campbell
1992 Sanan: Traces of a Previously Unknown Aboriginal
Language in Colonial Coahuila and Texas. Plains
Anthropologist 37(140):185-212.

Hester, T. R., S. L. Black, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, A. A. Fox,
K. J. Reinhard, and L. C. Bement
1989 From the Gulf to the Rio Grande: Human Adaptation in Central, South, and Lower Pecos Texas.
Research Series No. 33. Arkansas Archeological
Survey, Fayetteville.

Kay,M.
1996 Microwear Analysis of Some Clovis and Experimental Chipped Stone Tools. In Stone Tools: Theoretical Insights into Human Prehistory, edited by
G. H. Odell, pp. 315-344. Plenum Press, New York.

Highley, C. L.
1986 Archaeological Investigations at 41 LK201, Choke
Canyon Reservoir, Southern Texas. Choke Canyon
Series I I . Center for Archaeological Research, The
University of Texas at San Antonio.

Martin, W. A.
1997 Underwater Update, Excavations Continue in
Matagorda Bay, Cultural Resource Management
News and Views 9(1):15-18. Division of Antiquities
Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Hill, T. C., Jr.
1975 Experiments in Pottery-Making. La Tierra 2(3):430.

Montgomery, J. L.
1978 The Mariposa Site: A Late Prehistoric Site on the
Rio Grande Plain of Texas. Special Report 6(2).
Center for Archaeological Research, The University of Texas at San Antonio.

Hill, T. C., Jr. and T. R. Hester
1971 Isolated Archaic and Late Prehistoric Components
at the Honeymoon Site (41 ZV34 ), Southern Texas.
Plains Anthropologist 16(51):52-59.
1973

A Preliminary Report on the Tortuga Flat Site: A
Protohistoric Campsite in Southern Texas. Texas
Archeology 17 (2): 10-14.

Nunley, P. and T. R. Hester
1966 Preliminary Archeological Investigations in Dimmit
County, Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
18(3):233-253.

Inman, Hill, and Hester -Archeological Investigations at the Tortuga Flat Site
Shoberg, M. B.
n.d.
Beveled Knives from Sanford Reservoir. Manuscript
on file with the author.
Sollberger, J.B.
1971 A Technological Study of Beveled Knives. Plains
Anthropologist 16(53):209-218.
Stevens, J. W. and D. Arriaga
1985 Soil Survey of Dimmit and Zavala Counties, Texas.
United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service.
Stuiver, M. and G. W. Pearson
1993 High-Precision Bidecadal Calibration of the Radiocarbon Time Scale, AD 1950-500 BC and 25006000 BC. Radiocarbon 35(1):1-23.
Stuiver, M. and P. J. Reimer
1993 Extended 14C Database and Revised Calib 3.0 14C
Age Calibration Program. Radiocarbon 35:215-230.
Taylor, A. J. and C. L. Highley
1995 Archeological Investigations at the Loma Sandia
Site (41LK28), A Prehistoric Cemetery and Campsite in Live Oak County, Texas. 2 Vols. Studies in
Archeology 20. Texas Archeological Research
Laboratory, the University of Texas at Austin.

33

Thoms, A. V. and S. W. Ahr
1995 Pampopa-Talon Crossings and Hermann Ranch
Sites: Preliminary Results of the 1994 Southern
Texas Archaeological Association Field School. La
Tierra 22(2):34-67.
Turner, E. S. and T. R. Hester
1993 A Field Guide to Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians,
Second Edition. Gulf Publishing Company, Houston.
Vaughan, P. C.
1985 Use-Wear Analysis of Flaked Stone Tools. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Walter, T. L.
1997 The Dynamics of Culture Change and Its Reflection
in the Archaeological Record at Espiritu Santo De
Zuniga, Victoria, Texas. Special Publication 7,
Southern Texas Archaeological Association and
Studies in Archeology 23, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin.
Windberg, L. A.
1997 Annual Fruit Production of Prickly Pear (Opuntia
engelmanni) and Mesquite (Prosopis glandulosa)
in Southern Texas. The Texas Journal of Science
49(1 ):65-72.

Treachery and Tragedy in the Texas Wilderness: The
Adventures of Jean L' Archeveque in Texas
(A Member of La Salle's Colony)
Kathleen Gilmore

Jean l' Archeveque stood on the deck of the
supply ship L'Aimable, regarding with apprehension the strange and dismal shore where he was
going to land. Never had he seen anything like it. In
the distance behind the flat sand beach he could see
a few small rises. Patches of scrubby grass dotted
the landscape; not a tree was in sight. Glancing up
at the dull gray sky, he shivered when he felt the
cold damp wind that whipped the waves high against
the shore. He remembered that Minet, an engineer
from the ship, on land the day before saw ice on
some freshwater ponds (Weddle 1987). Despite this
bleak and uninviting scene, Jean was glad to be
landing after the long and wearying days of searching for the mouth of the Mississippi River with the
great explorer Robert Cavelier de La Salle.
The day was February 20, 1685. Jean
l 'Archeveque was 13 years old (Records of
Bibliotheque Municipal, Bayonne ). 1 Perhaps he
thought of his parents, Claude l' Archeveque and
Maria d' Armana back in Bayonne, France. Day by
day the ships of the La Salle enterprise, loaded with
supplies and about 250 persons, had slowly made
their way along the coast looking for the settlement
La Salle had left at the mouth of the Mississippi
River in 1682.
La Salle's dream was to include the entire
Mississippi River valley in the French empire. This
area he claimed for France based on his 1682 trip
from Canada down the river to its mouth. But his
dream could not become a reality without a permanent settlement. With the King's blessing and financial support, La Salle left La Rochelle, France,
in July 1684, with four well-loaded ships and headed

to the mouth of the Mississippi River to validate his
claim. This is the story of Jean l' Archeveque, a
member of that expedition, and his adventures in
Texas before he was exiled to New Mexico. 2
Bad luck stalked the venture from the beginning. After crossing the Atlantic Ocean, the fleet
was headed for Petit Goave, a French colony on the
southern coast of Santo Domingo, when the
Francois, carrying most of the supplies for the
colony, was captured by Spaniards off the northern
coast of the island. The other supply ship L 'Aimable,
in which Jean was traveling, was the slowest of the
three remaining ships. Another of the three was a
small frigate, La Belle, a gift from the King of
France to La Salle. The third ship was a man-ofwar with orders to return to France as soon as the
colony was established. After a two month stay, the
three ships left Petit Goave on November 25, 1684
(Joutel 1962:30). The men were already on low
rations; many we1:e sick, some with diseases picked
up during the stay at Petit Goave.
Jean joined the expedition with Pierre Duhaut,
a volunteer merchant who, with his younger brother,
Dominique, were from Jean's home town of
Bayonne, France. The Duhaut brothers may have
been his cousins. 3 These three were Basques, who
characteristically are of medium height, have rather
long faces, and prominent noses. Many Basques
have darkish skins, but not as dark as their surrounding French and Spanish neighbors (Krogman
1952:632).
Jean watched as the sailors unloaded cargo,
such as cannon, trunks, and heavy items, from
L 'Aimable to lighten her load so she could enter the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69 (1998)

36

Texas Archeological Society

shallow waters of the bay La Salle had mistaken for
the mouth of the Mississippi River. The route to
enter the bay was marked where the water was
deepest between an island and a tongue of land
stretching eastward. 4 La Salle was ashore with some
of the men, and the little frigate La Belle, already
inside the bay, was waiting for the bigger ship to
enter. The warship La Jolie was anchored a few
miles offshore.
Jean got into the loaded longboat headed
toward shore where a camp had been made, but the
boat sprung a leak and the passengers barely escaped
with their lives. Shivering as he climbed on shore,
Jean looked back and saw the supply ship with sails
unfurled beginning its entrance into the bay. As he
watched, the lumbering ship suddenly swayed off
the marked course and almost immediately ran
aground. Strenuous efforts to free the ship failed.
How had this disaster happened? The route was
plainly marked. The ship's captain, Aigron, and La
Salle had quarreled because La Salle wanted the
pilot of the Belle to help bring the ship into the bay,
but Aigron insisted he needed no help. Later Jean
learned that Aigron was accused of deliberately
stranding the ship (see O'Donnell 1936:16, 24).
A cannon boomed, signaling that L'Aimable
was fast aground. Emergency measures were
immediately put into effect. First, the men were
taken from the stranded ship, then the unloading
began using the longboats from the Jolie and a
canoe. The ship carried almost all the ammunition,
utensils, tools, a mill, and other essentials for a
settlement (Joutel 1962:51 ). All during the cold
night, trip after trip was made from the listing ship
to the shore (Weddle 1987: 108). Chilled to the
bone and exhausted from the hard work of
extricating goods from the sinking ship, the men
became less and less effective, although they were
able to save flour, corn, some meat, and a good part
of the wine and brandy.
Further bad luck befell them on February 23rd,
when bad weather with rain and fog delayed their
recovery efforts. In the night, the ship began to
break apart, letting supplies float out into the water.
When morning came, La Salle sent the men out to
rescue what they could (Joutel 1962:53). On the
26th, good weather returned, and part of the powder,
more cannon, food, and some of the merchandise
could be saved. AU recovered materials were piled
together at the shore camp. The Frenchmen, fearing
the local Indians, who, being good swimmers, were
helping themselves to the floating and beached

cargo, used recovered ship's timbers to make an
emergency stockade. By March 7th, the L'Aimable
could no longer be seen (Weddle 1987:112).
A pitiful, cold, hungry, and disillusioned group
camped on the sandy shore. Sickness was rampant
and soldiers were dying every day from weakness
and long exposure in the water. Some were deserting
(see O'Donnell 1936; Joutel 1962:57). Adding to
the sad condition of the colonists, Captain Beaujeu
of the Jolie, who was engaged in almost constant
disagreement with La Salle about provisions for his
ship and the direction of the Mississippi River,
decided to set sail for France on March 14th.
The local natives, not appreciating the invasion of their territory, harassed the survivors and
continued to take what they could from the ship's
wreckage. Gun shots, sounds never before heard,
were frightening and would usually scare them
away. But when La Salle appropriated some of
their canoes to explore the bay, the Indians retaliated. Two men of an exploring party were killed
and others were wounded. The colonists were
shocked and terrified, and the feeling of constant
danger never left them.
More timbers, washed ashore from the shipwreck, were used to protect the camp and make it a
little more livable. But food was scarce. The
"biskets" were gone, and the remaining food was
water-soaked. Meal doled out in rations was mixed
with water to make a sort of hasty pudding. Large
beans and Indian corn were also rationed. Fortunately, plentiful deer and bison roamed the local
prairies. Abundant fish swam in the nearby lakes
and the bay. The hunting and fishing became constant activities to keep the more than l 00 persons at
the shore camp from starving (Joutel 1962:53).
With the camp fairly secure, La Salle began
exploring the area, hoping to find the Mississippi
River and the settlement he had left in 1682. The
location of the river remained elusive, but farther
inland he found a prairie where crops could be
planted and where buffalo and birds were plentiful
(Joutel 1962:58)-a good spot for a permanent village. There he left a few men to start building a
settlement and to plant crops.
Not until the first of June did material from
the shore camp begin to be moved to the other
settlement (Figure 1) located about two leagues (a
league is a little less than three miles) up the bay. 5
About 70 men, women, and children left for the
new settlement, with about 30 staying at the shore
camp with Henri Joutel, who was in charge. By

Gilmore - Treachery and Tragedy in the Texas Wilderness

N

50

100

1150 miles

Figure I. Map showing location of the French settlement
and the Cenis (orTejas) country, with the general route the
Frenchmen took between them.

July, all the material, including salvaged ship's timbers, had been transferred to the settlement, now
named Saint Louis. St. Louis was a miserable
place. Drought, birds, and animals had ruined the
planted seeds. Several people had died; others were
sick. The single sheltered area protected only the
powder and brandy.
The nearest wood suitable for building grew a
league away. Lacking draft animals and carts, the
men, after cutting and squaring the logs, had to
drag them back over uneven terrain-no simple
chore. The labor was eased a bit when someone
thought to use a gun carriage as a wagon to haul the
timbers. The already sparse rations were reduced if
work was shirked, and La Salle was not an easy
taskmaster. Jean l' Archeveque was well aware of
this, and may have taken part in these activities
(Canedo 1968:107; O'Donnell 1936:23). More than
30 died from this labor (Joutel 1962:64).
A lodge was finished by sometime in September, and La Salle again explored the local area.
Later that winter he set out with 20 men and did not
return until March 1686. Adding to the beleaguered
colony's troubles, this same spring, the Belle was
blown across the bay and stranded on the shore
with a tragic loss of materials. 6 Now the little colony
was really isolated, and La Salle knew it was necessary to find help.
He set out again toward the east at the end of
April with 20 men haphazardly equipped with anything that could be found among the colonists.
Only eight of these men returned to St. Louis in
August 1686, with five horses loaded with maize.

37

The men were in rags and tatters. Besides those
who had died or had been killed by Indians, three
deserted (two sailors, Groslet and Ruter, and a man
from Provence). Dominique, younger brother of
Pierre Duhaut, did not return, causing Pierre to
harbor bitter resentment toward La Salle. Neither
the Mississippi River nor the aimed-for post of the
Illinois was reached. The disappointment among
the villagers was overwhelming, but La Salle revived their spirits, according to Henri Joutel, one
of his leading aides and supporters. He "made all
Men easy, and he found, by his great Vivacity of
Spirit, Expedients, which reviv' d the lowest ebb of
hope" (Joutel 1962:82).
With the colony dwindling and supplies almost non-existent, La Salle had no choice but to
try again to get help. Near the second anniversary
of the landing on the Gulf shore, 17 set out on January 12, 1687, to go to France by way of the Mississippi River and the Illinois Post to Canada: La
Salle; his brother, Abbe Cavelier; his nephews,
Moranget and the young Cavelier who was 11 or
12; Father Anastasius Douay; Pierre Duhaut,
l'Archeveque's employer and possibly his cousin;
l'Archeveque, now 15; Hiens (James), the English
gunner; Liotot, the surgeon; young (Pierre) Talon,
age 11; an Indian named Nika; La Salle's footman
Saget; Henri Joutel; Tessier, pilot of the wrecked
ship La Belle; de Marle, a volunteer; a young man
from Paris, Bartholomew; and Pierre Meunier, a
nobleman's (Sieur de Preville) son from Paris,
about 15 years old.
Equipment for this long journey was the best
to be had in the colony, but the best was improvised. Belts became leather for shoes, and salvaged
sails became material for shirts. The only five horses
were loaded with some of the most valuable belongings of each man including what might be
needed. The horses also carried gifts for the Indians: axes, knives, glass beads, and ribbons, essentials for peaceful passage.
Thirteen men and seven women bid the group
an emotional and touching good-bye, hoping desperately that eventually help would come. On hand
were about 70 swine, 18 or 20 hens, some meal,
powder, ball, and eight useless cannon, according
to Joutel (1962:84). 7
When they could finally leave, it was a time of
rain, flooding, and cold. Using their compasses to
head northeast, the group set out from Fort St. Louis
for the Cenis 8 in present-day East Texas where La
Salle had made friends the year before (see Figure

38

Texas Archeological Society

1). Soon they encountered marshy lands made worse
by heavy rains. Freshly-killed buffalo hides provided some protection from the rain, but the trekkers remained wet from frequently wading in water
up to their knees. Adding to their misery and fatigue, they had to hack through thick woods to give
the horses passage until they discovered buffalo
trails leading through the woods.
It was not long before the group's shabby shoes
were useless, and since buffalo hides, although untanned, were plentiful, the men fitted them around
their feet. This worked until the skins dried, then
they became so hard and rough they had to be
soaked periodically to restore the softness.
Crossing rivers was an ordeal. Some of the
smaller ones could be spanned by cutting a tree to
fall from bank to bank. To cross the larger rivers, a
small boat made of buffalo skins sewed together
and stretched over a sapling framework answered
their problem.
Progress was slow. Such exhausting labor required frequent rests, some for several days or a
week. Indians along the way for the most part were
friendly and helpful, some trading buffalo hides for
a knife, others advising on the way to travel. Some
Indians traded the Frenchmen tanned "goat" (probably pronghorn) skins, a boon to the travelers since
shoes made of these skins remained soft and supple.
By March 15th, after two months of travel,
food was getting scarce. Camp was made two or
three leagues from where La Salle had stashed a
quantity of corn and beans the year before. The
seven or eight sent to retrieve the food included
Pierre Duhaut, the Basque; Liotot, the surgeon;
Hiens, the gunner; Tessier, the pilot; Nika, the Indian hunter; Saget, La Salle's servant (Margry
1886:319); and l' Archeveque. When they found
the food spoiled, hunger set the stage for tragedy.
On the way back to camp the next day, Nika
fortunately killed two buffalo, and Saget was sent
to tell La Salle to send horses for the meat. When
morning came, La Salle dispatched the horses with
Moranget, his nephew, de Marle, and Meunier9 with
Saget to guide them.
When Moranget 10 and the others found the men,
they were smoking the meat and eating the marrow
from the marrow bones, a customary tradition, but
Moranget was enraged. He told them the meat was
not dry enough, and that he would take all of it,
including the marrow bones. The men, angry at
such treatment, and this combined with other times
they felt Moranget had been cruel and unjust,

decided Moranget had to be kilied. But this meant
Nika and Saget, both loyal to La Salle, also had to
be killed. That night when all was quiet, Liotot
took an axe and smashed the heads of the three men
while Duhaut, Hiens, Tessier, and l' Archeveque
stood guard. Nika and Saget died instantly, but
Moranget, although mortally wounded, sat up and
de Marle, an innocent bystander, was forced to end
Moranget's life with a shot.
The conspirators then realized their gruesome
scenario had to be completed with the death of La
Salle. To accomplish this, they would have to go to
La Salle's camp. Those who defied them would be
killed first, then it would be easier to kill the rest.
But the river near the conspirator's camp was in
flood, too high to cross, causing delay of their plans.
When the men had not returned to La Salle's
camp by the 18th, La Salle became worried, fearing
something had happened-an accident, an Indian
attack? Taking an Indian guide, he and Father
Anastasius set out for the hunting camp. Joutel
waited on a rise watching the horses and gathering
twigs for a signal fire to guide them back.
Crossing the river, La Salle fired a shot at
several eagles circling overhead, inadvertently warning the conspirators of his approach, and giving
them time to plan their strategy. As La Salle neared
the hunting camp, he saw Jean some distance ahead,
and called out, inquiring for his nephew, Moranget.
To this I' Archeveque replied that he was "along the
river" (Joutel 1962: 102). Simultaneously, Duhaut,
hidden nearby, fired a shot that hit La Salle in the
head, killing him instantly. The conspirators gathered around the body, and Father Anastasius, terrified, was sure he would be the next to die. La
Salle's body was partially stripped and rolled into
the woods with no eulogy but blasphemy. 11 After
reassuring Father Anastasius, the group headed back
across the river for the main camp. 12
After crossing the river, Jean l' Archeveque left
the group to find Joutel. Jean, 15 years old but
probably looking older, had always liked Joutel
and now, possibly shocked at his own part in the
murders and at the plan of the murderers to kill any
who resisted them, he came to Joutel excited and
afraid. He said he had news, that there was bad
luck. Then he told the story of the murders and
warned Joutel of the plot to kill any who resisted.
Jean assured Joutel that he would be all right if he
kept silent (Margry 1886:321).
The only choice of those not in the plot,
including La Salle's brother, the Abbe, his nephew,

Gilmore - Treachery and Tragedy in the Texas Wilderness
young Cavelier, and Father Anastasius, was to keep
silent and try not to irritate those now in charge.
Duhaut, I' Archeveque' s employer and the one who
had shot La Salle, had taken control.
The time came to continue the journey, and on
March 21st camp was broken. With their Indian
companions, the Frenchmen began following the
path to the Cenis. Finally, on the 28th, after crossing flooded rivers and being low on food (no buffalo had been seen), they camped on the Cenis
River, 10 leagues (about 26 miles) from the Cenis
village. Joutel, Liotot, Tessier, and Hiens proceeded
toward the village to barter for corn and horses
with axes and knives.
After a fair amount of supplies had been gathered, they were taken back to the camp by the men,
but Joutel stayed at the village to barter for more.
This left Joutel free to quiz the French sailors,
Groslet and Ruter, who had deserted La Salle the
year before, concerning the whereabouts of the
Mississippi River in case the Indians might have
talked about it.
When the men came to see Joutel, they were
dressed like Indians in breech clouts and turkey
feathers. Ruter was tattooed with lines running
across his forehead and down his nose to the tip of
his chin. Groslet, who did not know of La Salle's
murder, was not tattooed, nor was his hair cut in the
Indian fashion (which left a small lock on the crown
of the head). Some of the Indians also had hair
hanging from their temples (Joutel 1962: 118). Ruter
and Groslet enjoyed the free and easy life of the
Indians and the high status their guns gave them.
Furthermore, there were few restrictions on sexual
activity, and the Cenis women desired the glass
beads and colored ribbons the French men had.
Since the Cenis did know of a great river toward the northeast where there were men like the
Frenchmen, Joutel decided they would go in that
direction to find the Mississippi River, but they
would go without the Duhaut faction. Groslet and
Ruter could go, but they must keep the plans a
secret from the group in the murder plot.
Duhaut and the others had come to the conclusion that the best way out of their dilemma was to
return to Fort St. Louis, their settlement on the
coast, build a boat and head for the islands. But all
the carpenters were dead, no one knew how to
build a boat, and wood was scarce. Joutel, knowing
the project had little chance of success, pleaded
exhaustion for himself, Abbe Cavelier and young
Cavelier, and Father Anastasius, as an excuse to

39

stay behind in the Cenis village. They could later
set out for the Mississippi River by themselves.
Duhaut's group, talking it over among themselves,
agreed to give those staying half the trade goods
and to send word if they were successful in building a boat. If they were not successful, they would
return and continue to search for the Mississippi.
Meanwhile, word got to Duhaut that the Indians had knowledge of European settlements on a
large river toward the northeast, and all his gang
now agreed they should try to get there along with
Cavelier, Father Anastasius, and Joutel.
L' Archeveque, Hiens, and a few others had been
staying at the Cenis village collecting supplies and
enjoying the natives' lifestyle, when word came
that Duhaut had decided to go find the Mississippi
River. Hiens was decidedly against this, thinking
he would lose his head if he went back.
L' Archeveque left the Cenis village immediately to
inform Duhaut, and possibly to warn him of Hiens'
attitude. Even though Duhaut had killed La Salle,
Duhaut had been Jean's protector and employer, as
well as perhaps his kinsmen; no doubt Jean felt
some loyalty to him.
A few days later while Jean was out hunting,
Hiens appeared at Duhaut's camp with the two
French deserters and about 20 Indians. Hiens, confronting Duhaut, was adamant in his decision not to
go to the Mississippi River, and demanded his share
of the goods. Duhaut refused. Hiens quickly drew
his pistol and shot Duhaut. Almost immediately,
Ruter shot Liotot, the surgeon who had performed
the axe murders. The men were buried nearby in a
common grave (Joutel 1962:123).
Hiens waited for l' Archeveque, planning to
kill him when he returned. But Father Anastasius
and Cavelier, with considerable effort, persuaded
him not to do it. Joutel went out to meet Jean when
he returned to tell him about the disastrous happenings and what he should do. Thus, Joutel reciprocated for Jean's similar action for Joutel after La
Salle was killed. They went to Hiens and each
pledged no harm to the other.
Hiens, having promised the Indians to go to
war with them, persuaded Joutel, Cavelier, and Father Anastasius to delay their journey toward the
Mississippi River and wait in the Cenis village until they returned. Those who went to war were
probably Hiens, Groslet, Ruter, de Made, the
Provencal, Meunier, and l' Archeveque:
Victory was easy. The enemy, the
Cannohatinno, met the Cenis with aggressiveness,

40

Texas Archeological Society

but they scattered wildly when they heard the loud
noise of the Frenchmen's guns. Many women trying to escape scampered up the nearest trees and
were killed. About 48 men and women died, and
scalps were taken from each. The women were
brought back to the Cenis village; one who had
been scalped was sent back to her people with a
warning that this kind of war could happen again.
The other Cannohatinno woman was slowly tortured to death by the Cenis women in revenge for
the men they had lost in war (Joutel 1962: 126;
Margry 1886:374).
The victory celebration lasted three days, and
the Frenchmen, whose guns were responsible for
the victory, participated in the ceremonies. Each
warrior, carrying a bow and two arrows, with his
wife in front of him holding the scalp he had taken,
proceeded to the house where the ceremony took
place. The warrior took the scalp from his wife and
presented it to the master of ceremonies, who, holding the scalp with two hands, pointed to each of the
cardinal directions while he uttered incantations.
After all the warriors had presented scalps, the master of ceremonies delivered a speech. Food was then
served, but before it was eaten, a bowl of food was
presented to each of the scalps, and then tobacco
was blown over each. After eating and then smoking, the Indians began the dancing and singing.
With the war and the victory ceremonies over,
preparations to move on were again in the forefront
of the minds of the Frenchmen. Tessier and
l' Archeveque decided to go along with Joutel and
his group to France via Canada if Abbe Cavelier
would give them a pardon for their part in the
murder of La Salle. The Abbe agreed. Meunier
then decided to join the group. Hiens, though, still
felt that if he returned to France he would have his
head chopped off.
Time came for departure. Seven travelersJoutel, Cavelier, young Cavelier, Father Anastasius,
de Marle, Tessier, and Bartholomew-waited for
l' Archeveque and Meunier to join them, but they
waited in vain. Jou tel (1962: 129) thought they
wanted to stay with the Indians because of, as Joutel
viewed it, the lack of restraint in the Indians'
lifestyle, but later both insisted (perhaps truthfully,
perhaps not) they were sick and could not leave
(O'Donnell 1936; Meunier 1690).
The group left the Cenis near the end of May
1687. Word came to the village that one of the
party had drowned and the others had been killed
(l' Archeveque in O'Donnell 1936:24; see also

Gilmore 1991). It was true that de Marle drowned
near the Cadohadacho village on the Red River, but
the others survived. Joutel, Cavelier, and Father
Anastasius arrived at Rochelle, France in October
1688 (Joutel 1962: 170). L' Archeveque remained in
the village with Meunier, Hiens, Pierre Talon,
Groslet, Ruter, and the Provencal. Hiens was later
killed, according to l' Archeveque, possibly by
Ruter. Or both may have been killed by the Indians
(l' Archeveque in O'Donnell 1936:24; Weddle
1973:28). The Provencal disappears from the record.
But life went on in the Indian village for those
who stayed behind. The natives were kind and gentle
and took care of the Frenchmen. No doubt the
Frenchmen had their favorite ladies, who along with
others were able to persuade the reluctant Groslet,
l' Archeveque, Meunier, and Pierre Talon to endure
the painful process of being tattooed on the face,
hands, and chest with lines and flowers, thus showing their appreciation to their hosts (Weddle
1973: 172). Perhaps they were not aware that these
designs were permanent and could not be removed.
Through the yearly visits of the Cibolo and
Jumano nations to the Cenis, the Frenchmen learned
there were Spaniards some distance away. Usually
these nations, hunters and traders, made their spring
trip before the heavy spring rains came, just before
the buds on the trees opened (Kelley 1952:277).
This was probably about the middle of February on
the Rio Grande near present-day Presidio, Texas,
where the Jumano usually wintered (Kelley
1952:278). But this year, 1689, the traders brought
tragic news to the Frenchmen: the settlement of
Fort St. Louis on the Gulf had been attacked.'3
L' Archeveque, Groslet, and Meunier persuaded the
Cenis to take them to the settlement, but Meunier
became sick and stayed with Pierre Talon (Meunier,
Declaration 1690).
When they came to the road leading to the
settlement, Jean and Groslet wanted to go into it
alone, but their Indian friends insisted that they go
with them. As they approached nearer, a stench
must have arisen from the direction of the settlement, and Jean and Groslet were, no doubt, dreading what they might see. Even in their imagination
they were not prepared for the grisly scene they
beheld. Their former home was in total destruction.
The supply room was wrecked. Guns, boxes, cases,
wine barrels, pistols, and arquebuses (guns) were
broken and strewn everywhere. Books had been
torn apart. Doors had been yanked from the six
houses, and the meager furniture demolished. But

Gilmore - Treachery and Tragedy in the Texas Wilderness
worst of all, everyone was dead-killed, murdered,
their bodies lying where they had died. The attackers in their fury had laid waste to everything, even
killing the livestock. It was a scene of death; the
only life was in a few pigs, scrounging for food,
Angry, sad, and fearful for their own lives,
they buried the 14 bodies of their friends, including
two priests, and set fire to about 150 barrels of
powder so the Indians could not use it (Groslet in
O'Donnell 1936:20). L' Archeveque, now 16, in outrage and hatred mixed with fear, determined to
leave life among the "savages" even if it meant
working in the Mexican mines or being in prison.
There was no choice now but to return with
the Cenis. Back at their village, Jean told Meunier
about the horrible destruction and ghastly scene.
Miguel, a Cibolo Indian visiting at the village, offered to take the Frenchmen to the Spaniards. They
agreed, but after three days of rough travel through
lands of hostile Indians, the Frenchmen became
increasingly apprehensive and turned back to the
Cenis village. Talon and Meunier may not have

41

been on this trip, but at some time their fear of the
Spaniards must have become greater than their fear
of the Indians. The next year when the Spaniard,
General Alonso de Leon, returned to the Tejas looking for them, Meunier and Talon left the Tejas
village to escape the Spaniards, but inadvertently
went towards them and were captured (Weddle
1987:240).
Now what could they do to get out of this
country? Were they doomed to a life thinking each
minute they would be stalked by the destroyers of
Fort St. Louis who had vowed to kill all intruders?
Since it was dangerous to go to the Spaniards, they
would send a note to the Spaniards to come for
them. In the papers they had saved was the drawing
of a ship on a piece of parchment that would have a
good chance of surviving rough treatment. Jean
wrote his plea with a piece of red ochre on the right
side of the drawing. Gros let, not being able to write,
dictated his message for Jean to write on the left
side of the drawing (Figure 2; Hackett 1923-1926,
Vol. II:471).

Figure 2. Drawing of a ship with full sails and damaged masts, possibly the Belle, and messages on parchment sent to
De Leon by I' Archeveque. Reproduced with the permission of the Barker Texas History Center, The University of
Texas at Austin.

42

Texas Archeological Society
The translation of what Jean wrote:
Sir:
I do not know what sort of people you
are. We are French. We are among the
savages. We would like very much to be
among Christians such as we are. We
know well that you are Spaniards. We do
not know whether you will attack us ... we
are sorely grieved to be among the beasts
like these who believe neither in God nor
in anything. Gentlemen, if you are willing to take us away, you have only to
send a message, as we have but little or
nothing to do. As soon as we see the note
we will deliver ourselves up to you.
Sir, I am your very humble and obedient
servant.
Jean Larcheveque
of Bayonne
We have given this to [illegible] to take
to you we are young men who are not
[illegible] we [illegible] you [illegible]
are [illegible illegible] I am your servant
Gros let

They tore a few pages from the log book of the
Belle that someone had brought on this last expedition of La Salle. These they wrapped with the parchment containing their messages and other papers in
a necklace. Some of their native friends set out to
overtake the Indians (probably the Cibolo and
Jumanos) on their way to the Spanish settlements
to give them the messages. By March 3, 1689,
these papers were in the hands of the Spanish General Juan Fernandez de Retana, who was told at the
same time of the destruction of the French village.
Unfortunately, none of the Spaniards with Retana
could read French, so answers to the letters were
not made. The messages were sent with a letter to
Governor Juan Isidro de Pardinas at Parral, then on
to Mexico City, thence to Spain, where they lay
unread and forgotten for 200 years (see Hackett
[ 1923-1926] and Dunn [ 1917] for the story of
Dunn's rediscovery of these papers in the Seville
Archives).
While the young Frenchmen were anxiously
awaiting an answer to their letters, an expedition
sent to find the French colony was nearing success.
From the first news of the French plans to establish
a colony on the Gulf coast, the Spaniards had been
hunting for such a place without success. Five sea

expeditions and four land expeditions had to report
"no luck" (Weddle 1973:160). When the Indians
told General Retana of the destruction of the village,
the Governor canceled plans to continue to look for
it. But Alonso de Leon, not aware of the destruction,
was already on the way with a force of about 100
soldiers, using as guide Yan Jarri (Jean Gery), whom
de Leon had captured the year before.
Gery, who had set himself up as the leader of
an Indian group, said he was French, but he insisted
that he was not one of La Salle's colonists. Gery
was ambiguous in his statements-one time saying
he knew where the French colony was, and again
saying that he did not. Father Massanet, chaplain of
the expedition, called him demented.
When the expedition came to the Guadalupe
River (probably near present-day Victoria) on April
14, 1689, Gery said they were near the French
settlement. Not knowing what he would find there,
de Leon left the main force at the river and took 60
well-equipped soldiers on the search. They had not
gone far when they encountered an Indian who said
there were four Frenchmen in his village. At his
village, however, the Spaniards found that the
Frenchmen had left four days before. De Leon
chased the Frenchmen, who were on horseback, for
some distance, always several days behind. 14
At one village, using the French guide as interpreter, the Spaniards found that the Frenchmen, as
usual, had gone to the Tejas four days before. In
this village, they were shocked to learn that "the
rest who had settled on the sea" had died at the
hands of the coastal Indians three months before
(Bolton 1963:395).
De Leon, anxious to find the French settlement, sent a letter to the Frenchmen, and proceeded
on to St. Louis, where finally on April 22nd, the
Spaniards viewed the destruction of the long soughtafter colony (Bolton 1963:398). The letter to the
Frenchmen, written in French by Francisco
Martinez, said, according to de Leon (Bolton
1963:396), that they had been informed of their
escape when some Christians on the coast had been
killed by the Indians, and that they could come with
the Spaniards, who would wait three or four days
for them in the village from where they set out.
Father Massanet added a few lines in Latin in case
one of the Frenchmen might be a "religious." Paper
for a reply was sent with the message.
Already at the Tejas village, 1' Archeveque received the message, probably with much excitement.15 At last he could return to his own kind. But

Gilmore - Treachery and Tragedy in the Texas Wilderness
since the other Frenchmen were not there, they
would not know they could be rescued. He sent
them a message, and told them he would ask the
Spaniards to wait a little longer for them. He found
a piece of red ochre, and wrote on the paper sent by
the Spaniards:
.. .I have received your letter informing
us that you are near to where we are. We
pray that you may have the kindness to
wait for us two days more, since we are
separated from each other... As soon as
[the others] have come, we shall not
spurn your aid. Your coming does honor
to the Christian European. We shall not
be kept from reuniting ourselves with
Christians. It is such a long time that we
have been among barbarians, who are
not even social people. I am satisfied,
lord, with everything expressed in your
letter. I will not permit separating [ourselves] to go and look for the others,
lord. Gentlemen, I am your most humble
and obedient servant.
l' Archeveque of Bayonne
(translation by Weddle 1973:193)

L' Archeveque and Groslet, with the Tejas chief
and eight of his people as guides, proceeded to the
meeting place with the Spaniards, but stopped along
the way at a village of the Toaa Indians (Bolton
1963:363), probably near the Colorado River, where
they were waiting for the other Frenchmen to join
them. De Leon received the letter after he had been
to St. Louis, and anxious to know what had happened with the French colony, he went to the Toaa
village instead of waiting for them at the appointed
village. Without the other Frenchmen, they set out
for de Leon's main camp on the Guadalupe River,
arriving there May 1, 1689 (Bolton 1963:402). Jean
was perhaps disappointed to leave without his companions, yet he was determined to leave the country
with or without them.
Two years had passed since La Salle's murder,
two years of the Frenchmen living as a small
minority among people who did not speak their
language, probably in a constant state of culture
shock. Their only clothes were like the Indiansantelope and buffalo skins-their French clothes
long since worn out. Tattoos were on their faces,
breasts, and arms.
L' Archeveque and Groslet knew they would
be subject to questions about themselves, La Salle,

43

and his enterprise. They knew they would have to
tell of La Salle's murder. Together, they decided to
tell the Spaniards that Hiens had fatally shot La
Salle, and that Hiens had been killed by the Indians.16 Jean probably feared Hiens, especially since
Hiens had wanted to kill him, and, moreover Hiens
was not French but probably English. Furthermore,
Jean might be in deep trouble if it became known
that Duhaut, his friend and possibly his kinsmen,
was the murderer.
They were interrogated separately by de Leon
with Francisco Martinez as interpreter, and each
gave a similar account, though varying in detail, of
their actions (O'Donnell 1936; Canedo 1968).
Somehow they had learned how the coastal Indians
had been able to destroy the French settlement. 17
They related how a few Indians, pretending friendship, went to the remotest house in the settlement.
When the settlers, unarmed, came to see the Indians, they were attacked and killed, while other Indians approached from the creek, attacking the rest
of the village (Bolton 1963:402).
The expedition, with l' Archeveque and Groslet,
arrived in Coahuila on May 13th. The Frenchmen
were sent on to Mexico City with Francisco
Martinez, where they were cross-examined again
on June 10th by two Captains, Andres de Pez and
Juan Enriquez Barroto. This time Jean gave the
primary deposition, and Groslet was asked only if
he agreed. Jean intimates in this deposition that
they did not know previously of the destruction of
the village when they saw it (l' Archeveque in
O'Donnell 1936:25). At another time, he says they
went to St. Louis to help the settlers. This action,
true or not, certainly would make a good impression, since it seems that they had made no attempt
to go back to the settlement in two years.
That summer the two captive Frenchmen were
sent to Spain with Captain Pez, no doubt creating a
sensation there with their story of French aggression
and failure. The Spaniards feared that the two
Frenchmen, especially I' Archeveque, being the
better educated and perhaps more intelligent and
perceptive, could benefit France with their
knowledge of New Spain. Thus, they were finally
sent back across the Atlantic, in exile, beyond the
reach of the French government. L' Archeveque,
Groslet, and Meunier, who had been taken by the
Spaniards in 1690, reached Santa Fe, New Mexico,
on June 22, 1694 with settlers mainly from Mexico
City (Espinosa 1977: 189, fn. 31 ). On a muster roll
of the colonists made November 16, 1693, near

44

Texas Archeological Society

Zacatecas, the three Frenchmen were listed as Pedro
Munier, Santiago Grola, and Juan Arechibeca. They
were described as "forzados ... rayados en la cara''
(enemy prisoners ... streaked or tattooed on the face)
(Twitchell 1914).
So ends the story of Jean l' Archeveque (later
known as Juan Archibeque) in Texas. It is a story
of a well-educated, intelligent young man, always
mindful of his own welfare, experiencing deprivation, treachery, and tragedy, and perhaps romance,
but who could not tolerate a culture radically different from his own.

EPILOGUE

the lonesome widow, and they formed an attachment during the difficult journey to Santa Fe.
Archibeque and Antonia had two children,
Miguel and Maria. During the time he was married
to Antonia, he had a "natural" (illegitimate) son,
Augustin, whom he raised in his household "as a
son." Antonia died between 1700 and 1701
(Bandelier 1962). About 1719, Archibeque had a
son, Juan, by an "orphan maid," Maria de
Mascarena. Both were members of the household.
Archibeque became a successful trader and
merchant aided by his sons. He did not marry again
until 1719. His bride, Dona Maria Roybal, was the
daughter of a prominent Santa Fe family.
At 47 years of age, Jean 1' Archeveque had led
an eventful and colorful life, and his death followed
the pattern of his life. The year after his second
marriage, Archibeque was asked by the Governor to
accompany an expedition eastward onto the plains
where it was believed the Pawnee Indians, abetted
by French merchants, were gathering to attack the
Spanish colony. Juan was to act as an interpreter.
This was not to be.

L' Archeveque, who became Juan Archibeque
(variously spelled) and Pierre Meunier, who became Pedro Muesnier (variously spelled) were attached to the presidio of the Villa of Santa Fe as
soldiers. Jaques Groslet became Santiago Groslet
(variously spelled). Groslet married Elaine Gallegos
in 1697 and settled in Bernalillo (State Records
Center and Archives, Vol. 5, Document 8, 1699).
In 1699, Pedro Muesnier married Lucia Madrid, age 14, of San
Antonio de Senecu in El Paso (State
Records Center and Archives, Vol.
5, Document 12, 1699). Further information on his life is lacking, but
descendants of Archebeque and
Groslet are living in the Santa FeAlbuquerque area today.
Archibeque married Antonia
Gutierrez, widow of Tomas Uta, in
1697 (State Records Center and Archives, Vol. 5, Document 9, 1699).
Antonia and Uta had joined the caravan, probably in Mexico City, of settlers headed for New Mexico. This
expedition of settlers was in the
charge of Father Farfan, and included
the three Frenchmen. On the way,
not far from Zacatecas, Tomas was
killed in a fight with a mulatto.
Antonia, a "tall, broad faced, brownFigure 3. A part of the painting (Segesser II) depicting the attack on the
haired, brown-eyed" young woman
Villasur Expedition in 1720. Villasur, with his head raised by a pillow, is
of 16 (Twitchell 1914), despite belying dead near his tent. To the right, a portrait of a man facing toward the
ing a widow, continued on to Santa
right may be that of I' Archeveque. Reproduced with the permission of the
Fe. Perhaps l' Archeveque befriended
Museum of New Mexico, Santa Fe.

Gilmore - Treachery and Tragedy in the Texas Wilderness
In a surprise attack, the Indians routed the expeditionary force, killing all but a few. Jean
1' Archeveque, for all his wily ways, did not escape,
nor did the commander of the force, Villasur. The
colorful Frenchman was colorful still, even in death.
This rout of the Spanish forces is depicted on a
painting on hide (see Holtz 1991), now owned by
the Museum of New Mexico, Santa Fe, and known
as Segesser II. It is believed that it was painted by a
witness of the battle, but some years after it took
place. The painting is a series of portraits of those
present. There is a difference of opinion concerning which portrait might be l' Archeveque. I favor a
person shown near and to the right of the wounded
commander (Figure 3). This person is wearing a
large hat, and seems to have rather heavy features
with a somewhat large nose. There is no hair visible, and no tattoos.

NOTES
1. Jean was informally baptized (ondoye) on October 5,
1672 when he was six days old. He was formally baptized,
obviously in absentia, May 4, 1687. His mother died in 1716.
2. Jean left only two documents of his adventures in
Texas as far as is known, namely his declarations to the
Spanish authorities found in O'Donnell ( 1936) and Canedo
( 1968). His story is patched with experiences of his companions,
with the assumption he had shared them, with a heavy reliance
on Henri Joutel's journal (1962). His journal is also found in
a less abridged addition in Pierre Margry ( 1886). Jou tel is the
most reliable of the chroniclers of La Salle's last expedition.
3. In his declaration to De Leon in 1689, I' Archeveque
said he came with "primo hijo" [cousin?] in four ships in the
charge of La Salle (O'Donnell 1936:16). Joutel (Margry
1886:323) notes that Duhaut had taken Jean at Petit Goave,
where he was enlisted. In a pre-nuptial affidavit for Pedro
(Pierre) Meunier (1699), l'Archeveque implies that he and
Meunier left France together in 1684. Nowhere does Jean say
he left La Rochelle with La Salle, but nowhere does he say he
joined the expedition at Petit Goave. Conceivably, the Duhaut
brothers andJean took earlier passage to Petit Goave, and Jean
was reluctant to acknowledge his relationship with Duhaut.
4. This was Cabello Pass, the entrance to Matagorda Bay.
5. The settlement was five miles up Garcitas Creek; the
creek flows into Lavaca Bay, an extension of Matagorda Bay
(see Gilmore 1973, 1986).
6. In the summer of 1995, the Texas Historical
Commission found the wreckage of the Belle on the north
shore of Matagorda Peninsula (see Arnold 1996 for a
preliminary report of the findings).
7. These cannons were discovered in 1996 by a ranch
hand, and were recovered by a team from the Texas Historical
Commission in September 1996 (Tunnell 1997).

45

8. These Indians, also known as the Tejas and the Hasinai
by the Spaniards, lived in East Texas west of and near
Nacogdoches, and were Caddo peoples (Swanton 1942).
9. Margry (1886:320) includes Monnier (a different
spelling of Meunier) as being sent with Moranget and de
Marie, indicating that Meunier probably witnessed the action
that follows.
10. Joutel' s ( 1962: 100) account of what happened next
may have been told to him by l' Archeveque.
11. There is controversy about where the murder took
place. It was probably on a southern branch of the Trinity
River.
12. This account of La Salle's death was told to Joutel
(1962: 108) by Father Anastasius.
13. This sequence of events is conjectural, but, I believe,
reasonable. I could not determine with certainty whether the
Jumanos told of the attack, or if the Frenchmen discovered it.
14. It is not clear who these four Frenchmen were, or
whether they were fleeing before the Spaniards. Probably
neither I' Archeveque nor Groslet were among the four since
they would have been at St. Louis and returned to the Cenis or
Tejas before March 3 when Retana received the message Jean
had written on the parchment.
15. Weddle (1973:192) and Picardo (in Hackett 19311934, Vol. II: 184) have a different version of this episode.
16. It is unclear whether Hiens was still alive at this date,
but he probably was not. It was probably Jean's idea to credit
Hiens with La Salle's murder, especially since Gros let was not
a witness to the event.
17. The settlement was destroyed on Christmas Eve,
1688, according to Jean Baptiste Talon, an eyewitness (Weddle
1987:216).

REFERENCES CITED
Arnold, J.B.
1996 The Texas Historical Commission's Underwater
Archaeological Survey of 1995 and the Preliminary
Report on the Belle, La Salle's Shipwreck of 1686.
Historical Archaeology 30(4 ):66-87.
Bandelier, A.
1962(1893) The Gilded Man. D. Appleton and Company,
New York.
Bolton, H. E. (editor)
1963(1908) Spanish Exploration in the Southwest, 15421706. Barnes and Noble, New York.
Canedo, L. G. (editor)
1968 Primeras Exploraciones y Poblamiento de Texas
(1686-1694). Instituto Tecnologico y de estudios
superiores de Monterrey, Monterrey.

46

Texas Archeological Society

Dunn, W. E.
1917 Spanish and French Rivalry in the Gulf Region of
the United States, 1678-1702: The Beginnings of
Texas and Pensacola. Bulletin No. 1705, Studies in
History No. I. University of Texas at Austin.
Espinosa, J.M.
1977 Crusaders of the Rio Grande. Documentary Publications, Salisbury, North Carolina.
Gilmore, K.
1973 The Keeran Site, The Probable Site of LaSalle 's
Fort St. Louis in Texas. Report No. 24. Office of the
State Archeologist, Texas Historical Commission,
Austin.
1986

La Salle's Fort St. Louis in Texas. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 55:61-72.

1991

An Archeological Footnote to History. Bulletin
the Texas Archeological Society 60:303-324.

<~f

Hackett, C. W. (editor)
1923-1926 Historical Documents Relating to New Mexico,
Nueva Vizcaya, and Approaches Thereto, to 1773.
Vols I and II. Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Washington, D.C.
1931-1934 Pichardo' s Treatise on the Limits of Louisiana
and Texas. Translated by C. W. Hackett, C. C.
Shelby, and M. R. Splawn. 4 Vols. University of
Texas Press, Austin.
Holtz,G.
1991 The Segesser Hide Paintings: Maste1pieces Depicting Spanish Colonial New Mexico. Translated by J.
Malthaner. Museum of New Mexico Press, Santa
Fe.
Joutel, H.
1962 Joutel's Journal of La Salle's Last Voyage, 1684-7.
Corinth Books, New York.
Kelley, J. C.
1952 The Historic Indian Pueblos of La Junta de los Rios.
New Mexico Historical Review 27(4):257-295.

Parkman, F.
1963(1907) La Salle and the Discovery of the Great West.
New American Library of World Literature, New
York.
Swanton, J. R.
1942 Source Material on the History and Ethnology of
the Caddo Indians. Bulletin No. 132. Bureau of
American Ethnology, Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, D.C.
Tunnell, C.
1997 The Cannons of Fort Saint Louis. CRM News &
Views 9(2):5-7. Division of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.
Twitchell, R. E.
1914 The Spanish Archives of New Mexico, Vol. 2. The
Torch Press, Cedar Rapids, Iowa.
Weddle, R. S.
1972 La Salle's Survivors. Southwestern Historical Quarterly 75(4):414-433.
1973

Wilderness Manhunt, The Spanish Search for La
Salle. University of Texas Press, Austin.

Weddle, R. S. (editor)
1987 La Salle, the Mississippi, and the Gulf: Three Primary Documents. Texas A&M University Press,
College Station.

ARCHIVAL MATERIAL
1672

Records of Bibliotheque Municipal, Bayonne,
France.

1688-1690 Meunier, Pierre. Declaration. Archivo General
de Indias, Audiencia de Mexico (61-6-21). Dunn
Transcripts, Barker Texas History Center, University of Texas at Austin.
1697

Informaciones de Juan de Archebec y Anth".
Gutierrez. Hemenway Collection, Vol. 5, Document
9. State Records Center and Archives, Santa Fe.

1699

Informaciones de Santiago Grolle y de Elena
Gallegos. Henenway Collection, Vol. 5, Document
8. State Records Center and Archives, Santa Fe.

Margry, P. (editor)
1886 Decouvertes et etablissements des Francais dans
l'Ouest et dans le Sud de l'Amerique septentrionale,
Vol. 3. Imprimiere de D. Jouaust, Paris.

1699

Pre-Nuptial Investigations, Pedro Meunier. Chancery Office, Archdiocese of Santa Fe. Hemenway
Collection Vol. 5, Document 12. State Records Center and Archives, Santa Fe.

O'Donnell, W. J.
1936 La Salle's Occupation of Texas. Preliminary Studies, Vol. 3, No. 2. Texas Catholic Historical Society, Austin.

1719

Informaciones de Juan Archibeque y de Dona
Manuela de Roybal. Hemenway Collection Vol. 5,
Document 12. Microfilm Reel 2. State Records Center and Archives, Santa Fe.

Krogman, W. M.
1952 Basque. In World Book Encyclopedia, Vol. 2, p.
632. Field Enterprises, Inc., Chicago.

The Washington Square Mound Site: A Middle Caddo
Mound Complex in South Central East Texas
James E. Corbin and John P. Hart 1

ABSTRACT

The Washington Square Mound site (41NA49) is a Middle Caddoan period mound complex located in the
city of Nacogdoches in Nacogdoches County, Texas. The site is located on an interfluve between two streams,
La Nana and Bani ta creeks, in one of the oldest residential districts of the city. There were originally at least three
mounds present at Washington Square, although, based on historic descriptions, there may have been four or
even five mounds present at the time Europeans first entered the area. Today, only the remnant of one is still
visible, as the other two known mounds were destroyed or partially destroyed by 1904 and 1939 construction
activities. Excavations conducted under Texas Antiquities Permit No. 213 by the Stephen F. Austin State
University Archaeological Field School (1979 to 1982) and the Texas Archeological Society Annual Field
School ( 1985) revealed a previously unknown Caddoan complex in the southern Caddo region that dates to ca.
A.D. 1250-1350. The numerous ceramic artifacts recovered from the excavations (including complete vessels
from two mortuaries in the remaining mound) indicate strong ties with the Haley phase, but with a local flair.
These ceramics also suggest that the culture represented at the site contributed significantly to the development
of later Caddoan manifestations in the region.

INTRODUCTION
The Washington Square Mound site is a
Caddoan mound complex dated ca. A.D. 1250-1350
that is located in the city of Nacogdoches in
Nacogdoches County, Texas (Figure 1). The site is
located on an interfluve between two streams, La
Nana and Banita creeks (Figure 2), in one of the
oldest residential districts of the city. The main
portion of the remaining parts of the site is restricted to the east and south portions of the campus
of the Thomas J. Rusk Middle School, originally
built as the Nacogdoches High School in 1939 by
the Works Project Administration (WPA). Archeological testing has shown that some aboriginal artifacts are also present in the yards of the houses
directly adjacent to the school.
The site has suffered tremendous impact from
buildings, roads, and sidewalks, and yet exhibits an
amazing preservation of archeological data in intervening areas. This level of preservation is due
in part to the establishment and maintenance of a
public commons prior to the agricultural impact
that has devastated many other Caddoan sites. The
mounds associated with this site have suffered the
most impact, however. The extant mortuary mound

(and its environs) is owned by two individuals and
the City of Nacogdoches, and intact portions of the
non-public portions of the site may be owned by
as many as five or six parties. The mound could
only be significantly damaged by extensive and
premeditated vandalism. This seems highly unlikely at the present time, particularly given the
public interest and concern with the site. The largest and probably most significant portion of the site
is on public land owned by the Nacogdoches Independent School District. Because it is on public
land, the site is a State Archeological Landmark
(designated in 1984 ). Thus, it would appear that
this portion of the site is offered the greatest protection. Nevertheless, it is this particular public
ownership that continues to impact (through school
facilities and landscaping) this portion of the site
on a yearly basis.

SITE LOCATION AND
DESCRIPTION
The Washington Square site is on an interfluve
between Banita Creek and La Nana Creek, a
northern tributary of the Angelina River (Figure 3).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69 (1998)

48

Texas Archeological Society

NACOGDOCHES
NA49

COUNTY

Figure 1. Location of the Washington Square Mound site (41NA49).

Corbin and Hart The site is surrounded by residential
and commercial buildings. The
majority of the extant portions of
the site (Figure 4) are in the east
and north yards of the T. J. Rusk
Middle School, between the Middle
School and the Old University
Building (1859) and the 1916 High
School (razed in 1984) to the north,
and between the Middle School and
North Mound Street on the east.
Aboriginal artifacts are also present
in the yards of the houses and
businesses bordering Washington
Square. In addition, a classic
Washington Square style incised
vessel (Figure 5) was recovered
from a burial in the Oak Grove
Cemetery (several blocks to the
southeast of the school) during the
excavation for a contemporary
burial (Fain 1957). Therefore, it is
apparent that the site was once
originally much larger in size.
It is believed that originally
there were at least three mounds
present at the Washington Square
site. However, today, only the remnant of one mound is visible. One
mound, south of Washington
Square (see below), was destroyed
in 1937 while the other was partially leveled and buried in 1904.
The visible mound, the ReavelyHouse Mound, is a mortuary mound
located just east of the school property. Excavations in and around the
mound indicate, based on the location of several burial pit outlines
and mound stratigraphy, that the
mound was originally much larger
than it is today.
In addition to the construction
of various buildings, recent disturbance of the site includes historic
pits, water and gas pipe trenches,
sidewalks, and rodent burrows.
Nevertheless, the site has, unlike
many Caddoan sites, never been
plowed, and in the undisturbed portions of the site, preservation is re-

The Washington Square Mound Site

\:

..........
A Early Ceramic sites

e

Archaic sites



Caddo sites

@l Caddo/Early Ceramic sites

49

~. l

,- : .....

-. I ""'
}

'

...(

\

Figure 2. Area Map showing the Topographic Location of the Washington
Square Mound site and other Sites in the Vicinity.

50

Texas Archeological Society

stream drainages. Outcrops of
indurated sandstones generally mark
the upper and lower boundary of the
Weches, forming small local cuestas.
Numerous small springs occur along
the margins of the uplands,
particularly at the contact of the
Weches and the overlying Sparta
Sand. These springs feed a variety
of small tributary branches to the
major perennial creeks.
The interfluve on which the site
is located is a weathered upland remnant primarily composed of the
Weches formation. The interfluve
runs generally north-south, sloping
to the south and the intersection of
the two streams. The site is located
on a rise near the southern end of
Figure 3. Contour Map of the Area around the Washington Square Mound
the interfluve. The topography is
site (from Nacogdoches 7.5' USGS quadrangle).
relatively level; the terrain slopes
slightly to the south to the end of the
interfluve, but slopes fairly steeply to the north,
markably good. This unusual preservation has been
east and west.
greatly facilitated by the placement of fill on top of
The surface of the interfluve is characterized by
the original ground surface as a means of leveling
shallow
colluvial deposits derived from the Sparta
the school yard during and after construction of the
Sand upslope and eolian deposits derived from the
school building in 1939. In the southeastern part of
floodplains of the nearby streams. Remnants of a
the site there is as much as 60 cm of fill on top of
few small to medium pimple mounds occur on the
the original soil. There is generally 5-15 cm of
interfluve. Historical descriptions of the locale suggravelly fill present in the northeastern portion of
gest that, in the past, these features were more nuthe site. Farther west in the northern portions of the
merous on the southern end of the interfluve. Our
site, the fill reaches a depth of 80 cm. The majority
archeological investigations indicates that two of
of the archeological material recovered has come
the
mounds at the site may have been constructed
from 5-20 cm below the original ground surface.
on these geologic features.
Although there has been no midden layer observSprings and marshy areas occur along the marable in many excavation units, such a midden zone
gins of the interfluve and on the interfluve. Oral
is present in some units in Area A at this depth.
history accounts indicate that there was a marshy,
spring-fed pond (now filled in) just to the north of
the
site, and a marshy area to the southwest.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL
Washington Square is located on the
SETTING
Nacogdoches Urban land soil complex, part of the
The geology of Nacogdoches County is
Nacogdoches soil series (Dolezel 1980:34-35). Based
dominated by the Eocene Sparta, W eches, and
on undisturbed buried soil profiles at the site (i.e.,
Queen City formations (Bureau of Economic
under the extant mound), the soil was a Nacogdoches
Geology 1993), with recent alluvium covering the
gravelly fine sandy loam with an A-horizon apbottoms of the stream valleys. The glauconitic
proximately 12.5 cm thick. The B-horizon is apWeches formation generally weathers reddishproximately 1.8 m thick, the initial 45 cm consisting
of a red clay and the remaining 1.35 m of red clay
brown or yellowish-brown and creates the familiar
red deposits characteristic of this portion of East
with some hematite and limestone nodules. The CTexas. The topography of the region is rolling
horizon is a weathered, glauconitic sandstone of the
uplands with relatively shallow, well-developed,
Weches formation (Dolezel 1980:3, 70).

Corbin and Hart - The Washington Square Mound Site

.-

The Nacogdoches area is
located in the Austroriparian
biotic province (Blair 1950), and
is dominated by the post oak and
pine forest typical of the northern
and western portions of this
province in Texas. The dominant
trees include loblolly pine,
yellow pine, red oak, post oak,
and blackjack oak. There are over
47 mammal species present as
well as 41 species of reptiles, 17
anurans, and 18 urodeles. Common local mammals include
deer, rabbits, squirrels, opossums, rats, mice, and bats (Blair
1957:98-99).

~
8

___________ "'"]

....

[

-

PERKINS

~
---------

c

N

f

;

HISTORICAL
BACKGROUND

c
a;

Although the City of
Nacogdoches was established in
1779, there are no known descriptions of the Washington Square
Mound site prior to the 1830s.
The earliest recorded mention of
the site is found in the diary of
Colonel William F. Gray in 18351836. Gray (1909:91) noted
"There are several mounds on the
north side of town." Later, 0. M.
Roberts wrote (Roberts 1898: 146)
that:

51

~

ii)

c

'CJ

c:

0

150ft

::J

0

:ii

Arnold

I

Street
MONK

HARDEMAN

D ~

c

Figure 4. Portion of the 1900 Sanborn Insurance Map of Nacogdoches
showing the location of historic and extant buildings on the site, and mound
locations based on historic descriptions. NU=Nacogdoches University.

During the years from 1842
to 1845, when I attended the
district courts at Nacogdoches, in Eastern Texas, there was discovered an earth
mound of oblong form fifty feet long and
ten feet high, with a large sugar maple
(then dead) that had grown near the
middle of it, and in connection with the
mound were four other lesser mounds,
fifty feet apart, located in the line of a
large circle, so that each of the small
ones could be plainly seen while standing at the large one.

In 1851, Adolphus Sterne (McDonald 1969:218)
wrote in his diary " ... had a beutifull [sic] ceremony

performed on the mound North of the Town, on the
commons."
An interesting description of the site was published in 1880 in a small pamphlet entitled "History
and Description of Nacogdoches County, Texas"
by Richard W. Haltom, the local newspaper editor.
He said (Haltom 1880:58) that:
In front of it [the Nacogdoches University building, which he notes is five hundred yards northeast of the public square]
a hundred yards or more are two mounds,
a few yards apart, the larger one being
near ten feet high, and more than one

52

Texas Archeological Society

0

10cm

Figure 5. Vessel recovered from a burial at the Oak
Grove Cemetery, Nacogdoches, Texas, in 1957.
Excavations at the Washington Square Mound site have
recovered many sherds from vessels having this shape
and general design motif.

hundred feet in diameter at the base.
These mounds were evidently built by
human hands. There is an excavation
from which the dirt was probably obtained, situated about one hundred and
fifty yards east of them. Large trees are
growing in this pit. It is not of much
depth or extent, seeming to have filled up
in the long period of time. There once
was a large sugar maple tree, scrubby in
character, growing on the top of the larger
mound.
When Thomas E. Baker (Karle Wilson Baker
Papers 1887) first came to Nacogdoches in 1887,
he noted that there were several mounds, including
the one (Stephenson's Mound #4) on the Perkins
(later Reavely) property and some on the school
campus. The largest was on the corner lot just southeast of the corner of the campus.

The local historian, Mayfield (n.d.), writing in
ca. 1906-1907, noted that in an area 200 yards
across were four mounds, arranged in no apparent
pattern. The largest mound, at about the date 1850,
was circular, ca. 120 feet in diameter, and was located at the southeast corner of the school campus
crossing of two streets (Mound and Arnold). This
mound he said was 12 feet high, 50 feet in diameter at the top, and had a large sugar maple on top.
Mayfield also noted the small mound across
Mound Street (Stephenson's Mound #4) and that
several borrow pits were still visible. Later, in
1936, he wrote that only the smallest mound was
still visible.
R. G. Upton (Upton 1940:10), a professor of
Biology at Stephen F. Austin State College, delivered a paper at the 1939 Texas Academy of Science meeting in Houston. In that address he
described the mound site, noting that the highest
mound was on the corner of Mound and Arnold
streets, and that it had been mostly leveled by
Mayor Mims in about 1890 (but see Hardeman
interview below). He reported that, in 1937, 4-5
feet of the base of what remained of the mound had
been removed, to prepare for the construction of a
filling station, so that the edges were 2-3 feet above
the street level. Upton noticed only a few bones and
pieces of pottery during the removal of this portion of the mound. Upton also describes another
mound, longer than the one leveled for the filling
station, that had been on the school campus. This
mound, informants had told him, was estimated to
be 50 feet wide, 7 5-100 feet in length, and about
six feet high. The mound had been completely leveled by 1914 and, he was told, this was where the
1939 school was constructed. During the WPA
construction of the 1939 High School, Upton recovered most of a large brushed-punctated vessel
from the excavations at the northeast corner of the
building foundation (Sanders 1939).
In 1979, an interview with Mrs. Gladys
Hardeman, Nacogdoches resident since 1893,
cleared up some of the confusion that had begun to
dominate the remembered history of the mounds.
The Hardeman's owned the westernmost of the two
lots immediately south of the school campus and
south of Arnold Street. The northeast corner of
those lots was the comer of Mound and Arnold
streets. As a young child, Mrs. Hardeman remembered playing on the mound, located partially on
the easternmost lot and on the lot that her family
owned, and finding artifacts around it. The mound

Corbin and Hart - The Washington Square Mound Site
(Stephenson's Mound #3) was very large and had
enough slope that the west side of the barn constructed in their backyard had to be raised considerably to have a level floor. Mrs. Hardeman also
remembered the mound(s) on the school campus.
They were on either side of a drive that extended
north from Church Street to the University building; the largest was on the east side of the drive
(Mrs. Hardeman said she believed that there was
actually only one mound, the drive cutting it into
two). This mound was just below (south of) the Old
University Building and had been destroyed in 1904
by the construction of the Central Public School (at
that time the main high school).
R. L. Stephenson's 1948 archeological survey
notes (Stephenson 1948a:20) describe:
one small mound [Figure 6; the existing
mortuary mound; Stephenson's photo
identifies this as Mound #4] remaining
across Mound street from the High
School [ 1939 WPA High School] ...
another mound was leveled near the high
school to build a filling station [Mound
#3, the Hardeman mound]. .. two large
mounds, each over 15 feet high, were
leveled sometime between 1903 and
1910 for the building of the Nacogdoches
High School [actually the 1904 Central
Public School, but later known as the
High School]. Burials, pottery and many
other relics were found at the time [Perusal of the 1904 Nacogdoches newspapers did not find any reports of artifacts
found during construction].

HISTORICAL
RECONSTRUCTION
From the earliest descriptions in 1837 and
1842, it was noted that there were at least three
mounds (Figure 7) visible on the site. 2 All
descriptions agree that the largest mound (numbered
by Stephenson as Mound #3, the same as the
Hardeman mound), with a large sugar maple tree
on top of it, was the southernmost mound.
Statements vary on the size (ca. 50 feet in diameter;
ca. 100 feet in diameter; ca. 120 feet in diameter;
50 feet in diameter at the top and 12 feet high) and
shape (circular to oval) of the mound. Upton's 1939
description indicates that at that time it was at least
50 feet in diameter and between six and eight feet

53

Figure 6. Stephenson's Mound #4, ca. 1948, North Mound
Street, view to the northeast.
high. Roberts described four smaller mounds, placed
in a circle, that could be seen from this mound. It is
not clear how far these were from the mound, nor
can these four be reconciled with the other mounds
described below.
Another large mound, or mounds, was located
in the central part of the original commons. Although apparently not described by Roberts, this
mound is described by many others and is clearly
not the mound described by Roberts. This mound
(labeled by Stephenson as Mounds #1 and #2) may
have actually been one mound, and lay in front of
the Old Nacogdoches University, which was constructed in 1859. Upton's informants (who apparently were describing the site from ca. 1880)
describe a single mound 50 feet wide, 7 5-100 feet
in length, and six feet high. Stephenson's informants said it was over 15 feet high, although this is
unlikely. Surely Roberts would have noticed two
mounds this high less than 100 m from the mound
he described. In 1857, Sterne describes a ceremony
on the mound on the commons. Historic photographs from the 1890s show a mound (or mound
remnant?) that fits Upton's description sitting just
in front of the Old University Building (Figure 8).
A third mound (labeled by Stephenson as
Mound #4, also known as the Reavely-House
mound), the only remaining visible mound, was
always noted as the smallest of the Washington
Square mounds. The earliest mention of this mound
is by Baker in 1887, who commented that it was
" ... the one now standing on the old Charles Perkins
place ... " Stephenson photographed this mound in
1948.
One obvious borrow pit was visible on the site
at one time. Haltom (1880:58) describes a large,
tree-filled borrow pit about 150 yards east of the

Texas Archeological Society

54

HUGHES

ST.

D

,,
:;:u

1'11

D

0

0
2

-)>
00

......

~

0

c

EJ

ma

11

'1 .a

'illll &t

ll.

.,

19

Ill

0



00

.

OU

......

.
I

II
Ill

- -- -...,
1904
1....r-~
-4 I B

..

,.'"

Iii

I

~

ill!

D
D

D

1939

I
1111
Ill

I

D

llllll

Ill

ARNOLD

z



-

D

!.~I

D

ST.

I [EJ

mog

Figure 7. Composite Sanborn Insurance Map showing historic buildings, mound locations, and archeological excavations.
OU=Nacogdoches University; H=Hardeman residence; R=Reavely residence.

Corbin and Hart- The Washington Square Mound Site

55

SITE IMPACT

a

b

Figure 8. Nacogdoches University: a, ca. 1887, looking
northeast. Note edge of mound at right edge of photo; b,
before 1904; people and tree are on the mound.

southern mound. This would place the pit near or at
the edge of the interfluve, a situation similar to the
borrow pit(s) at the George C. Davis site on the
Neches River (Story 1997; Story and Valastro
1977:64-65).
In summary, historic documents and oral
histories describe three mounds at Washington
Square. The southernmost and largest mound was
probably a structural mound. This mound was
destroyed in 1937. Another large mound, also
probably a structural mound, was located near the
center of the commons (Washington Square) and
was mostly destroyed in 1904. Archeological
research indicates (see below) that some of the
lowest portions of this mound are intact, but buried
beneath construction fill. A third mound, the
northeasternmost, was always described as the
smallest mound. Archeological excavations indicate
that this mound is a mortuary mound that may have
been much larger than it is now.

The Washington Square Mound site was initially protected, if only fortuitously, in 1855, when
most of the known site was deeded as a public tract
for a school (Blount n.d.:22). This tract later became a public commons known as Washington
Square. As the commons developed, impact to the
site began. The earliest construction impact came
about 1859 with the construction of the
Nacogdoches University building (Blount n.d.:23).
This brick building was constructed just to the north
of the north westernmost mound (Stephenson's
Mounds #1 and #2). In 1860, a wooden dormitory
building was built to the east of the University
building; a cistern was built between the two buildings. In 1904, this mound was leveled off (as noted
below, archeological excavations showed that the
mound was not completely leveled to the original
ground surface), a thick clay pad was laid down,
and the 1904 Central Public School (Figure 9) was
built over it. 3 Although Stephenson's informants
(?) indicated that "burials, pottery, and other relics
were found," the local newspaper did not describe
leveling the mound or note that archeological remains had been found. The 1904 building was razed
in the 1950s with little further damage occurring to
the mound. Contrary to public history, it appears
that the construction of the 1939 WP A High School
had little if any impact on this mound. Today, the
location suffers from some erosion, but is essentially stabilized.
Sometime after about 1887, the southernmost
mound began to be impacted. This began as
leveling by the owner of the easternmost lot, Carl
Monk, Sr. (Hardeman 1979), and removed an
unknown volume of the original mound. Of that,
Baker notes that only a few pieces of pottery were
found. Interestingly, an early accession (Cooper
1930) by the Stone Fort Museum is a complete
cranium and femur that was donated in May 1930
by a Captain Cooper. The accession cards note that
the skeletal material 4 came from the " .. .Indian
mound south of the High School Campus. Mound
said to be about fifteen feet high. Was leveled off
to improve campus."
In 1937, this mound, 5 according to Upton, was
still six to eight feet high. In that year approximately
four to five feet of fill was removed, leaving a low
platform ca. two to three feet above street level.
Upton's report states that only a few bones and
pottery sherds were recovered in 1937. A filling

56

Texas Archeological Society

a

Figure 9. Central Public School: a, picture postcard,
looking north; archeological excavations and Fl 0 I were
near the east entrance; b, photograph, date unknown,
showing the 1904 Central Public School in front of the
Nacogdoches University building.

(still standing) and during the later Reavely
occupation. Construction of the historic driveway
(visible in Stephenson's 1948 photo) cut away a
small portion of the mound. Archeological
excavations documented a gas line that had cut
through the mound, disturbing and removing
portions of a ceramic vessel from a mortuary in the
mound. A large oak tree grew on top of the mound
for at least 40 years (the tree appears in Stephenson's
1948 photo; the tree is quite large at that time) and
was removed (after dying) in 1977. Recent (1995)
lowering of the driveway across the northern edge
of the mound was monitored by SFASU
archeologists. No artifacts were found, but the
corner of an apparent burial pit was noted and
mapped. Today the mound, owned by the City of
Nacogdoches and two private landowners, is stable
and protected.
Impacts to the non-mound portions of the site
began fairly early. Adolphus Sterne (Sterne 1923)
told his son that the Mexican soldiers (only those
that were Masons) killed in the Battle of
Nacogdoches in 1828 were buried near the mound
on the commons (some oral traditions note that
when the basement of the 1916 High School was
constructed, a large number of bodies were uncovered and the remains dumped in the creek). Most of
the impact has been primarily through recent construction activities and erosion, principally with the
construction of the 1916 High School (Figure 11).
Footings for the building and a large central basement obviously had considerable subsurface impact. The fill removed by this construction was

station was constructed on the mound remnants. At
the time of our first excavations at Washington
Square, the filling station was still standing,
although the surrounding terrain was at street
level (Figure 10). In 1996, the filling station
was razed and its large underground storage
tank was removed. No artifacts were noted by
the senior author during the destruction. Today, the area has been re-landscaped and is
occupied by a florist shop.
The small mound (Stephenson's Mound
#4) to the east of the school campus across
Mound Street has also been impacted,
apparently through reduction of its original
size by landscaping. There are no recorded
instances of landscaping or other impacts,
but the archeological excavations indicate a
reduction in height and possibly a Figure 10. East yard of the T. J. Rusk Middle School, looking
considerable reduction in diameter of the south, showing excavations in Area B. The 1937 filling station
mound. This may be a result of the (location of Mound #3 or Hardeman Mound) is marked by the
construction of the original Perkins house arrow.

Corbin and Hart- The Washington Square Mound Site

Figure 11. 1916 High School Building, looking north.
Area A is in the right middle ground, while 1985 Texas
Archeological Society excavations and Fl34 and Fl38
are in the area north and east of the sidewalks

placed to the north of the building to create more
level space. Portions of this fill were excavated in
1982 and 1984 (Corbin et al. 1984); numerous artifacts, including very large pottery sherds, were recovered. During demolition of the building in 1984,
heavy rains softened the ground considerably and
heavy trucks churned and destroyed some
unexcavated areas south of the building.
The construction of the 1939 WPA High
School may have protected more of the site than it
destroyed (Figure 12). Construction of the footings
was apparently accomplished by manual excavation,
and only the footings were excavated. Thus, there
are intact portions of the site between the footings.
Upton collected most of a large brushed-punctated
vessel (Figure 13) that was uncovered while
excavating the footing at the northeast corner of the

building (Sanders 1939). In addition, archeological
excavations indicate that leveling of the terrain was
accomplished by bringing in fill from off site rather
than by cutting and filling on the site. Therefore,
large areas of the southeast portion of the school
property is still protected by up to 60 cm of fill.
Since 1939, extensive building construction has
occurred across the entire northern half of the original commons as the school property was developed. The extent of impacts to the archeological
remains is not known at this time. Portions of the
area north of the 1916 High School were known
locally as a prime area to collect artifacts; most of
this area is now believed to be disturbed to below
the level of the known archeological deposits. Construction of buildings in the northwest quadrant has
also left few if any intact archeological deposits.
The construction of a sports playing field in the
southwest quadrant completely obliterated any archeological remains in that vicinity. And yet there

0

Figure 12. View of the Thomas J. Rusk Middle School
(1939 WPA Nacogdoches High School), looking
southwest. The place where the Caddo vessel found by
Upton in 1939 is marked by the "X" on the photograph.

57

10 cm

Figure 13. Brushed-punctated vessel (possibly parts of
two or three vessels) recovered by Upton in 1939. Sherds
recovered in our excavations indicate that this vessel
form and decoration was very common.

58

Texas Archeological Society

are, in the southeast quadrant of the school property
(i.e., Washington Square), archeological remains
that are virtually intact and much like they were
prior to European settlement.

ARCHEOLOGICAL
BACKGROUND
Archeological investigations at the Washington
Square Mound site comprise part of ongoing
investigations in Nacogdoches County and adjacent
areas. These investigations help to provide a context for our Washington Square investigations. The
earliest archeological work done in the area were
surveys conducted in 1939-1940 by Gus Arnold as
part of a larger survey of East Texas (Arnold 1939,
1940). This was followed by survey work in 1948
by Robert L. Stephenson (Stephenson l 948a,
l 948b) as a preliminary step to the archeological
excavation of sites within the proposed McGee
Bend (Lake Sam Rayburn) reservoir. Archeological research, survey, and excavations in the Lake
Rayburn area were conducted in the 1950s and
early 1960s by Edward B. Jelks and others. Numerous sites were recorded; and 13 were excavated and
reported (Jelks 1965).
More recent work has been carried out in the
vicinity of present Lake Nacogdoches. Prior to the
construction of the lake, the Nacogdoches Archaeological Society had conducted an archeological survey of Bayou Loco, Bayou Moral, and Bayou
Alazan, recording numerous Caddoan and Archaic
period sites. Subsequently, the Texas Archeological Survey (Prewitt et al. 1972) recorded more sites.
Large-scale excavations at the DeShazo site
(41NA27), now under Lake Nacogdoches, were carried out by the University of Texas Archeological
Field School during the summers of 1975 and 1976
(Story 1982, 1995). Research at this significant early
historic Caddo site and the nearby Mayhew site
(41 N A2 l) has significant! y enhanced our archeological know ledge (Kenmotsu 1992) of the Late
Caddoan occupation of the region.
In I 976, the Stephen F. Austin (SFA) Archaeological Field School excavated a small Late Archaic to Late Caddoan site, 41NA44 (Corbin et al.
1978), on Legg Creek, west of Bayou Loco and
Lake Nacogdoches. An archeological survey of the
proposed Angelina-Nacogdoches Regional Airport
recorded eight Late Archaic sites along Bayou
Moral (Corbin I 978).

From l 979 through l 982, the SFA Field School
conducted large-scale excavations at the Washington Square Mound site (41NA49). In 1984, the
Laboratory of Anthropology conducted excavations
there prior to removal of the 1916 High School
building. The Texas Archeological Society Annual
Field School, under the direction of the senior author, excavated portions of the site in June 1985.
The excavations from 1979 to 1985 are the subject
of the current paper.
In addition, the SFA Field School has conducted archeological investigations at several other
sites on the same interfluve occupied by the Washington Square site. Site 41NA144 (Corbin and
Kisling 1983 ), to the south of Washington Square,
is primarily an 18th and 19th century Spanish Colonial and Euro-American site, but also has significant Early Ceramic and Late Caddoan occupations.
The excavations at the Acosta-Taylor House site
(41NA182), another significant 18th and 19th century site just to the southwest of Washington
Square, produced evidence to indicate that the
Middle Caddoan Washington Square occupation
continued at least 300 m to the southwest of the
mound complex.

SITE INVESTIGATIONS
Stephen F. Austin State University Archaeological Field School investigations of the site began
in the spring of 1979. Earlier that year, the senior
author had discovered, along the southern edge of
the 1939 school building, numerous pottery sherds
eroding from what appeared to be an undisturbed
soil horizon beneath the fill associated with the
building. In addition, some pottery sherds were also
collected just north of the northwest corner of the
building. At this time, little was known historically
about the site other than from local tradition and
occasional newspaper articles. To determine if anything remained of what was believed to be a severely impacted site, three backhoe trenches were
excavated in the southern half of the front (east)
yard of what is today the Thomas J. Rusk Middle
School. These excavations revealed that a large
part of the site was intact, capped by as much as 60
cm of overburden that had literally sealed off the
site. Surprisingly, there was no plow zone evident
in the trench profiles, and many large sherds and
several cultural features were noted very close to
the original ground surface.

Corbin and Hart -

The Washington Square Mound Site

59

Five 1 x 1 m test pits excavated by the field
to be excavated. To some degree then, much of the
school students in the first week of June 1979 in the
initial excavations were exploratory in nature, using
area north (Area A) of the trenches also indicated
trenches, I x 1 m, and 3 x 3 m, excavation units.
relatively undisturbed and concentrated archeologiThe exposure of features or the presence of artifacts
cal deposits. Although there was virtually no overusually led to the larger scale excavations. In this
burden on this portion of the site, there again was
manner, from 1979 to the present, over 480 m2 of
no plow zone, and many large sherds were recovthe site have been excavated, recovering several
ered quite near the surface.
thousands artifacts and many cultural features.
At this time a permanent datum (assigned an
arbitrary vertical elevation of l 00 m) was estabExcavation History
lished on the bottom step of the northernmost front
(east) steps of the 1939 school building; a secondIn 1979, the initial field school excavations
ary datum was established on the bottom step of the
consisted of 92 m 1 , including 25 m 1 of machinenorth steps of the building. Two permanent grid
excavated trenches (Figure 14). Four 3 x 3 m units
markers (NlOO/WlOO and N240/Wl00), iron rebar
were excavated by hand in the eastern portion of
set in concrete, were established using a laser thethe school yard. Two were excavated in Area A
odolite. The excavation plan was designed to focus
near test units 3-5, and two others were established
on the excavation of 3 x 3 m units excavated in I x
in Area B, adjacent to the northernmost backhoe
1 m sub-units. Excavation units were designated by
trench. Near the end of the season, a 1 x 5 m trench
their southeast corner coordinates. Since there was
was excavated into the remaining mound, revealing
little visible stratigraphy other than that of a normal
that it was an artificial construction that contained
soil profile, the soil was removed in arbitrary 10 cm
burials. A burial, Feature 31 (F31 ), was excavated
levels measured from the southeast corner of the 3
in this part of the mound.
x 3 m unit. Using flat-point shovels, the soil was
In 1980, excavations west of Area A, desigusually removed in shallow increments so that feanated Area C (23 m2 ), documented portions of a
tures could be recognized early in the process. Delarge structure (F 101) under the remnants of a mound.
tailed maps were drawn of the floor of each 10 cm
A 1 x 3 m trench (Trench 7A) excavated into the
level. In units with complex archeological deposits,
east side of the Reavley-House Mound revealed
composite maps of each level of the unit were drawn
more of the nature of the mound construction and
as the excavation proceeded, recording as many
the outlines of at least two deep shaft burials.
large sherds and other objects as possible in situ.
Excavations in Area A continued in I 981 and
Features were recorded in plan as soon as they
Trench I 0 ( 18 m2 ), north of the Reavley-House
were detected; if deemed necessary, excavations
Mound, was excavated prior to the construction of
would proceed in 2-5 cm increments to facilitate
a new sewer line. In addition, we excavated one of
exposure and mapping of the feature. Most pit/posthole features were
also cross-sectioned.
The initial research philosophy
was to determine the nature of the
North Mound Street
site, its level of preservation, and
how the site was related to known
Caddoan components and phases in
this portion of eastern Texas. We
Building
hoped to accomplish this in the
Thomo JRuk Middla School
context of an archeological field
school (ranging from l 0 to 25
students), where the primary task
was to instruct students in proper
excavation and field recording
techniques. Thus, there was no plan
that called for a certain volume of
earth to be moved or number of units
Figure 14. Excavation plan, 1979-1985.

60

Texas Archeological Society

the burial pits, F95, found in Trench 7A the previous year.
In 1982, Trench 7B (a 1 x 3 m unit) extended
the profile along the N239 line into the center of
the mound. An attempt was made to excavate a
burial pit (Fl 12) located the previous season in
Trench 10, but this was abandoned when it was
determined that the pit was larger than our 3 x 3 m
unit and at least 2 ill in depth.
In 1984, the Nacogdoches Independent School
District (NISD) decided to raze the 1916
Nacogdoches High School building. Under a contract with the district, the SFASU Laboratory of
Anthropology excavated 48 m2 and two backhoe
trenches (23.25 m2 ) to partially mitigate any impact
to the site caused by the destruction and removal of
the building (Corbin et al. 1984).
The last major excavations at the site were
conducted by the Texas Archeological Society Annual Field School in 1985. This enterprise focused
entirely on expanding excavations in Area A. A
total of 101 m2 were excavated, revealing several
features, including the enigmatic ceramic-filled pits.
From 1979 to the present, a number of small
excavations have been conducted in conjunction
with various small construction projects initiated
by the NISD. In some cases, controlled excavations
(ca. 4 m 2) were completed prior to the project, but
most often the archeologists performed clean-up
functions and spot screening as the project was
nearing completion or after it had been completed.
Occasionally, some school construction projects that
impacted the site were initiated and completed without any archeological work.
Other small (three or four 1 x l m units) shortterm excavations were conducted as a part of laboratory exercises for university introductory
archeology classes, and for training and educational
programs for groups such as the Junior Historians
at the Middle School. Some were also conducted as
a part of an annual University program, Fabulous
Friday, a day-long enterprise to introduce talented
5th graders from the region to the University. The
archeology program, entitled Search for the Lost
Texans, was supervised by the senior author and
assisted by members of the SFASU Anthropology/
Archaeology Club.

small charcoal-filled pits, ceramic-filled pits, and
various other pits. Although there is no plow zone
at Washington Square, the features were usually
detected at ca. 10-20 cm below the original ground
surface (bs). When detected in profile, a definite
demarcation of the original point/surface of origin
of features was not discernible, although they generally could be traced higher in the profile than
they could be detected in horizontal excavations.
Thus, the actual depth of the original feature can
only be estimated, but it is believed that most features, including the charcoal-filled pits, originated
10-15 cm above the level of detection.

Postholes
With the exception of the postholes associated
with the structure under Moundl/2, none of the
postholes (Figures 15-17 and Table 1) appear to be
associated with a typical circular Caddoan
structure. While it is possible that the excavations
were not extensive enough to detect circular
alignments, it is interesting that the excavations in
Area A did not reveal even a small portion of a
circular alignment. In most cases the few postholes
appeared to be isolated, or associated with only a
few other features. They differ from the charcoalfilled pits in that they are usually deeper and lack
masses of charred organic material. Most have a
tan, sandy fill, occasionally with tiny flecks of
charcoal.

I"""""""

0

IM

F23

..._.,,._F...;;2"'-2----~N\56
W95
F53

TEST TRENCH 3

EXCAVATION PLAN FOR
F15

SOUTH UNITS
(ffjJJ;F17

Non-mound Features
A number of features were exposed during the
area excavations. Most of these were postholes,

Figure 15. Plan of 1979 Area B excavations showing
feature locations.

Corbin and Hart- The Washington Square Mound Site

61

Charcoal-filled pits
These aboriginal features occur in many
Caddo archeological sites in south-central East
Texas, from the earliest periods (e.g., George
C. Davis site) through the historic period (e.g.,
Mission Dolores de los Ais), and are a common
source for carbonized material for radiocarbon
dating. At Washington Square (Figures 18-19
and Table 2), the amount of carbonized material in the pits varied as did the type of charred
organic remains. The charred material was primarily wood, but several features also included
charred com cobs, hardwood nut shells, and
pine cones. In addition, other materials (small
pottery sherds, small bone fragments, and small
bits of fired clay) were occasionally recovered
from the fill of the pits. Large pottery sherds
occurred in the upper few cm of two (F9 and
Fl99) of these pits.
Most of these features at Washington
Square appear to have been used repeatedly or
at least had multiple fill and excavation

FEATURE 18

..,
0

5

IOcm

FEATuRE 22

FEATURE 5

FEATURE 23

Figure 16. Profiles of typical postholes.

Table 1. Postholes
Feature#

Provenience

BS (cm)

Dimensions

Fill Material

5

Test Pit I

?

top=2 l cm; bottom=
11 cm; depth=30+ cm

Tan sand, sherds,
Charcoal flecks

18

Nl56/W96

?

top=20 cm; bottom=
15 cm; depth=27 cm+

Tan sand,
Charcoal flecks

22

Nl56/W97

30

top=! I cm; bottom=
11 cm; depth= 17 cm+

Tan sand

23

Nl56/W97

30

top=l5 cm; bottom=
15 cm; depth= 17 cm+

Tan sand

53

Test Trench 3

?

top=60 cm; bottom=
20 cm; depth=30 cm+

Tan sand

64

N219/W162

55

top=20 cm; bottom=
13 cm; depth=7 cm+

Tan sand

68

N230/WI06

10

depth=42 cm

Reddish sand,
Clay lumps,
Charcoal flecks

78

N214/Wl61

?

top= 18 cm; bottom=
18 cm; depth=l6 cm+

Dark grayish sand

96

N228/WI05,
under F45

39

top=17 cm; bottom=?

Tan sand,
Charcoal flecks

62

Texas Archeological Society
"'~

ff)
~

'

D

I

rf!jP

~

ti'

,

I

'IJil

--- - - -

-

- -~

-

~:'

,.,.11 ~

'I

:''
,'

0

Fl20

,.:+
I

~~

,
I

~

0

o

Q

.
I

0

/i!li;
I

""'

core

',,6100.23

'

I

I

I

---1 ~.:: ',
,'

,'

I

F128

:

\

\'...
6100.02

@.

+----- -_dlh0

-

0

'21

+

t::i

I

I
I

,I

-I

;



F129
~ ..._~-

-

!

I

I

6100.14

,'

,'tlJJJ;
f\1222

O~~~~~~SOcm

0 O -10cm

@10-20cmbs b'v.,rlical oherd

.otooth

lfJI)

bone

~adze

Figure 17. Plan view of Feature 120.

episodes. The charcoal-filled pits averaged ca. 2530 cm in diameter and ranged from ca. 20-30 cm
in depth. Based on radiocarbon dates from six of
these features (F8, F9, F30, F75, F80, and Fl99),
four (F8, F9, F75, and Fl99) are clearly associated
with the primary occupation of the site at ca. AD
1300. The other two (F30, with a calibrated two
sigma date range of AD 1430-1666; and F80, with
a calibrated two sigma data range of AD 604-984)
may be associated with the very ephemeral earlier
and later occupations that occur at the site.

Pits
Five pits of varying size have been identified at
the site (Table 3). The characteristics of the pits are
such that we suggest that each had a very different
function or use.

Feature 15, located in Nl53/W91 (see Figure
15), was first recorded as a ca. 40 cm circular area
with a darker, more friable matrix than the surrounding soil. A even more friable circular area
occurred in the center of the feature. The soil was
removed from the feature before profiling, and the
matrix was screened. The matrix was comprised
primarily of a soft brown sand with fine charcoal
flecks, charred hickory nut fragments, a small charred
bean seed, and a fragmentary charred corn cob. The
pit was slightly bell-shaped and ca. 50 cm deep.
Feature 17 first appeared as a soft circular
area of sandy soil ca. 20 cm in diameter in Nl52/
W93 (see Figure 15). An east-west profile of the
feature indicated it was a pit with three distinct
areas of fill (Figure 20). The western area, possibly
a large post mold, was ca. 20 cm in diameter and 57
cm deep, and had a very dark mottled sandy fill.

Corbin and Hart -

,.,

The Washington Square Mound Site

63

Feature 115 occurred in the
northwest quadrant of the 3 x 3 m
i
i
N231
unit N224/Wl 03, ca. 3 m due south
T
of Feature 45. First detected at ca.
10 cm bs, the feature appeared as
P.'12*
~
an
oval area of soft brown sandy
T
N 1@51
loam
bordered by several small
.
post
holes
(Figure 21 ). Most of the
42
.
pit was ca. 30 cm below detection
level. A circular area 40 cm in
F45
diameter
in the southeast end of
I
I
... _- - .... ,,.
Fl
15
was
40 cm below detection
.,.37
...!..
...!..
level. Within this depression was a
.:{.."-1
1m
0
smaller round-bottomed pit ca. 10
':;s36
,,j4
cm in diameter and 8-10 cm deeper
N227
J..
..!.
than the rest of the feature.
A number of small and shalchorcool-filled pit
*Tx3942
low post holes were clustered along
the southeastern margins of the pit.
Figure 18. Plan of 1979 Area A excavations showing feature locations.
Some had clearly been intersected
by the pit, while others clearly inThe second fill was sandier and lighter, and may
truded into the pit margins. Two post holes were in
represent fill around the post. The third area, a tree
the pit fill (see Figure 21). In the northwest end of
the pit was a concentration of red clay lumps. The
root mold, was a light tan sand. Water screening of
the primary matrix produced small deteriorated bone
lumps were similar to that of the B2t soil horizon
fragments, charcoal, and three small pottery sherds.
that occurs lower in the solum at the site.
0
0

0

j

a

I

.

.

----+--------r--~

""

99.94

FEATURE 2 PLAN VIEW

FEATURE 15

FEATURE 2 :. P.ROFILE

FEATURE9: PROFILE

_,,,..-DIFFUSED
"""CHARCOAL
di CHARCOAL
0 ROOT
0 RED CLAY
{} POTSHERD

0

5

IOcm

Figure 19. Plan and profile of charcoal-filled pits: a, F2; b,
F9; c, F8; d, F42.

O

10

FEATURE 17

Figure 20. Profiles of Features 15 and 17.

20cm

64 Texas Archeological Society
Table 2. Charcoal-filled Pits
Feature# .

Provenience

BS (cm)

Dimensions (cm)

Fill Material

2

Test Pit 3

28

27 x 12+

Charcoal flecks

8*

N230 I W102

30

30 x IO+

Wood Charcoal

9*

Nl56 I W95

30

30 x 13+

Corncobs, Wood

30*

Nl56 I W95

25

20 x 10+

Corncobs, Wood

42

N299/Wl04

20

30 x 18+

Wood Charcoal

51

N229 I W105

30

27 x 8+

Wood Charcoal

75*

N214/Wl60

30

40 x 27+

Wood Charcoal

79

N214/WJ61

30

25 x 10+

Nutshells, Wood

80*

N214/Wl60

Wood Charcoal

Nl24/Wl62

.,

30 x 15+

86

27 x 8+

Wood Charcoal

199*

Nl95 I W95

?

?

Corncobs, Wood

?

* Features associated with radiocarbon dates (see Table 4)
An excavated area of ca. 6 x 5 m incorporated
the original 3 x 3 m excavation unit. Over 7,000
pottery sherds were recovered here, many in clusters that may mark small, shallow pits. In addition,
most of the ground stone tools from the site, including fragments of a large battered ground stone celt,
were also recovered from the units adjacent to
Fll5.
Feature 52 is a shallow pit exposed in the profile of Test Trench 2. The pit was ca. 150 cm wide

and 20 cm deep at ca. 10 cm bs. No artifacts were
recovered from F52 while preparing the profile.
Feature I 08 was recorded in the south profile
of Trench 9. The top of the pit originated just below
the A-horizon (ca. 17 cm bs). The sides of the pit, 87
cm wide and 21 cm deep, tapered smoothly to form
a sharp angle at the bottom. The matrix in the pit is a
fine, compact, grey sand containing flecks of charcoal. One sherd was recovered from the pit during
troweling of the profile.

Sherd-filled Pits
Four shallow pits contained numerous small to very
large sherds from ceramic vessels. While several sherds from
the same vessel did occur, usually many vessels were represented in the pits. In almost
each case, the cluster of sherds
in the pit was detected before
the outlines of the pit were
visible. Usually the pit was
noted only if it had been excavated into the B2t soil horizon. Although sherds were the
main artifacts in the pits, some
lithic and bone debris were
also associated.

N224

Figure 21. Plan view of Feature 115.

Corbin and Hart -

The Washington Square Mound Site

Table 3. Other Features
Provenience/Unit

Description

15
17
31
35
36
37
43
44
45
52
64
90
95
98
99
101

Nl53/W91
Nl52/W93
Reavely-House Md.
Reavely-House Md.
N227/Wl04
N228/Wl04
Reavely House Md.
N227/Wl05
N227/Wl03
Test Trench 2
Feature 101
Reavely-House Md.
Reavely-House Md.
N219/Wl63
N217/Wl62
N217/Wl63, N219/Wl62

102

N217/Wl62

104

N217/Wl62

107

N237/Wl07

Pit
Pit
Burial
Burial Pit
Charred Corn Cobs
2 Deer Bones
Burial Pit
2 Deer Bones
Sherd-filled Pit
Pit
Post Hole
Burial Pit
Burial
Post Mold/Fea. 101
Post Mold/Fea. 101
Buried Structure
Remains
Shallow Post Mold/
Fea. 101
Compacted Floor of
Fea. 101
Sandstone, Pottery
Sherds, and Charcoal
Pit
Burial Pit
Burial Pit
Pit
Burned Clay
associated with Fea.
115
Small Ash Lens
Area of Dark Sandy
Loam
Post Mold associated
with Fea. 115
Pit associated with
Fea. 115
Burial Pit
Possible Shallow Post
Mold
Possible Post Mold
Sherd-Filled Pit
Sherd-Filled Pit

Feature#

108
112
113
ll5
1161122

Trench 9, N239/Wl04
Trench 10, N249/W51
Reavely-House Md.
N224/Wl03
N224/Wl03

117
118/119

N224/Wl04
N224/Wl03

121

N223/Wl03

123

N225/Wl05

126
128

Reavley-House Md.
N223/Wl08

129
134
138

N222/Wl08
N214/W106
N21l/Wl12

65

Feature 45, a large, oval shallow pit, occurred in the northwest
quadrant of the 3 x 3 m unit N227 I
Wl03 (Figure 22). It first appeared
as an indistinct area of mottled
brown soil containing small red
clay lumps and charcoal flecks at
ca. 20 cm bs. The feature bottomed
out at ca. 50 cm bs, and was at
least 2 m in diameter. Excavations
of F45 produced over 100 sherds;
63 large sherds were mapped in
place. These sherds represent major portions of at least seven different vessels. Features 51 and F42,
charcoal-filled pits, F36, a concentration of charred corncob fragments, and F37 and F44 (bone
clusters) circumscribed F45. Feature 96, a possible posthole, was
discovered beneath F45 in N228/
Wl05.
Feature 120 was the second of
these interesting features to be discovered at the site. The cluster of
large sherds was first detected at
ca. 9 cm bs. It was not readily apparent that the cluster of sherds was
in a pit, but the vertical position of
many large sherds and overlapping
sherds suggested a pit (see Figure
17). Once the sherds had been plotted and removed, a very faint pit
outline could be seen at ca 30 cm
bs where the very bottom of the
original excavation had cut into the
B2 soil horizon. At the detection
level, Fl20 may have exceeded 2
m in diameter, with a deeper area
ca. 1 m in diameter.
Feature 134 is similar to F 120
in that no distinct pit outlines were
visible (Figure 23), but the very
large size of the sherds, the number of vertically-oriented sherds,
and the presence of overlapping
sherds, indicated that the sherds
were not on a horizontal surface.
The matrix associated with the
sherds was less homogeneous and
more mottled than the surrounding

66

Texas Archeological Society

-----

f51

N

/

0

0

/

f45

(]) Cl

:i. Q~

I

I

'0

o~

I

0

'D

0

.,.

~o~=-/

I

0
oft



D

- -- - - - - ~-

0

0

N228~
0

50cm

0

sherd

/

vertical sherd
.iJ."'1 du:m:oal

Figure 22. Plan view of Features 45, 51, and 96.

soil. The sherds first appeared ca. 8 cm below the
original ground surface and continued to ca. 25 cm
bs. The pit apparently encompassed an area at least
1 m in diameter.
Feature 138, like the other ceramic-filled pits,
was originally noted as a large concentration of
pottery sherds containing many overlapping and
vertically-oriented sherds. While no pit outline could
be discerned in plan view, adjacent profiles revealed that the sherds and other artifacts were in a
large (> 4 m2 ) shallow depression (Figures 24 and
25). The distribution of the sherds by l 0 cm level
suggest either that the bottom of the depression was

irregular in depth or that the pit/depression may
have been filled with loads of debris that included
soil and sherds.
MOUND FEATURES
The Reavely-House Mound (Mound 4)
As previously mentioned, portions of two of
the three mounds known to have existed at the site
are still extant. Of these, the Reavely-House Mound
(Mound 4) is the best preserved. The initial trench
(Trench 5) into the mound was excavated to deter-

Corbin and Hart -

The Washington Square Mound Site
Do
D

{}

0

~r:f''f!)

t:lc::.
I)

.,o

0

67

~~

0

t;)

CJo@

QI> 0

r;pa

0

"'

()

~
()

D

0
0

0 0-10cm ~I0-20
<b
 20- 30cm bs
p ~
\vertical
o
@sandstone
c9
'I\\) ~
JP bone
9P
o
o~
1 flake
"'

-

0

0

SO cm
,___,___._...._--'----'

0

;

0

t

!lo

0

Figure 23. Plan view of Feature 134.
0

mine the nature of the mound and
record the stratigraphic sequence (Figure 26). By 20 cm bs, the complex
layering of brightly colored red and
yellow fills indicated that the mound
was a man-made construction.
Slightly deeper, a ceramic vessel was
uncovered within an area of fill that
suggested a shaft burial.
Since the primary function of
the trench was to obtain a stratigraphic profile of the mound, it was
decided to continue excavating the
trench even if it cut through the presumed burial, designated F3 l. As the
excavations continued, detailed photographs and drawings recorded other
ceramic vessels and conch columella
beads. The walls and floor of the
trench had a complex series of deep
shaft burials, mound construction
episodes, and occasional segments of
the pre-mound surface (Figure 27).
The F3 l burial was apparently one of

0

Oil'

,,,

:J1

0

;).

io
00
(JJ

0
0
0

o
 ..

0
lP 0

0

~~o

Figure 24. Plan view of Feature 138.

OoO
0
0
0

0
D

68

Texas Archeological Society

N214W106

N216W106

______ - -

- .. _-_ _:_._.
100m

A

- - - -- - ------ ------- - B

-- -:--;--. __ _

the northeast of the current mound,
but this feature has not been
investigated.

f138

- --.-- --'?....ia:~------

Feature 31

Feature 31 was a burial of a
single individual in a northwestW107
southeast oriented pit that was ca.
N216 W106
N216WJ08,
_
_
"'rs"t!nt,. - ..fill
160 cm x 105 cm in size (Figure
---..------::--- - - --- . -29). A trench and pipe for the original gas line to the historic Reavely
F138
- -- - - - - - -,house had cut through the burial
- -- _.- . .. --.
-B. - . . . . .
pit and disturbed a ceramic vessel.
The skeletal remains, possibly those
_f'~::0//-=:4-:://C::C:J'--//-0'/.::://-::://--::!'c;;;;;:-/{-//.::-//::://..:://..:://-
!-f/~11=11-=-11--;/1 =7/ .::::;; ..::::-11--=r//.-?..=ij~_:::-//-=//-//..::4--=//
of a young male, were very poorly
N214 W108
N214 W108
preserved; the cranium was at the
southeast end of the pit. Fifteen ceramic vessels (including two
f138
bottles), 13 conch columella beads,
-\\
and a cache of 11 chert flakes were
. .,.... ~-:--:-.:-:-:. -c-. --c---_.-_-..,..-.--. J . __ a-:"7 :-:_-.-::. :-:---:--_:--::-,....-:--:-=:---. -_-~-:-.:->~
associated with the human remains.
l/""'/l:::fl :::-/l=o.//-//_-//.::://2//-//C:::// //--/f::C::://.:::Y /-//.;::;.//-/C:.-//::::/ /7,1.:::;;::::://:::-I (:::/!~1--11=11=-11~//~/
'/::::-11:::// ..:::-//.:::::-;/-=f/-/'/-/7:= .//
Several areas of darkly stained soil
in the vicinity of the skeletal reN216W108
\U N215 -"'.1!
N214 W108
mains suggested the presence of
.[_
.._
-. - -~---- --------!--~--organic materials in the grave,
while one cluster of beads around
1'138
the wrist was from a bead bracelet.
For the most part, the ceramic vessels were clustered, some nested,
in the corners of the pit. A large,
undecorated olla near the skull was
sitting on a small area of charred
Figure 25. Profile of Feature 138.
wood. Associated fire-reddened
earth suggests that a small fire (or
at least glowing embers) had been placed in the pit
the latest interments in the mound. After recording
before the vessel.
the profiles and floor plan, the rest of F31 was excavated.
The following season, a 1 x 3 m Trench 7 A
Feature 95
was excavated to determine if the extant basal edge
This burial contained the poorly preserved skelof the mound was indeed the original edge. The
etal remains of two individuals placed one on top
walls and floor of the trench, however, uncovered
of the other (Figure 30). The shaft for the burial had
two burial pits (Figure 28), suggesting that the
been excavated deep into the C-horizon; digging
mound had been larger in the past. The walls and
stick marks were readily visible on the walls of the
floors of Trench 7B had a complex sequence of
shaft. The floor of the grave was excavated to a
mound construction and shaft burials similar to
bright
yellow clay strata. The floor was not level;
Trench 5. Feature 95, one of the burial pits recorded
small
humps
of clay, apparently left intentionally,
in Trench 7 A, was also excavated at this time. This
often served as pedestals for clusters of ceramic
excavation exposed another burial pit (Fl 13)
vessels. A distinct organic layer overlay the yellow
immediately to the north of F95. Trench 10
clay
in all areas of the floor.
encountered another burial pit, Fl 12, about 3 m to
<:o.

-)

_

Corbin and Hart - The Washington Square Mound Site

@excavated burial
n estimated outline of
'.) unexcavated burial

-<

~id

fmstairs

~'

I

'

I

fm

contour interval 20 cm.

Sidewalk

North Mound Street

Figure 26. Excavation plan of Area D and Reavely-House Mound.

The clay into which the shaft had been
excavated is highly impermeable; at the time of the
archeological excavations, the matrix in the burial
was very damp. Many of the ceramic vessels,
particularly the lowest ones, were very soft and
deteriorated, and their removal was extremely
difficult. Horizontal surfaces of the vessels were
highly leached and some interior and exterior
surfaces were completely removed.
Analysis of the skeletal remains suggest the
lower individual (B-II) was an adult female, while
the other (B-1) may have been a sub-adult male.
Both had cranially modeled skulls. Interred with
the individuals were 34 ceramic vessels, including
two bottles. In contrast to F3 l, most of the vessels,

69

many nested within each other, were
placed in a row along each side of the
individuals. The two bottles, obviously
intentionally smashed, occuITed at each
wrist area. One of these bottles is engraved with the canebrake rattlesnake
motif (Figure 31 ), a motif that may be
a Middle Caddoan period cultural
marker (Middlebrook and Perttula
1997:7).
Many of the vessels contained
small lumps of yellow clay as if some
of the material from the bottom of the
pit had been intentionally placed in the
vessels. Almost all of the complete,
unbroken, vessels contained some organic debris. In addition, Vessel 1 contained small lumps of red, yellow, and
black pigment; Vessel 13 contained a
small mass of soft reddish material;
Vessel 24 contained a lump of reddish-purple and yellow pigment; and
Vessels 30 and 32 contained lumps of
white clay.
Badly deteriorated conch columella beads were recovered at each
wrist of the adult female (B-II), along
with a small shell pendant from the
chest area. Furthermore, a small shell
disc and two possible bone artifacts
were also recovered in association with
this adult female. Organic staining and
debris in and around the vessels and
skeletal remains suggest that the individuals were both covered with some
material distinct from clothing at the
time 'of interment.

The University Mound.
(Mounds 1/2)
The excavations at the Washington Square
Mound site that uncovered this mound were directed
at explaining the occurrence of a large rectangular
area of dead grass immediately south of the Old
University Building. South of this anomaly was a
gently sloping eroded surface that usually exhibited
a number of pottery sherds after a rain. Our
excavations showed that the rectangular anomaly
was a thick clay pad that had been the foundation
for the 1904 Central Public School. Excavations

70

Texas Archeological Society

recent

'
F31

F43

F35 ( ' . '  . 

-

-

FSO

se~er line



.

f35
99.98m

0

40cm
"""""5;;;~

~

I

F31

m

F43

-}-99.98m

I
Figure 27. Profile and Plan, Trench 5, Reavely-House Mound.

~Ocm
F95
{excavated)

N239

B

Figure 28. Profile and Plan, Trench 7 A and 7B: a, north profile of Trench 7B along W239 line; b, south profile of Trench
7A along N239 line.

Corbin and Hart -

The Washington Square Mound Site

71

\

\

0
',\\BEADS~
'0

'-

-,

PAT:~~
DARKS~~F~
I

I

20 cm

Figure 29. Plan of Feature 31.

beneath the clay pad found relatively intact Caddoan
archeological remains that were probably associated
with the mound that stood immediately south of the
Old University Building.
The Caddoan remains (F 101) were originally
identified as a series of long, narrow, and parallel
organic stains (Figure 32). Once the first l x 1 m
unit was expanded, it was obvious that the long
tapering stains, generally oval in cross-section, were
the archeological remains of long wood structural
members from a building. There appeared to be
two sets of stains; one set of stains is wider and
thicker and generally appeared to overlie or lie atop
the second set. The second set of stains was not as
wide or thick, but may only represent the upper
portion of long tapering structural members.
Among the structural stains was a series of
shallow post depressions and two postholes that
formed a slight arc. The two postholes and attendant post molds (F64 and F99) were much deeper
than the rest of the shallow depressions. Seven very
compact circular depressions may be from sturdy
posts set on the surface that supported considerable
weight. These shallow depressions contained a
light tan sandy fill. These features generally
appeared to overlie the remains of the horizontal
structural members. Four other similar features

0

F95

A/IB:interment
I beads
shell
Wl21bone

Figure 30. Plan of Feature 95.

were shallow, dark, organically-stained compacted
depressions, but occurred below the horizontal
structural remains.
Within the arc the matrix was hard and compact, while outside to the east the matrix was similar to that found throughout the site. Incorporated
into the compacted surface were tiny sherd and
bone fragments, along with bits of charcoal. Outside the arc, sherds were much larger and artifacts
were much more numerous.
The excavations suggest that the structure had
been constructed on the leveled surface of a low,
natural sandy rise. There is a normal soil profile
below the surface on which the structure was built,
and there was no indication of occupation below
F 101. Only a portion of a thin layer of the sandy fill
that had been placed over the razed structure had not

72

Texas Archeological Society

Scm
Figure 31. Bottle (Vessel #23) with Canebrake Rattlesnake Motif, Feature 95.

Corbin and Hart -

The Washington Square Mound Site

I

I

I

'I

I

I

I
1

I

I

'. .,1 I

,

.,/

1:._, .
\
~ : .'":\
..

;

...

!

1

.;
"/

fl01

/

r.\

fl

N

1-. \
1..1

IF

\ I
\':I

I

.r

I

I

""1
I

:--~r

-

... -

.. -.'....:_;._

//~/

/.'

./'

..

I I
I I

I

./
,/

@post holo

 shallow

Post mold, soft fill

011hallow post mold, compact fill

#

hori:i:ontal pole, plan&. profile

>-~J'orizontal pole, in profile
... ?"eilge, compact area

Figure 32. Plan View and Profile of Feature 101, a collapsed structure in the University Mound.

73

74

Texas Archeological Society

been removed by the construction of the 1904 building. This fill contained many artifacts, suggesting
an origin in a nearby occupation area. Most of the
sherds recovered from the surface immediately south
of the FlOl structure came from disturbed fill from
the upper portion of the original mound.

RADIOCARBON DATES
Twelve radiocarbon samples, primarily from
charcoal-filled pits, were collected, processed, and
analyzed from the Washington Square Mound site
(Table 4 ). 6 Seven of the dates (calibrated and 2 sigma
age range) derived from the radiocarbon analysis
clusterbetweenA.D.1268-1302. Ward and Wilson's
( 1978) chi-square test, as implemented in the CALIB
rev. 3.0.3 program (Stuiver and Reimer 1993:27),
was used to determine that these dates are statistically
the same at the 95 percent confidence level. The dates
were subsequently pooled with CALIB 3.0.3, producing a radiocarbon age of 720  28 B.P. The
calibrated age range at two sigma is AD 1268-1302.
These dates are consistent with calibrated radiocar-

bon dates from Caddoan sites to the north and northeast with similar ceramic styles-such as Oak Hill
Village (41RK214), where the 30+ calibrated dates
range between A.D. 1150-1400, and Tyson (41 SY92),
whose four calibrated dates range from AD 13361490 (Perttula 1997:Table 1)-and with the estimated age of the Haley phase (ca. A.D. 1200-1400).
Thus, the AD 1268-1302 age range is believed to
reflect the primary occupation of the site.
Samples Tx-3944 and Tx-4873 suggest that the
occupation of the site may have begun 100+ years
prior to the primary occupation. Sample Tx-4528
is consistent with a small series of Late Caddoan
artifacts (specifically sherds of Patton Engraved
and Emory Punctated-Incised) that occur at the site.
Similarly, sample Tx-4876 may pertain to the small
Early Ceramic occupation (sandy paste pottery
sherds, small dart points, etc.). While there are no
classic Early Caddoan period sherds from the site,
there are some Pennington Punctated-Incised or
Pennington-like sherds that may be evidence for a
small Early Caddoan occupation at Washington
Square; sample Tx-4876 could also be associated
with this material.

Table 4. Radiocarbon Dates fo.r the Washington Squa.re Mound Site
Sample
#

2

Lab
#

Provenience

Material

Radiocarbon
Age (B.P.)

Calibrated 2-sigma
(A.D.)*

Tx-3941

F8, N230/Wl02

Charcoal (wood)

650  80

1238-1434

Tx-3942

F31, N214/Wl61

Charcoal (wood)

1000  260

552-1436

3

Tx-3943

Fl8, Nl56/W96

Charcoal (wood)

710  70

1217-1403

4

Tx-3944

F30, Nl56/W95

Charcoal (wood)

1150  140

640-1199

5

Tx-3945

F9, Nl56/W95

Charcoal (wood)

790  200

881-1478

6

Tx-4257

F75, N214/Wl60

Charcoal (pine cone
fragments, hardwood
nut shell)

620  70

1278-1436

7

Tx-4258

F30, N l 56/W95

Charred corn

360  70

1430-1666

8

Tx-4872

F75, N214/Wl60

Charcoal (wood, corn,
hardwood nuts)

830  l IO

1004-1322

9

Tx-4873

Fl99, Nl95/Wl 12

Charred corn

840  50

1153-1285

10

Tx-4874

F199, Nl95/Wl 12

Charcoal (wood)

980  60

974-1215

11

Tx-4875

F9, Nl56/W95

Charred corn

12

Tx-4876

F80, N214/W161

Hardwood nutshell

POOLED DATE,** SAMPLES 1, 3, 5, 6, 8, 9, 11

630  60

1280-1427

1280 JOO

604-984

720  28

1268-1302

*Calibrations done with CALIB 3.03 (Stuiver and Reimer 1993)
**Pooled dates are statistically the same at 95% level of confidence (Stuiver and Reimer 1993)

Corbin and Hart- The Washington Square Mound Site
SUMMARY
Excavations at the Washington Mound site
have uncovered the archeological remains of a large
Middle Caddoan period (ca. A.D. 1250-1350)
mound complex in south-central East Texas. The
investigations of this heretofore unknown complex
indicate that there was a significant post-Alto phase
culture in the region that may have had a significant
impact on subsequent regional Caddoan
manifestations.
The excavations were conducted primarily in
the area between three historically known artificial
mounds. Although fairly extensive, the excavations
did not identify any structural evidence (i.e., circular alignments of postholes) of on-site habitation in
the non-mound area. While a number of archeological features, primarily pits, were recovered, they
do not appear to be the kinds of features generally
associated with permanent Caddoan habitation. In
Area A, ca. 250 m 2 of excavations found only large
shallow pits that contained sherds of numerous ceramic vessels, and a few charcoal-filled pits. If there
had been a house or houses in the vicinity, logic
suggests that the excavations should have intersected at least a portion of a circle of postholes.
Similarly, in Area B, 18 m 2 of excavation and ca.
30 m of backhoe trenches did not intersect any
readily definable posthole alignments. There were
some large pits, different from the sherd-filled pits
in Area A and not obviously refuse pits or storage
pits, that could have been large postholes, but again,
no pattern was discernible. While pottery sherds
were common in this area, their numbers did not
approach the concentrations in Area A.
The only obvious structural remains were recovered in Area C in a part of the site known
historically to have been the location of at least one
mound. The excavations suggest that this feature,
FlOl, is the remains of a circular structure constructed on a low natural sandy rise. If it was associated with the mound, which we believe it was,
then Fl01 may be the remnants of one of the first,
if not the first, structure associated with the mound.
The available archeological evidence suggests that
the University Mound (Mounds 1/2) was a typical
Caddoan structural mound.
Excavations into the one visible extant mound
on the site, the Reavely-House Mound, indicate
that it was a typical Caddoan mortuary mound. The
original mortuary (or mortuaries) was excavated
into a low natural sandy rise. As the mortuary

75

expanded, various layers of red and yellow clays
and other brightly colored soil were added to the
original mound, raising its height and increasing its
diameter. Planning in the use of the mound was
obvious since subsequent burials generally did not
impinge on existing burials. Mortuary offerings,
primarily ceramic vessels, and the skeletal remains
of the interred individuals, are consistent with those
generally associated with the prehistoric Caddoan
tradition and culture area.
The excavations also recovered a large assemblage of Caddoan pottery and a relatively small
assemblage of chipped and ground stone tools and
debitage (we will discuss this material in a subsequent paper). Of particular note is the definition of
three new pottery types (Hart 1982) that, although
showing strong ties with the Haley phase of the
Great Bend area of the Red River, constitute a
regionally distinct Middle Caddoan horizon in
south-central East Texas. This horizon exhibits continuities with Early Caddoan (e.g., Pennington
Punctated-Incised and Crockett Curvilinear Incised
manifestations) and Late Caddoan ceramic styles
(e.g., grog tempering and brushed-incised modes)
in this region.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Many people have been instrumental in facilitating the archeological and archival research on
the Washington Square Mound Site. Much of the
preliminary feature and excavation description was
done as class projects or papers presented at professional meetings from 1979-1984 by the authors and
archeology students at Stephen F. Austin State University (SFASU). The student papers include those
by Heather Brown, Charles Curb, John P. Hart,
Deborah C. Kisling, Jeanine McDonald, and Sharon
Toups. Heather Brown also served as the crew chief
for the 1984 mitigation work prior to the demolition of the 1916 school building, and as field assistant for the 1985 T AS Field School excavations.
Much of the original drafting of the mound profiles
and features was done by an Anthropology Lab
Assistant, Carolyn Spears.
The excavations would not have been possible
without the hard work of some I 00 SFASU archaeology field school students and the members of the
Texas Archeological Society that participated in
the 1985 Annual Field School. In addition, over the
years historical information has been forwarded to

76

Texas Archeological Society

the authors by various researchers, specifically
Darrell Creel (Mayfield-Fewkes), Bob D. Skiles
(Roberts 1898), Carolyn Spock (Stephenson l 948b
and Krieger's Mounds notes), and Dee Ann Story
(Upton 1930).
Special thanks are due to Mr. H. L. House,
now deceased, and Leland House for their concern
about the Reavely-House Mound and for allowing
the excavations in the southern portion of the
mound. Thanks are also due to Robert and Ruth
Carroll for allowing excavations in the northern
portion of the mound and for allowing archeological excavations in their yard prior to any subsurface
impact to the site. The Nacogdoches Independent
School District enthusiastically allowed the excavations on their portion of the site year after year
and made their various facilities available to us
during the four archeological field schools. The
district also supplied the funds to conduct archeological excavations prior to the 1984 removal of the
1916 High School building.

NOTES
1. John P. Hart conducted a detailed analysis of the
ceramics from Washington Square as the subject of a Master's
Thesis (Hart 1982) atNortheastLouisiana University, Monroe.
This material and the other artifacts will be the subject of a
future article in the BT AS.
2. There has never been any formal designation of the
mounds associated with Washington Square. Stephenson's
1948 photograph (McGee Bend Miscellaneous) of the extant
mound on the east side of Mound Street was labeled Mound
#4. Given the sequence of his discussion, Mound #3 would
have been the mound opposite the southeast corner of the
campus, the same mound described by Upton that was
destroyed in 1937 by the construction of a service station.
Mounds #l and #2 would be the mound(s) destroyed by the
building of the 1904 Nacogdoches High School (see end note
3 ). Prior to discovering Stephenson's notes, we had named the
small extant mound (that we now know is a mortuary mound)
east of Mound Street the Reavely-House Mound after past and
present owners. Since the mound destroyed by the service
station had been in the ownership of the Hardeman family
many years, we named it the Hardeman Mound. This is the
mound that most early descriptions refer to as the largest
mound, or the mound with the maple tree growing on it.
Stephenson's Mound #1 and Mound #2, supposedly
mostly razed prior to 1939, and supposedly totally destroyed
by the construction of the 1939 WPA Nacogdoches High
School (see end note 3), may have only been one mound.
Various historic references note one or two mounds. Mrs.
Hardeman believed it was "two" only because a road had cut

through a single large mound. Ratherthan refer to the mound(s)
that existed at that locality as Mound(s) I (and 2), we have
referred to the archeological expression of that mound (FI 01
and associated features) as the University Mound.
3. There is considerable folklore in Nacogdoches
(newspapers, various articles, Centennial booklets, etc.)
concerning the location and history of the mounds at the
Washington Square Mound site. During the course of time,
there have been three structures on Washington Square that
have been called, informally or formally, the Nacogdoches
High School. The first school building constructed by the
Nacogdoches School District (who acquired Washington
Square in 1904) was the Nacogdoches Central Public School
in 1904. It later became the Nacogdoches High School; a
number of historic photographs and picture postcards identify
the building. This building, according to Gladys Hardeman,
who was intimately familiar with the building and the mound
under it, was the high school building that destroyed the
mound (Stephenson's Mounds #1 and #2), not the 1939
Nacogdoches High School as local folklore and various
newspaper articles would have us believe. To further confuse
matters, another Nacogdoches High School had been built on
the campus in 1916; this was the building razed in 1984. A
detailed perusal of the various Sanborn Fire Insurance maps
from 1900-1939 indicate the sequence of construction and
names of various buildings on the campus. It was these maps,
historic photographs, and the various historical descriptions
that allowed us to accurately locate (see end note 5 below) the
Hardeman Mound and the University Mound.
4. This skeletal material is Cll!Tently curated in the
Laboratory of Anthropology, Stephen F. Austin State
University. The material was studied briefly in the laboratory
by Dr. Clyde Snow about 1982. His assessment was that the
cranium was definitely aboriginal, and its features were
consistent with his know ledge of Caddoan skeletal remains.
5. In Alex D. Krieger's files, "Mound Records N. E.
Texas," at the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, is a
sketch map of the Washington Square Mound site. A note on
the map attributes it to R. L. Stephenson, 1948 or 1949. The
map is inaccurate, either because it was drawn by Stephenson
from memory or possibly because it was drawn by Krieger or
someone else based on the description by Stephenson. The
map has a north arrow pointing east, while the service station
and mound (shown with a dotted line) is on the northwest
corner rather than the northeast corner of the Hardeman lot.
The map also shows a huge mound (shown with a dotted line)
under the 1939 Nacogdoches High School (labeled Hi School).
6. The radiocarbon dates for the Washington Square
Mound site were previously published in Story et al. (1990).

REFERENCES
Arnold, G. E.
1939 Arnold Reports. County Files, Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Corbin and Hart 1940

The Washington Square Mound Site

77

Reconnaissance Quarterly. County Files, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University
of Texas at Austin.

Fain, L.
1957 Ancient Indian Urn With ArrowHeads Found Here.
Daily Sentinel. Nacogdoches, Texas.

Baker, T. E.
1887 Karle Wilson Baker Papers. Box 28, Item 8. Manuscript in the East Texas Collection, Ralph W. Steen
Library, Stephen F. Austin State University,
Nacogdoches.

Gray, W. F.
1909 From Virginia to Texas, 1835: Diary of Co. Wm. F.
Gray. Gray, Dillaye & Co. Printers, Houston. Reprinted in l 965 by The Fletcher Young Publishing
Company, Houston.

Blair, F. W.
1950 The Biotic Provinces of Texas. Texas Journal of
Science 2( I ):93-117.

Haltom, R. W.
1880 History and Description of Nacogdoches County,
Texas. Nacogdoches News, Nacogdoches.

1957

The Vertebrates o.fTexas. McGraw-Hill, New York.

Blount, L. F.
n.d.
Nacogdoches University. Manuscript in the Lois
Foster Blount Papers. East Texas Collection, Ralph
W. Steen Library. Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches.
Bureau of Economic Geology
1993 Palestine Sheet, 1:250,000. Bureau of Economic
Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Cooper, Capt.
l 930 Accession records. Stone Fort Museum, Stephen F.
State University, Nacogdoches.
Corbin, J.E.
1978 Archaeological Survey for Angelina-Nacogdoches
Regional Airport Master Plan Study. Letter report
submitted to Turner, Collie & Braden, Houston.
l 984

An Archaeological Assessment (if a Portion o.f the
Washington Square Mound Site (41NA49). Manuscript on file, Division of Antiquities Protection,
Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Corbin,J. E. and D. C. Kisling
1983 The Adolphus Sterne Home. Papers in Anthropology No. 4. Stephen F. Austin State University,
Nacogdoches.
Corbin, J. E., T. C. Alex, and A. Kalina
1980 Mission Dolores de los Ais. Papers in Anthropology
No. 3. Stephen F. Austin State University,
Nacogdoches.
Corbin, J.E., J.M. Studer, and L. Nummi
1978 The Chayah Site. Papers in Anthropology No. 1.
Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches.
Dolezel, R.
1980 Soil Survey of Nacogdoches County, Texas. Soil
Conservation Service and United States Forest Service in cooperation with the Texas Agricultural Experiment Station. U. S. Department of Agriculture,
Washington, D.C.

Hardeman, G.
1979 Personal interview conducted and recorded by
Deborah Thomas. Manuscript on file at the Laboratory of Anthropology, Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches.
Hart, J.P.
1982 An Analysis of the Aboriginal Ceramics from the
Washington Square Mound Site, Nacogdoches
County, Texas. M.A. Thesis, Department of Anthropology, Northeast Louisiana University, Monroe.
Jelks, E. B.
1965 The Archaeology of McGee Bend Reservoir, Texas.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Anthropology,
The University of Texas at Austin.
Kenmotsu, N. A.
1992 The Mayhew Site: A Possible Hasinai Farmstead,
Nacogdoches County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas
Archeological Societ_v 63: 135-173.
Mayfield, J.E.
n.d.
Letter in J. W. Fewkes (Bureau of American Ethnology) records, National Anthropological Archives,
Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C..
McDonald, A. P.
1969 Hurrah for Texas! The Diary of Adolplws Ste me:
1838-1851. Texian Press, Waco.
Middlebrook, T. and T. K. Perttula
1997 The Middle Caddoan Period in East Texas: A Summary of the Findings of the East Texas Caddoan
Research Group. Journal <~f Northeast Texas Archaeology No. 9: 1-8.
Perttula, T. K.
1997 A Compendium of Radiocarbon and Oxidizable Carbon Ratio Dates from Archaeological Sites in East
Texas, with a Discussion of the Age and Dating of
Select Components and Phases. Journal o.f Northeast Texas Archaeology, in press.

78

Texas Archeological Society

Prewitt, E. R., J. W. Clark, Jr., and D. S. Dibble
1972 An Assessment of the Archeological and Historical
Resources of the Bayou Loco Reservoir Area,
Nacogdoches County, Texas. Research Report No.
11. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Roberts, 0. M.
1898 Prehistoric Races in Texas. The Quarterly of the
Texas State Historical Association. 1(3):145-150.
Sanders, V.
1939 Jar Believed to have been made by Ancient Mound
Builders has been dug up at Nacogdoches. The Houston Chronicle. Personal Papers, A-94. East Texas
Collection, Ralph W. Steen Library, Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches.
Stephenson, R. L.
l 948a Archeological Survey of McGee Bend Reservoir: A
Preliminary Report. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society. 19:57-73.
l 948b McGee Bend Miscellaneous. Manuscript on file at
the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Story, D. A.
1972 A Preliminary Report of the 1968, 1969, and 1970
Excavations at the George C. Davis Site, Cherokee
County, Texas. Report of Field Research Conducted
under National Science Foundation Grants (GS-2573
and 3200) and Interagency Contracts between the
University of Texas at Austin and Texas Building
Commission and the Texas Historical Survey Committee. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
The University of Texas at Austin.
1997

1968-1970 Archeological Investigations at the
George C. Davis Site, Cherokee County, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 68:1-113.

Story, D. A. (editor)
1982

The DeShaw Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Vol.
l. Texas Antiquities Permit Series. No. 7. Texas
Antiquities Committee, Austin.

1995

The Deshazo Site, Nacogdoches County, Texas, Vol.
2: Artifacts of Native Manufacture. Studies in Archeology 21. Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin.

Story, D. A., J. A. Guy, B. A. Burnett, M. D. Freeman, J.C.
Rose, D. G. Steele, B. W. Olive, and K. J. Reinhard
1990 Archeology and Bioarcheology of the Gulf Coastal
Plain. 2 Vols. Research Series No. 38. Arkansas
Archeological Survey, Fayetteville.
Story, D. A. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1977 Radiocarbon Dating and the George C. Davis Site,
Texas. Journal of Field Archaeology 4(1):64-89.
Sterne, C. A.
1923 Memoirs of C. A. Sterne. R. B. Blake Papers, Vol.
LXII. East Texas Collection, Ralph W. Steen Library. Stephen F. Austin State University,
Nacogdoches.
Stuiver, M. and P. J.
1993 CALIB User's Guide Rev 3.0.3A. Quaternary Research Center, University of Washington, Seattle.
Upton, R. G.
1940 The Mound Street Mound of Nacogdoches, Texas.
Abstract of a paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Texas Academy of Science, Houston,
1939. Proceedings of the Texas Academy of Science
23:10.
Ward, G. K. and S. R. Wilson
1978 Procedures for Comparing and Combining Radiocarbon Age Determinations: A Critique.
Archaeometry 20: 19-34.

Terrace Deposits and Late Quaternary Climate,
South-Central Edwards Plateau, Texas
------ - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Charles E. M ear

ABSTRACT
Late Quaternary fluvial terrace deposits are complex stratigraphic units that contain archeological sites and
various clues to paleoclimatic conditions that prevailed during and after deposition. In the upper Sabinal River
valley of the south-central Edwards Plateau, three Holocene and two Pleistocene terrace deposits have been
mapped and correlated with dated deposits located in the eastern Edwards Plateau and the east-central Lampasas
Cut Plain, where differing and sometimes conflicting, Late Quaternary paleoclimatic models have been
reconstructed by various investigators from studies of stable carbon isotope ratios, and of plant and animal
remains in the Quaternary sediments. The climatic data appear to indicate that periods of predominant
downcutting by the Sabinal River and its tributaries occurred after a change from cooler and moister conditions
to a drier and warmer climate; and, at least once, downcutting occurred during an indicated change to a cooler
and moister period. Late Quaternary fluvial deposition occurred during drier and warmer, as well as cooler and
moister, climatic regimes.

INTRODUCTION
River terraces and te1nce deposits are important indicators of climatic and hydrological changes
that force streams to change behavior while regaining equilibrium (Oberlander and Muller 1987:424).
The following discussion compares and contrasts
evidence for Late Quaternary climatic control of
stream downcutting and deposition along Cowhouse
Creek, upper Brushy Creek, and the Pedernales
River drainage systems (Figure 1). The terrace deposits in these valleys are correlated with terrace
deposits in the upper Sabinal River valley, and tentative paleoclimatic conditions are postulated
throughout the Late Quaternary for the south-central Edward Plateau.

PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIONS
Of the several deep stream valleys present in
the south-central Edwards Plateau, only the upper
Sabinal River Quaternary geology has been studied
(Mear 1953, 1995). Cursory investigations by the
author indicate that the Quaternary geology of the
upper Frio River valley (see Figure 1) c01Tesponds
closely to the upper Sabinal.

The Quaternary deposits of the upper Sabinal
valley were correlated by Mear (1995) with those
that occur along the Pedernales River of the eastern
Edwards Plateau, and with those along upper Brushy
Creek and upper Cowhouse Creek in the east-central Lampasas Cut Plain. The deposits along the
Pedernales were dated by Blum and Valastro ( 1989),
and those along Cowhouse Creek by Nordt et al.
( 1994). Mear ( 1995) utilized information from
Collins et al. (1993) to date the "Wilson-Leonard"
terrace deposit along upper Brushy Creek. Quaternary paleoclimate in the Cowhouse Creek valley
was established by Nordt et al. (1994), and Toomey
et al. (1993) and Toomey and Stafford (1994) reconstructed the Late Quaternary paleoclimate of
the eastern Edwards Plateau from deposits in Hall's
Cave (see Figure 1).
The geological field study of the upper Sabinal
River valley was conducted by the author in 1951
and 1952 (Mear 1953 ). In 1995 the study was updated and published (Mear 1995). Recently the author mapped the geology of the upper Brushy Creek
valley in Williamson County (report on file, Texas
Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin).

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69 (1998)

80

Texas Archeological Society

High
Plains

Oklahoma

E. Cross Timbers

New

Mexico

Eastern
Timbers

V

MEXICO

0

50

100

Barrier
Islands

~

o'

. 0

+'0

~0

.;:,

150 miles

0

9.__ _s_,_p_ _1s~,0_~210 kilometers
Lower Rio Grande
Valley

Figure I. Physiographic features of Texas (after Kier et al. 1977) and location of areas discussed in the text: (1) upper
Sabinal River valley, (2) upper Frio River valley, (3) Pedernales River valley, (4) upper Brushy Creek, (5) Cowhouse
Creek, and (6) Hall's Cave.

TERRACE DEPOSITS
Terraces are bench-like surfaces located on
stream-deposited alluvium (terrace deposits) and
on bedrock (strath terraces). Terrace deposits are
composed largely of alluvial sediment deposited by
streams during and immediately following floodstage, but they also contain soils, paleosols, and
minor amounts of colluvium, anthropogenic
materials, and wind-blown sediment. Terrace
deposits are alloformations as defined by the North

American Commission on Stratigraphic
Nomenclature (1983:865). They transgress time, and
are bounded above and below by discontinuities,
but also contain lesser discontinuities, often
indicated by paleosols that mark periods of relative
non-deposition. Other discontinuities are recognizable only by reliable radiocarbon dating that
indicates periods of non-deposition. Colluvium,
anthropogenic materials, younger overbank
deposits, and eolian sediment that lie on a terrace
deposit are not part of the formation (Figure 2).

Mear -

Terrace Deposits and IAte Quaternary Climate, South-Central Edwards Plateau

81

c

Sabinal
River

I

00

LEGEND
.A
Burned Rock Midden
ITTT Soil, Poleosol

~

Grovel
Silt

SLH/97

Figure 2. Summary geological section of the upper Sabinal River valley terrace deposits QO through Q4, showing the
generalized relationship of Late Quaternary terrace deposits (no scale). L is recent levee on the Q2 deposit; C is
colluvium within and above the Q2. Colluvium, burned rock middens, and other sites lying on terrace deposits are not
part of the underlying deposit. The Q2 deposit on the left (west) side of the section is a point bar whose basal gravel
decreases in age westward.

The basal unconformity of a terrace deposit
usually is obvious where exposed. Establishing the
upper boundary of a deposit can be difficult where
there is no discernible exposed erosional
unconformity between it and younger overlying
sediment; in some cases, the upper terrace boundary is arbitrary.
Virtually all terrace deposits are composed of
lower coarser material and finer-grained material in
the upper deposit. In geological terms this is
"fineing-upward." In general, the lower part of a
terrace deposit is formed by the stream channel;
and the upper, finer-grained sediment is deposited
from muddy overbank flood water.
The lower, coarser-grained part of a point bar
formed by stream meandering is deposited in a
series of contiguous arcuate bars while the stream
bed meanders; thus the age of the bars decreases
laterally (see Figure 2). The overlying finer material decreases in age upward, but erosional cut-outs
and irregular overbank deposits may be present,
causing laterally-contiguous parts to be of somewhat different ages.
Other terrace deposits not in the form of a
point bar are linear, and also fine-upward. These
deposits are formed sub-parallel to. the stream
course, and consist of ridge and swale topography
usually buried under the upper part of the deposit.
The upper Sabinal River and its tributaries contains only a few meanders (indicating low sinuosity), some of which seem to be the result of
deflection of the channels along the strike of joints

in the limestone bedrock. The principal joint systems in the area strike about N20 E and N60 W
and appear to control the present direction of stream
flow throughout much of the valley. In the upper
part of the upper Sabinal valley, the Sabinal river is
downcutting and flowing largely on bedrock. It is
largely bed-load dominated (channel on gravel) in
the lower part of the valley; but even here the stream
is downcutting locally. This contrasts with conditions along the Pedernales River where Blum and
Valastro ( 1989) report that it has been an aggrading, gravel-dominated meandering stream for the
last 1000 years. Upper Brushy Creek is gravel bedload dominated and it has low sinuosity, based on a
detailed study of the creek and its tributaries by the
author. Cowhouse Creek was not investigated by
the author, but appears to have moderate sinuosity
(Nordt et al. 1994).

ORIGIN OF TERRACE DEPOSITS
As stated by Shelton ( 1966: 134), if over the
years the supply of sediment available is greater
than the carrying capacity of a given part of a stream,
then the stream aggrades its bed in that part by
depositing alluvium. Where the average available
load is less than the average capacity, erosion will
take place and the stream degrades, or cuts into its
channel.
Both alluviation and degradation can occur simultaneously along the course of streams, although

82

Texas Archeological Society

erosion may predominate along the upper part of
the stream, degradation and aggradation alternate
in the middle course of a stream, and deposition
prevails in the lower course of a stream (Shelton
1966:134). In the stream valleys of the southern
Edwards Plateau, the rivers have an upper, middle,
and lower course upstream from the Balcones Fault
Zone where downfaulted Edwards and Comanche
Peak limestones form a slowly-lowering base level.
Thus, it would be expected that degradation and
deposition could occur simultaneously within a very
few miles along the streams.
Downcutting by streams follows lowering of
base level, rejuvenation by uplift, or by increase in
carrying capacity, and/or decrease in sediment load.
Deposition occurs when sediment overload occurs
at any part of a stream. As explained by Oberlander
and Muller (1987:424), where a stream cuts downward into the floodplain of a valley floor, some
floodplain sediments may be left standing above
the new channel as a fluvial te1Tace. Pluvial terraces also can be formed by aggradation when increased stream energy or increased sediment input
raises the stream bed, forming an alluvial fill. These
stream behaviors often result in paired terraces along
both sides of stream valleys. Unpaired terrace deposits can result where downcutting occurs during
stream meandering.

FACTORS CONTROLLING
STREAM DOWNCUTTING
AND ALLUVIATION
Streams respond to sea level changes, structural movements, climatic conditions, differences
in bedrock, changes in climate, and to stream piracy. During the Late Quaternary, the streams of
the south-central Edwards Plateau were not noticeably influenced by any of these conditions except
by climate, and by changes in bedrock encountered
as the streams downcut into the Glen Rose (Cretaceous) bedrock.
Early geoarcheologists Albritton and Bryan
(1939: 1472) concluded that field evidence in the
Davis Mountains corroborated the working hypothesis that along ephemeral and intermittent streams,
" ... aggradation of valley floors occurs in periods of
relative humidity, and erosion by channeling occurs in periods of relative aridity." Shortly thereafter, Evans and Meade (1945:502) deduced from
their investigation of the High Plains that terrace

deposition along the streams had occurred during a
period of increased aridity. Blum and Valastro
(1989) determined that the Pedernales River in the
eastern Edwards Plateau had been an aggrading,
gravel-dominated meandering stream, operating in
a climate more moist than at present, at least between 4500 to 1000 B.P. They also determined that
the Pedernales River and its tributaries incised their
channels following a transition to drier conditions
that occurred about 1000 B.P.
Ellis et al. (1995 :412) point out that various
investigators working in North America and Great
Britain have deduced that stream downcutting occurred during periods of increased aridity, as well
as in periods of increased humidity, and that deposition resulted during wet and dry periods. I conclude that all of these relationships have occurred
in the south-central Edwards Plateau, and that
downcutting and deposition have taken place simultaneously, based on ancient and modern stream
behavior of the Sabinal and its tributaries.

TERRACE DEPOSITS IN
SOUTH-CENTRAL
EDWARDS PLATEAU
Along the upper Sabinal River valley of Uvalde
and Bandera counties, Mear ( 1953, 1995) described
and mapped five terrace deposits. In order of increasing height above stream level and age, these
were informally called the QO (present major floodplain), QI, Q2, Q3, and the Q4 (Figure 3). Based on
elevation above stream level, soil development, and
archeological data, QO, Ql and Q2 were identified
as Holocene, and Q3 and Q4 as Pleistocene. Two
remnants of older terrace deposits were noted and
described near the head of the Sabinal (see discussion in Mear 1953, 1995).
The Q4 and Q3 Pleistocene alluvial deposits
comprise the bulk of the terrace deposits in the
upper Sabinal valley. Composed predominantly of
limestone gravel with minor amounts of limestone
sand, and silt, the Q4 and Q3 are characterized by a
hard pedogenic calcium carbonate-cemented conglomerate (calcrete) in the upper 3 meters or so, in
what is the Bk-horizon of a calcic soil. The Bkhorizon is capped with a hard calcareous crust, in
which is contained solution-faceted limestone
pebbles and cobbles as described by Bryan (1929).
A reddish-brown clayey A-horizon containing
weathered chert fragments overlies the Bk-horizon.

Mear -

Terrace Deposits and Late Quaternary Climate, South-Central Edwards Plateau

I;



0

110 220

;; ;

83

i

feet

B

B'
Sabinal River
T-2
T-1

2

-

.

.

 .. I

02

...

.

.

.

. .

/. 03 "
o

eo

0

., "

0
01. / . o on o v
o o u ' :,.lf------i...J!:S':l...1t.3.-'!4'.------------- - - -_- ....
0

0

111

11o1

- - - - - - - - - - Kgr - - - - - - -

- -

Glen Rose Is.

----------------Figure 3. South to north transverse section B-B' of upper Sabinal River valley looking westward, about 11 km south of
Utopia. All surface measurements by plane table and alidade. Vertical exaggeration 5.5:1. Note truncation of QI
deposit, left side of river. Terraces are numbered in order of increasing age. Thickness of deposits estimated from
isolated exposures not necessarily in line of section.

These horizons constitute Stage III and IV calcic
soils (Machette ( 1985) that form mainly during arid
to semiarid climates. Deposits similar to the Q4 and
Q3 have been observed in the upper Frio, upper
Pedernales, and upper Medina river valleys. Archaic burned rock middens and other archeological
sites are present on the Q4 and Q3 deposits in the
upper Sabinal valley.
The younger Q2 and Ql deposits are dominantly limestone gravel in the lower one-third, and
buff featureless silt in the upper part. These recently have been eroded by the Sabinal in some
areas, but have received overbank deposition in
others. The Q2 deposit has a moderate calcic soil
development, ranging to Machette Stage II near
Utopia where post-terrace deposition has not occmTed. South of Utopia, the Q2 has only a Stage I
calcic soil, and the Bk-horizon contains only wisps
and a few soft nodules of calcium carbonate. The
QI deposit has an incipient soil at its surface, in
areas protected from flooding, where 5-15 cm of Ahorizon is present. No definable B-horizon was observed. The QO is the present major floodplain
deposit, and is still being formed.
Middle Archaic and younger cultural material
lie on the Q2, often partially buried by a veneer of
younger elastics (see Figure 2). In the valley, older
Archaic material was observed to a maximum depth
of 3 .4 m below the surface of the Q2. Midden
material and artifacts were found in all levels of the
Q 1 alluvium, although diagnostic artifacts were
scarce (Mear 1953:56).

Based on relative elevation above stream
level, soil development, and archeological sites
located on and in the terrace deposits of the upper
Sabinal, Mear ( 1995) correlated the Q2 with the
Georgetown and Fort Hood formations along
Cowhouse Creek in the east-central Lampasas Cut
Plain, which range in age from 11,000 B.P. to 5000
B.P. (Nordt et al. 1994). The Q2 also was correlated with the Q2 equivalent ("Wilson-Leonard")
terrace deposit along upper Brushy Creek in the
southern Lampasas Cut Plain, whose basal gravel
is about 11,200 years in age (Collins et al. 1993)
and its upper boundary appears to be about 4500
B.P. (Mear 1995:474).
A corrected radiocarbon date of 6284-6413
B.P. (Hester 1990) was obtained from a firepit at a
depth of about 1 m in the Q2 deposit at the Smith
site (41UV132) in the upper Sabinal valley. A
Middle Archaic burned rock midden lay above it
on the Q2. This relationship indicates that deposition of the Q2 was completed prior to about 4500
B.P.
The QI in the upper Sabinal valley was correlated with the West Range alluvium along
Cowhouse Creek. This has been dated by Nordt et
al. (1994) as ranging in age from 4 200 to 600 B .P.
Furthermore, the QO correlated with the Ford deposit, dated by them at 400 B.P. to the present
(Figure 4).
The Q3 of the Sabinal valley was correlated
by Mear (1995) with Unit D of the Pedernales
River dated by Blum and Valastro (1989) to 17 ,670

84

Texas Archeological Society

YEARS

B.P.

G)





UPPER
SABINAL
VALLEY

PEDERNALES
RIVER

COWHOUSE
CREEK

0

G
West
Range

F
?

5000

7i

J

Fort
Hood

J J J J J J J J J li

02

E

JJJJJJJJJ JJ

Georgetown

10,000
?

15,000

J J J J J JJ J J J J

JJ

03

) J JJ J! ! ! JJJ

Jackson

D

20,000
SLH/97

J J J J Soil, Poleosol

c=J Missing Sediments

Figure 4. Correlation of some stratigraphic units discussed
in the text. Column 1 is from Mear (1995), Column 2
from Blum and Valastro (1989), and Column 3 from
Nordt et al. (1994).

 230 B.P. in its upper part. The Q4 was correlated
with Unit C along the Pedernales River, believed
to be about 33,000 B.P. in part by Blum and
Valastro (1989). The Q2 is believed to be equivalent to Unit E (ranging from 10,550  130 to 7150
 90 B.P.), and the Ql to Unit F, ranging from
4140  90 to 1050  50 B.P. Finally, the QO alluvium was correlated with Blum and Valastro's Unit
G, which they dated to range from about 830  70
B.P. to 150  50 B.P. (see Figure 4).

LATE QUATERNARY
PALEOCLIMATE

In an effort to determine Late Quaternary climatic conditions along Cowhouse, Table Rock, and
Owl creeks in the east-central Lampasas Cut Plain,
Nordt et al. (1994) analyzed stable carbon isotope
ratios that revealed the past proportions of C3-C4
plant production. Nordt et al. (1994: 110) reported
that C4 plants are most abundant in warm, semiarid environments, and C3 plants are predominantly

trees, shrubs, forbs, and cool season temperate
grasses that grow in forest communities and temperate-zone plant communities. The data indicated
to them that the Late Pleistocene was cooler and
wetter than at any time during the last 15,000 years.
During the transition to the Holocene, 11,000 to
8000 B.P., the climate was transitional to warmer
and drier Holocene conditions. Between 6000 and
5000 B.P., the climate reached its maximum warm
and dry conditions. By 4000 B.P., climate was similar to that of the Early Holocene. These conditions
have persisted to the present, except for a brief
drying episode about 2000 B.P. (Nordt et al.
1994: 119) (Figure 5).
Toomey and Stafford (1994:96) reported that
at Hall's Cave in the east-central Edwards Plateau,
the proportions of vertebrate remains, pollen, and
gastropod shells in the cave deposits suggest that in
Central Texas significant warming ensued between
12,500 and 11,000 B.P. and between 7000 to 2500
B.P. Moister periods occurred before 12,500 B.P.
and 11,000 B.P. and briefly after 2500 B.P. (see
Figure 5).
In the southern United States Great Plains, including the Lampasas Cut Plain, Hall ( 1990) used
increases in hickory in the Cross Timbers and the
greater abundance of moist-habitat land snails in
rock-shelter deposits to conclude that Central Texas
was wetter than today from 2000 to 1000 years ago.
This wet period was "unprecedented in the late
Holocene" (Hall 1990:343), and resulted in low
rates of sediment deposition and the formation of a
soil having a cumulic, organic-rich, over-thickened
A-horizon (Copan soil). Hall (1990:342) also reported that at 1000 B.P. the regional climate changed
from moist to dry, and channel trenching lasting
200 years abruptly terminated a 4000 year period
of generally uninterrupted floodplain deposition on
the southern Great Plains (see Figure 5).
Collins (1995:377), using Bousman's interpretation of the reported pollen data from Weakly and
Boriack bogs located in East Central Texas, shows
a dry period about 12,000 B.P., followed by a wet
period that lasted until about 7500 B.P. At 7500
B.P., the climate became drier and stayed drier than
previously, until 2500 B.P. This dry period of about
5000 years duration is shown to be slightly wetter
during the period about 6000 to 5000 years ago. At
2500 B.P., the climate became wetter than at any
time after 7500 B.P., and has stayed more humid to
the present, interrupted by a drier period about I 000
B.P. (see Figure 5).

Mear -

Terrace Deposits and Laie Quaternary Climate, South-Central Edwards Plateau

85

from dated terrace deposits of
Cowhouse Creek. Nordt et al.
(1994: 109) report that differences
0
in the stable carbon isotopic comFord
'0
00
Ol
position of C3 and C4 plant species
Ol
?
:::.
1000
allows an assessment of the longd
i?s
I
term
stability of plant communities
West
2000
Range
and climate of a region, and relative
01
C3/C4 biomass in grassland correlates well with mean annual tem4000
perature. There is little change in
~
?
Ol
the carbon isotopic composition durOl
:::.
5000
i?s J J J J J J J J J J J J
ing deposition and burial and it is
d
Q)
possible to infer vegetation compoFort
6000
'e0
Hood
sition in alluvium, modern soils, and
z
in paleosols from the stable carbon
7000
02
isotopic composition of soil organic
0000
JJJJJJJJJ
material (Nordt et al. 1994: 110).
Because of possible changes in the
9000
amount of carbon isotopes that may
Georgetown
~
have occurred during the late QuaOl
10,000
Ol
:::.
ternary, only major shifts in C3/C4

?
production during the period can be
11,000
~
determined.
d
c
12.000
0
Collins (1995:378) reported that
2
the bog-pollen sequence at Boriack
13.000
and Weakly bogs is not wells s s s Soil, Paleosol
~ Missing Sediments
controlled chronologically. Most of
the radiocarbon dates at Hall's Cave
igure 5. Comparison of Late Quaternary paleoclimatic conditions in Central
are on bone (three on charcoal) as
- - - - - ----rexas as interpreted by Collins ( 1995), Column 1 and Column 2; Column 3
reported by Collins (1995:379), and
- -----Oy Mear from data in Hall (1990), Nordt et al. (1994 ), and Monastersky
he cone! udes that the cave
(1994). Terrace deposits in Column 4 are those of the upper Sabinal River
stratigraphy is one of the best-dated
-valley; in Column 5, those of Cowhouse Creek (Nordt et al. 1994).
and most environmentally sensitive
records in North America (Collins
Analyses of air trapped in ice cores from the
1995:379). The climatic history depicted for Hall's
Greenl and ice cap are indicative of a warm period
Cave by Collins  (1995) is based on the relative
that lasted from about 10,000 to 12,000 years ago
proportions of the least shrew (Cryptotis) (moist
(Monastersky 1994:74). This corresponds roughly
habitat) to the desert shrew (Notiosorex) (arid
to a period of drought about 11,000 B.P. evident in
habitat), but is supplemented by pollen records.
several Clovis sites in the southwestern U.S.A.
These data do not show the same climatic changes
(Haynes 1991 ).
during the past 2000 years that were detected by
At the present time, I mainly have utilized the
Hall (1990).
climati c data of Nordt et al. (1994 ), Hall (1990),
At the present time, a precise Late Quaternary
and Monastersky (1994) to establish a tentative inpaleoclimatic model is lacking for the Central Texas
terpretation of the Late Quaternary paleoclimate of
area, which includes the south-central Edwards
the southern Edwards Plateau. These conclusions
Plateau. The differences in timing of mesic and
xeric periods in the area (see Figure 5) are
are fai r ly consistent with those of Collins, Bousman,
and Toomey et al., although differing somewhat in
considerable, although the climatic changes have a
the timing of climatic changes. The investigation
roughly similar pattern through the past 12,000
by Nordt et al. utilized extensive testing of carbon
years. Perhaps these different interpretations result
isotope ratios in alluvial deposits and soils, mainly
partly from the different proxies used for the
G)

BOG
YEARS
B.P.
POLLEN



@





HALL'S
CAVE
(tentative)

THIS
ARTICLE

UPPER
SABINAL
VALLEY

COWHOUSE
CREEK

I

J
*

St.Hl9 7

86

Texas Archeological Society

climatic interpretations. As postulated by Ellis et
al. (1995:413), climatic models may differ because
the proxies from which the interpretations are made
may record the same climatic events at different
levels of temporal precision, some reacting almost
immediately and others taking many years to change
sufficiently to be recorded in the plant and animal
remains. Ellis et al. (1995:412) report striking
changes in the pollen record appear to take several
millennia to be discernible.

RELATIONSHIP OF
PALEOCLIMATE AND
STREAM ACTION

valley is drought-prone, and droughts of one or
more years duration alternate with wet periods. The
area is characterized by severe rainstorms such as
the one that occurred in the valley in July 1932,
during which 31.28 inches of rain fell in 24 hours
(U.S. War Department 1944). This event caused a
flood that stripped some silt from the upper Ql and
Q2 alluvium in localized areas, and deposited silt
on other parts of the terrace deposits. The modem
deposits on the QI and Q2 form thin veneers that
are equivalent to the QO (see Evans 1962 for additional descriptions of similar depositional effects
along the Rio Grande in the Falcon-Zapata area).

CONCLUSIONS
A period of downcutting occurred shortly before 11,000 B.P. along the Pedernales River valley,
along the upper Brushy Creek and Cowhouse Creek
in the Lampasas Cut Plain, and probably along the
upper Sabinal River. Gustavson et al. (1991 :483)
report a period of downcutting in the High Plains
between 11,500 and 11, 100 B.P., followed by aggradation prior to 11,000 B.P. This regional downcutting
took place during a period of climatic change from
cool and wet to warm and dry conditions.
Deposition of the Q2 and its equivalents in
Central Texas apparently ensued from about 11,000
to 5000 B.P. This was a period of generally increasing warmth and dryness in the area.
About 5000 years ago, a period of predominant downcutting took place prior to the deposition
of Unit F (Blum and Valastro 1989) along the
Pedernales River, the QI in the upper Sabinal valley, and its equivalent along upper Brushy Creek
(Mear 1995). The downcutting occurred during a
change in climate from warmer and drier to cooler
and wetter conditions. This downcutting may have
resulted from an increase in carrying capacity of
the streams, and a reduction of sediment supplied
from the drainage area. After equilibrium was regained by the Sabinal and its tributaries, the Ql
was deposited during a cooler and wetter climate.
The effects on stream behavior in the southcentral Edwards Plateau by the brief drying episode
about 2000 B.P. are unknown. Minor downcutting
by the Sabinal probably resulted from the change in
climate from moist to dry that occurred 1000 years
ago and was accompanied by channel trenching of
streams throughout the southern High Plains (Hall
1990:342). The present climate in the upper Sabinal

Predominant channel trenching by the upper
Sabinal River occurred several times since the Late
Pleistocene, during periods of increased warmth
and dryness. But, at least once, about 5000 B.P.,
prior to the deposition of Q 1 sediments and its
Central Texas equivalents, the Sabinal downcut its
channel during an indicated period of climatic
change from dry and hot to a cooler and moister
period. All of the periods of downcutting were followed by periods of predominant aggradation. This
leads to the conclusion that downcutting followed
climatic events that caused disequilibrium in the
stream system, such as an increase of carrying capacity or decreased sediment supply; following the
periods of predominant downcutting, the supply of
alluvium fed into the Sabinal largely exceeded its
carrying capacity and the Holocene Q2 and Q l
sediments were deposited.
Downcutting and deposition can occur simultaneously along a stream, during both dry and humid climatic regimes. A break in sedimentation can
occur in one part of a stream valley at the same
time that deposition is occurring in other parts of
the valley. Most stream terrace deposits contain
minor unconformities that resulted from various
activities, such as localized scouring by side tributaries, migration of streams, and interruptions in
regional and localized sedimentation that can result
from changes in a stream's course, or from climatic
changes. The upper and lower limits of a terrace
deposit range in age throughout a river basin, and
the formations are time-transgressive. They may be
overlain by a veneer of younger colluvial, alluvial,
or anthropogenic sediment.

Mear -

Terrace Deposits and Late Quaternary Climate, South-Central Edwards Plateau

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Sincere appreciation is extended to Thomas R.
Hester for furnishing archeological information
from the Smith site (41UV132), and for reviewing
this article. Tonie K. Mear typed the article, and
provided many useful suggestions for improvements
in it. Her continued assistance is gratefully acknowledged. Glen L. Evans has freely shared the results
of his geological studies of stream deposits in Texas,
and acted as the field supervisor during the original
mapping of the upper Sabinal in 1951-1952. His
contributions and review of the article are sincerely
appreciated. The article also benefited greatly from
the review by Tom Gustavson and Ed Garner.

REFERENCES CITED
Albritton, C. C., Jr. and K. Bryan
1939 Quaternary Stratigraphy in the Davis Mountains,
Trans-Pecos, Texas. Bulletin of the Geological Society of America 50: 1423-1474.
Blum, M.D. and S. Valastro, Jr.
1989 Response of the Pedernales River of Central Texas
to Late Holocene Climatic Change. Annals of the
Association of American Geographers 79(3):435456.
Bryan, K.
1929 Solution-facetted Limestone Pebbles. American
Journal of Science 18: 193-208.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:361-400.
Collins, M. B., C. B. Bousman, P.R. Goldberg, and P. Takac,
J.C. Guy, J. L. Lanata, T. W. Stafford, and V. T. Holliday
1993 The Paleoindian Sequence at the Wilson-Leonard
Site, Texas. Current Research in the Pleistocene
10:10-12.
Ellis, L. W., G. L. Ellis, and C. D. Frederick
1995 Implications of Environmental Diversity in the Central Texas Archeological Region. Bulletin of the
Texas Archeological Society 66:401-423.
Evans, G. L.
1962 Notes on Terraces of the Rio Grande, Falcon-Zapata
Area, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
Society 32:33-45.

87

Evans, G. L. and G. E. Meade
1945 Quaternary of the Texas High Plains. In Contributions to Geology 1944, pp. 485-507. Publication
No. 440 I. University of Texas, Austin.
Gustavson, T. C., R. W. Baumgardner, Jr., S. C. Caran, V. T.
Holliday, H. H. Menart, J.M. O'Neill, and C. C. Reeves, Jr.
1991 Quaternary geology of the Southern High Plains
and an adjacent segment of the Rolling Plains. In
Quaternary Nonglacial Geology. The Geology of
North America, K-2, edited by R. B. Morrison, pp.
477-501. The Geological Society of America, Boulder.
Hall, S. A.
1990 Channel Trenching and climatic change in the southern U.S. Great Plains. Geology 18:342-345.
Haynes, C. V., Jr.
1991 Geoarchaeological and Paleohydrological Evidence
for a Clovis-age Drought in North America and its
Bearing on Extinction. Quaternary Research
35:438-450.
Hester, T. R.
1990 Radiocarbon Dates from Archaeological Excavations in Medina County. La Tierra 17(4):1-3.
Kier, R. S., L. E. Garner, and F. L. Brown, Jr.
1977 Land Resources of Texas. Bureau of Economic Geology, The University of Texas at Austin.
Machette. M .N.
1985 Calcic soils of the southwestern United States. Special Paper 203. Geological Society of America,
Boulder.
Mear, C .E.
1953 Quaternary Geology of upper Sabinal River valley,
Uvalde and Bandera Counties, Texas. Master's Thesis, Department of Geology, The University of Texas
at Austin.
1995

Quaternary Geology of upper Sabinal River valley,
Uvalde and Bandera Counties, Texas.
Geoarchaeology 10(6):457-480.

Monastersky, R.
1994 Staggering through the Ice Ages. Science News
146(5):74-76.
Nordt, L. C., T. W. Boutton, C. T. Hallmark, and M. R.
Waters.
1994 Late Quaternary Vegetation and Climate Changes
in Central Texas Based on the Isotopic Composition of Organic Carbon. Quaternary Research
41:109-120.

88

Texas Archeological Society

North American Commission on Stratigraphic Nomenclature
1983 North American Stratigraphic Code. American Association of Petroleum Geologists Bulletin
67(5):841-875.
Oberlander, T. M. and R. A. Muller
1987 Essentials of Physical Geography Today. Random
House, New York.
Shelton, J. S.
1966 Geology Illustrated. W.H. Freeman and Company,
San Francisco.
Toomey, R. S. III, M .D. Blum, and S. Valastro, Jr.
1993 Late Quaternary Climates and Environments of the
Edwards Plateau, Texas. Global and Planetary
Change 7:299-320.

Toomey, R. S. HI and T. W. Stafford, Jr.
1994 Paleoenvironmental and Radiocarbon Study of the
Deposits from Hall's Cave, Kerr County, Texas. In
Abstracts, 52nd Plains Anthropological Conference,
p. 96.
U.S. War Department
1944 Report on Survey of Nueces River and tributaries,
Texas,for Flood Control and Allied Purposes. Vol.
3. U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Galveston.

Infierno Phase Pottery of the
Lower Pecos River Region
Solveig A. Turpin and David G. Robinson

ABSTRACT
Although the Lower Pecos region is usually considered almost aceramic, small numbers of sherds have been
collected from 12 sites, most of them on terraces paralleling the major rivers or on promontories overlooking
spring-fed water holes. The vast majority of the sherds are undecorated brown wares made of clays that naturally
include some sand particles. Surface treatment is generally limited to smoothing and polishing although redslipped pieces may appear late in the pottery tradition. The most distinctive characteristic is the combination of
bone and calcium carbonate tempering material, evident as large white inclusions protruding from a pinkish-tan
paste that is incompletely fired, leaving a darkened core. This ceramic ware is an index artifact of the Late
Prehistoric/Protohistoric Infierno phase in the Lower Pecos region. Similarities with some historic indigenous
pottery at the Apache mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz suggest the basic constituents were adapted by native
potters to the new technology of wheel-made ceramics.

INTRODUCTION
Although ceramics are so rare in the Lower
Pecos cultural area that the region was omitted
from a recent resume of pottery traditions in Texas
(Perttula et al. 1995), bone and calcium carbonatetempered, plain brownware sherds are a defining
attribute of the Infierno phase in the local chronology. Dibble (1978) established the Late Prehistoric
or Protohistoric Infierno phase on the basis of the
type site, Infierno Camp, where tipi rings, or circular stone alignments made of paired limestone
blocks, are surrounded by small stemmed arrow
points, steeply beveled end scrapers, four-beveled
knives, and fragments of plain pottery. Survey later
demonstrated a relationship between tipi rings and
cairn burials that may indicate the two are contemporaneous. The Infierno phase became an accepted
division of the Lower Pecos chronology, occupying the period between A.D. l 500 and 1780
(Turpin 1991 ), although the steeply beveled end
scrapers are the only typical artifact class that has
been analyzed and reported in detail (Bement and
Turpin 1987).
Infierno phase ceramics, albeit fragmentary and
in small quantities, have been recovered from at
least 12 sites in the Lower Pecos proper, specifically

southeastern Val Verde County, although the
sources that report them are scattered and not widely
circulated. Similarities between the majority of the
sherds that have been recovered and one class of
historic indigenous pottery from the late 18th
century Mission San Lorenzo de la Santa Cruz on
the Nueces River, I 00 km east of the Lower Pecos
region (Tunnell and Newcomb 1969), suggest an
affiliation with Protohistoric and Historic migrants
who entered the region after A.D. 1500.

THE SAMPLE INVENTORY
In the Lower Pecos region, ceramic fragments
have been recovered from Infierno Camp
(41VV446: Dibble 1978; Turpin 1982); Javelina
Bluff (41VV11 : McClurkan 1968 ); Coon tail Spin
(41VV82: Nunley et al. 1965); Devil's Mouth
(41VV188: Johnson 1961, 1964; Sorrow 1968);
Black Cave Camp (41VV365: Turpin 1982);
Baker's Crossing (41VV424: Word 1978); Brite
Terrace (41VV662); Live Oak Hole (41VV828:
Turpin and Bement 1989); Dolan Creek Terrace
(41VV869); two unreported Rio Grande terrace
sites, 41VV1723 and 41VVl724 (Billingsley, 1996
personal communication); and an unidentified rock

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69 (1998)

90

Texas Archeological Society

Texas
USA

41W869,.

Coahuila
MEXICO

r

N

Rio

I

Figure 1. The Lower Pecos Region. The majority of the ceramic-bearing sites are on or
near the Rio Grande

shelter on the Pecos River (Figure 1). Individual
specimens from all the sites total more than 50 and
less than l 00.
Of the 58 sherds reported or known to the
authors, all but three are similar in color, firing
temperature, paste, temper, and finish. The exceptions are decorated sherds: one from the unidentified rock shelter on the Pecos River and two from
Coontail Spin on the Rio Grande. The more common plain brownware may have developed into
one strain of historic indigenous pottery found at
Mission San Lorenzo. To further explore this relationship, 13 sherds-two each from the mission,
41VV11, 41VV188, 41VV365, and41VV446, and
one each from 41VV424, 41RG26, and 41FY1were thin-sectioned and subjected to macroscopic
analysis.

THE CERAMIC-PRODUCING
SITES OF THE LOWER PECOS

Rio Grande Tributaries and Terraces
Infierno Camp has more ceramics than all the
other Lower Pecos sites added together, but only a
few were collected before the site was closed to
further study. High on an upland divide between
two tributaries to the Rio Grande and overlooking a
permanent spring, over 100 tipi rings provided the
context for an artifact assemblage that is clearly
different from the Archaic tool kit. Dibble ( 1978)
described this large open camp site and its artifacts,
using it as the type site for his definition of the
Infierno phase, the latest prehistoric division of his
Lower Pecos chronology. Dozens of plain

Turpin and Robinson - Infierno Phase Pottery of the Lower Pecos River Region
brownware sherds were clearly associated with
small triangular arrow points, steeply beveled end
scrapers, four-beveled knives, and circular stone
alignments that presumably served as pole supports
for brush or hide-covered structures. Based on the
highly specific features and tool types, Dibble
(1978) estimated that the site was Protohistoric in
age and served as a base camp for bison hunters
who exploited the expansion of the Plains biota
into the Lower Pecos sometime after AD. 1500, a
supposition that is not inconsistent with the ethnographic record (Turpin 1987). The Infierno phase is
roughly contemporaneous with, but not an extension of, the Toyah phase of Central and South Texas
(Turpin 1991). Dibble thought that the Infierno pottery differed from the more generic Leon Plain
wares of Texas and explored its possible relationship with ceramics from the Panhandle.
Only a few hundred meters from Infierno
Camp, 13 sherds, possibly from the same vessel,
were collected from Black Cave Camp, an Infierno
phase artifact scatter that consisted of steeply beveled end scrapers, a four-beveled knife, and ceramics found atop a high promontory near a series of
burial cairns. The sherds were described as 2 to 4
mm thick, light tan with a darkened core, and tempered by aplastic inclusions of calcite, rounded
quartz, and black and grey rounded and angular
volcanic material (Turpin 1982:124-125). Most surfaces were roughened from weathering but one fragment had a slightly redder polished finish.
Excavations at Coontail Spin, a large rock shelter on the Rio Grande, produced two sherds that
apparently differed from each other and from the
bulk of the Lower Pecos ceramic inventory. The
larger of the two, a punctated rim fragment, was
unlike the rest of Lower Pecos sherds in paste,
color, surface treatment, and texture. The other, a
body sherd, was described as having a fine-textured reddish paste with interior and exterior
smoothing. Reportedly, its ornamentation consisted
of "two concentric arcs of small, closely spaced
punctations made with a sharp, needle-like objectperhaps a cactus thorn" (Nunley et al. 1965:96).
Unfortunately, this sherd could not be located in
the Texas Archeological Research laboratory
(TARL) collections so any resemblance to the undecorated specimens attributed to the Infierno phase
cannot be verified.
One sherd was found on the limestone bedrock
adjacent to a circular stone feature at the Live Oak

91

Hole site, a tipi ring site overlooking the historic
pictograph at Live Oak Hole on Cow Creek, a
tributary of the Rio Grande east of the Pecos River
(Turpin and Bement 1989). Slightly downstream,
on the banks of the Rio Grande below Amistad
Dam, Turpin and Bement collected four sherds
from the surface of the Brite Terrace site, a site
exposed in the walls of a borrow pit. The National
Park Service's survey of river terraces exposed
during the drought and subsequent lowering of
Amistad Reservoir encountered sherds on two topographically similar locations along the Rio
Grande (Billingsley, 1996 personal communication; TARL site files). Seven pieces of pottery, two
of which fit together, were collected from
41VV1723 and five were found on neighboring
41VV1724. One of the latter was a rim sherd.
According to Sandra Billingsley, who recorded
these sites, the ceramics outwardly fit the description of Infierno phase pottery.
Devils River Drainage
The first report on the Devil's Mouth site, a
deeply stratified, multi-component terrace site
(Johnson 1961 :279), mentions three sherds. By
1964, excavations had produced six sherds that
Johnson (1964:73) described as 5 to 8 mm thick,
smooth but not polished, and tan or cream-colored
with a surface hardness that equaled 2.5-3 on Moh's
scale. The paste was said to be soft and porous,
tempered with abundant bone fragments, clay lumps
or ground pottery sherds (grog), and a small amount
of sand. One was associated with arrow points between 60-80 cm deep in Area B, and five came
from the upper four strata of Area A. The third
season at Devil's Mouth produced two more sherds,
similar to those recovered earlier but thinner. Sorrow (1968:42) described them as reddish-tan with a
darker core. The aplastic inclusions were thought
to be crushed bone with some sand. The basal sherd,
a fragment from a flat-bottomed bowl, was wellsmoothed but not polished, and the smaller body
sherd was polished on the exterior surface. Sorrow
(1968:42) states that three field seasons produced a
total of 11 sherds, but a review of the collections
and his calculations suggests that there were only
eight: three from the first season, three from the
second, and two from the third.
Test excavations at the Javelina Bluff site, an
upland open camp that overlooked the Devils River

92

Texas Archeological Society

prior to the impoundment of Amistad Reservoir,
produced 12 sherds in the upper three levels of one
excavation unit. The ceramic fragments were described as ranging in color from orange-tan to buff
and gray (McClurkan 1968:8). The specimens were
smoothed and one had a polished exterior. Temper,
thickness, or paste were not discussed but the sherds
were likened to those from Devil's Mouth in appearance and composition.
James H. Word recorded 41VV424, a terrace
site on the banks of the Devils River near Baker's
Crossing (TARL files), where he collected a fragment of a ceramic pipe and two sherds which he
described as reddish pink, quite firm, 3 to 4 mm
thick, and tempered with a white material, either
bone or crushed caliche. To him, the pottery
seemed similar to sherds that he had seen from the
San Angelo area, and material he had collected
from the Floydada Country Club site (41 FLl;
Word 1963:57, 1968).
Turpin and Bement collected yet another sherd,
13 steeply beveled end scrapers, and four arrow
points from the Dolan Creek Terrace site, paralleling Dolan Creek, across from an historic pictograph, a Spanish mission scene at 41 VV343.
Reportedly, the landowner also found a metal arrow point on this site.
Pecos River Drainage
An incised rim sherd in a private collection
reportedly came from a unspecified rock shelter on
the Pecos River. This fragment of brownware
differs from Infierno phase pottery in its finetextured paste, sand tempering, higher firing
temperature, and decoration. The exterior of a
simple rim was apparently encircled by a zigzag
line about 1 cm in height.
Other Locations
North of the Lower Pecos region, one specimen used in this preliminary analysis is from
Reagan County. A sherd that outwardly looked very
much like Infierno phase pottery was eroding from
a dissected sand drift on the north shore of Big
Lake (41RG26), the largest playa lake in Texas.
This ceramic fragment was generally associated
with Perdiz and Toyah arrow points (Turpin 1994).
Long ago, collectors and amateur archeologists
working even farther north recognized similarities

in sherds from sites near Abilene, San Angelo, and
Rotan that in turn are very like the Lower Pecos
complement discussed here. The pottery was
informally called Abilene Brown (Word 1978) and
presumably was similar to ceramics reported in the
1930s by Ray (1935; Griffin 1935). Word (1978)
corresponded with Dibble about the possible
Infierno-Abilene link based on the perceived
similarities, and loaned him a comparative sample
from the Floydada Country Club site (41FL1). One
of those sherds was thin-sectioned for this analysis.
In addition, one of two sherds collected during
excavation of Sotol Shelter (41CX9), a rock shelter
in Crockett County (Lorrain 1968), may be relevant to this discussion in that it was associated
with arrow points and radiocarbon dates, although
its physical description is not conclusive. Hearths
associated with arrow points and ceramic fragments,
one of which has crushed rock temper only vaguely
reminiscent of the Infierno sherds, produced uncorrected, uncalibrated ages of 400  60 (Tx-649) and
370  60 B.P. (Tx-650). The I-sigma calibrated
date range of the hearths is AD. 1440-1640 (Stuiver
and Reimer 1993, Method A). In fact, a number of
sherds from Crockett and Pecos counties were reported by Rogers (1972), who attributed many of
them to Caddoan or Jornada Mogollon influences,
leaving only a few that might potentially match the
Infierno sample. However, none of these specimens
were available for our analyses.

Mission San Lorenzo
de la Santa Cruz
The history and archeology of Mission San
Lorenzo are discussed in detail by Tunnell and
Newcomb (1969). Established for the Apaches, the
mission was only in existence from 1762 to 1771
when it was abandoned and left to disintegrate.
Archeological excavations unearthed massive
amounts of pottery, including several sherds whose
description was given as "soft paste, wheel-made
earthenware" (Tunnell and Newcomb 1969:80-81 ).
Six sherds assigned to this group were borrowed
from T ARL for this analysis. Only one of these
evidences wheel turning, and none bear the red slip
attributed to this category (Tunnell and Newcomb
1969:80-81).
Coil undulations are visible on some sherds,
indicating that these specimens were hand-made.
The paste has a granular sandy texture and the

Turpin and Robinson - lnfierno Phase Pottery of the Lower Pecos River Region
aplastic inclusions are small angular fragments of
calcium carbonate. Some, but not all, of the sherds
also contained crushed bone. On most of them, the
paste has oxidized to a light orange on the surface;
and the core is dark gray and constitutes up to onehalf of the sherd. Gross characteristics, such as the
tempering materials, paste, color, and firing temperatures, align this particular sample of sherds with
the Lower Pecos assemblage so two sherds were
thin-sectioned for the next stage of the analysis.

ANALYSIS OF SELECTED
SHERDS
Point counts of the 13 thin-sectioned sherds
demonstrate the similarities and differences within
a sample that outwardly appeared to be uniformly
one type (Table 1). Perhaps typical of poorly fired,
hand-molded ceramics, the variability within any
one sherd often exceeded that between sherds from
different locations. Two 100-point counts per sherd
were averaged to arrive at the percentages provided
in the table.
The two sherds from Javelina Bluff (41VV11 ),
share smooth texture, straight fracture, and pore
space in fine and very fine voids. Both have subrounded to sub-angular and angular black to white
particles, a mixture of limestone and bone. One
sherd ( 1119) has smoothed interior and exterior
surfaces but the other ( 1131) has a smoothed interior and polished exterior. The latter sherd is pinkish-tan throughout; the other has a dull grey core
streak interrupting its pinkish-tan body. The variety
in color and surface attributes mitigate against attributing both sherds to the same vessel but this
variability may also be the result of casual finishing
and poorly controlled firing.
Both the thin-sectioned sherds from the Devils
Mouth site (41VV188), have pinkish to dark tan
clay bodies with carbon core streaks. Their unifying characteristic is the inclusion of fine to coarse
and sub-rounded to sub-angular limestone and bone
particles. One sherd has granular texture and wavy
fracture, and the other has a smooth texture and
straight fracture. The former has smoothed exterior
and interior surfaces while the other has a polished
interior and a smoothed exterior. Body particles
protrude from the smoothed surfaces of both sherds.
Both sherds from Black Camp Cave
(41 VV365) share irregularly-shaped pore space, fine

93

to very coarse black to white particles of limestone
and bone, a distinct carbon streak, pinkish-tan clay
bodies, and smoothed exterior and interior surfaces
with protruding particles. One has smooth texture
and straight fracture, while the other has a rough
texture and wavy fracture.
The sherd from Baker's Crossing, 41VV424,
has granular texture and wavy fracture; pore space
in irregularly shaped voids; and fine-to-coarse, subangular to sub-rounded black to white particles of
limestone and bone. The interior clay body is pinkish-tan, and its surface is smoothed; the exterior is
blackened by a carbon flare and polished.
The two sherds from Infierno Camp
(41VV446) have irregular fracture and texture that
is coarser than either Leon Plain pottery of coastal
and South Texas or Mogollon brownware of the
Trans-Pecos. The clay bodies have very small
amounts of fine sand with rounded edges, suggesting it probably is a natural inclusion. The most
obvious tempering agent consists of large white
particles of limestone, partially slaked by the firing process. Voids in the ceramic fabric are rodlike, their interior surfaces scored longitudinally,
indicating additional tempering with clipped grass
or herbivore dung. Both sherds have thick black
core streaks. One sherd has a red exterior and interior, the other is yellowish-tan. Both were manufactured by coiling; the surfaces are haphazardly
polished with a hard instrument that left polishing
marks and smeared the outer layer of clay. The
polishing action created both piles of clay and gaps
in the surface.
The small fragment of plain pottery from the
Floydada Country Club site (41 FL I) has even fracture and smooth texture. Both exterior and interior
surfaces are smoothed and paste particles are visible on the surface. Paste colors range from yellowish tan to grayish-tan; the core has a wide gray
carbon streak. The paste has medium to coarse
voids and numerous medium to coarse sub-angular and angular particles that range in color from
gray to white. The sherd failed to effervesce in hydrochloric acid, the first indication that the particles
are bone or bone phosphate without the calcium
carbonate that is the key diagnostic element in
Infierno ceramics (see Matson 1935 for a discussion of these tempering materials). This preliminary finding was confirmed by the point count (see
Table I), which clearly segregates the Floydada
sherd from the Lower Pecos sample based on the

\0

Table 1. Thin-Section Analyses of Selected Lower Pecos Sherds
Site No.

41VV11

41VVI I

1119

1131

41VV188 41VV188 41VV365

41VV365

41VV424 41VV446 41VV446

~

MSL

MSL

41FLI

41RG26

I

22

67

FL-12

GQU-1

I

~
~

""

;i..

Thin Section

751

761

3651

3652

424

GQU-1

GQU-2

Texture

smooth

smooth

smooth

granular

smooth

rough

granular

coarse

coarse

blocky

even

smooth

coarse

Surface Color

pink-tan

pink-tan

dark tan

pink-tan

pink-tan

pink-tan

pink-tan

red

yellowtan

redbrown

red

yellowtan

red-tan

I

;:i

~

(1)
~

~

l)q

-....
~
!::i

I

~
~

(I)

smooth

sm/pol*

sm/pol

smooth

smooth

smooth

sm/pol

polish

polish

smooth

sm/pol

smooth

smooth '

64.5-r

53.5

58.5

61.0

59.S

58.0

66.0

52.5

55.0

52.0

58.5

45.5

41.5

Pore Space

4.5

5.0

3.5

11.5

11.0

7.0

3.0

19.5

17.5

4.0

1.5

25.0

10.5

Quartz

2.5

2.5

13.0

5.0

1.5

1.0

1.5

11.5

17.0

7.5

12.0

15.0

16.5

Bone

12.0

30.0

17.0

18.0

24.0

30.0

21.0

13.0

8.0

36.0

20.0

10.0

Limestone

10.5

5.5

3.5

1.5

1.5

2.0

4.5

2.5

2.5

-

3.5

-

-

-

-

-

Finishing
Matrix

Calcite
Chert

-

-

Fe-stain

3.0

2.0

4.0

2.5

1.0

Clay balls

3.0

1.0

0.5

0.5

1.5

-

-

-

-

-

Other

* sm/pol = smooth/polished

1.0

-

-

-

-

2.0

4.0

1.0

1.5

-

-

-

-

-

-

** Appears as black particles, not red patches
*** Quartz rock 5.5%, Orthoclase 7.5%, Microline l .5%, Pyroxene 3.5%, and Unknown 6.0%
t =percentage

-

0.5

-

-

-

-

3.5

4.0

-

-

-

7.5**

24.0***

q-

Turpin and Robinson - Infierno Phase Pottery of the Lower Pecos River Region
absence of limestone tempering material and the
minor presence of chert.
The ceramic fragment from 41 RG26 was very
small, about 6 mm thick, and almost destroyed by
thin-sectioning. This sherd has reddish-brown interior and exterior surfaces and a grey-brown core.
Its texture is coarse. The ceramic fabric has numerous coarse white particles and a few fine black
particles. The thin section analysis clearly isolates
this sherd based on the absence of bone and limestone tempering and the inclusion of irregular
crushed quartz rock as opposed to quartz sand, feldspars (orthoclase, microcline ), igneous silicates
(pyrozene ), and unknown particles (see Table 1).
The two thin-sectioned sherds from Mission
San Lorenzo vary in a number of attributes. One
has a crazed, blocky texture while the other has
even texture. The latter has a polished exterior and
smoothed interior; the former has smoothed interior and exterior surfaces. Although both have reddish exteriors, neither is slipped. They have thick
black carbon streaks and fine to coarse white particles of bone and/or limestone as well; very fine,
well-rounded sand particles may be naturally occurring in the ceramic paste. The point count demonstrated that one of the sherds (67) was tempered
with both bone and limestone, like the Lower Pecos
sample, but the only aplastic additive identified in
the other specimen was bone.

Summary Descriptions
The sum of the sherds examined macroscopically and in thin-section indicates that Lower
Pecos pottery is predominantly low-to-moderately
fired earthenware, perhaps a variation on the
widespread tradition found in Central, South, and
West Texas and often subsumed under the generic
name Leon Plain. The Lower Pecos pottery is coilmade and fired in an open oxidizing atmosphere
with few controls. Surface colors range from orangered through yellowish-brown to pinkish and light
tan. Black and gray carbon streaks are common in
the core of the clay bodies and carbon flares
occasionally darken the exterior surfaces.
Smoothing and polishing are the most common
finishing modes, although initial brushing is
occasionally indicated by marks. The red slip
attributed to Mission San Lorenzo pottery may be a
late introduction or it may imply yet another variety
of simple earthenware.

95

Ceramic pastes are alluvial clays with
inclusions of very fine quartz sand particles.
Medium and coarse rounded chunks of hematite
are often accidentally incorporated into the clay
body. The most dramatic tempering agent is crushed
calcium carbonate (limestone) which gives the
sherds their distinctive appearance, especially when
coarse particles protrude from the smoothed and
polished surfaces. All of the thin-sectioned sherds
from the Lower Pecos proper contain both bone
and limestone aplastic material, a combination found
in only one sherd from Mission San Lorenzo in the
outside sample. Variability is expectable in a shortlived site such as the mission where people from
different ethnic groups entered and exited at will.
However, the use of calcium carbonate tempering
agents in the Lower Pecos ceramics and its absence
in the sherds from the Big Lake and Floydada sites
are consistent with local geology and may indicate
local manufacture.
Little is known about vessel forms. Sorrow
(1968:42) collected one basal sherd from a flatbottomed bowl at the Devil's Mouth site; a few
simple rims were noted at Infierno Camp.
Generally, vessel walls ranged in thickness from 2
to 9 mm. The Mission San Lorenzo sherds were
considered to be fragments from large jars, unlike
the prehistoric vessels. Wheel turning of some of
the plain pottery from Mission San Lorenzo
probably reflects the indigenous application of
imported technology to an old art to create new
forms and may signal the end of the production of
typical ceramics.

DISCUSSION
The typological classification of Infierno ceramics is currently limited by the small sample
size, all of which was collected from the Lower
Pecos region: more specifically from open camp
sites on the terraces of the major rivers or on promontories overlooking spring-fed tributaries. Only
three sherds, two of which are definitely different
from the bulk of the ceramic inventory, came from
rock shelters-Coontail Spin and an unidentified
Pecos River site-in the Lower Pecos proper. Four
of the ceramic-bearing sites (41VV365, 41VV446,
41 VV828, and 41 VV869) clearly belong to the
Infierno phase artifact and feature complex with
stone circles, small arrow points, and/or steeply

96

Texas Archeological Society

beveled end scrapers. Two of these are on high
promontories; all four overlook permanent springs
or water holes.
The estimated age of the Infierno phase is
post-AD. 1500 (Turpin 1991 :36-37), a time not inconsistent with the sherds found at the eastern limits of the current sample at Mission San Lorenzo
(Tunnell and Newcomb 1969). The commonality
in gross characteristics and the combined limestone/bone temper in one of the thin-sections from
the Mission assemblage suggests that the basic
constituents of Infierno pottery were carried into
the post-contact period by local artisans. Thus, temporal parameters of A.D. 1500-1780 are a logical
first estimate.
Speculation on the origin of the ceramic technology employed by the people who accidentally
left these few sherds on the banks of the Rio
Grande and its tributaries is surely premature given
the small size of the sample. Whether they constitute a distinct ceramic type or are more comfortably envisioned as a variety of Leon Plain produced
on the western periphery of the Toyah phase, it is
clear that specific similarities in paste, temper, and
finishing unite these few sherds into a useful tool
for identifying the Infierno phase sites and people
late in the prehistory of the Lower Pecos region.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Sandra Billingsley and Bryant Saner were instrumental in directing us to the unreported sherds
found during the Amistad Reservoir low-water survey. Lee Bement was the first to spot the sherds at
41 VV365, 41VV662, 41 VV828, and 41 VV869.
Several of the thin-sectioned sherds were obtained
from the Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, some in the 1980s with the consent of Dr. Dee
Ann Story, and others more recently with permission granted by Dr. Thomas R. Hester. Other specimens were contributed by James H. Word and
David S. Dibble, who initiated their correspondence about Infierno pottery in the 1970s. This
paper is a logical continuation of Dibble's work.

REFERENCES CITED
Bement, L. C. and S. A. Turpin
1987 Technological Continuity and Functional Change:
The Case of the Dorso End Scraper. Plains Anthropologist 32(116):191-196.
Dibble, D. S.
1978 The Infierno Phase: Evidence for a Late Occupation
in the Lower Pecos River Region, Texas. Paper
presented at the 43rd annual meeting of the Society
for American Archaeology, Tucson, Arizona.
Griffin, J.B.
1935 Report on Pottery Sherds from near Abilene, Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 7:57-69.
Johnson, L., Jr.
1961 The Devil's Mouth Site: A River Terrace Midden,
Diablo Reservoir, Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 30:253-285.
1964

The Devil's Mouth Site, A Stratified Campsite at
Amistad Reservoir. Archaeology Series 6. Department of Anthropology, The University of Texas at
Austin.

Lorrain, D.
1968 Archeological Investigations in Northwestern
Crockett County, Texas, 1966-1967. Archeological
Program Report 12. State Building Commission,
Austin.
Matson, F. R.
1935 Identification of Aplastic Present in Pottery Sherds
from Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological
and Paleontologica! Society 7:68-69.
McClurkan, B. B.
1968 Test Excavations, Javelina Bluff, Val Verde County,
Texas. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin.
Nunley, J.P., L. F. Duffield, and E. B. Jelks
1965 Excavations at Amistad Reservoir. Miscellaneous
Papers 3. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The
University of Texas at Austin
Perttula, T. K., M. R. Miller, R. A. Ricklis, D. J. Prikryl, and
C. Lintz
1995 Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66:175-235.

Turpin and Robinson - lnfierno Phase Pottery of the Lower Pecos River Region
Ray, C. N.
1935 The Pottery Complex Artifacts of the Abilene Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological and Paleontological Society 7:70-88.
Rogers, R. M.
1972 Ceramics, Pecos River Drainage, Crockett and Pecos
Counties. Transactions of the Seventh Regional Archeological Symposium for Southeastern New
Mexico and Western Texas, pp. 47-67.
Sorrow, W. M.
1968 The Devil's Mouth Site: The Third Season, 1967.
Papers of the Texas Archeological Salvage Project
14. Texas Archeological Salvage Project, The University of Texas at Austin.
Stuiver, M. and P. J. Reimer
1993 Radiocarbon Calibration Program, Rev. 3.0.3. Quaternary Isotope Laboratory, University of Washington, Seattle.
Tunnell, C. D. and W.W. Newcomb, Jr.
1969 A Lipan Apache Mission, San Lorenzo de la Santa
Cruz, 1762-1771. Bulletin 14. Texas Memorial Museum, The University of Texas at Austin.
Turpin, S. A.
1982 Seminole Canyon: The Art and the Archeology. Research Report 83. Texas Archeological Survey, The
University of Texas at Austin.

1991

97

Time Out of Mind: The Radiocarbon Chronology of
the Lower Pecos River Region. In Papers on Lower
Pecos Prehistory, edited by S. A. Turpin, pp. 1-49.
Studies in Archeology 8. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

1994 A Reconnaissance of Big Lake Draw: Implications
for Prehistoric Playa Utilization, Reagan County,
Texas. Technical Series 40. Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.
Turpin, S. A. and L. C. Bement
1989 The Live Oak Hole Complex: Plains Indian Art and
Occupation in the Lower Pecos River Region. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 59:65-82.
Word, J. H.
1963 Floydada Country Club Site. Bulletin of the South
Plains Archeological Society 1:37-62.
1968

Letter re 41VV424 to Dr. Dee Ann Story, dated
March 18, 1968. On file at the Texas Archeological
Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at
Austin.

1978

Letter to David S. Dibble, dated June 3, 1978. In
possession of the authors.

Texas Archeological Society

I 00

Sacramento
Mountains

Organ
Mountains

'\%

\~

\~
\

0
\
\

I
I
\

''

' '\

I

I

I
I



\

Fort Bliss Military Reservation

Las Cruces '\.

''

''

\\ ..... ,... -.~-~:~;~,ns .
}!f~

\\

~~?''

\

NEW MEXICO

\
\

....

,

\
............... \

MEXICO

~:~*
,.

4

'i:i

El Paso

---- ',

''\

\
\
\

l
N

-

lOKilometers

\ TEXAS
\

................ ,
...............

'

\

Figure 1. Map of the study area.

of stable grassland with a mesquite-dominated landscape. This vegetational change, possibly enhanced
by climate change (Mauldin 1995; Neilson 1986),
has resulted in significant erosion. As Figure 2
shows, the basin portion of Fort Bliss is currently
characterized by mesquite-stabilized sand dunes,
sheet sands, sand ridges, and eroded inter-dune
blowouts (see Abbott 1996).
Archeological research in the study area reveals human use for more than 11,000 years
(Carmichael 1986; Mauldin and Leach 1996; Whalen
1986, l 994a), although recent studies of occupation
patterns (Carmichael 1986; Mauldin 1994) suggest
that most of the record has been generated within
the last 5,000 years. While the surrounding area has
some of the earliest evidence for agriculture in the
Southwest (Tagg 1996; Upham et al. 1987), summaries of subsistence patterns suggest that the region was primarily occupied by highly mobile groups

relying on hunting and gathering
for most of the prehistoric sequence
(Hard et al. 1996; Mauldin 1996;
Whalen l 994a).
Over three decades of survey
and excavation work in the region
suggests that the archeological
record generally consists of sma!I
(ca. 1000 m2 ) sites dominated by a
few thermal features, an occasional
pit structure, and low density scatters of fire-cracked rock, ceramics,
and chipped and ground stone (e.g.,
Abbott et al. 1996; Leach 1994;
Mauldin 1994; Seaman et al. 1988) .
The first evidence of ceramic production appeared in the area as undecorated brownwares about 1700
B.P. (Perttula et al. 1995; Whalen
1981 ), although many sites that
date to this time period lack ceramics (Mauldin et al. 1994;
Whalen 1994a). Pueblo architecture, associated with adaptations
that may rely on agriculture, develops in the region at about 750
B.P. (Whalen 1994b). This increased reliance on agriculture,
which may begin prior to the appearance of pueblo architecture at
about 750 to 850 B.P. (Hard et al.
1996:297-299), also marks the appearance of water control features
(Bentley 1993; Leach et al. 1993, 1996;
Scarborough 1988). By 500 B.P., these agriculturally-based systems seem to have collapsed.

Figure 2. Photograph of the Hueco Bolson.

Leach, Mauldin, and Monger THE ARCHEOLOGICAL
DATASET
The archeological sites used in this study were
recorded during three large surveys conducted in
the late 1970s and early 1980s (Carmichael 1986;
Whalen 1977, 1978). These surveys recorded over
10,000 archeological sites that reflect occupation in
the region from the terminal Pleistocene throughout the Holocene. While a few large sites (> l km 2)
are present, most are small ( < 1000 m 2 ), and consist
of low-density scatters of chipped and ground stone,
ceramics, fire-cracked rock, and occasional hearth
and structural features. Radiocarbon dates from recent excavations demonstrate that regardless of site
size, most appear to represent multiple occupations
(Doleman et al. 1992; Mauldin et al. 1994; Miller
1997; O'Laughlin 1980; Whalen 1994b). For example, data from Mauldin et al. (1994) suggest that
of 12 sites with multiple radiocarbon dates from
different features, only three sites (25 percent) had
date ranges that overlapped at two sigmas (see also
Whalen 1980; O'Laughlin and Martin 1989). In
several cases, radiocarbon dates from a given site
span several thousand years (Leach et al. in press;
Mauldin 1994, 1995, 1996; Mauldin and Leach
1996), suggesting that most sites may reflect multiple occupations. Therefore, much of the current
archeological data points to a pattern of short-term
reuse of the basin areas. Combined with the erosion
brought about by overgrazing and climate change
over the last 100 years (Buffington and Herbel 1965;

The Impact of Eolian Processes

101

Mauldin 1995; Monger 1993; Neilson 1986), the
current surface record is often a palimpsest of archeological material.

GEOMORPHIC AND
ARCHEOLOGICAL PATTERNING
Maps of eolian surface features in military maneuver areas on Fort Bliss (see Figure I) were
made to identify areas where erosion-resulting
primarily from modern eolian activity-had altered
the stratigraphic integrity of soils, causing the deflation and exposure of archeological deposits, and
also identify areas where eolian deposition may
have buried archeological material (Monger
1993:35-40, 1995). These maps contain four eolian
erosion and deposition units based on the presence
or absence of dunes, inter-dune sheet sand deposits, or caliche nodules, fragments, and gravels
(Table 1). Using combinations of these variables,
Monger further subdivides the four mapping units
into sub-units. For example, Mapping Unit 2, characterized by dunes, inter-dune sheet deposits, and
lacking caliche and gravel, is subdivided into subunits 2a and 2b on the basis of dune size (Table 1
provides definitions of the four eolian mapping
units and their respective sub-units). Figure 3 presents an example of the distribution of these units
in a portion of the study area. Note that combinations of sub-units (e.g., 2a/J a) are present. These
are cases in which two mapping sub-units are in-

Table 1. Eolian Mapping Units defined by Monger (1993:35-38, 1995:41-43)
Sub-units

Mapping Units
I - Modern deflational surfaces

la- Large dunes (generally> 1m) with collapsed interdune strata;
1b- Small dunes (generally < 1m) with collapsed interdune strata;
le- deflated nondune areas.

2 - Dunes with interdune sheet
deposits

2a- Large dunes (generally> 1m) with interdune sheet deposits;
2b- Small dunes (generally <Im) with interdune sheet deposits.

3 - Depositional areas composed
of sand sheet deposits.

No subunits defined

4 - Areas where soil strata are
modified little by wind.

No subunits defined

102

Texas Archeological Society

We consider only the basin area
(ca. 1200 km 2) between the
Franklin-Organ and the HuecoOtero Mesa-Sacramento fan systems (see Figure 1). The alluvial
fans are not used due to the lack of
survey data for those areas. Over
8,000 previously recorded survey
sites fall within the basin area. We
assigned each of these sites to a
corresponding erosional unit by
overlaying the survey and geomorphic data sets in a CAD program.
2b
3
However, archeological sites that
extended from one mapping unit
2km
onto another, and could not be confidently assigned to a unit, were
Figure 3. Eolian mapping units from a portion of the study area (adapted
from Monger 1993).
omitted from further analysis, along
with any sites that lacked complete
data on site level assemblage content. This samtermingled at small scales, with the initial designapling process resulted in 7 ,923 sites with complete
tion indicating the dominant unit (Monger
locational and content data for our analysis. High
1993:40).
erosion/deposition settings (Mapping Unit 1) cover
As the purpose of the present analysis is to
less than five percent of the basin and contain 218
consider the impact of eolian erosion (exposure)
~rcheological sites. The moderate erosion/deposiand deposition (burial) on archeological site size
tion areas cover about 91 percent of the basin and
and site characteristics, we reclassified the mapping
contain 7,247 sites. The low erosion/deposition
units to highlight erosion and deposition. For
areas cover roughly five percent of the basin and
example, Mapping Unit 1 is characterized by dunes
contain 458 sites.
and inter-dune areas with lagged deposits, that
reflect high rates of eolian erosion and subsequent
deposition in the form of dunes and sheet sands.
SITE SIZE AND EROSION
Consequently, we classify all areas in which
~apping Unit 1, or a sub-unit of Mapping Unit 1,
The first pattern involves relationships between
is present as high erosion. The high dunes and
the size of archeological sites and the erosion/
inter-dune sheet sands of Mapping Unit 2 are
deposition units. While variation in site size is
classified as reflecting moderate levels of erosion
commonly tied to different numbers of people and
and deposition. Mapping Units 3 and 4 reflect stable
different activities, it could be hypothesized that as
or aggrading surfaces, and are classified as a low
erosion increases, site size will increase as
erosion/deposition category. While it can be argued
previously buried archeological material would be
that these two units should be separated to reflect
collapsed onto an exposed surface. However, the
the potential for buried occupations in Unit 4, our
erosion of sediments will simultaneously be
goal in combining the units is to highlight erosional
redeposited in the form of dunes and sheet sands
and depositional differences. These regrouped units
nearby, creating small windows in which
(i.e., high, moderate, and low erosion/deposition)
archeological material may be present. In this
form the basis for our consideration of site
environmental setting, we suggest that erosion and
characteristics. The high to moderate erosion
deposition combine to create different site
designations are used to highlight areas that are
boundaries. Figure 4 presents a hypothetical
likely to have exposed archeological material. In
scenario of how erosion and deposition affect
contrast, areas that are characterized by low erosion
artifact distribution. In situations of minimal erosion
are likely to mask underlying archeological deposits
and sedimentation, artifact visibility would be high
(Blair et al. 1990).

Leach, Mauldin, and Monger - The Impact of Eolian Processes

A

Artifacts

B

Mesquite Dunes

Sheet sands

I

103

0

~~

;:l

eij~"~

c
\



'.,)7-:\

.,,
Art1Iacts

..

'"
\
'.

'.

.

.

.

....... __ ....,
'

\

....

Figure 4. An idealized scenario of the impact of varying erosion and deposition on an archeological assemblage (A, B)
and site size (C, D).

(Figure 4a, c). In areas of high erosion (exposure),
and subsequent localized deposition of sheet sands
and dunes, artifact visibility could increase as a
result of sediment loss (Figure 4b, d). However, as
the area undergoes localized erosion and
subsequent sedimentation, the artifact distribution
is broken up into spatially smaller units. In this
scenario, if the distance between these smaller units
exceeds the minimal distance in the definition of a
site, two smaller sites will be assigned (see Figure
4d).
Site size and erosional data from the 7 ,923
sites in the survey data base support the Figure 4
scenario. The mean site size for the 218 sites in
the high erosion/deposition unit is 906 m2  In the
moderate erosion unit, the mean site size is 1536
m2  Finally, in the low erosion unit, the average
site size is 3167 m 2 . As erosion increases, the
mean site size decreases. Sites in the low erosion
group are, on average, 3.5 times larger than sites
in the high erosion group. While the patterns in
site size may still reflect past decisions regarding
where to locate activities, or overall population
size, the patterns can also be the result of recent
eolian processes.

IMPUCATIONS OF SITE SIZE
AND EROSIONAL PATTERNS
FOR SITE TYPES
If surface site size is linked to erosion/
deposition, then variables that are commonly used
to assign sites to different functional and temporal
groups, or site types, would be affected. Site types,
such as residential, base camp, macro-band, and
limited activity sites, form the basis of settlement
and subsistence reconstructions in the study area
(e.g., Carmichael 1986; MacNeish 1993; Whalen
1977). Variables used to create site types commonly
include the number and variety of artifact types,
usually as a measure of behavioral complexity at
that location (e.g., Whalen 1977), as well as the
presence of temporally diagnostic artifact forms that
are used to assign sites or components within sites
to phases (e.g., MacNeish 1993). In the study area,
these variables correlate with site size. As such,
these variables may not directly reflect past
settlement types.
Table 2 presents various measures of site size
(mean, medium, and quartiles) and number of artifact types (e.g., mano, flake, Mimbres Black-on-

104

Texas Archeological Society

Table 2. Number of Artifact Types by Site Size
No. of
Artifact Types

Number
of Sites

Mean Site
Size*

Lower
Quartile*

Median*

Upper
Quartile*

O+

2818
1745
1185
855
502
336
200
134
87
30
24
7

124
441
855
1466
2501
4052
6538
11954
14983
17153
66512
62471

50
50
50
100
200
400
900
1900
2700
2600
10850
20200

50
200
400
500
800
1400
2600
4600
7100
5100
33800
25800

50
400
800
1200
2200
4350
7150
11200
14000
18600
70350
131900

l
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11

*Site size in m2 
+Site is defined by the presence of a feature(s).

white pottery) using survey records from Fort Bliss
(Mauldin 1995). Sites with no artifacts, consisting
of features only, have the lowest recorded mean
site size (124 m2 ). Sites with the highest number of
artifact types (n= 11) have an average site area of
more than 62,000 m2 
Clearly, the number of artifact types is closely
related to site size. In the "site type approach," sites
with greater artifact variety are frequently assumed
to represent a greater range of activities, while sites
with lower artifact variety are interpreted as reflecting a more limited activity range. As artifact variety is dependent on site size, and site size is related
to eolian settings, using artifact variety as a measure of activity diversity at a site level in the study
area may be problematic. While it is possible to
consider artifact variability on sites taking into account site size (e.g., Mauldin 1996), the size of
surface sites in this eolian setting is, in part, a function of the history of erosion and deposition, and
not directly reflective of past behavior.
The number of temporal components on a site,
identified by the presence of time-sensitive artifacts
(e.g., Mimbres Black-on-white ceramics, Bajada projectile points), also correlates with modern erosional
units. Considering relationships between erosional
settings and the presence of temporally diagnostic
artifacts, over 90 percent of the sites in high erosion/

deposition settings lack temporal diagnostics. This
percentage declines to just below 88 percent in moderate erosion areas, and to 70.5 percent in low erosion settings. The percentage of sites that lack
diagnostic artifacts appears to be related to modern
eolian processes, primarily as a result of the impacts
of these processes on site size. This relationship can
be seen by considering the number of temporal components and site size. The 6,866 archaeological sites
with no diagnostic artifacts (no identified temporal
components) have the smallest site size (mean=555
m2 ). Sites with only one temporal component (n=962)
average 6577 m2 , and sites with two temporal components (n=85) average 24,434 m2 Finally, those
sites with more than two temporal components average 54,990 m2 in size. As the number of components increase, the average site size increases. This
pattern is probably a function of the overall increase
in artifacts on larger sites. That is, as the size of the
site increases, which we have seen is related in part
to erosional factors, more artifacts are likely to be
present, increasing the probability that diagnostic
artifacts will be discovered in the assemblage. The
larger the assemblage, the more likely it is that
artifacts representing different temporal periods will
be uncovered.
In the site survey data base, the number of
artifacts on a site was not recorded by the original

Leach, Mauldin, and Monger -

The Impact of Eolian Processes

105

is not a site, then records some portion
of this material as sites. In the current
study area, these sites are frequently
assigned to temporal groups on the basis of diagnostic artifacts, and to func0
3
tional
groups on the basis of artifact
0
"' 0
OJ
0
"'
0
These temporal-functional
variety.
_J
groups then are used in settlement
(/")
_,___,
0
analysis, as well as for making basic
0
$
0
0
C\l
decisions regarding research potential,
:;::;
2
e
significance, and treatment procedures.
<(
Q
0
The focus of this paper has been
0
0
to
demonstrate
that eolian processes can
411
0
(f)
ID
have a substantial effect on how we
@ @
Q)
D
see, and ultimately interpret, the surface
0
E
=i
0 @ff"'
archeological record of the basin areas
0:
411
z
@0
0
of West Texas and southern New
Q
@
$
e
Mexico. Many other factors, including
@
llD
<ilG
survey intensity (e.g., Leach 1994;
0
Mauldin 1995), site definition (Mauldin
0
4
2
5
3
1995), topographic location (e.g.,
Doleman
et al. 1992), and artifact
Site Size (Log 10)
obtrusiveness (Schiffer 1987), also
Figure 5. Bivariate (log x log) plot of the number of artifacts by site size
affect the surface archeological record.
for 336 basin sites.
However, in the current study area,
patterns of artifact variety, artifact
researchers. However, we can consider this relanumber, and the number of temporal components
on a site correlate with site size. In this area and,
tionship using recently collected surface data from
we suspect, in other eolian environments, site size
another project in the study area (Leach 1994 ).
Figure 5 plots (log x log) the number of artifacts
is related to the history of natural deposition and
(including fire-cracked rock) and site size using
erosion. The way we draw site boundaries around
data from 336 basin sites (Leach et al. in press).
artifact and feature distributions in eolian settings
As site size increases, so does the number of artiis tied, in part, to artifact and feature visibility.
facts. Assemblage size and site area are signifiThese sites, defined for management purposes, are
cantly correlated with a Pearson's R of .76
commonly used to reconstruct settlement and
(p=.0001). The number of artifacts influences artisubsistence patterns during a given temporal period,
fact variety, and the probability that time-sensitive
and differences between periods are identified and
"explained" (e.g., Carmichael 1986; MacNeish
artifacts will be recovered. These overall patterns,
1993; Whalen 1977, 1978). However, the patterns
then, may simply be a function of sample size (see
identified in this paper suggest that in the northern
Leonard and Jones 1989; McCartney and Glass
Chihuahuan Desert, any attempt to reconstruct
1990; Rhode 1988).
prehistoric settlement from site level data such as
artifact variety, the number of artifacts, or even the
presence or number of temporal components,
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
without detailed attention to the geomorphic setting,
is problematic. Patterns identified at a site level
By definition, cultural materials enter the arcorrelate with patterns of eolian erosion and
cheological record as the result of human behavior.
deposition. Such patterns are not directly
After deposition, these cultural materials may be
representative of prehistoric behavior.
transformed by a number of cultural and natural
The realization that past and present landprocesses that potentially alter their original sysscapes are dynamic and continually changing (Watemic context (Ebert 1992; Schiffer 1987). Archeoters and Kuehn 1996), thus resulting in different
logical survey, using some definition of what is and

4

~

~

Q

L

Y-

L

-

106

Texas Archeological Society

opportumt1es for site discovery (Bettis 1995;
Collins 1995), is a necessary first step in developing reasonable behavioral inferences from the surface archeological record. A second step involves
the realization that in eolian settings such as the
current study area, these changing landscapes significantly impact the character of the sites that are
discovered. Interpretations that fail' to consider the
impact of eolian processes on the character of sites
will not advance our understanding of past settlement systems.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The data used in this paper are from projects
and studies funded by the Natural and Cultural Resources Division, Directorate of the Environment,
at Fort Bliss. An earlier version of this paper was
read at the 8th Mogollon Conference, El Paso.
Thanks to Karen Adkins for assistance in several
aspects of the CAD program. Thanks to James
Abbott, Dan Amick, Glen DeGarmo, Federico
Almarez, Bill Doleman, Susan Ruth, Timothy K.
Perttula, David Nickels, Paul Lukoswki, Carlos
Caraveo, and an anonymous reviewer for comments
on this research.

REFERENCES CITED
Abbott, J. T.
1996 Geoarchaeological Research Domains. In Significance Standards for Prehistoric Archaeological
Sites at Fort Bliss: A Design for Further Research
and the Management of Cultural Resources, by J.
T. Abbott, R. P. Mauldin, P. E. Patterson, W. N.
Trieweiler, R. J. Hard, C. R. Lintz, and C. L. Tennis, pp. 83-138. U.S. Army Corps of Engineer District, Fort Worth.
Abbott, J. T., R. P. Mauldin, P. E. Patterson, W. N. Trieweiler,
R. J. Hard, C. R. Lintz, and C. L.Tennis
1996 Significance Standards/or Prehistoric Archaeological Sites at Fort Bliss: A Design for Further Research and the Management of Cultural Resources.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineer District, Fort Worth.
Bentley, M. T.
1993 Hot Well Village and Reservoir: A Preliminary
Overview. The Artifact 31(2): 1-32.

Bettis, E. A. (editor)
1995 Archaeological Geology of the Archaic Period in
North America. Special Paper 297. Geological Society of America, Boulder, Colorado.
Blair, T. C., J. S. Clark, and S. G. Wells
1990 Quaternary continental stratigraphy, landscape evolution, and application to archeology: Jarilla piedmont and Tularosa graben floor, White Sands
Missile Range, New Mexico. Geological Society of
America Bulletin 102:749-759.
Buffington, L. C. and C. H. Herbel.
1965 Vegetational changes in a semi-desert grassland
range from 1858 to 1963. Ecological Monographs
35:139-164.
Carmichael, D. L.
1986 Archaeological Survey in the Southern Tularosa
Basin of New Mexico. Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 3. Environmental Management
Office, Directorate of Engineering and Housing,
United States Air Defense Artillery Center, Fort
Bliss, Texas.
Collins, M. B.
1995 Forty Years of Archeology in Central Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 66:361-400.
Doleman, W., H., R. C. Chapman, R. L. Stauber, and J. Piper
(editors)
1992 Landscape Archeology in the Southern Tularosa
Basin, Volume III: Archeological Distributions and
Prehistoric Human Ecology. OCAIUNM Report No.
185-324 and WSMR Archeological Report No. 926. Office of Contract Archeology, University of New
Mexico, Albuquerque.
Ebert, J. L
1992 Distributional Archaeology. University of New
Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
Hard, R. J., R. P. Mauldin, and G. R. Raymond
1996 Mano Size, Stable Carbon Isotope Ratios, and
Macrobotanical Remains as Multiple Lines of Evidence of Maize Dependence in the American Southwest. Journal ofArchaeological Method and Theory
3(4):253-318.
Leach, J. D.
1994 Archaeological Investigations in the Eastern Hueco
Bolson: Preliminary Findings from the Hueco Mountain Archaeological Project. In Mogollon VII: The
Collected Papers of the 1992 Mogollon Conference
Held in Las Cruces, New Mexico, edited by P.
Beckett, pp. 115-128. COAS Publishing and Research, Las Cruces.

Leach, Mauldin, and Monger Leach, J. D., F. Almarez, B. Buck, and G. Burgett
1993 The Hueco Mountain Reservoir: A Preliminary Assessment of an El Paso Phase Water Catchment
Basin. The Artifact 31 (2):33-45.
Leach, J. D., F. Almarez, and B. Buck
1996 A Prehistoric Reservoir in Far West Texas. Bulletin
of the Texas Archeological Society 67: 133-144.
Leach, J. D., F. A. Almarez, and K. Adkins
in press The Hueco Mountain Archaeological Project: Discussions on Survey, Surface Collection, and Subsurface Testing. In Prehistoric and Historic
Research Along the Border: Proceedings of the 7th
and 8th Jornada-Mogollon Conference, edited by
M. Duran. Human Systems Research, Las Cruces.
Leonard, R. D. and G. Jones (editors)
1989 Quantifying Diversity in Archaeology. Cambridge
University Press, New York.
MacNeish, R. S. (editor)
1993 Preliminary Investigations of the Archaic in the Region of Las Cruces, New Mexico. Historic and Natural Resources Report No. 9. Cultural Resources
Management Program, Directorate of Environment.
United States Army Air Defense Artillery Center,
Fort Bliss, Texas.
Marston, R. A.
1986 Maneuver-Caused Wind Erosion Impacts, South
Central New Mexico. In Aeolian Geomorphology,
edited by W. G. Nickling, pp. 273-290. Allen and
Unwin, London.
Mauldin, R. P.
1994 Small Sites in Western Texas and Southern New
Mexico. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65: 185-206.
1995

1996

Groping for the Past: Archaeological Patterns Across
Space and Time in the Southern Southwestern
United States. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Anthropology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.
Exploring Patterns in Late Archaic and Early Ceramic Residential Occupations in the Northern
Chihuahuan Desert. In Early Formative Adaptations
in the Southern Southwest, edited by B. Roth, pp.
85-99. Prehistory Press, Madison, Wisconsin.

Mauldin, R. P. and J. D. Leach
1996 Results of Additional Testing of Six Archaeological
Sites Along the Proposed Samalayuca Pipeline.
Technical Report No. 10. CIA, El Paso.

The Impact of Eolian Processes

l 07

Mauldin, R. P., T. Graves, and M. Bentley
1994 Small Sites in the Central Hueco Balson: A Final
Report on Project 90-l J. Cultural and Natural Resources Division, Directorate of the Environment,
Fort Bliss, Texas.
McCartney, P. H. and M. F. Glass
1990 Simulation Models and the Interpretation of Archaeological Diversity. American Antiquity 55:521536.
Miller, M. R.
1997 The Chronometric and Relative Chronology Project.
Archaeological Technical Report No. 5. Anthropology Research Center, The University of Texas at El
Paso.
Monger, H. C.
1993 Eolian Alteration of Soil Strata on Maneuver and
Adjacent Areas of Fort Bliss. In Soil-Geomorphic
and Paleoclimatic Characteristics of the Fort Bliss
Maneuver Areas, Southern New Mexico and Western Texas, edited by H. C. Monger, pp. 34-40. Historic and Natural Resources Report No. I 0. Cultural
Resource Management Program. Directorate of Environment, United States Army Air Defense Artillery Center, Fort Bliss, Texas.
1995

Pedology in Arid Lands Archaeological Research:
An Example from Southern New Mexico-Western
Texas. In Pedological Perspectives in Archaeological Research, edited by M. E. Collins, pp. 35-50.
SSSA Special Publication 44, Madison, Wisconsin.

Nash, D. T. and M. D. Petraglia (editors)
1987 Natural Formation Processes and the Archaeological Record. British Archeological Reports 352.
Neilson, R. P.
1986 High-Resolution Climate Analysis and Southwest
Biogeography. Science 232:27-34.
O'Brien, M. J. and D. E. Lewarch (editors)
1981 Plowwne Archaeology: Contributions to Theory and
Technique. Publications in Anthropology No. 27.
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.
O'Laughlin, T. C.
1980 The Keystone Dam Site and Other Archaic and Formative Sites in Northwest El Paso, Texas. Publications in Anthropology No. 8. El Paso Centennial
Museum, The University of Texas at El Paso.
O'Laughlin, T. C. and D. L. Martin
1989 Loop 375 Archaeological Project, El Paso County,
Texas. An Interim Report for Phase II Additional
Testing and Phase HI Data Recovery. Manuscript
prepared for the State Department of Highway and
Public Transportation, Austin, Texas.

108

Texas Archeological Society

Perttula, T. K., M. R. Miller, R. A. Ricklis, D. J. Prikryl, and
C. Lintz
1995 Prehistoric and Historic Aboriginal Ceramics in
Texas. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society
66: 175-235.
Plog, S., F. Plog, and W. C. Wait
1982 Decision Making in Modern Surveys. In Advances
in Archaeological Method and Theory: Selections
for Students from Volumes 1 through 4, edited by
M. B. Schiffer, pp. 607-645. Academic Press.
Rhode, D.
1988 Measurements of Archaeological Diversity and the
Sample Size Effect. American Antiquity 53:708-716.

Waters, M. R.
1992 Principles of Geoarchaeology: A North American
Perspective. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Waters, M. R. and D. D. Kuehn
1996 The Geoarchaeology of Place: The Effect of Geological Processes on the Preservation and Interpretation of the Archaeological Record. American
Antiquity 61 (3):483-497.
Whalen, M. E.
1977 Settlement Patterns of the Eastern Hueco Balson.
Publications in Anthropology No. 4. El Paso Centennial Museum, The University of Texas at El Paso.
1978

Scarborough, V. L.
1988 A Water Storage Adaptation in the American Southwest. Journal of Anthropological Research 44( I ):2140.

Settlement Patterns of the Western Hueco Balson.
Publications in Anthropology No. 6. El Paso Centennial Museum, The University of Texas at El Paso.

1980

Schiffer, M. B.
1987 Formation Processes of the Archaeological Record.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.

Special Studies in the Archaeology of the Hueco
Bo/son. Publications in Anthropology No. 9. El Paso
Centennial Museum, The University of Texas at El
Paso.

1981

Origin and Evolution of Ceramics in Western Texas.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 52:215229.

1986

Small Site Analysis in the Hueco Bolson of Western Texas. Journal of Field Archaeology 13:69-81.

Seaman, T. J., W. H. Doleman, and R. C. Chapman
1988 The Border Star 85 Survey: Toward An Archeology
Of Landscapes. Office of Contract Archeology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.
Tagg, M. D.
1996 Early Cultigens from Fresnal Shelter, Southeastern
New Mexico. American Antiquity 61(2):311-324.
Upham, S., R. S. MacNeish, W. C. Galinat, and C. M.
Stevenson
1987 Evidence concerning the origin of Maize de Ocho.
American Anthropologist 89(2):410-419.
Wandsnider, L.
1988 Experimental Investigation of the Effect of Dune
Processes on Archaeological Remains. American
Archaeology 7:18-28.
Wandsnider, L. and E. L. Camilli
1992 The Character of Surface Archaeological Deposits
and Its Influence on Survey Accuracy. Journal of
Field Archaeology 19(2): 169-188.

I 994a Moving out of the Archaic on the edge of the Southwest. American Antiquity 59(4):622-638.
l 994b Turquoise Ridge and Late Prehistoric Residential
Mobility in the Desert Mogollon Region. Anthropological Papers No. 118. University of Utah Press,
Salt Lake City.
Wood, W.R. and D. L. Johnson
1978 A Survey of Disturbance Processes in Archaeological Site Formation. In Advances in Archaeological
Method and Theory, Vol. 1, edited by M. B. Schiffer,
pp. 315-381. Academic Press, New York.
York, J. C. and W. A. Dick-Peddie
1969 Vegetation Changes in Southern New Mexico During the Past Hundred Years. In Lands in Perspective, edited by W. G. McGuiness and B. J. Goldman,
pp. 155-166. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.

Hand Prints at Pace Bend Park That Are
Probably Not Prehistoric
E. ]. Mawk and M. W. Rowe

ABSTRACT
We studied tiny samples scraped from a white hand print painted in Pace Bend Park by scanning electron
microscopy equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. Titanium was the most prominent element
seen in the X-ray spectra, indicating the use of a 20th century paint. The hand print is probably not prehistoric.

INTRODUCTION
Several painted hand prints are located in Pace
Bend Park at Lake Travis in Travis County, Texas;
one of them is shown in Figure 1. To ascertain the
authenticity of the hand print rock paintingswhether they were painted in prehistoric times by
Native Americans or more recently-we were sent

sample sizes of approximately 0.1 mm or less.
Thus, the technique is virtually non-destructive and
no visible damage is suffered by the rock paintings.
SEM uses electron bombardment and secondary
electrons to image the sample, much the same way
that optical microscopes image using light. A
byproduct of SEM is the generation of X-rays; fortunately, X-rays emitted are of distinctive energies
that are characteristic of the elements being
bombarded with electrons. An energy dispersion spectrum (EDX) thus allows determination of major and minor elements present in a
sample. Major constituents (;::: l 0 percent by
weight) can be determined in only 10 seconds;
minor constituents, on the order of a few percent, can be determined in 100 seconds
(Goldstein et al. 1992).

EXPERIMENTAL METHOD

Figure I. Hand print rock painting located at Pace Bend
Lake Travis, Texas. Photograph by Solveig Turpin.

small scrapings of the paint for chemical analysis.
Scanning electron microscopy with energy
dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDX) was
chosen for qualitative elemental characterization of
major and minor qualitative elemental analysis of
the sample. SEM-EDX is rapid, and requires small

We mounted pigment fragments on a
standard aluminum SEM sample mount by
attaching them with double-sided sticky tape.
Park,
They were coated with 100 m of gold/
palladium to render the surfaces electrically
conducting, as this is necessary for good
images and chemical analyses. The sample mount
was placed in a JEOL JSM-6400 analytical grade
scanning electron microscope equipped with an
EDX. One-hundred second EDX spectra were
taken on numerous -0.1 mm-sized samples of the
hand print pigment.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69 (1998)

110

Texas Archeological Society
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 2 shows the EDX spectrum for a representative sample. The element titanium (Ti) was
prominent in all of the pigment scrapings. We took
multiple spectra from various pieces of the
scrapings, always with the same result: the dominant presence of titanium.

Ti
Ca

s
Fe
Energy

Figure 2. SEM-EDX spectrum of a sample of white
pigment from a Pace Bend Park hand print rock painting.
The spectrum, typical for all samples examined, shows
abundant titanium.

Ancient people have used white pigments
throughout the world. The pigments are generally
clay minerals or other naturally occurring minerals.
For example, Mawk et al. (1996) analyzed white
pigments from four rock paintings in South Australia and found they contained micaceous clay with
the addition of gypsum (calcite sulfate) in some
cases. The presence of the other elements in the
Pace Bend Park spectra is consistent with those
expected from rock surfaces and mineral accretions
that accumulate on rock and rock painting surfaces.
Calcium (Ca) and sulfur (S) are indicative of the
presence of gypsum, while calcium, carbon (C),
and oxygen (0) are indicative of whewellite. These
are found in mineral accretions seen both on top
and underneath pigment layers in rock paintings in
the lower Pecos River region of Texas by Hyman et
al. (1996) and Russ et al. (1995); in Utah by Chaffee
et al. (1994); in Australia by Mawk et al. (1996);
and other researchers listed in the references in
those papers. The sodium (Na) and silicon (Si) in
the Pace Bend sample are probably from the underlying rock itself.
Titanium was not used by ancient painters as a
white pigment; its use as a pigment is a modern

occurrence (Paul 1985; Remington 1945; Wilson et
al. 1987). The commonly available modern white
pigments now used are titanium dioxide, zinc oxide, and zinc sulfide. Until titanium dioxide was
introduced as a pigment, white lead (basic lead
carbonates) and zinc oxide were most commonly
used as pigments. Titanium dioxide is now the most
commonly used white pigment in the coatings industry. The main raw material for titanium pigments is the iron-black-colored mineral, ilmenite
(iron-titanium oxide). In order to obtain a white
pigment from ilmenite, it is first ground and dissolved in concentrated sulfuric acid to form titanyl
sulfate. Iron is added to reduce the iron(III) to
iron(II), and some titanium is reduced to prevent
re-oxidation of iron. The titanyl sulfate is purified
by sedimentation and crystallization, after which
the titanium is then precipitated by hydrosis to yield
titanium dioxide that functions as the pigment (Paul
1985). Clearly, the presence of titanium in the Pace
Bend hand print pigment indicates that this rock
painting is of 20th century vintage rather than prehistoric. By inference, we assume that none of the
others are either. Alternatively, an earlier prehistoric image could have been repainted in modern
times. The samples taken for our analyses were too
small to make a section to investigate the possibility of more than one layer of paint.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Partial support for this work was supplied by
the Lower Colorado River Authority (LCRA) and
the National Center for Preservation Technology
and Training. We also thank Bruce A. Nightengale
(LCRA) and the Travis County Park Rangers, for
finding and supplying us with the samples. We
gratefully acknowledge discussion with, and suggestions and support from, Marian Hyman. We appreciate the cooperation of the staff of the Texas
A&M University Electron Microscopy Center.

REFERENCES CITED
Chaffee, S. D., M. Hyman, M. W. Rowe, N. Coulam, A.
Schroedl, and K. Hogue
1994 Radiocarbon Dates on the All American Man.
American Antiquity 59:769-781.

Mawk and Rowe -

Hand Prints at Pace Bend Park That Are Probably Not Prehistoric

Goldstein, J. I., A. D. Romig, Jr., D. E. Newbury, C. E. Lyman,
P. Echlin, C. Fiori, D. C. Joy, and E. Lifshin
1992 Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-Ray Microanalysis. 2nd Edition. Plenum Press, New York.
Hyman, M., S. A. Turpin, and M. E. Zolensky
1996 Pigment Analyses from Panther Cave, Texas. Rock
Art Research 13:93-103.
Mawk, E. J., M. F. Nobbs, and M. W. Rowe
1996 Analysis of White Pigments from the Olary Region,
South Australia. Rock Art Research 13:31-37.
Paul, S.
1985 Surface Coatings: Science and Technology. John
Wiley & Sons, New York.

11 l

Remington, J. S.
1945 Pigments: Their Manufacture and Properties.
Leonard Hill Limited, London.
Russ, J., R. L. Palma, D. H. Loyd, D. W. Farwell, and H. G.
M. Edwards
1995 Analysis of the Rock Accretions in the Lower Pecos
Region of Southwest Texas. Geoarchaeology I 0:4363.
Wilson, A. D., J. W. Nicholson, and H.J. Prosser
1987 Swface Coatings - I. Elsevier Applied Science,
New York.

Life and Death in the Templo Mayor, by Eduardo Matos Moctezuma, translated by Bernard R. Ortiz de
Montellano and Thelma Ortiz de Montellano. University Press of Colorado, Niwot, CO. 1995, 138
pages, index, bibliography and appendices.

Reviewed by John A. Giacobbe

Life and Death in the Templo Mayor, by
Eduardo Matos Moctezuma, is a well-written (and
presumably translated) text that is readable and edifying for both the educated laymen and the professional anthropologist. The main theme of the book
centers around an examination of the spiritual and
ritualistic importance of the Templo Mayor, a large
great temple of the Aztec or Mexica people located
in Tenochtitlan, present day Mexico City.
Moctezuma developed his interpretation of the
significance of the site aided by both the recent
archeological excavations of the site, and extensive
ethnographic and ethnohistoric research. In fact,
although this is not clear from the introduction or
book backing, this text is more properly thought of
as an interpretative ethnohistoric account, backed
by archeological data.
The Templo Mayor was discovered in 1978 by
workmen in downtown Mexico City during the
construction of a hotel complex. The site discovered to date includes a multi-tiered temple complex
and an impressive assortment of well preserved artifacts, including burial urns, effigies, ceramics and
lithics, and an extensive collection of additional artifactual material, although not much information
regarding these finds is detailed in the book.
Moctezuma utilizes stelae, statues, and various inscriptions located during excavations to suggest the
ritualistic importance of the Templo Mayor and its
symbolic place in the Mexica universe.
While one's first impressions of this text may
be that it appears to stray towards post-processualistic
impressionism, one cannot but be impressed by the
scholarly treatment of the material presented, and
the thoughtful examination of the ancient Mexica
codices and the writings of the early Spanish religious and military chroniclers. Moctezuma, while
perhaps overextending himself down the interpretative path, does so with a creative flair, and an appreciation of the historic context of the Templo Mayor
in the Mexica spiritual universe.
Chapter One outlines the. basis for
Moctezumas' theoretical and methodological
perspective. This includes a review of the major

ethnographic and ethnohistoric sources he utilized
to gain his contemporary understanding of the
Mexica 1itualistic world. The references form a wellrounded starting point for one interested in further
exploring this topic area. Next he mentions the
import of archeological data for his interpretations,
and refers readers to additional texts that describe
this source information in detail. He concludes the
chapter by reiterating his goals and perspectives in
combining archeology and ethnohistoric
interpretation.
Chapter Two briefly reviews the manner in
which a society develops ritualistic behaviors, and
the place such behaviors have in molding that society. Moctezuma begins by touching on the work of
Gordon Childe and other researchers attempting to
understand the importance of ritual, and eventually
works his way around to describing his Marxist
approach to such interpretations. He concludes with
a brief explanation of the Mexica culture from a
Marxist perspective. This part of the text is rather
weak, both theoretically and contextually, but thankfully the Marxist diatribe ends quickly and does not
appear again in the text.
Chapter Three reviews the origins of myth in a
society, and delves into the origins of several
Mexica myths. Moctezuma attempts to correlate
such myths with the little known archeological evidence about the establishment of the Mexica in the
Valley of Mexico. This melding of myth, legend,
and fact is brief but well done, and sets the stage for
the remainder of the text.
Chapter Four specifically reviews the creation
myth of the Mexica. Moctezuma goes point by
point through the recorded versions of the creation
myth of the Mexica, and correlates these verses
with either archeologically-derived contextual
associations or additional ethnohistoric data. This
chapter attempts the difficult task of making the
origin and development of a myth understandable
by placing it in a historical and social perspective
among a living people. This is handled very well by
an individual clearly familiar with both the historic
and ritualistic background of his study population.

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69 (1998)

114

Texas Archeological Society

Chapter Five concludes the body of the text by
placing the Templo Mayor in regional perspective
within both the Mexica spiritual world and the historic culture of the Aztecs of the Valley of Mexico.
Moctezuma summarizes his initial hypothesis about
the place of the Templo Mayor in Mexica ritual and
Mexica society, and how this symbolic role functioned in a living culture.
Appendix One includes a series of black and
white photographs of the site of Templo Mayor and
several of the artifacts unearthed during excavations there. Appendix Two presents several Nahua

poems translated into English. This is a pleasant
addition, and follows the spiritual tone of the text
rather well. One might want the original N ahua
versions alongside, however.
Overall, Life and Death in the Templo Mayor
by Eduardo Matos Moctezuma is a well written and
organized book. If one has either a professional or
casual interest in the time period in question, one
would be encouraged to read this book. In addition,
the effort Moctezuma makes in correlating archeological knowledge with ethnohistoric ritualistic interpretation provides a fine example of the practice.

The Lion Creek Site (41BT105): Aboriginal Houses and Other Remains at a Prehistoric Rancherfa in
the Texas Hill Country (Burnet County), by LeRoy Johnson. Environmental Affairs Division,
Archeology Studies Program, Report 1, Texas Department of Transportation and Office of the
State Archeologist, Report 41, Texas Historical Commission, Austin, 1997. xviii + 191 pp.
Reviewed by Dawn Youngblood

In helping the Texas Department of
Transportation (TxDOT) catch up on their backlog
of site reports, LeRoy Johnson has taken on a series
of challenges. He must derive his information from
journals, logs, maps, photographs, sketches, and
data bases produced many years ago. He was not
present at the excavations, and had no control over
the research design or the quality of the work. In
bringing together the Lion Creek report, therefore,
Johnson has met the challenge, and in the process
has done Texas archeology a tremendous service
by offering a quality published record of the
excavations. This volume is beautifully presented,
with high quality tables, photographs, and
illustrations.
The Lion Creek site was excavated in 1975
under the direction of TxDOT archeologists Frank
A. Weir, Raymond D. Crawford, and Joe T. Denton
in anticipation of roadway improvements along
RM690 just south of Lake Buchanan. It is a shallow, chronologically-mixed site dominated by rock
features on a relict terrace of the Colorado River,
some 100 m south and 3 m above present-day Lake
Buchanan. Several rock features were uncovered
that are of particular interest in light of current
discussions regarding the nature of large Archaic
rock features, including burned rock middens and
possible house structures. In part, Johnson takes
advantage of the time gap between excavation and
publication by adding some current references, and
by offering a limited consideration of the implications of this more recent body of archeological research (primarily in the Afterword and in a section
discussing other house-like rock structures in Central Texas).
Two, and possibly three, rock features at Lion
Creek are interpreted by Johnson as houses that are
part of a prehistoric rancherfa. He distinguishes between hearths and fireplaces, with hearths being
very large, paved fire areas and fireplaces being
small, outdoor clusters of rocks that supported fire
sticks. Some 150 m north of Lion Creek is a large
and heavily looted burned rock midden; Lion Creek

may have been one encampment that utilized the
midden.
Due to the shallow nature of the archeological
deposit, Lion Creek is not well-dated. One calibrated one-sigma radiocarbon date of AD 982-1045
pertains to the structure termed House 3. A wide
range of projectile point styles, including Scallorn,
Pedernales, Nolan, and Travis, were recovered in
association with the identified house features.
Clearly, unequivocal association of the structures
with a specific time period is not possible. Only by
comparison with similar structures at other sites
can Johnson, and others (Lintz et al. 1995), attempt
to temporally correlate them; regional perspectives
are necessary for Johnson to comprehensively assess prehistoric house structures in Central Texas.
To place the temporal associations used in the report to current terms, readers should refer to Johnson
and Goode (1994). For example, Johnson (p. 37)
suggests House 1 is Middle Archaic based on the
presence of Pedernales points, but in the 1994 article, he correlates Pedernales points with a revised
definition of the Late Archaic. This inconsistency
is clearly the product of the present volume having
been so long in production. Whatever the categorical definition. Pedernales points have been associated with a dry climatic interval on the Edwards
Plateau that peaked shortly after 2000 B.C. (Johnson
and Goode 1994).
Throughout the volume, the interpretation of
the rock structures labeled House l and House 3 as
dwellings is taken somewhat for granted.
Consideration of multiple alternative hypotheses
would have strengthened Johnson's argument that
the site locality is a rancherfa. As alternatives are
not seriously considered, the reader is left wondering
whether these structures with only 1 m of space
between the hearth pavement and the outside "wall"
could be interpreted as something other than a
house. Could they be some form of meat smoking
or roasting area, with post-supported racks? Could
they be sweat lodges, or some other kind of
structure?

116

Texas Archeological Society

Artifacts from the site are carefully
documented. Johnson thoroughly describes the 35
milling stones, and suggests that the majority came
from the stratigraphically lower layers. While most
authors would avoid a discussion of knapping
debitage from a clearly mixed context such as Lion
Creek, Johnson does not shy away from the
challenge. The heavier debitage is reported from
the lower layers of the site, perhaps indicating that
the larger artifacts have simply worked their way
down to lower levels. Lithic raw materials from all
time periods at the site are believed to have been
transported from nearby Colorado River gravel bars.
The section on bifacial tools is well-done and nicely
illustrated, most notably the bifacial "stars,"
carefully retouched three-pointed objects tentatively
interpreted as gorges.
Johnson concludes the report with a word of
hope that if future multiple "house" sites are found
in the Lion Creek region, they will be carefully
investigated using all available modern methods.
An important lesson learned and reinforced from
the Lion Creek site is to carefully consider all rock
features that may represent house structures.
Anyone wishing to stay current on the Archaic
and Late Prehistoric periods in Central Texas should

obtain a copy of the Lion Creek Site report. Unlike
many site reports, this one has the advantage of
being written in a clear and engaging style that
should encourage a more general readership. For
this reason, avocational archeologists who work in
the Central Texas area are particularly encouraged
to obtain a copy of Johnson's report, and consider
the interpretations for themselves.

REFERENCES CITED
Johnson, L. and G. T. Goode
1994 A New Try at Dating and Characterizing Holocene
Climates, as well as Archeological Periods, on the
Eastern Edwards Plateau. Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 65: 1-51.
Lintz, C., A. Treece, and F. Oglesby
1995 The Early Archaic Structure at the Turkey Bend
Ranch Site (41CC112), Concho County. In Advances
in Texas Archeology: Contributions from Cultural
Resource Management, Volume I, edited by J. E.
Bruseth and T. K. Perttula, pp. 155-185. Cultural
Resource Management Report 5. Department of
Antiquities Protection, Texas Historical Commission, Austin.

Trade and Discovery: The Scientific Study of Artefacts from Post-Medieval Europe and Beyond, edited
by Duncan R. Hook and David R. M. Gaimster, 1995. Occasional Paper 109, Department of
Scientific Research, British Museum, London, v + 326 pp.
Reviewed by Timothy K. Perttula

This volume is the product of a conference
held in November 1992 by the British Museum and
the Society for Post-Medieval Archaeology to commemorate the SOOth anniversary of the Voyages of
Discovery. The conference's purpose was to discuss current projects and approaches to the archeological study of post-medieval trade in Europe and
across the World, specifically the examination of
the artifacts that so vividly demonstrate "the development in intercontinental trade and the simultaneous growth in consumption at all levels of society"
(p. 1). In Trade and Discovery, the papers focus on
ceramics, glass, precious metals, copper-based alloys, and other metals found in archeological sites
from Native American contexts in the Dominican
Republic, Canada, and northeastern North America,
as well as sites (and museum collections) from a
variety of archeological contexts in South America,
Europe, England, and Trans-Saharan Africa. Of particular interest from the perspective of contact and
trade between Native Americans and Europeans
are papers by Kathleen Deagan and Jose M.
Cruxent, Reginald Auger et al., and William R.
Fitzgerald that discuss, respectively, the character
of 15th and 16th century European trade goods
from La Isabela (1493-1498), the 1576-1578 Martin Frobisher expeditions among the Inuit, and various aboriginal sites around the Gulf of St. Lawrence
with goods from Basque/Breton/Norman fisherman
and trappers.
The ceramic studies of Spanish, Italian, and
English tin-glazed wares, English earthenware
(redware) ceramics, salt-glazed stoneware from the
Rhineland, French stonewares, English ceramic
stove-tiles, and Moroccan trade ceramics concentrate on determinations of provenance and source
(i.e., the place of production). Instrumental neutron
activation (INAA) and inductively coupled plasma
emission spectrography analyses of the mineralogical/chemical constituents of these ceramic wares
independently document their extensive trade
around Europe and the New World. In the case of
the French stonewares, widely distributed in the
17th and 18th centuries, the preferred forms made

for trade were commercial containers of "foodstuff,
beverage, potion or ointment" (p. 94).
Of particular concern in the study of glass is
the technology of glass production, both in Europe
(particularly Venice and the Netherlands) and as it
was introduced into the New World and elsewhere.
Mark Redknap and Ian C. Freestone employ energy-dispersive X-ray analysis of glass cakes or
ingots from a 1765 shipwreck to show through compositional analysis that the raw glass cakes were
items of commerce destined for China, where they
"were being exported for use in Chinese glassworks" (p. 145).
The studies of metals in Trade and Discovery
examine the extraction of New World mineral resources with European and Native American technologies, as well as the wide-ranging impact of the
movement of precious metals (gold and silver) from
the Americas into post-medieval Europe. W. Iain
Mackay's paper on gold extraction equipment at
Maukallqta (in Bolivia) indicates that the techniques, equipment, and production methods employed in one part of the Americas represents a
hybrid of European and aboriginal metallurgic technologies (particularly the use of quimbaletes or
rocker-grinding stones and arrastra or cabeza de
ingenio, a Spanish-introduced powered grinding
mechanism) over several centuries.
Artifacts made of copper-based alloys were
widely traded after 1492 within Europe, the Americas, Africa, and the Far East, and through the archeological perspective, provide direct evidence of
the scale of trade. Other papers concern ferrous
metals, armor, and 16th and 17th century English
lead cloth seals. Hancock et al.' s INAA study of
native copper and copper-based metals (including
European copper and brass) from pre-contact and
post-contact archeological sites indicates that these
materials can be readily distinguished on chemical
compositional grounds, such that "pre-European
contact sites can be separated from contact sites"
(p. 286).
Trade and Discovery is an important archeological monograph on European trade, and the

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69 (1998)

118

Texas Archeological Society

archeometric methods and techniques currently being employed on a broad range of material goods
found in the New World as well as the Old World.
Several of the papers have direct relevance to archeological studies of the post-1492 era in Texas,
especially those dealing with the chemical composition, identification, and origins of stonewares and
tin-glazed ceramic wares found on Texas sites, as

well as the provenance of copper-based metal goods
recovered in aboriginal contexts across the state. I
recommend the monograph to those archeologists
particularly concerned with the archaeometric study
of artifactual remains, and to those interested in the
material evidence of trade and context in the postmedieval period.

Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices During the Central Texas Archaic, by Leland C. Bement. University
of Texas Press, Austin, 1994. x + 165 pp.

Reviewed by Helen Danzeiser Dockall

This book, composed of nine chapters and an
appendix, focuses on the results of excavation from
one site, the Bering Sinkhole, in Kerr County,
Texas. The first chapter discusses the site, specifically the site description, location, history, and duration of use for burial purposes (approximately
5500 years). Further, Bement states (p. 5) that the
analysis of the Bering Sinkhole "concentrates on
reconstructing the biological, cultural, and environmental aspects of prehistoric mortuary practices of
the hunter and gatherer groups of the Edwards Plateau." Bement also expresses an interest in social
complexity during the Archaic period, an important
issue that has been long overlooked (or understated)
in Texas prehistoric archeology.
Chapter 2 focuses on the site setting, specifying various flora and fauna from the region, in
addition to discussing the regional geology. Chapter 3 provides background information on mortuary
studies and the regional chronology. Bement provides a thorough discussion of Weir's Central Texas
Archaic chronology, comparing it with more recent
developments. He also provides a clear discussion
of theories of mortuary behaviors and their reflections on social structure and inter-group relationships. Bement focuses on the importance of
mortuary sites as territorial markers and addresses
the important issue of how "sedentary" a huntergatherer group needs to be before this behavior
occurs. The impact shifts in mobility patterns will
have on mortuary affairs and health is another significant issue raised in this chapter. At this point in
the book, Bement also introduces Central Texas
sites used for comparisons with the Bering Sinkhole. His primary comparative sites are the large
cemeteries of Ernest Witte (all burial groups) and
Loma Sandia, as well as the smaller Olmos Dam
site. Interestingly, these are not sinkhole sites, but
Bement does find many similarities between grave
goods at these "traditional" cemetery sites with information obtained from the Bering Sinkhole, the
primary focus of this book. In addition, Bering
Sinkhole is compared with Seminole Sink in the

Lower Pecos region, which Bement points out is
the only sinkhole in Texas that has a detailed excavation and analysis comparable to larger mortuary
sites. Perhaps the strongest point about this book is
that it chronicles results and techniques of excavation at a large Central Texas sinkhole, a type of site
that appears to have been neglected in past research.
Chapters 4 and 5 detail the site excavations
and its depositional history. The sinkhole consists
of four discrete levels representing several
thousands years of use as a burial site. Both of
these chapters, although specific to excavations at
the Bering Sinkhole, will be useful to anyone
attempting the excavation of other sinkhole
mortuary locales.
Chapters 6, 7, and 8 present the results of
excavation at the site. Chapter 6 focuses on faunal
remains (specifically, mammals and molluscs) recovered from the site, with an emphasis placed on
utilizing faunal remains to reconstruct the
paleoenvironment. Another section of this chapter
is dedicated to the discussion of culturally significant fauna, such as the presence of antlers with
burials, and the existence of dog burials. Most of
this discussion emphasizes the geographical distribution of these remains, rather than their significance in a mortuary setting. Chapter 7 provides
descriptions of lithic, shell, and bone artifacts recovered from the Bering Sinkhole, along with a
consideration of their cultural significance in a mortuary setting. There is also some discussion of the
implications of these artifacts to the existence of a
trade network in Archaic times.
Chapter 8 discusses the bioarcheological analysis of the (minimally) 62 individuals recovered from
the Bering Sinkhole. The discussion of taphonomic
impacts on the human skeletal remains is timely, as
this is an area of bioarcheological research that is
too often neglected. In his analysis of human skeletal material, Bement addresses basic demographic
data and information pertaining to skeletal stress
that he hopes can indicate shifts in mobility, subsistence, or technology. Demographic data are limited

120

Texas Archeological Society

because of the commingled nature of the sample,
while the discussion of osseous lesions is limited
by being presented in a "percent per individual"
fashion rather than "percent per element," which
may have been more appropriate given that at least
part of this sample was commingled and could not
be associated to specific individuals. In his discussions of traumatic injuries and infectious disease,
no accounting is given of differences between males
and females or adult vs. subadult rates, nor was
there any discussion of the specific elements on
which these disorders were observed. This type of
information would have been particularly useful to
other researchers interested in understanding more
about the intricacies of skeletal health in prehistoric
hunter-gatherers. It is also not clear why trauma
and infection were discussed, while degenerative
joint disease and porotic hyperostosis/cribra
orbitalia--disorders that can provide a great deal of
information about a skeletal sample-were not discussed. Bement' s discussion of linear enamel hypoplasias also utilizes a "per individual" style of
analysis, rather than the more methodologically
solid technique based on the total number of observable teeth. However, the discussion of caries
and wear patterns is especially cogent. In particular, Bement feels that the evidence from caries frequency suggests a shift to a higher carbohydrate
diet during the Middle Archaic. His discussion of
dental wear utilizes results from scanning electron
microscopy, a forum that has not been used to its
fullest potential by other researchers. Based on this
evidence, Bement is able to argue for different seasonal uses over the periods in which the sinkhole
was used for mortuary purposes. This chapter concludes with a section on stable carbon and nitrogen
isotope analysis.
Chapter 9 summarizes what was found at
Bering Sinkhole and describes the utilization of
sinkhole sites. The last half of the chapter discusses mortuary patterns at the site, mentioning
evidence for changes in social systems, settlement

patterns, and subsistence during the Round Rock
phase. Some comparisons are drawn between mortuary practices at the Bering Sinkhole and some
other Texas (non-sinkhole) mortuary sites.
Most readers of Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary
Practices During the Central Texas Archaic will
find Chapters 3, 7, and 9 to bear most of the topics
that will interest them, as Chapters 3 and 9 focus on
mortuary patterns, while Chapter 7 describes the
archeological material recovered from the Bering
Sinkhole, being especially relevant to researchers
specializing in Central or Southeastern Texas archeology. However, Chapter 4 will be distinctly
pertinent to anyone excavating a sinkhole site. The
most appropriate audience for this book is researchers interested primarily in hunter-gatherer groups
from the Central Texas area, or researchers interested in studying the differences between sinkhole
sites and "traditional" mortuary sites.
Individual reviewers have their own feelings
about what subject matter they would like to see
emphasized, or how they would like material
covered, in books they review. In this particular
case, I found the title of this book to be misleading
in terms of what I had anticipated based solely on
the title, as it implies a synthesis of information
from Central Texas Archaic sites pertaining to
mortuary practices. The book title suggests that it
will concentrate on Central Texas Archaic mortuary
sites, implying that more than one site will be
presented, and that not all discussed sites will be
sinkhole sites. This book might better have been
titled "Hunter-Gatherer Mortuary Practices During
the Central Texas Archaic: An Example from the
Bering Sinkhole." Taken in this tone, the book does
a better job of meeting its stated and implied
objectives. This book does provide a thorough
accounting of how sinkholes are systematically
excavated and what was recovered from this
particular site, but does not focus as well on Archaic
period mortuary affairs in Central Texas during the
Archaic as I had anticipated.

The Story of Big Bend National Park, by John R. Jameson. University of Texas Press, Austin, 1996. 208 pp.

Reviewed by Jean L. Epperson

John Jameson was introduced to the Texas Big
Bend as a child by his parents on camping trips. It
is apparent that he became entranced with the
breathtakingly beautiful mountain peaks, arid
deserts, and spectacular river canyons of the future
national park. Jameson has crafted an informative
and vigorous story of the region. Eight chapters, 52
photographs, comprehensive chapter notes, and an
excellent index leave the reader as replete as having digested a good meal.
Of special interest to the archeological
community, Jameson states that the Big Bend
National Park has an estimated 10,000 sites ranging
from Late Paleoindian, Archaic, Late Prehistoric,
and Historic eras. These sites belong to Indian and
Anglo-Mexican cultures. Among others, the Indians
are identified as Jornada Mogollon, Chisos, Jumano,
Mescalero Apache, and Comanche. Within the park
are nine National Register of Historic Places
archeological and historic sites or districts, including
Castelon district (trading post), Hot Springs district
(recreational and therapeutic springs), Mariscal
Mining district, the Homer Wilson Ranch, Rancho

Estelle, Luna's jacal (a Mexican goat herder abode),
and several archeological sites.
The first half of the book describes in minute
detail the individuals involved in the conceptualization of, and the trials and tribulations of, the
beginnings of a national park in Texas. Jameson
also explores the local and national political climate about the creation of the park. The Big Bend
was finally established on June 20, 1935, as the
27th national park, containing 800,000 acres of land
(about the size of Rhode Island). The first 50 years
of the park's existence is detailed in the book
through land acquisition, development, and options
of the guiding authorities.
The remainder of the book focuses on local
and national plans, issues, and controversies surrounding Big Bend National Park. Jameson thoroughly treats other complex issues, such as
international park development, the use of the park
as a preserve for endangered species or as an incubator for predators, and preservation versus development. The book is a must resource for those
readers interested in the Big Bend region.

Stone Tools: Theoretical Insights into Human Prehistory, edited by George H. Odell. Plenum Press, New
York, 1996. 401 pp.

Reviewed by John E. Dockall

One of the most important aspirations of
symposia and conferences should be the publication
and dissemination of results. George Odell has
admirably done this in Stone Tools: Theoretical
Insights into Human Prehistory. This book
represents the second installment of symposium
papers from the Tulsa Conference on Lithic
Analysis held at the University of Tulsa. The current
Tulsa Conference volume presents a very useful
blend of papers presenting theoretical,
methodological, and practical applications for the
study of lithic material culture, and represent a broad
temporal and geographic perspective necessary for
today's well-rounded archeologist. Additionally,
many aspects of these papers can be applied to
other categories of material culture.
This book comprises 13 chapters, each with
numerous tables and illustrations. It is not overly
data-laden, but has enough presented in tabular
form to be clearly interpreted from the text portion.
A most welcome aspect of the book is its presentation in five independent sections or broad topical
areas in an organized manner so that the reader can
proceed through each section without becoming
lost in a morass of competing theories. Even so, the
sections elegantly tie into one another, benefiting
the reader whether one section or the entire book
is read.
Part I, on Research Design, is represented by a
chapter written by Hayden, Franco, and Spafford
that focuses on tool design and manufacturing techniques. Hayden and colleagues employ the concepts of design theory as an analytical tool for
examining lithic assemblage variability and implement morphology. Their paper examines the relationship between material and technological
limitations, tool manufacture, and use with data
from the Keatley Creek site in British Columbia.
They take to task such vaguely defined concepts as
maintainability, versatility, and curation.
The concept and utility of curation is the focus
of Part II, with papers that examine "curation" in
terms of lithic technology and conservation. George

Odell (Chapter 2) provides an in-depth review of
curation and its multiple and often confusing
meanings in the archeological literature. The term
has come to be associated with the advance
manufacture of implements, multi-functionality,
artifact transport, recycling, and resharpening. Odell
uses data from five sites in the lower Illinois River
valley to examine these views of curation and the
importance of raw material variability. Stephen
Nash (Chapter 3) employs curation as a means to
discover patterns of conservation within the Middle
Paleolithic assemblages from Tabun Cave and
Central Negev sites. Variables used include
abundance of cortex, artifact transport, platform
preparation, flake type, and retouch intensity. Nash
demonstrates that curational behaviors existed in
the Middle Paleolithic following the definitions of
curation entrenched in the archeological literature.
An important aspect of curation behavior established
by Nash is that it has not been properly defined by
archeologists that employ it in their research. Paul
Thacker's paper (Chapter 4) is innovative in that he
employed curation behavior to factor out differences
between Gravettian and Magdalenian material
procurement patterns. Patterns of tool/core
conservation were related to distinct curation
patterns; Gravettian procurement was specialized
via extraction and workshop sites while
Magdalenian peoples employed direct procurement
of chert cobbles.
Recently, there has been renewed interest in
technology and complex societies. Part III explores
the relationship between lithic technology and social complexity. Three papers by Steven Rosen, Jay
Johnson, and Michael Nassaney address such issues as raw material procurement, craft specialization, access to raw material, and control of
production.
Rosen (Chapter 5) tackles the seldom
considered topic of replacement of stone with metal
tools. The decline of stone tools in the Near East
from the Chalcolithic to Bronze Age is shown not
to be directly or solely related to the increasing

Reviews

importance of metal tools. Expansion of trade and
exchange networks, economic shifts from
household to specialist economies, and the
increasing availability of iron were contributing
factors. Rosen illustrates the unique dynamics of
the process of technological innovation and
replacement, and his paper serves to dispel
assumptions of linear developments in technology.
Chapter 6, by Jay Johnson, provides a detailed
review of Maya lithic technology since its early
days as a typological exercise to the forefront of
Mayan lithic studies at Colha. Although the
importance of ad hoc tools is addressed, most of
the emphasis is placed on craft specialization and
raw material access and control. I would have liked
to have seen more attention given to stone tool
exchange networks and producer-consumer
relationships. Nassaney' s paper (Chapter 7)
employs a political-economic framework to
examine the role of lithic technology in the Plum
Bayou culture in central Arkansas. This chapter is
complex and may require more than the customary
first read to absorb and synthesize. Much effort is
given to provide the reader with a working
understanding of the political and material aspects
of social ranking as it relates to stone tools.
Nassaney then examines lithic resource
procurement of chert, novaculite, and quartz
crystal, and notes that only quartz crystal was
associated with any type of social control to access
and use. The implications are that quartz crystal
was a part of the dynamics of social ranking in
prehistoric central Arkansas. Variations in the
abundance of quartz crystal through time, and from
the primary source, suggested to Nassaney the
existence of some type of down-the-line exchange
network.
Part IV of the book addresses style and innovation in projectile points, and should be reviewed
by Texas archeologists interested in projectile
points. The arguments and broad theoretical issues
raised by the Part IV papers are equally applicable
to other categories of material culture. Therefore, I
highly recommend this section to lithicists and nonlithicists alike.
In Chapter 8, Michael Rondeau employs
breakage patterns and evidence of reworking to
evaluate morphological variability among Elko
Corner-notched points. He demonstrates that although tool refurbishing can be proffered as an
agent of variability, repair can follow original point

123

morphology. John Rick (Chapter 9) provides an
extensive and ambitious program for investigating
changes in projectile point sequences. The major
sources of morphological variability are stylistic.
Rick's type classifications are based entirely on
morphological characteristics (such as outline) with
little consideration of post-manufacture sources of
variability, breakage, resharpening, and repair.
While this may prompt some (this reviewer included) to distrust the developed point sequences,
Rick's study is a fine example of a multi-level
approach to temporal and spatial variability in artifact form, and promises future potential. Chapter
10, authored by Michael Shott, examines technological innovation and projectile point change in
the American Bottom. Shott employs metric attributes, particularly neck width and basal width,
to examine temporal changes associated with the
transition from dart points to arrow points. These
changes are then interpreted within a framework of
the diet breadth model to predict weapon design
changes necessary to increase hunting efficiency.
In Part V, Odell provides two articles presenting technique and methodology. Marvin Kay (Chapter 11) describes and presents new equipment
available to microwear analysts. Relying upon
Nomarski optics, this equipment promises greater
interpretive power for the analyst and more comprehensive use-wear histories for lithic tools and
assemblages. The drawbacks of cost and increased
analysis time should be ameliorated by the increased
level of accuracy and detail that can be provided
for reconstruction of behaviors associated with tool
use and repair. Chapter 12 by Toby Morrow addresses the utility of intensive lithic refitting
projects. Morrow emphasizes systematic efforts to
refit flakes, flakes to cores, and flakes to bifaces,
and provides the reader with a series of refitting
shortcuts. Refitting of artifacts from the Twin Ditch
site revealed horizontal and vertical patterning that
indicated two distinct episodes of occupation.
Morrow's work on the Two Ditch assemblage also
detailed complex technological histories associated
with biface manufacture, use, and repair.
Part VI is the conclusion and is co-authored
by all volume contributors. This chapter (Chapter
13) serves the reader by concisely summarizing the
most salient aspects of each chapter and book
section. Because some of the chapters are of
considerable length and detail, the summary
chapter enables the reader to refocus and begin to

124

Texas Archeological Society

synthesize a very meaty and significant
contribution to lithic technology. This book
promises to be a well-worn member of any library,
and should be considered by all interested in lithic

technology as well as those doing research in
prehistoric material culture.

AUTHORS

James E. Corbin, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Stephen F. Austin University,
Nacogdoches

Helen Danzeiser Dockall, U.S. Army Central Identification Laboratory, Hawaii
John E. Dockall, W ahiawa, Hawaii
Jean L. Epperson, Texas Heritage Services, Dayton
John A. Giacobbe, Environmental Management Division, SFC Engineering Company, Phoenix, Arizona
Kathleen Gilmore, Dallas
Grant D. Hall, Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock
John P. Hart, New York State Museum, Albany, New York
Thomas R. Hester, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
T. C. Hill, Jr., Crystal City

Betty J. Inman, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
Jeff D. Leach, Centro de Investgaciones Arqueologicas, El Paso
Raymond P. Mauldin, Anthropology Research Center, Department of Sociology and Anthropology,
University of Texas at El Paso
E. J. Mawk, Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station

Charles E. Mear, Austin, Texas
H. Curtis Monger, Department of Agronomy and Horticulture, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces
Timothy K. Perttula, Archeological & Environmental Consultants, Austin
David G. Robinson, Texas Archeological Research Laboratory, The University of Texas at Austin
M. W. Rowe, Department of Chemistry, Texas A&M University, College Station

Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society 69 (1998)

126

Texas Archeological Society

Solveig A. Turpin, Institute of Latin American Studies, The University of Texas at Austin
Dawn Youngblood, Department of Anthropology, Southern Methodist University, Dallas

